CHRIST'S Famous Titles, AND A Believers Golden-Chain, Handled In diverse
SERMONS. Together with His CABINET of JEWELS, OR A Glimpse of SION's Glory. AS
ALSO Christ's Voice to LONDON. The Great Day of God's Wrath. The Necessity of
Watching and Praying. WITH A small Treatise of DEATH.

By Will. Dyer, Preacher of the Gospel.

EPHESIANS. iii. Verse. viii. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints, is
this Grace given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
Riches of Christ.

Boston, N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Nicholas Buttelph at his
Shop. 1704.

The Epistle DEDICATORY. (...) all my loving Friends, into whose hands these
shall (...), Greeting.
(...) Friends.
WH^^ I Love dearly, Remember daily, Long for greatly, Pray for ^^^nestly, and
Praise God heartily; to whom I could write with my purest Blood, and do send
these Lines (...) my very inward Bowels.

Though I cannot say I (...) so transported with Affection and Zeal, as (...),
to wish my self accursed from Christ for th^^^ sakes, yet I am persuaded. I
could be contented with Jonah to be ^^^st ^^to the Sea. for the pacifying for
Gods (...) for you, that I may be free from the (...) of all men. I may be free
from the strength, and by the Power of God to deal plainly, and I h^pe s^^^ly
with all men, not val^ing the sm^^es, nor fearing the frowns of wicked men, a
is lette^ to lose the smiles of men, than it is to (...) the souls of men,
though there be many that ^^^e enemies to me, yet I am enemy to (...) ad^^er of
no man's person, but a lover of every m^ns soul, he that loved me when I was
(...) enemy commands me to love my enemies. D^^^ ^^^stians cleave to the
Lord, and follow (...) Lord fu^ly; neglect no duty though you k^ow there is
danger in doing; fear God and (...) more than men and suffering; let your souls
(...) up with Christ, bear off from the world, bear ^own your Corruptions, and
bear forth your Testimony; respect all, reject none of Gods Commandments, take
patiently and thankfully the hardest dealings of God.

The heaviest Afflictions on Earth, are but light in comparison of Christ's
sufferings, or the punishment of the Wicked in Hell. When Gods People are
humble enough, and the Wicked has enough, and the Lords appointed time come,
then expect deliverance to the Godly, and not before. You should not envy the
patience of God toward your enemies, for it is nothing in comparison of what
love he she weth to you; be you diligent at your work, and leave God at his
work; you need not fear success, the Lord would soon turn from his wrath, if
men were turned from their wickednesses: look narrowly to your hearts, tongues
and ways. I never trusted God, but I found him faithful; nor mine own heart,
but I found it false: Take heed, Friends, that you be not always wooing Christ,
and yet never be married to him; therefore never leave till you have put the
great question out of question.

Look upon Christ, first without you, and then search for Christ within you: he
that will clearly see with the Eye of Faith, must shut the bye of Reason, it is
the Will of God that Saints should rejoice more in what Christ has done for
them, than in what they have done for Christ. Oh lay up, and lay out for
Christ, make have, and do your work, and God will make haste, and give you
wages.

Dear Sirs, I beseech you with beseeching, consider well of these things, for
these are precious truths, weighty truths, and necessary truths. I shall add no
more, but promise you my Prayers, and reque^^^ ^our Prayers for me, and for a
blessing upon this; that it may bring glory to God, and good to you, which is
all that is aimed at by him, who is,

Your Souls Servant, William Dyer.

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is the great unhappiness of our Age, that the greatest part of men busy
themselves most in that which concerns them least; look into the World, amongst
rich end poor, high and low, young and old, and see whether it appear not by
the wh^le scope of their Conversations, that they set more by s^mething else
than Christ and Salvation so they may have but some of the Earth in their
Hands, they ca^e for nothing of Heaven in their Hearts, though Gold can no more
fill their Hearts than Grace their Purses.

Most Men are like the silly Woman, that when her H^rse was on fire, so minded
the saving of her G^^ds, that she left her Child ro^sting in the flames: at
last being put in remembrance of it she cries out, Oh my Child, my Child! Oh
how many men are there, that drop into Perdition merely for a little Wealth!

There are many that are temporally Miserable, that are eternally Happy; and
there are many that are temporally Happy, that shall be eternally Miserable. Oh
there is a great vanity in all worldly Excellencies; the Earth is big in Hopes,
but little in our Hands; it cannot satisfy the Senses of Men, much less can it
satisfy the Souls of Men.

Dear Christians, according to my Talent received, I have endeavored to set
forth the Riches, the Loveliness, the Preciousness and Excellencies that are in
Christ, to draw the Heart after Him, and to be sick of Love for Him: Oh Jesus
Christ is a Fountain of Life, Light, Love, Grace, Glory, Comfort, Joy,
Goodness, Sweetness, always full and flowing, yea, ever-flowing. Paul was so
much taken with Christ, that he was ever in his Thoughts, always near his
Heart, and upon his Tongue; he names him six or seven times in one Chapter, 1
Cor. 1. Oh that our Hearts and Thoughts were thus busted about Christ, and
taken up with Christ, and those treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge that are in
Him.

The Design of this Piece is not the Ostentation of the Author, but the
Edification of the Reader; though the Author be contemptible, yet the Matter is
comfortable. I hope none will blow out such a Candle upon Earth, by the light
of which, themselves may see the Way to Heaven; If God had given in more of
himse^f to me, I should have given more out to thee; but God leeks not for what
he gives not; If God may have glory, and the Church edification by these
labors of mine, I shall have my end. Now the good Lord bring thy heart more
and more in love with Christ, who is altogether lovely, that shortly thou
may enjoy endless felicity in his bosom.

This shall be his Prayer for thee, that is,

Thy Servant in Christ, William Dyer.

THE Desire of all Nations.
Cant. 5. verse 16. He is altogether Lovely.


OUT of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah comes bitter and sweeter Honey, than out
of Sampson's Lion: That is the sweetest Honey which we suck out of Christ's
Hive: for the face of none is so comely in a Saints eye, as the face of Christ;
and the voice of none is so pleasant in a Saints ear, as the voice of Christ. O
Christian! the God whom tho^^ servest is so excellent, that no good can be
added to him; and so infinite, that no good can be diminished in him: He makes
happy, and yet is not the less happy; He shows mercy to the full, and yet
remains full of mercy* O come eat and drink abundantly! O Beloved! there is no
fear of excess here, though one drop of Christ be sweet, yet the deeper the
sweeter.

The Wine that Christ draws, is the best Wine that a Christian drinks. This
whole Book of Canticles is bespangled with the praises of Jesus Christ. The
subject matter of this Book i^ Declaration of the mutual intercourse of Love
and Affection between Christ and his Church, what spiritual entertainment is
given on both sides, with the sweet content they have in each others beauty.
Here you may see the King in his glory, the Spouse in her beauty; here you may
see Christ giving her sweet Promises, adorning her with sundry Excellencies,
communicating his Love, and commending her Graces. Here you may also see the
Church even ravished with the consideration, and contemplation of Christ's Love
and Beauty; his Beauty is taking, his Love is ravishing, his Voice is pleasing,
his Goodness is drawing, his Manifestations are inti^ing, he is the beloved
Son, and the Son of Love, he is nothing but Love to those who are his Love. But
I shall no longer detain you with a Crumb at the Door, but carry you to the
Chapter out of which my Text is taken, and so lead you to the Cabinet where the
Jewel lies.

Brethren and Beloved, you have a glorious description of Jesus Christ in this
Chapter, and that from Verse 10. to Ver. 16. where the Spouse is setting forth
the Riches, the Dignity, the Excellency, the Beauty, the Majesty, the Glory,
the Preciousness, and Loveliness of Jesus Christ; He is white and ruddy, the
chi^f^st among ten thousand: His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are
bushy and black as a Raven, his eyes are as the eyes of Dove, by the Rivers of
waters, washed with Milk, and fitly set, his cheeks are as a Tree of Spices, as
sweet Flowers, his lips like Li^ies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh, his hands
are as Gold-rings set forth with Beril, his belly is as bright ^very. over-laid
with Saphires, his legs are as Pillar^ of Marble set upon sockets of fine Gold,
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellen^^ as the Cedars. And thus she sets
forth her Beloved; and at last winds up all with this ^are Expression, He is
altogether lovely.

The Text is a sacred Cabinet, which contains in it. 1. The Jewel Christ, in
this word, He. 2. The price of this Jewel, Altogether lovely.


The Observation or Doctrine is this: That Jesus Christ is ^^^finitely and
superlatively lovely: He is the most amazing and delightful Object: The very
Name of Jesus Christ is a precious Ointment poured forth. It Is said that the
Letters of his Name were found engraven upon Ignatius his heart: Jesus Christ
is in every Believers he^rt, and nothing can do better there; for He is
altogether lovely. That Jesus Christ is thus transcendently lovely, will appear
four manner of ways. 1. By Titles. 2. By Types. 3. By Resemblances. 4. By
Demonstrations.
I shall speak only to the first of these: Our Lord Jesus has seven famous and
lovely Titles which are as so many Jewels of his Crown. 1. The Desire (...) all
Nation. 2. King of Kings. 3. The Migh^y God. 4. The Ever^asting Father. 5. The
Prince of P^^ce. 6. The Elect Precious. 7. Wonderful.
We will begin wi^h the first of these famous Titles, to wit, The Desire of all
Nations. This Title you have in the second of Hagga^ and the seventh verse, And
the Desire of all Nations shall (...). But you will say, How is Christ the
Desire of all Nations? Do not all the Nations abhor him, and say, we will not
have this man to rule over us? The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Psalm.
2. verse 2. Here you see the Kings of the Earth were afraid, lest Christ's
Government should un-king them. The Rulers were jealous, lest it should depose
them from their Dignities. The People were afraid of it, lest it should compel
them to subjection to that Law and Way which their souls abhorred. O how long
has the World rebelled against Jesus Christ and his Government! But tell me,
have the People gained any thing by resisting Christ, his Gospel and
Government, by hating his Servants, and by scorning his holy Ways? Or does it
make the Crowns sit faster on the heads of Kings? I will leave you to judge of
this. But, Beloved, for all this, Jesus Christ is the Desire of all Nations.
And that I shall show you in five particulars. Though Jesus Christ be not
actively desired by all Nations, yet he is rightly styled, The Desire of all
Nations.

First, Because he is most desirable in himself, and all things that are
desirable are in him. Beauty is in Christ, Bounty is in Christ, Riches and
Honors are in Christ, Prove. 8.18. Jesus Christ is the Treasure hid in the
Gospel, the Pearl of great price, he is the Sun in the Firmament of the
Scriptures, whom to know is Everlasting Life; he is a Spring full of the Water
of Life, a Hive of Sweetness, a Magazine of Riches, a River of Pleasures,
wherein you may bathe your souls to all Eternity. O he is fullness and
sweetness, the chiefest among ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. He is more precious
than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared to
him, Prove. 3.15. Alas, what are all the Crowns and Kingdoms of tho World, all
the Thrones and Scepters of Kings, to Christ? I say, What are the Treasures of
the East, the Gold of the West, the Spices of the South, and the Pearls of the
North, to them? This, or whatsoever thou do imagine, are not to be compared
unto blessed Jesus. Beloved, the Glories and Excellencies of Christ, excel all
others; as all Waters meet in the Sea, and as all the Lights meet in the Sun;
so all the Perfections and Excellencies of all the Saints and Angels meet in
Christ. Nay, Si^s. Christ has not only the Holiness of Angels, the Loveliness
of Saints, and the Treasures of Heaven, but also the Fullness of the Godhead,
and the Riches of the Deity are in him, Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness d^ell; fullness of Grace, fullness of Knowledge,
fullness of Love, fullness of Glory: He is lovely to the Father, lovely to the
Angels, lovely to the Saints, and lovely to the Soul; and therefore he may well
be called, The Desire of all Nations, for all desirable things are in him.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is called the Desire of all Nations, because his
desires are after all Nations, though he has no ^eed of them; he has
thousands of Angels before him, and ten thousand daily ministering unto him; yet
such infinite love does he bear to the Sans of Men, in whom there is ^o
loveliness, that he himself says, My delight to with the ^^^s of mon, Prove.
8.11. That our Lord Jesus has a strong desire after the Nations, to convert
them, and save the Nations, will appear by three things. 1. By what he did
before he came into the World. 2. By what he did when he was in the World. 3.
By what he does now he is out of the World.
1. Our Lord Jesus had a great desire after the poor Nations, before he came
into the World, or else he would never have left his Crown, his Royal Court,
his Father's Ba^m^, his Glorious Robes, to come into this World to be spit upon
by men, and to be murdered by men; nay, he did not only become a laughing stock
to Men, but a gazing stock to Angels. Now, Beloved, do you not think that Jesus
Christ had a great desire after the Nations good, that he would leave all his
glory, and greatness, and pomp, and riches, to come into this World to he poor,
to be hungry, to be weary, to be tempted, to be forsaken, to be betrayed, to be
sold? But you may perhaps say, that Christ little thought his own Countrymen
would have shed his blood, and that one of his own Family would betray him.
Why, Beloved, do you think he did not know it? yea, he knew it before he came
into the World, how he should be used in the World, that the Jews ^^^^ld
Crucify him, and that Judas would be^^^ him, Joh. 6.46. He knew it from the
beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him: Christ
knew it before they knew it. Alas, our Lord Jesus knew it before he came from
Heaven, what coarse Entertainment he should have upon Earth. Now, Beloved. put
all this together, and tell me, had not Jesus Christ a great desire after us,
before he came to us? That he would uncrown himself to crown us, and put off
his Robes to put on our Rags, and to come out of Heaven to keep us out of Hell?
He fasted forty days, that he might feast us to all Eternity. He came from
Heaven to Earth, that he might send us from Earth to Heaven. The Son of God
became the Son of Man, that we the Sons of Men might become the Sons of God;
and all this he did to save the Nations. 2. He had a strong desire after the
Nations when he was in the World. Oh, Christ would fain have saved the Nations,
and healed them, and enlightened them, therefore he sends forth his Apostles,
Mat. 28.19. and bids them. Go and teach all Nations; the people were in his
eye, and upon his heart; and so in Mat. 22 Christ sends forth his servants
once, twice, thrice, as if he would take no denial, but they would not come.
Nay, Beloved, our Lord Jesus Christ did not only send others to poor souls to
beseech them, to entreat them to come in, to repent and to believe in their
Savior, that their souls might be saved, but he went himself and desired them:
Nay, that is not all, Beloved, he cried to them, and said, If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink, Joh. 7.37. O how earnest was Jesus Christ with
poor souls to come to him! Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. So in L^k. 14.23, Go to the Highways, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be full. Do you see this, Christians^
What vehement desires Jesus Christ had after the Nation and Souls of men, that
he might for ever make them happy when he was in the World, and he has the
same desire still: How often would Jesus Christ have healed the Jews, that poor
Nation, as he himself speaks in Mat. 23.37. How often would I have gathered
thy children together, as a H^n gathers ^er young ones, and you would not?
Nay, when he had done all this, he does not leave them, but weeps over-them,
his eyes were wet, because their eyes were dry. So that it is clear by what
Christ did when he was in the World, that he desired much the healing and
converting of Nations. 1. In his bearing with them. 2. In his proffers unto
them. 3. He has a great desire after the Nations now he is out of the World,
though he be gone to Heaven and entered into Glory, and there sits at the
right hand of the Father; yet I say, his desire are as much after poor souls as
ever.
This (...) appear by two things. 1. In his Forbearance and Long-sufferance. O!
how long has Jesus Christ born with the sinful Nations, and yet he bears with
them still, notwithstanding they have broke his Laws, and despised his Gospel,
and contemn his Ordinances, and shed his Saints blood, grieved his Spirit, and
abused his Mercies: This and thus much they have done, and yet he spares them
that he might be gracious to them, Isa. 30.18. and therefore will the Lord
wait, that he may be gracious to you. Therefore will he be exalted, that he may
show mercy. Now, Beloved, do you think that Jesus Christ would take all this at
the Nations hands, but that he is unwilling to destroy them, and most willing
to save them? 2. His Love appears not only by his bearing with them, but by his
proffers to them. O Beloved, how does God stand day after day, month after
month, and year after year, proffering Himself, his Son, his Mercies, his Love,
his Grace and his Glory to poor souls? Many have the Space of Repentance, who
have not the Grace of Repentance. Now, my Brethren, by these things you may see
that Jesus Christ has a great desire after the Nations. 3. Jesus Christ is
called the Desire of all Nations, because it is he only that can make any
Person, or Family, or Nation, truly desirable.
Oh, Beloved, what is the reason that the Lord of Hosts prefers' his people
before all the Sons of Men? The Lord prefers his little Remnant before all the
World beside; Exodus 19.5. You shall be a peculiar treasure to me above all
people. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, Proc. 12.26. Though
his Neighbor be great, rich, honorable, yet if he be more Righteous, he is
more excellent than he in Christ's eye. Believers be those Worthies, of whom
the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.35. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Believers are not
only diligent Christians, but excellent Christians.

Now what is the reason, Beloved, that the Saints are thus excellent above all
others? is it for their birth, breeding, or learning, or riches, or greatness,
or honor? No, no; it is for none of these: but if you will know the reason, it
is because Christ is formed in them, and married to them; they have the new
Name, the new Nature, the new Heart, the new Spirit: Oh this is the reason! If
there were any thing besides Christ, that could make any Nation, or Family, or
Person truly desirable, it must be either birth, or greatness, or learning, or
riches, or beauty, or wisdom, or strength; now all these do not make any one
desirable: for if they did, than those that sit upon the Nations would be the
most desirable persons under Heaven; because they have the most of these: but
for this, see D^n. 4*17. And s^^tet^ up over it the ba^^st of men, Rev. 17.15.
The waters which thou s^w^^t, where the w^o^^ ^itt^t^, are peoples, and
mul^i^^d^s, and ^ation^, and ^o^gu^s. So that none of these then can do it, but
Christ only, Rev. 5.10.

He has made us unto our God, Kings and Priests; O Christ has made every
Believer as a King to his Father: it is Christ's beauty that makes ^s
beautiful; it is his riches that makes us rich; it is his righteousness that
makes us righteous; he only makes us truly honorable and desirable; well may
Christ be called the Desire of all Nations; it is he that can make a Nation
desirable.

4. Jesus Christ is called the Desire of all Nations, because all Nations stand
in need of him: nay, not only all Nations, but all Persons, young and old, rich
and poor, high and low; he that will be saved, must have a Savior to save him,
or else he can never be saved. the Apostle tells us, Act. 4.12. Neither is
there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given
among men, whereby we must be saved. And Christ says, Joh. 14.16. I am the
way, and the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father but by me. So
that not only all Nations, but all Persons stand in need of him. You may go to
Heaven without health, without wealth, without honors, without pleasures,
without friends, without learning; but you can never go to Heaven without
Christ. What will you do, if you begin to die Naturally, before you begin to
live Spiritually; if the tabernacle of Nature be taken down, before the Temple
of Grace be raised up; if your Paradise be laid waste, before the Tree of Life
be set in it; if you give up the Ghost, before ever you receive the Holy Ghost;
if the Sun of your Life be set within you before the Sun of Righteousness shine
upon you; if the Body be fit to be turned into the Earth, before the Soul be
fit to be taken into Heaven; if the second Birth have no place in you, the
second Death shall have a power over you? Though the Nations need nothing more
than Christ, yet they slight nothing more than Christ. Tell me, how will you
live when you die, that are dead whilst you live? O Beloved! is it not sad that
the Nations should resist Christ, his Gospel and Government as they do? Indeed
if men might be their own Judges, then Christ had no Enemies, we are all his
Friends. If the Jews might so have been their own Judges, it was not the Son of
God whom they crucified, but an Enemy to Caesar. It was not Paul a Saint that
they persecuted, but one that they found to be a pestilent Fellow. S^^ men will
say now, they do not persecute the Saints of God, but seditious Fanatics; but
God will shortly take often the Veil of Hypocrisy from their Faces. O grieve for
them that cannot grieve for themselves. And thus you see that all Nations stand
in need of Christ, who is the Desire of all. Nations. 5. Our Lord Jesus is
called the Desire of all Nations, because when he sets up himself in any one as
their Desire, then they run after him, and count nothing too dear for him. So
the Church of God, Isa. 26.8, 9. The desire of our soul is to thy name; with my
soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I
seek thee early. Oh, when the Desire of all Nations once sets up himself in
the Soul then he becomes the desire of the Soul. When he has thus endeared
himself to their Souls, then they count nothing too de^r for him; all shall be
at his command, their gold; their silver, their strength, their lives, Rev.
10.11. They loved not their lives unto the death. So that, Beloved, let men be
Enemies to Jesus Christ, yet as soon as Christ sets up himself in their Hearts,
they will love him, own him, serve him, and suffer for him. Now, Sirs, put all
these together, and it will fully prove Christ to be the Desire of all Nations.
I shall make but a short use of it, and so conclude. Is it so that our Lord
Jesus Christ is the Desire of all Nations, and that all things desirable a^^ in
him? Oh then let me beg of you, Oh (...) me beseech you, for the Lords sake,
and your Souls sake, make Christ Jesus the Desire (...) your souls. He is the
Desire of all Nations; (...) shall he not be the Desire of your Souls; who will
you love, if not the King of Saints? (...) will you long for, if not for the
Desire of all Nations? who will you prize, if not the P^^^^ of Peace? He is the
Son of God, the seco^^ Person in the Glorious Trinity, before wh^^ Angels and
Archangels, and all the Hos^^ (...) Heaven do bow before him: He is the (...)
of Glories, the Crown of Crowns, the Heaven of ^^^vens; he is a Light in
Darkness, Joy in Sa^^^ Riches in Poverty, Life in Death; it is he (...) can
resolve all our doubts, secure you in ^^^ger, save your souls, and bring you to
Gl^^^ where all joy is enjoyed: O therefore let all (...) glory of your glory
be to give all glory and your se^^^ to him. So much for this time.

The King of Kings
Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely.


The Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is inf^^ite^^ and superlatively lovely.
I Now proceed to the Second Title, w^^^^ is given to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and that is, King of Kings. A^stin desired ^o have (...) three things before he
died: 1. Rome in (...) Glory and Purity. 2. Paul in the Pulpit (...) Preaching.
3. Christ in the Flesh upon Earth C^^o the Heathen repente^ himself of thre^
things:
1. That he ever spent a day idely* 2. That ever he revealed his secrets to a
Woman. 3. That ever he went by Water, when be might have gone by L^nd.
T^ales gave thanks for three things: 1. That he was in-dued with Reason, and
was not a B^^st. 2. That he was a Man, and not a Woman. 3. That he was a
Grecian, and no Bar^ari^n.
And I, poor I, desire to see three things before I die: 1. Babylon's Ruin. 2.
Christ's Reigning. 3. Satan's Binding.
The Angel has sworn by him that lives for ever, that time shall be no langer,
in Rev. 10.6. Who will not believe this sacred Oath? Did be say it? No, he
swore it. How, by himself? No, by him that lives for ever. What, that time must
be a little? No, it must be no l^^ger. The time shall be ^o longer: The Lord
whom you seek shall suddenly come, says the Prophet, in Mal. 3.1. They who
keep the word of God's Patience, God will keep them in the hour of Temptation.
Well, the second Title of Jesus Christ is, King of Kings. I pray you take
notice of it: it is now to be handled, in Rev. 19.16. He had a Name written,
says the Text, KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS. Here is his Title now, King of
Kings. Beloved, Jesus Christ is a threefold King.

I. His Enemies King. II. His Saints King. III. His Father's King.
The first he Rules over. The second ^e Rules in. The third he Rules for. I
shall begin with the first, and take them in order. First, Christ is his
Enemies King; that is, he is King over his Enemies; Christ is a King above all,
and over all; and therefore the Scripture calls him, King of Kings; as you have
it (...) Tim. 6.15. Christ is a King above all Kings; for if he were not a king
above all Kings, he could not be a King over all Kings. Now that he is a King
above all Kings, two Scriptures prove it, in Psa. 98.27. faith God the Father
there, I will make my firstborn higher than the Kings of the Earth. Now who is
the firstborn? Why, it is Jesus Christ; as he is elsewhere called the
firstborn of every Creature. Now, says God, I will make my firstborn higher
than the Kings of the Earth; higher in Glory, higher in Power, higher in
Majesty. So in Rev. 1.5. there Christ is called, The Prince of the Earth. Alas,
alas, what are all the mighty men, the great men, the honorable men of the
Earth to Jesus Christ? They are but like a little bubble in the W^ter; for if
all the Nations, in comparison to God, be but as the drop of a bucket, o^ the
dust of the balame, as the Prophet speaks in Isa. 40. O how little then be the
great men of the Earth! Nay, Beloved, Christ Jesus is not only above the Kings
of the Earth, and higher than Kings, but he is higher than the Angels, yea, he
is the head of Angles; and therefore all the Angels in Heaven are commanded to
worship him. He is the head of all Angels, (...) Col. 2.10. He is the head of
all principalities and powers; which includes the Angels. And in Heb. 1.6. Let
all the Angels of God worship him. God will have the Angels worship Christ as
well as Men. O Sirs, Christ is a King before whom the Angels v^il their faces,
and the Kings of the Earth do cast down their Crowns! Again, as he is a King
above all Kings, so he is a King over all Kings too: Jesus Christ is an
Universal King, he is a King over all Kingdoms, over all Nations, over all
Governments, over all Powers, and over all People, Dan. 7.14. There was given
to him, says the Text, dominion, and power, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all
people, and nations, and languages were to serve him. Now, who was this? in the
13th. ver. it is clearly meant of Jesus Christ, all People, all Nations, and
Languages, and Kingdoms were to obey him; so that you see Christ is not only
King of Saints, but King of Nations too; and therefore you find in Psa. 2.8.
it is a Text often read, but little observed, Ask of me, says the Father, and I
will give the^ the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost ports of the
earth for thy possession. The very Heathen are given to Christ, and the utmost
parts of the Earth for his possession.

And as the Lord Jesus Christ has all the Kingdoms of the Earth given to him,
so likewise he has all Power given to him; or else what should he do with a
Kingdom? In Mat. 18.28. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Oh,
Sirs, here is a Text that should revive the hearts of Saints! All power is
given to ^e in heaven and in earth, says Christ to his Apostles. So that it is
he that binds Kings in chains, and princes in fetters of iron, as the last
Psa^m saving one speaks. It Is he tha^ suffers no man to do them wrong, yea, he
rep^r^^^ kings for their sakes, and ^reaks mighty kings in pieces for the
Saints sake, in Psalm. 105.14. And therefore it is he that overrules Kings, and
overcomes the Kings of the Earth, that makes war with the Saints; in Rev.
17.14. the ten Kings made war with the Lamb, but the Lamb prevailed. And why?
Because he was King of kings, and Lord of lords. This is the first, Jesus
Christ is his Enemies King; that is, he is a King above their Kings, and over
their Kings. Secondly, As Jesus Christ is his L^e^^es King, so he is his Saints
King: I will give you two Scriptures to prove it, though I need not, yet I
will, because of making things very clear as I go on: in Rev. 15.3. there Jesus
Christ is called the Saints King, Thou King of Saints. So also in Mat. 21.5.
Tell ye the Daughters of Sion, Behold, thy King comes. So that by those two
Scriptures, you see Jesus Christ is King of Saints. Now, Beloved, I beseech you
here to mind me; Jesus Christ, you see, is King of the bad, and of the good;
but as for the wicked, he rules over them by his Power and Might, but the
Saints he rules in them by his Spirit and Graces. Now to this the Scripture
witnesses, that Jesus Christ rules in the Saints, and is King of the Saints;
and therefore it tells us, in Col. 1. Christ in you the hope of glory; and
elsewhere, Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Mark
here, Christ must be in you, Christ in you the hope of glory; so in Psa. ^4.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye ^^fted up ye everlasting do^rs, that
the King of Glory may come in. Here Christ is called the King of Glory: and the
Psalm calls upon men to open their Hearts, that the King of Glory may come in:
so in Rev. 2.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me. Oh
this is Christ's spiritual Kingdom, and here he rules in the hearts of his
People: here he rules over their Consciences, over their Wills, over their
Affections, over their Judgments and Understandings, and no body has any thing
to do here but Christ; it is Christ that rules over the Consciences and
Judgments of men, and therefore he is called the King of Saints. It Is true,
other Kings may bear rule over the Estates of men, but as for the Soul, that
only belongs to Christ: and therefore Believers are said to be all glorious
within: The King's Daughter, which is the Church, in Psalm. 45. the King of
Glory rules there, and dwells there; you know God dwells in the highest
Heavens, and in the humble hearts: Christ is not only King of Nations, but King
of Saints; the one he rules over, the other he rules in. Thirdly, Jesus Christ
is his Father's King too; and so his Father calls him, God calls Christ his
King, in. Psalm. 2.6. I will set my King upon my ^oly hill of Sion: Well may he
be our King, when he is God's King. But you may say, How is Christ his Father's
King, because he rules over him, he rules for his Father? There Is a twofold
Kingdom of God committed to Jesus Christ; pray mark, Sirs: 1. A Spiritual
Kingdom, by which he rules in the Hearts of his People, and so he is King of
Saints. 2. A Providential Kingdom, by which he rules the ^ffairs of the World,
and so he is King of Nations. Now, Beloved, the Scripture says, That the Father
has put (...) things into Christ's h^^ds, Joh. 3. last. And the Apostle tells
us, God has put all things under his feet. The Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment to the Son, and he has appointed him over his own
House: now as Christ has all, so he does all, and rules all for his Father,
and therefore the Father calls him his Servant, Isa. 41.2. Behold my Servant,
and in the other Text, my King, because he ruled for his Father, and does his
Father's Will: so that, Beloved, in these three respects, Christ is a King. Now
I shall lay down something wherein the Lord Jesus Christ does infinitely excel
all the Kings of the Earth. 1. Christ Jesus is a King, that in a spiritual
sense makes all his Subjects Kings: He has a Crown of Glory for every Subject.
Oh what a glorious King is this! Now that Christ make^ all his Subjects Kings;
se^ Rev. ^.10. says the Ch^^^^ there, Who has ^^de us (...) God, Kings and
Priests. Oh Sirs, it is better to be a Member of Christ, than the Head of a
Nation. Oh how infinitely happy are all Christ's Subjects! They be all Heirs,
all Favorites, all Sons, all true Believers are so; the ^^liever is the only
happy man. Alas, where (...) there such a King to be found, that makes (...)
his Subjects Kings? but they may give their ^^bjects Titles, but Christ gives
all his Subjects Grace and Glory. Sirs, in a word, thi^ is the greatest
Nobility, to be the Servant of the great God; He is nobly descended, wh^^ is
born from above. Oh, how many Lord has that man who has not Christ for his
Lord Every Sin is his Lord, and every Lust lords i^ over him. Now where Jesus
Christ comes to be King, he makes them Kings to his Father, and Kings over
their lusts. Now Beloved here is the blessedness and happiness of ou^ King in
his fence, he makes us all Kings, an^ gives us all Crowns of Glory. 2. Jesus
Christ is a most just and righteous King, he ^eigns i^ righteousness, he brings
peace by righteousness, he makes us righteous, and therefore (...) is called,
The Lord our Righteousness, in Jer. 23.^. He is a righteous King, and rules in
righteousness, and thou shall have nothing but righteous Dealing from him. Mind
this Text (...) Scripture, which infinitely speak out Christ's righteous
dealing with poor Souls, in Rev. ^^.13. Just and true are thy ways. Mark! who
are just and true here? Why, it is the King (...) Saints: Just and true are thy
ways, thou King (...) Saints, Justice and Truth well becomes (...) King of
Saints. In Prove. 3.8. it is said, (...) ways be ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths (...) peace, speaking of Wisdom, which is me^^ of Christ. Oh what a
golden King is he^^ what a glorious King is here! he is just (...) true, and
all his ways are pleasantness, and (...) his paths are peace. Oh, Sirs, this is
the Excellency of Christ, he oppresses no body, (...) wrongs no body, and
therefore he is calle^ Just and True: He infinitely excels all the King of the
earth in righteousness; he is a righteous King, and deals for nothing but
righteousness. 3. Christ is a King that livet^ for ever, and reigns for ever;
other Kings they are but of yesterday, they be dead and gone. What is become of
all those great and mighty Kings we read of? Why? they be gone like a Tal^,
like a Dream. But it is not so with the King of Saints, the Lord is King for
ever, he reigns for ever; and therefore the Apostle calls him. A King immortal,
eternal, as you may see in 1 Timothy 1.17. Christ is there called, A King
^^^^^^tal, because he lives for ever. So in Heb. 7. speaking of Christ, Who
ever lives says he, to make intercession for us. Now, Beloved, here is the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, he lives for ever; other Kings he dead, and
their Subjects may do what they will; but Jesus Christ lives for ever. 4. Jesus
Christ is a King that has a perfect knowledge of all his Subjects. Oh, Sirs,
Kings and Princes, and States, do not know all their Subjects, nay they know
very few; alas, they know not a quarter of them, the poor subjects are unknown
to them, they be not so well acquainted with their wrongs, and wants, and
miseries that their poor subjects lie under: we are unknown must of us to our
Prince. But now here is (...) Excellency of Christ, he has a perfect knowledge
of all his Subjects, he knows them all by name, he knows all their thoughts,
all their wants, all their ways, all their conditions. Now, I say, this is a
great happiness, that we ha^^, a King that knows us so well. Oh, poor souls!
Christ knows you all, all your wants, all your conditions, all your ^^^^ssities
whatsoever. The Lord Jesus knows all thy sufferings, and therefore says (...)
in P^^il. 4. My God shall supply all your ^ants. Oh, it is a sweet Scripture, My
God shall supply all your ^^eds. So I say to you, Sirs, your King will supply
all your needs, he knows all your needs, all your straits, all your fears, I,
and he will supply all your needs. Oh here is the Excellency of this King. 5.
Jesus Christ is a King that sits upon his Father's Throne, at this very time he
sits upon his Father's Throne. But, Beloved, this is not all, Christ does not
only sit there himself, but he has promised that all men who overcome shall
sit down with him upon the Throne: you have a full Text to this purpose, in
Rev. 21. To him th^^ it erco^eth will I grant to sit with me upon my Thr^^^
M^^k, Sirs! Christ promises all his Subjects, that they should sit upon the
Throne with him: New I wonder where there is any King but Christ who will
suffer his Subjects to sit upon his Throne with him: Alas, this would he
Treason for a man to desire it. I remember, amongst other things, I have read
of a King, who passing over a water, his Crown fell from his head into the
water, and one of his poor Servants, out of love to him, leapt in and fetched it
up, and for his more ease put it upon his head, that he might get the better
out; and for this the poor man had his head cut off: so high, and mighty, and
lofty was the Prince. Ay but Sirs, the lord Jesus is not so, he is no such
proud King; he did not only uncrown himse^^ ^o crown (...), and we^^ the Crown
of Tho^^ that we might wear the Crown of Glory: but he consents and gives leave
for his subjects to sit upon the Throne with him; To him that overcomes will I
grant r^^^it with me upon my throne. Oh, what a glorious King is this, that
every one of his poor subjects shall sit upon his Throne with him! so in Rev.
21.7. He that evercometh shall inherit all things. A man would think, Sirs,
this very thing should draw the whole world after Christ. Oh how should this
draw the affections of men to be in love with those great proffers and
privileges, and honors that Christ bestows upon his poor followers! He does
not only make them Kings, but he grants them to sit upon his Throne with him:
thou would say it were an honor indeed. (Oh Saint) could thou but look
into Heaven, and see Christ sit upon his Throne; but this honor have all his
^^ints: Yea, much more, he makes them ^^^l Kings and grants to them, to sit
upon the Throne (...) him. 6. Jesus Christ is a King that (...) all his
Subjects, and his Subjects love him; And I am sure this can scarce be said of
any King* under Heaven; but it may be said of the Lord Christ, for he is a King
that loves all his Subjects, and all his subjects love him: and this I shall
endeavor to show you in the Afternoons Exercise; and the next day I shall
handle the other part, That all his s^^^^^^^ love him.
There are nine or ten particulars wherein the love of Christ to his subjects
does appear, and is wonderfully manifest. 1. His love to his subjects, it is
Primary: We love him, says the Apostle, because he loved us first, 1 John
4.19. We love him, and why? Because he loved us first; his love is the cause
preceding, our love is the effect following: If he had not fired our hearts
with the flames of his love, we should never h^ve bestowed one spark of
spiritual love upon Christ; he must draw before we can run; and therefore says
the Church, Cant. 1.4. Draw us, and we will run after thee. Oh Sirs, we cannot
run without drawing, he must draw us before we can, and when he draws then we
run. It was not man's loveliness that engaged God to love and save man; God
loves his Enemies even in their sinful estate, though not with a love of well
liking of them, yet with a love of well willing to them. Oh, Sirs, since God
loved us when we were not like him, we should strive to be like him who thus
loved us; nothing enga^eth a Saint to love God so much as this, that God loved
him so much. A Minister once weeping at the Table, and being asked the reason
of it, answered, Because I love Christ no more. Indeed, Friends, this should
grieve us, that we love so little, who are so much beloved. You have a famous
saying of Austin, He loves not Christ at all, who loves him not above all. This
is the first love wherewith God loves his people, it is a primary love. 2. Christ
is a King that loves his Subjects with a distinguishing love, and a separating
love; the general love of Christ is scattered and branched out to all the
Creatures in the World, but his special love is exceeding great, and rich love
is only settled upon his Church. Now if you ask me what Christ's distinguishing
love is, I shall name it, and but name it to you. 1. It Is Pardoning Love. 2.
It Is Redeeming Love. 3. Calling Love. 4. Justifying Love. 5. Adopting Love. 6.
Sanctifying Love. 7. Glorifying Love.
This I say, is his peculiar Love; Christ's Love is not only sweeter than Wine,
but better than Life: He is most lovely, he is always lovely, He is altogether
lovely; Christ is nothing but Love to those who are his Lovers 3. Christ loves
his Saints with a protecting love, Isa. 15.49 Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have ^^^^^ssion on the son of her womb? Can a woman
forget her sucking child? Is it possible a woman should be so inhumane to
forget her tender infant, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yes,
says the Lord, they may forget them, yet I will not forget thee, God may as
soon cease to be God, as cease to be good; he may as soon cease to live, as
cease to love; no, no, he cannot forget them: Did he forget Israel in Egypt, or
his Church in Babylon, or Daniel in the Lions Den? Did he forget the three
Children in the Furnace, or Jeremiah in the Dungeon, or Jonas in the Whale's
belly, or Peter in Prison? Did he forget them? The wicked say indeed, the Lord
does forget, in Ezekiel. 9. The Lord has forgotten the earth, and he sees it not,
but they are much mistaken. There are three or four Texts of Scripture which I
shall humbly offer to your serious consideration, that do wonderfully speak out
God's protecting love to his people. The first is in Rev. 7.2, 3. you find
there an Angel has power given him to hurt the earth and the sea. Now there
comes another Angel and cries out, hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the
trees. Why? what is the reason? why, in the third Verse, Until we have sealed
the servant of God in the forehead. Do not you pour out your Judgments upon
them, until we have secured the Servants of God. Oh, how wonderfully does the
Lord protect his people: So again in ^zek. 9. certain men be sent to destroy
that wicked people; and amongst the rest, the Lord calls, and bids one set a
mark upon them that sigh for the abominations of the land; and for the rest,
says he, destroy them old and young. Oh Sirs, this does wonderfully set out
God's protecting love to his people. So in Is^. 3.10. the Lord bids the Prophet
tell them, what find Judgments should come upon them; upon unrighteous Kings
and Princes, and great Men and Soldiers Now says the Lord, Say to the
righteous, it shall be well with them, none of this shall come near them. O how
wonderfully does this magnify God's protecting love! Isa. 26.20. Come, my
people, enter into your chambers, shut the d^r, and hide your selves for a
little moment: Why so, O Lord? why? until thy ^^dignation be (...) past. Come,
says God, I am resolved to exe^^te my Judgments on wicked men, therefore hide
your selves for a moment. And therefore I say, ^^t no man's heart fail him,
it is but for a moment, and thy miseries shall end. Beloved, when our miseries
are at the greatest, his help is at the n^^rest; Man's extremity is God's
opportunity; when Mord^ca^ is thoroughly humbled, the Rod Haman shall be hanged.
4. But then fourthly, Christ loves his people with a most cordial love, he
loves them with all his heart; nay, they are the dearly beloved of his soul, as
himself calls them, Jer. 12. I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into
the hands of her enemies. Christ's love to his people, it is not a lip love,
from the teeth outwardly, but a real love from the heart inwardly. Christ loves
his people as his Father loves him, and how is that, can you tell? No, all the
men on earth, nor Angels in heaven, cannot declare the love that the Father
bears to Christ; and yet as God loves Christ* so does Christ love his people.
You have a full Text for this* they are Christ's ^wn ^ords, A^ the Father (...)
me, so love I you. Oh, Sirs, how infinitely does the Father love the Son, and
how infinitely does the Son love his people. Why, he loves them as the Father
loves him. Oh Lord, what love is this, that the Savior should love the Sinner,
that Christ should love the miserable Sinner? And yet thus it is, Oh, Sirs,
Believers are like I^^tters of Gold engraven on the very heart of Christ, Oh
the breadth, the depth, the ^^ight, the l^^gth of the ^^ve of Christ, says the
Apostle, it poss^th knowledge; as if so be he wanted words to set it forth, in
Ephesians. 3.20. The love of Christ which posseth knowledge. As if so be there were
both want of-words, and want in words, to set forth the love of Christ* But
certainly it must be very great, for as the Father loves him* so he loves them.
Alas, others love the Saints, but how, (...) they love them? Why* not with a
cordial love; they do not love them for their good, but for their goods; it is
more for the mo^y in their purses, than for the grace in their hearts, they
love the Saint, as the Sama^^tans did the Jews; just as men do with their
Sun-dials, never look on them, but when the Sun shines; why so, the World never
looks upon the Saints, but in the time of prosperity: when the Je^s flourisht
and were in their glory, O what great Friends were the Samaritans to them! But
when the poor Jews were under affliction, then they had no worse enemies than
they. Why, but Christ's love is not so, he loves thee when thou art poor as
well as when thou art rich; as well when thou art in rags, as when thou art in
thy robes; when thou art in adversity, as well as when thou art in prosperity:
Christ loves his Saints as well upon Gallows, as in a Palace; for whom he
loves, he loves unto the end, Heb. 13.5. He is faithful, who has said, I will
never ^ave th^^ nor forsake thee: Never leave thee in any condition, or any
place. O Sirs, what a love is this^ and therefore a rush for what the world can
do, or for the world's love, it is like a V^^ice Glass, soon broken; it smiles
now, and quickly frowns; it cries Hosanna to day, and to morrow, Crucify him:
but Christ's love is with the very heart. 5. Jesus Christ loves his Subjects
with a love of benevolence, Joh. 3. God so l^ved the world, that he gave his
only begotten ^^on, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. And says Paul, He loved (...), and gave himself for me,
Gal. 2.20. The Father gives the Son, and the Son gives himself* who loved me,
and gave himself for me; all that Christ did and suffered, it is for me: All
that Christ has, is mine. Oh, soul, soul, Christ's love it is thine to pity
thee, Christ's mercy is thine to save thee, Christ's graces are thine to
beautify thee, and his glory is thine to crown thee, Christ's power is thine
to protect thee, thou see. He that is sure of God's love to him, is sure of
God's power for him: And Christ's wisdom is thine to counsel thee, and his
Angels are thine to guard thee, and his Spirit is thine to comfort thee, and
his word is thine to teach thee. There are four Attributes of God, which are of
great support to Christians. 1. His Faithfulness. 2. His Mightiness. 3. His
Goodness. 4. His Wisdom.
And therefore, Sirs, it is your duty to live upon Promises, while Providence
seems to run cross to Promises. Christ's love to you it is free love. All that
he has given you it is free, his grace is free, his love is free, his salvation
is free, his peace is free, and himself is free. A dram of grace in the heart
is better than a chain of gold about the neck! Now, Beloved, all that Christ
has bestowed upon you, it is free, and therefore it is a love of Benevolence. 6.
Christ loves his subjects with a love of compassion, sympathizing with them in
all their sorrows and sufferings. Truly this is a great comfort indeed, in all
their ^^^lictions, says the Text, He was a^^^^^^, Isa. 63.9. So says the
Apostle, Heb. 4. We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the
seeling of our infi^i^ies: that is, we have art* High Priest that is touched
with the feeling of ^^r Infirmities, one that does weep in our ^^rs, and sigh
in our sighs, and sorrow in o^^ sorrows, and suffer in our sufferings; and
therefore says Christ, Saul, Saul, why pers^^^test thou ^^e? Oh what a sweet
love is this, a love of compassion, and sympathizing with us in a^^ sorrows and
sufferings! Christ was first persecuted by Paul in his Members, and afterward
he was persecuted in Paul as one of his Members. Now, Beloved, Jesus Christ
loves his Subjects with a love of compassion; and therefore let thy sufferings
be what they will, Jesus Christ does as it were bear a share with thee. (...)
Christ loves his people with a love of (...) and complascency, Prove. 8.17. I
love th^^ th^^ love me. The King shall greath (...) in thy beauty: Psalm. 45.11.
speaking there of Christ, The King shall greatly delight in thy bea^^^, with
great delight and complascency. And therefore, Beloved, Christ calls ^^s
Church* (...) Love, his Dove, his Beloved, his Fair Ou^. Oh, how ^n^initely
does. Christ love his Church! certainly Christ bears a great love to his
Char^^^ and hence it is you read, Christ walks among (...) golden candlesticks,
and he fe^deth among the lilli^^^ and his delight is with the sous of men.
Although poor Believers be Rav^as in the World's eye yet they are Doves in
Christ's eye, they are very precious in his esteem; though they be the ^o^thing
of wicked men's souls, yet the^ are dearly beloved of God's soul; (...) delights
in them: O how much is Christ taken with them, The King shall greatly delight
in them! 8. Christ loves his people with an everlasting love, an enduring love;
it is a love that (...) dies, never w^^eth cold: Christ's love, it is (...) a
Fountain overflowing, but never dried (...) whom he loved from Eternity, those
he loves (...) Eternity, and they are Believers. Now, Sirs, (...) not this a
great favor to be beloved of God? In Joh. 13.5. He loved them even to the end;
no^ for a day, or a mon^^, or a year, not for a flash and away, but even to the
end. And in Jer. 31.3. speaking there of his love, it is called (...)
everlasting love. I have loved thee says God, ^it^^an everlasting love. Oh,
Sirs, this is a love that shall bed and board with thee, that shall ^e down and
rise up with th^^, that shall go to thy Deathbed with thee, to thy Grave with
thee, and to Heaven with thee; the Saints shall put off the Jewel of Faith when
they die* but not the Jewel of Love, for that shall remain with them to
Eternity; God loves his Saints with an everlasting love. 9. With an universal
love; his love is universal to all the Saints: Oh there is not one Saint but
Christ infinitely lo^es; he loves them as the I other lo^es him; he lo^es poor
Lazarus as well as rich Abra^am* and despised Job as well as honorable David;
he loves the poorest Saints, as well as the richest, he lo^es them all alike,
God is no Respecter of persons. Oh where is these such a King now as Christ!
They peculiarly love their No^^^^, their Favorites, peculiarly their Darlings,
but Christ loves all his Subjects, Christ's (...) extends to all his Saints;
his love it is like the beams of the Sun, which reaches all ways, East, West,
North and South, so does Christ's love. 10. His love it is a correcting love:
Whom he loves he chas^iseth; he cerre^^^^ ^ery son whom he receives. 11.
Christ's love ^^s a directing love; he has pro^^^ed to guide and direct his
people in the way wherein they ought to walk. Oh, Sirs, put all these
particulars together, and sure you must needs confess, that Jesus Christ loves
his Subjects infinitely as it was said of Lazarus, when Christ wept for him,
they made this construction of it, Oh how he loves him! O, Sirs, how does
Christ love you, who are his people? He loves you infinitely, even beyond
measure, his love it pa^^^th knowledge. Now, O Sirs, for the Lords (...)
consider of it, and let this draw forth your love to him. I shall the next
opportunity come to show you the Love of Christ's Subjects to him, if the Lord
give leave.


Canticles 5.16.

THe Spouse indeed was sick of love, but Christ exceeded ^er, for he died for
love; Whilst we were sinners Christ died for us, says the Apostle: He loved us
more than his own life yea, the very life of Christ, to him was not too dear
for us. Some write of a Fowl called a Pelican, and they say that she feeds her
young ones with her own Blood. O, Sirs, Christ is our Pelican, that has
nourisht and fed us with his own Blood: My flesh is meat indeed and my blood is
drink indeed, says Christ, John 6.55. Christ's red Blood has taken away our
red Guilt; scarlet red Sinners are by Grace become milk-white Saints. All our
precious Mercies come swimming to us in precious Blood Christ bled love at
every Vein; his drops of Blood were drops of Love, yea, the more bloody, the
more lovely; he was most lovely upon the Cross, because then he showed most
love to us. The last day I showed you the great love which Jesus Christ bears
to his subjects: And the sum of my Discourse was this: That Jesus Christ loves
his subjects with an everlasting and enduring love. That which I am now to show
you, is this, That all Christ's subjects love him, and what a kind of love it
is. The Saints love to Christ is vehement and strong: This will appear, if you
consider to what the Scripture likens and compares the Saints love. Now it is
compared to four things. 1. To Sickness. 2. To Death. 3. To the Grave. 4. To
Fire.
To these things is a Believer's love compared in Scripture: I shall handle
them in order.

1. Sickness, this is the first comparison which does set forth the strength of
the Believer's love: this is set down in two places of this Book of Canticles,
in Cant. 2.5. Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick
of love. And in Chap. 5.8. Tell ye him whom ^y soul loves, that I am sick of
love. She is overwhelmed, she is overcome, and even ravished with his love and
beauty. Oh I thirst, I faint, I pant, I long for him! Oh, Sirs, the Church is
very sick, and ready to swoon: never was Ahab so sick for a Vineyard, never was
Sisera so desirous for Milk, nor Sampson for Water, nor Rachel for a Child, nor
Amnon for his Sister Tamar, as poor brokenhearted Sinners are for Christ; when
Christ gets into the Heart, he draws all the affections to him, I remember the
Speech of a gracious Woman, I have ^orn (say^ she) nine Children, with as much
pain (...) ^ther W^men do, and yet I could with all my ^ea^t ^ea^ them ^ver
again, yea, bear them and fee^ the^ all the days of my life, so I ^ight ^e ^ure
of a part in Christ. Oh how infinitely do Believers love Christ! David wonders
at his own love, Ps^^. 119.9^. O ^o^ I love the Law* He makes a wonder ^t it
here, with what vehemence he lo^es God's Word, O how I l^^e (...) Law: So the
Sp^^se h^re, she does not (...) love him, but sh^'s (...) love ^e^dy to die f^r
love. Oh, S^rs, h^re is a sickness, but not unto death, but unto life; it is a
sickness that sti^^, bring^th Blessedness and Happiness with it; a sickness
which shall be cured by him who is the great Physician of Souls. This is the
first, she compares her Love t^ Sickness.

2. The next thing whereby she expresseth^ the strength of her love to Christ,
it is by Death: this you have in Cant. 8 chapter 6. she there tells you, Her love
it is strong as death, Be^o^ed, you know Death is strong, it is the King of
Terrors, and the Terror of Kings; it subdues all sorts of People, high and low;
rich and poor, old and young, good and bad the greatest Monarchs, Kings and
Emperors be thrown down by Death: Whe^^ did ever that man dwell that was too
strong for Death? If strength could have resisted it, then Sampson had mis^ it;
could Greatness have overlookt it, Nebuchadnezzar had escaped it; could Beauty
have out-fac'd it, then Absal^m had never met it; could Riches have bribed it,
Dives had avoided it. But alas none of these Gallants were hard enough for
Death, it trod on the necks of them all: And therefore oh look upon Death all
of you, as a thing you must meet with, and look upon your Lives as a thing you
must part with. Now by this you may guess what love is, it is strong as Death;
Ay strong indeed: Oh how strong is Death; Nay, a Believer's love to Christ is
not only strong as Death, but stronger than Death, as some Scriptures make it
appear. A Believer's love to Christ is stronger than Death: I am persuaded,
says Paul, neither life nor death, princip^^ities nor powers, things present
nor things to come, shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39. Death, though it may kill us, it cannot
hurt us, though Death may send us to the bed of darkness, yet it cannot send us
to the place of torments; though ^t may take away our lives, it cannot take away
our loves: bloody Tyrants have taken away Marty^s lives for Christ, but they
could ^ever destroy their love to Christ. One of ^^e Primitive Christians, when
he came to f^rs^ (...), Oh (said he (...) I shall die f^r (...) Savior b^^
(...): Oh I could die a hundred ^^^es for Christ. Alas, He was grieved because
he should suff^^ but once, and had no more lives to lay ^o^n: Oh I could die a
hundred times for him: Oh, Sirs, love it is a thing that out lives al^ Enemies,
all Persecutions, all Dangers, nay Death it self, as Rev. 12.11. says the Text
They love I not their lives unto death: and (...) says Job, Though then kill
me, yet will I tr^^^ in thee: as if he had said O Lord, though th^^ take away my
prosperity, my greatness, m^ health, my goods, my children, yea, my li^^ it
self, thou shall: never take away my love Though thou kill me yet will I trust
in thee; Jo^ 13.15. So that is not only strong as Death but stronger than
Death, for love is the Co^querour at the last.

3. Another thing whereby she expresse^ the strength of her love and strong
affecti^^ to Christ, it is the Grave, and this you ha^^ in Chap. 8.6. Here love
is cruel as the gr^^^^ The Grave it is the bed of darkness, which always craving
and never satisfied, but ^^vours all that comes: Christ tells us in Jo^ 4.14.
He that drinks of the water which shall give him, shall thirst no more. Wh^^
thirst no more? No, no more after (...) World and worldly things, but more
(...) more after Christ and Heaven: He that drink of the waters which I give
him, shall thirst (...) more. No more after these poor low thin^ but more and
more after Christ. No h^^^ry man did ever with more appetite long (...) bread,
nor a thirsty man long for water, no^ naked man for clothes, nor a covetous m^^
for riches, nor a sick man for health, not condemned man for pardon; than Souls
(...) gracious do for Christ Jesus: My soul thirst^th for thee, says David, in
Psalm. 63.1. My soul thirsts far thee. Why, David, how does your soul thirst
for God? Why, he tells you in Psalm. 42. As the heart pants after the
^^ater-brooks; so does my soul after thee, O God. Now mark, Sirs, the poor Heart
which is hunted by Dogs, his nature, it is as it were ^ll ever on a flame, in a
burning heat, and ^^en it pants, and thirsts, and is ready to die for water.
Now says David, As the heart p^^teth after the waterbrooks, so does my soul
after thee, O God. Oh the vehemence here of David's thirst. And therefore he
t^lls you elsewhere, Whom have I i^ heaven out thee? and there is none I desire
on earth in comparison of thee, Psalm. 33. Do you desire none besides God' do
not you desire your Wives, your Children, your Crown, your Kingdom? Yes, these
he desired in their places, but these ^ere nothing in comparison of God. I
remember the saying of a Martyr, to one that asked him if he did not love his
Wife and Children, when they wept by him, Love them, yes, (says he) if all the
World were ^old, and mine to dispose of, I would give it all (...) live with
them, though it were in a Prison; (...) (says he) in comparison of Christ I
love them no^. Oh here was a spirit now! Oh, ^irs, we must leave Father, and
Mother, to come to Christ: You know Peter, to come to Christ, would go upon the
bare water rather than fail, he went upon the Sea to Christ; truly it was a
dangerous passage, (...) truly Peter bore up excellently well wh^ his Faith
bore up, but when his Faith (...) then Peter began to sink too. The World is
(...) a Sea, in Da^^el (...) the Re^elations, (...) we must go upon these
Waters to Christ, and (...) sure to keep (...) Faith, and then you will hold
(...) but if Faith fails, you will be sure to (...) Oh Sirs the Believer's love
is unsatisfied (...) the Grave: None but Christ, none but Christ said the
Martyr; and as A^s^in said, Oh (...) take away all, ^^ly give ^e thy self.

4. Love is compared to Fire, and it has most vehement flame, in chap. 8.6.
Now, Be^^^ved, the Saints love to Christ, it is not o^^ compared to fire, for
its warming and heati^^ but for its kindling, and increasing, and b^^^ing and
flaming; While I was ^^^sing, says D^vid, the fire b^rned, Psalm. 39.3. What
fire? W^^^ the ^^re in his heart, not the fire on his heart^ And when the
Apostles went to preach th^^ Gospel, the fire sat upon their Tongues, (...)
Act^ 2.3. Now, Beloved, As the Saints love (...) compared to fire in the
Scripture; so you (...) find afflictions, and persecutions, ^^d perse^tors, and
(...), and these cruel things (...) accompany the poor Saints in the World,
(...) called waters and floods, in Dan. 9. and Psalm. (...) and Mat. 7. But two
Scripture, there are m^^^ than ordinary, in R^. 17.15. there they be ^^^^ed
waters, The waters which thou s^vest where (...) Where s^t, they be People, and
Multitu^^s, and ^^^tious, and (...), The Spirit opens it to (...) hands: and
you have another full Scripture (...) Re. 1^.15. It Is said there of the Dragon.
The (...) (...) cast out much water like a s^^ll after the (...). ^ow what is
this flood here? Why this flood, is bloody persecutions and devilish
superstiti^^. Now, Beloved, How long has the Dra^^^ been spewing out this
water upon the ^^^rch, and wherefore is all this water thrown ^^t? Why, it is to
quench this fire that I speak (...); but can they do it? No, alas, they may ^ew
till their eyes fly out of their head, and (...) no purpose, Ca^^. 8.7. Many
waters cannot (...) love, neither c^n the ^^^^ds drown it; all the ^^dy
persecutions and afflictions cannot ^^ch love; and therefore let wicked met:
and forth as many floods as they will, it cannot drown the Saints love. All the
water (...) Saul and his parry threw after David, did (...) quench this: No,
(says he) Though I walk ^^ough the Valley of the shadow of death, yet will I
(...) ill, in Psalm. 33.4. DAVID is not afraid to (...) by Death's door. (...)
all the water that (...) and the Rulers threw after the Apostles, ^^^ld never
^^^nch^ their love. Now, Belov^d, You shall ^^d, after the Apostles were whipped
^^^ndly, they went ^^ay rejoicing, and re^^red in this very thing, That they
were accoun^^^ worthy to suffer for Jesus Christ; And Heb. 10. (...) joyfully
the sp^^^ing of their goods. And (...) P^^l, in Romans 8.25. W^o shall s^p^rate
us from (...) love of Christ; shall tribulation, or distress, or (...), or
famine? and the like. Believe it, (...), all these be trying things, and yet
says (...) shall s^parate ^s from the love of Christ? (...) no, they cannot do
it, there is nothing shall (...) be able to separate us from the love of christ;
so that the Believers love is not made of such metal to be quenched by this
flood the Saints are all on fire for Christ. And s^^ we find that great flood
which Nero and Julian poured out upon the Primitive Christians: what, did it
quench the fire? I remember one of them said, (says he) Had I to Heads, they
should all off for Christ. And another, (says he) If every hair of my head
(...) a man, they should all suffer for Christ. Ala^ the poor Christians catch
their Tormen^ like so many Crowns, and therefore the Scripture tells you, That
many waters cannot q^e^^^ love. Now, Beloved, put these four thing together,
and it is very clear, that the Saint love to Christ is vehement and strong;
the^ will hang for him, they will burn for him, (...) any thing for him, suffer
the great^^^ tormen^^ rather than he should lose the least dram (...) glory.
But you will say, Why do all Christ Subjects love him with this love? The
^^^sons are two: 1. Because he deserves (...) 2. He commands it

First, Christ deserves our love: Why do (...) love him? Why he deserves it at
(...) hands, were it ten thousand times mo^^ than it is. Beloved, 'twas he that
created (...) it is he that sanctifies us, it is he that redee^ed us, and loved
us, 'twas he that change^ our natures, and pardons our sins, 'twas (...) that
made our peace, and pacified his F^ther's wrath for us, and satisfied his
Father justice for us, and wrought everlasting righteousness for us; 'twas he
that bore o^^ Cross, that we might wear his Crown. He waded through a Sea of
sufferings to bring pardon to our Souls: And does not this Christ deserve our
love? Oh infinitely, infinitely. And truly Sirs, the more Christ has done and
suffered for us, the deares should he be unto us. 2. As Christ deserves our
love, so he commands it: Christ commands us to love him above life, above wife,
above relations: Christ will have all, or none at all: Jesus Christ must weigh
heavier than all relations in the balance of our Affections, he commands us to
love him above all. Application. I now proceed to the Application of all to our
selves, which is the third thing in order to be handled, and I shall make three
Uses of it: 1. For Consolation. 2. Examination. 3. Exhortation.


First of all, Is it so that Christ loves us with an everlasting and a
never-dying Love? Why then here is comfort for you who are his people. I speak
only now to such; Comfort ye, comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says God, Isa.
41.1. And says Christ, J^h. 14.1. Let not your hearts ^e troubled: Christ would
not have his poor Saints troubled: and says the Apostle, Rejoice evermore, 1
These. 5.1^. Rejoice evermore! Alas, how can we rejoice when men villifie us,
when men reproach (...), and abuse us, and persecute us how can we rejoice? But
do but hark what Christ says, Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you fal^^y for my
Name's sake. Mark, Blessedness goes in the first place* Blessed are you when
men shall revile you, and persecute you. Oh, Sirs, it is matter of blessedness,
and therefore be not cast down: You know what was said of old, In the world you
shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world, Joh.
16. the la^^ Verse. O poor souls, this is all the H^^^ that ever thou shall
have, therefore be of good cheer; here thou have thy bad things thy good things
are to come; here thou ha^^ thy bitter things, but thy sweet things are to
come; here thou have thy prison, but thy palace is to come; here thou have thy
cross, thy crown is to come: here thou ha^^ thy rags, thy robes are to come;
here thou have thy sorrow, thy joy is to come; here thou have thy hell, thy
heaven is to come; after the cup of affliction, comes the ^up of sa^vation: The
sweetness of the Crown which shall he enjoyed, will make amends for the
bitterness of the Cross which may be endured One passing by a place where a
^^^ss lay o^ the ground, he caused it to be reared up, and found much riches
and treasures under it^ Oh Sirs, under your greatest troubles lie your greatest
treasures; the seed of sorrow (...) Earth, shall reap a golden crop of joy in
Heaven: they that sow Holiness in the seed (...) of their Lives, shall reap
Happiness in the ^^^vest of Eternity. Oh Sirs. never think to have an end of
your sorrow, till there be an en^ of your sin. The Apostle tells us, Our light
afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for a^ a for more exceeding and
eternal wait of glory. Alas! what is a dram of reproach to a weight of glory: O
what is a short moment of pain to eternity of pleasures? And therefore, Saints,
be of good cheer, here is comfort for you, your best days are to come, you are
Subjects who are beloved entirely, cordially, infinitely, with an enduring love.

Use 2. For the use of Examination: Is it so that the Saints love to Christ is
vehement and ^^rong? Why then, I beseech you, examine, and try, and search your
selves, how do your pulses beat after Christ? O that you would but examine your
selves, that you may know whose you are while you live, and whither you shall
^o when you die, and what will become of you to eternity. O Sirs, are you sick
of love? that was the first: do you love Christ? are you sick of love for
Christ? For the Lord's sake, Sirs, examine and try, and see whether you be sick
of love to Christ; it is to be feared, there is but few (...) the World sick of
that Disease: many are sick for Honors, that are ^^^t ratties to still men's
Ambitions; many are (...) for gold and silver, which is but a little shining
dirt; many are sick (...) blood, who eat up the Lords People like bread; ^od
will lay on such the hand of ^^ng^ance, who (...) on his Saints the hand of
Violence; many are ^^^k for Superstition, and the humane traditions of (...),
which instead of bringing their Souls to heaven, will beguile them of Heaven;
many (...) sick of their ^^^^erings; alas, who needs fear ^he Cross that is
sure of the Crown (...) but O how few are those that are sick of. love to
Christ? how many are there in this Congregation, that are sick of love to
Christ? For the Lord's sake do not deceive your selves, you see the Spouse was
ready to swoon, and faint, and die for Christ.

Secondly, Her love was as strong as death, nay stronger than death: is your
love so? O Soul can thou endure a Prison for Christ, burning for Christ,
hanging for Christ, forsaking all f^^ Christ? will thou venture on the Ways
f^^ Christ, as Peter did? O Sirs, for the Lord's sa^^^ look to your selves,
there are many profess lo^^ to Christ in words, but more that deny him (...)
their works; God was never more in me^^ mouths, and never less in men's lives.
Belov^^ is your love like the Grave, never satisfied Do thou cry out more for
Christ, Oh give (...) Christ, and take the World who will? Is th^^ flame in
your souls? For the Lord's sake tr^^ your selves, deal cordially with your poor
sou^^ Now Beloved, I have given you a taste of cr^^ sincere love, and blessed
are they who cast the^ love into the sweet bosom of their Maker.

Use 3. I shall now close all with a word (...) Exhortation: Well Si^^, if I
should Preach (...) till to morrow Morning, what can I say (...) to you to make
you to love Christ? H^t (...) lovely, H^s alto^^^^^r lovely; therefore love
Christ love Christ: All causes of love are in him; the^^ may be particular
causes of love in Men and ^^^g^l^, but I say all causes of love are in Christ
Oh Sir, love Christ. for if you do not, there (...) dreadful Curse pronounced
against you: the^ is no Heaven, no Happi^^^s, no Crown, without Christ; for in
him does all fullness dwell, and all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are
in Christ, and the Father gives forth all his loving kindness through Christ.
Beloved, is it not better swimming in the Waterworks of Repentance, than
burning in the Fireworks of Vengeance? one of them you must: there is no coming
to the fair Haven of Glory, without sailing through the narrow Strait of
Repentan^^: and therefore say what you will, unless you believe in your
Savior, your souls will be miserable forever; and therefore consider of what I
have said, and the Lord give you under standing in all things. Love Christ more
than ever, more than all, and above all, and then you shall be happy for
evermore.

Christ is a King, Priest, and Prophet; a King for Government and Rule, a
Priest for Sacrifice and Intercession, a Prophet for Preaching and Revealing
the Secrets of his Father's Bosom.

Canticles 5.16. BEloved, you know how far we proceeded the last Lord's Day. I
finished the 6th. Particular, wherein Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, ^^th
surmount and excel all other Kings, and it ^^s thus? Jesus Christ loves all his
Subjects, and all ^is Subjects love him: And I showed you the wonderful love of
Christ to his Subjects, and his subjects love to him, in many particulars: I
^^w proceed to other particulars wherein Christ excels the Kings of the earth.

Seventhly; Jesus Christ makes all his Subjects: By him were all things created
that are in heaven, dr^^^ as are in the ear^^, Col. 1.16. by him, by whom? by
Jesus Christ, by Christ were all things (...). He was in the world, and the
world was made by (...), and the world knew him not, Joh. 1.10. and so i^^ v 3.
All things were made by him, and without (...) nothing made. Jesus Christ he
creates his subjects; he makes his subjects, and gives being to his subjects:
in him we live, move, and love (...), Act ^7.28. Our King gives us our beings
he gives us a threefold being: Our first being in the state of Nature, our
second being in the state of Grace and our third being in the state Glory This
is the seventh thing wherein Jesus Christ excells all other Kings, he makes his
subjects, which none else can do.

Eighthly, Christ is the richest of all Kings (...) O-Sir^, he is rich in love,
he is rich in knowledge, rich in goodness, rich in wisdom, rich in grace, rich
in glory, he is as rich as the Father himself; the riches of the Deity are in
him, in him dwe^^ (...) fullness ^f the Godhead bod^^^, Col. 2.9. Mark (...),
in h^^^ there dwells a fullness: of what (...) why of the Godhead; and not only
so, but i^ ^well^in him bodily Alas, Sir, what (...) Princes single C^^wns or
the Pope's Tripp^^ Crown to Chirsts many Crowns: Christ (...) not one, or two,
or three Crowns, but ma^^ Crowns upon (...), Rev. 19 (...) H^^ (...) as a^^^^
of five, and (...) h^a^ wore many (...), Christ as ^^^her than any thing, (...)
^^cher than all the Kings in the World, for (...) is (...) of (...) things in
is (...) 1.2. (...) the (...) of (...), he (...) let the Treasury of S. (...)
at Venice, which was so much cried up through the World for a famous Treasury,
he fell (...) gropping of it, to find whether it had any bottom, and being
asked the reason of it, says he, My great Master's Treasury. ^^fers from yours
in this, (...) has (...) bottom, as I ^a^^ yours has, alluding to the Mines
of the Indies. But alas, what is the Spaniards Treasure to Christ's Treasure,
and what are his Mines to Christ's Mines? What are all the Jewels and Diamonds,
and Crown, and Scepters of the Kings of the earth to Christ? the whole T^rkish
Empire, says Luther, is but a ^^rust that God throws to dogs, which is a great
part of the world indeed; but it is no more than (...) bone or crust, which God
throws to^^egs. Oh Sirs. Christ^ Riches are so many they cannot be numbered,
they are so precious they cannot be valued, so great they cannot be measured:
Oh the infinite Riches of our King! Christ is (...) Mine of Cold, in which we
must dig till we find Heaven.

Ninthly, Christ excels all other Kings in this too. He Is a King whose power is
ab^olut^ over all Nations, and People, and Kindreds, and Tongues. Now, Beloved,
though e^rchly Kings have a groat power, yet not an absolute power over all
Nations, their power reaches no farther than their own Dominions: But now the
^ower of Christ it is an absolute power over all Nations, Kindreds and People.

Tenthly Jesus Christ is a King who rules o^^er the Souls and Consciences of
men, over the will and hearts of men; other Kings may rule over the estates of
men, over the bodies of man, but not over their Consciences: now this is
Christ's glory which he will give to no other; Christ by his power is able to
subdue the wills of men, and the hearts of men, though never so stubborn and
s^ut before. All the power in the World cannot do this; If all the Kings and
Princes and Emperors in the World were put together, they were not able to
subdue the heart of one poor man: they may beat his body, afflict his body,
torment his body; but as for his heart, I say all the Kings and Potentates
(...). the World, nay, all the Angels in Heaven cannot subdue the heart of a
poor si^ner; and this is the glory of Christ that He can d^^ this. Heart-work
is Gods work; the great Heart-maker must be the great Heart-breaker (...) none
can do it but he.

Eleventhly, Christ is a King that has no need of any instruments, he makes,
use of them sometimes, but he needs not any. Alas, Sirs, what can the Kings of
the earth do without instruments? How can they govern their Kingdoms without
instruments? They must have thi^^ instrument here, and the other there, or else
farewell Crown and Kingdom quickly. But Jesus Christ has no need of any, he can
do any thing by his own, power; by himself he destroyed Phar^^h and his great
host in the red sea, Exodus 14. By himself he overthrew Jericho, that great
City, Josh. 6. By himself he smote that great Army of a thousand thousand men,
the greatest Army that ever we read of, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. By himself he overthrew
Ammon and Moab, and Mount Seer, who warred against Judah, this now he did by
himself.

Secondly, See what he has done by we^k means; by weak means he smote the
Kings about Sodom; even by Abraham and his poor Family, Genesis 14. By weak means
(...) ^^erthrew that mighty Army of the Midia^ites by Gide^us 300, J^^g. 7. By
weak means he destroyed great Go^^ah, even by David; and great Sise^a by a
woman. By weak means he destroyed a Garrison of the Philistines, even by
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 1 14 Now this he did by weak means, and
much more. Now thirdly, See what be did contrary to means; Why contrary to
means he delivered the three children from burning, being in the fire. Dan. 3.
Contrary to means he delivered (...) from drowning, being in the Sea. Contrary
to means he preserved Daniel from devouring being in a Den of Lyon^. Contrary
to means he kept the Israelites from being drowned, being in the Sea: I say
this he ^^d contrary to means. And I might s^ew you what he has done by
contrary means, but I pass that, so that you see our King has no need of
Instruments, and therein he wonderfully excels all others.

Twelfthly, Christ is a King who will overcome and subdue all our Enemies, all
our Enemies within us, and all our Enemies without us, our King will subdue
them all. Our Enemies are very many, and very mighty, high in power, and high
in pride, and we are very weak; we may all speak in David's words, 2 Samuel: 3.
says he, I am this day weak, though a^^^nted King. How? David, weak to day, and
yet made King to day? Yes, says he, the sons of Zerviah are too hard for me:
Why, but Sirs, Jesus Christ is King of Kings, King those all Kings, and over
all Kings, and he (...) reign till he has put all h^s Enemies under his feet,
in 1 Cor. 15.25 Mark, he must Reign, he must of necessity, God has spoken it,
till he has put all his Enemies under his Feet, not only some, but all. Oh
this is good News to Saint^ excellent News, what King can ^^o thus but Christ?
what King can put all his Enemies under his feet? What earthly King can subdue
all his Enemies? Alas, they cannot subdue their own, for some Kings that we
read o^ have fell before their Enemy; for want of strength; Richard the Third
cried out in his distress, A Kingdom for a Horse, a Kingdom for (...) ^orse;
and yet all this could not save his life. Alas, alas, the most flourishing
Kings have been so far from subduing their Subjects Enemies, that they cannot
subdue their own, but Jesus Christ can subdue all his Enemies, He has (...)
power in Heaven and Earth given to him, in Matt. 28. So that if he speaks the
word, all his Enemies are overthrown even in a moment.

In the Thirteenth place, Christ surmount^ all other Kings in this, he is a
King that gives his Subjects the richest and best gifts of any other King
whatsoever, in Joh. 10.28. My sheep says he, hear my voice, and they know
(...), and they follow me, and I give to them eternal life. T^^ wise God, that
he may in^ite and encourage poor souls to holiness of life, sets before their
eyes the recompense of reward: that if the equity of his precepts do not
prevail the excellency of his promises may; he would fai^^^ catch men with a
golden bait, Abraham's ^^^^ant gave Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold to
Rebe^^^, that he might w^^^ her heart o^^^ to Isa^^, in Genesis 24. Oh the Jewels,
the excellent Jewels that Christ gives to poor souls to win their hearts unto
him; Christ gives us richly all things to enjoy; what can you desire more? 1 Timothy 6. (...) Alas, the men of the earth give but poo^ly and penuriously, but
Christ gives, richly Christ gives freely, no man in the World gives so freely
as Christ, Christ gives frequently, every day, every hour, be scatters Jewels
to poor souls. The great King of Person gave two of his Courtiets, to the one a
Golden Cup, to the other a Kiss, and be than had the Cup complained to the King
that his Fellow's Kiss was better than his Golden Cup. Oh, Sirs. Christ does
not put us off with a Cup of Gold, but gives us the Kiss; he gives the best
gifts to his best beloved ^^es, he gives his best love, his best joy, his best
peace, his best mercies. Oh where is there a King like this King? alas, earthly
Kings may give great Titles, or a place in the Court, and the like, they may
give a Title to day, and a Halter to morrow, as in the case of Haman; he may
smile to day, and frown to morrow; kiss to day and; kill to morrow; ^ut Christ
does not so, he gives the best of every thing, the best of his love, his best
blood, not the blood of his, singers, but the blood of his heart. Oh, Sirs, how
far does Christ excel all other in giving to his Subjects the best gifts. Oh,
Sirs, what a gift is heaven, what a gift is pardon, of sin! what King can give
his people such gifts; and herein the Lord Jesus infinitely excels all others.

14. In the last place, Christ makes all hi^ Subjects free, there is not one
subject that (...) has, but is a free man and woman. The^^ are some things
that Christ frees us from, and some things that he makes us free of; some
things he frees us from and what is that? wh^^ that which if we were not freed
from, would undo us to all eternity. First, He frees (...) from the Curse, the
cursed Curse: if Christ ha^ not freed us from the Curse, we had lived cursedly,
and died most cursedly, and been dam^ed for ever; but Jesus Christ has freed
us, in Gal. 3. Stand fast, says Paul, in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free; and in Joh. 8. (...) the Son make you free, then you are free indeed.
Again, he frees us from the guilt of sin; o^ pride would damn us, our
covetousness would damn us, our unbelief, would damn us, had not he freed us
from the guilt of sin; but Christ frees his people from this. Again, He has
freed us from the power of the Devil, insomuch that the Devil has nothing to
do with us, in Acts 26 and he frees us from the flames of hell, the torments of
hell, from the pit of hell^ Christ has cut off the intail of hell and
damnation, in (...) These. 1. He has freed us from wrath to come, that is,
Christ he has freed us from the flames of hell. Again, Christ has freed us
from slavery, from bondage, from (...) yoke, in Call. 3.1. Sta^^^ f^st in the
liberty wh^^^ with Christ has made you free, and be not again in^angled in the
yoke of bondage We are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens
with the Sai^^s, and of the household of God. in Ephesians. 2.9. And Christ tells us
himself, in Mat. 11. the (...). verse. My yoke is easy and my burden is light:
here we have burden upon burden, yoke upon yoke; but says Christ, my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light: Christ has delivered us from slavery, we are
not under the Law, but under Grace. These things we are freed from. And there
are other things we are made free of, and that in Heaven: we are all made free
men and women of the new Jerusalem, and we may trade there, and have as good
right there as any other Saints; we are fellow Citizens with the Saints, free
men of Heaven, not only of Heaven, but of all the Promises and all the
Privileges that the Saints enjoy. N^w is not this a wonderful mercy that our
King has done for us? he has freed us from all those miserie^ which would
ruin us forever, and made us free of all the excellent ^iviledges whatsoever
which poor souls can enjoy. Now on how far does Christ excel (...) ^ther Kings?
the Rulers of the earth they may perhaps some of them at least, lay heavy
burdens, upon the consciences of men, and bodies of ^^n, and the estates, of
men; but Christ (...) burden upon us, No, Christ h^^^ made ^s free, and no
people so (...) because Christ has f^^^d us upon the Cross (...) ^^aht it dear
enough, it cost him (...) his noble blood. I might name more particulars
wherein Christ excels all other Kings, but I think these are very sufficient to
demonstrate it.

(...) Use. I shall close up this head w^^^ a word of Application, and so shall
finish this second Title, King of Kings. 1. Is it so that Christ is a
threefold King, as I have showed you, and he is a King that does so far
surmount all the Kings of the earth? Oh then however the World goe's here is
comfort for Saints, that they have such a King. Oh what a mercy is this, what a
comfort is this to the Lords people, that Christ is a King above all Kings, and
over all Kings, and must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet!
all his enemies must be brought down and made his Footstool. Now this should
comfort the people of God, and teach them to wait Christ's leisure, and let him
alone; some earthly Kings would do great matters, but they want power; but
Christ wants no power, for all power is given him in heaven and earth. Now,
Sirs, did you really believe thus, that all power is given to Christ, certainly
it would be a cordial to revive you in the worst of times, and saddest of
trials. He who is our Savior, he who is our Head, our Brother, our Friend, is
King of Kings. Oh, Sirs, this Doctrine of Christ's Kingly power it is a very
sweet Doctrine to the Members of Christ: and I beseech you let these
considerations which I have laid before you bear up your spirits. I have showed
you with what an entire love Christ loves his subjects, he is King of Kings,
and can do any thing without instruments, he needs none to help him to do his
work, he can if he pleases, enable the most despicable creatures, as Flies,
and Frogs, and Catterpillers and Gra^hoppers to do his work: Therefore let
these considerations take the impression upon your souls. If a man should tell
you your Brother or Sister beyond the Seas were advanced to great honor; as
Joseph when he heard his Father was alive go, says he, and tell my father of
all my glory and greatness in Egypt, he will rejoice a^^. Now I have ^^ld you a
relation of the excellency of Christ's Kingly power; and therefore let this
quiet your spirit, Be still, says the Lord, and know that I am God, Psa. 46.
It Is enough for you to know that I am God, therefore be still, consider what I
am.

2. Use. Secondly, By way of Exhortation, I have one word to say to the Saints,
and another to Sinners. 1. To Saints; If it be so that Christ is King of Kings,
King above all Kings, and over all Kings, Oh then you who are the people of
God, you who are near and dear to him, upon whom and in whom Christ is formed
and stamped, Oh that you would give all glory, and praise, and honor to Christ,
study to advance his fame, He has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light, says the Apostle, to show forth his praise. Oh Sirs, this
should be our great endeavor: Oh that you who pretend friendship and love to
Christ would endeavor in your places to advance Christ! 2. A word or two to
such as are none of the subjects of Christ. Let me exhort you to believe in
Christ; embrace him, receive him, to lay hold upon him, to be one with him, or
else thou will one day cry out as that King did in distress, Oh, a Kingdom for
a Horse, a Kingdom for a Christ. Oh thou would give ten thousand worlds if
thou had them to give, for a part in Christ. Alas, sinner, what is the reason
that Christ is no more in thy ^^eem? thou will part with Christ rather than
part with thy swea^ing, and drunkeness, and filthiness; O this is sad, there is
no other Name under Heaven whereby we can be saved: he is the desire of all
Nations, and we can never be happy without him; and the ^^ore, for the Lord's
sake, Sirs, as you love your souls, lay ^^rd upon him, that he may be the
Savior of our souls, the joy of your hearts, and your all in all. For the
Lord's sake Sirs, consider of it, you that do yet stand out against Christ; Oh
that I could but tempt you into Christ! Oh that I could prevail with you to
love Christ, and to have strong desires after him Alas, Sirs, if you do not
believe and part with all your iniquities, you must part with Christ at last;
and what a sad parting will that be to part with God, and Christ, and Heaven,
when thou shall come to know what thou have lost, by hugging thy darling
corruptions? Oh what a sad condition will it be! and therefore, I beseech you
think of it in time, and believe in your Savior, that your souls may be saved
in the day of Christ.


Mighty God.
Cant 5.16. He is altogether lovely.


Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely.
I Finished the second Title which is given to Christ in Scripture, King of
Kings. I now proceed to a third, and that is, Mighty God; one of Christ's
Titl^e is, The Mighty God. You have it in Isa. 9.6. he is there called, The
Mighty God. Beloved, I have showed you from the second Title, That Christ is a
great King, a King above all Kings, a King over all Kings, and the King of
Kings, and that his Laws are most equal, his Subjects most happy, having no
other Tax said upon them, than Love and Fear. But now this Title holds him
forth, not only as a great King, but as a great God, before wh^^ all the Kings
and Kingdoms are but as a little (...), or a small dust, Isa. 40. From this
Title, The Mighty God, I shall lay down this Proposition That Jesus Christ is
true and perfect God. that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, that is the
point which I shall insist upon. There are two sorts of People in the World
that deny my Doctrine, who deny the Deity of Jesus Christ, who say the second
Person in the Trinity is not God.

1. The Unbelieving Jews. If Christ had came as the Jews dreamed, as a great
Monarch, trea^ing upon nothing but Crowns and Scepters, and the necks of Kings,
and had all the Potentates of the Earth to attend his Train; I say, had Christ
come in this worldly glory, and pomp, and power, then it may be the Jews would
have believed on him, may be then he should have been their God. But now,
Beloved, because Christ came poorly, and meanly, and made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, as the Scripture says,
Phil. 2 7. He took none of this gallantry, none of this bravery upon him, but
made himself of no reputation, and therefore the Jews slighted him, and
disowned him. The Tur^s mock us at this day with our crucified God; Oh, say
they, you worship a crucified God: and some of the Heathens said, They would
not believe in a hanged God. O blessed Jesus, thus art thou reproached and
despised by the unbelieving World, because thou came poorly, and die
shamefully for our sins. They who despise the death of the Lamb, shall surely
feel the wrath of the Lamb. They who turn away their ears from hearing Christ's
voice now, Christ will turn away his ears from hearing their cries then.

2. There be others that deny the Deity of Christ, and they are some seditious
ones in this Nation, who say, that Christ is but mere Man, and that every Saint
is as much God as Christ: And further, they say, that to equal Christ with God,
is high Blasphemy. They that ^id not own them at his first ^^^ing, Christ will
not (...) them at the second ^^^ing: they that will not obey the t^ut^ of God
revealed from heaven unto them, shall suffer the wrath of God revealed from
known against them. O ye Blasphemers, ye say, the-Son is not God, the Father
says, he is God: now who speaks true, God or you? Let God be true, and every
m^n a liar. That it is so, I shall give you most clear proof, express
Scriptures spoke it forth, that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, T^^.
2.13. says the Apostle there; Looking for the (...) hope, (...) glorious
appearance of the great God Mark Christ is here not only called God, but Great
God. Oh Saints, he that come from Heaven to make us Righteous, will also come
from Heaven to make us Glorious: Looking for the bless^^ hope, (...) glorious
appearance of Jesus Christ. Not only so, but Christ is also called Mighty God,
Isa 6.9. Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God. Nay, not only Mighty God, but
again, God blessed for ever; Christ is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. Not only
God blessed for ever, but the true God. Joh. 5.20. Jesus Christ is there
called, the tr^^ God. (...) ^nly the true God, but a God for ever and ever.
Heb. 1.8. Mark there, unto the Son he said, Thy Throne is for ever and ever.
The Father he calls the Son God himself, and therefore well may we: Unto the
Son he said, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever. Thus you see the Doctrine
fully proved, that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God. But, Beloved, because
the Deity of Christ is so much questioned at this day, and this being one of
the serious and chiefest points in Di^inity, therefore I shall give you some
Considerations or Demonstrations, or Arguments to fortify you against this
great Error before named. 1. That Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, he is
for Time coeternal, for Nature co-essential, for Dignity coequal with the
Father* 1. For Time coeternal, Joh. 17.5. O Father, glorify thou me with thy
self, with that glory which (...) thee before the world was. You see he^^ Sirs,
Christ was before the world was, Christ was from everlasting, from the
beginning Prove. ^ 23 speaking concerning Christ, I wa^ set from everlasting,
from the beginning, before ^ver the Earth wa^^ And therefore Christ (...)
called the (...) 6. So (...) Rev (...) Christ there speaking of (...) say^ he,
(...) which was, (...) ^ighty, Mark, Sirs, Christ is the^s^me before Time in
Time, and after Time; which was, and i^ and is to come Now, Beloved, none can
be Eternal but God, but Christ is Eternal, and therefore he is God, and
coeternal with his Father.

2. He is for Nature co-essential; I and my Father are one, says Christ, Joh.
10.30. So again. Joh. 1^ 5, 7. There are three (...) record i^ heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these thre^ are one. Mark here, they are
one, Joh. 14.1. When Philip desires to see the Father, Show at the Father, and
it is enough; says Christ in the (...) and to verses, He that has seen me,
has seen the Father: How so^ For I am in the Father, and the Father is in me.
So that you see Christ is more than mere Man, he is one with the Father. Oh,
Sirs, he is the (...), the God-man, if you make the Son mere Man, you must make
the Father so too.

3. He is for Dignity coequal with the Father, Phil. 2.6. Who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with his Father. Christ thought
it no diminution of his Fathers glory, to be equal with his Father in glory.
And you shall further find, that all the honor which belongs to God the
Father, the Father has commanded us to give it to the Son. You have a full
Te^t, Jo^. 5.23. That all men should honor the son even as they honor the
Father: For he that honors not the Son honors not the Father. Therefore
it is clear to every eye, that Christ is for Dignity coequal with the Father:
for the Father has commanded us to give the same Honor to Christ which is due
to him; so that (...), certainly, to equal Christ with God, for in him are the
r^n^s of the Deity, and the (...) of the Godhead (...) him, as you may see,
Col. 2.9. This is the first Argument, he is for Time coeternal, for Nature
co-essential, for Dignity co equal with the Father.

Secondly, I shall lay down this Argument to prove the Deity of Jesus Christ;
consider the work of Creation; surely he that made Heaven and Earth, must needs
be a God, you will yield to this, for says the Lord himself, All the Gods that
have not made heaven and earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under
heaven, Jer. 10.11. But now, Beloved, Jesus Christ made the Heavens and the
Earth, and all things therein, and therefore he is God: See a few Scriptures
for this, Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him. Mark, this is by Christ, all
things were made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made, Col.
1.16. By him were all things created in heaven and earth, visible and
invisible, all things were made by him and for him. So again, Joh 1.10. He was
in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. Now
Beloved, had Christ been less than God he could not have made Heaven and Earth,
and therefore he is a God of Glory, the great God that now sits upon the
Throne; for he created the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein.

3. That Christ is the true and perfect God, appears if you consider the works
and miracles which he did in the days of his flesh; here is another
unanswerable Argument to prove the Godhead of Jesus Christ. The winds and the
Seas obey him, the Devil came out of the possessed, the blind received their
sight, the lame walked, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, lepers were cleansed,
the dead were raised, the sick were healed. Oh, who could do this but God* as
you may see, Mat 11.5. But you may say, the Apostles did great Miracles, and
yet were no Gods. Why, it is true; they did great Miracles, but in whose Name
did they do it (...) and by whose power and strength did they do it? was it in
their own names, and by their own power? No, Beloved, they themselves confess
the contrary, Act. 12.13. they tell you, It is not by their own power, but in
the Name and power of Jesus Christ, so in Act. 4.10. We do it in the Name of
Christ. So that, Beloved, this is a strong Argument to prove the Deity of
Christ; they did great Miracles in his Name, and by his power his Disciples did
great Miracles. And with this Christ satisfied the Disciples of John, Go and
tell what things you hear and see, how the lame walk, and the blind receive
their sight, go and tell John. Now I say, these great things could be done by
none but a great God; and therefore Jesus Christ is not only the Son of Man,
but the Son of God, even the God blessed for ever.

But 4ly, Consider Divine Worship is due unto Christ* now you know Worship is
proper only to God, Worship him that made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, said
the Angel, Re. 14.7. Worship only is proper to God alone. Now, Beloved, all the
Acts of Worship that belong to God the Father, are given to the Son Jesus
Christ, both Angels and men are commanded to worship him as well as we, Heb. 1
6. Let the Angels of God worship him, and in Phil. 2.10. That at the Name of
Jesus every knee should ^ow, of things in heaven, and things on the Earth.
Mark, Sirs, things in Heaven, as well as things on Earth, must worship Christ
and Christ himself says, (...) 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Mark, Sirs, speaking to those that believed in God, says he, Ye believe in God;
believe also in (...). Now, Beloved, we are commanded to pray to Christ, to
glorify Christ, to believe in Christ, to honor Christ, and worship Christ,
and therefore the Saint^ have prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; as St^phen
did: so that you see Worship is due to Christ both from Angels and men, and
therefore he must needs be God.

5ly, There were clear Predictions of the coming of Christ, under the Old
Testament. No sooner was man fallen, but Christ was promised, The Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpe^ts head. All the Prophets foretold of the Messiah,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, Daniel, Malachy, and the rest of them, how falsely he
should be accused, and how basely he should be used; and this will be enough to
condemn the unbelieving Jews, and make them speechless in the great day of
Account. I might gi^e you the Sayings of the same Prophets, but you may find
them your selves; search the Old Testament, and you will find them all speak
more or less of Jesus Christ. Thus have I clearly proved, by express Scripture,
and undeniable Arguments, that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God. I proceed
to the Use and Appl^cation of it to our sel^es. Use. The first Use shall be for
Information; if it be so, that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, then,
though this be a strange truth to some, yet it is a sound truth: though the
Mystery be deep, yet the Di^i^ity is true, that he who made man, became man,
suffered by man, and for man: W^th^^^ controversi^, says the Apostle, great is
the myste^y of godlin^ss. What is the matter? God manif^st^^ in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without contro^ersie without all doubt, a great mystery says the
Apostle, God manif^sted in the flesh. The Schoolmen compare the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ to (...) Garment made by three Sisters, and one of them wears it.
(...) all the three Persons in the Trinity had a ha^^ in the Garment of
Christ's Flesh, but the ^^^cond Person He wore it, He was God mani^^st in the
flesh; and this is a great mystery. And truly, Sirs, i^ is a great mystery for
Happiness to become a Curse, Gal. 3. for him that made the Angels, to become
(...) th^^ the Angel^. Heb. ^. for the Creator to become a Creature: for him
that had the riches of all in him, (...) become poor; Oh this is a great
mystery, that he, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain his glory, would be
wrap^ in the r^gs of flesh, that the great God should take upon him a piece of
Earth, that he who hangs the Earth upon nothing, should hang upon a Cross,
between two Thieves, truly a great Mystery; that he who rules the Stars, should
suck the Breasts; that he who thunders in the Clouds, should be cra^^ed in a
Manger. Oh a great mystery, that Abraham's Lord should become (...) Son; that
the God of Abra^am should take upon him Ab^aham's Seed, what a mystery is this?
He was conceived in the bowels of his Mother, that he might be received into
the b^s^me of his ^^ther. Therefore says the Apostle, (...) great ^s the
mystery of (...), Go^ (...) in the flesh. God's Son became Man's Son, that we
poor men's sons might become God's sons, 2. But secondly, is Jesus Christ true
and perfect God? My second inference is this, that Jesus is a precio^s Christ:
He is Honey in the Mouth, Beauty in the Eye, Joy in the Heart, and Music in
the Ear. Let all their money perish with them, who ^^^em all the gold in the
world worth (...) days s^ciety with Jesus Christ, said that great Mar^^ess when
he was tempted with Money. Oh, S^rs, Christ's Members are the happiest,
Christ^s Comforts are the sweetest, Christ's Reward the highest. Christ's.
Precepts are the put off, Christ's Glory is the greatest, Christ's Love is the
tru^st, Christ's Riches are the most precious. He is the Glory of God, the
Paradise of Angels, the Beauty of Heaven the Redeemer of Men. In He^. 1.3. He
is there called, The ^^ightness of his Father's Glory. He is the rich Jewel in
the Cabir^^ of Glory (...) is that sparkling Pearl, whosoever has ^un, cannot
be poor, and whosoever wants him, cannot be rich.

Thirdly, If Christ be true and perfect God, the^ Christ's Members are the
greatest and happiest: Christ is God Almighty's only Son, believers are God
Almighty's only Daught^rs. You read of God's Daughter, in ^sal 45. Christ is
the King, Believers are the Queen. Ch^^st is the Bridegroom, Believers are his
Bride; Christ is the Lamb, Believers are his Wife, R^^. 21.9. What shall I say?
The Angels in glory are in a ^very glorious sta^e, and yet let me tell you,
Believers in Christ be higher than Angels; they are Servants, we are Members:
they be the Friends of the Bri^g^^^m, we are th^^ Bride; they have their
personal glory, we have the same glory for substance with Jesus Christ, Joh.
17. The glory which thou give me, says Christ, I have given them. Believers
be nearer the Throne than Angels, and this does wonderfully speak out, that we
are higher than the Angels, in Rev. 5. The four beasts are ma^^r the Thr^me
than the Angels. Oh, Beloved, how are Believers advanced, how high are we
become, poor dust and ashes, to be above Angels! And this is the great
happiness which we get by Christ's assuming our Nature for the salvation of our
souls. Again, Christ's Members be not only the greatest, but the happiest; our
renewed condition is as good in Christ, as it was ^ad in Adam. Oh, Sirs, we
were not more cursed out of Christ, than we are blessed in Christ; Christ is as
full of life, as Adam was full of death; Christ is as full of sweetness to us,
as Adam was of bitterness to us. Truly, Soul, if thou can say Christ is
thine, I will speak next, and say, Soul, thou have that which is more worth
than a Kings Ransom, that which is more worth than all that which the Devil
promised Christ, when he showed him all the Kingdoms of the World. Oh the
happiness of poor Believers! Th^re is ^o condemnation to them who belong to
Christ Jesus, says Paul, Romans 8.1. Therefore they are happy. But, Fourthly, Is
Christ Jesus true and perfect God? then we infer from hence, that Gods love and
good will to mankind was very great. That Jesus Christ should come from Heaven
to take our Nature, that we might be partakers of the Divine Nature. Christ
took upon him our shame, that we might be partakers of his glory. One drop of
his blood is more worth then a Sea of ours, and yet he died our death, that we
might live his life; he suffered our Hell, that we might enjoy his Heaven. Oh
how infinitely did he love us! He endured the forests pains, that we might
enjoy the sweetest pleasures. The Scripture tells ^^s, that he came leaping, he
came with such a good will, he came leaping. As you know when a man goes
leaping, you may know that it is with a good will; he came leaping and
skipping, C^^^. He came leaping upon the mountains, and skipping on the hills.
Leaping, says Gregory, How so? Why, says he, from the Throne to the Womb, from
the Womb to the Cradle, from the Cradle to the Cross, and from thence to the
Throne again; this was his leap. Oh Sirs, Oh Sirs, how much did this Jesus
suffer for poor Believers! he was hanged upon the Cross in Mount Calvary, that
we might sit upon the Throne in Mount Sion.

2. Use. Secondly, by way of Exhortation.

First, To sinners, to unbelievers, to graceless persons, I have a few words to
say. Oh Sirs, Oh Sirs, methinks I cannot but do toward you as Christ once did
toward ^r^a^^m, when he came nigh the City, he wept ever it. I rely, sinners,
your stare is? we^p^^g stare your state is a miserable state, you ^e ^pe^ to
all the Wrath all the Vengeance, all the Curses under Heaven O poor miserable
sinner^ I cannot you pity your selves! the Lord of Heaven p^^y you^. Did Jesus
Christ come from (...) to yo^ ^inners and will not you come (...) your ^ins
toc^^u^ to Christ Did Christ, (...) from his ^^^then Bosom, and lest his (...)
as his glory to c^^e to the poor lost World, and to die and suffer here for
poor lost Sinners, and what, Sinner, will this make no impression upon you? Let
me tell you Sirs, Christ came into the World for no other end and reason, but
only to die for poor Sinners. It was the great design of Christ to save poor
Sinners. Sirs, if you will not credit me look into the Scripture, and them
surely you will believe it, 1 Timothy 5.16. This is a faithful ^^^ing, says the
Apostle, ^^d worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World
to save sinners. Mark, Sirs, he came into the World to save Sinners: Christ
hanged upon the Cross, and wept upon the Cross, and died upon the Cross to save
Sinners. It was for poor Sinners all the hardship, all the wants, all the
trials and buffettings which he met with, it was for the sakes of poor Sinners;
Christ has suffered all this woe and misery for thee, and wilt not thou leave
thy swearing, and thy drunkenness, and wickedness for Christ? Oh how can thou
answer this before God Almighty, that Jesus Christ, the King (...) King, should
come into the World, and abase himself so much as to be ^n a mean estate, and
yet that this should nothing affect you? Oh who will pity you when you are
damned, when you are how ling and scaring in Hell, that would not pity your
selves. Oh for the Lords sake con^^^ that God should come and take our Nature,
^^at he should take our K^gs, that we might we^^ h^s Robes: and what, will you
rather ^e^^^^ in your sins and die than come to Christ for life* Oh sinners,
for the Lords sake put off your Beggars Rags, that you may put on his lovely
Robes. I have read of Al^^^^^^r the Great, th^^ when he came against a City, he
used to set up a Candle, and if they yielded before the Candle was out, they
should have quarter; but if they stood out, then they must expect nothing but
hanging, drawing, and quartering. O Sirs, Christ sets up a Candle to thee, and
if thou will come in to day, thou shall have mercy, or else there will be none.
If all the Angels and Saints in Heaven should fall upon their knees, and say, O
Lord, spare this poor creature one dram of mercy for him, it would not be
regarded, the Lord will not hear them: and therefore for the Lords sake
consider, men are sentenced not only for their sinfulness, but for their
slothfulness, men may pe^ish for being servants that are unprofitable, as well
as for sinners that are abominable: methinks you should take as much delight in
those Precepts that enjoy^ holiness, as in those Promises that assure
happiness; if the day of Mercy leave you graceless, the day of Judgment will
find you speechless; though you may resist the judgment that he lays before
you, yet you can never resist the judgment that he lays upon you; there is no
standing before Christ, but by standing in Christ: ungodly men fear no wrath,
because they feel no wrath, because they sin unpunished, they think there is no
punishment for their sins; because he go^th on to spare them, they go on to
provoke him; as he adds to their lives, they add to their lusts; because he is
very merciful, they will be very sinful; because he is very good, they will be
very bad; because Justice winks, men think he is blind; because he does not
reprove 'em for their sins, therefore they think he does approve them in their
sins. But enraged Justice will avenge the quarrel of abused Mercy; the longer
God forbears, not finding amendment, the sorer he strikes when he comes to
Judgment. O Sinners, though the patience of God be lasting, it is not
everlasting; if by the warning piece of God you be not reformed, you shall be
consumed: the longer God is fetching about his hand, the he^vier will be the
(...) when it comes: I gave he^ spot^ to repent of h^^ fornication, but she
repented not; what follows? Behold, I will c^st ^er into a bed, and they that
commit adultery with her, Rev. 2.21, 22. The day that begins in Mercy, may end
in Judgment; God is silent as long as our sins will (...) him be quiet. But
know that God has Vials of Wrath ^^lled with Indignation, for Vessels of Wrath
fitted for destruction; if Gods Mercy do not draw you to Repentance, Gods
Judgments will drive you to Destruction; the Sea of Damnation shall not be
sweetened with a drop of Compassion. Oh sinners, either seek out a Savior to
deliver you from the Wrath of God, or else find out a shoulder to bear up under
the Wrath of God. Oh that you would but consider your ways; has not God said,
That no Swearer, not Drunkard, nor Wh^remengers, nor Adulterers, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven? and such are some of you, God knows it, and your
conscience knows it, and yet you flatter your selves, (...) speak peace to your
selves, when God speaks not a word of peace to you. Oh Sinners, think of this
before the bottomless Pit has shut her mouth upon you. Oh do no longer neglect
God and your own salvation. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? If you neglect the great Salvation, you cannot escape the
great Damnation. 2dly, Believers, let me beseech you to stand fast, and to hold
fast that which you have already, Rev. 2.^5. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life, ver. 13. He has a Crown for Runners, but a
Curse for Runaways. As you look for happiness as long as God has a being in
Heaven so God looks for holiness as long as you have a being on Earth. As
many as walk according to this Rule peace he upon them, Gal. 6.16. To tread in
any other path on Earth, is but to mistake your way to Heaven; whilst you are
o^ this side Eternity, you must hold the Scep^^^ of Grace in your hands, till
God sets the Crown of Glory upon your heads; this is the sparkling Diamond
that is set in the Apostle's Crown, 2 Timothy 3.7. I have sought a good fight, I
have finish^ ^y ^^^rse, I have kept for faith. O Believers, it will be your
happiness, your glory, your honor another day, if in this day you be found
faithful. Oh do not you turn your backs upon the truths of God, as too many i^
our days have done; they have gone from ou^ Religion unto all, till at last
they have come from all Religions unto none: that man's beginning was in
Hypocrisy, whose ending is in Apostasy; Indifferency in Religion, is the next
step to Apostasy from Religion. O do not make him a stone of stumbling, that
God has made to be a stone for building. If the Golden Chain of Duty will not
hold you, the (...) chain of Darkness shall bind you; if you abuse your liberty
in one world, you will lose your liberty in another. If you had made as much
conscience in your liberty, as you have had liberty for your conscience it had
been well: that soal was never related to Carist; that soul was never related
to Christ: there is no obtaining the price of Happiness, without running the
^^ce of Happiness. Oh for the Lords sake, do not you begin in the spirit, and
end in the flesh. Oh do not you put your hand to the ^low, and look backward be
not true to the Fa^^^ of (...), and false to the God of Truth; keep close to
the Son of God, to the Word of Cod. to the ^^dinances of God, to the Day of
God, to the Ministers of God, to the People of God, and thou will be safe, Gal.
6.9. Be not ^^ary i^ ^^ll doing, s^r in (...) se^^^ you shall reap if (...)
^^i^t not. I shall wind up all with that saying of Ig^^tius, They who ad^^re to
them (...) ad^^ere not to truth, shall (...) inherit the Kingdom of God.

The Everlasting Father.
Cant 5.16. He is altogether lovely.


Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely.
MAn is the excellency of the Creature, the Saint is the excellency of the Man,
Grace is the excellency of the Saint, Glory is the excellency of Grace. I now
proceed to a fourth Title, and that is, The Everlasting Father. For this, see
Isa. 9.6. Beloved, we have showed you from the third Title, Mighty God, that
Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, a mighty God, mighty with God, mighty as
God, the great and mighty God: but now this fourth Title holds him forth to
be a Father, not only a Father, but an Everlasting Father, The Everlasting
Father. The Proposition which I shall lay down from this Title is this, That
God in Christ is a Believer's Everlasting Father. That I may clear up this
point, I shall lay down these truths.

First, That God in Christ, the Everlasting Father, hath-begot himself in us,
and us in himself; He is both the Author and Finisher of all (...) Faith, Heb.
12.2. of all our Joy, of all our Peace, of all our Life, of all our Salvation;
he is a Father ever begetting and bringing forth himself in us, his light is in
(...) his love is in us, his nature is in us, his wisdom is in us, his power
and strength is in us, Of his fullness we have a^l received gr^^ f^r gra^^, Joh.
1.16. We Belierers, we in time past, we in time present, we in time to come; we
that were, we that are, we that shall (...) hereafter, shall receive of his
fullness; and therefore he is called, The Everlasting Father. He is the Sun, we
are the Beams; he is the Fountain, we are the Streams; he is the Root, we are
the Branches; he is the Head, we are the Members; he is the Father, we are the
Children: and hence it is, that ^^lievers are called his Offspring; we are the
Offspring of God, says the Apostle. In C^^ation God has given us to our
selves, but in redemption he has given himself to us; it is a greater favor to
be converted, than to be created; yea, far better to have no being, than not to
have a new being: it is only the new creatures that are heirs of the new
Jerusalem.

2. God in Christ calls all his children by his Name, he puts his Name
upon them. Do you mark Sirs, I will write upon them the Name of ^^y God, in
Rev. 3.12. The Saints are called Godly, from God; Christians from Christ;
Spiritual from the Spirit; and Heavenly, from Heaven, because their
conversation is there, because their Head is there, and they be heirs of
Heaven: So the Wicked be called Devilish from the Devil; and Cursed, from the
Curse; and Worldling from the World; and Sinners from Sin. O^ the difference,
the great difference that there is between the names of Saints, and the names
of the Wicked. The ungodly be called d^gs, cip^r^, swine, th^rns, and ravening
(...), who lick up, and suck the blood of the Innocent; but the Saints they are
called Jewels, Treasures, Kings, ^^wes, Li^lies, and Heirs of Glory. And hence
it is that some good men have gloried more in their name Christian, than in
their name Emperor; and have thought it greater honor to be a Member of
Christ, than to be a King upon a T^^^^^^ a greater honor to be one of Christ's
li^^^^ Ones, than one of the World's great One^. Indeed, Sirs, a good heart is
better than (...) great estate; inward holiness is better than outward
happiness, a Christ without honors, is better than honors without a Christ;
Piety without Prosperity, is better than Prosperity without Piety. Goodness
without Greatness, is better than Greatness without Goodness. That Is the second.

3. God in Christ is a Father, who is tender and full of bowels toward his
poor Children; when we were full of blood then he was full of bowels. Christ is
more tender of his body mystical, than he was of his body natural; he suffered
his body natural to be hungry, to be thirsty, to be weary, to hang upon the
Cross, ^o bleed upon the Cross, to suffer upon the Cross, to be pierced and
boared with nails upon the Cross. Oh, he went into the furnace to keep us out
of the flames. But now mark, Sirs, for his body mystical. O^ how tender is he,
he loves them, he pities them, he smiles upon them, he carries them ^n his
bosom, and dandles them on his knee^. Oh, they are the beauty of his eye, the
joy of his heart; he cannot endure to see them wronged, see them injured or
abused, every blow they have, goes to his very heart. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? You see how tender Christ is of his body mystical. This is
our Jo^^s who threw himself into the Sea of his Fathers wrath to save us from
drowning. He has shut the doors of Hell to keep us from Perdition, and he has
opened the ^are of Heaven to let us into Salvation. That Is the third.

4. God in Christ is a Father that lays up for his Children; he gives them
something in possession, but more in reversion; a little in hand, and a great
deal in hope. 1. He gives them something in hand, he lays out for us, he
gives us the Air to breath ^n, and the Earth to tread upon; he gives us the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, Wind, Water, and Fire; he gives us the Fish of
the Sea, the Beasts of the Earth, and the Fowls of the Air. Poor man lives by
death, our natural life is preserved by the death of the creatures, and our
spiritual life by the death of our Savior: so that I may say we live by death.
It Is man's duty to serve God, since God has made all the World to serve him, in
1 Timothy 6.17. says the Apostle, Who gives us richly all things to enjoy* Mark,
he does not only give us some things, but all things; not only all things, but
all things richly to enjoy. 2. God in Christ is a Father that lays up for his
Children, as well us lays out, in Psalm. 1^.19. Oh h^^ great (...) thy
goodness, which th^^^ ^^st said up (...) them (...) f^ar thee? (...) David
wonders at it: Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have l^i^ up! Mark the
words: So in 2 Timothy 4.8. H^^^^ forth a laid up for me a Crown of Righteou^^^^s.
What only for you, Paul? No, not only for me, but for all them that love his
appearing (...). So again see another Scripture for this, 1. Cor. 2.^ As it is
written, says the Apostle, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, ne^t^e^ can i^
enter into the heart of man to con^^^^^. Why, Sirs, what is this which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to
conceive? why mark, The things that God has prepared for them that fear him.
Oh Beloved, God gives his children the best portion, the richest portion, the
greatest portion; all things be theirs, life is theirs, death is theirs, things
present are theirs, things to come are theirs, God is theirs, Christ is theirs,
the Spirit is theirs, Heaven is theirs, and what can they have more? in 1 Cor.
3.23. God gives his children in this world (...) talent of Cl^^y. They shall
wear Christ's Crown above, wh^ wear his Cross below.


5. God in Christ does protect and defend his children from their enemies, from
Satan, from Sin, from the World, from the Curse, from the Second Death, which
is Hell, in Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second
death. Mark, a Believer may feel the stroke of death, but he shall never feel
the sting of death; the first death may bring his body to corruption, but the
second death shall never bring his soul to damnation; though he may live a life
that is dying, he shall die a death that is living; he that is ^^used in
Christ, shall never be housed in Hell: God protects his children from all
wrongs and injuries, in Psalm. 105.14. He suff^^s (...) man to do them wrong,
yea, he reproves kings for their sakes. Pray mark the phrase well, Sirs, if
Kings will lay on Saints the hands of Violence, God will lay on Kings the hands
of Vengeance, He reproves kings for their sakes. If Kings should ever wrong the
poor Saints for Christ's sake, Christ will reprove Kings for the Saints sake;
so says the Word of God, they that be Gods before men, be but men before God.
If men will throw Saints into Prison for their Piety, God will throw them into
Hell for their iniquity: mark what the Prophet says in Isa. 30.33. pray mark
the phrase, ^ophet (...), yea, for the King it is pr^^^^^^, a^ (...) ^o the
Prophet should speak so downright, as though Hell were chiefly prepared for great
unrighteous men^^, Oh Sirs, Hell is prepared for great men, as well as mean.
These to whom God bestows great mercies, if they abound in great vice, God will
inflict great punishments; how shall they be able to lift up their heads before
Christ, who do lift up their hands against him. The Kings of the Earth stood
up, ^^d the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ, Acts 4.26. Christ will pass a sentence upon every sentence that has
past. He that says, Come ye blessed, will also say, Go ye cursed. That Is the
fifth.

Sixthly, God in Christ is a Father that teaches his children, and instructs
his children* Thy children shall be all taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.14. All
God's children be taught of God, God teaches all his children; and what does
b^ teach them? Why, among other things (...) teaches his children these six
Lessons. 1. (...) teaches them to deny themselves. A true Believer will lay
down his lusts at the command of Christ, and his life for the sake of Christ.
2. Christ teaches them contentment. Here is another Divine Lesson which Christ
teaches his children. A Believer will be contented to bear the wrath of men
(...) him, who bore the wrath of God for him. 3. The Vanity of the Creature. He
teaches us that all things below be but vanity and vexation of spirit. 4. A
fourth thing is, the sinfulness of Sin. 5. The deceitfulness of the Heart. 6.
The right knowledge of himself. Oh Christians, have you learned these Lessons?
Then let all the actions be Christ-like, and walk as you have Him for an
Example; He lived to teach us how to live, and he d^ed to teach us how to die:
he that will nor follow the example of Christ's life, shall never he saved by
the merits of his death. As he is the ro^t on which (...) Saint grows* so he is
a r^le by which a Saint squares: It he be not thy (...), Staff to guide thee to
Heaven* he will never be thy (...), Ladder to mount thee up to Heaven. We
should be as willing to be ruled by Christ. as we are willing to be saved by
Christ; God made one Son like to all, that he might make all his Sons like to
one. If the life of Christ be not your pattern, the death of Christ will never
be your portion. That Is the sixth.

7. God in Christ is a Father that stamps upon all his children the lovely
^mage of Jesus Christ, they resemble him to the very life. As it was said of
Cons^^^tine's. Children, they resemble their Father to the life. So we may say
of Believers, they resemble Christ to the life; God will suffer no man to wear
the livery of Christ upon him, who has not the likeness of Christ within him,
1 Cor. 3. last. We ad (says the Apostle) beholding with open face as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to
glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. Oh Sirs, what a rare Jewel is Grace? the
God of grace calls it glory; Mark, From glory to glory, grace is called glory,
from glory to glory, that is, from one degree of grace to another; grace is
glory militant, and glory is grace triumphant; grace is glory begun, and glory
is grace made perfect; grace is the first degree of glory, glory is the highest
degree of grace: grace is the seed, glory the flower; grace is the ring, glory
is the sparkling diamond in the ring; grace is glories infant, and glory is the
perfect man of grace; grace is the spring, glory is the harvest, the soul of
man is the cabinet, the grace of God is the jewel, Christ will throw away the
cabinet where he finds not the jewel. He that created us in his Image, will
restore us to his Image: That is the seventh particular.

8. God in Christ is a Father that never dies? other Fathers be dead and gone,
our Father Abraham is dead, our Father Is^^c is dead, our Father ^acob is dead,
and others be dead and gone. Oh but God in Christ is a Father that lives for
ever, that loves for ever, that reigns for ever. He Is the Father of Eternity,
in Eternity, from Eternity, and to Eternity, (...) 8. He was always, it always,
and Shall (...) always, and he cannot but be always, (...) Christ is the same
before time, in time, and after time, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ is the same (says
the Apostle) yesterday, and to day, and for ever; of him, and from him, and
through him, and to him, and for him are all things, Col. 1.16.

9. God in Christ is a Father that corrects his children; all whom God loves
be chastises, though he loves not to chastise; God had one Son without sin,
but no son without sorrow; he had one Son without corruption, but no son
without correction, Heb. 12.6. For whom the L^^d loves he chast^^eth, and
scourges every s^^ whom he receives, Rev. 3.16. As many (...) I love, I
reb^^e and chasten. Afflictions are blessings to us, when we can bless. God for
the afflictions, Christ tells us, That he that will be (...) Disciple, must
deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow him, Mat. 16.24. There is a
fourfold self that must be denied for Jesus Christ, or else we cannot be his
Disciples. 1. A sinful self. 2. A natural self. 3. A self-righteousness. 4. A
self-gain or lucre.
Sinful self is to be destroyed, and Natural self is to be denied; we cannot
enjoy our selves, till we deny our selves; God is as far from beating his
children for nothing, as he is from beating his children to nothing. The
Application. Is it so, that God in Christ is a Believer's Everlasting Father.
Oh then what is so sweet a good as Christ, and what so great an evil as sin? Oh
love Christ more, and ^ate sin more, Christ brings life with him* a life of
grace, a life of comfort, a life of glo^^ (...) him sin bring^ death, with it,
death of (...), death of soul, death he^^, and death (...). O (...) bl^^a, of
Christ speaks better (...) than the blood of Abel. Abel's blood cried (...)
V^^g^ance, but Christ's cried for Mercy; he i^ (...) Pearl of great pri^e, for
which the ric^^ M^^ch^^^ sold all that he had, and bought (...) and found more
joy in this Pearl than ever he did with all that he had: Oh therefore let me
beseech you that are his children to love him, and to serve him; he is your
Everlasting Father, therefore do his will on earth, as the Angels do in heaven.
You cannot complain of him for want of mercy; Oh let not him complain of you
for want of duty; so good has ^e been to you as that he has not been wanting
to you in any thing, and (...) ^ou be wanting to him in every thing? A son
honors his father, and a servant his master, If I th^^ ^e a father, where is
my honor; if a master, where is my fear? Mal. 1.6. As a father, so he will be
reverenced for his goodness; as a master, he will be feared for his greatness.
Oh what is that little he desires of you, to that much he deserves from you?
if honor be not (...) to him, let it not be bestowed; if it be due to him, let
it not be denied: if God do great things for his children, he will not accept
of small things from his children. Do but see the great outcry that God makes
against his own children, Isa. 3.3. Hear O heaven, and be astonished, O earth!
What is the matter? I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me: the near^^ the relation, the greater the obligation:
Christ is related to them as a Lord to his servants, as a Father to his
children, as a Prince to his subject^, (...) a Head to his m^mbers. Where the
relations is nearest, there the provocation is greatest; i^ ^s a more pleasing
thing to see rebels become children, than it is to see children become re^els.
What mother can endure to see those lips that drew her breasts to suck her
blood Oh Christians, you are more known to God than others; therefore you must
more (...) knowledge him than others; you do not look for so much splendour from
the burning of a Candle, as from the shining of the Sun; (...) for so much
moisture from the dropping (...) a Bucket, as from the dissolving of a Cloud,
to whom much is given, of them much sta^^ be required^^ God do^^ not expect
much where little is bestowed, nor accept little where much is received. Hear
ye the (...) of the Lord, O children of Israel, you ^^ly have I known of all
the families of the earth. Amos^ 2. God has exalted you above others, and
therefore you must do more for God than others. It was a great blemish to
H^^^ki^^, that his returnings were not answerable to his receivings. Oh
Believers, let me beseech you to do much, to love much, to give much, to pray
much, seeing you have received much I shall wind up all with a word of comfort
to you the Children of God. O Sirs, God in Christ is your Father, your loving
Father, your everlasting Father, and you are his children; therefore fear not,
it shall go well with you here and hereafter, Luke 12.32. Fear not little
stock, for it is year Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: he will
withold no good thing from you, Psalm. ^^.11. He gives grace and glory unto
you. Grace is the silver link that draws the golden sa^^ of glory after it.

Prince of Peace.
Cant. 5 16. He is altogether lovely.


Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely.
Wherever Christ is a Priest for Redemption, he is a Prince for Dominion;
wherever he is a Savior, there he is a Ruler; where he is a Fountain of
Happines^, there he is a Fountain of Holiness; where he is a Redeemer, there he
is a Refiner; wherever he takes a burden from off the Creatures back, there
he lays a yoke upon the Creatures neck, The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our
lawgiver, the Lord is our king, be will save us, Isa. 33.22. I shall now
proceed to the fifth Title of Jesus Christ, which is, Prince of Peace; this you
have in Isa. 9.6. It is the Happiness of the Church of God, that although they
cannot give Peace, yet they may get Peace: though they cannot settle it on
earth, yet they may seek it from heaven: Peace is the well-being of all other
enjoyments, all other Mercies suck their livelihood at the breast of Peace, it
is the Mother of all Prosperity; as the life of old Jacob was wrapped up in the
life of the lad Benjamin, ^o is all Happiness wrapped up in Peace. It is the
felicity of the Saints on earth, and the glory of the Angels in heaven: when
the old Hebrews wish^ any happiness to any one, they only used this expression,
Peace be unto you. From this Title of Christ, I shall lay down two
Propositions. 1. That Si^n's King is a peaceable King. 2. That the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Prince of Peace, is the cause and foundation of a Believer's Peace.


Doct. These two points lie full in the words, but I shall only speak to the
latter, to wit, that Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, is the cause and
foundation of all a Believers peace. In the prosecution of it, I shall show you
four things: 1. He is the Peace-bringer. 2. The Peacemaker. 3. The
Peace-giver. 4. He is the Prince of Peace, or the Peaceable Prince.


First, Jesus Christ is the Peace-bringer; he brought in Everlasting Peace by
Righteousness, and not by a Sword, Luke 2.14. Peace on earth, and good will
toward men. Why was the bread of life an hungry, but that he might feed the
hungry with the bread of life? Why was Rest it self weary, but to give the
Weary rest? Why was the Prince of Peace in trouble, but that the troubled might
have peace? None but the Image of God could restore us to Gods Image; none but
the beloved of God could make us beloved to God; none but the natural Son could
make us sons; none but the wisdom of God could make us wise; none but the
Prince of Peace could bring the God of Peace, and the Peace of God to poor
Sinners: and therefore he is called our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. Oh, what is so sweet
a good as Christ, and what so great an evil as sin? The former brings us ^o joy
and peace, the latter brings us to woe and misery. That Is the first.

Secondly, He is the Peacemaker as well as the Peace-bringer; he is the
Peacemaker between God and man, Sin is the great make-^^te between God and the
Soul, Sir is the wall of separation between God and us, but the Prince of Peace
makes peace between God and us; He paid all debts, and took up all
controversies, and blotted out the handwriting, and has broken down the
partition wall, and rude up the great breach between God and man, 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. Mark, it is in Christ; so
likewise elsewhere, You who were sometimes for of, ^e made nigh by the blood of
Christ. Oh Sinners, Christ is our Peacemaker, the Prince of Peace makes peace
between God and us, he reconcileth God to man, and man to God; so that though
God might justly be displeased with us, yet in his Son, is well pleased with
us: God is more-pleased with a Believer for Christ's sake, than he was
displeased with him for Sins sake.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is the Peace giver; alas, poor Sinne^s, we have no peace
with Angels, no peace with Conscience, nor one with another, till the Prince of
Peace gives it us: Peace I leave with you, peace I give unto you, says nor
Lord to his Disciples, Jo^. 14.27. Oh Sirs, he gives peace with God: In Romans
5.1. We have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ gives that
Peace to us, which the World cannot take from us, worldly troubles cannot
overcome heavenly Peace.

Fourthly, He is a Prince of Peace, or the Peaceable Prince; so he is styled
not only Peace, but the Prince of Peace. Indeed, Beloved, he is all Peace to a
Believer, her ways (...) ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace,
speaking of Christ, Prove. 17. Mark, all (...) paths are peace. Now what are the
paths, I shall name six to you. 1. The Path of Repentance. 2. Of Faith. 3. Of
Truth. 4. Of Self-denial. 5. Of Obedience. 6 Of Holiness.


These are all paths of Peace, and peaceable paths. Oh Sirs, there is no Peace
to be found but in the Paths of Peace. As all his works be great and
mavelous, so all his way (...) peace and pleasantness. Secondly, His Gospel
is a Gospel of Peace, it is a great Mercy to enjoy the Gospel in Peace, but a
greater Mercy to enjoy the Peace of the Gospel. Thirdly, His reward is Peace,
Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace. Here the joys of Heaven are called Peace;
the true sons of Peace, and the peaceable sons of Truth, shall be crowned with
Peace, they shall enter into Peace. And thus, Beloved, I have briefly, you I
have fully proved the point. That Jesus Christ is the cause and foundation of a
Believer's (...).

Us. Now for the Application of the point, I shall reduce it to four heads: 1.
For Information. 2. For Examination. 3. For Exhortation. 4. For Consolation.


1. By way of Information, here we may see what great need we stand in of Jesus
Christ, O Christians, is Jesus Christ the cause and foundation of all our
peace, then we have no right or title to peace, but by the Prince of Peace: We
love peace with God, says the Apostle, but how? through our Lord Jesus Christ;
we are reconciled to God in Jesus Christ. And we who were far off, such Paul,
are made nigh by the blood of Christ, we are only acceptable in the Beloved. So
that, beloved, it is all in Christ, and through Christ that we have our peace. A
Christless man is (...) peaceless man, He has no peace with God, to peace with
Angels, no peace with Conscience: till we be Christ's friends, we are our own
soes. It Is true, a wicked man may speak peace to himself, but God speaks not
a jot of peace to him; he may speak peace to himself all he falls into
everlasting flames, God is his Enemy, the Devil is his fee. Angels hate him,
all Creatures ^ry for vengeance upon him, in Isa 57.21. (...) no peace to the
wicked says (...) God, no no^ a word, not a dram of peace for a person who is
out of Christ: therefore, Oh Sirs, con^ider in what need you stand of the
Prince of Peace.

2. It informs us, that to have peace with our Creatu^^ and Maker, is the
sweetest and best thing in the World: Oh how infinitely sweet is peace* What is
sweeter than peace? Alas, gold is but dust, pleasures are but toys, wit is but
a ^as^, beauty but (...) blast, honor but a (...), life but a vapor, Oh, but
peace ^s sweeter than the sweetest, and better than the best of all those.
First, Because he that has peace with God, may come boldly to God, Heb. 4.16.
Secondly; He that has peace with God, has communion and fellowship with God,
1 John 1.2. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Thirdly, He that is at peace with God, is the Son of God. Peace is of
all others the most sweet: Oh, it is wine to comfort us, and bread to nourish
us; it makes a man live comfortably, and die cheerfully. Thirdly, If Jesus
Christ the Prince of Peace, be the cause and foundation of all our peace, why
then, he that wants the Prince of Peace, wants all good things, he is the
miserablest man in the world that is without Christ, he wants reconciliation
with God, and interest in Christ, he wants the sealing and comforting of the
Spirit, he wants Justification, Sanctification and Adoption; he wants pardon of
sin, and freedom from the dominion of sin; he wants that favor which is better
than life, that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, and that faith, a
dram of which is more worth than a Kings ransom: he wants those riches which
perish not, that love which dies not, that Kingdom which shakes not. O Beloved,
how many things does that poor soul want, which wants. Christ? He is
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and naked, Rev. 3.^^. Christ is a
Pearl, and whosoever has him can never be poor, and whosoever wants him can
never be rich: did but men see all in this Pearl of Price, then they would sell
all for this Pearl of Price. Fourthly, If Jesus Christ be the cause and
foundation of our peace, then it is our greatest concernment to get into favor
with this Prince of Peace, Many seek the Rulers favor, says the Scripture.
But Oh seek ye the favor of this Prince, poor souls, without him there is no
mercy, no peace, no grace, no glory, no heaven, no crown, no eternal life, For
this is eternal life, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
then have sent, Joh. 17.4.

Use 2. Secondly, By way of Examination and Self-trial, the trial of our selves
is the ready way to the knowledge of our selves, Oh Christians, would you see
your God? then cast your eyes upward; would you see your selves? then cast your
eyes inward. Contemplation is a Glass to see our God in: It Is of greater
concernment to know the estate of our Hearts, than to know the state of the
Kingdom. And therefore I beseech you examine your selves, that you may know
your selves, that you may know whose you are, while you live, and whither you
shall go when you die, and what will become of you to all eternity. Oh Sirs,
bring your selves to the trial, and try your selves, and see whether ^ou be in
the Faith; and the faith in you; faith is such a grace, that a man cannot be
saved without it, and not a man can be damned that has it. Oh see, whether you
be in the narrow way that leads to life, or in the broad way that leads to
death; whether your hearts be chairs for vice to sit in, or thrones for grace
to rule us, whether you are one of Christ's Spo^se, or the Devils harlot;
whether you are heirs of heaven, or hell; whether you be Satan's bondmen, or
God's freemen; Examination is the beaten path to perfection, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not
many wise, not many mighty, not many noble are called. It Is not always seen
that the sparkling Diamond of a great Estate, is set in the Gold-ring of a
gracious Heart. A man may be great with Saul, and graceless; rich, with Dives,
and miserable: The richest are oftentimes the poorest, and the poorest
oftentimes the richest. Oh how many threadbare souls may there be found under
silken-coats, and purple robes? they who live most downward, die most upward; a
sight of our selves in grace, will certainly bring us to a sight of our selves
in glory: those sins shall never make a hell for us, that be a hell to us.

Use, But it is time for me to turn my Speech into an Exhortation, and Oh that
you would encourage me with your Resolution to obey my Message this day, that
is, to make you peace with the Prince of Peace, that you (...) the truth ^ons
of peace, and the peaceable Sons of truth, that you may be righteous bese^^^
God, and holy before men, that you may gloriously shine in glory, and that you
may have peace with God, and with Angels, and with your own Conscience, and
with one another. Well Sirs, what say you in answer to my Passage? shall the
Prince of Peace be your Love and Lord, your nearest and dearest, your joy and
your delight? will you kiss the Son, will you make your peace with the God of
Peace, and g^^ up your soul; and lives to be ruled by have these things I
exhort you to, and God expects them at your hands; but that this Exhortation
may stay with you, I shall beak to with some pressing Considerations. First,
Co^^ider Gods goodness and good will toward men; God has given you rich means
that you may make and secure your peace with God. First, He has given you the
Lamb, and the Gospel. Secondly, He has graciously given time and opportunity.
Thirdly, Mercies and Afflictions; Mercies to draw you, and Afflictions, to
drive you. Fourthly, He has given you Preachers, both inward and outward
Preachers: by outward Preachers, I mean the Ministers of Christ, who beseech
you and entreat you for Christ's sake to be reconciled to God: by inward
Preachers, I mean your Conscience that judges you, and checketh you, and
reproves you for your sins and abominations. Fifthly, He has given you
precepts and promises; precepts commanding you to do, and promises assuring you
of a glorious reward for your doing. Sixthly, The spirit and convictions, Genesis
6. My spirit shall not always strive with man. Oh how long will you yet stand
out against God? what have you to say against this? how can you answer this
when you and I shall appear before God's Judgment Seat I have you any thing to
say against this? Oh sad will be your end, unless you make your peace with God,
and therefore seeing God has given these things to you, that you may make and
secure your peace with him. He that loves in sin without repentance, shall he
in sin without sweetfulness. Secondly, God inviteth and (...) you to come and
make your peace (...) him, Isa. 55.1. He every one that (...), come ye to the
water, and he that ^ath no money, come ye buy and eat, yea come and buy wine
and milk without money, and without price. Beloved, Here is three comes in this
Text, to show the infinite willingness of God to save poor Sinners: so in Rev.
22.17. The Bride and Spirit say come (here is three come again in this Text)
and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, and he that is a
thirsty let him come. What are there none thirsty among you? do non^ thirst for
Christ, and grace, and heaven, if you come Sirs, here you may have grace and
mercy, and happiness: now for the Lords sake consider wherefore is all this,
but that you may make your peace with God: shall the God of Heaven call, and
will you not hear? what* will you rather stay in your sins and die, than go to
Christ for life? Oh Sirs, go to the Prince of Peace for Peace, that you may
have Peace; if you do not lay your sins to your hearts, that you may be humble
for them, God will lay them to your charge, that you may he damned for them. A
third consideration is this, either you must taste of Gods goodness, or his
s^^y; there is not a man, woman or child amongst you but must partake of the
one or the other, your portion will be either joy or sorrow, either desolation
or consolation, if you be not trees for hearing, you must be trees for burning;
if you are not for fruit you must be for flames; if you do not swim in the
waterworks of repentance, you shall burn in the fireworks of vengeance; if you
will not go and make your peace with God, that you may have heaven, you shall
go to hell for not making your peace; one of them you must do. Oh Sirs, I have
set life and death, heaven and hell, bitter and sweet before you this day, will
you make your peace with God or no^? Will you still go on in a way of
wickedness, breaking his laws, grieving his spirit? will you die a natural
death, before you live a spiritual life? I say then, if you live so, and die
so, you shall be damned with the damned, and punished with the punishment of
hell, and be sent to hell with loads of wrath upon your backs: Ye shall have
your part in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death; He that believes shall (...) saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned, says our Lord, Mark 16.16. Oh Sirs, it is better to r^p^nt without
perishing, than to perish without repenting; and therefore look to it as well
as you will, are you able to deal with God? Alas, alas, all the World is but as
a drop of water in comparison of God, and therefore make your peace with him,
Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation. Fourthly,
Consider what the damned in Hell would give for those offers of mercy that are
now offered to you: certainly they would give ten thousand Worlds, if they had
them, for those opportunities that you enjoy. Should God say to poor wretches
that are now suffereing in hell for their drunkenness upon earth, and their
whoring and abominations, as he does to us, Come to me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you rest? Oh how earnestly would they run and
catch the word out of Gods mouth? Oh, Beloved, the Devils are too well
acquainted with misery, to pu^ by mercy, if it were offered to them. But alas,
alas, poor damned wretches, there is no dram of mercy for them, no not so much
as a drop of water for them, not one drop of water to cool their flaming
tongues. Oh that you would consider this, and make your peace with God before
death comes: which may be next night for ought you know: if you lose your
golden season, you lose your soul. O therefore make your peace with God, that
it may not be said (...) you as it was once to Jerusalem, in Luke 10.42. O that
thou had known in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace, but now
they are hid from thy eyes. Here was a weeping word, a sad word to Jerusalem.
Alas, now it is hid from their eyes, their golden season is gone, there is no
peace to be ^ad; and therefore I beg of you, as though I were condemned, and
begging for my life, so I beg of you in the bowels of Christ, and for your
souls sake, make your peace with God. 5. Seriously consider the multitude of
Sins thou art guilty of, even more than the hairs of thy head, or the sand on
the Seashore, or the stars in the heaven, which are innumerable, says David,
They are more than the hairs of my head, Psalm. 40.12. Alas, one of thy sins
were enough to sink thee into Hell for ever; what advantage does Dives reap in
Hell of all the delicate banquets that he had on Earth? Oh think of that time
wherein you shall be ashamed of nothing but your wickedness, and glory in
nothing but your holiness. Sin it is like a Se^pent in the bosom that is
stinging, or like a Thief in the closet that is stealing, or like Poison in the
stomach, that is poisoning, or like a Sword, in the bowels that is killing:
Some are in Hell already for the same sins thou live in, and if thou live
and die without Christ, thou shall ere long be with them* therefore I say,
make thy peace with God. 6. Consider that there is more bitterness following
upon sins ending, than ever there was sweetness flowing from sins actings, you
that see nothing but well in its commission, will suffer nothing but woe in its
conclusion! It is better here to forego the pleasures of sin, than hereafter to
undergo the pain of sin; you that sin for your profit, will never profit by
your sins: he that likes the works of sin to do them, will never like the wages
of sin to have them; sin is both shameful and damnable; it shameth men in this
World, and damneth them in the other World: it is like Judas that at first
salutes us, but at last betrays us; or like Delia, to smile in our faces, and
betray us into our enemies hands. Oh sinners, think of this, and part with your
sins, that you may meet with your Savior, and make your peace with him* 7.
Consider the heavy judgments that hang over your heads; you lie open to all the
judgments in this life, and torments in the life to come. Oh you Sinners, the
day is hasting upon you, wherein you will have misery without mercy, sorrows
without succor, pain without ease, punishment without pity, and torment
without end unless Repentance do prevent, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angles in flaming fire* taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power: Oh let the hearing of this prevent
the feeling of this poor Sinner. 8. And lastly. If none of the former Arguments
or Considerations prevail with you to make your peace with the Prince of Peace,
yet let this one I beseech you, and that is, the readiness and willingness of
God to give Christ, a^ Christ to give himself to you. Oh Sinners, is God
willing to give his Son and are you not willing to receive his Son Consider the
willingness of God, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him. Mark
Sinners, here behold I stand; who? I, I that have Heaven to give, I that have a
Crown to give, I that have all Joys to give, I that have My self to give, I
stand and knock, do you see this, poor Sinners, who is it that stands at the
door of your hearts and knocks? Why it is the King of Saints, the Prince of
Peace, the Mighty God, and will you not open to him? What are you unwilling to
be saved, to go to Heaven, and to be happy for ever? What are you unwilling to
be delivered from Satan, from fin, and from the flames of Hell? If you be
willing, then make your peace with God, for God is willing to open Heaven to
you, if you be but willing to open your Hearts to him; he is willing to save
you, if you be but willing to be saved; he is willing to give Christ, if you be
willing to receive a Christ; and therefore, poor souls, let these
Considerations provoke you to go for life to the Lord of life, to go for Peace
to the Prince of Peace, to go for grace to the God of Crace; were men so
diligent as to do their best, God is so indulgent, He would forgive the worst.

The Elect Precious.
Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely.


Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely.
WHO can be wea^y of preaching, or hearing, or (...) o^ learning Christ, who is
so precious and lovely (...) Mah^m^^ is the Turk^ love, M^ses is the Jews love,
but Christ is a Believers love* I shall now make some entrance upon Christ's
sixth famous and lovely Title, The Elect Precious. This you have in 1 Pe^. 2.6.
From this excellent Title I shall lay down two Propositions.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ the Mediator, is God the Father Elect; I pray mark
Sirs* there is a threefold Elect of God. 1. The Elect Jesus Christ, Isa. 42.1.
Behold my Servant, my Elect, says the Father, speaking of Christ. 2 The Elect
Angels, in 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Elect Angels. 3. The Elect Saints, and for this see Col. 3.12. Put on
therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved bowels of mercy.
But alas, what are the Elect Angels, or Elect Saints, to the Elect Precious,
and precious to the Elect. But I shall not stand upon this point, but proceed
to the second.

Doct. 2. And that is this, That a crucified and glorified Christ, is very
precious to all believing Saints. In handling of this precious point, I shall
show you five things. 1. That he is precious. 2. He is most precious. 3. He is
all precious. 4. He is always precious. 5. Why he is so precious.


First, That he is precious; Jesus Christ is precious three ways, to God, to
Angels, to Saints. 1. To God the Father; and this will appear by what God the
Father has said himself of his Son, Isa. 42.1. My Elect in whom my soul
delights: here you see Christians, what God says of Christ; the soul of God
delights in the Son of God. So again, Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased. Mark here, not only pleased, but well pleased. Oh how
precious is Christ to God the Father! The Lord Jesus, though he was a man of
sorrow, yet he was not a man of ^in; he had correction, but (...) ^^^^ption; he
that was a way to others, never went out of the way himself. Jesus Christ must
needs be precious to the Father, because he never displeased him in any thing,
but pleased him in every thing, Joh. 8.29. Christ there speaking of himself, I
do always the things that please him, said our Lord Jesus. Oh Friends, it will
be your glory, your crown, your honor and happiness another day, if in this
day you do the things that please God: So did Christ here, I do always the
things that please him. Christ, went about doing good, he must needs please the
Father, For he went about doing good* A^^s 10.38. He did not always stay in a
place, but he went about doing good. And truly Sins, if people were not made
better by his coming, they might thank themselves, For he went about doing
good. As he was never il^imployed he was never un-employed; as he opened the
Scriptures to our understandings, so he opened our understandings to the
Scriptures. That Is the first. Secondly, He is very precious to the Angels as
well as to the ^^th^r; the Angels were very joyful at the birth of Christ their
Lord: They sang praises to God (...) high, Luke 13.14. See with what joy and
^^^umph the Angels sang at the birth of Christ^ Oh how precious is Christ to
the Elect Angels! The Angels adore him. Let all the Angels of God wo^ship him,
Heb. 1.6. The Lord of Hosts (...) worshipped by an Host of Angels: Let all the
Angels of God worship him. 2 The Angels desire to pry into the Mysteries of the
Gospel of Grace, as you may see, 1 Pe^. 1.12. The Angles* th^ugh they are
glorio^s to all Eternity, lock u^ ^n it as not (...) them to p. (...) into
Christ's Mystery. Oh Sirs, the Angels are desirous to know these things which
we neglect to know. 3. The Angels stand before him as Waiting-men to serve God,
and to serve such as are God's; when he bids them go, they go; come, and they
come; do this, and they do it; they do all his commands, Psalm. 103.20. Jesus
Christ is the Creator of Angels, the Lord of Angels, the Prince of Angels, the
Head of Angels, Col. 1.16. The Son of God is very precious to the Angels of
God. Do you see, Sirs, how precious Christ is to the Angels of God; and well he
may, for indeed he is the precious Jewel in the Cabinet of glory. Thirdly,
Jesus Christ is precious to the Saints, as well as to the Father and Angels, 1
Pet. 2.7. you have there a full Text to this purpose, Unto you therefore that
believe he is precious: Mark here, unto you, what you? to you therefore which
believe, he is precious: he is precious indeed to them that believe, and no
wonder he is a Believer's All: now that which is his ^ll, must needs be
precious; Christ is his all, he is all that (...) he is all that he enjoys;
Christ is all that he is worth, he is all that they are; they are no such thing
without him, they are nothing without him; whatever they are worth, it is he
that makes them worth it; it is not worth a man's while ^p five, unless he live
in Christ; Christ is the gain of a Believer, living or dying; so that whatever
is good for a Believer, he must say for this I am beholding to Christ, says
he, At things are yours, and ye are Christ's. Now Sirs, let me give you a
little more particular account of the Christians worth, an Inventory of his
Estate, and all along I shall show you, that Christ is the worth of all that.
What is it that makes a Believer so precious and so excellent? Why it is such
things as these: 1. He is a living man. 2. He is a seeing man. 3. He is a
Person of honor. 4. He has a great deal of joy and hopes of more. 5. He is
righteous and holy, and in a word, he is saved at last.
These are the things that make a Christian so excellent a person, and he has
none of those but by Christ, and he has all this alone by Christ.

First, This is the excellency of a Christian, that he is a living man; there is
no man on earth can in a spiritual sense be called a living man, but a
Believer; all men be dead men, but they that believe. You know 'twas said of
the Prodigal, while he lived in his sin, he was dead: This my son that was
dead, and is now alive. When he believed, then he was alive. Now, Sirs, as it
is in the things of Nature, life is the most valuable thing which we have, skin
for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life; a man will rather
part with his livelihood than with his life, because his life is so dear to
him. Now, Beloved, if natural life be so desirable a thing, what is spiritual
life, that which is Scripture is called the life of God? Now the Believer is
the only living man, every other man is spiritually dead: but now how comes the
Believer to live? by whom does he live? why, It Is Christ Jesus, Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, notwithstanding I live: What crucified, and yet live?
Yes, Christ was crucified, and yet lives: and so did Paul in a resemblance and
conformity to Christ, I live, says he, yet not I, but Christ which lives in me;
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God. So that Paul will not call his life his own, but only as he deriveth it
from Christ, Christ lived in him more than he himself lived.

Secondly, The excellency of a Believer lies in this, That he is a seeing man:
it is sight which puts the difference between person and person; it is a sad
thing to be born blind, or to be blind after a man is born. Now a^l men are
either bo^n blind, o^ ^l^^ded after they are born, or b^t^. Now, Beloved, would
you know how precious sight is? Ask a blind man who once could see: we read of
a poor man, who comes running to Christ, and cries out, Lo^d have m^rcy upon
me; why, what mercy was it that he begged with so much earnestness? O Lord,
that I may receive (...) sight. Now Sirs, if in Nature the having the sight of
ou^ eyes be a thing that makes us so much more excellent than otherwise we
should be without it. Oh then how much value should we put upon this spiritual
light which refers to our souls? We can much better want the eyes of our heads,
than the eyes of our understandings. Now in a spiritual fence, there is no man a
seeing man, but a Believer; no man saw Christ savingly, but they who saw him
believingly; every man but a Believer walks ^n darkness; ^^y, he is darkness.
The Apostle, Eph^^. 5.8. tells us somewhat to this purpose. You were ^^metime^
da^kness, but now (...) you light in the la^^, in the Lord Jesus Christ; you
see the Believer does see, and how he comes to see, it is in the Lord that he
sees, he was as dark as others, and as blind as others, till he was in the
Lord, and no sooner was he in the Lord, but he was light in the Lord. That Is
the second.

Thirdly, The excellency of the Believer lies in this, that he is a very
beautiful and honorable Person. Now, Beauty and Honor be the taking ravishing
things of this-World; now all but Believers be deformed persons, there is no
beauty nor comeliness, why they should be desired; but now the Believer is a
very lovely beautiful person, he is so in the eyes of God, Ezekiel. 16.13, 14 And
I put a jewel on thy forehead, and ^n^^^gs in thy ears; and so he goes on and
says, Thou wast exceeding beautifu^, and did prosp^^ into a Kingdom: But now
mark how she came by this beauty, in the next verse, And thy renown went forth
among the Heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect through the comeliness
which I put upon thee, says the Lord God; she was not only beautiful in the
eyes of the Lord, but she had her beauty also from the Lord. And as they are
thus lovely and taking in the eyes of God, so also of good Angels and Saints
too; as glor^^^s a place as Heaven is, the Angels think it not below them to
wait upon the Images and Pictures of Christ here below, that is, to wait upon
Believers, and be their Lord's Guardians here upon Earth, Heb. 1.14. Are they
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who should be heirs
of salvation; but this is not all they do for them, they will not leave them
when they die, but take those lovely souls, and transport them to a better
Country than ever this World was to them for it is no Paradox to say this,
that there is no Believer goes to Heaven, but he goes in the arms of Angles,
Luke 16. In that parabolical History of Dives and Lazarus, says the Text,
Lazarus died, believing Lazarus died and his soul was carried by Angels into
Ab^aham's b^som, that is, to Heaven. O what an honor have Believers in their
death, that the very Angles transport their Souls to Heaven^ and they also are
very lovely and honorable in the eyes of all good men: the truth is, there is
scarce any man fit company for Believers, but Believers; and therefore, says
the Apostle, Be not unequally yo^ked, believers with unbelievers. Now, good men
be much taken with a Believer though he be a Stranger to them on all other
accounts: they are very fond one of another in this World, and had rather
suffer together than ^ive with other men. Now this makes a Believer so
excellent, that he is thus beautiful and honorable in the eyes of God and good
Angles, and good Men. Now all this beauty and honor they have from Christ, see
that Text before quoted, To you who believe, he is an honor, so the words may
be read: It Is Christ that makes them honorable in the eyes of God, and in the
eyes of good Angles, and good Men: and all that b^auty and honor they have,
it is through Christ, he is their Worth in every capacity.

Fourthly. That which makes a Believer so excellent, is, that he has joy; all
other men have no joy, but that which is not worth the having. Alas, the joy of
the Hypocrite, what is it, but as the crackling of Thorns under a Pot? but now
a Believer has a joy that no man intermedleth with, nor no man partakes of.
But how where has he his joy? why in and from the Lord, These things I speak;
says Christ, that my joy might be in you. They have it from the Lord, and
having it from the Lord, they rejoice in the Lord, We rejoice in Christ Jesus,
says Paul, and have no confidence in the flesh. Fifthly, Have they hope? it is
from Christ, and indeed none have hope but they; for without God, and without
Christ, and without Hope, are put together, in Ephesians. 2.12. but now the Believer
has good hope, and this bears up many times. Alexander thought this so brave a
thing, that when he gave this man whole Countries, and another vast Treasures,
and being asked what he would keep for himself, says he* I will keep Hope; for
he thought it enough for so brave and great a soul as his, to hope for that
which would make him do whatever he was able to do, or any one could think. The
hopes of Mercy; and joy, and peace, will carry a man through thousands of
difficulties: Now, the Believer has this hope, but he has it from Christ,
Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory.

Sixthly, Are they wise, are they righteous, are they holy? and none be so but
they; every Sinner is a Fool, and therefore in Scripture is called by the name
of a foolish man; he plays the fool all the time he spends out of the fear of
God; all sinning time is fooling time. Now the Believer is a wise man, and he
is a righteous man, and a holy man: but how comes it to be thus now? Take an
account of it in 1 Cor. 1.30. Pray mark, here now Christ is all of a Believer,
Of him ^re ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and ^e^emption. So that you see, if a
Believer be a wise man, he may thank Christ for it; if he be a righteous m^n,
if he be a holy man, he may thank Christ for it; for he of God is made to us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

Lastly, in a word, Are they saved? And indeed this is the Complement, aye, the
Complement of all the rest, Are they saved? and none are saved but Believers,
for, says Christ, He that believes, shall be saved; and ^e that believes not,
shall be damned. The Believer is already in the State of Salvation, as the
Unbeliever is in the State of Damnation; by nature we are all children of
wrath. Now, Faith in Jesus Christ is the means that God appoints to free us
from being children of wrath. Now he that believes, is past this, he shall not
be condemned, he shall be saved; and how comes he to be saved? It Is by Christ,
by believing in Christ. Oh, who is the Savior, but Christ? To be in Christ is
Heaven below, and to be with Christ is Heaven above; but there is no being with
Christ above, if we are not in Christ here below. Thus you see Beloved,
whatever it is that makes the Believer excellent and precious, it is Christ
that makes him worth all that, he has it all from Christ; Christ his all in
all: Now put all this together, and see if there be no great reason that Christ
should be precious to Believers.

3. As Jesus Christ is precious, so he is most precious. O Sirs, Angels are
precious, Saints are precious, Friends are precious, Heaven is precious; but
Christ, a Savior is ten thousand times more precious than these; a Believer
had rather have Christ without Heaven, than Heaven without Christ: Whom have I
in heaven but thee; and there is none upon earth which I desire besides thee,
Psalm 73.25. Let a Believer search Heaven and Earth, yet he will find nothing
comparable to God; to be like to him is our Happiness, and to draw near to him
is our Holiness. You will say, Beloved, Life is precious, Freedom is precious,
Health is precious, Peace is precious, Food and Raiment is precious, Gold and
Silver is precious, Parts and Gifts are precious, Jewels and Pearls are
precious, Kingdoms and Crowns are precious; indeed they are in their places,
but nothing in comparison of Jesus Christ. Mark, Sirs, what the Apostle says,
Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless I account all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, I account all things but loss, nay, that
is not all, I count them but (...), that I may win Christ; What is our Life,
but a Warfare? and what is the World but a Thorowfare? It is only the best of
Beings that can bestow the best of Blessings. O how good is a Believer's God,
that does not only shorten his Pilgrimage for him, but sweeten his Pilgrimage
to him. Oh, Christ is a Believer's All, and therefore he is more precious tha^
all; he has all in Christ, and nothing (...) of Christ; there is not such a
thing as a Believe is without him: By Faith we have an Interest in Christ, we
have an Interest in God, and by having an Interest in God, we have an Interest
in all things; the Believer is the only blessed man, the only happy man, the
only rich man, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things. O what a
glorious Inheritance are they born to, that are new born! All things are
theirs, and they shall inherit all things; what can they desire more than all?
All that Christ has is theirs; his Wisdom is theirs to teach them, his Love is
theirs to pity them, his Spirit is theirs to comfort them, his Word is theirs
to counsel them, his Mercy is theirs to save them, his Angels are theirs to
guard them, his Righteousness is theirs to justify them, his Power is theirs
to protect them, and his Glory is theirs to crown them. O Sirs, Christ cannot
but be most precious to a Believer, because all his precious Comforts come from
Christ. The Lord Jesus is fairer than the fairest, sweeter than the sweetest;
nearer than the nearest, and dearer than the dearest, and richer than the
richest, and better than the best, the Elect Precious is of all the most
precious. 1. Because he is the greatest gift that God can give, or we can
receive, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, this is
more than if he had given us all the World; for God has but one Son, and can
make no more Sons; but God can make more Worlds at his pleasure; this gift is
God himself, and God can give us no greater gift than himself: we may say as
one said to Caesar, when he gave him a great Reward, This is too great a Gift
(said he) for me to receive but it is not too great for me to give, (said
Caesar.) 2. Because he is the richest gift that ever was given, for Christ is
all in all; if he has given us Christ, He will give us all things else, Romans
8.^2. He is that one thing needful that brings all things; yea, he is that gift
of God, If thou know that gift of God, said our Savior, Joh. 4.10. thou
would have asked for it, and begged it of me. Why's Christ called the gifts
of God? surely God has given us more gift than one; true, but as one Sun is
more worth than all the Stars, so that this gift excels them all, according to
the Proverb, We bless not God for Stars when the Sun shines; for when the Sun
shines, the Stars appear not. 3. Because he is the choicest gift that God has
to give, other gifts he gives promiscuously to good and bad, so as no man
knows love or hatred by any thing that is before him, Eccl. 9.1. Judas had
the bag, and Dives fared deliciously every day, when Lazarus would have been
glad of his crumbs; but God never gives this gift to any but whom he loves ^^th
his dearest, special, and eternal love. Suppose some Prince should woo a great
Lady, and had a Jewel worth a million, it may be he would scatter pieces of
silver, or give some light tokens of favor unto the Servants, but the rich
Jewel, that he gives to his Spouse. This Jewel is Christ; Abraham may give to
Is^^a^l a bottle of Milk, but Isa^c had the Inheritance. 4. The Lord Jesus is
the rarest gift of all others whatsoever, Christ is a gift given but to a very
few, here one, and there another: million of millions perish for not knowing
and trusting in Christ. Oh what a rare Jewel is Christ! though our Soul is more
worth than a world, yet a world of Souls is not worth Christ: it is he that
makes us blessed in life, happy in death, and glorious after death. 5. The Lord
Jesus is the sweetest gift of all others, for i^ God gives us Christ, then he
gives us all other gifts in his love, and they come as blessings sweetened to
us: they that have this good shall want no good. The young Lions do lack and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm.
34. Now put all this together, and you will see a Christ to be most precious.
Thirdly, He is altogether precious. I told you the last day, that Christ is
precious, and indeed I told you the truth, for they are not only my sayings,
but Gods sayings, therefore they are true, he is all precious: there is nothing
in Christ but what is precious, he is amiable and desirable, he is fullness and
sweetness^ greatness and goodness, light and life, w^^dom and knowledge,
pleasures and treasures, holiness and happiness: Believers enjoy all things in
Christ, and Christ in all things; he is the joy of a Believers life, and the
life of a Believers joy. O Sirs, Christ is precious, Christ is very precious,
Christ is most precious, Christ is always precious, Christ is altogether
precious to the believing soul.
1. His Name is precious, he is called a precious stone, in Isa. 28.26. Christ
is there called a precious stone. 2. His Blood is precious, in 1 Pet. 1.19. his
blood is there called precious blood: I, and well it may, for a drop of his
Blood is worth a Sea of ours; and yet he died for our death, that we might live
his life. 3. Faith is precious, in 2 Pet. 1.1. Faith is there called precious
Faith; the least grain of Faith is more worth than all the Gold in Europe. 4.
His Promises are precious, in 2 Pet. 1.4. giving to us exceeding great and
precious promises. Christ's promises are called great and precious promises:
Why great, and why precious? They are great for their extent, and precious for
their excellencies. 5. His Gifts and Graces are precious, Prove. 3.15. More
precious than rubies, all things thou can desire are not to be compared to
them. 6. His Members are precious, in Isa. 43.4. Since thou have been precious
in my sight, thou have been honorable. Here you see the Members of Christ are
called precious. A Believer indeed is a Raven in the Worlds eye, but a Dove in
Christ's eye: the Saints in the Worlds account are Dung and Di^^, but in Gods
account they ^re Jewels and Pearls. Graceless men look upon Gods people as
Cast-aways, but God will give whole Kingdoms for their Ransom wicked men may
call the Saints factious, but God calls the Saints precious. Indeed Sirs, the
Scoffers and Jeerers of the people of God in other Ages, were but Bunglers to
the Scoffers and Jeerers of the people of God in our Age. Well, there is a time
a coming when Christ will laugh at the ungodly, for now laughing at godliness;
though holiness be that which a Sinner scorns, yet holiness is that which a
Savior crowns.


As you expect Happiness from God above, so God expects Holiness from you
belo^^ therefore be godly as the godly. 7. The (...) preaches of Christ are
precious, in Heb 11.26. Est^^^ing the reproache^ of Christ greater riches than
(...) treasures of Egypt. I beseech you mark here, it not here said, that Moses
did esteem the Perso^^ Christ, or the Members of Christ, or the Priviled^^^ of
Christ, or the Glory of Christ, greater ric^es than the treasures of Egypt; but
he esteems the reproaches of Christ above the treasures of Egypt. Oh, Beloved,
the worst of Christ is better than the b^^t of the World; Christ's Cross is
sweete^ than the World's Crown; the Reproaches of Christ are greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt; E^t^^ming the reproaches of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt. Will you give me leave to tell you that which few
believe? and that is, That Afflictions ^e good and precious. Few believe this
Truth, That Afflictions are good and precious; and yet let me tell y^^, it is a
great Truth, and this I shall make appear. Now, Beloved, if I can prove, that
affliction a^^ reproaches for Christ (...) good and precious, which is the
worst of Christ, then you will conclude with me, that Christ is all precious.
1. That must needs be good which comes from the only Good; now Afflictions come
from God, who is the only Good, Psalm. 39 9. I was ^^mb, and opened not my
m^^th, says David, Why* because thou did it. I was silent, I did not speak:
why, David? because thou did it. 2. That must needs be good which was
suffered by the sweetest good; now, afflictions were ^^dured by Christ, who is
the sweetest good; He (...) a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa.
53.5. 3. That must needs be good, which fits ^^d prepares us for a glorious
estate, the eternal ^^od. Now thus does affliction. It was good for (...) that
I was afflicted, says David, ^sal. 119.71. Do (...) see Christians? It was
good for me, says David, (...) I was afflicted. Sirs, will you believe King
^^vid? will you believe David a Christian? will you believe David a Saint? will
you believe David a man after Gods own heart? Why he tells you, It was good for
him that he was afflicted. But you will say, Why was it so good? look in the
(...). and there is the reason; for, says he, Before I was afflicted I went
astray, a very satisfactory answer, and therefore it was good for me that I was
afflicted. So again, in 1 Cor. 4.17, 18. For our light afflictions, which are
but for a moment, work for us; what do they work? a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: Do you know what they work for us? why, a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. O Christians, under your greatest
troubles lies your greatest treasures: Afflictions are good, but not pleasant;
sin is pleasant, but not good; there is more evil in a drop of corruption* than
there is in a sea of Afflictions; God by affliction separated the sin he hates
so deadly, from the soul he loves so dearly; by the greatest affliction God
teaches us the sweetest instruction. A Believer, when he lies under that hand
that does afflict him, he lie^ in that heart that does affect him: Believers
are crucified by the World, that they may be crucified to the World; the Flesh
is an enemy to Sufferings, because Suffering is an enemy to the Flesh; it may
make a man an earthly Courtier, but it will never make a man a heavenly Martyr,
they that carry not the Yo^^ of Christ upon their necks, will never carry the
Cross of Christ upon their backs; but (...) Believer studies more how to adorn
the Cr^^ than how to avoid the Cross; none so co^^geous a^ those who are
religious. A Beli^^^^ never falls asleep for Jesus, till he falls asleep (...)
Jesus; some glory in that which is their shame, and shall we be ashamed of that
which is our glory? It is an honor to be dishonored for Jesus Christ: tell
me, O Believer, is not Christ with his Cross, better than the World with its
Crown? Suppose, Christian, the furnace be heat seven times hotter, it is but to
make you seven times better, fiery trials make golden Christians: sin has
brought many a Believer into suffering, and suffering has kept many a Believer
out of sinning; they that are here crossed for well living, shall hereafter be
crowned for well dying: the losing of our heads makes way for the receiving of
our Crowns: God will season our Vessels with the water of afflictions, before
he pours in the wine of glory. By this you s^e, Beloved, that the reproaches of
Christ are precious: it is better to be preserved in Brine, than to rot in
Honey. 4. Jesus Christ is always precious to Believers, he it more precious to
them than (...) thousand Worlds, because he is always with them in all their
trials, in all their troubles, in all their straits, and in all their
afflictions: In all their afflictions he was afflicted, says the Text. Oh,
Sirs, who would not suffer wi^h such a Companion as this? When thou passest
through the water, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee; when thou walk through the five thou shall not be burned,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.2. Do you ^e this, Christian,
Christ is with you in the ^re, in the water, and in the prison, in all places,
and all times, he never leaves you nor forsakes you, Heb. 13.5. He beds and
boards with you, he lies down and rises up with you, he is with you in life
and in death, he goes to the Deathbed, and to Heaven with you. Jesus Christ
is called a Friend, and indeed he is our best Friend; Cant. 5.16. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. 1. Jesus Christ is
a faithful Friend. 2. He is a prudent Friend. 3. A careful or providing Friend.
4. A protecting Friend. 5. A compassionate Friend. 6. A constant Friend. 7. A
loving Friend. 8. An everlasting Friend.
He loves us to the end, and there is no end of his love; he that gave his
Image to us, loves his Image in us; Jesus Christ gave himself for us, and to
us; he loves us in himself, and as himself. Oh what a sweet Friend is Christ*
God in giving Christ to us, gave his very heart for us: Now, Beloved, how can
Jesus Christ but b^ always precious to a Believer, who is th^^ always precious
to a Believer, who is thus always with Believers? Fifthly and lastly, Why is
Jesus Christ so precious to Believers? 1. Because (...) is a (...) Life, Col.
3. When Christ who (...) ^^fe (...), thou shall we appear with him in glory. 1.
There is a threefold life that flo^^ (...) Christ, a life of Grace, a life of
Comfort, (...) life of Glory. 2. Jesus Christ is precious to (...) because he
is their Light. Alas, alas, till we be in Christ we be in darkness, it is in
his light that we ^^e light, Ephesians. 5.14. Awak^ th^^ what (...), and arise from
the dead, and Christ (...) give thee light. 3. Christ is precious to Believers,
because he is their food; My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, Joh. 6. Oh what choice fare have they to feed on, that have Christ to
feed on! Oh Soul, whatever thou art the have not Christ to feed on, thy bread
is but ^^rishing bread. 4. Jesus Christ is precious (...) Believers, because he
is their strength: take a man that is out of Christ, and he has (...)
strength, no strength to withstand or to overcome: Without me, says Christ,
you can do nothing, Joh. 15. When we were without strength, Christ di^^ for us.
To be without Christ, and to be without strength, is all one. 5. Jesus Christ
is precious to Believers, because he is their Righteousness and Holiness. 6.
Jesus Christ is precious to Believers, because he is their Portion, he is the
Terror of his Enemies, and the Portion of his People.
I might in a few particulars Anatomize the Believer, and begin with his Head,
and show you all that he knows of the things of God, he is beholding to Christ
for it: s^ys Paul, God who has sh^^^^ into our (...) by the light of the
Gospel in the face of Christ. All the knowledge of God, all Gospel light, all
the knowledge of spiritual things, we have all from Christ If you consider the
Believer in his Heart, if you ^^nd there a broken heart, a tender heart, a good
and honest heart, a n^w Covenant heart, ^^w comes he by this? why he has it
only from him in whom the new Covenant is made, and that is Christ. Consider
the (...) in his (...) as Faith, and Love, and Patience, and Humility, and the
rest; he has all from Christ, (...) 1.19. Of his fullness have (...) received,
and gr^^^ (...) grace; there is not one Grace but we have i^ from Christ.
Consider him in his life; he is an ^^^st and j^st man; who made him to differ?
why is he not so full of cheating cricks as other (...)? why he has not so
(...) Christ, Christ teaches him to live at a more holy rate than others do:
so that if the Believer be better than others in this life, he must say, thanks
be to Christ for that; before I lived as vainly as others did, but now I have
not so learned Christ. Consider the Believer in his Previledges; he is the Son
of God, and it is by the Son of God that he is the Son of God, Joh. 1.12. To as
many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, (...) to them
that believe in his Name. So that if he be the Son of God, he must thank Christ
for it: Is he ^^e of the Family-Royal? one of the chosen Generation? he must
thank Christ for it, for it is in and by him alone that we have all the good
which we enjoy. Consider him in his Comforts, he has not one good-day, but it
is from Christ: Has he comfort in Ordinances, in the Society of Saints, and in
Prayer? We must thank Christ for all this. And thus I have given you a brief
Anatomy of the Christian, and showed you that Christ is his all in all,
whatever he is worth he is beholden to Christ for it. Now put all this
together, and see what great reason there is that Christ should be precious to
Believer^; and is it any wonder that these Se^^^ ^e enamoured so with Christ,
that they thi^^ their lives not worth the living but for him, (...) in (...)
and for his ^^ke? Oh Sirs, there is a very ^^^at reason why Believers set so
high a value (...) upon Christ, who is their all in all.


Application. The first Use shall be for Examination and Self-trial: You have
heard that Christ is precious, precious to God, to Angels, to Saints: but now,
Oh Soul, is Christ precious to thy Soul? If Christ be precious to you, then all
th^^ which is precious to Christ, is precious to you. Oh that men would but
deal truly with their own Souls: Many talk of Grace, but few ta^^ of Grace;
every one does not live like? Christian, that looks like a Christian; every one
does not walk like a Christian, that talks like a Christian: many know what is
to be done, but never do what is to be known: many wear Christ's Livery, and do
the Devils Drudgery; many have hands as white as wo^ll, and their he^^^e are as
black as hell; many think themselves ass^^rodly going to Heaven, as if they
were already dwelling in Heaven; many think it shall go w^ll with them
hereafter, because it (...) w^ll with them here; many lie down with such hopes
in their Beds of Rest, which they dare (...) lie down withal in their Beds of
Dust; many (...) righteous, who are only righteous in app^^^ance; but such as
deceive others with a false show of holiness, will deceive themselves with a
false show of happiness. Remember, Christians, that the Sheeps Coat shall be
taken off from the Wolves back: If there be nothing done by your Souls on
Earth, there will be nothing do^^ for your Souls in Heaven; there is no making
out our salvation, but by working out our salvation. God binds up none in the
bundle of life, but such who are the heirs of life; there is no living a life
that is vicious, and then dying a death that is righteous. O therefore (...)
your selves. I shall propose four Questions (...) be resolved by your own
hearts. 1. What interest have you in him? 2. What influence have you from him?
3. What affections beat you to him? 4. What preparations make you for him? O
Christians, that you would consider well these weighty things.
Tell me, O Soul, what did Judas get by his deceitful dealing? nothing but a
halter, in which his body was hanged, and a fire in which his soul was burned.
Though the Earth may keep a wicked man living, yet Heaven will not take a
wicked man dying. I say therefore, examine your selves.

2. I shall speak a little by way of Exhortation, and so conclude. 1. If Jesus
Christ be so precious, O then open the door of your affections to Christ, that
Christ may open the door of salvation to you; open to the God of Glory, that
his may make you glorious. Behold, the God of Hea^^^ stands (...) the door of
your hearts and knocks, Rev. 3.20. B^ho^^ I stand at the door and knock, if any
^en, will hear my voice, and open the door, I will come (...) to him, and sup
with him, and he with me; he knocks by his Word, by his Rod, by his Spirit, by
his Mercies, by his Judgments, by Conscience, and all is that he may come in
and sup with you. Now Sinners, will not you open the door of your hearts to
Christ, that Christ may open the door of Heaven to you? If you shut Christ out
of your hearts, he will shut you out of Heaven; and what will you get by that?
O Sirs, he has Gold to enrich you, Wine to cheer you, Bread to nourish you,
Righteousness to justify you, Mercy to save you, Hap^iness to crown you. 2.
Let all that which is precious to God, be precious to you. 1. The Son of God.
2. The Book of God. 3. The Day of God. 4. The Ordinances of God. 5. The
Ministers of God. 6. The People of God.
O let these be precious to you; the People of God are very precious to God; a
Saint is as glorious in his greatest misery, as a Sinner i^ miserable in his
greatest glory. The Lord give a Blessing to what has been deliverd.


Wonderful.
Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely.


Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely.
TO be in a state of Grace, is to be mis^^^ble no more, is to be happy for
^ver. Faith, that unites Christ and sanctified Souls together on Earth; and
Love, that unit^^ God and glorified Souls together in Heaven. Oh Believers, you
are those Worthi^^ of whom the World is not worthy. Jesus Christ from ^^e Saint
has more glory given to him, than be receives from all the World besides*
(...) owe not only our service to Christ, but we owe also our selves to Christ.
I shall now make some entrance upon our Lord Jesus Christ's seventh Famous
Title, which is, Wonderful; this is one of Jesus Christ's* lovely Titles, in
Is^, 9.6. He shall be called Wonderful. The point that we shall lay down, and
speak to from hence, is this:

Doct. That a Believer'^. Savior is a Wonderful Savior. He is wonderful in
the eyes of all^ Angels and Saints for love, the World and Devils for fear,
wonder at him. For the opening this excellent Point, take these Particulars. 1.
Christ is wonderful in his Nature. 2. He Is wonderful in his Person. 3. He is
wonderful in his Incarnation. 4. He is wonderful in his Saints. 5. He is
wonderful in his Offices. 6. He is wonderful in his Miracles that he wrought.
7. He is wonderful in his Humiliation. 8. He is wonderful in his Conquest. 9.
He is wonderful in his Ascension. 10. He is wonderful in his Exaltation. 11. He
is wonderful in his Workings toward his Saints.
Lastly, He is wonderful in his coming to Judgment.

Some have more time than matter, but I have now more matter than time;
therefore I must omit much precious matter, for want of precious time.

Beloved, I shall handle but one of these particulars, and that is the seventh,
That Jesus Christ's is ^^^derful in (...) Humiliation.

This is (...) Head we shall now insist upon; (...) indeed this is one of the
greatest Wonders of all, that he that was so high, should be brought so low;
that he that was so rich, should become so poo^; that the Lord of Life should
(...), and the great God to become a Babe, and the E^^^^al Word not able to
speak a wor^^ that (...) that made the Law, should be made ^^der the Law; he
that was more excellent th^^ (...) the Angels, should become lesser and lower
than the Angels. Oh ye Angels, how stand ye ama^ed at this! that the Lord of
Heaven and Earth should become a Servant to his own Servants, Phil. 2.7. He
took upon him the (...) of a Servant; this must needs be wonderful to all the
Angels in Heaven. But to proceed: 1. Jesus Christ took upon him our nature,
Heb. 2.16. God could stoop no lower, than to become Man, and man could be
advanced no higher, than to be united with God. He that before made man a soul
after the Image of God, now made himself a body after the Image of Man. For man
to be like to God is a wonder, but for God to be like to man, is a great
wonder. But when was it that Jesus Christ took upon him our nature? when it was
in innocence, free from all Misery and Calamity? No, no, but when it was at the
lowest, after the fall, when it was (...) beggarly, when wretched, most bloody,
(...) accursed, most sinful, most feeble; (...) we (...) strength, Christ died
for the ^^godly, says the Apostle, Romans 5.6. Now my Brethren, (...) Jesus
Christ should take upon him our condition, our frailty, our curse, our sin, our
nature, when it was thus low, thus poor, thus wretched. O this is a Wonder of
Wonders, and yet this you see did Jesus Christ. Oh wonderful Redemption! must
God take upon him our frailty? had we so far ran upon the score of Vengeance,
that none could satisfy but God himself? could not he have sent his Angles or
Saints, but must come himself in person? No, no, Angels nor Saints could not do
it; but if Christ will save us, he himself must come and die for us.

2. Our Savior's Humility descended very low, he was born of a poor Maid of no
account or reputation; was there never a great Lady or Gentlewoman in
Jerusalem, for this great Prince of Heaven and Earth to be born of, but that he
must be born of a poor despised Virgin? Yea certainly, there were Gentlewomen
store in Jerusalem, but our Lord Jesus Christ regards not the rich no more
then the poor.

2. He was revealed to poor Shepherds, not to Emperors and Kings, not to
Rulers and great Men, not to Doctors and learned Men, not to Caesar at Rome, I
say the Angel did not go and declare this joyful Tidings and good News to
Caesar at Rome, but to poor Shepherds in the fields, Luke 2.8, 9.

3. He was born in a Stable, Luke 2.12. Not in a fair House or Palace, not in a
Parlour or Chamber, no, but in a Stable where H^^ses and Beasts are fed.

4. He was wrapped in Clouts and laid in a Manger; they were not Clouts of fine
Linen or Silk, or Cloth of Silver or Gold, nor precious Robes, but poor and
mean, like to Beggars Rags. Now Beloved, put all this together, and tell me
what is more wonderful than this: Oh wonderful, wonderful Redemption! Oh
Humility, Humility! how great is thy riches that are th^^ commended to us? thou
please Men, delighe^^ Angles, and confoundest Devils, and bring thy
Creator to a Manger: Oh sweet Jesus, thou conqueredst Death by dying.

3. The third Wonder in Christ's Humiliation is this he became poor: that he
that was so rich, became poor; that he that was Lord of all, had nothing at
all; he that made Heaven and Earth, had no Habitation of his own; he that gave
Crowns of Victory, of Life, of Glory, to others, had no Crown himself here, but
a Crown of Thorns; the Foxes and the Fowls had more than Jesus Christ, Mat.
8.20. The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of
Man has not where to lay his head. The Foxes had holes to lay their heads in
but Christ had no place to lay his head in: as he was born in another Man's
house, so he was buried in another Man's Tomb. You say, says the Apostle, the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, though he was rich, yet he became poor, 2 Cor.
8.9. Yet became he poor, ay, poor indeed, and so poor that he had not a penny;
you will say, that man is very poor that has not a penny. Truly such a one was
Christ, he had not a penny to pay tribute, till he had got it of a Fish, Mat.
17. And when he was to ride in pomp to Jerusalem, he had no Coach, no Chariot,
no Horse or Beast of his own, he was fain to ride upon another man's Ass, Mat.
21.1, 2. O ye blessed Saints, admire and wonder at this, is not he the
Brightness of God, the Paridise of Angles, the Beauty of Heaven, the Redeemer
of Men, the Destroyer of Death, the King of Saints; and that he should become
so Poor for us. Oh! this is a wonder to Angles and Men!

4. The fourth wonder in Christ's Humiliation is this That he shed his blood
six times for poor sinners; and this is a great Wonder. 1. The first time was,
when he was Circumcised at eight days old. O what a blessed Jesus is this!
what ready for the Sacrifice already? What, but eight days old and yet shed thy
blood for the salvation of Man's soul? 2. The second time was, when he was in
his Agony when he was in the Garden: Matthew tells us, that His soul began to
be sorrowful. Sore amazed, says Mark, Mark 14. To be troubled, says John Joh.
12. Now my soul is troubled, what shall I say? save me from this hour.
Troubled! O Lord! what, thou that bindest up the proud Waves of the Sea, thou
that turnest the Hearts of Kings as the Rivers of (...), thou that laidst the
foundations of the Earth, and spreadest the Heavens as a Curtain, thou that
guidest the Stars, and thundrest in the Clouds, thou that upholdest all things
by the Word of thy Power, and what, thou troubled! O the horror, the terror,
the sorrow that seized upon the soul of Christ! Says Luke, (...) began to be in
an Agony, Luke 22.24. He began to be in an Agony and he sweat, what? (...)
natural sweat but blood, he was in a bloody sweat all over, he sweat clods of
blood, as the Original has it. O how did Christ come swimming to us in blood,
and have not we a tear to shed for all those Streams of his? We did eat the
sour Grapes and his Teeth were set on edge; we climb^d the Tree, and stole the
forb^dden Fruit and Christ he went up the Ladder of the Cross and dyed. Oh how
lovely should Christ be in our eyes! We should wear this Crucifix in our
hearts, and treasure it up as Moses did the Manna in the Pot. Christ's Cross,
says one, is the golden Key that lets us into Paradise; and the Angel with the
flaming Sword is turned out, his red blood washed away our red Sins. But, 3. He
shed his blood for us, when his Cheeks were nipt and tore, the pulling off the
ha^^, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 5.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that pulled off she hair. Some be of opinion, that Christ's
cheeks were rent to his very chin, and his beard was pulled off; both very
likely to be true, neither of them could be without much blood, for we find
that the So^ldiers did blindfold him, and then smote him on the face, and bid
him read who it was that smote; they made sport of it, Luke 22.64. O how was
that face of his massacred and covered with blood, that was brighter than the
Sun! He that was fairer than the Sons of men, he that is the great glistering
and sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Glory, how was he bespotted and besmeared
with blood! Oh ye' hard of heart, ye stubborn of heart, and indeed too stubborn
are we all; if Judgment and the Hammer will not break your hearts, let Love and
Mercy do it: Look unto Christ, and say. Have thou suffered this for me, and
shall not I love thee, O Lord, and serve thee, and obey thee, and honor thee?
So say, and so do, and the Lord say, Amen.

But then 4. Christ shed his blood when the Cr^wn of prickling Thorns was put
upon his head, Mat. 27. Some of the Fathers say, that he received seventy two
wounds in his head; certainly there could not but much blood come out. Oh what
a sight was this, to behold that head of his that was as the most fine Gold, as
the Spouse expresses it, to be now covered with Thorns, and rent with Thorns;
that he should wear the prickling Crown of sharp Thor^s, that was fit to wear
the Crown of Glory.

5. A fifth time when he shed his blood, was, when his hands and feet were
mailed to the Cross; these beautiful feet of his that came skipping upon the
Mountains, bringing the glad tidings of peace and salvation, Skipping, as
Gregory says, from the Throne to the Cradle, from the Cradle to the Cross, and
from the Cross (...) the Thr^^^, again. How were these blessed hands of his
nailed and made fast to the Cross? O ye blessed Spirits, look down from Heaven
and you may see even the Almighty knee^ at the (...) of men. O ye Angels, how
should you be amazed at this, to see your Lord and Master so far deny himself,
as to take upon him the form of a Servant? We saw Jesus, says the Apostle,
made a little lower than the Angels to suffer death; the Creator not only
become a Creature, but inferior to some of the Creatures which he had made. O
ye blessed Saints, why do you not wonder at this wonder? to see the Beauty of
Heaven, the Paradise of Angels, the Brightness of his Father's Glory, the
Redeemer of men, thus to humble and take upon him man's nature, for the
salvation of man's soul.

6. And lastly, Christ shed his blood when the Spear was thrust into his side,
out of which presently gush^d out water and blood, Joh. 9. Some say, that the
Soldier that pierced Christ with a Spear, was a blind man; but our Savior's
blood sprinkling our upon his eyes, restored him to his sight, and he became a
Convert, a Preacher, and a Martyr: you will say a very strange Cure, that the
Physician should b^eed, and his blood should be of that virtue that we should
all be saved. Physicians be usually liberal of other men's blood, but sparing of
their own; but it was not so with our Physician, instead of the Patients
bleeding in the arm, he bled in the side. Why do thou shower down thy blood,
and come swimming in thy blood? Is not a drop sufficient? One drop, says
Luther, is more worth than Heaven and Earth. Oh love without measure! Oh
wonderful Redemption! that God should take up in him man's frailty, this is
wonderful indeed! Is it not, enough for a King to pardon a Thief, but that the
King himself should die for the Malefactor? This is beyond expression: thus did
our blessed Lord, our blessed Savior, he died that we might live, he went and
suffered in his Agony, that he might stay us with flaggons, and comfort us with
apples; he endured the greatest pain, that we might enjoy the sweetest
pleasures. Oh how lovely, how lovely was Christ in his sufferings! who would
but love thee, thou King of Saints? O Christians, consider how much thy dear
Lord and Savior has suffered and undergone for thee. O precious blood, it
redeems us, it cleanses us, it washes us, it justifies us, it sanctifies us,
it restores us to God, and brings us to Heaven. 5. Another Wonder in Christ's
Humiliation is this, he suffered in his soul, Mat. 26.38. My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto death, says Christ. Oh what a word was this for a God to
speak, to say, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; for man to say
so, is no great wonder; but for a God to say so, Oh this is a great wonder
indeed: the sufferings of his soul was the soul of his sufferings. Christ
yielded his soul for our souls, his soul in our souls stead. Many of the
faithful Servants have suffered much in their bodies, as the Martyrs that were
racked, and burnt, and sawn asunder, but they had much freedom in their souls,
their souls were full of much spiritual joy and comfort: but now Jesus Christ
did not only suffer in his body, but in his soul; and this is that which makes
the wonder the greater, that Christ suffered in his soul, he drank the Cup of
Affliction, that we might drink the Cup of Consolation; he tasted Death for us,
that we might taste Life for him: Christ was forsaken, that we might never be
forsaken.

6. A sixth Wonder in Christ's Humiliation, is this, that Jesus Christ should
suffer himself to be so much mocked: he was mocked, as ^a^^psm was by the
Philistines when his eyes were put out; and truly this is a great wonder. 1. If
we consider who Christ was. 2. If we consider who they were that mocked him:
Christ he was God, the God-man, they were but dusk and ashes. 1. They did spit
upon him. 2. They blind-folded him. 3. They crowned him with Thorns. 4. They
put a Reed into his hand instead of a Scepter. 5. They clothed him with purple
Garments. 6. They bowed their knees to him in scorn. 7. They saluted him with
Hall King of the Jews. 8. They made him carry his own Cross on which he was
hanged; as Malefactors go with Halters about their necks to Execution, so they
made Christ carry his Cross. 9. They reviled him, wagging their heads. 10. They
crucified him, with two Thieves, and in the raidst of them, as though he had
been the Prince of Thieves, the greatest Malefactor of them all. 11. They
insulted over him in his misery: thus they never left him, till his Soul left
the World; and all this they did in scorn to him, that they might make his
death the more painful and shameful.

O Sirs, this is no small wonder, if we consider how Jesus Christ was mocked.
(...) The seventh Wonder in the Humiliation of Christ, was this, he suffered
much from his Father; here is a wonder, if you talk of wonders. Jesus Christ did
not only suffer from Jews and Gentiles, Scribes and Pharisees, J^d^s and
Pilate, wicked men and Devils, but he suffered too from his Father; and this is
that which makes the wonder the greater, Isa. 53. (...) pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has (...) him to grief. Mark, one would have thought, if God
would spare any, it should have been his Son, his own Son, his beloved Son, his
begotten Son, his bosom Son, and yet God spared him not a jot, Romans ^.32. He
that (...) was his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. Mark here, God did
not spare him, but delivered him up for us. If Jesus Christ will come and take
our sins upon him, God will not spare him, but let out the fullness of Justice,
and Justice to be full upon him, till he has paid the uttermost farthing of
Justice. O blessed Jesus, did thou undergo so much for our sinning, for our
offending, for our rebelling: O then what infinite cause have we to love thee,
and obey thee, and honor thee; for the more he has done and suffered for us,
the dearer ought he to be unto us. 8. The last great wonder that I shall
mention, is this, Christ foresaw all this, and yet he willingly undertook it to
save mankind; Christ knew before he come from Heaven, how his Countrymen the
Jews would use him, and that one of his Family would betray him, Job. 6.4. says
the. Text, Jesus knew from the beginning who should betray him; nothing was in
the womb of time that was not first in the womb of Christ, he knew it from the
beginning, says the Text: Now that our Lord Jesus Christ should foreknow all
this most wonderful misery that he endured, yet that he should come freely,
willingly, and joyfully from Heaven, to die and suffer by and for such poor
wretches as we are, here is a wonder to Angels and Men, H^b. 10.11. Lo I come
says Christ, to do thy ^i^^ O God. Lo I come, and what was it he was to do
why, to suffer for poor man, to redeem poor man. Do you see here. Sirs, what
great love Christ bore to his people, rather than they should be in Hell, and
be damned, Jesus Christ would come from Heaven, and suffer and this for them,
though he knew before how he should be used. O this is a great wonder, dear
Christians, methinks such a Pearl should sparkle in our eyes: we sail O Glory,
not in the salt Sea of our Tears, but in the Red Sea of Christ's Blood. Truly
it is wonderful to think how much Jesus Christ did for us, and how little do we
for him; the greater his sufferings were, the greater were our sins; the
greater his pain was, the greater should be our love to him again. I shall make
of this point, a Use of Information and Exhortation.

Use 1. First, Is it so that a Believer's Savior is a wonderful Savior? then
it informs us of eight things.

1. My first Inference is this, that Christ's sufferings were great sufferings,
in what he endured from men in his body, and in what he suffered from God in
his soul. Christ did not only endure pain in his body, but a^^ny in his soul.
On the Sea of Sufferings the Sea of Sorrow, the Sea of Blood, the Sea of Tears
that our Blessed Savior waded through to come and bring peace to our souls,
salvation to our souls, grace and glory to our souls. He suffered from God,
also from men his enemies, he suffered from men his friends, he suffered from
Devils, he suffered in his Name, he suffered in his Members, he suffered in his
Body, he suffered in his Soul; the cause was our sins, the effect our
salvation. If you look through the Chronicle of his life, you shall find his
whole life full of sorrow and misery: He was persecuted, he was tempted, he was
repreached, he was falsely accused, he was apprehended, he was betrayed, he was
crucified: what shall we say more? what can be said more? He was so full of
sorrow, he took his Name from sorrow; our Lord Jesus Christ is called a man of
sorrows, Isa. 53.3. A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief Now judge,
Sirs, whether Christ's life was not full of sorrows; he took his Name from
sorrow. O sweet Jesus, thy sufferings were great sufferings: that is my first
Inference. 2. Jesus Christ suffered by himself, but not for himself; he was
alone in his sufferings, neither Angles nor Saints bore any part with Christ in
his sufferings; no, he drank the bitter cup alone, He alone purged our sins,
Heb. 1.3. He alone by himself, says the Text, purged ou^ sins. No, Christ had
none to help to bear his heavy burden with him, he bare it himself alon^. But
my Beloved, though our Lord Jesus Christ suffered by himself, yet he did not
suffer for himself (...) suffered for us, he suff^r^d that which we deserved,
Isa. 53* ^, 5 (...) been our griefs and carried our sorrows, he was wounded for
our transgressions, he w^^ bruised for our iniquities; the chastiseme^^ of our
peace was upon him and with his stripes we are h^^ded. Do you see here
Christians, how many Ours are here? our griefs, our sorrows, our
transgressions, our iniquities, our peace; you have here five Ours: so again,
For (...) sakes he became poor, 2 Co^. 8.9. Mark, for (...) sakes. Beloved he
was born for us; Unto (...) a child is born: he was given for us, To (...) son
(...) given, Isa. 9.6. He was made a curse f^^ us, Gal. 3.13. The Text tells
us, He was m^^^ a curse, but it was for us: He was delivered ^p for us, Romans
8.23. W^o spared not his own Son, but de^ivered him up for us all. O Si^s, all
these things they were for us, born for us, given for us, made a curse for us,
made sin for us, delivered up for us, lived for us, died for us, and is now in
Heaven interceding for us, Heb. 7.25. So that, my Brethren, all that our Lord
Jesus suffered, it was not for himself, but it was for us; our blessed Savior
suffered for us, that we might not suffer. This is the second Inference. 3. My
third is this, That it is more for Christ to suffer any thing, than for all Men
and Angles to suffer all things. Pray mark Sirs, if all the Kings and ^^^^rours
in the Earth should have left their T^rones, their Crowns, their Kingdoms,
their Scepters, their Glory, their Honors, and Princely Robes, and have come
and took upon them a poor Lazarus's condition, to go poorly, and fare hardly,
and die shamefully, why all this had not been so much as for Jesus Christ the
Son of God to have suffered the least thing he did suffer Nay further, I say,
If all the Angels in Heaven, and Men on Earth, had come and suffered, and died
ten thousand deaths, it had not been so much, put all together; as it was for
Christ to suffer any thing; because they ^re Creatures, he the Creator; they
are Servants, he the Master; they are Subjects, he the Prince; they are mean,
he is Mighty; He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6. Now I say, it would not have been half such a
wonder, if all the Angels in Heaven, and Men on Earth, had come and suffered,
as it was for the Son of God. Oh this is a wonder of wonders, his sufferings
were wonderful, his humility was wonderful, his patience was wonderful, his
love was wonderful, greater love could none show; he loved us so that he died
for love. Now I beseech you consider this Inference, which was this, That it is
more for Jesus Christ to suffer any thing, than for all M^n and Angels to
suffer all things. And indeed Si^s, let me tell you, I want words to express
it, or set it forth; for there is both want of words, and want in words to
express this matter. 4 My fourth Inference is this; In what a miserable case
lay we, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ must endure all this, suffer all
th^s hear all this, undergo all this, for poor Sinners* In what a miserable
case lay we in, think you? Certainly the misery of man was very great, that man
should need such Redemption as this. Oh what a breach has Sin made between God
and us, that the Son of God must come from Heaven to Earth to suffer all this?
Oh Sirs, mischievous Sin, I say mischievous Sin had undone us; Sin has robbed
every one of six Jewels, every of which Jewels were more worth than Heaven and
Earth. Would you know what Jewels they be that Sin has robbed us of? I will
tell you, and than you will sa^ with me, that we were in a very miserable case.
1. It robs us of the Image of God: wa^ not this a precious Jewel think you? I
say, it robbed us of the Image of God, and did draw in man the Devil's picture.
Malice is the Devil's eye, Oppression is the Devil's hand, Blasphemy is the
Devil's tongue, and Hypocris^ is the Devil's cloven foot. 2. Sin robs us of our
Sonship, and makes us slaves to the Devil, slaves to Sin, slaves to the World,
and slaves to our selves. This is another Jewel we lost. 3. It robs us of our
Friendship with God, and made us enemies to God, enemies to Christ, ^nemies to
our Souls, and enemies to all that is good. 4. It robs us of our communion and
fellowship with the Father, Son, and Spirit, and makes us strangers and aliens.
5. It robs us of our Rights and Privileges, of Heaven, and heavenly things,
and makes us the children of wrath, and heirs of Hell. 6. It robs us of our
honor and glory, and made us vile and miserable, as you may see, Isa. 1.6.
There w^^^ (...) soundness from the crown of the head to the sole of (...) foot.
Now Sirs, put all this together, and th^^ see whether or no we are not
miserable, and whether we did not need a Savior to com^ and deliver us from
this misery into which our souls were plunged. Now here is our happiness
Christians, in Christ we (...) all those Jewels again that were lost in the old
Adam, the glorious Image of God, our Sonship, our Friendship, our Fellowship,
our Privileges, and our Glory and Honor; we have all again by Jesus Christ. O
Sirs man was in a very sad condition, man had brought himself in a sad
condition, our condition was a miserable condition. 5. A fifth Inference is
this (...) Jesus Christ brought life to us, but we brought death to him; a life
of grace, a life of comfort, a life of glory: Christ brought glory to us, but
we brought shame to him: Christ brought riche^ to us, but we brought poverty to
him; he brought joy to us, but we brought sorrow to him, sorrow upon sorrow: we
put a Crown of Thorns upon Christ's head, Christ put the Crown of Glory upon
(...) heads. We thought the Earth too good for Christ, and would not let him
live here, but put him to death; but Christ thinks not Heaven too good for us;
we are ashamed to own Christ before men, but Christ is not ashamed to own us
before his Father, and his holy Angels. We condemn Christ, but Christ justifies
us. Oh Sirs, think of your unkindness to Christ, and let the consideration of
his infinite love and favor to you, draw out your affections after him. That Is
the fifth. 6. My sixth Inference is ^his, All Believers have exceeding cause to
bless God for Jesus Christ: God the Father gave Christ to us, to us who were
not his friends but enemies; to us who were not sons, but slaves; to us who
were not Angels, but men; to us who loved not God, but hated him. Oh, have not
we cause to bless God for Jesus Christ? In Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten S^^, that whoever b^lieved in him should (...)
perish, but h^v^ everlasting life. Oh, Sirs, what a Gift is Jesus Christ! 7. If
Jesus Christ be so wonderful, Oh then how vile a thing, how base a thing is it
for the hearts of men to prefer any thing before Jesus Christ! I beseech you,
and I beg of you all (...) mind this Inference. Surely Sirs, if Jesus Chri^^^
be so wonderful, so precious, so lovely, so ric^^^ so sweet, so rare; Oh then
it is a most abominable thing, a wicked thing, a vile thing, to prefer any
thing before Jesus Christ. Oh, I may speak it with grief of heart, there be too
many in the world that set light by Christ, and m^^^ nothing of Christ, and
love not Christ, and prefer every base lust before Christ; though then is
nothing more cursed than this, yet there is nothing more common than this,
Christians for men to prefer the vilest of things before Christ. 1. The wicked
Worldling he prefer^ the trash of this world before Jesus Christ; he can leave
hearing, and praying, and reading, and fasting, to follow the world; he prefers
gol^ before God, earth before Heaven, gain before Glory, his corruptible silver
before his Savior (...) thou wicked Worldling, thou wretched Worldling, can
thy Riches save thy Soul? Let me a^ thee, can thy Riches deliver thee from
Hell, c^^ thy Riches bring thee to Heaven, that thou th^^ preferrest them
before Christ? Oh the Lord Jesus will come in flames of fire to take venge^^^
on such; and then thou will know to thy (...) and pain, and torment, that thy
Riches ca^^^ keep thee out of Hell, much less bring thy Soul to Heaven; then
thou will see thy folly, wh^^ it is too late. 2. Drunkards, wic^est Drunkards,
prefer their Drunkenness before Christ; the Drunkard prefers his Pots before
Christ; the Drunkard wades through a Sea of Drink to his Grave; he can sit a
day or whole night in an Alehouse, and think it but a little time; but an hour
in the Service of God, O how tedious is that! Oh thou Drunkard, that thou
turnest off thy Cups so fast, God Almighty has a Cu^^^ thee, but not a Cup of
Sack, nor a Cup of ^eer, but a Cup of Wrath, which thou shall drink to
Eternity; which is thou to drink scalding ^^t Load down thy throat: he has so
much Liquor here, not only to drink to quench his thirst, but to drink to
excess, till he say and do he knows not what: In Hell he shall have little
enough, there is never a Tavern or Alehouse there, no, there is not a drop of
Water to be got all Hell over. O thou Wretch, thou shall live in burning
flames, and thy tongue shall cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and if thou
would give a thousand worlds for one drop of water, thou shall not have it:
and therefore, I beseech you, if ^ay such there are, in the name of God hear
and fear, and do no more so wickedly. O, I would not be in thy condition for
ten thousand worlds; and yet I cannot but have bowels of pity toward thee,
which constrains me thus to speak, knowing thy condition better than thou do
thy self. O could thou but speak with thy fellow Drunkards that are now in
Hell, O what dreadful Stories would they tell thee of their burnings, and
sufferings, and pain, and torments! Some are in Hell already for the same sin
you live in; and if you live and die without Christ, you shall be e're long
with them. 3. The Swearer, the blasphemous Swearer prefers his Oaths before
Christ: Many can swear by their Creator and Maker, and speak proudly, and look
highly, and walk contemptuously, as if there were no God to punish, no Devil to
torment. Well, let me tell thee, O thou Swearer, that now delighte^^ in
cursing, thou shall be ^'re long sent with a Curse to a cursed place; Depart ye
cursed into everlasting flames, will Christ say to such persons. Lastly, The
proud person prefers his pride before Christ: If a fine Sure of Clothes did lie
on the one hand, and Christ on the other, the proud person would rather put on
the Suit of Clothes than Christ. O I beseech you, Sirs, consider what a vile
and abominable thing it is to prefer any thing before Christ; Consider this,
says the Psalmist, y^ that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces and there be
none to deliver you. O, poor wretch, consider of that Text, thou ^iest open to
all the Judgments in this life, and to all the torments in the life to come,
all ye wicked ones that prefer any thing before Christ. 8. The last Inference
is this; If Jesus Christ be so wonderful, O then every one that hears of
Christ, should think it to be a m^st dreadful thing to miss of Christ. O
Christians (...) Friends, consider of it; certainly that man or woman's
condition must needs be said indeed, that lives and dies without Jesus Christ.
O poor wretch, the Devil looks but for a look from God to come and rend thee
and tear thee in pieces, and drag thy soul to Hell. Poor soul; thy soul is in
danger every hou^ of being arrested by Death, and curied Prisoner to Hell. O
Sirs, I beseech you, do you think and consider with your selves what a sad
thing it is to miss of Christ. Until a man is in Christ, he has nothing, he
know^ nothing he enjoys nothing, can do nothing, is fit for nothing, and is
worth nothing, Prove. 10.20.
Oh I beseech you, that you would consider seriously, consider that of all
miseries this is one of the greatest miseries, to miss of Christ: we are never
able to lament the loss of that poor soul that loses Jesus Christ, all losses
be wrapped up in that one loss* and therefore I beseech you all both good and
bad, bethink with your selves what a sad condition that person is in that
misseth of Christ. So much for this Use of Information.

A Believers Golden Chain.
I Come now to the second Use, and that is a Use of Exhortation; and here I
shall make a Golden Chain of twelve Links, for Believers to wear about their
Necks. I. Hear the best Men. Read the best Books. Keep the best Company. 1.
Hear the best Men: O Sir^ hear a soul-enriching Minister, a soul-winning
Minister, a soul-searching Minister, one that declares the whole counsel of
God, that gives the Father his due, the Son his due, the Holy Ghost his due;
one that makes hard things easy, and dark things plain. Many there are, I may
speak with grief, and to their shame, who instead of making hard things easy
to the people, make easy things hard to the people, plain things dark,
speaking in unknown tongues, which the people understand not, and all to work a
vain admiration of them in the ignorant; but how unlike to Christ, and the
Prophets, and. Apostles, these are, I will leave you to judge. This is as if a
man should make a Scaffold as high as a Steeple, when his work is down upon the
ground. Ministers are Fishermen; now you know if Fishermen should wind their
Nets up together, they could catch nothing; but if they will catch the Fish,
they must spread their Net: The Application is easy: A sanctified heart is
better than a silver tongue, a heart full of Graces, is better than a head full
of Nations, notional knowledge it may make a man's head giddy, but it will
never make a man's heart holy; that which most tickleth delicate ears, least
helps diseased souls: how are we to speak to God and live, much less to speak
from God to the People that they may live; how holy had they need be that draw
near to a Holy God? Ministers are called Angels, because we should be as Angels
in our lives; but if Angels fall, they turn Devils; O we should be holy as the
holy Angels; it is the foolishness of Preaching that saves souls, but not
foolish Preaching. Christ taught them as they were able to hear it, and as they
were able to bear it, Mark 4.33. Paul was excellent at this, I had rather speak
five words in a known tongue, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. A
man may be a gre^ (...), and yet a great Sinner; Judas the Traitor was (...)
the Preacher: therefore Sirs, let me beseech you, for your poor souls sake,
hear those Ministers that come nearest to Christ, the Prophets and Apostles; he
is the best Preacher that does most good, and wins most souls (...) you may go
from men to truth, but not from truth to men; for the best of men are but men
at the best. 2. Read the best Books, for in them you will find the best things,
and compare what is spoken in the l^^k of man, with what is written in the Book
of God. 3. Keep the best Company, be much with them that are much with God,
walk with them that walk with God, Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus C^^ist, 1 John 1.3. Forsake all bad company, and join thy
self with good company; let them be thy choicest companions that have made
Christ their choicest companion; lay them nearest your hearts, who lie nearest
Christ's heart: carry them in your bosom by love, who shall be carried by
Angels into Abraham's besome; let Christ's Dove be your Love; with whom should
Believers be, but with Believers? you know what our English Proverb is, Birds
of a feather will flock together; Being let go, they went to their own Company,
Act. 4.23. Indeed none are fit company for a Believer, but a Believer; to see a
Saint and a Sinner sociating one with another, is to see the dead and the
living keep house together; carnal men, though they be naturally alive, yet they
are spiritually dead; it is better to be with Lazarus, though in his rags, than
to be Dives, though in his robes: He that walks with the wise shall be wise,
Prove. 13.20. O dwell where God dwells, make them your Companions on Earth, who
shall be your Companions in Heaven. That Is the first.

II. Meditate often, think often on the four last things, Death, which is most
certain; Judgment, which is most strict; Hell, which is most doleful; Heaven,
which is most delightful. 1. Meditate upon Death, which is most certain; He
has appointed unto all men once to die, Heb. 9.27. Out of the dust was man
formed, and unto dust shall man be returned; to think of Death, is a death to
some men: but Beloved, meditate upon death, the meditation of Death will put
Sin to death. Death to the wicked is the end of all comfort, and the beginning
of all misery; but Death to the godly is the Outlet to sin and sorrow, and the
Inlet to peace and happiness: the Saints enjoyments shall be incomparable,
when the Sinners torments shall be intolerable; when a Believers soul shall go
out of his own bosom, it goes into Abraham bosom; when a Believer dies, he
leaves all his bad behind him, and carries his good with him; when a Sinner
^ies, he carries his bad with him, and leaves his good behind him; the one
goes from evil to good, the other from good to evil: when a Saint leaves the
World, his flesh returns to dust, and his spirit returns to rest; when a Sinner
leaves the World, his body goes to Worms to be consumed, and his soul goes to
flames to be tormented; the one goes to Abraham's bosom, the other to Bel^ebub's
bosom: The Chaff to the fire, and the wheat to the barn. Oh for the Lord's sake
meditate upon Death. When you come into the World, you do but live to die
again; when you go out of the World, you do but die to live again; he that
lives well, cannot die ill; he that is assured of a life that has no and,
cares not how soon this life has an end; but he that lives without sear, shall
die wit^out hope: he that has no grace in his life* shall have no true peace
in his death. An old Sinner is nearer the second death, than he is to the
second birth; his body is nearer to corruption, than his soul is unto
salvation: Death levelleth the highest Mountains with the lowest Valleys; the
robes of Princes, and the rags of Beggars, are both laid up together in the
Wardrobe of the Grave. The reason why men so little prepare for death, is
because they so little think of death; when they feel sickness arresting them,
then they fear death approaching: The Grave is a bed to rest in, but not (...)
shop to trade in: when the soul in death takes its ^ight from its loving Mate,
they shall meet no more till the General Assize. When you are putting off your
Clothes, think of the putting off your Tabernacles; be going to your Beds, as
if you were going to your Graves, and so close your eyes in one World, as you
would open them in another World; when you are creeping between the Sheets,
then think of your Winding Sheet. Remember, Christians, that God can as easily
turn you into the dust, as he could take you out of the dust. To day is your
living day, to morrow may be your dying day, the meditation of death will
prepare you for death. 2. Meditate upon Judgment, which is most strict, We must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. They who will not come before
his Mercy-seat, shall be forced to come before his Judgment Seat; they who will
not hear his Word, shall feel his Sword; they who are graceless in this day,
will be speechless in that day. Do you mind me, Sirs? At the World's end such
will be at their wits end, to see the Earth flaming, the Heavens melting, the
Stars falling, the Graves opening, the Judgment hastening, the Sun and Moon
mourning, and Christ and his Angels coming: He that comes to raise the dead,
will also come to judge the dead. O Sirs the great Day to great Sinners will be
a terrible day, when they shall see Christ coming in the Clouds, who has the
person of a man, but the power of God, being crowned with dignity, and guarded
with Angels, and enraged with Anger, and enabled with Power, to bring all Kings
and Nobles, high and low, rich and poor to his Bar, and there he will judge
them, not by the witness of their countenances, but by the blackness of their
consciences; he that was guarded to the Cross with a band of Soldiers, shall
be guarded to the Bench with a guard of Angels: you that make no account of his
coming, how do you think to give an account at his coming? For the Lord's sake
meditate upon Judgment, the Meditation of Judgment Sirs, may make you
Judgment-proof, they who now judge themselves in their own private Sessions,
shall not be judged by Christ at his public Assize. 3. Meditate upon Hell,
which is most doleful. O Sirs, Heaven is a place where all is joyful; and Hell
is a place where all is doleful: in the former there is nothing but happiness,
and in the latter there is nothing but heaviness; Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall
be turned into Hell. Mark, Sirs, The wicked shall be turned into Hell. O
dreadful place, where the Devil is the Jailer, Hell the Prison, Damnation the
punishment, Eternity the time, Brimstone the fire, men and spirits the fuel; to
endure this will be intolerable, to avoid it, will be impossible. This is the
day of God's long-suffering, that will be the day of man's long-suffering;
there they may suffer, and suffer pain without ease, and torments without end,
sorrow without succor, and misery without mercy: for the Lord's sake meditate
upon Hell. Oh what Hells are there in Hell! the lo^^ of God, the loss of
Christ, the loss of Saints, the loss of Angels, the loss of all good, and
endless, ^aseless, remidiless torment must be their por^^^^: O that you would
but often th^^k of (...). If (...) thou droppest into Hell, after a thousand
years you will be as far from coming out, as at first entrance in; there is a
way to keep a man out of Hell, but no way to get a man out of Hell. The Wheat
and the Chaff they may both grow together, but they shall not both lie
together* in Hell there shall not be a Saint amongst those that are ^errified,
and in Heaven there shall not be a Sinner amongst those that are glorified. The
Sea of Damnation shall not be swee^^ed with a drop of Compassion. Will you pity
a body that is going to the Block, and will you not pity a soul that is going
to the Pit? What a sad Visitation is that, where the black horse of Death goes
before, and the red horse of Wrath follows after? O that must needs be sad,
when one death comes upon the neck of another. A man's condition in this life
may be honorable, and yet his state as to another life may be damnable. Poor
Lazarus goes to Heaven, when rich Dives goes to Hell; it is better to go to
Heaven poorly, than it is to go to Hell richly. O Sirs, let us go into Heaven
by contemplation, that we may never go into Hell by condemnation. 4. Meditation
on Heaven which is most joyful, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you. Heaven is a place where all joy is enjoyed, mirth
without sadness, light without darkness, sweetness without bitterness, life
without death, rest without labor, plenty without poverty. Oh what joy
enters into a Believer, when he enters into the joy of his Master! who would
not work for glory with the greatest diligence, and wait for glory with the
greatest patience? Oh wha^ glories are there in glory! Thrones of glory, Crowns
of glory, Vessels of glory, a Weight of Glory, a Kingdom of glory; here Christ
puts his Grace upon his Spouse, but there he puts his glory upon his Spouse. In
Heaven the Crown is made for them, and in Heaven the Crown shall be worn by
them. In this life Believers have some good things, but the rest and the best
are reserved for the life to come. O Sirs, meditate upon Heaven, the meditation
of Heaven will make us heavenly; Heaven is not only a possession promised, but
a possession purchased. When our contemplations and conversations are in
heaven, then we enjoy Heaven and Earth. To be in Christ is Heaven below, and to
be with Christ is Heaven above: there cannot be a better being for us, than for
us to be with the best of beings. To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain,
Phil. 1.21. Paul was contented to stay a while out of Heaven, that he might
bring other souls into Heaven; his life to them was most useful, but his death
to him was most gainful: let our condition be never so great, it is a Hell
without him; and let our condition be never so sad, it is a Heaven with him. I
had rather be in Hell with Christ, than in heaven without Christ, says Luther.
Indeed hell it self would be heaven if God were in it, and heaven would be hell
if God were from it That which makes heaven so full of joy is, that it is above
all fear; and that which makes hell so full of horror is, that it is below all
hope: the Vessels of grace shall swim in the Ocean of glory; here all the Earth
is not enough for one man, but there one Heaven is enough for all men: a
Believer should see with an eye that is purified, what he shall shortly see
with an eye that is glorified: we may talk of the greatness of our Crowns, but
we shall never know the weight of our Crowns, till they be set on our Heads.
That Is the second.

III. Set the watch of your lives by the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Live
in print, and keep the Copy of your lives free from blots and blu^s, that the
Characters thereof may be read by all. And bring up the bottom of your lives to
the top of your lights; then only does the Watch of our lives move with
uprightness, when it is s^t by the beams of the Sun of Righteousness. The grace
of God that brings saiv^^^, both appeared to all men, teaching us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this presons world, Ti^. 2.11, 12. They who will not submit to Graces teaching,
shall never enjoy Graces salvation. Oh live so, that the word which has
brought salvation to your souls, may bring your souls unto salvation: that you
may be such Jewels of Grace as shall be locked up in the Cabinet of Glory. The
Father of Light takes no pleasure in the Children of Darkness: Let your light
so shine before men, Mat. 5. We must first shine in Grace, before we can shine
in Glory. They who look for a Heaven made ready, should live as if they were in
Heaven already.

There are four things that make up a New Creature: 1. Light. 2. Life. 3.
Holiness. And 4. Good works. The Children of Light must put on the Armor of
Light. I cannot but sadly reflect on the Inconstancy of rotten Professors: An
applauded Christ shall have many Hosanna's, but a condemned Christ shall have
many C^uc^^ige's. But a true Believer can as well go with Christ to the Tree
where he is to be crucified, as the can go with Christ to the Throne, where he
is to be glorified. Oh how unanswerable are the ^ives of some Professors, to
the Lights of Pro^^^ors! They know much, but do little; they know the good they
are to do, but they do not the good they know. They speak of things above, but
they love and follow after things below: A man is not what he says, but he is
what is does: To say what we do, and not do what we say, is but to undo our
selves by doing. Take heed, Sirs, that you do not talk your selves to Hell with
Heavenly words: what is the great prejudice that the World has against
Professors, but this, that they who profess against pride more than others, are
themselves as proud as others? They profess against convetousness more than
others, but are themselves as covetous as others: they often meet together to
be better, but they are never the better for their often meeting together: do
but take away their Profession, and you take away their Religion. They have
nothing of the shape but the skin: they are better in their outsides, than they
are in their insides. Oh Sirs, if godliness be evil, why do you so much profess
it? and if godliness be good, why do you so little practice it? Either take
Christ into your lives, or cast Christ out of your lips; either obey his
commands more, or else call him Lord no more; either get oil in your Lamps, or
cast away your Lamps: to be a Professor of Piety, and a Practiser of Iniquity,
is an abomination unto the Lord: some would not seem evil, and yet would be
so; others would seem good, and yet would not be so; either be what thou
seem, or else seem what thou be. There are many that blush to confess
their sins, that did never blush to commit their sins; there is nothing done in
vain, but that which is vainly done. O Christians, bring your lights to the
light; what darkness can obscure them, who have a Sun above them? Believers,
when their Candles are put out, they can fetch light from the Sun of
Righteousness the nearer you are to such a Sun, the clearer will be your light.
Oh Christians, you are never the b^tter for your lights, if you are not made
the better by your light* he that sins against his light* will at last sin away
his light. If thy ^ight do not put (...) and the world under thy fe^t* it will
never put a Crown of glory upon thy ^^ad. That is the thir^.

IV. Be willing to want what God is (...) ^i^ing to give. As God has never the
(...) for the mercies he gives* so he has never the more for the duty he
takes: Man is such a debtor to God, that he can never pay his dae to God; we
are so far from paying of the utmost farthing, that at the utmost we have not a
farthing to pay; the^^ is no man but ^ath received more good than he deserves,
and done more evil than he has suffered; th^^ (...) he should be contented
though he enjoy but little good, and not discontented though he suffer much evil;
let us therefore be contented, 1 Timothy 6.8. A Christian is to submit to the will
of Gods disposing, as well as to the will of Gods commanding: that man obtains
his will of God* who submits his will to God. A gracious ^^art should never be
out of heart, because he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,
Heb. 13.5. He that has said it, will not unsa^ it* therefore take up your
contentment in Gods appointment; we are not to be troubled for this, that we
have no more from God* but we are to be troubled for this, that we do no more
for God. (...) Christian, though he has a Will of his own, yet it becomes not
a Christian to do his own Will: Contentment without the World, is better than
the World without Contentment. Christian, get a holy Heart, and thy Estate on
Earth shall be transce^^^nt, yea, thy estate on Earth shall be sufficient.
Christian, is not God willing to give thee Riches? O then be thou willing to
want Riches. Is not God willing to give thee Health? O then be thou willing to
want Health. Is not God willing to give the^ Children? O then be thou willing
to want Children. Is not God willing to give thee thy desire in this thing or
that thing? O be thou willing to want that thing. We many times stand in our
own light. Never were any Saints their own Carvers, but before they had done
they cut their own Fingers. Lot, you know, was put to his own choice, and he
chose Sodom; but you know how it fell out, it was not long before Sodom was
burnt. So R^chel said, Give me children, or else I die; and she had a Child.
and it cost her her Life. Abraham desired the Life of Ishmael, but he had but
little comfort of him all his days. Therefore dear Christian, submit thy Will
to Gods Will. That Soul shall have his will of God, that desires nothing but
what God will. Do but you take care of all that which belongs to God, and God
will take care of all that belong to you. It is nothing but reason that God
should fall out with them in the course of his Providence, that fall off from
him in the course of their obedience. Wicked men make the world their treasure,
and God makes the world their torment: when thy want estates they are troubled
for them, and when they have estates, they are troubled with them. Murmuring
persons think every thing too much that is dent by them, and every thing too
little that is done for them. God is us far from pleasing them with his mercy,
as they are from pleasing God with their duty. It is unthankfulness that is the
cause of the Earths unfruitfulness. Did a man believe that the Lord would not
fail in his body; how carefully would he look after his soul! It is only the
Christian man that is the contented man, he does not quarrel with God for
mercies denied, but blesses God for mercies bestowed. The higher a Christian
is raised above the things of the Earth, the more he is ravished with the joys
of Heaven. That Is the 4th.

V. Crucify your sins, that have Crucified your Savior. They that are
Christ's, said Paul, have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. Did the
Recks rend when Christ died for our sins, and shall not our Hearts rend that
have lived in our sins? O the Nails that pierced his hands should now pierce
our hearts. They should wound themselves with their sorrows, who have wounded
(...) with their sins; that they have grieved his spirit, it should grieve
their spirit. Oh that ever I s^^uld ^e so bad a child to him, th^^ has been so
good a Father to me! Our sins have been our greatest ^^ay^o^s, and our Savior
has been our choicest helper. O put sin to death, that was the cause of
Christ's death. If one should kill our Father, would we hug him, and embrace him
as our friend, let him eat at our Table, and not rather hate and detest the
very sight of him? If a Snake should ^^ing thy dearly beloved Spouse to death,
would thou preserve it alive, warm it at the fire, ^ug it in thy (...), and
not ^^ther stab it with a thousand wounds* And were not our sins the cause and
instruments of Christ's death? were not they the Whips that scourged him, the
Nails, the Cords, the Spear, the Thorns, that wounded him, and fetched the
heart-blood from him, and can we love our sins that killed our Savior? Can a
Spouse love her Husband, and her heart embrace an Adulterer? We complain of the
sins of Judas, and of the Jews, and seem to hate them, and spit at the mention
of them, and can we love our Judas sins that sets them all on work, and put
Christ to death? And yet how many are there that had rather have sinful self
satisfied, than to have sinful self crucified? Oh sin is that mark at which all
the arrows of vengeance are shot: were it not for sin, death had never had a
beginning; and were it not for death, sin would never have an ending. Man began
to be sorrowful, when he began to be sinful. The wind of our lust blowing out
the candle of our lives. If man had had nothing to do with sin, death had had
nothing to do with man. Oh did sin bring sorrow into the world? O then let
sorrow carry sin out of the world. Of all evils sin is the greatest evil, Romans
6.23. The wages of sin is death. Oh it is wors^ than punishment, banishment,
and Imprisonment. s^^ kills both body and soul; it throws the (...) into the
^^ld Earth a rotting, and the soul into the hot Hell a burning. O for the Lords
sake think of this and weep for this betimes; (...) the cry of your Prayers out
cry the cry of you^ Sins. Nothing c^n quenth the fire that sin has kindled but
^he water which (...) has c^used. If we (...) can sins, be is (...) and just
to forgive us ou^ sins, and (...) clea^se us from ou^ sins. Jo^. 1.11. A Saint
is not free from sin, that is his burden* a Saint is not free to sin, that is
his joying, sin is in his (...) is his lamentation* his soul is not in sin,
that is his consolation: If you will not sin in your grief, then grieve for
your sins. That Is the fifth.

VI. Do you bless God most, who are most blessed. God is good to al^, but to
Is^a^l he is truly good, Even to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73.1. they
can never speak good enough of God, who have t^sted the goodness of God; it is
but reason they should bless most, who are the most blessed. They who hold the
largest F^rms must pay the greatest Rent. Differing mercies call for differing
duties. It is very meet that he should be magnified by us that makes us meet to
be glorified with him. O Christians. if he has called you out of your (...)
darkness into his mavelous light, you ought to show forth his mavelous
pr^^se, 1 P^^. 2.9. But you are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar People, that you should show forth the praises of him
(...) has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Men should not
glory in what they have received, but they should give glory for what they have
received. The Glory of God must be the g^lie^ Butt at which all the Arrows of
Duty are shot. Grace in our Hearts is like Stars in the Heaven, that shine not
by their own splender, but by borrowed Beams from the Sun of Righteousness,
Giving thanks to the Father, who has made (...) ^^et to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints i^ light, Col. 1.12. As the best of means should make
us fruitful, so the best of mercies should make, us thankful. Shall a Saint
find God a Master that is bountiful, and shall not God find a Saint a Servant
that is dutiful? If he gives us my ^^^^^ment, it is but for his own
entertainment. He shall never want mercy, that does not play the wanton with
mercy. To bless God for mercies, is the way to increase them; to bless God for
miseries is the way to remove them. No good lives so long as that which is
thankfully improved; no evil dies so soon as that which is patiently endured. O
Christians, give all your glory unto him who has given all his glory unto you,
and do as those glorified ones do in glory. The four and twenty E^d^^s fell
down before him that sat on the Throne, and wor^hipped him that lives for ever
and ever; and ca^^ their crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive all Glory, and honor, and (...), for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they were and are created, Rev 4.10.11. All you
have is derived from God, let all you have be returned to God. The more God's
hand is enlarged in the blessing of us, the more our hearts should be enlarged
in the blessing of God. O Believers, he has frowned upon others, but he has
smiled upon you. He has past by others doors, and knock at your doors. He has
made you light, when others dark. He has made you living, when others are
dead. He has made you heirs of glory, when others are children of wrath. He
has made you sons, when others are sl^ves. He has made you higher than
Angels, when others (...) no better than Devils. This has lie done (...) more,
for you who are Believers. Now have you not great cause to bless God? Whilst
M^^ is a blessing of God for his mercies, God is a bles^^^ of man with his
mercies. Can you find me out that good that is not given you, or that evil that
is not forgiven you? God he deserves more from every Christian, than he demands
from every Christian: where this Sun of mercy shines hott^^^, there the fruits
of Grace should grow fai^^^^* That Is the sixth.

VII. Fear not the fear of men. Wicked men must not be feared, though they be
never so mighty; nor followed, though never so many. Fear not them that can
kill the body, said our blessed Savior, and can do no more, Mat. 10.28. If a
righteous cause brings us into suffering, a righteous God will bring us out
of suffering. If we suffer for well doing, we do well in suffering. Shall we
cease to be Professors, because others will not cease to be Persecutors. If ye
suffer for well doing, says the Scripture, ^e are happy. What are we Members
of Christ, and yet afraid to be ^^^tyrs for Christ? what are the children of
God afraid of the children of the Devil? Are the children of light afraid of
the children of darkness? The children of heaven afraid of the children of
wrath? What though you be weak, your King is strong: what though you be Lamb, among
Wolves, your Captain is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: what though you have no
power, Christ has all power given him both in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18.
The fear of Persecution is more than Persecution. He that los^th a base life
for Christ, shall find a better life in Christ. Persecution though it brings
death in the one hand, it brings life in the other; though it kills the body, it
crowns the soul, it sends the body to dust, and the spirit to rest; the worst
they can do against you, is the best they can do for you; the worst they can
do, is but to send you out of the Earth, and the best they can do for you, is
but to send you up to Heaven. They take a life from you which you cannot keep,
and bestow a life upon you which you cannot lose: if they be blessed who die in
the Lord, Oh how blessed are they that die for the Lord! Do wicked men glory in
that which is their shame, and shall we be ashamed of that which is our glory?
It is an honor to be dishonored for Christ. What is a short happiness
attended with an everlasting misery, to a short misery attended with an
everlasting happiness! O how clear will the S^^ of Righteousness shine, when
those dark Clouds are blown over! What if they threaten you with present death,
does not God also threaten you with everlasting death? It you be not ruled by
him, whose threatening should you fear? Is man more terrible than God? is Death
more dreadful than Hell? God has said, F^^r not man, who art thou that
shoulde^t be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the sons of men that shall
be made as the gras^, Isa. 51.12. Do you see, Christians, God would not have
you to be afraid of man; he that is afraid of man, is afraid of grass: Fear
thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness, Isa. 41. Let but Professors do their best, and then
let the world do their wor^^* That is the seventh.

VIII. Cleave thou ^^sest to that truth which is the choicest. 1. Be for
hearing and doing, both, but ^or doing more; he that does most, shall receive
most. Christians, the more glory you bring to God, the more glory you shall
have from God. O how abundant should they be in the work of the Lord, that know
their labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.18. 2. Be for knowledge and
practice both, but for practice more. Alas, what is it to be a Christian no
farther than a few good words will go? I tell you, Sirs, good words without
good works, will never turn to a good account. Holy sayings without holy
doings; will never conduct your souls to a holy place. 3. Be for Gift and
Graces both, but for Grace more; a heart sanctified, is better than a tongue
silvered. Grace brings Christ and the soul together, and unites them together.
Without Grace there may be a knowledge that is seeming, but without Grace there
can be acknowledge that is saving. 4. Be for Credit and, Conscience both, but
for Conscience more. Where there is a pure Conscience* there will be a pure
Conversation. As no flattery can heal a bad Conscience, so no cruelty can (...)
a good Conscience. 5. Be good in good times and (...), but in (...) more. To
(...) good as all times is a Christians duty; but to be good in bad times, is a
Christians glory. Your cannot tread in the ^^eps of our Savior, but you will
ta^^e of the Cup of our Savior, Any man, ^ays the Apostle, that will live
godly (...) Jesus Christ, must suffer p^rs^^^^i^^. 6. Be for (...) and s^^l
both, but for soul more. O how ^^^^ful are men for their bodies, but how
care^^ss for their souls? They are true to that part which is without, but
false to that part within. So they may have but something of the World in their
Hands, they care not though they have ^^^ing of (...) in their Heart. O
Christians, (...) work be (...) (...) the best (...), when our (...) above is
the first (...). The gr^^test happiness of the Creature is, not to have the
Crea^^^^ for ones happiness. 7. Be for P^^ce and Truth, but for Truth more. Oh
Christians, love the Truth in Truth. Love the Truth of God in (...); justify
the Truth, and the Truth will justi^^^ you. Till you can love the naked Truth,
you will ^^ver live to go naked for the Truth. Remember that I pray,
Christians. 8. Be for Life and Christ both, but for Christ more. Christ is
sweeter than Wine, better than Life; he that came from above, it above all: He
that has the (...) of Heaven, can open the Doors of Heaven. 9. Be ^or W^^ks
and Faith too, but for Faith ^^re (...) is Grace that is the most needful, and
a Grace that is the most fruitful. A Faith that wor^^^^ not, is a Faith that
saves not. Nothing will get (...) to Heaven, Christians, but that which came
(...) from Heaven. 10. Be for public (...) and pri^^^e (...), but for pri^^^^
more. Be much in pri^^^e d^^ie^; if you fall (...) in any, (...) short in
public (...), and be most in priv^^^. You that have (...) the (...) of God
will you ^ins, should fill the Bottle of God with your (...) ^1. Be for Form
and (...) both, but for (...) more. I say, be for Power more, Christ (...)
(...), what is the (...) without the Power? (...) God the (...) and (...), did
give up (...) do all (...) of abominable (...). O Christ (...) I say, be for
Power; be ^^re look to that, that (...) be for the Power of Godliness (...)
than the (...) Goodliness, 12. (...) to please Men and God (...) but God
rather. To be in favor with (...) who are out of favor with God, to be (...)
of by them who are evil spoken of (...) God, (...) ^ather a reproach than in
honor. (...) there be not fellowship between Christ and (...) in holiness,
there will be no society between Christ and you in happiness. This is the eig^.


IX. Acquaint your selves with your selves. (...) ^rial of your selves in the
really load to (...) knowledge of your selves. No (...) begin (...) be good,
tell he seet himself to be (...). Pill (...) see ho^r foul your Faces are, you
will not (...) pay tribute to Christ for wanting of them, (...) can never truly
relish the sweetness of (...) mercy, who never tasted the bitterness (...) own
misery. The bottom of our Dis^^^ (...) here, that we search not our Disease to
(...). He that (...) his (...) yet such Fools are we that we trust (...) The
conversation may to civili^ed; (...) ^^^ions are not sanctified A man may be
(...) quainted with the Grace of truth, who nev^^ knew the (...) of Grace.
Therefore (...) your selves, (...) selves, 2 (...) 3.5. (...) you be in (...)
faith or no, at whether the Faith be in you or no. See whether your hearts be
the Cabinet of such a Jewel; For want of this, many are like Travallers,
skilled (...) other Countri^^^, but ignorant in their own; many have their
Evidences of Grace to seek, where they should have their (...) Grace to show. O
Beloved, I beseech you with beseechings, (...) in searching of your own hear^^
more. It Is of greater concernment to know the state of your hearts, than to know
the state of all our estates. A man may, profess like a Saint, grace like a
Saint, speak, like a Saint, look like a Saint and yet not be a Saint. You
cannot always tell what it is a Clock in a Man's (...) by the (...) of his
countenance. The humble look is sometimes linked to the proudest heart.
Believers, for the Lord's sake consider well these; three things: 1. What you
were in the state of (...). 2. What you are in the state of Grace, 3. What you
shall be in the state of Glory.
O, me thinks you should think of this ^^at you were, what you are, and what
you shall be. Conversion begins in consideration. Grace, as it makes our
comforts sweeter, so it makes our crown greater Beloved, for Gods sake, for
your soul sake, acquaint your selves with your selves. The readiest way to know
whether or no you are in Christ, is to know whether or no Christ be in you: for
the fruit is more visible than the root. The Tree of Righteousness is known by
the Fruits of Righteousness, Mat. 7.20. The tree is known by its fruit, said
our Lord Jesus Christ. If you would know the heart of your sins, you must then
know the sin of your (...); will you remember that Christians? (...) of the
^^^rt, says our Lord, proceeds evil thoughts, murder, adultery, and
for^^cation, and blasphemy, Mat. 15.19. Many have passed the Rocks of gross
Sin, that have been cast away upon the Sands of Self-righteousness. If you be
found in your righteousness, you will be lost in your unrighteousness. He that
has no better righteousness than what is (...) his own providing, shall meet
with no bigg^^, happiness than what is of his own deserving. That Is the Ninth.

X. Do good in the World, with the goods of the World. It Is better to spend our
time in doing good, than in getting goods; for the goods we (...), we must
leave, but the good we do, will (...) leave us, Rev. 14. They shall rest from
their, Labors, and their works follow them: The ambitious man shall leave all
his greatness behind him, when the religious man shall carry all his goodness
with him. Dives his charity was very cold, and he found the flames of Hell very
hot. There is not a drop of Water for such Dives's in Hell, that have not (...)
crumb of bread for such Lazarus's on Earth. Dives denied Lazarus a crumb of
Bread, and therefore Lazarus must not bring him a drop of Water: He that will
show no mercy, shall have no mercy showed him. Let Charity be your Shop to
trade in, and Evernity shall be your Bed to rest in. Be a Father to all in
Charity, and a Servant to all in Humility; do much good, and make but little
noise; every Grace that is more exercised, shall be more glorified: The more
good ye do for God, the more good you shall receive from God. As the poor
cannot live without your mercy on Earth, so without God's mercy you shall not
live in Heaven; he that gives to the poor Saints for Christ's sake, shall be
rewarded by Christ for the Saints sake, Mat. 25.36, to 40. Naked, and ye
chathed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto
me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungry, and s^^ (...)? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When s^w me thee a
stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and (...) thee? Or when saw we thee sick,
or in prison, and came unto thee? And the king shall answer and (...) unto
them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as to (...) done it unto one of the least
of these my brethen (...) have done it unto me. The more you (...) for Christ
on Earth, the greater sum^ of glory you shall recive from Christ in Heaven. The
^^op that is sown in mercy, shall be reaped in Glory. As we must lay out all in
the Cause of God, so we must lay down all for the Cause of God: That which is
cast into Christ's treasury by the way, is not cast away; Mercy is so good a
Servant, that it will never let its Master die a Beggar; though it make your
Pockets lighter, yet it will make your Crowns greater. O that God should give
the rich so much, and O that the rich should give the poor so little! Some say,
that the barrennest Ground is nearest to the richest Mines: it is too often true
in a spiritual sense. How many rich men, though their ^^states be like a fruitful
Paradise, yet their Hearts are like a barren Wilderness. They have much of the
Earth in their hands, but nothing of Heaven in their hearts. They be rich in
goods, but not in goodness. I wonder that such Worldlings do not tremble at
these sayings, Mat. 25.^1. Then stall be say (...) to them (...), the l^ss
hand, Depart from me, it ^^^sed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the (...)
and his Angels; si^ I was an hungered, and ye (...) no meat? I was thirsty, and
ye gave we (...) drink; I not a stranger, and ye took me not (...), and ye
chathed me not; sick and in (...) visited ^e not. Th^^ shall they also (...)
him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee (...), or a thirst, or a stranger, or
naked, (...) or in prison, and did not minister unit (...) shall be answer
them, saying, Verily I s^^ (...) as ye did it not to one of (...) these ye did
(...) not to me. And th^^ (...) into everlasting punishment, but to (...) into
life eternal. O that men should be so much mistaken with their Riches, who must
ere long be taken from their Riches As you brought none of your Coin into the
world with you, so you shall carry none (...) it out of the world with you. In
the world (...) find it, and in the world you shall leave it; to whom you know
not, it may be (...) them, you would not. Did but some rich men know before
their deaths how their Gold and Silver should be spent after death, they would
wish it back again at the Mines from whence it came. O ye rich men, I say, unto
you. Do good in the world with the good of the world, it is a greater honor to
give like a Prince, than live like a Prince (...) better to have a heart, and
not wherewith than to have wherewith, and not to have a heart. Give and it
shall be given you; your charity should seek the poor, before the poor seek
your charity. He (...) mercy when it may best be spared, shall receive mercy
when it shall most be needed. That Is the Tenth.

XI. Improve that time, which will be, yours but for a time^ time e're long
shall be to you time no longer, Re^. 1^ 6* (...) us for Eternity, but (...) to
Eternity; Christians remember that. That Race is short in which you run, but
the (...) is great for which you run. As you have not a Lease of your Lives, so
you have not a Brase for your Lives. Had we not (...) heed how we ^^oot, that
have but (...) Arrow (...) direct to the (...). No time is ours but what is
present; and this is as soon past as present. Naturals Womb often proved
Neture's Tomb. Oh con^ider how much of your Time is gone, and yet how little of
your Work is done. Shall your Rest steal away one half of your time, and your
Lusts the other? O what enemies are they to themselves, that of all their days
allow themselves not one! Your work is great, and your time is short; you have
a God to honor, a Christ to be believed in, and a Soul to save; you have a
Race to run, and a Crown to win, a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to make sine;
you have many strong Corruptions to weeken and many weak Graces to strengthen;
you have many Temptations to withstand, and many afflictions to bear; you have
many Mercys to improve, and many Dutys to perform; therefore endeavor to
improve your time. All the time that God allows us, is little enough to perform
the task which he allots us: Therefore, dear Christians, redeem the time, Ephesians.
5.16. Redeems the time, because the days are ^^il. If much of your time (...)
pa^^, let no more of your time be wast^^ how much the longer our time ^ath
been, so much the shorter our time shall be. Oh that every step your souls take
might be toward heaven, and that you would make sure of God to day, because
the next day you are not sure of your ^^^ves. For the Lord's sake improve you^
(...), for your souls sake redeem the ti^^. The Lawyer will not lose his Term,
the Wa^^^man will not lose his Tide, the Tradesman will not lose his
Exchange-time, the Husbandman will not lose his Reason; and will you lose your
precious Season? if you lose your Season, you lose your Souls. Know that there^
but one Heaven, and miss of that, and where will you take up your lodging but
in Hell. There is no sitting up under ground for those that have lost their
time above ground: the great hindrance of Well-living is the expectation of
Long-living* Many think not of living any better, ^ill they think of living any
longer. O how just is it that they should miss of Heaven at the last! Now is
the time of grace to accept of you, and now is the time for you to accept of
Grace; To day, to day, to day, says God thrice in that one Ch^^^es, Heb. 3. To
day, in the 7 v. To day, in the (...). To day, in the 15 v. Oh but Sinners say,
To morrow, to morrow, to morrow. Alas, Sirs, (...) to day is better than ^^o to
morrows, this day is thy living day, to morrow may be thy dying day, and
therefore for the Lord's sake put it not off. Now if ever, now for ever, now or
never; up and be doing, least you be utterly undone. That is the eleventh.

XII. Learn humility from Christ's humility: Learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to your souls, Mat. 11.29. Humility
makes a Man like an Angel, and for want of it, Angles were made (...) Proud
Sinners be fit Companions for none but proud Devils. The most lovely professor
is the most lowly Professor: a Believer is like a Vessel at Sea, the more it
fills the more it sinks. None so humble upon Earth, as th^se that live highest
in Heaven. Do but see have one of the best (...) looks upon himself as one of
the lea^^ of Saints, Unto me, who out less than the least of all Saints, said
great (...) Ephesians. 3.8. The most holy men be always the most humble men, Where
Humility is the cornerstone* there Piety is the Top-sto^^^ (...) is ^^ood to
have true thought^ of ourselves. The ^loth of H^mility should always be^w^^^ on
the back of Christianity. God Almighty has two Hous^s in which he dwells, his
City-Ho^se^ and his Country House; his City-House is in the Heaven of Heavens,
and his Country House is the (...) and lowly Heart, Isa. 57.18. I (...) in the
high and holy place, that is in Hen^^^y God's City-House; and with him that is
of (...) contrite and humble spirit, that is his Country-House^^ Humility is a
Bethel for God's dwelling, but Pride is a Babel of the Devil's building. If you
do not keep pride out of you^ souls, and your souls out of Pride, Pride will
keep your souls out of Heaven. I will not say, (...) good man is never proud,
but I will say, a proud man is never good. God resists the proud, Jam. 4.6.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. The face of ^^^^rity
shines brightest through the mask (...) Humility. Of all Garments Humility best
(...) comes Christians, and most adorns their Profession. God will not endure
that any man should think well of himself, but Himself. A Christian should look
with one eye upon grace to keep him thankful, and with the other eye upon vice
to keep him (...). When you begin to be proud of your (...) feathers, look down
upon your black^eet, Rev. 4.10. The sow and twenty elders fell down before the
throne, and cast down their crowns before him that fate upon the throne. The
only way of keeping our Crowns on our heads, is casting them (...) his feet.
Alas, Sirs, what are you proud (...) Are you proud of your Riches, of your
(...), of your Relations, or Beauties, or Strength, (...) Life? Alas, alas,
these are poor low things (...) glory in. When men glory in their prid^^ God
stains the pride of their glory. O go to ^e Graves of those that are gone
before you, and there see, are not their bones it attered, (...) eyes wasted,
their flesh consumed their ^outh corrupted? Where now be those rud^y lips,
lovely checks, fluent tongues, sparkling (...), comely nose, are they not all
gone as dream? and where will you be e're long? and will you be proud of th^se
things? (...) ^^mble heart knows no fountain but God's (...), and an upright
man knows no end ^ut God's glory. That Is the twelfth.

XIII. Be upright Christians. The Gospel does ^ot only require that we should
be excellent ^hristians, but that we should be diligent, ^^ristians. The more
glorious dispensations (...) live under, the more gracious conversations you
should have. Spiritual actions ^ill make you look fresh in the eyes of
spiri^^al Christians. The more you have of good (...) you, the more you shall
have of good with (...). The clearer the lamp of Grace burns (...) Earth the
Brighter the Sun of Glory shall (...) in Heaven. We live by dying to our,
(...), and ^^e by ^^ving (...) our selves (...) should be burning (...), as
well as shining ^^mps. Should he walk in darkness whose Father is light? Shall
that Tongue be (...) to constantly to men that was ^ound, (...) to God or those
eyes^ (...) found gazing on (...) objects, that were and reading of sacred
oracles? Shall such a^, ^^ve received Christ's Press-money sight under^ ^^ans
colors? Beloved, either let your works be according to your profession, or
else (...) your profession be according to your wo^^^ Never put on the fair
fruit of profession, (...) do the foul works of corruption, never pu^ on
Christ's Livery, to do Satan's d^^dgery Let every one that names the Name of the
(...) depart from iniquity. Not every one that sa^^ unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Fa^^^ which
is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21, 2^ O that ma^^ tongues should be larger than their
hands; in words they profess him, but in works they (...) him. Many set a Crown
of Glory on the head of Christ by a good profession, but place a Cro^^ of
Throns on the head of Christ by an ev^^ conversation: They fear the Lord, but
serve (...) own Gods 2 King. 17.33. Alas, Beloved, what good will your
profession do you, if you do not make good your profession? it is better never to
shine, than not to be gold. Either take O^ into your Lamps, or throw away your
Lamps. The almost Christian shall be but almost saved. Therefore my Brethren,
let me beseech you be altogether Christians be right upright Christians; be
sincere Christians; be as goodly as the godly. Holy David tells us, Psalm. 1^.^
^, 4. Who is the upright man? who is the right upright Christian? He that
walks uprightly, and (...) righ^ss, and ^eaketh the (...) from his heart, he
shall dwell in thy (...), and so he goes on. If you would ^^eep your selves
unspotted from the world, you must ^eep your selves unspotted in the world. O
be not vain in a vain world: the loose walkings of Christians, are the
reproaches of Christians. Were Abraham now on Earth, who is in Heaven, how
would the Father of the faithful blush to see their actions, that style
themselves his offspring O there be some men who think themselves too good to
go to Hell and God thinks them too bad to go to Heaven. Noah (...) a just man,
and perfect in his generation, Genesis 6.9. He was not a sinner amongst those that
were Saints, but he was a Saint among those that were sinners: he walked with
God, when others walked in iniquity; he was a man so like unto God that there
was never another like unto him. The Primitive Christians were the best of
Christians, they knew little but did much, we know much, but do little. O Sirs,
if the service of God be bad, why do you set forth in it? If the service of God
be good, why do you shrink back from it? Be altogether Christians, or else be
no Christians. It Is good to profess, but 'its better to practice; yea, of the
two, practice without profession, it better than profession without practice.
We must not be offended at the Professors of Religion, because all are not
religious that make profession. Though there be many Professors that are not
Believers, yet there are no Believers but are Professors Christi^^^, when you
make a good Profession, be sure you make your Profession good. That Is the
thirteenth.

XIV. Let it be thy art in duty to give God thy heart in duty. My son, give me
thy heart, Prove. 23.26. You see God calls for the heart, the heart is that
field from which God expects the utmost plentiful crop of Glory. God bears a
greater respect to your hearts, than he does to your works. God looks most,
where men look least. If the heart be for God, then all is for God; our
affections, our wills, our desires, our time, our strength, our tears, our
alms, our prayers, our estates, our bodies, our souls, for the Heart is the
Fo^^-royal that commands all the rest; the eye, the ear, the hand, the tongue,
the head, the soot, the heart commands all these. Now if God, has the heart,
he has all, if he has not the heart, be has none. The heart of obedience, is
the obedience of the heart; as the body is at the command of the soul that
rules it, so should the soul be at the command of God that gave it, 1 Cor. 6.
Ye are bought with a price, says the Apostle, therefore glorify God in your
bodies, and in your spirits. He that is all in (...), would have that which is
all in all in us. The bears is the Presence Chamber, where the King of Glory
(...) up his lodging. That which in most worthy in us, should be given to him
that is most worthy of us. The body is but the cabinet, the soul is the jewel;
that body is but the shell, the soul is the ker^^^^. The soul is the breath of
God, the beauty of man, the wonder of Angels, and the (...) of Devils. The
Devil knows if there be any good treasure, it is in our hearts, and he would
fa^^ have the key of this cabinet, that he might rob us of our jewel. The Devil
would fain have the key of the heart. As we commit our estates into the hands
of mon, so we should comm^^ our selves into the hands of God. But alas, man
has no mind to give what God has a mind to have: T^^^ people d^a^ noar to me
with their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from
me, Mat 1^.8. Alas, too too often we have our hearts to seek, when we come to
seek God. You may keep your duties to your selves, if you do not give your
hearts to him. A duty that is heareless, is a duty that is fruitless. You can
never give God the heart of your service, if you do not give him your heart in
your service. The heart should be the first that comes into duty, and the last
that goes out of duty. Good words without the heart are but flattery, and good
works without the heart are but hypocrisy. Beloved, for your poor souls sake,
let words and works go together, your tongue, and hearts go together, your lips
and lives go together, your prayers and practice go together. If your duties do
not eat out the heart of your sins, your sins will eat out the heart of your
duties. A dram of matter is better than a flood of words. A heart without
words, is better than words without a heart. A little done with the heart, is
better than a great deal done without the heart. Nothing takes with the heart
of God, but what is done with the hearts of men. He that regards the heart
without any thing, regards not any thing without the Heart. That is the
fourteenth.

XV. Be diligent in the means; but make not (...) Idol of the means. Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. It is our
present business to make sure our future blessedness. When estates, and
honors, and life and friends, and pleasures, cannot be made sure, let this be
made sure; for you see by daily experience, they cannot be made sure, 1 Timothy
6.19. Lay up for your selves a good foundation; see what the Apostle says, Lay
up for your selves a good foundation: and why? that you may lay hold of eternal
life. There is no landing at the shore of Felicity, without failing in the Bark
of Fidelity, Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: till
you attain to firm salvation, you will never be free from great temptations,
Luke 13 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Who would not strive for
glory with the greatest diligence, and wait for glory? Pray without ceasing, 1
These. 5.17. Pray continually, though you be not continually at praying; our
daily bread calls for daily prayer. Every day begin the day and end the day
with God; let prayer be your first work, and your last work every day: O
Christian, lock up thy heart with prayer, and give God the key: Are you called
by the name of Christ? and will not you call upon the name of Christ? Take away
spiritual breathings, and you take away spiritual living. We may pray always,
and yet not be always at prayer. Christians can never want a praying time, if
they do not want a praying frame. None can pray aright but those that are new
creatures, but all ought to pray, because they are creatures: a spiritual man
may pray carnally, but a carnal man cannot pray spiritually. Prayer fetched as
Angel out of Heaven to fetch Peter out of Prison; they prayed heartily, and
they sped happily. The Gift of Prayer may have praise from men, but it is the
Grace of Prayer that has power with God. Prayer, never did man rightly make it
but God did quickly grant it. No Christian has so little of Christ, but he
has matter for praising; and no Christian has so much of Christ, but he has
matter of praying. Deny not God Faith in Prayer, and God will not deny a
faithfu^ Prayer. But then, in the second place, as you must be diligent in the
means, so make not an Idol of the means. Take up all duties in a point of
performance, and say them down in a point of dependence. What is Hearing
without Christ, but like a Cabines without a Jewel; or receiving without
Christ, but an empty Glass without a Cordial? Duty can never have too much of
our diligence, not too little of our confidence. A Believer does not do good
works to live, but he lives to do good works. It is (...) had thing for us to
be nothing in our se^ves, and to be all in Christ; to undertake all our duties,
and yet to overlook all our duties. The Righteousness of Christ is to be
magnify I, but the Righteousness of Christians is not to be mentioned: When
y^^ have done all, say we are unprofitable persons, Luke 17.10. We own the life
of our souls to the death of our Savior. Duties they are not destroyed by
Christ but they must be denied for Christ. We have as much need of the Spirit
to bring up our graces, as we have need of the Spirit to bring forth our
graces. The clock of our hearts will stand still, unless he oil the wheels.
Rejoice ^n Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh: good works are so
indigent, as none can be saved by them, and yet they are so excellent, as none
can be saved without them. Duties, if Christ breat he not in them, a Christian
grows not under them, we must live is obedience. Many live more upon their
Customs, than they, do upon Christ: more upon the Prayers they make to God,
than upon t^^ God to whom they make their Prayers. Duties, they are but dry
Pipes in themselves, the never so curiously out out, till Christ fill them.

XVI. Take nothing upon trust, ^ut all, (...) on trial. Though all Gold
glisters yet all the glisters is not Gold: all is not truth that g^^ter truth;
1 Job. 4.1. Try the spirits, believe (...) every spirit. Mark Sirs, you must
not believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether th^^ be of God or no: 1
These. ^.31. Prove all things ^old fast that which is good, ^rove all things
that is, try all things by the Scripture. Ma^^ hold f^st before they try, but
we must try before we hold fast, Alas, there are many in the world that are
like Infants, who swallow dow^ all that the Nurse puts into the poor Bab^'s
mouth; truly so it is with many men and we men^ whatever then say, down it
goes; th^^ will not take so much paint, as to try the saying of men by the
sayings of God. O (...) they, the men we hear, be honest men, abl^ men, learned
men. But would no^ you tell money after them? would not you weigh gold after
them? I suppose you would, and will you take Doctrines upon trust (...) about
trial? Who will buy a Jewel in a case, but a fool? Remember, Christians, that
the Whore's Cup is gold without, but poison within, Rev. 1^.^. She had a golden
cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness. The Cup is of Gold, but
the Po^ion is of the rankest poison. God may reject those as Copper, whom men
do adore (...) silver: it is ill dressing our selves for another world, by the
Looking-glass of this world. The Scriptures do not only present us with what
God will do for man, but also what man must do for God. What is the reason that
there is so many scribbling Professors in the world, but because they write
after such imperfect Conies? The generality of person, they will rather wal^^
in the way that the most go than in the way that the best go. Great men's ^ice^
are more imitated, than poor men's graces; but know, they who follow after
others in ^^ning, are like to follow after others in suffering. We must not
walk in the way that both (...) gone, but in the way that must be gone; (...)
followers of me says Paul, 1 Cor. 11.1. as I am of Christ: where he follows
Christ, we must follow him; but if Paul forsake Christ, we must forsake Paul.
But Sirs, whatever you do, follow those that follow Christ O: that they should
speak so much of God to others, and act so little for God themselves. Now
Beloved, I beseech you that you would take nothing upon trust, but all upon
trial; try their ways, try their doctrines, try their sayings: try their
doctrine by the word of truth, and if it be according, to truth, and agreeable
to truth, and bottomed to truth, then believe it, then receive it; if not,
reject it, and tread it down a^ dirt under your feet, let it be who it will
that, brings it; nay, if it be an Angel from Heaven come and preach any other
doctrines than the written Word declares, let him be accursed, we ought not to
receive it, Gal. 1.2. If an Angel from Heaven, says he, bring any other
doctrine than what you have received, let (...) be accursed: And therefore once
more let (...) beseech you, for the Lords sake, take nothin^ upon trust, but
all upon trial: it is a vain thi^^ to say it is day, when there is nothing but
darkness in the sky. That Is the sixteenth.

XVII. Take those Reproofs-best, which y^^ need most. Be not angry with-them
who te^^ you the truth, nor with the truth that is toll you, Gal. 4.16. Am I
therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? He can be no tru^
friend to thee, that is a friend to thy sins; and thou can be no friend to
thy self, if thou (...) an enemy to him that tells thee of thy sins Will thou
like him the worse, that would have thee to be better? Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent ^yl. You see here the good man is not angry with reproofs, but
takes it as a kindness, it shall be a kindness, and as an excellent oil. But
the Serpent the more he is stirred, the more he gathers up his poison to spit
at you. If Amos declare the Word of the Lord, the Land is not able to bear his
Words, Amos 7.10. If John the Baptist endeavor to take away the life of
Herod's sins, Hered will take away the life of John the Baptist, Mat. 28.9, 10.
John was beheaded. If the Prophet go about to imprison the King's sins, he
himself shall be imprisoned, 2 Chronicles. 16.2, 1^ The King was wrath with the
Prophet, and he put him into prison. Jerusalem will stone the Prophets so long,
till she has not one stone left, upon another. Oh that men should be so cruel
to those that intend their cure! Wicked men cannot endure reproof. You give the
Physician leave to tell you of any Disease that is in your bodies, you give
your Lawyer leave to show you any slaw that is in your estates, you give your
Horse-keepers leave to tell you the surfeit of your Horse; and what, must we
only flatter with you, and dissemble with you, and cry peace, peace, till your
souls drop into Hell? Oh we cannot, we will not, we must not; speak all the
words that I have commanded thee, be not dismayed at their faces, lest I
destroy thee before their faces, Jer. 1.17. Speak to their faces, lest I
destroy thee before their faces, that is the sense of the words. Charge them
that be rich in the World, that they be (...) high minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. Great
men as well as poor, must be admonished; though they be greater than the
Ministers in the World, yet they are not greater than he that sent the
Ministers into this World. But my Brethren, there is a great deal of discretion
to be used in reproving. Many check passion but with passion, and anger with
anger; and this is to lay one Devil and raise another: reproofs should not be
with passion, but with compassion; not with ^eering, but with grieving; not
with laughing, but with weeping. I have told you often, and now I tell you
weeping, Phil. 3.18. The Apostle could not make mention of them with dry eyes.
His eyes were wet, because their eyes were dry. It Is the part of a good man to
reprove, though his reproof be not taken in good part. It Is better to lose the
smiles of men, than it is to lose the souls of men. The Magistrates they look
to your peace, the Lawye^^ they look to your estates, the Physicians (...) to
your bodies, and the Ministers to your souls Ministers must draw the sword of
reproof against the sins of men, and strike at them, (...) thrust at them. Have
us fellowship with the (...) fruitful works of darkness, but reprove^ them
(...) Ephesians. 5.11. Ri^^er reprove them. We (...) not suffer wicked men to walk in
the Devi^^ works without reproof, we must reprove you wisely, sincerely,
sharply; and when you men^ your lives, we shall mend our language.

That Is the seventeenth.

XVIII. Labor more for inward purity, tha^ for outward felicity: John 6.27.
Labor not (...) the meat that perishes, but for the meat which endures to
everlasting life. That man that is (...) laboring Be for earthly prosperity,
will be but an idle drone for heavenly felicity. Gold in your bags may make you
greater, but (...) grace in your hearts that will make you better. He is a rich
man that lives upon (...) wealth, but he is a righteous man that lives upon his
faith. A heavenly conversation is better than an earthly possession. It is a
great, mercy to have a portion in the world, but (...) have the world for a
portion is a great misery. Our affections were made for the things that are
above us, and not for the things (...) are without us, Col. 3.1, 2. If you be
ri^^^ with Christ, pray mark, what th^^? seek th^^ things which are above,
wh^re Christ sits at th^^ right hand of God. Set your affecti^^^ on things
(...) love, and not on things of the earth. The things of this life have not
the promise of godliness, but godliness has the ^^omise of the things of this
life! Inward P^ety is the best friend ^o our outward Felicity, though outward
Felicity be many times the worst enemy to outward Piety: the ways of Iniquity
are the ways of beggary. Do you make Heaven your Throne to serve it, and God
will make the Earth your Footstool to ^^rve you. Inward Purity is the ready
(...) to outward Plenty, 1. Tim. 4.8. Co^^l^ness has the (...) of that life
that now is, and of that which (...) come. O what an excellent Jewel is
Godliness! and who would not part with all for Godliness? who would not account
all other things bu^ ^ung and ^i^t to gain Godliness? But alas, some (...) are
^o in love with their, ^olden ^ags, that they will ride Post to Hell, if they
be paid well for their pains. They look upon gain as the highest Godliness, and
not upon Godliness as the highest Gain: they mind the World that is come so
much, as if it would never have an ending; and the World to come to little, as
if it would never have a beginning. Any good will serve the turn of those who
know not the chief good. The things of the World are all the happiness of the
men of the World, Job 21.15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him, or
(...) profit shall we have. if (...) pr^^^ unto him? O what wretched Worldlings
were here? O what pains do men take to cover their flesh from nakedness, when
their spirits are not clothed with the robes of Righteousness! They are
diligent about what is ^^mporal, but negligent about what is spiritu^^. They
are car^ful about dying Vanities, but slothful about durable Excellencies. They
feast their bodies, but starve their souls; th^^ lay up treasure on Earth, but
none in Heaven. O why do you spend your money, I say why? O Beloved, do you
spend your money for (...) which is not bread? and why do you labor for that
which satisfies not? read the T^^^ Isa. 55.2. Riches have made many good (...)
worse, but they never made any had (...) better. Usually the poorest on Earth
are (...) richest in Heaven. If riches could free (...) from Hell, O then how
few rich men would be damned? He that knocks at the Creature'^ door, will find
but an empty house kept there. O Beloved, what is darkness to light: what is
gold to grace? what is Earth to Heaven? that you thus neglect the great things,
the weighty things, the only things, and (...) your selves about toys and
tribes, when you have a Crown to look after, a Heaven as look after, a Kingdom
to look after? I beseech you, Beloved, labor more for inward holiness, than
for outward happiness; more (...) the seed of Grace, than for the bag of Gold;
more for the inward Piety, than for outward Plenty; more for an Heavenly
Conversation, than for an Earthly Possession. The Earth is for a Saints
passage, but Heaven is for a Sai^^^ portion. O Believer, Believer, while thou
live thou will find Godliness gainful; and when thou die, thou will find
Godliness needful. That is the eighteenth.

XIX. Live in love, and live in truth, 1 J^^. 3.18. My little children, let us
not love in (...) neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. Th^^ love is
love in deed and in truth. Let your love, Christians, be sincere, and not
selfish, Gal. 5.14. Love thy neighbor, as thy self. How do thou love thy
self, how dearly do thou love thy self? Why so you must love your neighbor;
Love thy neighbor as thy self. He that is not wanting in this Duty, is wanting
in no Duty. It Is called an old Commandment, and a new Commandment: 1 Jo^. 2.7,
8. Love is there called an old Commandment and a new. It Is as old as the Law of
Moses, and yet as new as the Gospel of Jesus Christ. A carnal man may love his
friend, but it is a Christian man that loves his enemy. He that loved us when we
were enemies, commands us to love our enemies, Mat. 3.34. Love your enemies,
faid our Lord, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray
for them which despightfully use you, and persecute you. A Christian should
wish well to them who wish ^ll to him. O Believer^, let me beseech you, let me
beg of you, for your precious souls sake, to live in love, and to love in
truth; ye are all Fellow Laborers, Fellow Members, fellow-Citizens,
fellow-Travellers, Fellow Sufferers, fellow-Heirs, Fellow Servants; and will
you not love one another? Remember, Christians, he that would not be his
Brothers keeper, would be his Brothers butther, Genesis 4 8. We have all the same
Father, God; the same Head, Christ; the same Guide, the Spirit; the same
Attendants, the Ange^s; the same Grace, Faith; the same Title, Son; the same
Clothing, Christ's Righteousness; the same Glory, Heaven; and shall not we be
dear to one another? He that loves himself, will not hate his Brother; for
whiles thou art out of Charity with thy Brother, God is out of Charity with
thee, and thou losest more for want of God's love, than thy Brother loses for
want of thy love, Heb. 13.1. Let thy brotherly love comtinue. Do thou love
the Person of Christ, and hate the Picture of Christ? O Sirs, I remember the
God of Love has commanded us to love one another. Beloved, it is a sad thing,
and truly so sad, as that it may make our very hearts to bleed within us, to
think that the Lamb's little party, Rev. 14.1, 2. who are in strength the
weakest, in riches the poorest, in number the fewest, and shall they be in love
the coldest, in judgment the most divided? Is not this sad now, that the little
ones of Jesus Christ, that the Lambs of Jesus Christ should love one another no
better? O Christians, either Jay your malice aside, or else God will lay you
aside, as he has done to too many of us in this day, to our great sorrow.
While you are with God, God is with you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. While you are with God,
he is with you, and if you seek him, he will be found of you; but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you. Never was man forsaken of God, till God was
forsaken of man; he sticks close to us, while we stick close to him; but if we
forsake him, he will forsake us. He that will be angry and sin not, must not be
angry but with sin. Therefore, dear Christians, let me beseech you to love one
another. O that I could but speak out how much I desire the love of one
another! O it will be a happy day, when all the people of God are knit together
in Love and Union and Affection. O Sirs, if God had desired or commanded some
great thing of us, some burdensome thing of us, it might have been excused; but
alas, it is no more but to love our Brethren, and shall we deny this? But you
may say, how should Believers love one another? I answer, 1. You should highly
esteem of one another, as Pearls in comparison of other men; so does God, God
calls his people his Jewels, his Treasure, his Glory, his Portion; when he
calls wicked Men Dogs, Vipers, Swine, Briars, and Thorns. You should be very
high in one another affection. 2. You should delight in the company of one
another, in the society of each other. God delights in the Society of Saints,
so should you. 3. You should be ready to help one another, and to do good one
for another, and communicate one to another. Remember the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who said, It Is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive. 4.
Admonish one another, exhort one another, provoke one another to love, and to
good works. 5. Sympathize one with another, Fellow Members should be
fellow-feelers: so did Moses, and Jeremiah, and old Eli; his heart was broken
before his neck was broken. Dear Christians, let me beseech you, let me beg of
you to love one another. He calls us to love, who is love it self. That Is the
19th.


XX. Set out for God at our beginning, and hold out with God until our ending.
As there are none too old for Eternity, so there are none too young for
Mortality; Remember thy Creator now in the days of thy Youth, Eccl. 12.1. We
are all born to serve God; and better we had never been born, than not to serve
him. Man is beholden to God for what he has, but God is not beholdng to man
for what he does. It Is a greater glory to us that we serve God, than it is to
God that we serve him. It Is not he that is made happy by us, but we are made
happy by him. He needs not such Servants as we are on Earth, but we need such a
Master as he is in Heaven. He will be everlastingly blessed without us, but we
shall be everlastingly cursed without him; of him and through him, and to him
are all things, to whom be glory for ever Amen, Romans 11.36. It is sad, my
Beloved, it is sad, that we should live so long in the World, and do so little
good; or that we should live so little in the World, and do so much evil. O you
must not think to dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Christ at night;
or to go from Dalila's lap to Abraham's bosom. If salvation were easy to come
by, it would be slightly set by. There is no obtaining of what is promised, but
by fulfilling what is commanded. The neglecting of the race of holiness, will
be the obstructing of the price of happiness. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which none shall see God, Heb. 12.14. Beloved, there are many
young people in the World, who are very wicked in the World, they walk in
darkness, and do the works of darkness; they are young in years, but old in
sin; they are very vain in a vain World, they sit with delight, and make sit
their delight. I beseech you look in Eccl. 11 9. Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee, and walk in the ways of thine own heart. O
this is brave indeed, if it would always last; but after the flash of
Lightnings, comes the clap of Thundering; mark what follows, Bot know for all
these things God will bring thee to Judgment. Do but you see here, Sirs, O were
it not for this But, how brave were it for wicked men! But know for all these
things God will bring thee to Judgment; for all thy wantonness, for all thy
pride, for all thy profaneness and prodigality, thou shall be brought to
Judgment. After all your present receiving, you must be brought to your future
reckoning. O therefore let nothing be done in this World, which cannot be
answered in another World. Let me beseech you, who are young men and young
women, To remember your Creator in the days of your Youth: To serve God, to
love God, to honor God, to obey God in your youthful days. The flower of Life
is of Christ's setting, and shall it be of the Devil's plucking? will you hang
the most sparkling Jewel of your younger years in the Devil's ear? O it is hard
^asting off the Devil's yokes, when we have worn them long upon our necks. O
young people, if you be sick of the will not, old age will die of the cannot.
If God's to day be too soon for thy repentance, thy to morrow will be too late
for his acceptance. You can never come too soon to God, nor stay too long with
God. He shall be happy in the end, who is holy to the end: Be thou faithful to
the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.2. O hold on, and hold
our to the end. He that draws back from profession, shall be kept back from
salvation. He that departs in the Faith shall be saved, but he that departs
from the Faith shall be damned: If ^^my man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Be steadfast, unmovable, always (...) Lord (...)to
the Lord: 1 (...) 15.^^. So I (...) to you (...), young (...), always (...) in
the (...) of (...) for us. (...) God. That is the (...)

FINIS.
A Cabinet of Jewels, OR A Glimpse of Sion's Glory.
Written by William Dy^r, late Preacher of the Gospel at Christian and Son
(...), in the County of (...).
I. Loath Sin, and leave Sin.

HE that ^o^^reth his s^ns, shall not prosper, but whosoever confes^^th and
forsakes them, shall how mercy, Prove 28.^^. If we con^^^^ our (...) (...) and
(...), and to church and from all (...), 1 John 1.9. Them must be a falling,
(...) with our sins, before them (...), then must be a (...) of (...) in our
(...) there as a le^ving of sin in our (...). Oh is it not (...) to part with
(...) never so (...) to part with God, and Christ, and (...)? One of them you
must do. (...) sin will (...) a soul out of Christ, but (...) sin can down a
soul in Christ; Son (...) the evil of evils, it is worse than the Devil, for it
is th^^ that made the Devil to be a Devil. Oh the love of sin and the lack of
grace, will rui^^ and destroy your souls for over; It Is (...) not to be, than
to be a (...) better to be no people, (...) not to be the Lords people: O
therefore kill sin, that sin may not hill you: Mourn for sin, and flee from
sin: Do not commit new sins, but repeat of old sins; Ezekiel. 36.31. You shall
has your selves in your own sighs for your iniquities. Oh poor soul, have thou
not served the Flesh and the Devil long enough? Yea, have thou not had enough
of sin? Is it so good to thee, or so profitable for thee? Oh what a place will
you be shortly in of Joy or of Torment! Oh what a sight will you shortly see in
Heaven or Hell! Oh what thoughts will shortly fill your hearts with unspeakable
delight or horror! What work will you be employed in, to praise the Lord with
Saints and Angels, or to cry out in fire unquenchable with Devils? Oh therefore
die unto sin, confess it, mourn for it, and be ashamed of it, hate it, and
loath it, and fly from it as from a Serpent; and though your sins are more than
you can number, yet they are not more than God can pardon.

II. Put off the old man, and put on the new man. Lie not one to another,
seeing you have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new
man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him,
Col. 3.9, 10. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2. Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature; old things are
past away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. A new understanding,
a new will, new desires, new love, new delights, new thoughts, new words, new
company, and a new conversation; he is not what he was before. Oh dear friends,
be new creatures, that you may be glorious creatures: We can call nothing in
Heaven ours, till Christ be ours; without Regeneration there is no Salvation.
Verily, I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little children,
ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Joh. 3.3. ^^rily, verily, I say
unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. You
have heard much of God, Christ, and Heaven, with your ears, but this will not
bring you to Heaven, unless you have much of God, Christ, and Heaven in your
hearts. You must be able to say, I was once a slave, but now a son; once I was
dead, but now I am alive; once I was in darkness, but now I am light in the
Lord; once I was a child of Wrath, an Heir of Hell, but now I am an heir of
Heaven: once I was under the spirit of bondage, but now I am under the spirit
of adoption. A true Believer lives in the Lord, 1 These. 1.1. On the Lord, Romans
1.17. Luke 20.38. From the Lord, Jo^. 6.57. To the Lord, Romans 14 8. With the
Lord, 2 Cor. 13 4.

III. Make your peace with the Prince of Peace. Isa. 9.6. Psalm. 2.12. Kis^ the
Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way: When his wrath is kindled
but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Oh do not list
up your hand against the Son, but kiss the Son. Let his Will, be your Rule;
'his Spirit, your Guide; his Precepts, your Practices; his Degrees, your
Delights; his chosen Ones; your choicest Companions. Submit to his Gospel and
Government: Oh Sirs, make your peace with God. There is a fourfold peace. 1.
There is a peace external: this peace, is with Men. 2. There is a peace
supernal: that is peace; with God. 3. There is a peace internal: that is peace
with Conscience. 4. There is a peace eternal: and this is peace in Heaven.
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace.
If you have peace with God, the World and the Devil cannot hurt you: And upon
the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. Believers have God for their guide and
guard; he that meddles with the Saints of God assaults God himself, Z^ch. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of (...) eye. He that lifts up his
hand against them, lifts up his hand against God; though they have many enemies,
yet they have one friend that has more strength than all their enemies. A
ragged Saint is dearer to God, than a glittering Emperor that wants grace. Oh
make your peace with the Prince of Peace, that in this life you may have
assurance of eternal life, that eternal death may not be your portion in the
other life.

IV. Make Religion your main business, and not a by business. Wherefore the
father, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.10. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33. O
why is the glory of this world so much regarded, but because the glory of
Heaven is so little minded! Oh what is an Earthly Kingdom in comparison of the
Heavenly Kingdom? The Angels themselves, though they are glorious Spirits, yet
they are ministering Spirits. Do not most men in the world make light of God,
and Christ, and the Spirit, and Heaven, and their precious Souls? And he sent
forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding, and they would
not come; again, he sent forth other servants saying, tell them that are
bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fartings are killed,
and all things are ready, come into the marriage. But they made light of it,
and went their way, one to his farm, and another to his merchandise, Mat. 22.3,
4, 5. Wretched Worldlings make Religion a by-business; they will hear, read,
and pray, when they have nothing else to do: O that such men did but know what
everlasting glory, and everlasting torments are, would they then do as they do?
O that they did but know the worth of their Souls, and the want of a Savior;
the shortness of their time, and the greatness of their work, would they then
neglect God, and their own souls, as they do? Oh Friends, let me beseech you to
whom I write, to make Religion your main business; hearing, reading, praying,
believing, and doing, your main business. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give unto you: for him has God the Father sealed, Joh. 6.27.

V. Do nothing in this world but what you can answer in another world. For we
must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16. He has appointed a day in
which he shall judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, Act. 17.31. For God shall bring every work to judgment, with every
secret thing, whether is be good, or whether it be evil. Eccl. 12. Oh, for the
Lords sake, my dear Brethren, let nothing be done by you in this world, but
what may be answered in another world. Ill men do that in this world, which
they cannot answer in another world: Now they contemn God, blaspheme God, rebel
against God, go a whoring from God, and are for persecuting the beloved of God,
instead of loving the Saints, are for imprisoning the Saints, and more for
crushing them than comforting them: instead of visiting them, v^^^fie them: and
instead of affecting them, are afflicting them, and eat them up (...) they eat
bread, Psalm 4 4. and are willing not to suffer them to worship the true God in
spirit and in truth, but are for mocking them, Heb. 11.36. threatening them,
Act. 4 29. accusing them, Act. 24 5. slandering them, Mat. 5.11. cursing them,
Mat. 5 44. beating them, Act. 5.40. imprisoning them, Act. 4.3. banishing them,
Heb. 11. All this the poor innocent suffers, whilst swearing, cursing, whoring,
robbing blaspheming, drunkenness, and gluttony, and all manner of debauchery,
if such men had their wills, should rather walk unpunished in the streets, and
only he that departs from evil makes himself a prey. What wonder then, if such
as these shall one day hide themselves in Dens and Holes, and cry to the rocks
and mountains to fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on
the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb? Rev. 6.15, 16. Oh what will
persecutors of godliness do, when Jesus Christ shall appear in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know him not, and obey not his Gospel? 2 These.
1.8. Will they not then be dumb and speechless, and have never a word to say
for themselves, as that man that had not on his Wedding garment? Mat. 22.12.
But Oh Beloved, Let that grace that has appeared to all men, teach us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we may live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. following the Lamb, resisting Satan,
shunning sin, and separating from the evil world.

VI. Make the Word of God your Rule, and the Spirit of God your Guide. To the
Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, because
there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. We have also a more sure word of
prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, 2
Pet. 1.19. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction for instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy
3.16. Howbeit, when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall bespeak; and he will show you things to come, Joh. 16.23. The Scripture
is a Rule before us, to show us where we must go: the Spirit is a Word behind
us, to enable us to go according to the Directions of that Word: The Word of
God is a Compass, by which we are to direct our Course; the Spirit is the great
Pilot, that steers us in this Course. We have no eyes to see the Word, till the
Spirit enlighten them; we have no ears to hear the Word, till the Spirit open
them; we have no hearts to obey the Word, till the Spirit bow and incline them.
By the Word of God we know the mind of the Spirit; and by the efficacy of the
Spirit we feel the efficacy of the Word, The Word of God shows us the way, and
the Spirit of God leads us in that way which the Word points out. The Spirit of
God is able to expound the Word of God, and to make it plain to our
understanding. The Holy Ghost is the Churches Interpreter; He gives the
Scripture, and he can reveal unto us the sense and meaning of the Scripture.
The Word is Gods Counselor, to discover the path in which we are to walk; the
Spirit is the Counsel of God, that teaches us how to walk in that path. The
Word is a Crystal glass, which shows us our Duty; the Spirit gives us sight to
see our Duty. If God had not put his Spirit into our hearts, as well as his
Word into our mouths, we should never have arrived at the fair Haven of Peace.
St. Austin calls the Scriptures, the Epistle of God to the Creatures, by which
we understand the very heart of God. God Almighty has in the sacred Scriptures
as it were unbowelled himself, and unfolded all his Counsel to the Creatures,
as far as it is necessary to be known, for their directon and guidance to
everlasting life. There be many that walk by false Rules. 1. Some by Opinions.
2. Some by Customs. 3. Some by Providence. 4. Some by Conscience. 5. Some by
their own Reason. 6. Some by Man's Examples. 7. Some by their Lusts.
But O my dear Friends, let me beseech you to walk by none of these false
Rules, but keep close to the Word and Spirit of God.

VII. Be faithful and fruitful. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
your labor is not in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Every tree that bears not good
fruit is ^^wen down and cast into the fire. Christians must be fruitful, and
not slothful. See that you bring forth good fruit, and much fruit. 1.
Sincerity: Which is not a single Grace, but the soul of all Graces. Behold,
thou desire truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.^6. 2. Humility: A Grace most
prevailing with God for the obtaining of all Graces. Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your
souls. 3. Prudence: The patient Christian is the best for waiting, but the
prudent Christian is the best for working: Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless
as doves, Mat. 10.16. We must have innocence with our wisdom, else our wisdom
is but craftiness, and we must have wisdom with our innocence, else our
innocence is but weakness: We must have the harmlesness of the Dove, that we
may not wrong others; and we must have the prudence of the Serpent, that others
may not abuse and cir^umvont us. Not to wrong the truth by silence, here is the
innocence of the Dove; not to betray our selves by rashness, here is the wisdom
of the Serpent. 4. Patience: Here is the Patience of the Saints, Rev. 13.10.
Rev. 14.12. The way to bring the world under us, is for us to be patient under
them. 5. Self-denial: If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me, Mat. 16.24. Be faithful in your promises, and
in your purposes; be faithful to the ways of God, and cause of God: Oh do not
begin with the Lamb, and end with the Beast, but be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.20. Keep your Lights burning, your
Lamps shining, your Loins girded, your Consciences wakened, your Garments
unstained, and your Spiritual Armor constantly on, and closely girt.


VIII. Have a care of reporting and believing the worlds reports of the People
of God. Those that have a good Conscience, have not always a good Name. The
people of God in this life are called by the wicked, the troublers of Israel,
Seditious, Rebellious, and what not? An old device of that old Serpent, to
persuade the troublers of Israel, upon Elijah, the Chariot of Israel, 1 King.
18.17* ^ King. 2.12. Jeremiah for speaking against their sins and wickednesses,
and denouncing Gods Judgments against them, is judged worthy of death, Jer.
26.8, 9. So Jer. 38.4. The wicked Nobles petition the King to murder him, under
the pretense, that he sought not the good of the people, but the hurt. So Amos
for speaking against the Abominations of the Kings Court, is charged with*
Treason against the Kings Person, Amos 7.10, 13. So Paul and Silas, for
preaching up Jesus Christ, are accused by the envious Jews, and rude multitude,
for turning the world upside down, and breaking the Decrees of Caesar: Yea,
Christ himself had this laid to his charge: Mark what the Jews say of him: And
they began to accuse him, saying, we found this Fellow perverting the Nations,
and forbidding to give tribute (...) Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ
a King. Luke 23.2. Mat. 17.18. And for this have the servants of God in all
Ages been accused and persecuted, killed and stoned, Mat. 27.37. Acts 7.52. Now
if they did so to the green Tree, no wonder if they do it to the dry. If the
Lord and Master was called an enemy to Caesar, no wonder if those of his
household be called so: Our integrity will not secure us from infamy; the
choicest of Professors have had black marks in the worlds Calendar. It is usual
for those who live in Treason and Rebellion against the King of Heaven, to
slander his Servants with Treason and Rebellion against the Kings of the Earth.
But, my dear Brethren, take heed of this; For as the death of the Saints is
precious, so the names of the Saints are precious in Gods account. The world
will father a hundred lies upon the Lords people. Men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,
Mat. 5.11. 2 Timothy 2.9. Wicked men hate them most, that God loves most; but God
will roll away the reproaches of his people, he will cause their innocence and
righteousness to break forth as the Sun at Noonday, and their names shall be in
everlasting remembrance. Yea, at that great day God will clear their innocence
before Men, and Angels, and all the World.

IX. Keep in with God, now men are out with you. But it is good for me to draw
near to God; I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy
works, Psalm. 73.28. He that dw^^leth under the shadow of the most High, no
Plague shall come nigh him. He will give his Angels charge ever thee, Psalm.
91.10. Though the fig-tr^^ should not blossom, and there be no fruit in the
Vi^^^ though the labor of the olive should fail, and the field shall yield no
meat; the flock should be (...) off from the fold, and the herd from the stall;
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will triumph in the God of my salvation, Hab.
3.17, 18. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous runs
into it, and are safe, J^^^. 4.8. Draw near to God, and he will draw near to
you. This is a great comfort to the people of God, though they be as Lillies
amongst Thorns, and as S^eep amongst Wolves, that they have a Go to go to.
Come, my p^^^pl^, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide
thy self as it were for a moment, until the indignation be over past, Isa.
26.20. Let the world frown, and friends forsake you, God can sweeten all your
enjoyments: Keep in God's way, and you will be sure of God's protection: Do you
keep Gods precepts, and God will keep your person: Do what God commands, and
avoid what God forbids, and then you need not fear what men can do unto you. If
you would have God to take care of you, you must cast your care upon God, wait
on him, and walk with him, obey his Precepts, and believe his Promises. Oh
Beloved, let wicked men fall out with us, and ha^^ us, and reproach us, and
punish us as much as they will, if we keep in with God: therefore, my Beloved,
above all things get communion with God, and keep communion with God; communion
with God will yield you two Heavens, a Heaven upon Earth, and a Heaven after
Death: All Saints shall enjoy a Heaven when they leave the Earth; some Saints
enjoy a Heaven whilst they are on the Earth. He enjoys nothing that wants
communion with God; he wants nothing that enjoys communion with God.

X. Live above the love of Life, and the fear of Death. For whosoever will save
his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall
find it, Mat. 16.25. If any man come to me, and hare not his father and mother,
and wife and children, and brethren, and ^isters, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.16. He that loves Christ more than his life,
will be sure to save and to keep both. He that goes out of God's way to avoid
danger, shall certainly meet with danger: Ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. My dear Friends, let us live above suffering
and fears, though we cannot live without suffering: In the world you shall have
tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. I have overcome
the world in you, Joh. 16.33. He that loves Christ above his life, will let
life go rather than Christ. Consider, my Beloved, Christ and the Cloud of
Witnesses and Martyrs that are gone before, and passed over and through all
those floods, and safely arrived to shore, and are now in Heaven with God, and
Christ, and holy Angels, where there is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for
evermore. Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence is fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 62.12. Oh
the Joy that they enjoy! Oh the Rivers of Consolation that flow from God!
Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell amongst them. They shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them,
nor any heat; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them into living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7, 15, 16, 17. Who are they that have all
this honor, and glory, and joy, and blessedness in Heaven? For this, see v.
14. Th^se are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made th^^^ white in the blood of the Lamb. The sweetness of the
Crown which Believers shall receive, will make them amends for the bitterness
of the Cross they carried.

XI. Desire better hearts, more than better times. O Jerusal^m, wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: How long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14. For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnesses,
blasphemies, Mat. 15. (...). The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Oh Beloved, intead of reforming
we are complaining of wicked men, more than of wickedness; of their cruelty,
more than our Apostasy; of their injuries against us, more than our injuries
against God. We pore too much upon second Causes, or complain of Instruments,
not of our selves. We have been a long time in sinning, and we had need be a
long time in repenting: the times had not been so bad, had we not been so bad;
and the times would soon be better, if we were but better. Alas, Beloved, we
have sinned such sins, as unrighteous men could not sin, against the clear^^t
Light, and dearest love: the better God has been to us, the worse we have been
to him; he has loaded us with his Mercies and we have wearied him with our
sins: Oh let us blame our selves more, and the times less: Let us turn unto the
Lord, that he may turn to us in love and mercy: Let our hearts go out unto him,
that his heart may come unto us. O beg and cry for better hearts, that you may
serve God better; for broken hearts, for sincere hearts, for that is it God
looks at, and calls for; Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thy heart. Our hearts are
always out of tune to serve God, but never out of tune to serve sin: for if we
had never so good times, and not good hearts, it would rather hurt us, than
bless us.

XII. Grow downward in humility, and inward in sincerity: 'Unto me who am less
than the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among
the Gentiles the u^^ searchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. An^ whosoever shall
exalt himself, shall be abas^d; and he that shall humble himself, shall be
exalted, Mat. 23.12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, Col.
3.10. Be clo^thed with humility; for God resists the proud, and gives grace
to the humble; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that
he may exalt you in due time, 1. Pet. 5.5, 6. Bring up your will to God, that
God may bring down his will to you. Be low in your own eyes, keep a low esteem
of your selves; abhor pride and fly from it; be inwardly sincere, as well as
outwardly humble; do not look Heavenward by your profession, and Hell-ward by
your conversation: He that lives in sin, is dead in sin; Ephesians. 2.1. Grace be
with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. Let your
hearts be upright with God, and walk as those that have God for their portion;
knowing there are many eyes upon you; the eye of God, the eye of Christ, the
eye of Angels, the eye of Saints, the eye of the World; and the Devil eyes you
too; therefore walk wisely and sincerely: Be like the KING's Daughter, all
glorious within, Psalm. 45.3. She is all glorious within, though within is not all
her glory; Her clothing is of wrought Gold. Do not think your selves good,
because others think so. Alas, the best men's confidence of us, are poo^
Evidences for Heaven: The best Testimony (...) that within us, and above us.
See there ^^re that ye grow in grace, and delight in holiness, bring forth much
fruit, live still a^ before the living God; take heed of Hypocris^^ and
Apostasy; make it your daily business to walk with God; be much in the exercise
of Humility; Humility will exceedingly adorn your Profession. Do not place
Religion in a few good words, when the substance is neglected: but live as you
would die; live to day, as if you were to die to morrow.

XIII. Do good to those that be good: He has showed thee, O man, what is good;
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? Mic. 6.8. That they do good, that they be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.18. But to
do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, Heb. 13.16. Pure religion, and undefiled, before God and the Father,
is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their afflictions, Jam. 1.22.
Forget not to contribute to the necessities of the poor Saints; think that God
has given you your Estates for such an end as this. Oh Beloved, what an
opportunity have you now to do good, if Satan do not hinder you! Are there not
many of Christ's Servants now in want, and Members in want? some in prison, and
others out of prison? Remember those that are in bonds, as bound with them; and
them that suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13.^.
There be many men that have a great deal of this Worlds wealth, and riches, and
goods in their hands, and in their houses: but they have no grace in their
hearts, and therefore they do no good with the goods of this World; they live
so unfruitful, that their Lives are scarce worth a Prayer, nor their Deaths
scarce worth a Tear. Men may as well go to Hell for not doing good as for doing
evil: He that bears not good fruit, is as well fuel for Hell, as he that bears
bad. You may not be outwardly bad, and yet not inwardly good; you may be as far
from Gra^^ as from Vice: Men are not so much sent to Hell for doing evil, as
for not doing good: For I was an hung^ed, and ye gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, Mat. 25.42. The rich Glutton was in
Hell Torments, not for persecuting Lazarus, but not relieving Lozarus. Merez
was cursed by an Angel, not because they fought against the Lord, but because
they came not to help the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5.25. It is one of the
greatest mercies in the World, for God to give a man a heart to do good with
that he has given him. Oh Beloved, be always a doing good, and hating evil:
look not only where you may get good, but where you may do good: Labor to be
helpful to the Souls of others, and to supply the want of others.

XIV. Choose Chastisement before Defilement: Moses when he was come to years,
refused to be called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 11.24, 25. For ye had compassion of me in my bands, and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in
heaven a better and (...) enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. So the three Children
chose burning in the Fiery Furnace, before bowing to the golden Image, Da^.
3.1^.18. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter: If is be so, our God
whom we serve, is able to deliver as from the burning fiery furnace, and be
will deliver us out of thy hand O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the golden image that thou host s^^ up. So Dani^l chose suffering
before sinning (...) And it is said of those in Heb. 11.35. they accepted not
of deliverance: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they
might obtain a better resurrection. Oh Behoved, there is more evil in the least
sin against Christ, than the greatest suffering for Christ.

1. Our sufferings for Christ are but light, 2 Cor. 4.17. 2. But short, but for
a moment. 3. Christ stands by us in our sufferings. 4. Our sufferings are
ordered by the Father. 5. Our sufferings shall not hurt our souls. 6. God
give^^ us the best of comforts in the worst of times; we have most of
consolations from God, when we have most of tribulations from men; as our
sufferings do abound, so our consolations do abound: When the burden is
heaviest upon the back, then the peace of conscience is sweetest and greatest
within.
Therefore my dear Brethren, keep your selves out of the puddle of this World,
and from the evil of this World; and if you must sin or suffer, choose suffering
before sinning.

XV. Think not the worse of Godliness, because it is frowned upon; nor the
better of Ungodliness, because it is smiled upon: For bodily ^se pr^^iteth
little, but godl^ness is profitable (...) all things, having the promise of the
life that m^^ it, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The doubtless, and
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do (...)
them but dung that I may win Christ, Phil. 3. (...). And have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11.
(...) the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. O Friends, think not the worse of Holiness,
because it may be reproached, and scorned, and perfec^ted by wicked men; nor
the better of Wickedness, because wicked men love it, and follow it, and say,
It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? Mal.
3.14. But there is a time coming, when ungodly men will be glad of some of that
Holiness that now they despise; but they shall be as far from obtaining it, as
they are now from destring it: let us therefore love Holiness, and hate
Wickedness: For without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.
Holiness is the only way to Happiness. We must not dress our selves for another
World, by the Looking-glass of this World: Thou shall not follow a multitude to
do evil, Exodus 23 2. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end
is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19. The Children of God must be harmless in
their actings, and blameless in their walkings.

XVI. Prize the Word of God by the worth of it, that you may never come to
prize the Word of God by the want of it: How sweet are thy words unto my tasted
yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119.10. It is sweeter than the
honey, and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. O how do I love thy Law! Psalm. 119.95.
I love thy Commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold. The law of thy mouth
is better to me than thousands of gold and silver, v. 72. As newborn babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 P^^. 2.1, 2.
Let the word of God dwell richly in you, not only with you, but in you, Col.
3.16. O let us with Job, esteem the Word of God above our necessary food, Job
23.12. and with David, above our gold and silver. The delight of a Saint in
Gods Word, over-tops all his Creature-delights. Wicked men can delight in the
Creatures of God, but not in the Word of God: they can delight in the gifts of
God, but not in the God of gifts. Oh let us love the Word, and prize the Word;
it is the Sun of the Christian World; as the Sun is the light of the natural
World, and without it the World is but a Chaps and a Dungeon full of Darkness;
so is the Word of God the Light of the Spiritual World, without which a
Christian is in an eternal Night. Take away the Scripture, and there will be no
certainty to direct men what is to be done, or what is to be believed; all
false ways are here discovered, all sins are here forbidden, all holiness (...)
here commanded: Here you may see every action and motion of your lives, as a
step to life, or a step to death; as a step Heavenward, or a step, Hell-ward:
O therefore prize the Word, and obey the Word.

1. It is a plain Word. 2. It is a perfect Word. 3. It is a sure Word. 4. It is
an uniform Word. 5. It is a powerful Word: it is the favor of life unto life,
unto them that believe.
Oh Beloved, let us read the Word, and abide in the Word: If ye continue in my
word, then are ye my Disciples, Joh. 8.31. Now the less you hear, the more do
you read that little B^ck of the Revelation, and Daniel especially.

XVII. Have a care of the Whore of Babylon's ( viz. the wicked and profane
World's) Golden Cup, and sweet Wine: And the women was arrayed in purple, and
scarlet color; and docked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a
golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication,
Rev. 17.4. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water, as (...) flood after
the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood, Rev. 12.
Let me beseech you to have a care of this, and keep your selves from this: be,
like the Virgin. Spouse of Christ, which follows him wheresoever he goes. My
dear Friends, keep your selves from four things.

1. From false Teachers: The Devil has his Ministers as well as Christ. Beware
of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
revening wolves, Mat, 7.15. Yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have
enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their
own way, every one for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. Oh false Teachers
do not feed the Flock, but fleece the Flock; they do not convert, but pervert,
they do not season, but poison; they do not edify to salvation, but edify to
damnation; instead of curing Souls, they kill Souls; so they have but the
peoples Goods, they care not though the Devil have their Souls: they are neither
rightly called, nor rightly qualified: Their course a evil, and therefore is
not right, Jer. 13.10. They are like Dogs and Wolves, combining together to
macerate the Flock of Christ. On therefore keep your selves from Babylon's
Merchants, that make Merchandise of the Souls of men, Rev. 18.13. Oh the sins
of Teachers, and the Teachers of sins. 2. From false Doctrine. But there were
false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers
among you, who privity shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. Be
not carried away with diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing that
the heart be established with grace, not with meats, which have not profited
them that have been occupied therein, Heb. 12.9. I beseech you also in the
Lord, my dear Brethren, that you do not carnally comply with, nor
superstitiously conform to the Inventions of men: But stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free. Gal. 5.1. 3. From false Worship. If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or
in his hand, the some shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence if the Lamb, Rev. 14.9, 10. Ye worship ye know (...) what; God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth,
Joh. ^.23, 24. As there be some in the World that worship false Gods, so there
be others that worship the true God with false worship. They that worship the
Beast, worship the Devil. Re. 13. Oh meddle not with false worship, with vain
worship, and will worship; worship God as he teaches us to worship him. Our
work is to depend on Christ's work; our outward working is to depend on God's
inward working. 4. From false Opinions, from Error and Sedition: Let your
hearts be upright, your judgments sound, and your lives holy. Love the truth,
obey the truth, and hold fast the truth. Now Beloved, let me beseech you for
God's sake, and for Christ's sake, and for your souls sake, keep your selves
from false Teachers, from false Doctrine, from false worship, from false
Opinions. If you will be tasting and sipping at Babylon's Cup, you must resolve
to receive more or less of Babylon's Plagues.
XVIII. Be one with every one that is one with Christ: Endeavoring to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one spirit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling: One Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all, Ephesians. 4.3.4, 5, 6. Every one that loves him that beg at, loves him also
that is begotten of him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when
we love God and keep his commandments, 1 John 5.1, 2. He that loves (...) ^is
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom be has not seen? 1 John
4.26. Oh consider what a dishonor it is to the Gospel, that those that profess
themselves Sons of the same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the
same Spirit, Heirs of the same Glory, should be at a jarring one with another.
It is strange and unnatural, that Lillies should prove Thorns to one another;
that those who are Saints in profession, should (...) Devils in practice to one
another! that Gods Diamonds should out one another! For Wolves to devour the
Lamb, is no wonder; but for one Lamb to devour another, is a wonder, and
monstrous! O that Christians, instead of loving one another, should hate one
another! O how unlike are we to that God whom we profess to be our God! He is
full of Love, full of Goodness, and full of Mercy and Patience: O but
Christians cannot bear, and forbear one with another. O do not wicked men warm
themselves at the sparks of our Animosities, and say, It is as we would have
it? Oh Beloved has not God made his Wrath to smoke against us, for divisions
and heart burnings that have been amongst us? Oh that you would lay this to
heart, and throw away all discord, and divisions, and heart-burnings, and
labor for an oneness in love and affection with every one that is one with
Christ: Oh labor for a healing spirit. You cannot love God, if you do not love
the people of God: If any man says, he loves God, and ^^^eth (...) brother,
he is a liar. Let brotherly love continue, Heb. 13.1. They that feared the
Lord, spoke often one to another, Mal. 3.16. Christ's Doves should flock
together. There be many that cannot love a man, unless he be of their Opinion,
or a Member of their Church, though he be a Member of Christ. Every man has a
good opinion of his own Opinion: but alas, Beloved, it is not this opinion or
that opinion, this way or that way, will bring a man to Heaven, without faith
in Christ; and he that has faith in Christ, has right to all the Ordinances
of Christ, and Promises of Christ, and Privileges of Christ; therefore let me
beseech you to love every man that is a godly man, let him be of what way and
form he will: And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and
of one soul, Acts 3.21.

XIX. Love Christ with a love stronger than life, who loved us with a love
stronger than death: Therefore do ^^^ny Father love (...), because I lay down
my life, that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it
down my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again,
Joh. 10.17* 18. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save ^^^^^rs, 1 Timothy 1 15. Christ's love to
us was stronger than death; he died for love; he laid down his life to save our
lives; he loves us as the Father loves him, Job. 15.9. As the Father has loved
me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my love. Oh the Scripture has
exceeding high expressions of his affection to us. Now Beloved, if he died for
us, and suffered for us, and set his heart upon us to love us, and to delight
in us, how ought we then to love him again! Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with: all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, Mat. 22.37,
38. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, 1
Pet. 2.7. O let our hearts be full of love and affection to Christ. Love will
breed courage, and cast out fear, slavish fear before God, and carnal fear
before men: God can keep us from the torments of men, but men cannot keep us
from the torments of God. Whilst we stand for godliness, God has promised to
stand by us. Therefore be not afraid of any one that stands in opposition to
the authority of Christ. None can promise us better than Christ can: None can
threaten us worse than Christ can. Can any man promise us a thing better than
Heaven? Can any man threaten us with a worse than Hell? Heaven is promised to
those that love him, and Hell is to be the portion of those that hate him. Oh
my dear Brethren, let us love Christ with a love stronger than death: So did
Paul. and the rest of the Apostles: Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Romans 8.35. Love is stronger than death; many
waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8.6, 7.

XX. Be every day as serious in your Preparations for Death, as if it were in
your last day. At the days of my appointed time will I wait until my change
come, Job 14 14. This night thy soul shall be required of thee, Luke 12.20. For
what is your life? it is even a vapor, that appears a little time, and then
vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. (...) hold, thou have made my days as an hand
breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: Verily, every man at his best
state is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. As no Saint knows when that time and
hour shall be, so no wicked man knows when it shall not be To live without fear
of death, is to die living: to labor not to die, is labor in vain: Men are
afraid to die in such and such sins, but not afraid to live in such and such
sins. Oh the Hell of horrors and terrors, that attend those souls that have
their greatest work to do when they come to die! Therefore as you would be
happy in death, and everlastingly blessed after death, prepare and fit your
selves for death Did Christ die for us that we might live with him, and shall
not we desire to die and be with him? A Believer's dying-day is his
crowning-day: And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labor, and their works do follow them, Rev.
14.13. Oh I beseech you my dear Brethren, every day spend some time in
preparation for, and meditation of Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven and Eternity:
Eternity is a sum that can never be numb^ed, a line that can never be measured:
Eternity is a condition of everlasting sorrow, or everlasting joy. O think of
this, and prepare for this every day, before the night death comes. And thus,
my Beloved, I have given you these twenty precious Directions for your Souls. I
shall leave this Book with you as a Legacy of my dearest love: my desire in all
this, is your happiness here, and your blessedness hereafter. My earnest and
humble desire of you is, that you would mind this Book, and my former Treatise;
not only read them, (...) reform your lives by them: O do your duty, love your
duty, and live your duty, that you may be made meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light: Which is, and shall be the earnest and
constant Prayer of one that esteems it a most glorious privilege to be of the
number of those who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

William Dyer.

Follow the Lamb.
REVEL. 14.6. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.


THe Title of this Book tells us it is the Revelation of John; and John tells
us, ^h. 1.1. it is the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Christ's Revelation to John,
and John's Revelation to us.

The Command of this Book is set forth, Chapter 1.19. Write the things that are,
and the things that shall be hereafter. And into these two Parts this Book is
divided.

1. A Revelation of the things that are re^^^red to the Seven Churches of Asia.
2. A Revelation of the general State of the Church to come; and that from
John's time unto the second coming of the Lord.
The Words of this Book are the true Sayings of the true God; they are
therefore true and faithful, Chap. 22.6. The Matter of this Book so much
concerns the Good of the Church, that Jesus Christ commands every one that
has an ear to h^^r, to hearken what the Spirit of God says unto the Church;
and ^o show how carnest Christ Jesus is to have all his Members and Servants
acquainted with the things revealed in this Book, this Charge he repeats eight
times over, as this Book shows, Chap. 2.7, 11, 17, 29. and Chap. 3.6, 13, 22.
and Chap. 13.9. A Blessing is pronounced upon the Reader, Hearer, and Doer of
the things written in this Book, Chapter 1.3. O what can be said more, or more
effectually, to stir us up to hear and read, than Blessedness? And blessed is
he that keeps the words of the Prophecy of this Book, Chap. 22.7. But how
shall we keep them, except we know them? And how shall we know them, except we
read them?

The excellency of this Book is such, as neither Man or Angel, none in Heaven
or Earth, or under the Earth, was found worthy so much as to look into it, till
Jesus Christ went and took it out of his Fathers hand to open it to us, Chap.
5.3. The blessed Saint John could not but weep for fear^, lost this Book should
have been kept close from him and the Church; so earnest was he to know those
things, which (...) neglect to know, Chap. 5.4. This Book is a most precious
Jewel, which Christ has bestowed upon his Church in the latter days; and it is
our great duty to look into it, and read it, study it, open it, and expound it,
that all the people may be acquainted with it: For in these latter Ages, is,
and shall be the very heat of the War, and brunt of the Battle betwixt God and
Belial, betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt the Lambs followers, and the
Beasts followers, betwixt the righteous and the wicked. Now this Book lays
all open, and plainly tells us, what shall be the issue and success in the
day of Battle? which side shall have the victory, and which side shall go down,
Chapter 17.19. and certainly the sons of Belial shall not prevail: the date of
their Reign is almost out, and the time draws on apace, wherein they shall be
laid in the dust. This Book shows us the rising of the Beast, the declining
of the Beast, and the ruin of the Beast, Chap. 18. Our Lord Jesus has showed
us in this Book, the sorrows, and sufferings, and afflictions, and
tribulations, which the Church was to meet withal in the latter times, Chap.
11.17. and Chap. 12.14, 15. and Chap. 13.7. This Book shows us likewise the
true state of the true Church upon Earth; what she is, where she is, how she
is, and what she shall be hereafter; and that before the slaying, under the
slaying, and after the slaying.

1. Before the slaying time, the true Church in (...) the Wilderness, Where she
has a place prepared her of God, that they should feed her there a (...)
hundred and threescore days, Chap. 12. 2. Before the slaying of the Witnesses
the true Worshippers of God are in a low condition, in heaviness and sadness,
in sackcloth and ash^^ in a mourning and suffering state; being scattered and
dispersed here and there, as Israel was of old. But though this be the
condition of the poor Woman in the Wilderness, yet she (...) not without
comfort: she may take comfort in three things.

1. That God prepared a place for her. 2. That God nourished her, and locked
her up in his Chamber of Providence. 3. That God numbered her days of
suffering. The tribulation of the Saints of the Old Testament is reckoned up
still by years; as the bondage of Egypt four hundred and thirty years, and the
Captivity of Babylon seventy years, but under the New Testament by days, Ye
shall have tribulation ^^n days, Chap. 2.10. And the two Witnesses shall lie
dead three days and a half, Chap. 11.9. So the Woman was to be in the
Wilderness a thousand two hundred and threescore days. The Church is compared
to a Woman for four Reasons.
First, As a Woman is weak and feeble, so is the Church, and can do nothing
without Christ, Joh. 15.5. Secondly, Arm Woman is useful and fruitful, so is
the Church, Joh. 15.2. Thirdly, As a Woman is fair and beautiful, so it the
Church, Ezekiel. 16.13. Fourthly, As a Woman is full of love and affection, so is
the Church, Cant. 2.5.2. Under the slaying time, the true Worshippers of God,
and Witnesses of Jesus Christ, lie dead in the street of the great City, which
is spiritually called S^^^^ and (...) Chap. 11.8. That is, in Antichrist's
Kingdoms and Dominions. The woman which thou saw, is that great City which
reigns ever the Kings of the Earth, Chap. 17.4. She is called Sodom, for her
filthiness and wickedness; and Egypt for her cruelty and oppression, Chap. 17,
18. The true Servants of God, and Members of Jesus Christ, that bear witness
for him against ^^e evils of the Beast, and against the evils of the World, are
here called two Witnesses.

1. Because of the fewness of them. 2. Because two is a number sufficient to
bear a witness, Joh. 8.17.3. Because Antichrists Beasts are called two, chap.
13.4. They are called Witnesses for six Reasons. 1. Because their work is to
bear witness for Christ and his Truth, against the World, the Flesh and the
Devil. A true Believer is to bear a threefold testimony, to and for Christ; a
word-testimony, a life-testimony, and a bloody testimony, Heb. 12. Job. 5.33.
2. Christ's Members are called Witnesses, because they stand up for Christ, to
maintain his Name, his Honor, his Cause, his Truth, his Worship, his Glory in
the World, Da^. 3.16, 17. and chap. 6. And ye killed the Prince of life, whom
God has raised from the ^^^d whereof we are witnesses, Acts 3.19. Be i^ known
unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ
of N^zareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does
this man stand here before you whole, Acts 4.10, 11, 1^ 3. The Lambs followers
are called Witnesses, because they ^^ep the testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev.
12.16. chapter 6.9. A testimony of all the Offices, Works, and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, as King of Saints, and King of Nations. 4. Gods chosen and precious
ones are called Witnesses, because they do appear boldly and openly for his
Truth; they own it, they love it, they publish it, they hold it fast, and
su^^^^ for it, who through the teachings of the Spirit in the Word, and by the
power of the same Spirit, are found in the practice of Christ's a^^ pointments;
they cannot deny the Truth, which is a testimony to it, Acts 24.14. 5. The true
Worshippers of God are called Witnesses, because they do bear witness against
the Beast, and all the whole mystery of iniquity; against the Whore of Babylon,
who has committed fornication with the Kings of the Earth, and made her self
drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6. Christ's faithful Witnesses bear
an eminent testimony against all her abominations, and filthiness, and
wickedness, 6. Christ's redeemed ones are called Witnesses, because in dying
they bear witness for him; for to die for the Truth, is a living standing
testimony to it. He who for Christ's sake loves not his life unto the death,
dies a most glorious witness of Christ, Chap. 12. And they loved not their
lives unto the death. And the beast that came out of the bottomless pit made
war against them, and overcame them, and killed them, Chap. 11.7, 9.

Antichrist rises in a double Beast; in hi^ Civil Power, and his
Ecclesiastical Power.

1. In his Civil Power; so he makes up one Beast with the ten Kings, Chap.
17.12, And this is the Beast that rises up out of the se^, which has seven
heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his head the name
of blasphemy: And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet
were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion; and the
dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and ^^eat authority, Chap. 13.1, 2.

2. In his Ecclesiastical Power; so he makes ^p another Beast; and this is that
Beast that ^ose up out of the Earth: He ^^ath two k^rns ^^ke a Lamb, and he
spoke like a dragon, v. 11.

Now these two monstrous Beasts slay the faithful Witnesses of Jesus Christ,
and rejoice over their dead bodies, and make merry, and send gifts one to
another, chapter 11.10. Oh how will graceless, faithless, Christless men rejoice at
the afflictions and calamities of God's people! saying, Where is now your God,
and Christ your King? Psalm. 42.10. As touching the nature of the Witnesses
death, we are not to conceive thereof as though the same were to be a corporal
killing or slaying, but a civil killing or slaying, not so much their bodies,
as their testimonies, depriving and stripping them of their liberty of Worship,
Ordinances, Religion, and the free exercise of their Gifts, suffering not a
servant of Jesus Christ to bear an open testimony against the abomination of
the Kingdom of Antichrist, nor against her wickedness; but making Laws against
them, and lying in wait for them, stopping their mouths, and imprisoning their
bodies, hating and hunting them up and down, afflicting and tormenting them,
and taking possession of their possession: Killing and slaying them all the day
(...) and accounting them as sheep for the slaughter, (...) 8.33. This is to be
broken in the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of d^^^^ Psalm.
44.29. This is to be killed all the ^^long; and upon this account the Witnesses
(...) said to be slain: And after three days and (...) half, the spirit of life
from God entered (...) them, and they stood upon their feet, and gr^^^ fear fell
upon them that saw them, chapter 11. (...) A spirit of b^^dness and courage, zeal
and undauntedness, and resolution to appear (...) Christ, and his cause against
Antichrist and the whole brood. Therefore rejoice all ye Saints, and be glad
all ye upright of heart; though (...) Witnesses be dead, they will not always
(...) dead, but rise again.

3. After the slaying time, the true Church is with the Lamb on Mount Sion,
chap. 14.1. And I locked and lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Nam^ ^ritte^ in their
foreheads; which notes a fixed state. Those which trust in the Lord shall be as
mount Sion, which cannot be removed, Psalm, 12.5. Before the slaying time the
Church is very low, but under the slaying time lowe^; but after the ^^^^ng time
the Church is very high, she is rejoicing, shining and triumphing on Mount
Sion; and they sung as i^ were a new song before the throne, and before the
four beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn that song but the hundred
forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. The true Church
having gotten (...) glorious presence of the Lamb in the midst (...) her, and
having gotten some victory over (...) Beast, they do rejoice mightily: And I
^^^d a voice of harpers harping with their harps. (...) this is not till after
the Resurrection of (...) Witnesses, and when Witnesses are risen, the Church
is exceedingly joyful. This Chapter, out of which my Text is taken, con^^eth
six principal things:

1. A lovely description of Jesus Christ; (...) he is described by the
similitude of a lamb: Lo^, a Lamb stood upon mount Sion, v. 1. And, behold the
Lamb of God, Joh. 1.19. He is called a Lamb in a double respect.

1. In respect of his Innocence, 1 Pet. 1.19. 1. In respect of his Meekness and
Patience, Acts 1.32.

2. A lively description of the Church, the Lamb's Wife, and that from Verse 1.
to v. 5.

3. A glorious description of the Churches Ministers: As the Church is in this
Book called Heaven, so her Ministers are called Angels: And I saw another Angel
flying in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, ver. 6. And there
followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, ver. 8. And the third Angel
followed him, saying with a loud voice, etc. ver. 9.

4. Here is set down the Doctrine which these Angels preach and publish.

The first Angel published the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ openly,
against all the inventions of men: saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give
glory to him, and worship him th^^ made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the
fountains of water, v. 7. Namely, That men should once fear God, and worship
him, and give all glory to him, none to Creatures, none to Images, none to
Antichrist; he that worshippeth the Beast, worshippeth the Dragon and the
Devil, chapter 13. The second Angel proclaimed the utter ruin of Babylon, and the
destruction thereof, over the Word, saying, Babylon (...) fallen, is fallen,
the great city, because she has made all nations drink of the wine of her
wrath of her fornication, v 8. The third Angel does seriously and solemnly give
warning to all those who shall yet adhere to the Beast, showing the danger and
misery of it: If any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark
in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God, which is poured without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb, ver. 19, 20.

5. A sweet word of heavenly consolation to the Saints and People of God: And I
heard a voice from heaven f^ying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord, from henceforth they rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them, ver. 3.

6. The Judgment and Vengeance which shall be executed upon the Wicked: the
Spirit does set it forth by a double similitude, the one by rendering, the other
by gathering, and that from v. 16. to the end. God will as it were rain. Hell
out of Heaven upon Babylon, he has fire and brimstone for this spiritual
Sodom, judgment without mercy, and fury without compassion.

I shall now come to the words of my Text, Those are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes. This Text is one of the golden Characters of the
hundred forty and four thousand, which stood with the Lamb upon Mount Sion. In
these words are three things: 1. The Subject, [these.] 2. The Act, [follow.] 3.
The Object, [the Lamb.] whithersoever he goes.
I shall gather this Observation from the words: That it is the sweet temper
and frame of Souls truly gracious, to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

In the handling of this Point I shall show you five things: 1. What it is to
follow the Lamb. 2. Why they follow the Lamb. 3. The Excellency of following
the Lamb. 4. The Misery of them that follow not the Lamb. 5. How the Lamb's
followers may be known from the Beast's followers.


1. To follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, is to follow him in four things:
1. In his Commandments: If you love me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. Ye
are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you, (...) 15.14. Blessed are
they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the ^^ee of life,
Rev. 22.4. Oh Beloved, we cannot follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, unless
we follow him in his commands; Then shall not be ashamed, (says David) when I
have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. Christians should take as
much delight (...) those Precepts that enjoin Holiness, as in th^^^ Promises
that assure Happiness. 2. In his Teachings: My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow (...) Joh. 10.27. A stranger they will not follow, but
will see from him, for they know not the voice of strangers, v. 5. 3. In his
Providence; through all afflictions, all straits, all discouragements and
sorrows whatsoever, though it be a way of blood. We must forsake all to follow a
cruci^^^ Christ, a condemned Christ, in bloody paths of sufferings, if he call
us to it: Yea th^^ I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me, Psalm.
23.4. For (faith Paul) I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. We must be willing to venture the
loss of all for him; Liberty, Estate, Relations, and Li^^ it self: We have
forsaken all, and followed thee, Mat. 16.27. 4. In his Example, For I have
given you an example, that you should do as I have done to you, Joh. 13.5.
That, Because Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should
follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.2^. ^2. So that to follow Christ's steps, is to take
(...) an example: we must walk in the (...) spirit, in the same steps, and in
the same obedience: we must not follow wicked men's examples, Who walk in the
broad way that leads to ^^^th and are of their father the Devil, and his (...)
they do, Joh. 8.11. But we must follow our head Christ, who went up and down
doing good, Acts 10.^3. Now this is to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.
In his Commands. In his Teachings. In his Providence. In his Example.


1. To follow the Lamb whithersoever be g^eth, is to follow him truly, without
Hypocrisy; and constantly, without Apostasy.

1. Truly, without Hypocrisy. Many follow the Lord, as Beggars follow a man,
only for an Alms: they price the wages of Religion, above the work of Religion:
You seek me not because of the miracles, but because you did eat of the loaves,
and were filled, Joh. 6.16. Oh Beloved, God abhors an Hypocrite more than a
Sodomite; And Hell is provided on purpose for Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. My
Beloved, following the Lamb fully, is to have the heart fixed and resolved for
God: My soul follows hard after thee, says David, Psa. 63.8. And, as the heart
pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. All the
faculties of his soul are working after God. My soul, and all that is withme
praise the Lord, says holy David.

2. Constantly, without Apostasy. A true Believer, after he begins to follow
the Lamb, he never leaves following him, but follows him whithersoever he
goes: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or samine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? For I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Power nor things present, nor things to come, (...) height, nor depth, nor any
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. O Beloved, he does not follow the Lamb whithersoever be goes,
that follows the Lamb earnestly for a while, but afterward forsakes him when a
storm rises: Yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of t^^ word, by and by he is
offended, Mat. 13.2^. Nor he that follows the Lamb in some things and the Beast
in other things: They fea^^^ the Lord, and served their own gods after the
manner of the nations. Nor he that follows the Lord in a dull heavy manner,
and a lukewarm temper: I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I
would thou we^^ cold or hot, chapter 3.15. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this,
and be horribly afraid; be ye very desolate, says the Lord; for my people have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and
hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water, Jer. 2.12, 13.
O this is no^ a following the Lamb: They that follow the Lord fully, abide in
the Lord, and cleave (...) the Lord, and continue constantly in God (...) ways,
unto the end of their days. The righteous holds on in his way, Job 17.9 Then
shall we know, if we follow on (...) know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. The righteous
m^^^ holds on his way, he follows the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

1. Speedily. 2. Truly. 3. Undividedly. 4. Zealously. 5. Humbly. 6. Cheerfully.
7. Diligently. 8. Constantly. 9. Faithfully. 10. Transcendently.
Now this is to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Now I shall show you
why Believers follow the Lamb.

1. Because they are redeemed by the blood of the Lamb, Forasmuch as ye know
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from
your vain conversation received by traditions from your fathers; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. He paid a price for our redemption, that so he might discharge the
debt of our sins. And they sang a new-song, saying, thou (...) worthy to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God, by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation, Rev. 5.9. There are three things called precious in the Scriptures: 1.
Faith is called precious, 2 Pet. 1.2. 2. The promises are called precious, v.
4. 3. The blood of Christ is called precious, 1 Pet. 1.19. O! his blood has
redeemed us from six Enemies. 1. From the World, Gal. 1.4. Rev. 21.4. 2. From
the Curse, Gal. 3.13. 3. From Sin, Romans 6.18, 22. 4. From the Devil, Heb. 2.18.
Acts 26.17, 18. 5. From the sting of Death, 1 Cor. 15.55,56. 6. From Hell, 1
These. 1.10. Rev. 2.12.

Oh his blood, his precious blood; his blood has slain our Enemies; he has
purchased by this blood Reconciliation with me Father, Union with the Son, and
Communion with the Holy Ghost: Ye that were sometimes afar off, are (...) nigh
by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13, 16.

2. They follow the Lamb because they (...) washed in the blood of the Lamb: He
has l^^^ts, and washed us from out sins in his blood, Rev^^^ These are they
which come out of the great trib^^^^on, and have washed their robes, and made
(...) white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. The (...) of Christ cleanses
us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Ch^^^^ blood washes away our bloody sins; I
s^^^^^ to thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live, Ezekiel. (...) For as soon as
we were united with Christ, (...) sins are upon him, and his righteousness
(...) us. It is Christ that gives us life, and puts ^^cellent ornaments upon us
to cover our na^^^ness, and decketh us with Jewels and Gem^^ Gold: so we become
beautiful in his sight, (...) 16.10. That he might present it to himself a
glor^^ Church, not having spot nor wrinkle, nor any (...) thing; but that it
should be holy, and without blem^^ Ephesians. 5.21.

3. Believers follow the Lamb, because the^ are risen with the Lamb. If ye then
be rise^ with Christ, seek those things which are abo^^ where Christ sits on
the right hand of God Col. 3.1. Therefore we are buried with h^^ by baptism
into death; that like as Christ (...) raised up from the dead by the glory of
(...) Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 9.4. Every
man besides Believer is a dead man, Dead in trespasses and (...) Ephesians. 2.1.
Therefore are they exhorted to (...) from the dead, Ephesians. 5.4. They must rise
fr^^ evil to good; from earthly-mindestness heavenly-mind^^^^s; but now
Believers since are risen from darkness to light: For ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light, Ephesians.
5.8. Rise, shine, for thy light is ^ome, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, (...) 60. When the Lord shines forth upon his people in glorious
discoveries of himself, he calls them away from their former condition. When
the Lord discovered himself in a Go^ (...) dispensation, his people were no
longer (...) under dark clouds of legal Ceremonies (...) follow the Lamb
whithersoever he go^^^

4. They follow the Lamb, because they ar^ enlightened by the Lamb: God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has mined in our hearts, to give
us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4.6. But we all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and d^ count them but dung that I may
(...) Christ, Phil. 3.8. Divine and Heavenly knowledge brings a man near to
God, it gives a man the clearest and the fullest sight of God; and the nearer
any man comes to God, the clearer vision he has of God, and the more communion
with God. The reason why others do not follow the Lamb, is, because they see
not the worth and want of the Lamb: Having the understanding darkness, being
alienated from the life of God, through the igneronce that is in them, because
of the blindness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.1^. Where there is a Vail cast before
the eyes of Knowledge, there is a bar set before the hands of Practice. An
ignorant person neither knows what he is doing, nor does he know whither he is
going: He does nothing but undo himself by doing, carnal men see no
preciousness and loveliness in Christ: Oh! what is thy beloved more them
another beloved, Cant. 5.9. If th^^ (...) the gift of God, and who it is that
as kith, (...) ^^^ldest have asked of him, and he would have, given the^ living
water, Joh. 4.10. Christ goes, undesired in the World, because he goes
undisc^^ned by the World; But the natural man re^^^^th not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they ^^^i f^^^s^ness unto him; neither can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned, 2 Cor. 2.14. But now Believers being
enlightened by the Spirit of God, and by the Word of God, they see themselves
what they were before Faith, and what they are by Faith, and what they shall be
at the end of Faith, they see Christ to be all precious, precious in his
Ordinances, precious in his Discoveries, precious in his Graces, precious in
his Gifts; precious in his promises, precious in his Members, precious in his
Ministers, and precious in himself, 1 Pet. 2.8. Therefore Believers cannot but
love him, and follow him.

5. They follow the Lamb, because they love the Lamb: Grace be with all them
that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.25. They love him with a
superlative love. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth
^^at I desire ^^sides thee, Psalm. 73.25. The Spouse of Christ looks upon what
she is, as not great enough for his remembrance; and what she does, as not good
enough for his acceptance: Look (...) upon me because I am block, because the
Sum has ^^^od upon me: My mothers children were angry with (...): they made me
the keeper of the vineyard, but (...) own vineyard I have not kept, Cant. 1.6.
The Church is never more fair, than when she judges her self to be most
deformed; never more happy, than when she accounts, her self most miserable;
never more holy, tha^ when she ^^kens her self most polluted; she is never
richer, than when she sees her self to be poorest of all. The soul that loves
much, is a soul that works much, the Commands of the Gospel are not grievous to
him, but precious to him, Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) wh^^ the^
fudest, Cant. 1.7. A soul that loves Christ, has his eyes upon Christ, and his
desire is after Christ. The desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with
my spirit will I seek t^be t^rly, Isa. 26.9. True believers love Christ more
than they love themselves, They loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.
12.11. Christ is d^arer to them than their lives, they slighted, contemned,
yea, despised their very lives, when they stood in competition with Christ and
his Glory, and chose rather to suffer the greatest misery, than he should lose
the least dram of his honor. The love of Christ has made his Saints and
Witnesses yield all the parts and members of their bodies to the cruel and
merciless instruments of bloody persecutors; their backs to be whipped, their
eyes to be boared, and their tongues to be out out of their mouths, Heb. 11.38.
Oh how strongly did these love! The measure of loving Christ, is to love him
without measure. Who shall separate us from the love Christ? Tribulation shall
not, Persecution (...) not, Famine and Nakedness shall not, Peril (...) Sword
shall not: For I am persuaded, that another Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principe^^ties, nor Power, nor things present, nor things (...) height, nor
depth nor any other cre^^^ shall be able to separate us from the love of (...)
is in Christ Jesus our Lord, To. 8.35, 38, 39.

6. They follow the Lamb, because the are married to the Lamb, Jer. 4.14. 1
(...) married (...) you, Rev. 21.9. I will show t^^ the Bride, the Lawbs Wife.
Cant. 2.19. (...) is mine, and I am his. Here I will ^^ew you two things: 1.
How Christ come to be ours. 2. How we come to be Christ (...) i^ Christ is ours
by the free donation and gift of the Father: God so loved the World that be
gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. (...) Christ freely gave himself unto
us, (...) that Christ is ours by his own consent; he has as it were passed
over himself unto us: Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, says the
Apostle, Gal. 2.20. 3. Christ has passed himself over unto his Church by
marriage, and therefore she is called his Quod, his Spouse, his Bride, and his
Wife, Psalm. 25. 9. Although we had nothing to bring to him but poverty, shame,
sorrow and misery, yet he took us, and loved us, and married us. 4. Christ is
ours by communicating his own spirit to us. 2. The saints are Christ's four
ways. 1. By the donation of the Father: God has made him both Lord and Christ.
Act. 2.36. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head
ever all things in the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. And no^ (says Christ) behold I, and
the children whom thou gave me; thine they were, and thou gave^^ them me,
Joh. 17.6. God the Father gave us to God the Son, that he might redeem us; and
God the Son gave us to God the Father, that he might sanctify us, and ke^^ us
from the evil of the world, iv. 19. 2. We are Christ's by choice; I have chosen
you out of the world. And the Saints are said to be chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
And they are called, A chosen goveration, 1 Pet. 2.9. And chosen and faithful,
Rev. 17.14. 3. The Saints are Christ's by purchase; we were in our enemies
hand, and under their power, and could not free our selves from the bondage of
the Law, Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell; therefore says the Apostle, we are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.26. For in respect of God's Justice, we are
bought by Christ. 4. We are Christ's by combination and covenant: I entered into
covenant with thee, and thou beca^est mine, Ezekiel. 16.18. That is, I did make a
solemn Covenant or Stipulation with thee, I would take thee to be my people. So
that it is no wonder Believers follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; they are
married to him, he is their Head and Husband.


7. They follow the Lamb, because they have the Spirit of the Lamb: We have
(...) the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we may know
the things that are (...) God; and we have the mind of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
2.11, 12, 16. And we know that (...) abides in us, by the spirit which he has
^^ven us. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The
Spirit th^^ the Lord Jesus gives to Believers, is a fealing Spirit, a lively
Spirit, and an enlightening Spirit, and a leading Spirit; it leads us from all
evil to all good. And all the Lambs followers are in the Spirit of the Lamb:
and therefore they pray in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, and by the Spirit,
and for more of the Spirit: Now all tru^^ Believers have the Spirit of the
Lamb, therefore they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

8. Believers follow the Lamb, because all their Privileges come from the
Lamb: they are all Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. Rev. 5.10. And Sons and Heirs,
1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us. Romans
8.17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs with God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ.
Though Believers have not a Crown in life, yet they are Heirs to a Crown of Life,
God puts the greatest honor upon his own people, Prove. 12.16. All the honor
that other men have, is not worth the having: that which makes a man great in
the eye of the world, makes a man nothing in the eye of God, men are never the
better for their greatness, if they are not made better by their greatness: But
now Believers greatness and honor comes by Christ, the faithful and true
witness, the first begotten of the Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth: He has made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign in
the earth, Rev. 5.10. All the light, and life, and hope, and joy, and peace,
and beauty, and honor, and riches, Believers have, they have it all by Christ,
and from Christ: He given them rich grace, and rich glory, and all thing.
richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Take a man that is out of Christ, and he has
none of all this: Ephesians. 2.12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, (yea) he is wretched,
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. O this is the condition
of every graceless, faithless, and Christless person: But now a Believer, though
he be never so poor in the Worlds eye, he is rich in Gods eye; for all things
are his, and he shall inherit all things, 1 Cor. 3.22. Rev. 21.7. He that
overcomes, shall inherit all things. But how comes it to pass, that the
Believer has so much, and all others so little: He has is all from Christ: Of
his fullness have we all received grace for grace. Therefore Believers do glory
in Christ, because they have all the^^ glory by and from Christ, 1 Cor. 2.1. He
has enough to glory in, that has a Christ to glory in; Now Believers cannot
but cleave to him, and follow him, because all their good things come by him.

9. They follow the Lamb, because their Names are written in the Lamb's Book,
Rev. 13.3. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; and
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abo^^^^^tion, or makes a lie: but they which an^ written in
the Lambs book of life, (Rev. 21.7.) All the rest, all the Worshippers of the
Beast, and all Unbelievers shall be cast into that La^^ of fire which burns and
flames for ever, Rev. 19. There be a great many that fellow the Beast, worship
the Beast, receive the mark of the Beast, and admire the Beast, chapter 13.3, 4.
But what are they? Are they any that have their names written in the Lambs Book
of Life (...) No, no: For this see Rev. 17.8. The Beast that thou saw, was,
and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit, and shall go into
Perdition, and obey that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not
written in the book of life. So that you see what that cursed crew are that
follow Babylon, viz. the wicked and profane World; they are such whose names
are not written in the Book of Life. But they that have their Father's Name
written in their forehead, and their Names written in the Lambs Book, they
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; And they that are with him, are called
and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14.

10. And lastly, Precious ones follow the Lamb, because they shall be for ever
with the Lamb: Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall ^e be ever
with the Lamb: Wherefore comfort ^^e another with these words, 1 These. 4.17,
18. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in
his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them. They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on
them nor heat; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. How troublesome soever a
Saints beginning is, his ending is joyful. When Believers change Earth for
Heaven, they do not lose their happiness, but complete their happiness, Joh.
12.17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou gave me be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world.

Not only with me for ever, but with my Saints with my Angels, and with my
Father, and with all that are with me. To be with God and Christ for ever,
implies these seven things: 1. The presence of God. 2. The happy union with
God. 3. The blessed vision of God. 4. The glorious communion with God. 5. The
fruition of God. 6. The rest that the Saints shall have (...) God. 7. The
enjoyments of themselves (...) God.
Oh how unspeakable is the glory (...) Heaven; Oh how infinitely glorious is
the Lamb: Now true Believers follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, because
they shall be for ever with the Lamb in fullness of glory, and endless felicity,
To. 8.17. Thus have I showed you why Believers follow the Lamb. Now I shall
show you the Excellencies of following the Lamb. The first Excellency is, they
that follow the Lamb, have the presence of the Lamb with them. The hundred
forty and four thousand that stood upon Mount Sion had the Lamb with them;
Psa^. 46.5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help
her, and that right early. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our refuge, ver. 8. God is in the midst of his Church, not only to behold her,
but to uphold her. Though the Churches Enemies may be waves to toss her, yet they
shall never be Rocks to split her, because God is in the midst of her. This is
that which comforted and strengthened David: Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art nigh me, Psalm.
2^.4. When thou possess through the wa^^^^. I will be with th^^^: and th^row
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk th^row the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.2.
Oh they that follow the Lamb, shall stand before the Lamb, have the presence of
the Lamb, his glorious presence, his precious presence, his comforting
presence, his protecting presence, his quickening and sanctifying presence. The
Second Excellency is, that they that follow the Lamb shall ^how the mind of the
Lamb: It is given unto you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
(...) to them it is not given: And blessed are your eyes, for they see, and
your ears, for they hear, Mat. 13.11, 16. Henceforth I call you not Servants,
for the Servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends,
for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you, Joh.
17.6, 7, 8. Jesus Christ that lies in the bosom of his Father, he unbosoms, and
unbowels the heart of the Father to Believers; they know his Secrets, his Mind,
his Counsel, and his Will, and none knows it but them; I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, Mat. 11.25. But they that
walk with God, know much of the mind of God, and the Mysteries of the Gospel.
The third Excellency of following the Lamb is, They that follow the Lamb may
come boldly to the Lamb's Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb.
6.14. A Soul that has an interest in Christ, may come boldly to Christ, and
speak boldly to him, and to his Father, for any mercy he needs; he may go to
the Throne of Grace, for Grace, and open his heart to God, as one friend to
another. Oh what* liberty has Believers; Oh what a priviled^e have they, that
they may go to God with a holy boldness. The wicked proud ones of the Earth are
so high, that the poor Saints cannot come boldly and freely to them; but they
may come boldly and freely to the Lord their God: Man. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that labor and are hea^^ laden, and I will give you rest.

The fourth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall have all their wants
supplied by the Lamb: Phil. 4.19. But my God shall su^^^ all your need,
according to his riches in glory, by Jesus Christ. They that follow the Lamb
shall want no good thing: Oh fear the Lord all ye his Saines, for there is no
want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.9, 10. The Lord is
my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23.7. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desire of thy heart; thou shall have whatsoever thou
desire to have. He that has the chiefest good shall want no good. Whosoever
shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; and he that
comes to me shall never hunger, Joh. 6.35. Oh who would not follow and believe
in the Lamb; Oh happy are all they that love the Lamb.

The fifth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall share with the Lamb.

1. In his Divine Nature. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.
That is, of those Divine qualities, whereby we are made like unto God in wisdom
and righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4 24.

2. In his Conquests. The poor Saints share with Christ in all his noble and
honorable Conquests (1 Cor. 15.55.) over the World, Death, and Hell, and over
Sufferings: In all these things we are more than conquerers, through him that
loved as, Romans 8.37.

3. They share with Christ in his Graces Of his fullness have we all received
grace for grace John 1.16. As a child receives member for member; as the Paper
from the Press receives letter for letter; as the Wax from the Seal receives
print for print; or as the Glass from the Image receives face for face; so do
Believers receive from Christ grace for grace, that is, for every grace that is
in the Lamb, there is the same grace in us in some measure.

4. Believers share with Christ in his glorious Titles. He is called a Son, so
are they; a King, so are they; a Priest, so are they; an Heir, so are they,
R^m. 8.17. Rev. 5.10. Rev. 1.5, 6.

5. They share with Christ in his Glory. I go to prepare a place for you* I
will come again a receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be
also, Joh. 14.23. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that
they may be one as we are one, Joh. 17.22. My sheep hear my voice, and they
follow me, and I gave unto them eternal life, Joh. 10.28. The Saints have the
same glory which Christ himself has; the Saints in Heaven are not only
glorified with Christ (which is a great exaltation) but they do enjoy the very
same glory which Christ himself does; the same for kind, though not for degree.
The Head and Members are glorified together with the same kind of glory: God
has not one Heaven for his Son and another for his Saints, but one and the
same for both. Believers shall be as truly glorious as Christ is, and eternally
glorious as he is. Our vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, and we shall be glorified together with him, and appear with him in
glory, Romans 8. Col. 3. Oh here is the excellency of following the Lamb; they
that follow him, share with him.

The sixth Excellency of following the Lamb is, They that follow the Lamb,
shall be protected by the Lamb: He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, Ps. 105.14, 15. which are his Saints. Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? And if ye suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither
be troubled, 1 Pet. 3.13. Fear them not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed,
for I am thy God: yea, I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee, yea, I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, Isa. 41.10. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee, Isa. 40.15. Who
can harm a man, if God be with him and for him? He that has the love of God,
needs not care for the anger of men* A true Believer has the love of God, the
love of Christ, the love of good Angels, the love of good men, and the love of
all whose love is worth the having. God protects men in his way, but not out of
his way; when men appear for God, God appears for men; he is good to them in
affliction, and he does them good by affliction.

The seventh Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb, shall not feel the wrath
of the Lamb: Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second
death, 1 These. 1.10. And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from
the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. O how sad is the condition of
those who live and die without Christ, they are sent to Hell, Psalm. 9.17. The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forsake God: who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 2.9. They shall feel and suffer the
wrath of the Lamb, because they despised the truth of the Lamb. Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will
laugh at yo^ calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes
as desolation, your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish comes upon you: then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27,
28. Do you hear this, sinners? If God will show you no mercy, if ye live in
your sins, and die in your sins, before Hell will show you no mercy; new the
Believer shall feel and suffer none of this, he is in a happy state and
condition.

The eighth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall reign with the Lamb:
and this is another Excellency of following the Lamb. True Believers do reign
now over the Creatures, over the pomp and pride of the World* and over sin and
sufferings* but besides all this, they shall reign with Christ, and over those
that have persecuted them: Rev. 5.10. And we shall reign on the earth: chapter
20.4. And they lived and reign a with Christ a thousand years. And as the
wicked tread down the Saints under their feet now, so shall the Saints then
tread down the wicked under their feet, Mal. 4.3. The Lord has promised that
the meek shall inherit the Earth Does not the Scripture say, that in the l^st
^ovs the mountain of the L^ra's house shall be lif^^d up above the (...), and
shall be established in the (...) of the mountains, Isa 2 2 And that the
kingdoms of the wo^ld must become the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus, Rev. 11 15.
And he that loves to see the face of his Church beautiful, will e're long wipe
away those tears: it is not long before you will triumph and say, (Cant. 2 11,
12.) Lo; the ^i^ter is past, the rain is over and gone, the s^ow^s appear on
the earth, the time of the Sing^ng of birds is come.

The ninth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb, shall sit upon the Throne
with the Lamb, Rev. 3.20, 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel, Mat 19.28. Oh what an honor is this! what a glory is this! to sit upon
the Throne with Christ! Is it not honor and glory enough for us to be in
Heaven with God, and Christ, and Angels, but we must sit upon a Throne there?
Oh what an honor is this! and yet this honor shall all the Lamb's followers
have.

The tenth Excellency of following the Lamb is. They that follow the Lamb,
shall judge the World with the Lamb. If you consult sacred Records, you shall
find that both God and Christ, and the Saints are said to judge the World: The
Ordination is God's, the Execution is Christ's, the Approbation is the Saints.
When the Apostle would stop the sinful suits among the Corinthian Brethren,
that did not want men of Eminency to put a period unto Controversies, says, Do
ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? And if the world shall be
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matter? 1 Cor. 6.2. Enoch
the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, Jude 14, 15. When the Son
of man shall sit ^in the throne of glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Mat. 19 28. Now the wicked may
judge the Saints, but then the Saints shall judge the Wicked: now they may
judge and condemn Christ in his Members, but then they shall be judged and
condemned by Christ and his Members: For as the Wicked cannot endure God
himself, so neither can they endure God in the Saints; and the more God dwells
in the Saints, the more the wicked World afflicts the Saints: but they that
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, shall then sit upon those that now sit
upon them. Thus have I showed you the Excellency of following the Lamb.

4. The Misery of those that follow not the Lamb, but the Beast: O their Misery
is great in this life, but it will be greater in the other!

The first Misery of them that follow the Beast is, They that follow him shall
share with him in all his Plagues: And the third Angel followed them, saying
with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the
wr^th of God which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the Lamb, Rev. 14 9, 10. O the plagues, the terrible plagues that shall fall
upon the Beast! Death, and Mourning, and Famine, and Fire, chap. 18.8. The
judgments shall come upon all parties, and upon all degrees and conditions of
men that join with the Beast: All those that do partake of his sins, shall
share of his plagues. So that all that worship the Beast, and receive his mark,
and belong to him, ( viz. those that live profane lives) whether they be high
or low, rich or poor, if they do not come off from him, they shall share with
him in all his plagues: Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4.

The second Misery of them that follow the Beast is, They shall cry to the
Rocks and to the Mountains of the Earth: And the great men, and rich men, and
the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman,
hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains, and said to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of wrath is
come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. The wicked, though here
clothed in Silk and Velvet, shall wish for the Mountains to cover them, which
would be but a poor shelter: For the mountains melt at the presence of the
Lord, and the rocks rend asunder when be is angry. They that made others fly
away from them, as innocent Lambs from devouring Wolves, shall be afraid of the
wrath of the Lamb that sits on the Throne. Oh how will any of those dare to
appear before his Tribunal, that have stained the Sword of Authority with the
blood of Innocence, by turning its back against the Vicious, and whetting its
edge against the Righteous: Every unjust Judge, that has sit confidently upon
the Bench, shall then stand trembling at the Bar: Oh how will they be able to
lift up their heads before Christ, who have lifted up their heads against
Christ? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together
against the Lord, and against (...) Christ, Acts 24.26. Rev. 17.14 Instead of
helping the Lord against the mighty, they help the mighty against the Lord,
Psalm. 2.2. Oh (...) many great men have there been that (...) made no other use
of their greatness, but (...) be great in wickedness! Great Swearers, gr^^^
Drunkards, great Sabbath Breakers, great ^^secutors, great Adulterers, great
Atheists; who instead of denying or forsaking the De^^^ and all his works, have
followed the Devil (...) all his works; who have sinned with conte^^ and have
been contented with their sins: The Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves, Is^. 1.23. But the great God, against whom they sin, is greater than
the greatest; Before whe^^ all the nations of the world are but as a drop of a
bucket, and as the small dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15. Who will not fear
thee, O King of Nations, forasmuch as there is now like unto thee, O Lord? Thou
art great, and thy Name is great, and thy power is great, Jer. 10.6. He
touches the Mountains, and they smoke, before whom the Devils fear and
tremble. Therefore, woe, woe, be to them that forsake him, and follow the
Beast; they shall cry and call for help, but there will be none to help them.

The third Misery of those that follow the Beast is, They shall be cast into a
lake of fire with the Beast: And the Beast was taken, and with him the false
Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his image, these both
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev. 19.20. The
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presene of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1 7, 8, 9. Oh
what a dreadful thing is it, to lie under the wrath of God, to lie in burning
flames, and for ever to be banished from the presence of God, and his holy
Angels! This will be the portion of the ^east's followers. O will they not wish
then they had never been born? and that they might be turned into stocks and
stones? but alas, all their wishes will do them no good? Christ will say to
them then, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43. O ye Rulers and Great Ones of the Earth, it
will be no dishonor to your Honors, to lay your Honors at his feet, in whose
presence the Angels vail their faces; and before whose Throne the Elders cast
their Crowns, Isa. 6. Rev. 4.10. O is it not better then with patience to
suffer with Si^^ a while, rather than join with the wicked, and be ruined with
them in the end? Rev. 14.10. Here is the patience of Saints. Ye shall suffer a
while, and be trodden down by them: and you must stay for the full
accomplishment of this promise for your deliverance: But I will surely come,
and will recompeno^ all your patience: And therefore be not discouraged and
faint in your minds, let not your hearts turn back again unto Agypt.

5. I shall show you now how the Lamb's followers may be known from the Beasts
followers.

1. You may know them by their number; they are in number the fewest, Many are,
called, but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. Though all Isracl be as the sand of the
sea, yet but a remnant shall be s^ved, Romans 9.27. And Christ calls his flock, a
little flock, Luke 12.32. And truly Beloved, they are but few that follow the
Lamb, and believe in him. Believers, though their natures are the sweetest, yet
their number is the smallest: (...) Heaven are the best, but in Hell are the
mo^^ O dear Christians, there are but few upright Christians; there are many
Thorns, but few Lillies. Many almost, but few altogether Christians.

2. By their Characters you may know them. You have nine lovely Characters of
them in this fourteenth Chapter.

1. They stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion. 2. They have their Father's Name
written in their foreheads. 3. They sing a new Song, which none can learn, but
only the hundred and forty and four thousand. 4. They are such as are redeemed
from the Earth. 5. They are Virgin-Saints, not defiled with women. 6. They
follow the Lamb whithersoever ^^goeth. 7. They are redeemed from amongst men.
8. They bring their first fruits unto God, (...) to the Lamb. 9. And in their
mouths w^^ found no guile; for they are without faul^ before the throne of God.
O how holy, how heavenly, how gracious, how lovely and spiritual are these;
they live in the Lord, on the Lord, to the Lord, and with the Lord; They are
(...) chosen generation, a royal priesthood, in holy nation, a peculiar people,
1 Pet. 2 9.
3. By their Spirit; they have another spirit, Numb. 14.24. All the Lamb's
followers are in the spirit of the Lamb, Romans 8 9.16. And by that spirit they
are led and taught; a spirit of holiness; a spirit of meekness, a spirit of
love, a free spirit, and a true-humble and faithful spirit too, and for the
Lord. Now as the Lamb's followers are in the spirit of the Lamb, so the Beast's
followers are in the spirit of the Beast, which is (...) other than the spirit
of the Devil, Ephesians. 2.2. ^^^^^ding to the Prince of the power of the air (the
(...) that now works in the children of disobedi^^^e? (...) a spirit of
lording and domineering, a spirit of cunning and craftiness, a spirit of
deceit, a spirit of superstition, a spirit of persecution and cruelty; and in
this spirit are all the Followers of the Beast. Now by this you may know the
Lamb's followers from the Beast's followers.

4. By their Name; they have another name, (...) n^^ne, ^ev. 3.12. God gives
his people honorable titles, though the Beast gives them ^^proachful titles;
God calls them, The dearly (...) of his soul, Jer. 12.7. And, The apple of his
(...), Zech. 2.8. And his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. His glory, his portion, his bride,
his friends and children! but the Beast calls them seditious deceivers and
deluders, blasphemers, and fools, and (...) men, as if they were not worthy to
have (...) being amongst men: but though they are Ravens (...) the World's eye,
yet they are Doves in God's eye; yea, they are such Worthies, Of whom this
^orld (...) not worthy, Heb. 11.38. Now dear Christians, by this you may know
the Lamb's followers from others, by the nicknames the World gives them, and
by the glorious (...) that God gives them.

5. By their Graces they may be known. Such as are the Lamb's followers, are
full of faith, (...) of love, full of grace and goodness, they are ^^ry
fruitful, and bring forth much fruit, Joh. ^5. They are called heavenly,
because of their ^^venliness, Romans 8.1. And holy, because of th^^^ holiness:
Spiritual, because of their spiri^^^ness; and faithful, because of their
faithfulness There is much of God to be seen in them, (...) their words, works,
duties and conversatio^^ Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven. Th^^
seek heavenly things, and walk by a heavenly Rule; they eye heavenly objects,
and are (...) by a heavenly Spirit; they submit to a heavenly government, and
imitate heavenly ones there is much of heaven in them, and much (...) them in
heaven: When I awake, I am still wi^^ thee, says David. But now the Beast's
followers they are full too, but it is with blood a^^ swearing, cursing,
stealing, lying, blasphemi^^ rebellion, and all manner of abominations (...)
filthiness, Hos 4.2. Rom 3. Rev. 13. Now Belov^^ by this you may know Christ's
precious o^^ from the Beast's filthy ones.

6. The Lamb's followers may be known from the Beast's followers, by their
keeping (...) Commandments of God, and the Faith of (...) Rev. ^4.1^. Here is
the patience of the Saints; (...) are they that keep the Commandments of God,
(...) the Faith of Jesus. So Rev. 12.17. The (...) was wrath with the Woman,
and made war ^aith (...) remnant of her seed, which ^eep the commandments God,
having the testimony of Jesus Christ. True Believers cleave to the Lord, and
follow him fully: But my servant Caleb has followed me fully, Numb. 4.45. And
Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.25. And Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. Let us
also walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. And they follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, they hear his voice, they profess his worship, and obey his Doctrine,
they abhor Antichrist, they follow not the Beast, nor receive his mark, but
keep their beautiful Garments of Gospel-innocency, and will not touch beastly
Babylon, viz. will not associate themselves with the wicked.

7. By their company; the Lamb's followers keep company together; Being let go,
they went (...) their own company, Act. 4.23. So they are said to stand upon a
Sea of Glass together: And I (...) as it were a sea of glass, mingled with
fire, and them that had gotten victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of Glass,
having the harps of God, Rev. 15.2. So they that are with the Lamb upon Mount
Sion, are together, and keep together, and follow the Lamb together. Christ's
faithful Witnesses do not hear with Antichrist's hearers, nor worship with them
which worship the Beast; for they are come out of Babylon, chapter 18.4. Come out
of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues: Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, says the Lord, 2 Cor.
6.17. The children of God will not keep company with the children of Wrath, for
they cannot agree: For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel? And what agreement
has the temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Therefore Believers
keep together, walk together, and worship God together And they that believed
were of one heart, and one soul, and continued in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, Act. 4.32. Act. 2 42. By this the Lamb's followers are known by, to
wit, their company.

8. By their language they are known, tru^^ Believers spoke the language of
Canaan, their language is Scripture Language; you may know them by their
speech, as Peter was known by his speech: Surely thou art one of them, for the
speech bewrays thee, Mat 26.73. Their words are holy and heavenly, they speak
of God, and to God and for God; and he heaveth them, Mal 3.16. But the Beast's
followers spoke wickedly. proudly, ^^a^ingly, and blasphemously, ch 13.4. And
he opened his mou^^, blaspheming God, his Son, his Name, his (...), and they
that (...) in heaven, v 6. Men are known who and what they are, and to whom
they do belong, by their language; if they are of God, and in God, they cannot
but speak much of God.

9. The Lamb's followers are known by this, they are more afflicted with the
Churches heaviness, than they are affected with their own happiness. The King
said, Why is thy countenance sad? This is nothing else but forrow of heart,
seeing thou art not sick. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City,
the place of my Fathers, lies waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with
fire? Neh. 2.3. How can Sions Sons be rejoicing, when their Mother is mourning?
though they were the Jews desolation, yet they were Jevemiab's lamentation. How
can such rejoice in her standing, that do not mourn for her falling? When the
Churches Adversaries make long furrows upon her back, we should cast in the
seed of tears. Remember them that are in bonds, as being bound with them; and
them which suffer adversity, as being your s^^ves also in a body, Heb. 13.3.
Sympathizing with others, makes an Estate that is joyful more happy, and an
Estate that is doleful less heavy. The righteous perish, and no man lays it
to heart, Isa. 5.7. We may draw up that charge against many now, Amos 6.46.
They lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon Couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall: that
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments; but they
are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Oh that there were not too many
such nowadays, that eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and are not troubled
for Sions troubles: instead of sympathizing with them in their misery, they are
censuring of them for their misery; but the true servants of God are tender and
brokenhearted, they weep and mourn, and wring their hands for Sions sins, for
Sions breaches, for Sions calamities, and wait for Sions deliverance; and thus
they do, and will do, till they see Sion on Mount Sion with the Lamb to be. 10.
The Lamb's followers are known by their love to Christ, and sufferings for
Christ, they choose the worst of sorrows, before they will commit the least of
sins: For thy sake we are killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the
slaughter, Psalm. 44. Romans 8.36. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names
sake, Mat. 10.22. Blessed are ye wh^^ men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you fal^^y for my sake, Mat. 5.10.
Love can walk on the water without drowning, and lie in the (...) without
burning. How shall we land at the Haven of Rest, if we are not tossed upon the
S^^ of Trouble? A Believer should live above the love of life, and the fear of
death. Though (...) cannot live without afflictions, yet let us liv^ above
afflictions. None are so welcome to th^^ spiritual Canaan, as those that swim
to it th^^ the Red Sea of their own blood. In suffering the offense is done to
us; in sinning the off^^^^ is done to God. In suffering we lose the favor of
men, in sinning we lose the favor of God: therefore Damiel chose the Den of
the Lion, rather than he would forsake the Cause of the Lamb, Dan. 6. And the
three Children chos^ rather to suffer sadly, than to sin foully, Dan. 3. And
Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasure of sin for a season, Heb. 11 29. It is better to be (...) Martyr
than a Monarch, it is better to be a Prisoner for Jesus Christ, than to be a
Prince with out Christ, or against Christ. O how precious, how glorious, how
lovely, and how sweet is Jesus Christ to believers! O they love him entirely,
uprightly, they love his glorious Person and the beauty of his Holiness, and
his Name, his Honor, his Cause, and his Members; they will suffer for him, and
die for him, because he suffered and died for them, Rev. 12.11. And they loved
not their lives unto the death. Now by this all men may know the Lambs
followers from the Beasts followers, viz. by their sorrows and sufferings for
Christ, for Truth, for Righteousness, and for Conscience sake, Heb. 10.34. And
they took joyfully the spelling of their goods, Heb. 11.35.

11. The Lamb's followers are known by this, They seek the public good of
others, above the private good of themselves: I have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in my heart: for I could wish that my self were accursed from
Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.2, 3. And
now, O Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee, Joh. 17.7. He
prayed for glory more for the Father's sake, that bestowed it, than for his own
sake that received it. A true Christian does not desire grace only for this
end, that God may glorify him, but he desires grace for this end, that he may
glorify God. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Oh that the Lord Jesus should not only in pity save us, but
in love die for us! And David after he ha^ se^ved his own Generation by the
will of God, fell asleep, Act. 33.26. His Generation did not serve him, but he
served his Generation, not the Generation that was before him, for they were
dead before he was living; nor the Generation that was behind him, for they
were living after he was dead; but his own Generation; and not by his own will,
but by the will of God. Old Ely mourned more for the loss of his Religion than
for the loss of his Relations, 1 Samuel 4.18. So Moses, Exodus 32.10. No^
therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax (...) against them, and that I
may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. He was no
self-seeker, but a life-preserver. Grace does not only make a man carry it like
a Man to God, but to carry it like a God to man: Reason makes a man a man, but
Grace makes a man a Christian. Every gracious spirit is public, though every
public spirit is not gracious. As we are not born by our selves, so we are not
born for our selves. But the Beasts followers and Babylons Merchants are for
themselves, and seek themselves: Yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never
have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all lock to
their own way, every one to his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. And teaching
things they ought not, for si^^^y lu^^c s^ke, Tit. 1.11. Woe to you Scribes and
Pharisees, for ye dev^ur widows houses, and for a pretense make ^^ng prayers;
therefore ye shall ^e^e^^e the grea^er damnation. Mat. 23. Th^se make not gain
to stoop to godliness, but godliness to stoop to gain. 12. And lastly, The
lambs followers may be known from the Beasts followers by this, they are more
for power th^n form, for heart than art, for matter than method, for substance
than show: Ha^ing a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such
turn aside. 2 Timothy 3.5. As they who have the power of godliness, cannot deny
the form, so they who have the form of godliness, should not deny the power.
Alas, what is hearing without doing, and praying without ^^act^sing, and
preaching without reformis^ (...) ^^od loves to see the Plants of Righteousness
loaded with the Fruits of Righteousness: He be^r^th greater respect to our
hearts, than he does to our works. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your l^dies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1. The Formalist he is all for outward actions,
and for nothing of inward sincerity: he is for a body without a soul, and a
show without a substance: but it is not a show of outward piety that will
excuse inward hypocrisy. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is
that Circumcision which is outwardly in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are of, the
Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2.9. They are better in their outsides than they are
in their insides, but Believers are better in their insides than they are in
their outsides: The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought gold, Psalm. 45.13. The one bows but his knee at the Name of Jesus, the
other bows his heart to the Truth of Jesus; the one only signs with the Cross,
the other carries the Cross. Oh what would not hypocritical men do for Heaven,
if they might have He^ven for their so doing? but they that fail i^ this rotten
bottom, will surely sink in the Oce^n (...) has acquired this at your hands,
to tread my (...)? To what purpose is your sacrifices unto me says the Lord? I
am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I
delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He goats. It was not
in the Clay and Spittle that cured the blind man, but Christ anointing his
eyes. It was not the troubling of the waters in the Pool of Bethesda, that made
them whole, but the coming down of the Angel. Alas, the dish without the meat
will not feed us. Man may spread the Net of Duty, but it is God must take the
draught of Mercy. Now by this, Beloved, you may know the Lamb's followers from
the Beast's followers. And thus I have briefly and clearly showed you these
five things: 1. What following the Lamb is. 2. Why gracious Souls follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goes. 3. The Excellency of following the Lamb. 4. The
Misery of following the Beast. 5. How the Lamb's followers may be known from
the Beast's followers.
I shall make some use of this:

1. For Examination and Self trial: Oh Friends for the Lord's sake, and for
your souls sake examine your selves, and try your selves by this, that you may
know whose you a^^ and to whom you do belong: Know ye not, that to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom they obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Romans 6.16. Oh
who do ye follow? If men, verily you have your reward; if sin, you will have
sins wages, which is eternal death; woe and misery in this life, and hell and
destruction in the other life: but if God, then you shall have eternal life.
Therefore be not deceived, mistake not your selves, God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man sows that he shall ^eap. Oh Beloved, examine yourselves, and
try yourselves: what is it you mind? what is it you seek? what is it you do? do
you follow the Lamb in his Commands, in his Teachings, in his Appointments, and
in his Examples, and through Sufferings and Reproaches? have you forsaken all and
followed him? Mat. 19.29. Have you taken up his Cross and denied your selves?
Mat. 16.24. Have you learned of him to be meek and lowly? Mat. 11.29. have you
visited and clothed his Members? Mat. 25.35. Have you kissed the Son, and made
your peace with him? O Beloved, are you new Creatures? are you in Christ? are
you in Faith? Know ye not, if Christ be not in you, ye are reprobates? 2 Cor.
13.5.

The second Use is of Exhortation. O Beloved, let me beseech you for your
precious and immortal souls sake, to come out of Babylon, from the company of
wicked men, from the Beast's Image, and from his Worship, and from his Mark,
that you may not be defiled: O come away to Jesus Christ, Arise, my love, and
come away, Cant. 2.10. Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. O sinners, he calls you to come to him,
will you not go? We must forsake sin, in embrace virtue; put off the Old man,
and put on the New-man; we must have repentance and mortification, a dying unto
sin, and a living unto righteousness; from the love of earthly things, to the
desire of heavenly things Our bodies and souls must come away unto Christ; our
Souls, because they are the Spouse of Christ; our bodies, because they are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost: We must come away from the enticements of the Flesh,
the allurements of the World, and suggestions of the Devil, Rev. 18.4. that ye
may walk with God, before God, after God, in the Name of God, and in the Spirit
of God; and that we may live in Christ, as Christ lives in the Father O what
more happy than to live for ever, and so to live for ever as Christ himself
lives: Surely that is a blessed and glorious life. This is a Believer's Life.

2. Labor more and more to be like those that follow the La^b fully; they are
very holy and pure; they are called Virgins.

1. For their Chastity: That I may present you as chaste Virgins unto Christ, 2
Cor. 11.2. These love Christ with a chaste, but not with an adulterous love. 2.
For their purity; they are Virgir-Saints, they are not in the least defiled,
but have kept themselves from Idolatry and Superstition, and from sin and
wickedness: And is their mouth was found no guile. Believers are ^itled and
titled Heaven: Christ's M^^bers are glorie^s Members; they are called Heaven
for two Reasons. 1. Because there is much of Heaven in them. 2. Because there
is much of them in Heaven.

1. There is much of Heaven in Believers, much of God, much of Christ, and much
of the Spirit: Of his fullness have all we received grace for grace, Joh. 1.16.
The glory of God, the knowledge of God, the presence of God, the love of God,
the holiness of God, the joys of God, these are the things that make Heaven to
be Heaven. Now there is much of these in Believers, therefore they are called
Heaven. We are taken into communion with Angels; and our communion with the
Angels in a great measure does consist in bearing a part with them in praising
God; it is the action of Heaven: Believers are holy ones, and they have
glorious Titles.

1. The Lords portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. 2. His pleasant portion, Jer. 12.10. 3. His
Inheritance, Isa. 19.25. 4. The dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. 5 God's
treasure and peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. 6 His gl^ry, Isa 46.13. 7 The house
of God's glory, Isa 60.7 8 A Crown of Glory, Isa 62 3. 9 A royal diad^m, in the
same place. 10 The glory of God, Jer. 3 17. 11 Golden candlesticks, Rev. 1.12.
12 Kings, Rev. 5.10. And in my Text, Heaven.
There is much difference between the Church of God and other men, as there is
betwixt Gold and Dirt, as betwixt Diamonds and Pebbles, in the Lords esteem;
they are to God above all people! The righteous is more excellent than his
neighbor, Prove. 12.26. O how precious, how happy, how blessed and glorious are
Believers? they are called Heaven.

2. Believers are called Heaven, because there is much of them in Heaven.

1. Their Thoughts are in Heaven, Psalm. 139.18. 2. Their Desires are in Heaven,
Psalm. 73.25. 3. Their Affections are in Heaven, Col. 3.2 4. Their Hopes are in
Heaven, Tit. 2.14. 5. Their Conversations are in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. 6. Their
Hearts are in Heaven, Mat. 6 21. 7. Their Aims are in Heaven, Luke 10.20.
Oh there is much of Believers in Heaven: their Souls are in Heaven, when their
Bodies are walking upon the Earth: they live in Heaven whilst they are on the
Earth, and they come to Heaven when they leave the Earth, Ephesians 2.6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. The Saints are s^t in heavenly Places, heavenly Dignities, heavenly
Privileges, heavenly Prerogatives. The Saints of the High God are set in high
place^. The true Church is that Spouse that is fair and beautiful, Cant. 2.14.
Oh the Church of Christ is lovely and glorious. 1. Glorious in her Head 2.
Glorious in her Titles. 3. Glorious in Gifts and Graces. 4. Glorious in her
Offices. 5. Glorious in her Privileges 6. Glorious in her Members.
O the Church of Christ is a holy Church, and a glorious Church; That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.^7. They are
not defiled, they are Virgins, and in their mouths are found no guile; N^^
(...) that has (...) ^ar to hear, let him hear.

I shall exhort you that are Members of this heavenly Church: 1. To seek
heavenly things ^^^^re and above all things else: Let your hearts be filled
with heavenly knowledge, and heavenly riches. 2. Delight in heavenly things;
let it be your heaven upon earth, to serve the God of Heaven. 3. Act by
heavenly Principles. 4. Have a holy dependence upon God: For Direction: For
Protection: For Assistance: For a Biessing. 5. Eye heavenly Objects, God,
Christ, and the Spirit 6. Imitate heavenly ones; follow them that follow
Christ. 7. Walk by a heavenly Rule; walk according to the Laws of heaven. 8 And
lastly; Live much in Heaven; your Father is in Heaven: your Head is in Heaven:
your Husband is in Heaven: your King is in Heaven: your Treasure is in Heaven:
your Crown is in Heaven: your Wages are in Heaven: And where should you be but
in Heaven? Knowing in your selves that you have in heaven a better, and an
enduring sub^^ance, Heb. 10.34. For we know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, and a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Oh these are blessed and holy ones;
And they that are with him we called, and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14.
Oh labor to be like those in purity, and piety, in holiness and humbleness,
in meekness and pati^uce, in faithfulness and uprightness, in spiritualness,
and in all godliness. O poor sinners, if you have any love to your souls, if
you have any mind to be saved, follow the Lamb, that you may be saved by the
Lamb.

He leads you from darkness to light; from de^^th to life; from vice to virtue;
from Satan to God; from poverty to plenty; from sorrow to joy: from misery to
glory; from an earthly Kingdom to a heavenly Kingdom. Come (...) blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom, Mat 25.34.

O the Kingdom which Christ leads poor Souls to, is, 1. A rich Kingdom: 2. A
peaceable Kingdom: 3. A righteous Kingdom: 4. A blessed Kingdom: 5. A glorious
Kingdom: 6. A satisfying Kingdom: 7. An universal Kingdom: 8. An everlasting
Kingdom.


O follow the Lamb, follow the Lamb, that you may be for ever glorified with
the Lamb, and by the Lamb.

CHRIST'S Voice to LONDON: AND The Great Day of God's Wrath.
Being the substance of two Sermons, Preached in the City in the time of the
sad Visitation: Together with the Necessity of Watching and Praying. With a
small Treatise of Death. By William Dyer, a Servant of Jesus Christ.
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.


THe Holy Scriptures are the Mysteries of God, Christ is the Mystery of the
Scriptures, Grace is the Mystery of Christ. 1 Timothy 3.16. The Lord Jesus is our
life, and the way to life, 1 Cor. 2.7. To know him savingly, believingly, and
experimentally, is life eternal, Joh. 17.3. I am the way, faith Christ, Joh. 14
6. The old and good way, Jer. 6.16. The new and living way, Heb. 10.20. The
strait and narrow way, Mat. 7.14. And because poor sinners are by nature the
Children of Wrath, and all gone out of the way, having their understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.18. are become wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, like to the L^^diceans, spoken
of in this Chapter, v. 27. Therefore the Lord Jesus who is full of love, full
of grace, and full of pity to poor lost Sinners, does graciously invite them to
come to him, that he may enrich them with his Gold, cloth them with his white
Raiment, and anoint their eyes with his Eye Salve, that they may see, v. 18.
And further, to show his willingness and readiness to save souls, he tells us
in the Text, That he stands at the doors and knocks, that if any man hear his
voice, and opens the door, he will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me.

In these words you have three general parts. 1. God's gracious offer to man,
B^hold, I stand at the door and knock 2. Man's duty in relation to God's
gracious offer, If any man hear my voice, and open the door. 3. God's gracious
pro^^ise in relation to Man's duty, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me.


The words being thus opened, there flows from them these four points of
Doctrine.

Doctrine 1. That there is a mavelous willingness in the heart of God and
Christ, to save (...) receive poor l^st Sinners.

Doctrine 2. That the hearts of poor Sinners, are barred and bolted against the
Lord Jesus.

Doctrine 3. That it is the duty and great concernment of all men whatever, to
hear God's voice, and to open the door.

Doctrine 4. That whosoever will but hear Christ's Voice, and open the door, he
will come in (...) them, and sup with them, and they with him.

Neither ^ime nor strength, Beloved, will give me leave to handle all these
Doctrines ^part, therefore I shall insist but upon one (...) them, which is the
second; That the hearts of poor Sinners are barred and bolted against the Lord
Jesus. In the prosecution of this point, I shall do three things: 1. Open it,
that you may see it: 2. Prove it, that you may believe it: 3. Apply it, that
you may receive it.


First in the opening of it, there are three things to be explained: 1. The
Bars: 2. The Voices: 3. The Doors.


1. I shall show you what the Bars are that bolt the doors of Sinners hearts
against Christ.

Beloved, they are six: 1. The Bar of Ignorance: 2. The Bar of Unbelief: 3.
The Bar of Self-conceitedness: 4. The Bar of Earthly-mindedness: 5. The Bar
of Prejudice: 6. The Bar of Hardness of Heart.


These (my Beloved) are the cursed Bars which bar God and Christ, and the
holy Spirit out of the Heart.

I shall begin first with the Bar of Ignorance, and in that I shall show you
these three things: 1. What Ignorance is: 2. What Sinners are ignorant of: 3.
The mischievousness of this Sin of Ignorance.


And first, What Ignorance is: Ignorance is the want of knowledge, or darkness
of the understanding; for so says the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.18. Having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Here you
may see what Ignorance is; the Apostle calls it darkness and blindness: So
likewise in 2 Cor. 3.4. But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, (...) whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them, which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ who is the image
of God, should shine unto them. So that Ignorance is darkness of mind,
blindness of heart, and want of knowledge and spiritual understanding in the
Soul.

Secondly, What are Sinners ignorant of?

Answer 1. They are ignorant of God, they are ignorant of Christ, they are
ignorant of the Spirit, they are ignorant of the Word, they are ignorant of
their own Misery, they are ignorant of the necessity of a Change, of being born
again, of being new Creatures, of being converted and turned from darkness to
light, from death to life, and from the power of Satan to the living God; such
things as these, I say, they are ignorant of; and this is that which keeps poor
souls from going to Christ. O Beloved! we have many of those amongst us, who
are thus ignorant. It was said of the Priests the Sons of Eli, that they were
Sons of Belial, and knew not the Lord, 1 S^^^. 2.8. So in the Prophesi^ of
Jeremiah, chap. 2.^. It is said, the Priests said not, where is the Lord? and
they that handle the Law, know me not. So the Pharisees were blind leaders of
the blind, Mat. 15.14. Would to God there were (...) such amongst us this day:
May not that charge be drawn up against us now, as was against Is^^^el? ^^os.
4.1. Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land; by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they
break out, and blood touches blood; therefore the land mourns, and my people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have rejected knowledge, I
will also reject thee; seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will
also forget thy children: they eat up the sins of my people, and set their
hearts on their iniquity. Thus men err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God, Mat. 22.29.

Thirdly, The Mischievousness of this Sin of Ignorance. 1. Ignorance is that
which keeps men from knowing of God: 2. Ignorance is that which keeps men from
pleasing God: 3. Ignorance is that which keeps men from coming to God: 4.
Ignorance hinders men from having a propriety in God: 5. Ignorance is that
which hardens the heart against God.
O cursed and mischievous Ignorance! What sin like unto this? This is that
which darkens, which hardens, which blinds and bars the door of Sinners hearts
against Christ. O that thou had known (says our dear Lord) the things that
belong to thy peace, Luke 19 42. But because they are a people of no
understanding; therefore he that made them, will have no mercy on them: and he
that formed them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27.11. Thus (my Beloved) I
have showed you what a wretched and miserable state such are in, that are thus
ignorant.

Secondly, The second Bar is Unbelief, which bars and bolts Christ out of the
Heart: this is that which makes men.

1. That they give no credit to the report of the Gospel. 2. Neither do they
yield that loving and loyal subjection to Christ as their Lord, where Unbelief
is. Where Unbelief is, it keeps off the heart from confidently depe^ing upon
Christ: for that which is to be ha^^ in him, and so keeps Christ out of our
souls; it is that which clips the wings of his mercy, Heb. 3. ^l^ it is that
which holds the hand of his power, Mat. 3.18. And he did not many mighty works
there, because of their Unbelief. It (...) that which lets the soul into
perdition, John ^. 24. Rev. 21.7. The Unbelieving shall have their portion in
the Lake of fire, which is the Second Death. Unbelief is that which hard^ns the
^eart, and causes it to depart from God, Heb. ^.12. Take heed, Brethren, lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living
God; but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you
(...) hardened. O Beloved! Unbelief is that (...) which gives God the lie: he
that believes (...) God, has made him a liar, because he belie^eth not the
record that God gave of his Son, 1 J^^ 5.10. They believe not his promises,
fear (...) his threatenings, nor hearken to the voice of (...) Word; though he
sets life and death before them, Heaven and Hell, bitter and sweet, y^^ they go
on in the imagination of their h^a^^^ to add sin to sin, putting the evil day
far away, but draw Iniquity with cords of Vanity and Sin, (as it were) with a
Cart-rope. O Belo^ed, this is the state and condition of Unbelievers, and this
is one of the Bars that bolts Christ out of the Heart; as all Believers are in
a stat^ of Salvation, so all Unbelievers are in a state (...) Damnation; for be
that believes not is e^^de^^^d already, Joh. 3 18.

Thirdly, The third Bar is Self-conceitedness, which bars and bolts the Lord
Jes^^ out of the Heart.

1. A self-conceited Man is one which supposes himself to be what he is not,
Gal. 6.3. If (...) man think himself to be something when he is ^^thing, he
deceives himself.

2. A self-conceited man is one that glories (...) his works and despises
others, Luke 18.9, 10. And he spoke this Parable unto certain which trusted in
themselves, that they were righte^^^ and despised others. The Pharisee stood
(...) prayed thus with himself: God, I thank (...) that I am not as other men
are, Extortioners, Un^^^^ Adulterers, or ev^n as this Publican. But the
^^^li^^n, whom he despised, went away rather ^^stified: for every ou^ that
exalts himself shall be a^^sed.

3. A self-conceited man is the farthest from Heaven of any man: Verily I say
unto you, that Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of Heaven before you,
says our Savior to the self-conceited Pharisees, Mat. 21.31,

4. A self-conceited man is one that lives the most securest in a stare of sin
and misery. And it shall come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse,
that he shall bless himself in his heart, saying: I shall have peace, though I
^^^k in the imagination of my heart, to add drun^^^ness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19.

5. A self-conceited man is the hardest to be wrought upon, and convinced of
the state and condition that he is in, of any man; because (...) thinks himself
righteous and holy enough, (...) good and sound enough. Thus it was (...) the
Scribes and Pharisees, who had such (...) thoughts of themselves, that they
thought themselves to be the most holy persons in (...) world: Mark what Christ
says to them, Joh. 9.12. The whole need not a Physician, but they that are
sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: So also it
is said, Joh. 7.48. H^^^^ any of the Rulers or of the Pharis^es believed (...)
him? Note, these were very hard to be con^^^^ed, and brought to own the truth.

6. A self-conceited man is one that thinks that God is made up of nothing but
Mercy, and therefore he lives in his sins, and pleases himself with this, that
God is merciful, he lying ^^ill in the Ditch of sin, and crying, God help, but
never endeavors to come out; but though the Lord waits to be gracious, yet
the L^^^ is a God of Judgment, Isa. 30.18. O! this is (...) sad and miserable
condition of a self-conce^^^ man: This is that which keeps him from ^^^sing
with Christ: this is that cursed Bar (...) bolts the Doors of Sinners hearts
against Chr^^^

The fourth Bar is Earthly-mindedness.

1. An earthly-minded man is one that mi^^^ the things of this World, more than
he (...) Jesus Christ; this was the case of that your man in the Gospel, which
came to Christ, (...) asks him, saying, What good thing shall I do (...)
inherit eternal life? Jesus bids him keep (...) Commandments; 'He says unto
him, All th^^^ (...) have I kept from my youth up: what lack yet? Jesus says
unto him, If thou will be p^^^^ect, sell all that thou have and give to the
poo^ and thou shall have treasure in heaven: (...) being an earthly-minded man,
would (...) Counsel of Christ, but went aw^^ sorrowful; for he had great
possessions, (...) 21, 22. 2. An earthly-mined man is one that wi^^ leave the
Work of God, to embrace the prese^^ World; this was Paul's complaint of Demas,
Tim. 4.10. 'For Demas has forsaken me, havin^ ^oved this present World. So
also in Phil. (...) he says, That all seek their own, not the thi^^ that are
Jesus Christ's. 3. An earthly-minded man is one that (...) preach false
Doctrine, for the love of Mo^^^ and filthy lucre's fake, 1 Timothy 7.10. For the
lo^^ of Money is the root of all Evil; which wh^^^ some have coveted after they
have erred f^^^ the faith, Ti^. 1.10, 11 For there are many (...) and ^^in
Talkers and Deceivers, which teach things they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake, 1 Pet. 2.15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of Ba^^^, the son of Bos^r, who loved the wages of
^^righteousness. O Beloved! I could wish that this were not too much practiced
in this our day; but alas! what shall I say? Such is the ^^thly mindedness of
many of the Priests, that I may say of them, as the blessed Apostle Paul said
of some of his days, Phil. 3.19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is in their sh^^e, who mind earthly things. 4. An
earthly-minded man is one that trust^^th in his Riches, and not in God, Prove.
11.28. (...) that trusts in his riches shad fa^l, Psalm 49.6. They that trust
in their wealth, and boast themselves (...) the multitude of their riches, none
of them can by (...) means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ran^^^ for him
(...) therefore if riches do increase, set not ^^y heart upon them, Psalm 62.11.
The blessed Apostle Paul, does charge them that be rich in ^his World, that
they trust not in uncertain ^iches, but in the living God, Who gives us all
things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Thus you may ^^e, my Beloved, that
whosoever trusts in uncertain riches, more than in God, is an earthly-minded
man; it is that which bars men out ^f the Kingdom of Heaven: they are the
words ^f Christ to his Disciples, Mark 10.24, 25. How ^^^d is it for them that
trust in riches, to enter into (...) Kingdom of God? It Is easier for a Camel to
go ^^^ugh the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to (...) into the Kingdom of
God. O Beloved, it is ^^^re, it is Idolatry, Col. 3.5. And Coveteousness, which
is Idolatry, it is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. For the love of money is
the root of all evil: Th^^ earthly-mindedness, or covetousness, is anot^^^
great sin, that keeps souls from going (...) Christ for life and salvation:
And they all wi^^ one consent began to make excuse: The first said (...) him. I
have bought a piece of ground, and I (...) needs go and see it, I pray thee
have me excused. (...) another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, (...) go
to prove them, I pray thee have me excused. (...) another said, I have married
a Wife, and theref^^^ I cannot come, Luke 14 18, 19, 20.
The fifth Bar is Prejudice, which bars Christ out of the heart; wicked and
sinful men (...) a great prejudice against Christ, that is, against these three
things of Christ.

1. They have a Prejudice against his Do^^rine or Worship; Many therefore of
his Discip^^ when they heard this, said, This is an hard sayi^^ who can bear
it? From that time ma^^ of his dis^^ples went back, and walked no more with
him, J^^ 6 60, 66. And they questioned among themselves, s^^ing, What thing is
this? what new Doctrine is this Mat. 11 11. Sinners have a great prejudice
against the Doctrine and Worship of Christ, th^^ think it too pure, too
spiritual, and too po^^ ^^ful for them to bear. 2. They have a great prejudice
against t^^ Ministers (or Ambassadors) of Christ: the say of them, as Ahab did
of Mi^ai^k; I hate (...) for he never prophesies good of me, 1 King 22.8. in 1
King. 18.17. Ahab said unto Elisah, Art th^^^ that ^^^^bleth Israel? So
Jeremiah complain this, saying, I am in derision daily, every one mo^^^ (...),
because the word of the Lord was made a rep^^^ unto me, and a derision daily,
Jer. 28*7, 8. So in Act. 24.5. it is said of Paul, For we have found this ^^an
a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout all
the world, and a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens; and this is according
to the words of our blessed Lord, Mat. 10.22. And ye shall be hated of all m^n
for my Name sak^. 3 Sinners have a great prejudice against the Members of
Christ; and that for four Reasons. 1. Because they are poor, Luke 11.22, 23. 1
Cor. 1.26, to 30 1 Cor. 1.2. Or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them
that are poor. 2. Because they are but a few, Luke 1^.32. Mat. 7.14. Deuteronomy. 7.7.
For ye were the fewest of all people, Rev 3.4. Thou have a few names in ^^^dis,
which have not defiled their garments. 3. Because they are unlearned in the
account of men: this is said of Christ, Joh. 17.15. How know^th this man
Letters, having never learned! Also of Peter and John it is said, Act. 4.13.
'And when they perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they
marve^led; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus. Are
ye also deceived; Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees bel^^^ed on him?
But this people, who know^th not the Law, are cursed, Joh. 7.47, 48. 4. Because
they will not conform to humane ^nventions: See 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. And the
^riests, and the Levites, that were in all Israel, ^^sorted to Reho^^am, out of
all their Coast; for they left their Suburbs, and their Possessions, became to
Judah and Jerusalem; for Jereboam and his ^as had cast them off from executing
the Priest's Office before the Lord: and after them out of all the Tribes of
Israel, such as set th^^^ hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel; came (...)
Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord God of their Fathers, Verse 16. See Dan.
3.18. Be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy God, nor
worship the golden Image that th^^ have set up. Also in Mat. 15.2. Why do thy
Disciples transgress the tradition of the ^^ders, for they wash not their hands
wh^^ they eat bread? But Jesus said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the
commandment of God by your tradition? See also Act. 5 th, 29. Did not we
straightly command you, that you should teach no more in his name? And behold, ye
have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood
upon us. Then Peter, and the other Apostle^ answered and said, We ought to obey
God rather than man. See Col. ^.21, 22. Touch not cast not, handle not, which
all are to peri^^ with the using, after the Commandments and doctrines of men.
O my dear Brethren, thi^ cursed sin of Prejudice is that which keeps sinners
from receiving the truth in the love of it and a Bar which bolts Christ out of
the heart.

The sixth Bar is hardness of Heart, whi^^ bolts the Hearts of sinners against
Christ, and they are hardened.

1. Against God, Joh. 9.4. Who has hard^^^ himself against him, and prospered?
2. Their hearts are hardened against his many, that it does not draw them, Rom 2
4, 5. despisest thou the riches of his goodness, (...) forbearance, and
long-suffering, not know^ that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance;
but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. 3.
Their hearts are hardened against his Judgment, that they do not tremble at
them, as it is said, Exodus 8.32. And Phar^^h hardened his heart (...) this time
also, neither would he let the people go: And it is also said, Jer. 5.22. Fear
ye not me s^ith the Lord, and will ye not tremble at my presence? 4. Their
hearts are hardened against his Word, that it does not reform them, Prove. 29.1.
He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my Word
behind thee, Psalm. 50. See in J^^. 44*16. As for the Word which thou have
spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee, but we will
certainly do whatsoever comes out of our own mouth. 5. Their hearts are
hardened against the Spirit of God, that it does not melt them, Genesis 6.3. My
Spirit shall not always strive with man. As Stephen said to the Jews, Act.
7.51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always ^^sist
the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye. 6. Their hearts are hardened
against all the means of Grace, or gracious Invitations from ^he People of God;
'But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped the
ear, and made the heart like an Adamantstone, lest they should hear the Law,
and the words which the Lord of Hosts sent to them by his Spirit in the former
Prophets, Zath. 7.11, 11, 12. They are like the deaf Adder, that stops his
ear, which will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmer, charming never so
wisely, Psalm. 54. 4, 5. O dear Friends, this is another Ba^^ which bolts Christ
out of the hearts of poor sinners: Thus, Beloved, I have showed you what the
Bars are that bolt the door of out Hearts against Christ, that we do not h^^^
his voice, and open the door.
2. The second thing which is here to be explained, is, What this Voice is
which s^^ners are to hear: It is the Voice of Christ, (...) is speaking to poor
sinners to open the do^^ of their hearts, that he may come in and fi^^ with
them. There are two sorts of Voices by which Christ speaks to the Soul;
Inward Voices, and Outward Voices.

1. Inward Voices.

1. The Voice of Conscience. The Lord Jesus speaks to sinners by their
Consciences; (...) is said of the Jews, Job. 8.9. They were convicted by their
own Consciences: So P^^^ says, Romans 9.1. My Conscience bears me (...) ^ost.
And of the Gentiles, Paul says, Romans (...). 15. That they did by nature the
things contain^^ in the Law, their Consciences also bearing th^^ witness: and
as Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our (...) Joycing is this, the testimony of a good
Conscien^^^ O Friends, God preached to you many ti^^ by your Consciences. which
speaks to (...) secretly and powerfully, condemning and (...) proving you for
your Iniquities: O there^^^^ hear the Voice of Conscience for it is the Vo^^^
of Christ; hear (I say) and hearken to it, and let Christ in, that he may sup
with you.

2. Christ speaks to us by the Voice of his Spirit, as he did to the old World;
Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with man; and as he did to the
Jews, Act. 7.51. Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did so do
ye: So in John 16.8. Christ tells us, that the Spirit should convince the world
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. O! the ever blessed God speaks to
the World by his blessed Spirit, striving with them, convincing of them, and
reproving them for their Iniquities, that their souls may believe in him, and
live with him to Eternity. 2. There are outward Voices, by which Christ speaks
to Sinners.

1. By the Voice of his Word, which is the Preaching of the Gospel, that is,
the Word of Reconcilation: O Sinner, when thou hear the Word read, thou
hear the Voice of Christ, Col. 1.5. Whereof you heard before in the word of
the truth of the gospel; as Christ says; Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for
they are they that test ^^e of me. The Voice of the Scriptures is the Voice of
Christ; and as Christ speaks to us by them here, so he will judge us by them
hereafter, Romans 2.16. God will judge the secrets of men by Christ Jesus,
according to my g^spel, Joh. 12.48. Where Christ says, The word that I have
sp^ken, the same shall judge him in the last day.

2. Christ speaks to Sinners by the Voice of his Rod, by Afflictions and
Tribulations, and Judgments, Mic. 6.9. The Lord's voice cries unto the city,
and the man of wisdom shall s^^ thy Name; hear ye the rod, and who has
appointed it.

3. Christ speaks to Sinners by the Voice of his servants, as in Isa. 50.10.
Who is there among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
servants? So in 2 Cor. 5.20. New then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God: So in Mat. 18. He that hears you, hears me. O Sinners! Christ speaks
to you by the Voice of his Servants, by his Ministers and Members, who beseech
you, and entreat you to be reconciled, that you may have peace with God through
Jesus Christ. Having thus briefly showed you what the Voices are,

3. I shall in the Third, place come to show you what the Door is that Christ
stands and knocks at, which Sinners are to open, and let him in.

1. The first door which Sinners should open unto Christ, is the door of their
Thoughts: I say, we must open the door of our thoughts to him, that God may be
in our thoughts and Christ in our thoughts, and the Spirit of Life and Power in
our thoughts, and Eternity in our thoughts, Heaven and Judgment in our
thoughts: Keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of thy heart, 1 Chronicles. 29.1^ How precious also are thy thoughts unto mo^ O God How great is the
sum of them, Psalm. 129.17. the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my soul, Psalm. 94.19. O! this is the first Door of our Hearts, which
Believers open to their beloved Lord.

2. The second is the Door of Consideration, which Sinners should open to
Christ: O that they were wise, and understood this, That they would consider
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his
master's crib, but Israel does not know; my people does not consider, Isa. 3.1.
The tabret, and pipe, and harp, and wine are in their feasts, but they regard
not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands, Isa.
5.12. But now those that have opened this Door to Christ, they consider their
ways: The upright considers his ways, Prove. 21.29. and the wondrous works of
God, Job 37.14. and what great things God has done for him, 1 Samuel 1.2.24.
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. Hag. 1.5. And this
is the second Door of the Heart.

3. The third Door is the Door of Affection, which Sinners should open to
Christ: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let hin be Anathema,
Maranaths, Cor. 16.22, Grace be with all them that love ^u^^ Lord Jesus Christ
in truth and sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. Set your effections on things above, and
now on things beneath, Col. 3.1. This door of Love and Affection must be opened
to Christ, that he may come in to your hearts, and be your nearest and dearest,
your joy and delight, that you may have reconcilation with the Father, union
with the Son and communion with the Holy Ghost: And this is the third Door of
the Heart.

4. The fourth is the Door of Desire, which must be opened to Christ, or else
he cannot come into our hearts, and sup with us: O sinners, you must desire and
thirst after Christ vehemently, and say as the Church does, in the last of
Canticles, ult. Make have, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young
Heart upon the mountains of Spices: So in Rov. 22.20. Even so come Lord Jesus
come quickly. So with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none on earth to be desired besides thee? And with the
Church, Isa. 16. With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early; for the desire of my soul is to thy
Name, and to the remembrance of thee: So Paul, I desire to know nothing among
you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. This is the fourth Door
of the Heart, which you must open to Christ, without which there is no supping
with Christ, no^ Christ with you.

5. The fifth is the Door of Estimation, which Sinners must open to Christ:
that (...) to prize him, and to value him as more precious than all other
things besides: So to Believers, (...) Unto (...) therefore which ^^lieve, he
is precious; and with Paul, to count all things but dung and dirt to gain him;
and also with Meses, to esteem the repreach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 25. O! those blessed souls that have opened this
door to Christ, he is to them all lovely, the chiefest among Ten thousands; yea
he is better than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are not to be
compared unto him, Prove. 3.15. So must it be with you, poor souls; you must
look upon Christ as most lovely, most precious, most desirable, and most
glorious; thus he is to the Father, to the Holy Angles, and to the Saints: And
this is the fifth Door of the Heart.

6. The sixth is the Door of a good Conversation, which Sinners as well as
Saints must open to Christ: For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also
we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus, Phil. 3.20. For the grace of God that
brings salvation has appeared to all men, and teaches us that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and godly, and
righteously in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. Seeing then that these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. 3, 11. Only let your conversation be as
becomes the gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.29. And to him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. This is the sixth Door
of the Heart, to wit, a good Conversation; this also must be opened to Christ,
that he may come in, and sup with us, and we with him, that our souls may have
fellowship and communion with him. And thus I have briefly ^^^^ed you. Beloved,
^^al the Doors are that must be opened to Christ. Now, having done with the
Explanation, I come to the Application of the point; and as I have opened it to
you, that you might see it, and proved it to you, that you might believe it, I
shall now apply it, that you may receive it. It is so, Beloved, that the hearts
of Sinners are thus barred and bolted against the Lord Jesus?

Use 1. First, By way of Information; This may be of use to Inform us of the
sad and miserable condition of all unconverted persons; they are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; they are without Christ, being
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, having no ^^pe, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.1^. Oh Sinners,
this is your condition, who a^^^aceless and Christless persons; and the (...)
^e sad, yet this is not all; for your heart^ are barred and bolted against the
Lord of ^^e and Glory. O thou that hear, or read this, how can thou but
tremble to think that thy heart should be thus barred and bolted against Jesus
Christ with Ignorance with Unbel^e^, Self-conceitedness, Earthly-mindedness,
Prejudice, and Hardness of Heart; and yet all this open to Sin and Satan^^nd to
the World, which are cruel Enemies to the Soul! That I may hasten you out of
this condition, if it be the will of God, (as the Angel did La^y out of Sodom,
Genesis 19.) I shall turn my Discourse into an Exhortation.

Use 2. And first of all, let me exhort you whose hearts are thus barred and
bolted against Jesus Christ, to hear his Voice, and to open the Door.

1. To hear his Voice: O Sinners, Christ speaks to you by your Consciences, by
his Spirit, by his Word, by his Rod, and by his Servants: O you men and women
of this City, God has spoken to you by all these Voices, but you have turned
the deaf ear to Christ. The Voice of the Lord cries to the city, (and the man
of wisdom shall see thy Name) hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it, Mic.
6.9. O London, London! God speaks to thee by his Judgments: and because thou
would not hear the Voice of his Word, he has made thee to feel the Voice of
his Rod. O great City! How has the Plague broke in upon thee, because of thy
abominations? Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and ^^e
Plague broke in upon them, Psalm. 106.29. O you of this City! how is the wrath
of the Lord kindled against you, that such multitudes of thousands are fallen
within thy borders by the n^^ some Pestilence, God's immediate Sword: O London!
how are thy Streets thinned, thy Widows increased^ and thy Burying places
filled, thy Inhabitants fled, thy Trade decayed! Oh therefore lay to heart, you
that are yet alive, all these things, and turn from your wicked ways, that the
cry of your Prayers may outcry the cry of your Sins, and be like unto the City
of N^noveh, who believed God, and gave c^^d ^t to J^^ah his words, who humbled
^homsel (...) and fasted, and cried mightily unto the Lord, J^^. (...). 5. O
let not Heathens outstrip Christians; Did Nineve^ repent, and turn from their
wicked ways, and shall not London? May be you may think (my Brethren) that all
is well now, and that God is friends with you, because the Sickness decreaseth
and abateth; I say, Blessed be God for it, but be not deceived, God is not
mocked: to whomsoever God bestows great mercies, if they abound in great
wickedness, he will inflict great punishments upon them. Alas, Beloved, do your
sins decrease? And does that abate? Is here a turning from sin, and a ^^rning
to God? Is there a reformation and amendment of life amongst you? if this be
so, then you may hope that God has done afflicting you? If my people, which
are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and
turn from their wicked ways, then will I forgive their sin, and heal their
land, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. But if you remain still as profane as before, a^
superstitious as before, as carnal as before, as lukewarm as before, as
hard-hearted and cruel as before, as proud and vain as before: I say, if it be
thus with you, God has not yet done with London. but has o^^er Judgments to
pour out upon you, though he cause this to cease. Do but see how God dealt with
the Jews in this case, Amos 4.6. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all
your cities, and want of bread in all your Palaces, ye^ have you not returned
unto me, says the Lord, I have also withheld the rain from you, yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting and
mildew, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have sent among yo^
the Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt; your young men have I slain with the
sword, and have taken away your horses, and I have made the stink of your
camels to come up into your nostrils; yet have you not returned unto me, says
the Lord. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,
and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and
because I will do this unto thee, p^epare to meet thy God, O Israel. Therefore
my dear Brethren, for God's sake, for Christ's sake, and for your souls sake,
hear Christ's voice that you may be prosperous on Earth, and glorious in Heaven.

2. Let me exhort you* and O that I could prevail with you to pers^ade you of
this City to three things.

1. That you would thoroughly ^urn from your evil ways, and amend your doings,
that God may repent him of the evil which otherwise he may bring upon you. O
see what the Lord says, Jer. 26.30. If so be they will hearken and turn every
man from his evil may, that I may repent me of the evil which I purpose to do
unto them, because of their doings, see v 13. There fore now amend your ways,
and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will
repent him of the evil (...) he has purposed against you. Also mark what the
Lord speaks by the Prophet, Jer. 7.3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of
Israel, amend your ways and your deings, and I will cause you to (...) in this
place, v 5. If ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings. O Beloved, the
Lord our God is willing to heal, willing to hear, and willing to forgive. Great
Cities are places which are usually guilty of great sins, great provocations,
and great abominations, and for this cause God has destroyed and overthrown
many Cities, as the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24. Then the Lord
rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven.
Also Adwah and Z^boim, Hos. 11 8. H^^ shall I make thee as Admah, and set thee
as Z^boim? So Jerusalem and other Cities were destroyed by God for their sins
and wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 35.19. Jer. 52.13, 14. Now see what the Apostle Peter
says of this, 2 Pet. 2 2. And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into
ashes, condemned them with ^n overthrow, waking them an ensample unto those
that after should live ungodly O London, repent, that it may not be so with
thee. O ye people, rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the
Lord, who is willing to receive you, that so his Judgments may b^^diverted,
your former mercies restored, and his blessings poured down upon you. 2. That
you would dearly love, and highly prize those precious Saints and Servants of
the Most High God, which are amongst you. These are they of whom the world is
not worthy, Heb. 11.38. God prizes them as his Jewels and Treasure, M^l. 3.17.
Ex^od. 9.5. God calls them the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 10.7. They are
a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1
Pet. 2.9. O therefore he suffers no man (...) do them wrong^ (...), he
rep^^^^^ Kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105.14. O Be^ov^^, Nations, and Cities,
and Kings are blessed for their sakes, s^e Genesis 12.2, 3. And thou shall be a
blessing; I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee O
London, in this thou are happy, yea, more happy than any one City upon the face
of the Earth (that I know, or have heard of) because thou have within thy
borders more righteous, more Saints, more true Believers, who are still sighing
and mourning for thy sins, praying for thy peace, and seeking and desiring thy
eternal good. 3. And lastly, let me exhort you to open the door and let Christ
in, into your thoughts, into your minds, into your affections, into your
desires, into your estimations, and into you conversations. O Beloved, keep
Christ out no longer, but let him into yo^^ hearts and souls, that he may make
you rich; ^ich in Faith, rich in Knowledge, rich in Assurance, rich in
Privileges, rich in Experiences, and rich in good works O therefore, let not
sin be let in, and Christ shut out. O let Jesus Christ into your hearts; for if
^ou shut the door against Christ, he will shut the ^^^r against you. 1. The
Door of Mercy. 2. The Door of Acceptance. 3. The Door of Salvation.

1. The Door of Mercy will be shut against you: such who Christ calls to, and
they will n^^hear, they shall call, but Christ will not hear, Prove. 1.24.
Because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stre^^d ^^t my hand, and no
man regarded, v. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not ^^swer; they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, mine eye shall not spare,
neither will I have pity; a^^ though they cry in mine ears with a lou^ voice,
yet will I not hear them, Ezekiel. 8 i^ Therefore, thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will bring evil upon them, which they shall no^ be able to escape; and though
they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them, J^^ 11.11. Because they
have behaved themsel^ ^ill in their doings, Mic. 3.4. Thus, my Belov^^^ you see
how the door of God's Mercy' will (...) shut against you, if you shut the door
of yo^^ hearts against Christ.

2. The Door of Acceptance will be shut against you, if you shut the door of
your hearts against Christ: Thus says the Lord unto the people, Thus have they
loved to wander, therefore the Lord does not accept them: when they fast, I
will not hear their cry; and wh^^ they offer burnt-offerings and oblations, I
will not accept them, Jer. 40.10, 12. To what purpose comes there to me
incense from S^^ba? and sweet cane from a far Country? Your burnt-offerings are
not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me, Jer. 6.29. I hate, I despise
your Feast-days, and I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies; and though ye
offer me offerings, I will not accept them, Amos 5.21, 22. O Beloved, those
that will not accept of Christ, shall not be accepted in Christ: W^^ ^^th made
us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

3. The Door of Salvation will be shut a (...) you, if you strut the d^^^ of
your hearts agai^^^ Christ. He that mad^ you, will not save yo^^ and he that
formed you, will show you no ^vour: but as you have ^^^^sed to open the doors
of your hearts to your Savior, so he will refuse to own you as his people, and
to open the door of Salvation for you; see the words of our blessed Lord
himself, Luke 13.15. When once the Master of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; and he shall an^^^^^ (...) say (...) you, I
know you not, whence you a^^; depart from me all ye workers of miquity. Then
shall be weeping and gnashing of ^^^th, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust
out. Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

[The End of the First Sermon.]
THE Great Day of his Wrath.
Rev. 6.17. For the Great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand?


EVery man's thoughts run now like N buc^^nezzar's, with a desire to know what
shall come to pass hereafter or what things time will bring forth, Dun. 2.19:
There is nothing in the womb of time, but what was first in the womb of God.
Now this Book of the Revelations shows is these three things* 1. The state and
condition of the true Church of Christ upon earth, under the power ^^^^ign of
Antichrist. 2. The Rise, the Reign, and Rage of Antichrist in the World. 3. The
quiet, blessed and glorious state and condition of the true Church here below,
after the ruin and downfall of Antichrist. The coming of Christ will be the ruin
of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.8. Whom the Lord shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming. This is decreed in Heaven, and declared on Earth.


This Chapter, out of which my Text is taken, shows us three things.

1. You may see what Gods dreadful judgments are, by which he cuts off and
destroys the Inhabitants of the Earth, for their sin and wickedness; they are
likened (or compared) to Horses, as you may see from v. 4. to v. 8. Here you
have a red Horse, the Sword; a black Horse, the Famine; a pale Horse, the
P^^ilence (or Plague) which leads to death. Horses are Creatures which run to
and fro, and so do God's Judgments, from House to House, from Street to Street,
from City to City, from Town to Town, and from one Parish to another: And the
Lord said, go ye after him through the City, and smite; let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity, Ezekiel. 9.5. so Jer. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Horses are
Creatures which are very swift in their motion, they run many miles in a little
time: and therefore men ride them Post. God's Judgments are also very swift,
they do much E^ecution in a little time. So the Lord sent a Pes^ilence upon
Isr^^h from the morning, even t^ the time appointed; and there died of the
people, from D^^ even to Beer shed ^^seventy thousand men, 2 Samuel 2^.15. 2
Chr^n. 2. (...) You may also see a proof of this, by what Go^ has done to
London, when there fell of the p^^ple above a thousand a day. 2. You may see
here, where all the holy Martyrs and Witnesses of Jesus Christ are, who have
been slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus, they are under
the Altar, v. 6. that is, under the glorious protection of Christ in Heaven.
They are before the Throne of God, serving him day and night, and the Lamb
leads them to the living Fountain, and God wipes away all tears from their
eyes, Rev. 15.16, 17. 3. You may see also the cause for which these blessed
Souls were slain; for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
v. 9. 4. Here you may see that all the Saints precious blood, which has been
spilt from time to time by the Whore of Babylon, viz. by cruel and blood
thirsty men, cries aloud day and night to God for vengeance upon Babylon, v.
10. 5. You have here the Answer of God, in relation to the Saints cry: And it
was said unto them, That they should rest yet for a little while, until their
f^llow-servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled, v. 11. 6. You may here see what dreadful and terrible
things followed upon the opening of the Sixth Seal, v. 12. And lo there was a
great Earthquake; and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon
became as blood, and the Stars of Heaven fell upon the Earth: And the Heaven
departed as a serowl when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and Island
was moved out of its place. These are the visible Judgments of God, which (...)
come upon the Antichristian Crew. 7. And (...), this Chapter shows us what will
be the ^^^e and condition of those men at that day, who are found Enemies to
God and his People, V^t. 15. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and
the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman,
and every freeman, hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
mountains, v. 16. And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb.
Now this brings me to the words of my Text, which shows us the Reason of this
great Outcry, For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand?

The words of my Text contain two things; a Reason, and a Question.

1. The former part of the Ground (or Reason) of this Outcry here made by the
Kings, and great men of the Earth, together with every Bondsman and Freeman; For
the great day of his wrath is come. The latter part is a Question proposed
about standing at that day, And who shall be able to stand? The Point of
Doctrine which I shall lay down from these words, is this:

Doct. That the greatest part of m^^ and women will not be able to stand in the
great day of Gods wrath. In the handling of this Point, I shall show you four
things: 1. That there are some days greater than other. 2. The nature and
property of this great day 3. Who they ar^ that will not be able to stand in
the day (...) Gods wrath. 4. The Use and Application.


In the first place I shall show you, (...) that there are some great days
spoken (...) Scripture: First, see Jer. 30.7. Alas, (...) da^ is great, so that
none is like it; it is even (...) time of Jacob's troubles, but he shall be
saved out of it. The second great Day you have it in Ibs. 1.11. Then shall the
children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint
themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land: for great shall be
the day of Jezreel. The third great Day you have (...) Joel 2.31. The Sun shall
be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great and terrible
day of the Lord come. The fourth great Day you have in Mal. 4.5. Behold, I will
send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of
the Lord. The fifth great Day is this in my Text; For the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? The sixth great Day you have in
Rev. 16 10. For they are the spirits of Devils working miracles, which go forth
unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty. The seve^^h and last great Day, you
have in the Epistle (...) v. 6. And the Angels which kept not the (...) estate,
but left their own habitation, he (...) reserved in everlasting chains, under
d^^^^^^ unto the judgment of the great day. The ^^^oved, you see that there are
some Days greater than other, which the Scripture calls great days, because of
the greatness of the work which God does and will do in those days.

2. I shall now show you the nature and pro^^^y of this great day in my Text,
which is (...), The great Day of Gods W^ath. O my Bre^^^, this will be a very
dreadful and terrible (...) to the Wicked, who call evil good, (...) good evil;
who put darkness for light, and light for darkness, and put far from them the
ev^^^ day, which is now hastening upon them. Fir^^ of all, this day will be a
day of astonishment (...) the wicked and ungodly; as it is said, Deuteronomy. (...) 28.
The Lord shall smite them with madness, and bli^iness, and astonishment of
heart. O it will be with the wicked as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, D^^. 3 24.
who was astonished to behold the works (...) wonders of God, which the Lord
wrought s^^ the deliverance of those which put their tru^^ in him. Then
Nebuchadnezzar the King (...) astonished, and rose up in haste, and spoke and
said unto his counselors, Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of
the fire? They answered and said unto the King, True, O King. He answered and
said. Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the sire, and they have
no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. O Sinners, do but
see here how the proud Nebuchadnezzar was astonished at the beholding of this
sight; here a^^ three ^^ings that did astonish this great King 1. To see the
Fire, whose nature is to burn and consume, to have no power to seize upon the
bodies of these men: Fire is one of the cruelle^^ Creatures; it is a merciless
Creature, and therefore the torments of Hell are set forth by Fire. Mat. 25 41.
Go^^ cursed into everlasting fire prepa^^^ for the Devil and his Angels. 2. The
second thi^^^ which did astonish Nebuchadnezzar, was to (...) the Servants of
the Lord walk in the fiery ^^^nace: Did not we cast three men bound into the
(...) of the fire? Lo, I see four men loose, walking i^ (...) of the flame:
These were cast in bound, (...) now they are loose. Now that the fire should
have power on their bonds, and not on their bodies, O this caused astonishment
in Nebuchadnezzar. 3. The third thing that did astonish him, was to see their
number not decreased, but increased: Did we not cast three men bound into the
fire? and lo, I see sour men walking in the midst of the f^re, and the form of
the fourth is like unto the Son of God.
And this did astonish this great King: New as it was with Nebuchadnezzar here,
so it will be with the wicked in this great day. O you that now speak proudly,
look highly, and walk contemptuously, it will astonish you to see God's
Judgments pouring down upon you, and his wrath wax h^t against you, till there
be no remedy. O do but see that Text, Jer. 51 37. And Babylon shall become
heaps, a dwelling place for Dragons, an astonishment and an hissing without an
inhabitant. Thus it will be with the ungodly at that day.

2. It will be a day of terror to those that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of Christ, the terrors of God will be upon such, as it was upon
those Cities, Genesis 35.5. O ye graceless persons, that now fear not God, nor
tremble at his Word, he will make you then tremble, as he did B^lshazzar, when
he beheld the Handwriting, Dan. 5.6. Then the King's counte^^^^e was changed,
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed,
and his (...) ^^^te one against another. O ye Drunkards (...) Swearers, you
that despise reproofs, and ha^^ instruction, and set at naught all God's
counsel, ^ow this, that the day of Gods wrath will be, (...) day of terror to
you, which will make your hearts to sink within you, your countenance (...)
change, your joints to be loosed, and your ears (...) tingle, when the terrors
of the Almighty s^^ themselves in array against you. Therefore says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.

3. This day of Gods wrath will be a day (...) distress to the wicked, when
your fear sh^^^ come as desolation, and your destruction a^^ whirlwind; when
distress and anguish come upon you, Prove 1.27. So see that in Zep^. 1.1^. That
day is a day of wrath, a day of troub^^ and distress, a day of wastings and
desolation a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of cloud and thick darkness.
And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men because
they have finned against the Lord, their blood shall be poured out as dust, and
the flesh as the dung; neither their silver, nor the gold shall be able to
deliver them in the day the Lord's Wrath. O the distress that ungo^ly persons
will be in that day, which will m^^^ them cry to the Rocks and Mountains to
(...) on them, and hide them from the face of h^^ that sits on the Throne,
and from the wra^^ of the Lamb. The God of Heaven will bri^^ distress upon all
sorts of men, which shall found ungodly, and their honor shall not (...) liver
them, nor their gold deliver them, (...) their silver deliver them, nor the
greatness their multitudes deliver them, but Distress (...) come upon them, as
it did upon Saul, 1 Samuel (...) 15. And Saul answered, I am in sore distre^^ the
Philistines make war against me, and G^^ is departed from me, and answers me
neith by Prophets, nor by dreams, see Luke 21.23. And there shall be great
distress in the Land, and wrath upon this people. Can you hear this and not
tremble at it, O ye that are profane?

4. This Day of Gods Wrath will be a day of great contempt to the ungodly, the
Lord of Hosts has proposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring
into contempt all the honorable of the earth, Isa. 23.9. O the enemies of the
Lord, and such as oppose his truth, will he then hiss at. O do but see that
place, Jer. 51. (...). And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling place for
Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without an Inhabitant. The Lord will
pour contempt upon all sorts of men, who have sided with the Whore of Babylon,
( viz. the profane Antichristian state of the world) and drunk of her Cup, they
will not know whither to go, nor where to hide their heads; but every one will
hiss at them, and have them in derision, saying. These are they who said, it is
in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there in the keeping of his
Ordinances, and in walking mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? who counted
Saints Sots, and Godliness to be Madness, therefore will they be contemptible
before the Lord, Angels and good men. O think of this, you that speak proudly
and blasphemously against God and his People; know assuredly, that God will
speak to you in his wrath, and vex you in his sore displeasure: He that sits
in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have you in derision, Psalm. 2.3, 4.

5. This Day of Gods Wrath will be a day of great destruction: Have ye not
asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens, that the wicked
is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth to the day
of wrath, Job. 21.29, 30. In this day the Lord will destroy both evil persons,
and evil things: men and their Idols, men and their Inventions, every Plant
which is not of Gods planting shall be plucked up, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day, and the Idols he shall utterly abolish; in that day a man
shall cast away his Idols of silver, and his Idols of gold, which they have
made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats to go into
the clifts of the Rocks, and into the tops of the ragged Rocks, for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the
earth ^sa. 2.18, 20, 21. All false Ways, false Worship, and false Doctrines
shall fall in that day: this will be a reaping day; God will empty the earth as
the Prophet Isaias speaks, chap. 24 1, 2, 3. Behold the Lord makes the earth
empty, and makes it waste, and turns it upside down, and scatters abroad
the Inhabitants thereof, and it shall be as with the people, so with the
Priest; as with the servant, so with the master; as with the Maid, so with the
Mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with
the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him;
the land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled, for the Lord has
spoken this word See Joel 3.13, 14. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is
ripe; come get you down, for the Press is full, the Fats overslow, for the
wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the
day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. So in Rev. 14.15. The Angels
are appointed to reap down the Earth. O let every one that hears (or reads)
these Sayings, let them hear, and fear, and tremble at them, for this will be a
day of great destruction to the wicked and ungodly.

6. And lastly, this will be a Day of great Wrath, as it is said in the words
of my Text, For the great day of his wrath is come: But who may abide the day
of his coming? and who shall stand when he app^^^eth? For he is like a refiners
fire. O Beloved, this is not the day, of man's Wrath: Men have had their day of
reigning, and raging, and lording it over God's people; but that is over and
gone, and now God's day is come, and this is the day of his wrath, and woe to
the Earth, and woe to the Sea, and woe to all the workers of Iniquity, for the
hour of their Judgment is come. O Beloved, God's wrath will be very terrible to
the wicked.

1. It will tear them in pieces like a Lion. For I will be unto Ephraim as a
Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah: I, even I will tear, and go
away, I will take away, and none shall rescue him, Hos. 15.14. So Job 16.9. The
Lord teareth me (...) his wrath. So Psalm. 50.28. Now consider this, ye that
forget God, least I tear you in pieces; and there be none to deliver.

2. It consumes like Fire. For behold the day comes that shall burn like an
oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble and
the day that comes shall burn th^^^ up, faith the Lord of hosts, that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4.1. The ^fore have I poured out my
indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of any wrath, Ezekiel.
22 31.

It follows up like a Dragon: He has devoured me, he has crushed me, he has
swallowed me up like a Dragon, Jer. 51.34. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven
in the time of thine anger; the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and
the fire shall devour them, Psalm. 21.9. O the wrath of the Almighty is that
which tears like a Lion, consumes like Fire, and swallows up like a Dragon; and
therefore it is called (in the Scripture) fierce wrath, 2 King. 23.26. See
Psalm. 78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and
indignation and trouble. So in Rev. 16.19. it is said, And the great city was
divided into three parts, and the cities of the nation fell, and great Babylon
came to remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath. Thus Beloved, I have showed you the nature and
property of this great Day spoken of in my Text. 1. A day of Astonishment. 2. A
day of Terror. 3. A day of Distress. 4. A day of Contempt. 5. A day of Wrath.
I shall now come, in the third place, to show you who they are that will not
be able to stand in this great Day.

1. Such as are profane, will not be able to stand in this great day, but say
to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us, Luke 23.30. Because
they have filled the midst of thee with vi^^^^, and thou have finned, therefore
I will cast th^^ (...) ^^ne out of the mountain of God, and I will de^^^ thee,
O Covering Cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire, Ezekiel. 28.16. So R^m.
2.9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil O ye
profane, ye that now wallow in your sins, as the Sow in the mire, and eat up
sin as they eat bread, and drink up iniquity like water: O let me tell you, you
will not be able to stand in the day of Wrath, nor in the day of Judgment, but
destruction will be your end, and everlasting misery your portion. O that such
would but consider these two places of Scripture, Phil. 3.19. Whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose Glory is in their shame, who mind
earthly things. So also in 1 Cor. 69, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor eff^^inate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor reviders, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Though these men may now carry
it out with a high hand, as if they had made a Covenant with Death, and with
Hell they were at an agreement; But your covenant with death shall be
disannulled, and your covenant with Hell shall not stand, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass thorough, then ye shall be trodden down by it, Isa. 28.15,
18.

2. Such ^s are ignorant will not be able to stand in this great (...) of God's
wrath when the Lord Jesus (...) ^e revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels,
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2
These. 17 8, 9. O you that are ignorant and blind, do you hear this? You are
some of those who will not be able to stand in this great day, but say to the
Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Beloved, I told you in the morning,
That Ignorance is one of those cursed sins that bar and bolt Christ out of the
heart; it is that which shuts them out from having mercy and favor with the
Lord: See Isa. 27.11. For it is a people of no uncerstanding, therefore he that
made them, will have no mercy on them; and he that formed them, will show them
no favor.

3. Such as have sided with Antichrist against Christ, will not be able to
stand in this great day; such as be drunk of the Whores Cup of Fornication,
shall drink of the Cup of Gods Indignation, which is poured out without
mixture; If any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in
his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.9, 10. O Beloved, all those
who have been partakers with her in finning, shall be partakers with her in
suffering; therefore come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye^r c^^ve not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. All that cursed brood
of profane ones, with all the Antichristian. crew, will not be able to stand in
this great day of Gods wrath, but will be consumed like fuel, and devoured as
stubble fully dry, Neh. 1.9, 10. What do ye imagine against the Lo^^^ he will
make an utter end, aff^^ction shall not rise up the second time; for they b^,
folded (...) there as tho^n^, and while they are drunk n^as drank ard^, they
shall be devoured as stutble ^ully dry: So that all those who have assisted
Antichrist against Christ, against his Government, against his Gospel, against
his Spirit, against his Worship, against his Ministers, against his Members,
and against his glorious Cause I say, they will not be able to stand in this
day of Gods wrath; but cry to the Rocks and the Mountains to fall on them, and
to hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 19.19 20, 21. 4 Such as have a form of Godliness, and
dery the power thereof, will not be able to stand in this great day of Gods
wrath; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such
^urn away, 2 Timothy, 3 5. All idle and slothful Professors, who have nothing of
God, nor nothing of Christ, nor nothing of the Spirit, nor nothing of the Power
of the Word in them, having only a Notion or formal Profession; such I say,
will not be able to stand in this Great Day: See Romans 2.17. Behold, thou art
called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and art
confident that thou thy self art a guider of the blind, an instructor of the
foolish, a teacher of babes, which have the form of knowledge and of the truth
in the Law. But mark what God says to such, v. 23. Thou that make thy boast
of the Law, through the breaking of the Law, dishonourest thou God? For the Name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. O! are there not many among
us, who profess God in words, but deny him in works? who have a name to live,
and are dead? who have a form, but not the power? who have all without, and
nothing within? like those in Man. 7. there spoken of by Christ, v. 22. Many
will say to me in that d^y, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and
in thy Name have c^st ^ut Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful works? v.
23. And then will I profess unto them, I never know you, Depart from me ye that
work iniquity.

5. Such as are idle Shepherds, and blind Guides, will not be able to stand in
this great day of Gods wrath, but will cry to the Rocks and the Mountains to
fall on thear, and to hide them from the face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For this, see a few Scriptures amongst
many, what the Lord speaks against idle Shepherds, and blind Guides, who feed
themselves, and not the Flock of Christ. See Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Thus says the
Lord God unto the Shepherds, We be unto the Shepherds of Israel, that do feed
themselves should not the Shepherds feed the flock; Ye eat the fat, and ye
cloth you with the wool; Ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the
flock: The diseased have you not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, weither have ye sought that which was
lost, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. Therefore, O ye
Shepherds hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God, Behold I am
against the Shepherds, and I will requite my stock at their hand, and cause
them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall the Shepherds feed
themselves any more, for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they
may not be meat for them, v. 9, 10. For both Prophet and Priest are prephane,
yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord. Therefore thus
says the Lord of Host, concerning the Prophets, Behold I will feed them with
Wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall, for from the Prophets of
Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into all the land, Jer. 23.11, 15, 16.
See also Hos. 4. from v. 1. to 11. Mark also what our Lord Jesus Christ says,
Mat. 23. of idle Shepherds, and blind Guides, v. 14. Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense, make
long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation Thus you see,
Beloved, that the Scriptures with open mouth do speak forth the desolation and
calamities which will befall idle Shepherds, and blind Guides, in that day; and
if they cannot stand when his wrath is kindled but a little, O what will they
do when his wrath shall come upon them to the utmost, even the fierceness of
his wrath? Then will they not be able to stand.

6. Such as are Hypocrites will not be able to stand in this day of Gods wrath,
but desire, if it were possible, to hide themselves in the Dens and Caves of
the Earth. And the people shall be as the burning of lime, as thorns cut up
shall they be burnt in the fire. Hear, ye that are afar off, what I have done;
and ye that are near, acknowledge my might: The S^mers in Zion are afraid fe^
fullness has surpize^ the Hypocrites: Who amongst us shall dwell ^^th devouring
fi^e? who amongst us s^all dwell with everlasting burning? See Jo^. 8 13. So
are ^^e paths of all that forget God, and the Hyp^^^^es ^^pt shall pe^^sh: v.
14. Whose hope shall ^e cut (...), and w^^se trust shall ^e ^^spide^s we^^: v.
15. He (...) wan upon his horse ^^t it shall not stand (...) shall hold it
fest, but it shall not endu^e. O thou Hypocrite, whoever thou art,
notwithstanding thou have got the talking part of Religion, and make a show
of Godliness, yet all this while thou art a dissembled in thy heart: See Jer.
42 20 21, 22. For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the Lord
your God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord your God, and according unto all
that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it. And now
I have this day declared it to you, but ye have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord your God, nor any thing for the which he has sent me unto you. Now
therefore know certainly, that ye shall die by the Sword, by the Famine, and by
the Pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn. Do ye hear
this ye that are Hypocrites, that God hates such, and will punish them with
great punishments, he will cut them asunder, and give them their portion with
Reprobates, and Cast-aways, in everlasting burning, Mat. 24.51.

7 And lastly, All such as love not the Lord Jesus Christ in truth and
sincerity, will not be able to stand in this day of God's wrath, whether they
be Turks or Jews, Papists or Protestants, bond or free, all is one, for they
will not be able to stand if they love not the Lord Jesus Christ: See 1 Cor.
16.22. If any man loves not the Lord Jesas Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. Oh, Beloved, all those who shall be found unbelievers, unconverted,
and unregenerate in this day of Gods wrath* be they Kings, or Great Men, Rich
Men, or Chief Captains, or Mighty Men, or Freemen, they shall cry to the
Mountains and Rocks, saying, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his
wrath is come.

Thus Beloved, I have showed you briefly in Seven Particulars, who they are
that will not be able to stand in the Day of Gods Wrath; 1. The Profane. 2.
The Ignorant. 3. They that side with Antichrist against Christ. 4. The formal
Professor. 5. The Idle Shepherds and blind Guides. 6. The Hypocrites. 7. And
lastly,
They that love not the Lord Jesus in sincerity and truth.

Obj. But Beloved, it may be you will say, If none of these will be able to
stand, who then will?

Answ. I answer, All those who shall be found having on their Wedding-garments,
and in the Spirit of the Lamb, will be able to stand in this Day, and they are
these: 1. They that overcome, Rev. 2.10. chapter 2.21. chapter 12.11. chapter 11.7. 2. They
that keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev.
12.17. chapter 6.9. 3. They that stand before the Lamb, Rev. 14.1. chapter 17.14. 4.
They that have their Father's Name written in their Forehead, Rev. 14.1. 5.
They that sing a new song, 14.3. 6* They that are redeemed from the earth, v 3.
7. They that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, v 4. 8. They that are not
defiled (...) the pollutions of the wicked, and in their mouth is found no
guile, v. 5.
Now Beloved, these are they who will be able to stand in that great day of
God's Wrath, when others will not be able, but call to the Rocks and Mountains
to fall on them. I shall now proceed in the fourth place to the Use and
Application of this point.

Use 1. And first of all by way of Information. If* it be so, that the greatest
part of Men and Women will not be able to stand in this day of Gods wrath, then
this may inform us of 3 things.

1. That as Men have had their day, so God will have his day: Men have had
their day of sinning, God will have his day of Punishing: Men have had their
day of treasuring up of Wrath, God will have his day of pouring out of Wrath:
Men have had their day of defiling, God will have his day of refining: Men have
had their day of Fornication, God will have his day of Indignation: For the day
of the Lord as near upon all the Heathen; as thou have done, it shall be done
unto thee; thy reward shall return upon thy own head, Obad. ^5. 2. That though
God bears with sinners in the day of his Patience, yet he will not bear with
them in the day of his Wrath, Go through the City, and smite: let not your eye
spare, neither have ye pity, Ezekiel 9.5. O Beloved! in the day of God's Patience,
he bears with you, and wait^th to be gracious: O how many hundred years has
God bore with wicked and profane men, notwithstanding their great provocations
and wickedness; but now in the day of his wrath the Lord will ^ot spare them,
nor show pity to them, but pour out his wrath and indignation upon them, to the
utmost: Therefore shall their plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine, and they shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God
who judges them, Rev. 18.8. O see that terrible word, Isa 42.13, 14 The Lord
shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealous^e l^ke a man of war:
he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. I have long time
holden my peace: I have been still, and refrained my self: Now will I cry like
a traveling woman; I will destroy and deliver at once. Do you see this,
Sinners, how God is resolved to proceed against you in the day of his Wrath,
though he bear with you in the day of his Patience? 3. This day of Gods wrath
will be a very dreadful and terrible day to the wicked, as appears by what has
been said. O Sinners! it will be a day of astonishment, a day of terror, a day
of distress, a day of contempt, a day of destruction, and a day of wrath! O! it
will be a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
Joel 2.2. The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly,
even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly;
that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasting and
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick
darkness, Zeph. 1.14, 15. O who is able to express the Terror of the Almighty,
in this Day of his Wrath! O that every soul that hears me this day, would lay
to heart, and consider with themselves, that they may be able to stand in this
day of Gods wrath. And so much for this Use of Information.
Use 2 By way of Examination and Self-tryal.

O Friends! how much does it concern you and me, to examine our standing, that
we may be able to stand in the day of Gods Wrath, which is coming so fast upon
us. O you see how that his Wrath is but a little kindled, and yet how hard a
matter is it for men to stand, and to abide it; Thousands have been sent to
their Graves by it, and many hundreds have left their Habitations, because of
it, and are fled out of the City, into several parts of this Kingdom for
refuge. O what a sad and doleful place has this City been for several weeks
past! The greatest Trade which bath been here amongst us, was to bury the dead,
and tend the sick. O now my Brethren, if this little be so much, what will it
be when the great day of his wrath is come! Who will then be able to stand? O
therefore examine your selves, and try your faith, examine your faith, whether
it be true; your knowledge, whether it be sanctified; your hope, whether it be
purified; your love, whether it be sincere; your evidences, whether they be
sound; your hearts, whether they be gracious; your desires, whether they be
holy; your ends, whether they be right; and your conversations, whether they be
heavenly, that you may be able to stand in the day of Wrath, in the day of
Death, and in the day of Judgment, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Use 3. By way of Exhortation. And I shall be brief, lest I should intrude too
much upon your patience; but I hope you will not think the time long, for it
may be the last Sermon that I may preach, or you hear. Well (Beloved) is it so,
that the greatest part of men and women will not be able to stand in the day of
God's wrath? Give me leave therefore to exhort you to these three things: 1.
You that are Sinners, to repent of your sins; For he that confesses and
forsakes, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not
prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Happy is
the man that fears always; but he that hardneth his heart, shall fall into
mischief. O sinners, you have grievously sinned against God, you have deserved
as many Hells, as you have committed Sins; you have sinned against his Mercies,
you have abused his Patience, you have resisted his Spir^t, you have not obeyed
his Gospel, you have made light of his Ministers, and you have hated his
Members. O sinners, all this have you done, and yet the Lord has spared you;
and though you have sinned at so high a rate, yet God has given you space to
repent: O let his goodness lead you to repentance, that you die not in your
sins. O therefore, for God's sake, and Christ's sake, be ye prevailed withal;
why will you die, seeing God would have you live? why will you damn your
selves? why will you go to Hell, seeing God would have you go to Heaven? O do
but see what the Lord says, Is^. 1 18. Come sinner, (says the Lord) and let
thee and I reason together, though thy sins be as scarlet, they shall be as snow;
though they be red as crimson, they shall be white as wool Verily, if you have
not hearts of stone, methinks these words should melt you, to see the love, the
pity, the mercy, and willingness of God to do your souls good. 2 Let me exhort
you, to get ^n Interest in the Lord Jesus, that you may be able to stand in the
day of his wrath: O sinners' there will be no standing before Christ, without
an Interest in Christ. O sinners! go to Christ, his Promises are open to you,
his Arms are open to embrace you, his Spirit is ready to assist you, and his
People are ready to own you, and his Angels are ready to attend you, and Heaven
it sel^ ^s ready to receive you. O sinners! if you will but come to Christ, you
shall be reconciled to the Father, justified by the Son, you shall be
sanctified by the Spirit, you shall be delivered from Wrath, you shall be made
the Children of God, you shall have your Names enrolled in the Book of Life:
and finally, you shall be received into everlasting Glory at the end of your
days. O therefore let this prevail with you to go to Christ for Light, for
Life, for Grace, for Strength, and for Comfort and Peace, that of his fullness
you may receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. 3. And lastly, Let me now exhort
you (who are dead to sin, separated from the world, espoused to Christ,
reconciled to the Father) to walk worthy of God, who has called you to his
kingdom and glory, 1 These. 2.12. O ye precious Saints, let me exhort you to
keep your Lamps burning, your Loins girded, your Lives holy, and your Hearts
upright, your Judgments sound, your Consciences pure, and your Garments
unspotted; and be not troubled at Gods dealings and dispensations, though he take
away from you those that are precious to you: for as he sends the Wicked to
Hell, that they may dishonor him no more; so he takes away the Righteous to
Heaven, that they may glorify him more. There seems to be four Reasons why God
swept away the Righteous with the Wicked by the Pestilence. 1. Because they
have finished their Work. 2. From the evil to come. 3. For the humbling of the
rest which remain behind. 4. For the hardening of the Wicked.



Therefore ye precious Saints, you ought to be quiet, and to submit to the Will
of God, and to say, with David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. Now, I beseech you, both Saints and Sinners, to
consider of these things, and the God of Heaven give you understanding in all
things which concern his Glory, and your Eternal Good

[The End of the Second Sermon.]
Watch and Pray.
Mark 14.18 Watch and Pray, lest ye enter into Temptation.


AS Christ is the Churches Friend, so Satan is the Churches Enemy: Her greatest
Enemy: Her cruellest Enemy: Her worst Enemy: Her continual Enemy: He that makes
War against the Remnant of his Seed which keeps the Commands of God, and have
the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17.

The Devil envieth our Happiness, and seeks our Ruin: 1. By tempting of us, 1
Cor. 5.7. 2. By ^ersecuting of us, Rev. 2.10. 3. By accusing of us, Rev. 12.10.
4. By hindering of us, 1 These. 2.18. 5. By beguiling of us, 2 Cor. 11.3.
O Beloved! The Devil is the great Troubler of Saints; the great Deceiver of
Nations; the great Devourer of Souls; the great Enemy of all Mankind, who goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.9. But now here
is the Churches Happiness, that Christ is her Friend, Cant. 5.16. Her greatest
Friend, her dearest Friend, her loving Friend, her best Friend, her constant
Friend, her sympathizing Friend, her mighty Friend. By his Blood she overcomes
the Devil; by his Graces she resists the Devil; by his Might she treads him
under her feet; and by his Faith in his Word she quenches all the fiery Darts
of the Devil. Oh! though Satan hate us, Christ loves us; though Satan condemns us,
Christ justifies us; though Satan accuse us, Christ clears us; though Satan
tempts us, Christ strengthens us; though Satan seeks to destroy us, Christ
preserves us; though Satan buffets us, Christ assists us: 1. By his Spirit. 2. By
his Promises. 3. By his Graces. 4 By his Presence. 5 By his Word. 6 By his
Intercession. 7 By his Power. 8. By his Ministers. 9. By his Examples, 10. By
his Prayers O!
the Lord Jesus has a great love to us, and a care for us, and therefore he
counsels us, in the words of the Text, To watch and pray, l^st we enter into
Temptation. These are the words of our Lord Jesus to his Disciples, they having
been slumbering and sleeping, when Christ had commanded them to Watch. They
contain first, A Supposition of their entering into Temptation, upon which
Christ grounds a Mandatory Exhortation, showing them the way how to avoid it,
in these words, Watch and Pray, etc. Hence we may raise these two Points of
Doctrine:

Doct 1. That a Child of God is attended with Temptations.

Doct. 2. That the only way to avoid the evil of Temptation, is to watch and
pray.

For the first of these, we may observe this Method. 1 Of the Tempter. 2. Of
the Temptation. 3. Of the manner of their working, with Reasons why they have
so much Power:
1. We have four several Tempters in Script^re 1. God tempting Man, i. e.
trying and provi^^^ Man, as in Deuteronomy. 8.2. Thus God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22 1.
which is interpreted, Heb. 11.17. By faith Abraham, when he was tri^d, offered
up Isaac, etc. This tempting is not to evil, nor for our hurt; but God tempts
upon these Accounts: 1. For the trial of his peoples Fear; as in that of
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. For now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
wit^-hold thine only son from me. 2. God tempts for the trial of their Faith,
he proves them in something that is near and dear to them: perhaps deprives them
of some special necessary Mercy, to see whether they can trust him, and believe
in the want of it; whether they can live by Faith upon the God of Mercies, when
the Mercies are gone, as it is written, The just shall live by faith. Heb. 2.
4. Romans 1 17. And it is said of Abraham, Wh^^ he was tried, he offered up
Isaac, Heb. 11.17.3. Again thirdly, the Lord tempts for the proof of their
Obedience: and thus the Lord speaks to Abraham after that trial: And in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed? Why? because thou host
they would my voice. In all this the Lord sees what is in our hearts, as he said
to Israel of old, Deuteronomy. 8 2.2. We may find Man tempting God too, that is,
provoking God to jealousy and wrath; this did the children of Israel at the
waters of Meribah, Deuteronomy 6.19. Ye shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Exodus 17.2.
Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord? But first of all, we tempt God when we doubt of
his Power; as when we are in any straight or difficulty, we mistrust the Power
of God to deliver us, or bestow any Mercy upon us which we stand in need of; as
that Lord did, on whose hand the King leaned, who said, If the Lord would make
windows in heaven, might this thing be? when God had promised, in time of
famine, that on the morrow there should be plenty, 2 King 7 2.2. We tempt God
when we doubt of his Mercy, for God is Mercy in the abstract, and it is a part
of his glorious Style; therefore he cannot endure to lose so great a part of
his Honor, but is provoked by it. 3. When we call his Faithfulness in
question: What greater disparagement or more disgraceful thing can there be to
a man, than to be wrongfully accused for falsifying his word? Then how much
greater provocation is it to the great God, to be impeached for breach of
promise; and counted unfuthful who cannot lie, Heb. 6.18. Lastly* When we
murmur at the hand of God at any of his Judgments; thus Israel did at Meribah,
Exodus 17.2, 3. and this does exceedingly inflame and excite the wrath of God:
we cannot dispose for our selves, and yet we are angry at the Providence of an
All-wise God: we sin, and are not troubled that God corrects us for sin. 3. In
the next place, ou^ Lusts are Tempters, as Jam. 1.14. Every man is tempted,
when he is drawn away of his own hearts lusts, and enticed. Our Lusts strive
within us to be sinfully satisfied, and the flesh wars against the spirit, the
Heart sometimes alluring; and this comes to pass, 1. By representing some
sinful object: It is not good to nourish such Conceptions, but strangle them in
their first appearance, else sinful Thoughts grow upon us. 2. By presenting
some desirableness in the object; but be quick-sighted; sin, however it seems
fair under some colorable pretext, is indeed, upon good deliberation, not at
all to be desired; but sometimes it comes clothed in such a glorious garb, as
if it meant no harm, that you must be fain to fly to God by Prayer against this
Temptation. 3. There Is a persuasion to consent to the Sin; but be not easily
persuaded to offend your Father; Oh! how will our Lusts gain upon us, if we do
not resist? strive with all your might; the greater your allurements to sin is,
the greater the sin is. I appeal to Saints experience. 4. In the fourth and
last place, We have the Devil tempting Man; he is called the Tempter, Mat. 4.1,
3. Mar. 1.13. And indeed this is the grand Tempter, that makes use of our Lusts
as a subservient Organ or Instrument for his Temptations against the Soul; and
indeed, were it not for our Lusts, it would be in vain for Satan to tempt: As
we see in Christ, there was nothing within for Satan to take hold of, Christ
being without sinful Lusts; but Satan must come by word of mouth to tempt him,
as Mat. 4.1, 3. But here it might be inquired, How shall I know when Satan
raised the Temptation.


1. I answer, first, When it comes strongly and forcibly upon the soul, as it
were, with a double power, even overthrowing the soul (almost) at the first
Encounter. There Is a double strength in the stroke. 2. When it is of long
continuance, as that was which Paul besought the Lord twice for, 2 Cor. 12.8.
Satan stirs up the heart afresh, and the lusts of the heart! When the fire is
ready to die and go out, he blows it up again, adds life and strength to the
Temptation, which else could not last long. The Lusts they are the combustible
Matter, and Satan he inflames and sets them on fire. 3. The Temptation when,
though it may be weak at first, yet at length, by degrees, it grows stronger
and stronger. Satan begins to reason with, and persuade the soul by plausible
arguments. 4. We may perceive the working of the Serpent, the Devil: when the
temptation is full of wiles. and subtle delusions, Ephesians. 16.11.2 Tim. 2.16. Rev.
2.24. The more intricate and full of subtilty the temptation is, the more cause
there is to suspect. Satan is very busy for the ensnaring of the Soul.

5. Lastly, The more it is in direct opposition to God in his Commands, or the
like, we may be the more sure it is of Satan's framing; for the heart, and its
lusts, seek for satisfaction, and then are still, (if Satan joi^^ not) though God
be not so directly opposite: But the Devil strikes always at God in his
temptations; or if not always, yet most frequently.

Thus much for the Tempter; now for the Temptation it self There are several
sorts of temptations; but to reduce them all to these three Heads, they do
concern, and strike at. First of all, God; this being Satan's great aim, to
oppose God; as two enemies, always in direct opposition to one another; and
thus he tempts either: 1. As to the Being of God, calling in question the very
truth of the Essence of the great God, causing the soul to doubt whether there
be a God or no, like Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, etc Exodus 1.5.

But secondly, Some Temptations touch upon the nature of God, as to the manner
of his Being, the Mystery of three distinct Persons, as to their Offices and
Operations, in the individual Godhead, God the Father, God the Son, God the
Holy Spirit; and yet all but one God blessed for ever. Again, As to those
Divine inseparable Attributes of God, his independency, purity, immutability,
greatness and eternity; his goodness, grace, mercy, love, patience, and
justice. I say, sometimes as doubting of these things is our temptation; yea,
and could Satan prevail, we should flatly deny his Being, Nature, Properties
and all. Look sternly on, and resist strongly such Temptations as these, which
do immediately and presumptuously entrench upon God's Sovereign and Just
Prerogative. And, if I mistake not, a great device of Satan's in this
stratagem, is, to persuade the Creature from all dependency upon a Creator,
that so being left to her self, and standing upon its own strength, he may more
destroy it. For what is the Creature without the Creator's power?

Again, some Temptations touch our Spiritual Being. Such as are an evil heart
of unbelief, mistrusting the grace of God, despairing of the goodness of our
Condition. Satan would fain raze the very Fountain of Spiritual Existence,
Adoption, Justification, and hopes of Salvation; it is his great design to
shake the very groundwork of this Building, and to persuade, that all is false.
But this temptation is fruitless, when we build aright upon a right foundation,
by Faith accompanied with repentance from dead works, upon Christ Jesus, as the
alone Author and Meritorious Cause of our Justification and Eternal
Clarification.

3. Lastly, Satan by his fiery Darts strikes at our well-being to disturb our
Peace by the omission of some Duty, or commission of some Sin; when he finds he
cannot prevail to destroy out being, then he would deprive us of well-being,
our joy and comfort. But know, though these Temptations may trouble us, yet shall
they never destroy us. Now for the manner of these Temptations, how they work.

1. When we fall under any want, strait, change of Providence, or the like;
then is a time for temptation to work; as when Christ had fasted and was an
hungered, then comes the Tempter, If thou be the Son of God, command that these
stones may be made bread, Mat. 4.3.

2. When we are first turning from sin to God, then we are sure to meet with a
Tempter, Satan will be busy.

3. When we are troubled, dejected, disconsolated, either to the outward or
inward estate, then beware of Satan's temptation, he will be furthering our
disquietments.

4. When we are arrived to some good hopes, through Grace, to some Confidence in
the Mercy of God the Father, through his Son Jesus Christ; then also shall we
find the battering Assaults of Satan to shake our Confidence: but be sure
always, that the grounds of your Confidence be good, established upon that
Everlasting Rock, Jesus Christ. For, if I mistake not in my observation, there
are two great Rocks, which Satan strives to split a Soul upon, Presumption and
Despair: Sometimes endeavoring to cause Souls to flatter up themselves, and
think Grace is theirs, Christ is theirs, and all is theirs, when it is nothing
so, but by this he might carry them blind to Hell, hood-winking their Souls so,
that they never come to see thoroughly, that they are in a bad condition, but
think always their condition good. The other Rock is Despair; Satan striving,
if he cannot blind them, as he does the other presumptuous Souls, yet to make
them go sorrowing all their days, thinking they shall never obtain that Mercy
which others think they always had.

5. Satan suits his Temptations to our Dispositions; he has various Objects
for diverse Spirits; for the proud haughty Soul, for the lustful Heart, for the
covetous Worldling, for the Prodigal Son, for the rash giddy Brain, for the
sluggish Drone, for the melancholy Person, for the light cheerful Spirit;
especially these two, either sinking the one in the terrible Waves of black and
dreadful Thoughts, or tossing and listing up the other with the Wind of foolish
Fancy. Oh! what black Apprehensions shall the one have of it self and God? and
what light and slight Thoughts the other, of the present State, and of Eternity.

Lastly, Satan aims to lull the Soul asleep in carnal security: And to this
end, presents great sins as small, and little sins, (if any there be) as none
at all: But sometimes he will add by temptation, as it were a
multiplying-glass, to the soul, so that then every sin looks with a ghastly
countenance, is thought to be the sin against the Holy Spirit, an unpardonable
Sin.

Having thus shown how, and upon what occasion Satan works; I shall take
occasion to enquire, why they have so much power, as many times to prevail.

1. Because of the Tempters Power, he is perhaps too strong for the soul.

2. Because of the Tempters Policy; if he cannot prevail by open force, the
soul being well and strongly grounded; then he invades by subtle devices, and
secret stratagems, so that the soul cannot escape by strength only; and
therefore (^wanting wisdom to evade his cunningly framed Arguments) is baffled
by him, and overthrown.

3. The enticing Nature of the Tempter's Baits; As, to instance in one case, Oh
how many poor sincere souls, yet guilty of too much curiosity, have been
entangled by curiously glorious, and gloriously curious Tenets, which were no
better than the devilish temptation of that Hellish Tempter! How many, (which
yet is strange to think, though there is no reason to fear it) nay, after their
seemingly comfortable, really, comfortless, wandering walkings in thought-ways
of truth, have cause to fit down, and set down their steps, marking for every
step a sin; and for every sin, letting fall a tear of blood.

4. Temptations often prevail by reason of the strength of Corruptions, which
the Tempter works upon. Were there no Corruptions, there would be few or no
Temptations; I am sure, they should not prevail.

5. Lastly, The Tempter's prevalency proceeds from the weakness and low estate
of the inward man: Sin is never at a higher flood, than when Grace is at a low
ebb: It is a hard matter (believe Experience) to keep the Soul from sinking at
such a time. Nothing more easy than to thrust one under water, when the depth
of the water is more than the height of the man.

Obj. But now to make sure the Doctrinal part, I shall lay down some Reasons,
why the People of God are thus attended with Temptations: for it is a natural
Objection against this Point, Why will the Lord, who is so mere. full of his
People, suffer them to be thus used and buffeted by Temptation?

Answ. I answer in general, on Gods behalf, that he is never the less tender in
it, as will appear in particular, thus: 1. Because one end seems to be this,
that they might know themselves the better, and see what they are naturally;
were it not for Temptation, we should not come to know our own corruption; we
see by this, what lust is most prevalent in us, according to that in Heb. 12.1.
The sin that does so easily beset us; and what Satan makes most use of against
us; we learn by this our own weakness to resist, without assisting Grace. 2.
Again, It is for a Saint's Exercise: This Tempted Condition, is God's
Artillery, his School of Arms, wherein God brings up his Children, trains them,
and instructs them how to clasp on their Helmet of Salvation, to put on the
Breast plate of Righteousness, to hold out the shield of Faith, to brandish the
Sword of the Spirit: In a word, how to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, even our
whole Armor of Righteousness. 3. That we might know our Enemies, that we may be
the more watchful over Satan, Sin, and the World. 4. That we might long to be
at home with our Fathers, that we might be weaned from the Milk; and drawn from
the Breasts of this present World. 5. Lastly, The Lord does it to beat down our
pride, and keep us humble, we should else be too much listed up through our
continued spiritual prosperity; and thus it was with Paul. 2. Cor. 10.7 8. This
Doctrine may afford us this useful Application.


1. By way of Information. 2. Reprehension. 3. Examination. 4. Consolation. 5.
Exhortation.
1. Information. It may inform us, 1. Of the Devil's Enmity, who is so much the
Saints Foe, as that he will not let them be quiet. This old Serpent at first
deceived Adam, and deprived him of Paradise; yea, and ever since be has been
and still is very busy to dispossess the Saints, if possible, of their
spiritual Paradise. 2. We may learn hence the remaining seeds of corruptions
that are in the best of Saints; without which (as I noted before) the Devil
would always tempt in vain. 3. We may perceive what is the Saints state here
below, it has indeed many fair pleasant prospects to the Christians eye, (I
mean the eye of Faith) but the way is a tempted, troublesome, dangerous way,
Act. 14.22. 4. It may teach us the Wisdom of God, and his great Care of the
Saints, who make use of Satan's Enmity, and our Corruptions, to do us good
withal.


2. Reprehension; and thus it reproves those who think it an easy matter, a
thing of nothing, to be a Christian. 2. It reproves such who censure poor
tempted, afflicted ones. 1. Under their Temptations, though not overcome. 2.
When fallen; and Oh how rash, uncharitable, and unchristian-like are they. 3.
It is an occasion of Rebuke to those who think it strange, that either
themselves, or others should be tempted.


3. Examination. This in these Particulars. 1. To examine who is the Tempter.
2. To examine the Temptations. 3. To examine the Frame of our Hearts, under
Temptations, whether we carry it lightly, and indifferently, or are grieved and
troubled for them.


4. Consolation. From these Arguments: Arg. 1. A tempted condition is frequent
among the Saints, yea, and so usual, that I may Confidently question, whether
ever he were truly a Saint, that is not tempted? And for this Assertion,
there is a cloud of Witnesses in Scripture; one in 1 Cor. 13. Arg. 2. God has
promised Assistance to the tempted ones, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient
for thee, etc. God is as able to help, as thou can be weak when thou art
tempted.

Arg. 3. Christ was tempted, that he might know how to succor these that are
tempted, Heb. 2.27, 28. read from ver. 9.

Arg. 4. It is a blessing, or a blessed thing, to endure temptations, James,
1.12. and 5.11.

Arg. 5. The Saints temptations are needful for them, 2 Pet. 1.6. Thou can
not be without them.

Arg. 6. They are but for the trial of Faith, 1 Pet. 1.7. Jam. 1.3, 4. And
should we be grieved, that our Faith is proved? The Goldsmith rather uses,
than avoideth the fire, for the trying his Gold: Neither is the Gold
dimin^shed, but rather its worth is more fully known, when the dr^ss is gone.
This is the trial that does try all the Faith of every Child of God. Arg. 7.
God has promised the burden shall not be too great for us to bear, 1 Cor.
10.13. This is ground of comfort, to know we shall not be overmatched by the
temptation.

Arg. 8. A great comfort ^t is, that God thinks upon us at such a time* we are
sure of this, both because of the temptations, and also the support we have
under them. Arg. 9. It is a great sign of God's love, else he would never take
ca^e to t^y and purge us.

Arg. 10. Many times is gees before some signal Providence. And we may take it
as a great sign, that God is about to do some great thing for us, or we must be
employed in some great work for him, Thus he did with Israel, proved them forty
years before he gave them to possess the Land.

Arg. 11. Be not disconsolate; strong and long enduring Temptations, when
meeting with resistance, are a strong Argument of a strong Faith, and
especially of the growth and increase of Faith. But (to be brief.)

Arg. 12. Consider the Saints condition here is not their best state; there is
Heaven to come yet, where there is no Tempter.

Arg. 13. We have not been so much, nor so often tempted, as we our selves have
tempted God.

Arg. 14. The Devils Temptations, though they be evils, yet are not the Saints
evils, unless they are overcome by them.

Arg. 15. It is a great sign, as of Gods love, so of Satan's hatred; and so
consequently a token that thou art none of his, but Gods; else he would never
rage thus, The Devil makes no such ado with wicked ones.

Arg. 16. As our Temptations now abound, so shall our Joy (in time) much more
abound.

Many Arguments, for Consolation, I might make use of, and much more
enlargement upon these; all which (for brevity sake) I here omit.

5. For Exhortation. 1. Beware how you tempt the Devil to tempt you; how you
give an occasion by indulging any sin or lust. When you are tempted, be not
cowardly, but courageous, do not fly, but resist, Jam. 4.7. 2. Beware of
Pride, when delivered out of temptation; this may make us fall into dangerous
relaps. Having finished this Point, I proceed to show in the next Observation,
how we may avoid the evil of Temptation.


Doct. 2. The only way to avoid the evil of temptation is to Watch and Pray,

In the handling of this Doctrine, we may consider these four things: 1. What
it is to Watch. 2. What it is to Pray. 3. The proof of the Point.


1. How Watching and Praying may conduce to our escape from the evil of
Temptation.

Concerning the Duty of Watching, observe 1. What Watching implies. 2. How we
do to Watch a Whatching implies, 1. A continual waking, like the Spouse, Can
5.2. 2. A diligent harkening. Thus the Watchman, Isa. 21.7. 3* A constant
readiness: Peter exhorts under a Metaphorical Expression, 1 Pet 1.13. Gird up
your loins, i. e. be ready; it is taken from the Jews long garments, which they
used to gird up about them, that they might run with less interruption.



2 How we may do to Watch; I shall but name the particulars. 1* Let the heart
be continually fixed upon God. Oh, how will this cool our affections to the
world, and kindle the fire of love to God. 2. Let the eye be much upon himself:
this will keep us low in spirit: And blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs
is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.3. 3. Beware of drowsiness: We should shake it
off by Prayer. 4. Be well resolved in spirit: mind that of the Prophet, 1 Kin.
18.21. 5. Be sure all be well within; be sure thy foundation be Christ: let
there be no sin unrepented of that will breed sorrow: harbor no enemy, no lust
in the soul, Pro. 20.9. 6. Trust not thine (no, no, not thine own) heart, but
regulate it by the Word of God; for the heart is deceitful, Jer. 17.9. And he
is a fool that trusts his heart, Pro. 28.26. 7. Keep therefore a narrow eye to
the heart, Prove. 4.23. 8. Call thy ^eart often to 2 strict account, Ps. 4.4.
Examine diligently, What have I done? What do I now? What am I about to do? 9.
And if there be any thing out of order, tarry not, but repair it suddenly, lay
sin upon Christ, and then mourn over it. 10. Let nothing be suggested, and
presently entertained, but first brought to trial: See if it be the will of
God, if it be for his glory; it is not his will, etc. 11. Be sure to keep
Conscience clear; a little filth (here) stops all the Channel. It is dangerous
to know of but of one sin, and not confess it; much more dangerous to know thy
sin, and wink at it. 12. For this end keep an open car to Conscience, let it
speak 13. Let the mouth be stopped to sin, and the hands tied from wickedness.
David prays, that a watch may be set to the doors of his lips; and certainly it
is very needful. 14. Let the whole armor of God be on, Ephesians. 10, to 18.
Thus much concerning Watching; now concerning Prayer. Consider 1. What Prayer
is. 2. The several kinds of Prayer. 3. The manner how we are to pray. 1. Prayer
is the outward enlargement of the Souls inward breathings; it is a work of
God's Spirit, and so flows out of the spirit and heart of man, Zech. 12.10. To.
8.26, 27. Jude 20. 1 Cor. 14.19. Ps. 62.8. and 42.4. Prayer is a talking of the
heart and soul with God, and of such a heart as is prepared by God, Jer. 29.13.
Ps. 27.1. and 10.17. 2. And thus it is either mental, in the heart only, Exe.
14.15. a S^m. 1.13. or else vocal, uttered by the voice, Psa. 77.1. Again, this
is secret Prayer, when we pray alone; Thus Daniel did, when he set upon his
windows, Dan. 6.10, 11.

Or more public, when we pray with others in the Family, Congregation, etc.
And here let some Preparatives to Prayer be added. 1. Pray that you may pray:
lift up your eye and your heart to God, when about to pray; thus did David,
Psalm. 14.1.1, 2.

2. Meditate, 1. On God's sufficiency, and especially his Promiser, Psalm. 50
15. Mal 7 7. This will make you confident in Prayer. 2. On thine own wants and
vileness, that thou may be fervent; so did Ezra. 9 6, 7. 3. On the great
Majesty of God, to beget humility and lowliness of spirit, Eccl. 5.2. Genesis 3 2
9, 19.
On the Relation thou stand in to God, by Christ, as thy Father.

3. Now how are we to pray? 1 We must pray what we understand, and understand
what we pray, 1 Cor. 14 15. 2. We must pray in the holy Spirit, be directed by
it, Jude 20. Romans 8.26. 3. In the Name and Mediation of Christ, i. e. relying
upon the Merits of his, not our own Righteousness, Joh. 14 13, 14, Joh. 16.23.
4. With Faith, believingly, that God will give us what is good for us, Jam.
1.6, 7. 5. With humility and acknowledgment of our own unworthiness, Psalm.
10.17. 6. With an heart willing to be cleansed by the blood of Christ, Jam. 4
6. from every pollution, Heb. 10.12. Psalm. 66 18. 7. With love to the Saints,
Mat. 6.14, 15. 8. With zoal and fervency, Jam. 5.16. 9. Do not give off but
wrestl^ with God for a Blessing, with unwearied constancy, Luke 18. (...) 9.
Mat. 15. 10. Pray, for heavenly things, first and most: seek earthly things in
the second place; the one absolutely, the other conditionally, Mat. 6.3^. 11.
Pray for things agreeable to God's Will, 1 John 5.14. Mat. 20.21, 22. 12. Take
heed you love not long prayers, and think to be heard because they are long,
Mat. 6.7.


Now I come to the proof of this point: That the only way to avoid the evil of
Temptation, as to, watch and pray. This is clearly stated in the Text; so that
it scarce needs more confirmation; only take that of Paul, when buffetted by
Temptation: For this, says he, I besought the Lord thrice, 2. Cor. 12.8 There
is great need of Watching and Praying: 1. Before we fall into Temptation. 2.
When we are under Temptation. How Watching and Praying conduces to the
anticipating the Assaults of Satan, frustrating Temptation. First of all, for
Watching. 1. It sets us in readiness for an Assault: When we are expecting, we
shall not be taken unprovided. 2. It adds resolution, to stand, it out against
Satan: We know suddenness strikes us into a fear, when expectation and
deliberation increases courage. 3. It is a countermine to all Satan's
stratagems: It will deceive the Deceiver, to find us watching with spiritual
diligence, when he would have us sleeping in carnal security. 4. Watching
secures us from much evil that might be added, in case we were drawn to the
Temptation: for security is no better than a temptation, especially at such a
time. Secondly, for Prayer: This conduces to avoid the evil of Temptation,
because it fetches help from God, in whom is all our strength: for it is Gods
promise, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me, Psalm. 50 15. It is a great comfort, under temptation, to
have a God to go to, especially one that is able and willing to help.


This may instruct us. 1. Then there is great need of watching. It is certainly
a universal necessary duty for all Saints, at whatever time, to watch: So says
Christ our Savior, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch, Mar. 13.27. The
great end of this duty, is the coming of the Lord Jesus. Watch, says Christ,
for you know not what hour your Lord does come, Mat. 24.42, 44. There are three
Considerations may move us to watch. 1. Let us consider whom we offend and
dishonor by our neglect in watching, no less than God; (...) would we rather
than want a nap of security, displease our God? Is God no more worth to us than
so? Let as seriously weigh how great an offense, how great a dishonor to God,
our unwatchfulness is; and this will engage us to watch. 2. Let us consider
whom we gratify and advantage by our neglect; no less an enemy than Satan, the
enemy of our Souls: And shall we pleasure our grand Adversary? Oh no! then let
us watch. 3. Whom we displeasure; it is our selves: And will we, that our Souls
should be losers? If not, let us be much, yea always upon our watch. But
secondly, It may inform us of the necessity of praying at all times: Pray
without ce^sing, 1 These. 5.17. So David would pray, and cry aloud, At evening,
at morning, and at noon, Psalm. 55.17. And Daniel prayed thrice a day, Dan.
6.16. It is the duty of all, and every Saint, in all conditions. In Spiritual
things, 1. Pray for Grace, that God would give and increase it, either in it
self or others. 2. Pray against sin, against the guilt of sin, a against the
power of sin. 3. Pray against Satan's Temptations. 1. Against the occasion of
temptation. That if it be possible, thou may shun and escape the very
appearance of it. 2. That the strength of corruption within, and the power of
temptation without, may not be so prevalent, as to lead thee captive to evil.

2. Pray, that the entrance into temptation, may be no disadvantage to thy
grace; and that the escape out, may be no impeachment to, but rather for the
advancement of God's glory. 1. Pray for nothing but what thou stand in need
of: Unnecessary things are not to be the subject of our Petitions: And
therefore our Savior bids us pray for our daily Bread, and so that good man
Ag^^, Give me ^ither poverty nor riches, Prove. 30.7, ^, ^ 2. Even in these
things, pray with submission to the Will of God 3. If Watching and Praying be
the means to escape the evil of temptation, then the strength of a Saint is not
sufficient: No, we must go to God for a deliverance. 4. If we do not watch and
pray, all other ways and means are irregular at least, if not sin. Thus much
for Information. Now for Exhortation. 1. Watch and Pray continually, but
especially at a time of temptation. 2. Be serious in Watching and Praying; some
do it between hot and cold, or by fits, or with much lightness of spirit: But
says the Apostle, B^ sober, and Watch unto prayer; Sobriety and Seriousness
becomes those that call upon God.

[The End of the Third Sermon.]
Considerations of DEATH: Containing some few Reasons why men fear it, and
opposite Reasons, by way of Answer, why they should not fear it.
Obj. 1 FIrst, Because thereby we are deprived of the exercise of all our
Senses; so that whatever delight either our Taste, Smell, Hearing, Sight, or
Feeling has afforded us, we shall, enjoy the same no more; whilst (perhaps)
many Generations after us shall have the fruition thereof. Answ. 1. As to the
exercise of our Senses afford opportunity of delight, so are they thereby
capable of annoying and grieving us: As the Taste by bitterness and sharpness,
etc. the smell by noisome pollution, corruption, etc. the Hearing by terrible
and hideous noise and evil tidings: the sight by loathsome, affrighting, and
miserable appearances; the Feeling by tedious pains, etc. Again, We have had
the benefit of surviving former Generations, who were liable to what we are;
and so shall those be who shall succeed us. Obj. 2. But that which aggravates
the evil hereof, is a man's being cut off in the flower or strength of his age;
whereas if he live the common age of man, he should the more contentedly leave
this life. Ans. 1. Why, what is man? Is he not a flower, and as grass, and the
like? And are they not cut off in their best estate? And may not God, when he
walks in, or vieweth this garden of humane flowers, have as much liberty to
crop them, as men have of their^? Surely yea; for all are his. 2. And though God
permit some men to live, as long as a^ ordinary course of nature, often be it,
seventy year^ (which is judged the more common) or more; yet he has not
promised them so long life. 3. And though some live so long, yet considering the
Wars, and Plagues, and other Diseases among men, it is not without reason
thought, there are many more die, who have not lived according to the course of
Nature. 4. As we conclude, that no person better, or so well as the Gardener,
or such as sowed, planted, dressed, and frequently practices about the Flowers
and plants, knows when, and for what reason, to gather, and pluck up; so no
person knows better, nor so well, as God knows well to cut or pluck up what he
has planted in the World, who does all his Actions upon good and weighty
Reasons, even greater and better than any Gardener or other person has, for
what he does in his concernment.
Obj. 3. In death a man becomes a loathsome spectacle to all beholders,
insomuch that the sight and smell of the survivers find not more noisome
offense from, and account not more vilely of the most loathsome Creatures in
the world, than of a dead and rotten Corpse of mankind: And, is not that very
grievous, to become from a delightful companion, an abhorrence of all people?
Ans. 1. True, being dead, a man becomes a loathsome spectacle to all beholders.
And do not many Diseases, to which a man is incident in this life, effect the
same in beholders? 2. Though man do become by death what is suggested, yet: has
he then no sense thereof, and in that is the Proverb verified, (What the eye
sees not, the Heart rues not;) for look on man in that case (as we may) as a
dead lump of Corruption, and what of misery can we apply thereto? Who looks on
a Dunghill; or a Jakes, and says, Alas, for its misery? the same feels not and
knows not any: So that although the thoughts of such a condition by Death grieves
us whilst living, yet in that condition it self we shall be free from such
grief 3. Again, consider, That we were but earth before we had life; and being
dead, we return to our first estate; and though withal, we become for a season
more impure and corrupt than barely earth, yet in time we shall become very
dust, when the putrefaction is consumed; and in that sense (but especially in a
more excellent) will that saying be fulfilled, viz. Corruption shall put on
Incorruption. Obj. 4. Death deprives man of his society, with whom he has had
sweet converse. Ans. 1. True, but in order (if he die in Gods favor) to enjoy
in due season better society than men on earth have. 2. Besides, as thou losest
thy friends on earth, so thou art rid of thy enemies there too. Obj. 5. Though
Death may make way for better society than we have been used to here, yet who
knows when it shall be, the Body not being to receive new life till the general
Resurrection, which may be very long first. Ans. Suppose it be so (as the most
Christians believe) that the best part of man receives glory and happiness
immediately after death; yet from the time of death, to the general
Resurrection (at which time all knowing Christians believe the reward of the
Righteous will not fail) the space betwixt Death and it, is but as one day; as
he who by means of an Apoplexy, or like occasion, sleeps many days and nights
without waking, cannot esteem of the time he has slept, answerable to the
measure thereof, but it may be to him as one day or one night; and in this
sense may Death be reckoned (as usually in the holy Scripture it is) a sleep.
Obj. 6. Suppose a man should die by the hand of a cruel Manslayer, who
delights in torturing and destroying the body of man, as has been seen; would
not the conceit of one so cruel, coming to act his mind upon a person, make the
thoughts of such a death more terrible, when therein a man is no more regarded
than a dog, or the vilest creature? Ans. 1 Yea: But do not many, by reason of
wounds and gangreen'd members in their life, for preserving the body, limb, or
member, endure as great pain, and tremble as much at the sight of the
Surgeon, when he comes to do his office on them, as a man does at the sight
of the Executioner to do his? And consider, that all that is commonly done at
such a death, causes less pain to the party, than what some do suffer by the
cutting off one limb, or curing some one wound or disease. 2. Again, consider,
That the more of torment a man endures in this life, whether at death or
otherwise, the less he is like to suffer after this life, and the more blessing
he is likely then to enjoy, if he be a good or worthy man, suffering here as a
child of God, and not a Reprobate, Rev. 18. v. 7. Chap 20. v. 4, 5, 6. Obj. 7.
But in our present Estate we have Being, Life, Sense, and Reason; and in Death
we shall have (at the most) only Being; and is not that very grievous to
consider, that we should be reduced to no better condition than a piece of
Earth, or a Stone? Ans. It is true, that the consideration thereof is very
grievous in it self; but yet whilst man has Reason, as well as Being, Life and
Sense, let him use it to consider also that he has no more cause to complain,
that for a piece of the Earth he now treads on if it should please God (as at
the first) to create thereof a man like himself, and shortly reduce it to its
former state; for thus it is now with mankind in general. Obj. 8. It is
confessed, that there is a Proverb, (From one pleasure a thousand dolours) but it
seems to be no better than a flourish of learned men, to color over a bad
matter: For although the miseries of man in this life are many, yet if the
benefits therein did not surmount those miseries, it is likely that men would
not so much desire to continue therein, as now they do; and therefore who would
not fear Death? Ans 1. Suppose it be granted, that the Proverb is but a
flourish, and that the benefits of this life do surmount the miseries thereof;
yet no man is able to say, how long a person, in order to be happy should live
here to enjoy these benefits: But God he knows, and he has appointed for men
once to die; therefore rest satisfied in his Wisdom for disposing of thy time
for Death, concluding that the same shall be in its due season. 2. Again,
Consider, That it is Gods Prerogative over all his Creatures, to dispose of
them how and when he will. 3. Moreover, God has already set the bounds of thy
life, beyond which thou can not pass: wherefore patiently commit thy self to
him in well-doing, and quietly satisfy thy self with pleasure, making of
Necessity a Virtue; for it is in vain for a man to strive against the stream,
by tormenting himself with that which he cannot avoid; yet this does not hinder
that all men may (yea ought) to use what lawful means God gives them
opportunity of, for saving their lives. Obj. 9. Well, though it be granted, that
these Answers. which have been urged, have (most, if not all of them) common
reason and experience on their fide; yet there remains further ground to fear
death, as well from the holy Scripture, as Nature or Custom does evidence, and
that in part is this, viz. Death is reckoned the King of Terrors, as in Job.
18.14. compared with H^b. 2.15. Ans. Death is indeed granted to be the King of
Terrors, but that is in regard of a certain sting that is in it; if that sting
be taken away, Death will not be saterrible as before, yea it will be rather
gain than l^ss to die, if that sting reach not the party dying. Obj. 10. I
confess, there may seem to be some comfort in that Answer, if one knew how to
escape that Sting; but that is a thing so difficult, that I greatly fear death:
If I were sufficiently provided in that case, I should have comfort. Ans. It is
true, that the difficulty lies even there, where it is expressed; but though it be
so difficult, yea impossible with man, yet it is not so difficult with God, he
has sufficiently provided for man in that case; for he that is King of Kings
has subdued that King of Terrors, and done what is needful for man concerning
the same; for which purpose see these Scriptures, viz. 1. Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
Job. 3.14, 15, 16, 17 and part of Ro^a. 18 from v. 5, to 12. and afterward to
the end of the Chapter. Obj. 11. I grant it appears plain enough, that there
is, through Jesus Christ, victory wrought over that enemy mentioned, and
answerably the Sting is taken away that I feared; I say, taken away for some,
but it seems not for all, because it is said, The sting of death is sin; so
t^a^ where sin is, there the sting is also; and I know my self a sinner,
therefore in danger of that sting. Ans. Indeed, if thou know thy self a
sinner, and griev'st not for it, but art therewith content, neither repented
of, nor reformed from it, I cannot say, the sting of Death is taken away for
thee; but if thou do truly repent of thy sin, and endeavor with thy heart to
forsake sin, the sting of Death is taken away for thee; for the Scripture tells
us, Christ died for sinners, that is to say, humble penitent sinners, not for
obstinate ones: A notable example whereof was manifested, when the Savior of
the World himself was held up, viz. in that of the two Thieves; the one railed
on Christ, and was reproved; the other humbled himself, he also prayed, and
received the answer of salvation Obj. 12. Indeed that Example (methinks) does
tend to prove what you say; but in so considerable a Case as this, a man would
desire more than one Witness. Ans. Therefore take more, viz. Prove. 8 13 Isa. 1.
from v. 16. to 19. Mat 9.12, 13. Romans 5.8 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.

S^^^ further Grounds whereon a poor sinner may expect M^r^^, through the
Merits of Jesus Christ.
THrough a sense of sin, so to look on the Lord Christ, as those who were stung
with Scorpions in the Wilderness, did on the brazen Serpent. 2. Next follows
humbling of the Soul, the effects of which is to be seen in these Scriptures,
viz Joh. 22 29. Psalm. 10.17. Isa. 55.15. Jam. 4.6. Which Humiliation begets a
Self-examination; by which knowing the Holy Rule of Life, and comparing a man's
Life to that Rule, trying how his Case is, he is thereby ready to say, (in
respect of his misery) as the Apostle does, Romans 7.9, 10, 11. sees himself a
dead man in the sense of the Law. Then that works in him a holy sorrow, and
that a repentance not to be repented of, viz. Repentance to salvation, 2 Cor.
7.10, 11.

It brings him to see, not only that he is a condemned or guilty Person, but
that he is irrecoverably lost, must needs perish, without some person, as
Mediator or Redeemer, do undertake for his Ransom or has undertaken it; for
that God is infinitely just, and he must have his Justice satisfied; and all
that the poor souls can do, is but to amend his life for the future, walking
more conformable to the righteous Law of God, than heretofore. But alas! that
is no more than what we ought to be for the time to come, it will not satisfy
Divine Justice for the Transgressions already done against the Law of God, any
more than a man's paying another, an ensuing Week, Month, or Year, for all he
is engaged for within that space of time, does satisfy or clear the Debt which
became due in time before that Week. Neither (indeed) can a man, of himself
satisfy for what he shall owe to it, in the remaining part of his life. Now
this consideration works the soul into a melting frame, brings him on his knee,
to say, as the poor Publican, Lord, have mercy on me a sinner: And, as the
Prodigal humbled, and sees all his shifts in vain, for yielding him that solid
comfort his soul thi^^ ^^th after; therefore resolves to go home to his Father;
and although he may look upon him, as enraged against him, (for which his soul
knew there was a just cause) yet he goes humbling himself to his Father,
saying, Father I have etc. and am ^o more worthy to be called thyson. Now
observe the success. When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and
had compassion, and fell on his neck, and kissed him; and farther entertained
him, not as a servant, as he humbly besought, (for the humble shall be exalted)
but Son, and rejoiced in him, Luke 15. The Assyrians also well knew what good
this humble Application was likely to effect in an Israchtish King, (1 King.
20.31, 32.) and if mercy may be expected from one of those Kings, then much
more may it be from the Supreme, the King of those Kings, the Almighty, who
has promised large Grace, humble souls. So He^ier, (at the advice of Morde^ai)
chap. 4, 5. made good proof of this humble way of addressing for Mercy, in a
case otherwise desperate, the success whereof was that Royal Scepter held
forth, with Grace, to grant even beyond the Petition, though she knew not when
she went about it, but that she should perish; yet wisely perciving that she
must perish, if she had not so applied, she proceeded. Thus was it with the
Lepers. 2 King. 7.4. If they went into the City, they should suffer Famine; if
they stay where they were, they must die; they therefore would venture for
relief among their enemies, being sure they could not be worsethan they were,
they could but die one way or another. So when the Soul is thus brought ^o see
its misery, and humble it self thoroughly, withal is willing to embrace what
means soever represents so much as a possibility of saving it; then God shows
his mercy to refresh it, according to that ^^t^ Chapter of Isaiah, v. 15, 16,
etc. To revive the spirit of humble, and to r^vive the heart of the contrite
ones. So Psalm. 51.15. ^^^k. 3^ 11. and forward. And Christ comfortably invites
such a poor sinner, that is w^^ry, and heavy laden with the sense of his sin,
he invites him to come and receive rest; and thus tho Gospel does in general
give encouragement to humble penitent sinners, to expect Salvation from the
eternal God, the Sting before spoken of being taken away. Then being truly
humbled under the sense of that miserable condition which sin has made a man
liable to, and being rightly desirous of Salvation; that which is re^^ired of
him, is, only to believe that the righ^^ous God, who might have made him
eternally miserable, has notwithstanding, through his tender compassion (his
mercy being above all his Works) resolved on, a way to satisfy his Justice, by
requitting the Guilty, who was no way able to pay a sufficient Ransom for his
own Redemption, therefore provided a Price satisfactory to redeem poor fallen
Man from the Curse; concerning which, both the Prophets and Apostles have
witnessed, as in Isaiah 53. and 55. Chapters; Micah Chap. 5. v. 2. Hosea, Chap.
11. v. 1. Psalm. 22. Acts, Chap. 1. v. 8. Chap. 10. v 41. and more Scriptures;
that price of Salvation being ^^s^s Christ, of whom the Angels proclaim, about
the time of his entrance into the World, Glory be to God in the Highest, on
Earth Peace, Good will toward Men, Luke 2. v. 14. And the Evangelist John,
Chap. 3. v. 16. declares positively, That God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have life eternal.

This is the term of Salvation, viz Believing in his Son, to be that Gift and
Ransom which the Gospel generally holds forth to those who would know what they
should do to be saved. Withal there must be an obedient Conversation, and that
universally, to all God's Commandments, answerable to a poor Souls ability, so
long (...) Life may last.

FINIS.

