AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
I Direct this my Book to thee, without any regard to one Sect more than
another, for the Unity and Fellowship of Gods People is Love, and this Love is
the Bond of Perfectness, and by this Love shall all men know that we are
Christ's Disciples; and if this Love be with us and dwell in us, by it we shall
know that we are translated from Death unto Life; for that Faith which purifies
the Soul works by this Love, and by this Faith which works by Love, we come to
have the Victory over the World.

Beloved Brethred, Since that great Apostasy ^ath been, which the holy Apost
(...) did in their day foretell of, which has spread over Nations and
Kingdoms, so that the very Names of things in Scripture has been, and in many
things yet are wrongly applied, and generally believed to be that which they
are not; and those false Customs which this great Apostasy has brought in,
has been received, and yet is in many things for Truths; but God has in these
latter Age^ raised up such Lights in the World at several times, as has
discovered much of the great Mystery of Iniquity; but they have always been
accounted (at their first appearing) as Deceivers and Seducers and the like, by
the dark World in general, and met with great opposition from the Powers of
this World, even from the Powers of Darkness; but the God with whom all Power
is, has so born them up, through their Faith, so that the Gates of Hell were
not able to with-stand them, nor all the Powers of Darkness able to gainsay
them, so that Satan has been forced to ^it up a new Form of pretended Holiness
to deceive the World with, at several times, yea, even at every such appearance
of the Light of the Gospel; for so often as the Lord has been pleased to
reveal unto his Church the Life and Light of the Gospel, by shining into the
hearts of his Children, so often has there been a falling away, and that old
Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole World, has at
such times endeavored to work in the hearts of Governors and great Men of the
Earth, to set up that which they imagine to be the Worship of God, and to
maintain the same; and this has ever been a Snare and Net whereby Gods
Children have been ensnared, and Hypocrites set up; for the true worship of God
is in Righteousness and true Holiness in the inner man, and none can thus
worship God till he sets them free from the Egypt of sin, and works this
Righteousness in their hearts by his own Spirit; and such as these cannot
conform to any prescribed from set up by the Powers of Darkness of this World,
without procuring the great displeasure of God; for they are to be Gods
Witnesses of that Worship, which God has set up in the hearts of his own
Children, who alone can worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and (...) Light of
the World, and yet are but (...) gers and Pilgrims in the World; for their
Kingdom is not of this World. But those that fall away from the Spirit of Truth
into the Spirit of the World, are the false Prophets and Antichrists, and
these are they whom the world does follow and close in with, according to
Scripture Testimony; for says the Scripture, They are of the World, and the
World hears them; he that is not of God hears not us; by this we know the
Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. Here is a plain Description laid down
for us to know the false Prophets by, to wit, For the World hears them; by
this we know they are always the greatest Number, because the Body of the
People will hear and speak well of them; but the World will not hear nor speak
well of the true, says the Scripture; and this is the Description the
Scripture gives us to know them by, 1 John 4.5, 6. Luke 6.26. Mat. 5.11, 12.

What I have written in this Book to the Churches of Christ, called Quakers, I
did present to the Ministry of the said People in the time of a General Meeting
at Rhode Island, desiring of them it might be read to the Congregation at the
said Meeting, and so handed among them till it came to Will. (...) and the rest
of their Ministry. But after the Ministry had perused it, some of them told me,
That I knew they did look at Water Baptism useless after a Person came to be
b^tized with the Spirit. To which I replied, Your argument is just contrary to
the Scripture, for said Peter, Can any Man forb^d Water, that these should not
be (...), which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? And ^e commanded
them (...) in the Name of the Lord, Acts 10.47, 48. Another replied, saying,
Thou holds forth the Light contrary to what we have done, both in our public
Testimonies and printed Books. To which I answered, if you can show me wherein
I have held it forth contrary to the holy Scriptures, it shall be rectified:
But I heard no further reply to that. I then told them, That if they would be
pleased to publish it among themselves, I should be satisfied, and proceed no
further in it, otherwise my purpose was to print it. Whereupon some of them
asked me, whether I would be satisfied if they read it in their private
Meeting? I told them, yes; for I directed it to them, and not to the World.
Upon which they appointed me to come to the same place the next Morning as
seven of the clock for an answer: accordingly I did, where my Book was returned
to me again, some saying, it holds forth things contrary to what we have done,
both in our public Testimonies and printed Books, and may make a Division
amongst us To which I answered, I^ Truth make a Division among you, it is such
a Division as Christ came to make. But they thus refusing to publish it among
themselves, I have thought it my Duty to put it to public view, believing
there is yet a Remnant among them which have not defiled their Garments.

I have also added something more at the end of that Epistle which I presented
to them, to show the difference between the Ministration of the Moral Law,
(written in the hearts of all the Children of Adam) and of the Ministration of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ (written on the heart of Gods Children by the Spirit
of the living God) the one being the Light of Condemnation, the other being the
Light of Life, or the Light of our Justification, through Faith in the Blood of
Jesus Christ, and both proceeding from one and the self-same God.

And as to what I have written to the Observers of the Seventh-Day Sabbath,
These may certify thee, that after it pleased God, through his rich Grace in
Christ Jesus, to take away the Guilt of my Sins from my Conscience, and to send
the Spirit of his Son into my heart, whereby he did reveal unto me his love,
and his acceptance of me in Jesus Christ; this unspeakable Mercy did greatly
engage my heart to love God, and diligently to search the Scriptures, that
there by I might know how to serve God acceptably, for then I soon became a
seeker how to worship God, though more zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers,
till I saw them to be Traditions, and no Scripture-Pr^epts. I thus upon
diligent search of the Scriptures found that the First Day Sabbath was no where
commanded by any Law of God, and the Scripture telling me, Where no Law is
there can be no Transgression, and that it is but vain to worship God by men's
Traditions, Mat. 15.9. and also finding by Scripture, that there was (...)
Commandment for the keeping of the seventh Day, I the^ openly labored on the
first Day of the Week, in faithfulness to God and my fellow Creature, and
strictly kept the 4th Commandment, which commanded labor on the first Day of
the Week, and required rest on the 7th. But I continuing a diligent searcher of
the holy Scriptures, and begging at the Throne of Grace for direction in the
way of Truth, it pleased God to open my Understanding, to understand the
Scriptures, and to see that the 7th Day Sabbath was but a Sign (under the Law)
of a Gospel Rest that Christ gives the Soul, and that the shadowing part of the
Law was nailed to the Cross of Christ: I could then no longer observe the 7th
Day Sabbath without defiling my Conscience; for faith Christ, Mat. 10.27. What
I tell you in Darkness, that speak ye in the light, and what ye hear in the
Ear, that preach ye upon the House tops. I then wrote to those my Brethren that
kept the 7th Day Sabbath, showing them how it was but a Sign or shadow of a
better thing that was to come by Jesus Christ, and since have writ this
following Epistle to them, wherein is opened the Covenant of the Law, and the
Covenant of Grace, the first Covenant being a figure of the second; which
Covenant, with all the Rites and Ceremonies of it, continued until the
establishment of the New Testament by the Blood of Jesus Christ; in which
Testament contains the substance of all those things shadowed out in the first
Covenant; and though the shadowing part of the Law was nailed to the Cross of
Christ, and so ceased, as they were signs and shadows, yet it is as easy for
Heaven and Earth to pass as it is for one Tittle (of what was shadowed out by
the Law) to escape of being fulfilled by Christ in the substance of it; for
what God had before determined should be fulfilled by Christ, was prophesied of
by the Law, as well as by the Prophets, as is to be seen, Mat. 11.13. But John
the Baptist came so near to him, that he pointed thim, saying, Behold, the Lamb
of God that taket^ away the sin of the World, John 1.29.

I have thought it my Duty to put these things to public view, being sensible
of the Wiles of Satan, who is wont to work in the Darkness of Men, to mis-lead
them, to make Idols of such things which God commanded to be observed as signs
of Instructions to his Church, as is to be seen, Numb. 21 9. compared with 2
Kings 18 4. and what it was a sign of, is to be seen, John 3.14, 15.

J. R.

An Epistle to the Churches of Christ, called Quakers.
JOhn Rogers, a Servant of Jesus Christ, To William Penn and the rest of the
Elders and Churches of Christ, called, Quakers, Grace and Peace be unto you,
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved in the Lord, When I consider the Blessed day of the Lords appearing
unto you, when he first illuminated you, it greatly affects my heart,
considering how ye endured a great fight of Affliction, and not only took
joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, but also your souls were seen to lie under
the Altar, being slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony you held in
that day, and loved not your Lives unto the Death; for you had washed your
Garments in the Blood of the Lamb, and made them white, and did live under this
great blessing, Mat. 5.11. B^ssed are ye when men shall Revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my Names
sak^, Then did there flow out of your Bellies Rivers of living Waters, which
did proceed from the Throne of God and of the Lamb; for you was then adorned as
a Bride prepared to meet her Husband, and many of you did run to and fro, and
know edge was increased in that Day; for your Earthen Vessels were fi^ed with
heavenly Treasure, by him that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness,
who then shined into your hearts by his divine Light, and filled your Vessels
with the Oil of gladness; and in that Day this was your Victory over the world,
even your Faith, and it did work by a pure love, which was shed abroad in your
hearts, by the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; for then was your Bodies
purely cleansed, and so became a Habitation for God to dwe^ in by his holy
Spirit, who was then the Object of your Hope, and the ground of your Faith, to
believe things not seen, and so, through Hope, patiently to wait for them.

Beloved in the Lord, Consider the Marriage Covenant that was in that Day
between him and you, who had espoused you to himself; you were then joined to
him by one Spirit, and served him then in that Spirit, in the newness thereof,
even him whom God raised from the dead. When ^ consider that love that was then
in that day between him and you, my-very heart melts within me! O how did
Christ, your loving Husband embrace you in the Arms of his Love! for he knew
that you were no Harlot, but true to him. O how great was your love to him in
that day! many waters could not quench it, neither could the floods drown it;
it utterly contemned all the glory and pleasures of this World, and imbracea
him alone; Tribulation could not separate you, nor Distress, nor Persecution,
nor Famine, nor Nakedness, nor Peril, not Sword; yea, in all things you were
Conquorers in that day, through him that loved you and espoused you to himself.

And now, Brethren, your Eyes see, and your Ears hear that it is your Brother
that speaks to you by a spiritual and divine Understanding, which is given me
by the Spirit of Truth, for the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, yea, it is impossible that the Natural man should know Christ after
a spiritual manner, for carnal men know Christ no other way but after the
flesh, they know not any man as he is a New Creature, but so many of you as are
Spiritual, can discern this Voice from whence it is.

And now, Brethren, I have further to declare unto you concerning the two Trees
in the mist of the Garden of God, the one called, The Tree of Life, the other,
called, The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. The Tree of Life, with its
Branches, represents the state of Christ, with his Members: The Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, with its Fruit and Branches, represents the state
of the first Adam and his Posterity. It was the purpose of God before these two
Adams were brought forth, that the Elder should serve the Younger, and that the
first should be a figure of him that was to come, that so Gods choice might
stand, not of Works, but of him that calls, having before determined, that
the Elder should serve the Younger, which accordingly after appeared, for the
first Adam, for the sake of one morsel of the forbidden Fruit, sold his
Birthright, and so lost the Blessing, and was disinherited. For it was the
purpose of God to take our Nature, and so to have the glory of all his Works
himself; and therefore he made the first Adam in his own Image, and after his
own likeness, in respect that he made him upright, and to be immortal, and gave
him dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and the
Beasts of the Field, yea, and over all the Earth; and thus he bore the Image of
God, but was not God; but the second Adam is the Lord from Heaven a quickening
Spirit, in his divine Nature, who made all things for the honor of himself.

When the first Adam had eaten of the forbidden F^uit, his Eyes were opened,
and not before, and a divine Light of the righteous Law of God did manifest to
him both good and evil, and let him see his just condemnation for his
Transgression; for the Sword of Gods Justice stopped the way to the Tree of Life,
and sentenced him to dye, so that Adam might see and know nothing by it but
Death; it left him without any ground of hope of Mercy, yea, it read to him
this doleful Sentence, T^ shall surely dye, and so left him. So that he could
not come at the Tree of Life to eat of that, but by the free gift of God, who
promised, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head; for he
that had the power of Death was the Devil, who was now become the god of this
world, ruling in their hearts, so that now there was no recovery of man, but by
a Resurrection from the dead; for there could be no Redemption from Gods
Sentence against Adams sin, in eating of the forbidden Fruit, but immediately
his Eves were opened, and a divine Light shined in him, to give him the
knowledge of good and evil, that by it the second Adam might judge the World at
the Resurrection of the Body. And though this Light in all men be the true Light
of Condemnation, and lights every one that comes into the World, and
proceeds from the Life of God, yet it gives us no life, but condemns us to
death; for it was not the gift of God to Adam and his Posterity for
Justification, but upon their own perfect Obedience to it; but it was for a
Light to Adam and to his Posterity, that by it they might see their own
Nakedness, upon their Disobedience, and fear Gods Wrath and Justice for the
same; for the Righteousness of this Light is not to be found in the first Adam,
not in his Posterity, therefore it is their Condemnation; but it is the free
gift of Righteousness, through Faith in the second Adam, who has received the
Promise of the Spirit, and sent it into our hearts, and so we come to have our
Nakedness covered with a Garment that God clothes us withal, and not of our
own making; for it is not works of Righteousness that we can do, that is
acceptable to God, but it is his own work, in creating us a new, through Faith
in the second Adam, the Seed of the Woman, that God did then promise should
bruise the Serpents head, and so come to obtain the Kingdom himself, who is the
Tree of Life, and gives to them that believe on him, to eat of it, that they
may live forever; for he has power to raise the dead, and has overcome him
that has the Power of Death, in that he was raised from the dead, as it is
written, This is he that lives, and was dead, and behold be lives for
evermore, and has the Keys of Hell and Death, and will at the last day open
the Graves that the dead may come forth, and does now quicken whom he will,
being the Tree of Life which is in the midst of the Garden. And thus we come to
be living Branches of it, and come to receive the Righteousness of this Light,
by the free gift of God, through Faith in Christ; for the natural man is
sensual, not having the Spirit of Christ; and the Spirit of Christ is the
Righteousness of the Law, or of this divino Light, so that no man can by
anyendeavouring to perform the Righteousness which this Lighs requires, ever be
able to perform it. So that the second Adam was not sent to be a Savior to
such as this Light does justify, but to be a Savior to such as see all their
endeavors to live up to it, to be in vain; for it is the true Light that makes
all men see what dwells in them, and that the Law of Sin, that dwells in their
Members, has Dominion over them, and compels them to rebel against this Light
of Righteousness, which shines in them; so that they are in a state of Death
and Darkness, as to Righteousness, and by it see all hope in themselves to
fail, and to prize the rich Mercy of God, which comes by the Death and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself a
Sacrifice for sin, so that through Faith in his Blood we receive the gift of
the Righteousness of this Light, by his Spirit sent into our heatrs, which
Righteousness this light justifies, and no other; and when we have received
this Righteousness into our hearts, through faith in the Blood of Christ, this
Light discovers to our certain knowledge, that we are made partakers of Gods
Righteoushess, which Righteousness was with God before the World was made, but
Man being in a state of sin, does not comprehend that this Light proceeds from
the Life of God, or divine Nature of Christ, and that Gods Wrath cannot be
pacified but by a perfect Obedience to it; for the Righteousness of Christ, and
this Light, is both of one ^ture; for this Light proceeds from that ^nal Life
that was with God, and was God, and it lays the sinful World naked either to
Gods Judgment or Mercy, so that his Mercy and Justice may both be seen by this
Light that shines in Darkness, but the Darkness does not comprehend it; and by
it that Man whom God has appointed will judge the World.

Now we receive the Spirit of Adoption by the hearing of Faith preached by the
Gospel, and thereby believing in the God that raised up Jesus Christ from the
dead; for it is he that has received of the Father the promise of the holy
Ghost, and only through Faith in his Name we receive it; for him has God the
Father sealed, and given him a Name above every Name, and has made him Heir of
all things that the first Adam did possess, as a figure for a time; and all
that believe in this second Adam, do receive the Spirit of Adoption, which
witnesses with their Spirits that they are the Children of God, and if
Children then Heirs of God, and jo^nt Heirs with Christ; for he has given us
his Spirit in earnest, until we come to inherit the purchased Possession, which
will be when all things come to be restored from the bondage of Corruption (for
it is subjected under hope of Recovery, tho lost by the first Adam) then shall
God reign as visible as the first Adam did, in the ^erson or Manhood of the
second Adam, over all the Wor^s of his glorious Creation, and all the Saints
with him, whose Kingdom is an uncorruptible Kingdom, and therefore corruptible
flesh and blood cannot inherit it.

Now since the fall of the first Adam, and promise of the second, God (under
the Law) did appoint shadows and figures of the Birth and Sufferings, Death and
Resurrection of the second Adam, which were as a Schoolmaster or Instructor to
his Church, that they might see a Resurrection from the dead by the second
Adam, so that his People might hope to come to enjoy the Garden of Happiness by
the second Adam, though lost by the first And though we have eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, in the first Adam, and so come to receive the Light
of Condemnation to Death thereby; so also, we that believe have eaten of the
Tree of Life, through Faith in the second Adam, and thereby is Life and
Immortality brought to light by his Resurrection from the dea.

And as the Law and Prophets did prophecy of the coming of the second Adam, to
wit, of his Birth, of his Death, and of his Resurrection that is to say, of God
becoming Man, and so laying down his Life, and taking it up again, and thereby
to give assurance to his Children of a Resurrection; so we have the Testimony
of his Apostles in Scripture, that the second Adam is come, and that he did
dye, and that God has raised him from the Dead, and that he is the Son of God,
and Heir of his Fathers Inheritance, which Inheritance the first Adam lost by
Disobedience; and that God did confirm their Testimony of his Resurrection, by
many Signs and Wonders, and Miracles and Gifts of the holy Ghost, which Signs
and Wonders God wrought by their hands, Heb 2^4. Joh. 20.27.28, 29. compared
with 31 verse. and Acts 3 15. compared with Acts 5.30 32. And also the Scripture
testifies, That the holy Ghost is a Witness of his Resurrection to all them
that obey him, yea, God has raised us up, together with him, to newness of
Life, that is to say, so many as have received him by Faith, he having taken
away from us the guilt of sin, and freed us from the fear of Wrath to come, so
that we can boldly say, O Death, where is thy string! O Grave, where is thy
Victory! So that every one that believes has the witness of God in himself, to
confirm the Truth of the holy Scriptures, and thereby can set to their Seals
that the Scripture is true.

Also, we have the Testimony of Scripture, That Jesus baptized with Water by
the hands of his Apostles, in that he commanded them to do it, it is said he
did it, John 3.22, and v^s. 20. compared with the first and second verse of
cha^. 4. And his A^stles did practice it after his Resurrection and Ascension,
as a visible sign of his Death and Resurrection, in burying the baptized into
the likeness of his Death, and raising them up in the likeness of his
Resurrection; for as the Godhead of Christ did raise his Manhood from the
Dead, so does his Godhead witness it in every one that believes and obeys him,
by condemning and mortifying sin in them, which is an immediate Witness of God,
that the oftering of the Body or Manhood of Christ is an acceptable Sacrifice
for sin, and that the guile is really taken from the Conscience, where
R^mission is, and the Def^ement of it really purged away: This is all done
through Gods acceptance of his Death for sin. And as to the power of his
Resurrection, God gives an immediate Witness to that also; for as the Godhead
of Christ has raised him from the Dead, so also does his Godhead quicken us,
and raises us up together with him, who were before dead in sin, and will also
raise up our Bodies at the last Day.

And as God has taken our Nature, even the seed of the Woman, and so
consequently the Seed of the first Adam (for the Woman was taken out of the
Man) I say, as God has taken of our flesh and blood, so also has he made us
partakers of his divine Nature or holy Spirit, which is the gift of
Righteousness by Jesus Christ. And thus we come to be reconciled by him to God,
and to comprehend this divine Light, that lights every one that is born into
the World; but the sin^l World have no fellowship with the Righteousness of it,
and therefore are in a state of Darkness: But the Saints Bodies are the Temple
of God, and in this Temple is to be seen the Ark of the New Testament, which
contains the Righteousness of the Law, or Doctrine of Christ, written and
engraven by Gods Spirit on the fleshly Tables of their hearts; and they being
thus inspired by the Life from whence this Light does proceed, they become the
Light of the World; for the Life of this Light is manifested to them, but not
to the World.

And as to the Supper of the Lord, it ought to be attended by his Church, as it
is delivered to his Church by the Scripture, How that the (...) Bread (when
they were at Supper with him) and brake it, and said, Take, eat, (...) my Body
which is broken for you, This do in^ ^mbrance of m^. This bread is to sign sie
that it is he that gives us to eat of the Tree (...) which is in the midst of
the Garden, that we may eat and live forever, in that Inheritance which he is
Heir of and shall posses in that World which is to come, even that Inheritence
which the first Adam was dispossessed of for Transgression; for he has
purchased Life for us, by the offering up his Body for a Sacrifice for our
sins, and will appear a second time Bodily and Visibly, as he is the Son of Man
and our fellow Creature.

As also, the Wine after Supper, which he gave them to drink, is to be attended
by his Church, as a visible sign that this second Adam, as he was flesh and
blood as we are (sin only excepted) did through his Godhead or eternal Spirit,
offer up himself as a Lamb without spot for us. And thus by the shedding of his
Blood we have obtained the Remission of sins, witnessed to us by his divine
Nature, in taking away the guilt of sin from our Conscience, and sanctifying us
by his Spirit, through Faith in his Blood, so that we know this is he that came
by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ, not only by that divine Water that
sanctifies us, but by Blood also, for without shedding of Blood there could be
no Remission of sins.

Here follows an Addition to what I presented to the Ministry of the Quakers,
To show the difference between the first Ministration to Adam, of the Light of
the Lam of God written in the hearts of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam (to
manifest to them the Knowledge of good and evil, by which Law or Light God will
judge the World) And the Ministration of Grace and Righteousness, (through
Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ the second Adam) ministered to the
Transgressor, under which Ministration the Righteousness of the Law is written
on their hearts, and they acquitted of their sins, through the free Pardon of
G^d, and so come to escape the Justice of Gods Wrath, justly due to them,
through Gods forbearance in not executing the same.
WHen Adam stood nakedly innocent before God, he was not ashamed, but when he
had disobeyed, by eating of the forbidden Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, there was an Eye opened in him to see himself nakedly guilty,
and therefore hid himself from the presence of God. Now this l^ight that
manifested-to him the gui^t of his sin, would not save him from the Death that
God had before threatened him with; so that the eye that was opened in Adam
could see nothing but Death; therefore for Adam to think of obtaining favor
with God, so as to escape the punishment of his sin, by following of this
Light, after once he had finned, was but sowing fig leaves together to cover
his Nakedness; for the wages of sin is Death; and therefore after he had sinned
God set Cherubims and a flaming Sword that turned every way, to keep the way of
the Tree of Life, that Gods Justice might be seen in punishing Adam for his
sin; for while Adam was obedient to God he lived in the Garden of Pleasure, but
when he disobeyed God, there was an eye opened in him to see his own guilt,
which caused Adam to hide himself from the presence of God, and to endeavor to
cover his shame or nakedness by his own wisdom and works; for, said he, I heard
thy Voice in the Garden, and was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my
self; but said the Lord to him, Who told thee that thou wast Naked? as much as
if God should say, How came thou by this knowledge? it must needs be by thy
Disobedience, in eating of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, whereof I
commanded thee that thou shoulest not eat; so that Adam came to receive the
Light of Condemnation by his ^in, and for his sin was sent forth from the
Garden to Till the ground, and could not by any means come at the Tree of Life
by following this Light that gave him the knowledge of good and evil, because
he had once sinned, and for this one sin, Condemnation came upon all men, even
Sorrow, Labor, and Death it self, from which there could be no redemption
after sentence was past, and the execution thereof is the full punishment of
Adams sin, and our Lord Jesus Christ himself did not escape the punishment
thereof, as he was the Seed of Adam; for he under-went Sorrow, Weariness and
Death it self, all which was the punishment of Adams sin.

And that Serpent (in the Mystery) that guiled Eve, was he that is now called
the great Red Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which
deceives the whole World; and thus by his subtilty became the Author of sin,
and therefore it is written, He that had the power of Death is the Devil, and
all we the Children of Adam have eaten of the Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil in the first Adam, so that our eyes are opened, and by a divine Light we
have the knowledge of good and evil, by which Light God will judge the World by
the second Adam, and every one shall be judged according to his own works, even
by this work of the Law written in their hearts, which ^ives the knowledge of
good and evil, their Consciences bearing witness to their own thoughts, whose
thoughts will either accuse or else excuse them before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and their Conscience will be a Witness for or against themselves, and
all those that then shall be found to have lived up to this divine Light, shall
be justified by it in their own perfect Righteousness; for all such have no
need of a Savior, for Christ did not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to Repentance; and all such as then shall be found justified, through Faith in
the Blood of Jesus Christ, shall not be condemned by it, though they had once
been the worst of sinners, because they have overcome through the Blood of the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the World; and therefore God has
given them to cat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Garden,
that they might eat thereof, and live forever; for such only have obtained of
God free Pardon and Remission of their sins, and therefore are beholding to God
for his rich Grace and free Mercy in Jesus Christ, for blotting out their sins,
and putting into them his own Righ^eousness, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ;
and all such as then shall be found to have rebelled against this Light or
Knowledge of good and evil, and their Names not found written in the Book of
Life, shall be eternally condemned by it, after the Resurrection of the Body.
For as there is a Death of the Body by the first Adams Disobedience, so will
there be a Resurrection of the Body by the second Adams Obedience; and this
Death is the Saints last Enemy which they have to encounter withal; for the
Death of the Body is the end of the punishment of Adams sin; for had the
Sentence been eternal, there could have been no place for Salvation by a second
Adam; for that Judgment after the Resurrection shall be so, as that every man
shall be judged according to his own Works, by this Work of the Law written in
their own hearts, or by that Knowledge of good which God has placed in them,
yea, both of good and evil, ever since Adams eating of the forbidden Fruit, in
whom all are partakers with him, and all our eyes are opened with him, to have
the same knowledge of good and evil; so then, if any can be able at the general
Judgment to make it appear that they have perfectly lived up to that Knowledge
of good which God has placed in them, and perfectly avoided that evil, the
knowledge of which God has placed in them, so many shall be justified by it,
and to such boasting ^nnot be excluded, for their Salvation will be of Debt,
and not of Grace; for God in Christ will not condemn the guiltless, and such
Christ did not come to save, for they have no need of his Salvation. But the
Scripture testifies that there never was any such Person since the fall of
Adam, save Jesus Christ only, who is the only begotten of (...) Father, full of
Gra^^ and Truth; for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, so
that there is none righteous in himself, no, not one.

And whereas God did promise, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpents Head, This Victory comes by a Resurrection from the Dead, for that
Jesus Christ is now alive, that was once dead, and lives for ^er-more, and
has the Keys of Hell and of Death, and will open the Graves that the Dead may
come forth to Judgment, and does now quicken whom he will, who were before dead
in sin; for he is that Tree of Life, and has overcome him that has the Power
of Death, and has brought to light Life and Immortality; for in him we come to
eat of the Tree of Life, being before dead in our sins; and thus we come to
have the assurance of the Resurrection of our Bodie^ also, even by him who is
raised from the dead, and has overcome Death it self. And thus by him do we
return into that Garden of Happiness, out of which the first Adam for his
Transgression was drove out to Till the ground; and thus we come to receive the
gift of eternal Life, through Faith in the second Adom; for the first
Mi^istration was the knowledge of good and evil, or the work of the Law written
in the heart, not to justify, but to condemn the Transgressor, yea, not to
justify any man, but upon his own perfect Obedience; for the first Adam and
his Posterity are become the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, in the
Mystery, and the second Adam and his Posterity are become the Tree of Life, in
the Mystery of it: So that the second Ministration is the Gospel Ministration
of Jesus Christ, and is held forth only to sinners, that they might see the
free Grace of God in the second Adam, in granting them free Pardon from all
their sins, and not only so, but also ministering to them the very Life and
Righteousness of God, by which the sinner is enabled to live in the perfect
Obedience of that Light or Knowledge o^ good and evil; and if, through
Temptation, he be enticed to transgress, yet upon Repentance has still
Remission, through the Blood of Jesus Christ; and thus the Righteousness of the
Law is fulfilled in us, by the gift of Gods Spirit; for no man is justified in
his sin, but in his Justification is freed from his sin, being purified by the
Spirit or Truth which is given to him, not because he has been obedient to the
Light, but to enable him to be obedient to the Light within; neither is any man
just^fied by the Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person,
till Christ works the same Righteousness in us, by his own Spirit; so that we
are not justified in Gods sight till the Righteousness of the Law be fulfilled
in us, by Christ's Spirit working it in us, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, which is given to us to lead and guide us into all Truth. But
those that are under only the first Ministration of the Knowledge of good and
evil, are under the Condemnation of it, if ever they have rebelled against it,
and it is their Condemnation because of their sin, and will never justify them
from their sin, which they have once committed, and therefore can never come to
Salvation by following it, after one Transgression committed, but always see
before their Eyes Gods Cherubims standing with a flaming Sword to keep the way
of the Tree of Life, that by this Light within them they may see nothing but
Death for their Sin, and are never afterable to come to Salvation by their
endeavoring to live up to this Light, though they could do it, by a perfect
Obedience, ever after one sin committed; and therefore Christ came to save only
such as are sinners against it, by ministering to them that Life that the Tree
of Life was a figure of; and when they come under this second or Gospel
Ministration, they eat of the Tree of Life, and then come to see Life in
themselves, even the Life of God that quickens them, who were before dead in
their Sins and Trespasses, but now are come to see Life and Righteousness in
themselves, not by their endeavoring to follow the Light within, for to obtain
Salvation by their so doing, but they are now come to see that the Gift of Life
and Righteousness is given to them through Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ,
though they had not done that good, the knowledge of which God had placed in
them, nor avoided the doing of that evil, of which God had placed the knowledge
in them, but had thus sinned against the Light within, which was sent into the
World to condemn the World for sin, for it was the first Ministration, but God
sent not his Son into the World to condemn the world for sin, but that the
sinful world by him might be saved. And this Son of God is the Word of Life, in
his divine Nature, and quickens the dead sinner; which Word of Life is the
second or Gospel Ministration; so that except a man be born again he cannot see
the Kingdom of God or second Ministration, nor understand any thing of it by
this Light within or Knowledge of good and evil, till it be revealed by Faith
in the Blood of Jesus Christ; and this Word of Life is very God revealed in us,
not as a Judge, but as a Savior; and this Li^e is the Light of the World, and
does as far excel the first Ministration, as the light of the Sun does excel
the light of the Moon and Stars; for the one is the light of Condemnation, but
the other is the light of Justification; in the first there is an eye opened in
us to see our just Condemnation for our sin; in the second, there is an eye
opened to see our Justification from our sins.

An Exposition upon Tit. 2.11.
For the Grace of God that bring^th Salvation has appeared to all men.
It is evident that this Apostle speaks of that glorious day of the Gospel,
that before was prophesied of, that should appear to all men, after the
Sufferings and Resurrection of Christ, agreeing with that Testimony in the 1st
of Peter, cha. 1. v. 10, etc. of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who prophcyed of the Grace that should come unto you,
searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them,
did signify, when it testified before hand the Sufferings of Christ, and the
Glory that should follow, unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves,
but unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you, by
them that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven. So that by the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to all Nations,
the Grace of God that brought Salvation to all men, had then appeared,
according to Pa^'s Testimony, teaching them (that had received it) to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly L^ts, an^ to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present World, through the holy Ghost that was given them in Christ's Name^

First, As to this Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, is extended
to them wholly and alone in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, since his
Resurrection from the Dead, as appears Acts 4.10. compared with vers^ 12 Be
it known unto you all, and to all the People of Israel, that by the Name of
Jesus Christ of Na^areth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the Dead,
even by him does this man stand here before you whole; neither is there
Salvation in any other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved. 1 T^m. 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. From hence we may observe, that in
this Text Paul sets before Timothy how that there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men: Now a Mediator cannot be a Mediator of One; for a Mediator
is to reconcile two that are at Enmity; so that this Jesus Christ is that one
Mediator between God and Men, by which we come to be reconciled to God, and
thereby to obtain Grace and Salvation, to with through Faith in the Blood of
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, which was to be
testified in due time, as appears, v 6. and 1 Col. 20. compared with e^s. 22.
And having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross, by him to (...) himself,
in the Body of his flesh through death; so that sinners are reconciled to God,
only and alone by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and their Ransom and
Reconciliation is made known only by the Ambassadors of Christ, as appears by
Scripture Testimony, Romans 10.14. 'How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach
except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good things? 2 Cor. 5.18,
etc. And all things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God
was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses
unto them, and has put in us the Word of Reconciliation. Now then are we
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

And it is evident that Paul was the Minister or God, to make his grace and
salvation appear to all men, as may be seen, Ephesians. 3. v. 7 compared with the 8
and 9th verses, Whereof I was made a Minister, etc. that I should preach among
the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and to make (all men) see what
is the fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the World has
been bid in God. From hence we may note, That this wonderful Mystery of Gods
grace and salvation in Jesus Christ was kept secret in God even from the
beginning, but was at that time published to [all men] by Gods appointment; so
that this grace of God in Christ Jesus (which brings Salvation) had appeared
to all men by Paul's Ministry, when he wrote this Epistle to Titus; for then
was the time that God purposed in himself, that the Gospel of his grace and
salvation should appear to all men by Paul's Ministry, that they might come to
the knowledge of the Truth and be saved, as appears also in 1 Timothy 2.4 and 5
verse. compared with the 6 and 7 verse. Who will have all men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the Truth; for there is one God and one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all,
to be testified in due time, whereof I am ordained a Preacher and an Apostle,
etc. a Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.

Here are three special things to be observed, One is in the 4th verse. how that
God would have all men to he saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth,
which imports not the Jen only, but the Heather also. From hence we may note,
That there was a time that they were not come to the knowledge of the Truth,
because the Gospel was not yet preached unto the Heath^n, which is the only
means by which Gods grace and salvation does appear to man. The second thing is
in the 6th verse. which shows that it was Gods purpose that the Ransom of their
Souls should be testified to them in due time; which shows, that there was a
time that they were not come to the knowledge of this Truth, to know that there
was a Ransom laid down for to redeem them, as appears in the 4th verse. compared
with the 6th And the Third thing to be n^ted is from the 7th verse. That Paul
was ordained of God to be a Preacher and an Apostle, to teach these things to
all men, that thereby they might come to the knowledge of the Truth and be
saved, Col. 1.23. which ye have heard, and which was preached to ever, Creature
(or as some translate it) to all the Creation under Heaven, whereof I Paul am
made a Minister. So that this is Gods w^y and manner by which he makes known
hi^race and salvation to all sinful men, when or wherever he does make it
known, to wit, by setting before them that Ransom that is laid down for to
redeem them from that eternal Punishment which is justly due to them for their
fining against that moral Law written in their hear^s, which should have been
their Rule to have wal^ed by; so that now their Salvation is of grace, and not
of debt, and stands upon a more sure Foundation, even by faith in the Almighty,
and not by works; so that now a man is no longer his own keeper, because he
has forfeited his mercy while he was his own keeper, even when he stood upon
the Condition of his own perfect Obedience, having the knowledge both of good
and evil placed in himself to be his rule and guide, by which he was to be
justified or condemned; but he having been condemned by it, and his Friend
having stepped in as Mediator, and pacified the Judge, by r^nsoming him from the
Justice of the Law, he is now kept by his Redeemer, through faith, unto eternal
Salvation, by the mighty power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. being reconciled to the
obedience of that true Light which lights every man that comes into the
World, by sending his own Spirit into their hearts, which Spirit is the Life
and Righteousness from whence that Light did proceed.

An Exposition upon 1 Cor. 12.7.
B^^ the mani^estation of the Spirit is given to e^er^ man to profit withal.
In the first place let us consider that the Apost^e writes this Epistle to a
Church of Christ, and not to the World in general, as is to be seen, C^ap 1 2.
And, 2dly, it is evident, that though the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man (in the Church) to profit withal, yet it is not given to the natural
man; for he is sensual, not having the Spirit, Jude 19. Romans 8.9. Now if any
man have not the Spirit, or Christ he is none of hi^ as also, in the 2d chap.
of this Epistle, verse 14. But the Natural Man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishress unto him, neither can be know them And
3dly, it is evident, that the manifestation of this Spirit, given to every man
to profit withal, is ^iven only and alone in the Name of Jesus Christ, through
Faith in him, as appears by Scripture-Testimony, Acts 2.33. compared with 38,
39 verse, There (...) being by the right hand of G^d ^aited, and having
received of the Fathere^th (...) the holy Ghost, he has shed orth this (...)
and bear. V. 38. Th^n said Peter, (...) and be Baptized every one of you, in
the Name of Jesus Christ, etc. and ^e shall receive the gist of the holy Ghost;
for the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off.

Here are four t^ings observable concerning the holy G^ost, The first is, That
Jesus Christ has received of the Father the Promise of the holy Ghost: The
second is, That he it was that shed it forth upon his Apostles before their
Eyes: The third, is, an absolute Promise was made to them, that upon their
Repentance and being Baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, that every one of
them should receive the holy Gho^. And fourthly, A rehearsal of the largeness
of the Promise of giving the holy Ghost^ upon these fore-mention^ Conditions;
for ^aith he, the Promise is to you and to your Children, and to all afar off,
even to so many as the Lord our God shall call. Thus it appears plainly, that
the manifestation of the Spirit is given only to such as obey the Call of the
Gospel, and so come to receive it by faith. Gal. 3.2 This only would I learn of
you, received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? Ve^s. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles,
through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spririt, through
^aith.

And whereas he ^aith. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, so likewise in the 13th ve^s he ^aith, For by one Spirit are we
all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bood
or Free, and have been all made to drink in one Spirit. So that by [ Every Man]
and [ We A^^] is intended every man in the Church of Christ; for whereas he
says. By one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink in one
Spirit, seems to carry in it as full a comprehension, if not fuller, and yet
intends only the Church of Christ; for the manifestation of this Spirit given
to every one in the Church to profit withal, is a Talent of Gods free Grace
bestowed upon his own Servants to improve for his own glory and honor, and to
their everlasting Comfort and Happiness, for the gift of the Spirit is the
Ministration of Life and Righteousness to the sinner, through Faith in the
Blood of Jesus Christ the second Adam; and before we received this Spirit we
could not truly call Jesus Christ Lord, as in the 3d verse of this Chapter; for
it is this Spirit that works faith in us, 2 Cor. 4.13. and by the hearing of
Faith preached we receive it, as appears Gal 3.2. compared with verse. 5^ So
that we receive this Spirit only by the hearing of Faith preached concerning a
crucisied Christ, since his Sufferings; and all those that have received the
manifestation of this Spirit, through Faith, -- and do make a diligent
improvement of it, do abide in perfect peace with God, and in full assurance of
eternal Life, and in a state of Gads safe Protection in this Life; for their
dwelline i^ in the perfect love of God, and they themselves see it, to their
unspeakable comfort, but those that have not received the gift or this Spirit,
see nothing in themselves, by the Light within, but deadness to all that is
good; and those that have received the gift of this Spirit, through Faith in the
Blood of Jesus Christ, and have been thereby reconciled to God, and afterward
come to be idle, and to make no improvement of it, come to loose the sight of
their Reconciliation, and so lose their joy and peace in God, and then they
walk in Darkness, and know not whither they go, because darkness has blinded
their eyes. And that true Light that lights every man that comes into the
World, does not manifest that which is not in man, but it does manifest that
which is in man; for God ha^h opened an eye in every man that comes into the
World, that by that Light he may see what is in himself, that he may be
convicted by it, what his state and condition is; if sin only dwell in him, it
does manifest to him, that sin only dwells in himself; but if ever he come to
receive the gift of the Spirit of Life, the^ this Light does manifest to him
that the Spirit of God is in him, and that by the gift of that Spirit he is
made partaker of the Righteousness of God, before he has done one good Work,
and that he is quickened by that Spirit, whenas before he had received this
Spirit, the true Light manifested to him that he was dead in sin, and had no
life in himself to Righteousness, but now God having sent the Spirit of his Son
into him, it reveals to him his Justification through Faith in the Blood of Jesus
Christ, and cleanses him from that sin which did dwell in him, before this
Spirit was sent into him; so that the sinner is justified by faith in the Blood
of Jesus Christ, before be has done one good Work; for it is this Spirit that
works in him and regenerateth him, by creating him a new; and all this is
done by the free grace of God in Jesus Christ; for God did purpose all this in
himself before the ^nner did at all endeavor to follow that good which this
true Light did discover to him, or to avoid that evil which it did manifest to
him, according to what is written, Isa. 65.1. I am sought of them that asked
not for me, I am found or them that sought me not; for the Election of God
stands not in Works, but in the God that calls the sinnor to Repentance by
his free Grace in Jesus Christ the second Adam and Heir of all things.

To the Seventh-Day Baptists.
John Rogers A Servant of Jesus Christ, To the Church of Christ at Wester by
Rhode Island, or elsewhere, greeting.
Beloved Brethren in Jesus Christ, Grace and Peace be unto you from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the Father.

Since it has pleased God of his much mercy and rich grace in Christ Jesus,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, who has also shined into my
heart, and thereby has given me the sight and knowledge of those things which
the natural man cannot understand, I have been under a great conff^ct
concerning my Brethren, that they also might come to be made partakers of the
same Light and Grace, without which we cannot discern those Mysteries contained
in the holy Scriptures. I am greatly sensible that many, since their first
illumination, might have been Teachers of others, had they not been unfruitful
Branches in Christ, and they thus continuing in this carnal state, their
understanding is much darkened, and they cannot see afar off, nor understand the
Mystries of the Kingdom of God, by reason of which I am sensible that I cannot
speak to such, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in
Christ.

I can truly say with the Apostle, That I have many things to say concerning
the Priesthood of our Lord Jesus Christ, but it is hard to be uttered, because
ye are dull of hearing divine and spiritual things; when indeed the heart and
mind of Christians are fixed on spiritual things, it is both life and peace to
them, but when their hearts and minds are set upon the observation of some
outward Rudiments or shadowing figures of the law, it brings death upon the
soul, because the mind is set upon the shadows of heavenly things and not upon
Christ himself, who is the substance and head of all Principality and Power
whatsoever.

I am greatly sensible that the Manhood of Christ is preached up and generaly
confessed and belived on, with a dead faith, from the report of the holy
Scriptures; and in a carnal way rejoiced in, believing he is the Savior of the
World; but as to his divine nature, many Professors are strangers to it, and
know nothing of the power and virtue of it; for it is his divine nature that
imputes the Righteousness of God to us; it is his divine nature that quickens
us, and strengthens us against the power of sin; it is his divine nature that
reveals to us our Justification, and that sanctifies us, and is our life, and
light, and wisdom, yea, the divine nature of Christ applies to us all the
virtues of the Sufferings of his Manhood, and thereby reveals to us, the truth
of the history of the Scriptures about his Sufferings, so that we can set to
our seal that the Scripture is true.

I have written unto you, beloved Brethren, concerning the two Covenants, and
do desire you in a Christian love to search the Scriptures, and to see whether
these things be so or no.

Qu. What are we to understand by the first; Covenant; or o^ Testament?

A^. the T^n Commandments, written and engraven on two tables of stone.

Qu. How do you prove that?

Answ. From ^xod 19 5. Now therefore if ye will obey my Voice indeed, and keep
my Covenant. From hence we may note, that God was about to speak to them, and
to declare his Covenant to them, in order to which he sends by the hand of
Moses to give them notice of it, as in the third verse that they might prepar^
themselves to hear his Voice, that they might obey the same, and k^^p his
Covenant; compare this with Deuteronomy. 4.13. And he declared unto you his Covenant,
which he commanded you to perform, even Ten Commandments, and he wrote them
upon two Tables of Stone. From hence we may note, that the ten Commandments are
called the Covenant, as also in ^xod. 34.28. Heb. 9.4. compared with the first
verse.

Secondly, These ten Commandments, were not given to Israel, nor commanded,
till after they came out of Egypt.

Qu How do you prove that?

Answ. From Deuteronomy 5 2, 3. The Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Hereb; the
Lord made not this Covenant with our Fathers but with us, even us, who are all
of us here alive this day. Gal. 3.17 And this I say, that the Covenant that was
consigned before of God in Christ, the law which was four hundrerd and thirty
years after. From hence we may note, that the Apostle speaks of this Law of the
ten Commandments given after they came out of Egyst, which was four hundred and
thirty years after that Covenant which God made with Abraham in Christ, and was
after they came out of Egypt, as appears (...) the 12th of Exodus 41. And it
came to pass, at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even the self same
day, all the Hosts of the Lord went out of the Land of Egypt. Again, it is
written, Romans 5.13. For until the Law, sin was in the world; for whereas he
says, Until the Lam, he has reference until this Law was given at Mount Sinai
by Moses, his Argument is to prove, That sin was in the world before the giving
of this Law; for, says he, sin is not imputed when there is no Law; and in the
following Verse, says, Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression. So
that it is evident sin was in the world from Adam till Moses, or rather until
the Law was given by Moses. Again, he says, Romans 2.14. For when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, it is evident he points at this Law or Covenant made
with Israel (which the Gentiles had not) to show, though they had it not, yet
they were not without a Law written in their hearts, by which Law God would
judge them; for Adam had no sooner sinned but his eyes were opened, and a
divine Light of the knowledge of good and evil shined in him, which is the
moral Law, for that Law was spiritual and not litteral, though he was carnal,
sold-under sin; and this is the true Light of Condemnation, that lights every
man that comes into the World; so that by this Law comes the knowledge of
sin, and makes all the World guilty before God, for all have sinned against
this moral or so ri^ual Law which is written in their hearts.

Thirdly, The Seventh-Day Sabbath, comman led to Israel by this Law, and to be
(...) in this Covenant, was but a sign o^ a better Rest, and was never
commanded before (...) came out of Egypt.

Qu. How do you prove that?

(...). From (...). 31.12, etc. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a
Sign betw^n me and you, etc. V^rs. 17. It is a Sign bet veen me and the
Children of Israel, etc.^ God required Moses to give this account to the
Children of (...), at the same time when he delivered to him the two (...) of
Testimony, as is to be seen in the (...) compared with v. 12 etc. (...)

And it appears not to have been comman^ed before, (...) Moses's Festimony to
the Children (...) the 5th o^ D^^. where he calls all Is^ to attention, in
verse. 1. and puts them in mind of the Covenant God made with them in the 2d
verse. and shows them, That God made not this Covenant with their Fathers, but
with us (faith he) who are all of us alive here this day; then he declares the
Govenant to them, to wit, the Ten Commandments, and when he had so done, in the
2^^ verse. he says, These words the Lord sp^ke unto ^all your Assembly in the
Mount, and ^e ^rote them in two Tables of stone, and delivered them (...); and
in the 4th Commandment, beginning at the 12th vers^ he leaves out the words of
Gods Creation, and says (at the end of the 4th Commandment) Remember that thou
wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out
thence, etc. therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day.
From hence we may note, that the word [ Therefore] being imposed upon that
Deliverance out of Egypt, carries with it a full ground of the Commandment,
Therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. So that we
may see, as their Deliverance was from a Temporal Bondage and Labor, so was
the sign a temporal Sabbath, of the same nature; which sign was to be observed
throughout their Generations, to signify that great Temporal Deliverance that
they had by the hand of God, and thereby to remember, that they were Gods
sanctified or chosen People, when they were come into the Land of Rest, out of
the Furnace of Affliction and hard Labor. So that this Weekly Seventh-Day
Sabbath was to be a sign to Israel (in the Land of Rest) of their former
Deliverance, and that while they kept Gods Law and Statutes they should rest
quietly in the Land with all Plenty and Prosperity, and none should make them
afraid

Now when they broke the Covenant of the Law, which was their Marriage Covenant
with God, and went a whoring from him, it was then no sign of their quiet Rest
in the Land, as appears by the Testimony of God by his Prophet Ezekiel, chap.
20. v. 5, 6. Here the Lord sets before them how he delivered them out of Egy^,
and in verse. 7. sets before them how he required their Obedience, and in verse.
8. how they had Rebelled against him; and in the 12th verse, says the Lord, I
gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between Me and Them. From hence we may see,
they were to be a sign to them only upon Condition of Obedience in keeping his
Covenant, and so not pollute the Land of their Rest, after so great Deliverance
out of Egypt; but when they had polluted the Land, then the Lord said unto
them, Mic. 2.10. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your Rest, because it is
polluted.

Qu. What are we to understand by a Sign?

Answ. We are to understand that a Sign is not the Substance; so the
Seventh-Day Rest given to Israel, after that Deliverance out of Egypt, was to
be a sign to them, that while they did not defile their Sanctification, they
should no more go into such Bondage, but rest quietly in the Land from the fear
of evil. So that the seventh Day Rest was a sign to them of a perpetual Rest in
their Land, from the Oppression of their Enemies, till that Prophet should
come, which Moses told them of, Acts 3.22. whom they were to hear in all
things, who was appointed of God to be a Savior and a Delivered out of a
spiritual Bondage, John 8.36. and to give a spiritual and eternal Rest to his
People, Mat. 11.28, 29. which is the Substance of those things shadowed out in
the first Testament or Covenant.

Qu. Do you not think that Adam in his state of Innocence, kept a weekly
Seventh-Day Sabbath?

Answ. No; for he had no need of a sign or shadow of a better thing, while in
the state of perfect Happiness; and besides that, it speaks only of Gods
resting from his Works of Creation, which was finished in six days, Genesis 2 2
Heb. 4 4. and A am was the last Work that was made on the sixth Day and the
seventh Day of Gods Rest, was his perpetual Cessation from all his Works, and
not to be understood a Day of Evening and Morning, and so when that was ended,
for God to begin another Work.

And as to the Seventh Day, Adam entered upon it in his first Creation, so that
it was not a 7th Day Rest to him from any Labor, for he had done none.

Qu Why (...) mention (...) Works of Creation, and his resting from it in the
fourth Commandment?

Answ. Because Israel, his chosen People, whom he had delivered out of that
hard Labor in Egypt, might look on that happy state of man in his first
Creation, and consider; how that through his Disobedience he brought this
Labor and Sorrow upon himself and that they might (by that temporal
Deliverance out of Egypt by the hand of M^ses) hope for a second Adam who
should do the Will of God by a perfect Obedience, and then suffer under that
Law or Covenant, and triumph over Death by (...) Resurrection, from the Dead,
and so bring them into Gods Rest again; and Joshua's bringing them into that
Canaan was a Type of it. So that these things were as a Schoolmaster to teach
his Church by Signs, till the promised Seed should come, even that second Adam,
and overcome him that had the power of Death in the first Adam, in triumphing,
over Death, by a Resurrection from the Dead, and so give us an assurance of an
immortal Life, by a Resurrection from the Dead.

Qu. Why is the Ten Commandments called (...) Covenant?

Answ. Because God espoused Israel to himself by that Covenant, so that God was
the Head and Husband, and Israel was the Wi^e, and that Law was the Covenant of
her Obedience.

Qu. How do you prove that?

Answ. From the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, as in Jer. 2.2. Thus says
the Lord, I remember the kindness of thy Youth, the love of thine Espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, Jer. 13.14. Turn, O backsliding
Children^ (says the Lord) for I am married unto (...) Isa. 54.5. For thy Maker
is thy Husband, Jer. 31.31, 32. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a New Covena^ with the House of I^rael, and with the House of Judan,
not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the Day that I
took them by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my
Covenant they brake, although I was an Husband to them, says the Lord. Ezekiel.
16.8. Gal. (...) 21, 23. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not
hear the Law? for it is written, That Abraham had two Sons, the one by a
Bond-maid, the other by a Free Woman; V. 24. Which things are an Allegory; for
these are the two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to
Bondage, which is Hagar; Ver. 26. But Jerusalem, which is above, is free,
which is the Mother of us all. From hence We may observe that Abraham's having
two Sons by two Women, are an Allegory, that is, another thing is meant by
it, which is the two Covenants, that is to say, the Covenant of the Law, and
the Covenant of the Gospel, Hagar answers to the Covenant of the Law, made
at Mount Sinai with Israel, and Ishmael answers to Israel after the flesh;
and Sarah answers to the Church of Christ or New-Jerusalem, which is the
Freewoman, and is the Mother of every one that believes^ for every true
Believer is in Rank with (...); for Jerusalem, which is free, is the Bride,
the Lambs Wife, being married to Chrise by the New Covenant or Testament, Rev.
21.9, 10. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, and taked with me,
saving, Come hither, I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife; and he showed
me that great City, the holy Jerusalem; but Ha^ar answers to that Covenant of
the Ten Commandments, by which God (...) Israel at Mount Sinai, by the first
Covenant, even the Ten Commandments, written on the two Tables of Stone, called
the Tables of the Covenant, Heb. 9.4. Deuteronomy. 9.9.

Qu. But seeing you say, That God is the Husband, and Israel the Wife, and that
Covenant the Covenant of her Marriage to God, and that Law was the Law of her
Obedience; how the^ is it possible that this Covenant can over be void, and
this Law cease of being her Rule of her Obedience, seeing she is bound by it to
her Husband, who is God, and that Law is the Law of her Obedience; and the
Scripture says, The Woman is bound to her Husband (by the Law) so long at he
lives; and how is it possible that her Husband (who is God) should ever dye?

To which I Answer; It is very true, the Wife is bound (by the Law) to her
Husband so long as he lives, but if the Husband be dead, she is no Adulteress
though she be mar^ to another man; but if while her Husband lives she be married
to another man, she shall be called an Adulteress. Now though it be impossible
for God to dye in his divine Nature, yet he hat^ laid down his Life in his
Humane Nature. 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid
down his Life for us. A^^s 2^.28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves and to
all the flock, to feed the Church of God, which ^e has purchased with his own
Blood. Gal. 3.13.1, Pat. 3.18. H^b. 9.28. Romans 5.6. Even thus it is with us, as
it was with the Woman, whose Husband being dead, she is loosed from that law of
her Obedience to her Husband; so that We, Brethren, are dead to the Law, by the
Body of Christ. Romans 7.4. That we should be married (by a new Covenant) to him
whom God has raised from the dead, that we should not serve in the oldness of
the Letter, engraven on stone, but in the newness of the Spirit, by which we
are joined to Christ in a new Marriage Covenant. 1 Cor 6.17. Ephesians. 5.31.
compared with verse. 32 And the Law of our Obedience is the law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, which has freed us from the Law of sin, which was in
our Members, for which Law of sin, that Law written and engraven on stone, did
condemn us to dye, (but gave us no strength against sin) which Death Christ
suffered for us under that law, that we might become dead to (...), and (...)
to Righteousness; for they that are Christ^ indeed have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts; so that we are made fre^ from sin by Jesus
Christ: Let us therefore stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free; for the Law has Dominion only over the Body of sin; so then if the
body of sin be crucified, dead and buried with Christ, and We be risen with
him, We are not under the Law but under Grace; shall We then continue in sin,
because We are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid; for how can We
that are dead to sin, live any longer in sin?

Now the first Covenant commanded (...) temporal Sabbath to be kept, which
Sabbath was a sign; but in the New Covenant is contained the Sabbath it self,
which remains to the People of God. The first Covenant gave an Earthly
Inheritance, but if we be Christ's, then are we Heirs of God, yea, joint Heirs
with Christ of a better Inheritance, which is contained in the New Covenant. So
that Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant, established upon better
Promises; for if the first Covenant had been without fault, there had been no
place for a second; for God finds fault with them, saying, My Covenant they
brake, although I was an husband unto them. So that fault was found both with the
Covenant, and Church or Wife; with the Church for the Breach of it, and with
the Covenant, because there was no remission of sins in that Covenant of the
Law; Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that continues not in all the Words of this Law
to do them; therefore, says the Lord, I will make a New Covenant with the
House of Israel and with the House of Judah, not according to the Covenant that
I made with their Fathers in the Day when I took them by the hand to lead them
out of the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I
regarded them not, says the Lord; for this is the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel, After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws
into their Mind, and Write them on their Hearts, and I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People; and they shall not teach every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know
me from the least to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. In that
he says a New Covenant, he has made the first Old. Now that which decays
and wa^eth old is ready to vanish away, says the Apostle; Which plainly
imports, the first is vanished away, that the second may be established.

Now the first Covenant did contain the Will of the Husband, in giving an
Inheritance to his Children, and withal giving them a charge to Obedience,
saying, Hor^ thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. Here was an Inheritance given by a Will or
Testament, but this was not the Saints Inheritance, but a figure of it, though
this Covenant was not dedicated without the Blood of Beasts, as a figure; for a
man's Testament or Will is of no force while the Testator is alive; but the New
Testament of Jesus Christ was dedicated with his own Blood, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; This Sacrifice does purge
our Conscience from dead Works of the Law, to serve the living God; and for
this cause he is a Mediator of the New Testament; so that by the means of his
Death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of an eternal
Inheritance, which eternal Inheritance is the substance of that Inheritance
contained in the first Testament given at Mount Sinai. And it is easier for
Heaven and Earth to pass, than one Tittle of the Levitical Law to fail; for
Christ came not to destroy it, but to fulfill it in every jot and tittle of it,
and also to fulfill in us the Righteousness of that Law Written on the Tables
of Stone, called, the Old Testament or Covenant, and to bring us into that Rest
which Adam by Transgression lost. So that in the first Covenant there was only
contained a Temporal Sabbath, which was but a sign or shadow; and there was
Willed an Inheritant, but it was but the earthly Canaan; there was a Law of
Obedience, but it allowed no Mercy to the Transgressor, neither did it afford
any strength to the sinner, in that it was Weak, neither did it minister
Righteousness to the Soul, so that it was altogether helpless.

But in the New Covenant is contained the Substance of those things; for in it
We have the Remission of sins by the Blood of Christ, figured out under the
first Covenant by the Blood of Beasts, and the gift of that Righteousness
required in the Law; it gives us strength against sin; for by it We have the
gift of the Spirit of God, by which we mortify the Deeds of the Body, and
without which we can no ways serve God acceptably, Which Spirit Witne^leth with
our spirits; that We are the Children of God; for by it We are adopted and made
Heirs of the heavenly Canaan, typi^led in the First Covenant, Which Inheritance
was before promised to Abraham's fleshly Seed, and it commanded a typical
Sabbath, or a Sabbath that was a Sign, but the New Testament gives us the
Substance of these things, even the Everlasting Sabbath, there signified by a
sign in the Covenant of the Law.

Upon the consideration of these things. We ought to give the more earnest
heed; for if the Word spoke by Angels and Writ upon Stone, was steadfast, and
every Transgression of Disobedience received a just Recompense of Reward, how
then shall We escape, if We neglect so great Salvation by Jesus Christ! Seeing
he that despised Moses Law, dyed without Mercy, how much greater Punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy of, that sets light by the Covenant of
Grace, by which Covenant We are sanctified, and the Rule of our Obedience
therein contained, is Written by the Spirit of God on the fleshly Tables of our
hearts, 2 Cor. 3.3. so that We have no need to be taught but as this anointing
of the Spirit teaches Us; for it is written (speaking of the New Covenant)
They shall be all taught of God ( John 6.45. Heb. 8, 11.1 Joh. 2.26, 27.) from
the least of them to the greatest; for in this Covenant is free Remission of
sins by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and Sanctification by the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, who has received of the Father the Promise of the Spirit, and sent it
into our hearts, that it may be our Leader and Guide, and through the gift of
this Treasure which we have in our earthen Vessels, he has made us Ministers
of the New Testament or Covenant, not of the Letter, written and engraven on
Stone, but of the Spirit; for the Letter, written on the Tables of the first
Covenant, ministered only Death, but the Spirit ministers Life and Peace; so
that the Ministration of Jesus Christ, in the New Covenant, ministering
Righteousness to the sinner, and so justifying the Ungodly through Faith, is
more glorious than the Ministration of Condemnation in the old Covenant, which
ministered only Death and Condemnation to the sinner, so that Gods Justice was
therein to be seen; but in the New Covenant his rich Mercy and infinite Grace
in Christ Jesus is seen.

Beloved Brethren, I am sensible that the Minds of many are blinded, and there
is a Vail of Darkness upon their hearts, in the reading of the Old Covenant so
that they cannot see what is abolished; but when their heart shall turn to the
Lord, that Vail of Darkness shall be taken away, and then they will come to
behold the Glory of the Lord in the New Covenant; for where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is Light and Liberty to behold his Glory; for the Lord is that
Spirit in his Divine Nature, and the Saints Bodies are his Temple and Sanctuary
where he dwells; for there the pure in heart shall s^e him; for as the Tables
of the Old Covenant were Stone, so the Tables of the New Covenant are the
fleshly hearts of Gods Children; and as the Law was engraven on those Tables,
and put into an Ark, so the Righteousness of the Law is no where to be found
but in Christ, and as our fleshly hearts are the Tables of the New Covenant, so
Christ has written the Law of our Obedience to him there, and he in us is the
Ark of Gods strength, and causes our spiritual Enemies to flee before him: And
as the Ark of the first Covenant did contain the Doctrine of the Law, so the
Ark of the New Testament contains the Doctrine of Christ; he that has this
Doctrine, and abides in it, he has both the Father and the Son dwelling in
him; for the Saints Bodies are the Temple of the the New Testament, where God
dwells. Now the first Covenant had Ceremonies of divine Service, and a worldly
Sanctuary (for there was a Tabernacle made with hands, which the Levitical
Priesthood ministered in) but Christ is our great High Priest, a Minister of
the holy things and true Tabernacle, which God has pitched, and not man, which
Tabernacle is the Saints Bodies.

Beloved Brethren, Keep your selves from Idols.
Postscript.
I Desire that these following things may be well considered.

First, When God delivered the two Tables of Stone into the hand of Moses, he
gave him a particular account about the Sabbath, how it was a Sign, as is to be
seen Exodus 31. beginning at verse. 12. to the end of the Chapt. yea, it was a
covenanted Si^n to that People, as is to be seen, verse. 16, 17, Ezekiel. 20.12, 20.

Secondly, Moses testifies it to Israel, that it was commanded to be kept upon
the account of that Deliverance out of Egypt, as ^s to be seen Deuteronomy. 5.
comparing the 12, 13, and 14 ^erses with the 15 verse. So that as their
Deliverance was from a Temporal Bondage, so the sign of it was a Temporal Rest,
and the Sign was for a Covenant between God and Them, of his safe protecting
them from the Oppression of their Enemies, in that Inheritance which he gave
them while they kept his Laws.

Thirdly, Christ testifies, That the Priests profaned the Sabbath in the
Temple, and yet were blameless, Mat. 12.5. compared with Numb. 28.9, 10. so
that we may well conclude, those Sacrifices by which they profaned the Sabbath
with, though they were but signs themselves, yet the Sabbath, which was of less
value, was to give place, that the greater might not be omitted.

Fourthly, The man that bore a burden on the Sabbath Day (to wit, his Bed, Joh
5.10.) profaned it in so doing, and was as blameless as the Priests; for that
Sign under the Law was not the Sabbath, any more than that Circumcision,
commanded to Abraham, was the Circumcision, and therefore, says the Apostle,
That is not Circumcision that is outward in the flesh, Romans 2.28. And again,
says he, Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, Rom 8 11. Thus we see he
calls it the Sign of Circumcision, though the Scripture did no where call it a
sign, but called it Circumcision; but the 7th Day Sabbath God declared it to be
Sign, yea, a covenanted Sign with that People, as Circumcision was, as is to be
seen, by comparing these two places of Scripture together, Exodus 31.16, 17.
G^^. 17.10, 13 and 14 Verses.

Fifthly, Seeing that God testi^ieth, that the Weekly 7th Day Sabbath is a
Sign, and gave no such plain demonstration of any other of the Sabbaths under
the Law, We have good and better reason to judge, that Pau^'s words, Col. 2.16,
17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect of an
^ly Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days, which are a shodow of
things to come, but the Body is of Christ comprehends the 7th Day Sabbath in a
special manner, seeing it agrees with Gods Testimony to Israel, that it was a
Sign to them, and a sign is not the Substance; for a shadow is but the sign of
the Substance.

And lastly, Seeing that God testifies to Israel, That the Weekly 7th-Day
Sabbath was a sign, it was no more the Sabbath, than the seven stars which John
saw in the right hand of Christ, was the Angel of the seven Churches, nor no
more the Sabbath than the seven Golden Candlesticks was the seven Churches,
Rev. 1.20. nor no more the Sabbath than those fat Kine that Pharaoh saw, Genesis
41.26. was the seven plentiful Years; which sort of Creature (we after read)
they made an Image of and worshipped; nor no more the Sabbath than the sign of
Circumcision was the Circumcision, Romans 2.28 and chapter p. 4.11. nor no more the
Sabbath (under the first Covenant) than the Wine that Christ gave his Disciples
to drink, was the Blood of the New Testament or Covenant, Mat. 26.27, 28 nor no
more the Sabbath, (under the first Testament) than the Bread that Christ gave
to his Disciples, was his Body under the second or new Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.23,
24.

Thus We see that Signs (in the Scripture) bear the complete Name of the
Substance or Thing they signify; so the 7th-Day Sabbath was a Sign under the
first Covenant, and so continued till the establishment of the second, and then
both the Covenant and Signs under it ceased; for they were signs of Instruction
to the Church, that they might impose their Faith on the things they signified,
which were to be fulfilled by Christ, who was the substance of them all; and so
at his coming they were all nailed to his Cross, and so ceased, E^hes. 2.15,
16. Col. 2.14. And so likewise the Signs that are now in being (under the New
Covenant) are to continue till Christ's second coming in his Manhood, 2 Cor.
11.26. and then they will cease also.

J. R.

An Exposition upon several Places of Scripture, which the unlearned and
unstable wrest (is they do also other places of Scripture) to their own
Destruction.
LAY not wait, O Wicked Man, against the Dwelling of the Righteous, neither
spoil thou his resting place; for a righteous Man alleth seven Times, and
rises again; but the Wicked shall fall into Mischief, Prove. 24.15, 16.

It is a common saying, that the Scripture says, A righteous Man falls into
sin seven times a day, which false Report seems to be raised from this Text of
Scripture, though it intends quite another thing, and not a falling into sin, as
the Consequents of it make it appear; for, says the Text, Lay not wait, O
Wicked Man, against the Dwelling of the Righteous, neither spoil thou his
resting Place; It is evident that the dwelling of the Righteous is in God, who
Pro^ects him, and the^e is his (...) place, ^ sal. 91.1. From hence we may
observe, that the holy Ghost cautions and forbids the Wicked man laving wait
against the Dwelling of the Righteous, thinking thereby to spoil his resting
place, which resting place is in God, upon this consideration, For a righteous
man falls seven times, and rises up again; which implies as much as if it
should say, Though he should f^ll before thee seven times, yet shall he rise up
again; for his state is not like the Wicked, for the Wicked when they come to
fall, it is into Mischief. so that this place of Scripture does not at all
intend falling into sin, but into Perils, through the means of the Wicked, but
they shall rise up again; for it is written, Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me,
O mine Enemy; when I fall I shall arise, Isa. 54.17. No Weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper.

Another place of Scripture, which is grossly wrested, is 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. where
the Lord says to Paul, My strength is made perfect in weakness; they say,
Paul's weakeness and infirmities (there mentioned) is meant, sin, which in so
saving they make Paul seem very abominable; for he says most gladly, Therefore
will I rather glory in ^y I firmitie. What! did Paul take pleasure in
Wickedness, and most gladly glory (...) it? Surely Nay. And after this manner
do they wrest the Scripture to their own Destruction.

Whenas this place of Scripture does plainly show, that the faithful Children
of God, who are perfected in the Doctrine of Christ, do come to obtain a
perfect strength against the Power of sin, as appears by comparing verse. 7.
with the 8 and 9 verses; for faith Paul, And lest I should be exalted above
measure, through the abundance of Revelation, there was given me a Thorn in the
flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffer me, lest I should be exalted above
measure. From hence we may observe, That Paul had abundance of Revelations, and
left he should be exalted above measure, through them, there was given him a
Thorn in the flesh, which was the Messenger of Satan, to buffet him, which was
some evil Motions working in his fleshly Body, which he compares to a Thorn in
the flesh, which will terrify a man till he can get rid of it; and the end of
God in exercising Paul under these Temptations, was, that he might not be
exalted in himself, but might learn by them the Doctrine of Humility; These
Temptations or evil Motions that did work in Paul's flesh, he found to be too
strong for him to withstand, and therefore besought the Lord, that it might
depart from him; the answer of the Lord to him, was, My Grace is sufficient for
thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Thus we may see how God was
pleased to exercise Paul, to humble and abase him, under the fence of his own
weakness and infirmities, and then in showing him most graciously his
All Sufficiency, in making his own strength appear perfectly in Paul, and
thereby giving him the Victory. From hence we may Note, That when Pride was in
Paul he was under the buffeting Warfare, but when he was humbled under it, ann
by it had learned Humility, then God revealed his perfect strength in him, and
gave him the Victory over the power of sin; and when Paul came thus to see his
own weakness, not being able to with-stand the power of sin, he was greatly
abased and humbled, and did glory in the sight that he had obtained of himself:
And thus he comes not to glory in himself, any otherwise than in the sight that
he had obtained of his own weakness and infirmities, that the power of Christ
might rest on him, by giving him Gods perfect strength, against the Motions of
sin; and when Paul had attained to this Learning, rightly to know his own
weakness and infirmities, so as to glory in them, being abased in himself,
lowly and humble, and to know the Almighty Power of God, and his readiness to
help the humble and lowly in time of need; then did he come (as in the 10th
verse) to take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in
Persecutions, and in Distresses for Christ's sake; for when I am weak (says he)
then am I strong, that is, because he sees his own Weakness, and is humble and
lowly in himself, but is strong by Faith in God, whom he knows will give him
the Victory; so that when he is thus Weak in himself, then is he strong in God
by Faith.

From this recorded Experience of Paul, it is our Wisdom to learn of Christ,
who was meek and lowly in heart, and then we shall find Rest, as Paul did, by
Gods perfect strength that did appear in him, against the strength and powerful
Motions of Sin, under which Warfair he could not rest quietly, for it was like
a pricking Bryar or grieving Thom in the flesh, which was suffered of God so to
be, to teach him Humility, in seeing his own Weakness and Gods Strength made
perfect in him; and thus he comes to glory in those two forementioned things.
And this is the Saints Perfection in this Life, even when Gods strength is made
perfect in us, against the power of sin. And this is the Perfection that I have
born Witness to, for which I have suffered Repreach from such as never saw Gods
strength at any time made perfect in them against the power of sin, neither
will they believe the Truth of it, because the God of this World has blinded
their Eyes.

Another place greatly wrested, is in James 3, 2 For in many things we Offend
all.

Here arises a Question from this Text, What we are to understand by Offending
all? Whether all the Church is here meant to Offend, or whether some particular
Persons is here intended to Offend all the Church?

To which I Answer; The following words do answer the Question, being compared
with Verse. 1. If any man Offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man, and
able also to bridle the whole Body. From hence we may Note, that he speaks of
Offending with the Tongue; for says he, If any Man Offend not in word, the
same is a perfect Man; compare this with verse 1. which faith, My Brethren, be
not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater Condemnation; which
imports, Be not of a Domineering or Masterly Spirit, for such are apt to Offend
all the Church of Christ in many things, with their ungoverned Tongue; and
whereas he faith, We shall receive the greater Damnation that is to be
understood, so many of us as are of an exalted Masterly Spirit, for it is such
of us as Offend all, by not bridling our Tongue; for this Offending all is with
an unbridled Tongue, as is to be seen in the 3d and 4th verses, compared with
the 5 and 6 verses, etc.

They mention also James 4.5. say they, the Apostle says, That the Scripture
says, the Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to envy; whenas the Apostle is
speaking to Adulterers and Adulteresses, as in the foregoing verse and is
showing to them what the Scripture says of the Spirit that was in the
adulterated old world, Genesis 6, 5. and is in all of us, that are gone out of
Gods Spirit, and got into the Spirit of the World, and so have gone a whoring
from God.

They greatly wrest many passages of the Apostle Paul's words in the 7th of the
Romans, to their own destruction; for the Apostle is setting forth the
miserable state of man, as he is in the flesh, and not in Christ, and he makes
use of himself to set it forth, which is most proper and decent for a man
rather to nominate hinself, to set forth the wretched, misrable and sinful
state of man, then to reflect it upon another or upon them that are not yet
delivered from that state.

But it will be objected, That Paul was a converted man when he wrote the said
Chapter.

To which I Answer; It is very true, for he was not in a wretched state, then
wanting deliverance, or a carnal man sold under sin; as he there makes use of
himself (as he was in his unconverted state) to open the miserable state of the
unconverted man, sold under sin, beind in a wretched and undelivered states as
he there sets it forth, under the denomination of himself. Now when he has
ended the 7th Chapter, having set forth the carnal, unconverted state of man,
who is sold under sin, being in a wretched captivated state of Death, while he
is in the flesh and not in Christ, so that though he wills that which is good,
yet he is so under the power of Satan, that he finds no ability to perform that
which is good, by reason that there is the law of fin in his Membes, which law
of fin proceeds from the Kingdom of Satan, and warreth against the law of his
mind, and brings him into Captivity to the law of sin, which is in his
Members, and make him cry out against his wretchedness, and state of Death that
he is in, desiring deliverance, which can come only and alone by Jesus Christ,
I say he having thus set forth the miserable state of man out of Christ, in the
next place he sets forth the happy state of man in Christ, as throughout the 8
chap. which begins thus, There is therefore now no condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. But in
the 7th Chap. (faith he) for when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin
which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death,
v. 5. But in the 8th Chap. v. 9. he says to them that are in Christ, But ye
are not in the flesh. In the 7th Chap. 23.24 verses, he says of the
Unconverted, But I see another Law in my Members, waring against the Law of my
Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my Members,
O wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from this Body of Death. In
Chap. 8. v. 2. speaking of a Converted state, he says, The Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and Death. In
Chap. 7. v. 14. speaking of the Unconverted state of Man, he says, For we know
that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. In Chap. 8. verse.
6, 7. to set forth the miserable state of the carnal Man, he says, To be
carnally minded is Death, because the carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for it
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. In Chap. 7. v. 15. he
shows, That an unconverted state is a state of Bondage and Slavery, for a man
does that which he allows not, and what he would do, that he does not; and what
he hates, that he does; all which shows, he is under the power of sin; this
state cannot but be attended with a Spirit of Bondage, to fear Gods Wrath. But
in Chap. 8.15, 16, and 17 Verses, he shows, That the Converted has not the
Spirit of Fear, but has the Spirit of Adoption, and can call God Father, by
the Witness of Gods own spirit, which reveals to the soul Gods Love, and gives
the Soul a certain knowledge, that it is an Heir of eternal Life, by the
immediate Witness and Revelation of God and every one that believes has this
Witness of God in himself, 1 John 5.9, 10. Romans 8.16. Thus it appears,
according to the Apostle Peter's Testimony, That there be some that wrest
Paul's Writings to their own Destruction, as they do also other Scriptures, 2
Pet. 3.15, 16.

Another Scripture which they wrest, to maintain a sinning Life, is Gal. 5.17.
For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would.

Look but into the foregoing Verse, and it will show the reason why these
could not do the things they would, and why this Battle did arise in them, to
wit, the flesh against the spirit, for the Spirit of God in them did not want
strength to overcome and to mortify the deeds of the Body, and to have given
them the Victory through Faith in God, but they were Disobedient Children, and
did not walk in the Spirit, but did bite and devour one another, as in the 15
verse. which Contention did arise through Pride, contending about the Works of
the Law; for it is written, Only through Pride comes Contention; had they been
sowing to the Spirit, they would have reaped the fruit of Peace, as in the 22th
verse. and not of War in themselves, but they sowing to the flesh, did cause a
War in themselves, and one against another; for as in verse. 24. They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Now when the
flesh is crucified, dead and buried how can it make war against the Spirit, any
more than a dead man can make war against a living man? Romans 6.6, 7, 8.
compared with v. 11.1 Pet. 4.1, 2, Gal. 2.20, but while Humility is wanting,
that Soul cannot expect a perfect Rest and Peace; for if it should enjoy that,
Pride would increase, and therefore God does not reveal in such a one his
perfect strength, but lets them labor to humble them, that they may not glory
in themselves, but in him who gives them strength.

Another Scripture which they wrest, to defend the power and authority of sin,
is 1 John 1.8 If we say that me have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in us.

It will appear plainly that this Scripture is spoken to the unconverted, yea,
this whole Chapter is written, not to the Believer, but to the Unbeliever, as
thus appears in the 3d verse says he, That which we have seen and heard declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with Us; This [ Vs] is the
Saints, which were come into fellowship already with the Father and with h^s
Son Jesus Christ; but he writes to such as yet had not fellowship with [ Vs]
that is to say, the Saints; for, says he, that which we have seen and heard,
declare We unto You, that Ye [ also] may have fellowship with Us; The Word [
also] imports, as We are come into fellowship with God, so We desire, that Ye [
also] may come into this fellowship with us. So that it appears plainly, that
he writes to such as were not yet come into fellowship with the Saints. The
truth of this also appears in the 9th Verse. If We confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. From whence it appears, that these to whom he writes, had not
yet made confession of their sins, neither were cleansed from all
Unrighteousness; but it is evident that John had confessed his sins, and that
God had been faithful and just to forgive him his sins, and had cleansed him
from all unrighteousness. It is also evident, that all those that are cleansed
from all unrighteousness, walk in a clear Light, and therefore have a perfect
sight that they are Gods Children; for it is the ingrafted Spirit of Truth in
their hearts that sanctifies them; so that it is evident, whosoever conceits
that they have fellowship with God, and are not in this Light, they do but
deceive themselves, as appears in the 5, 6 and 7 Verses, and are not cleansed
from their sins by the Blood or Jesus Christ; and for such to say they have no
sin, do but deceive themselves, and the Truth is not in them, or say, they have
not sinned, they make him a liar, and his Word is not in them; for they being
in a state of Darkness, it is (...) evidence, that they are alienated from the
Life of God, and that his living Word is not in them

This Apostle John does not in this first Chapter use the Word [ Vs] only to
his Brethren in Christ, but also to his Brethren after the flesh, as being his
fellow Creatures which he writes to. And in the beginning of the second Chapter
he writes to Babes in Christ, and after to Fathers and Young Men, yea, to all
sorts and degrees of Christians, throughout the rest of his Epistle, but in this
Chapter only to Unbelievers.

Another place of Scripture which they wrest, to uphold a continuance in sin,
or at least to confirm it to be a truth, that none ^an live free from sin,
while in the Land of the living, which place is Eccles. 7.20. For there is not
a just Man upon Earth, that does good, and sins not.

To which I Answer; If there were a just man upon Earth, that does good, and
sins not, that man stands in no need of a Savior, for Christ did not come
to call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance; for boasting could not be
excluded from this man, because his Salvation would not be of Grace, but of
Debt, for he would have no need to be beholding to God for the forgiveness of
sin, because he never had sinned; but as Solemen faith, There was never such a
man since the f^ll of Adam, save Jesus Christ only. Look upon the 15th verse of
this Chap. and thou may see what just Man this is he speaks of: There is a
just Man (says he) that perishes in his Righteousness. So that it is evident,
that this just Man's Righteousness, which he speaks of, is not the Righteousness
of Christ, which is by Faith, but a Self-Righteousness; but this does not
confute the Apostle John's Testimony, who says, If we confess our sins he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. Neither does it confute what he further says,
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his Seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9.

Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy sury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name, for they have eaten up Jacob, and
devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation desolate.

Here are several observable things in this Text. First, The Prophet seems to
interceed against these Heathen and Families, saying, Pour out thy fury upon
the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy
name: Secondly, He gives the reason why, because (says he) they have eaten up
Jacob, and devoured him

Here arises a question or two, first, What Families were those that eat up
Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and made his habitation desolate,
and yet called not upon the Name of the Lord?

To which I Answer; These families were the Kingdoms of the Earth, as appears
by these Scriptures, Jer. 1 15. For ^o I will call all the Families of the
Kingdoms of the North, faith the Lord, and they shallcome, and they shall set
every one his Throne at the c^tring of the gates of Jerusalem, against all the
Walls thereof round about, and against all the (...) of Judah, Amos 3.1.2. hear
this Word which the Lord has spoken against you, O Children of Israel, against
the whole Family which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying, you only
have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for
all your Iniquities. Here the whole Nation of Israel is called a Family, in
opposition to all the kingdoms or Families of the Earth. Again, in Zach. 14.18.
Egypt is called a Family; but this Prophet Jeremiah in this place speaks
after the manner of Asaph, Psalm. 79.6.7. Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen
that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy
Name; for they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place. From
hence we may see these Families were the Kingdoms of the Earth, that devoured
Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place, and yet called not upon the Name of
the Lord; for had they known God, and called upon his Name, as Israel did, only
with the mouth and lips, then they would have been as bad Hypocrites as they
were, but they knew him not, and therefore called not upon his Name at all; for
it is better of the two, not to call upon the Name of God at all, then to call
upon his name with the mouth and lips only, without any amendment of Life, for
this is high Hypocrisy, and abominable deceit in the sight of God; for it is
adding hypocrisy to sin; for it is like a disobedient servant that goes about
to curry favor with his Master by flattery, which is a double Provocation.

Secondly, Why did God suffer these Families or Kingdoms of the Earth to devour
Jacob, and lay waste his dewlling place?

Answ. Because Israel lived in their sins, and did not endeavor to Repent or
amend their ways, but were in such a state of blindness that they thought it
was pleasing (...) God, for them to approach before God at their set times of
Prayer, with their Mouths and Lips, while they lived in their sins, and they
seemed to themselves more holy than others, by reason of these hypocritical
Prayers which they thought was their Duty, though living in their sins, whenas it
was but adding sin to sin, and doing only by the suggestions of Satan, to
flatter God while they served sin. Amos 4.4. Come to Bethel, and transgress at
Gilgall, multiply Transgressions, and bring your Sacrifices every morning;
compare this with v. 6. etc. And I also have given you cleanness of Teeth in
all your Cities, and want of Bread in all your Palaces, etc. As much as if the
Lord should say, As you have dealt with me, so have I dealt with you; you lived
in your sins, and yet attend your praying Custom every morning. Isa. 1.11, 12.
To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices, to me (faith the Lord)
when ^e come to appear before me? who has required this at your hand? As much
as if God should say, It is not that which I require at your hand; but, says
he, ( verse. 16.) Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine Eyes: As much as if he should say, It is Truth and
Righteousness in the inner man that I require of you, and not your flattering
by pocritical Prayers. Hos. 6.6. For I desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, and the
knowledge of God more than burnt Offerings. Jer. 7.21, 22. Thus faith the Lord
of Hosts the God of Israel, Put your burnt Offerings to your Sacrifices, and
eat flesh, for I spoke not onto your Fathers, nor commanded them, in the day
that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt Offerings or
Sacrifices, but this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, and I will
be your God, and ye shall be my People, and walk ye in all the ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well unto you. Thus we see Prayer is of no use
without a Conversation answerable thereunto; for the Prayer of the wicked is an
Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. chap. 21.27. and says David, If I regard
Iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. and such a wicked
praying People as these who offer abomination to the Lord, for their Prayers
are so faith the Scripture, and therefore, faith the Lord, these are a smoke in
my Nose, a fire that burns all the day; so that Gods anger was very hot
against this sinful praying People; so that he made use of the Heathen that
knew him not, and the Kingdoms or Families that called not upon his Name, to
eat them up and devour them, and make their Habitation desolate, according to
what God had before threatened them with, Isa. 10.5. O Affyrian, the Rod of mine
Anger, and the Staff in their hand is mine Indignation, I will send him against
an hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my Wrath; I will give him a
charge to take the Spoil, and to take the Prey, and to tread them down like the
Mire in the Streets. Isa. 33.14 The sinners in Zion are afraid, Fearfulness
has surprised the Hypocrites. Thus did God threaten this praying People with
sore Destruction, and that it should come upon them by the Heathen that knew
him not, and therefore called not upon his Name; and this Prophet Jeremiah saw
their destruction with his Eyes; for this hypocritical Nation drew near to God
with their Mouth, and with their Lips did honor him at their set times of
Prayer, and therefore Destruction came upon them by a People that knew not God,
and therefore called not upon his Name; and when the Prophet saw this, that
Jacob was eaten up and devoured, and consumed, and his Habitation made
desolate, he interceeds against them, That God would be pleased to pour out his
Wrath upon them also; for they were sinners, though not such hypocritical sinners
as the other was, for these knew not God.

From hence we may note, That a smsti^ hypocritical praying People, of all
People are in the greatest danger of destruction from the hand of God, by some
Calamity or other, before other sinners, that call not upon the Name of God at
all, for they do not add hypocrisy to their sin, as these do, and these shall
have their portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth; for these are they which Christ distinguishes his Disciples from, Mat.
6.5, 6. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, for
they love to ^ray standing in the S^agognes (that is, in a public Assembly) to
be seen of Men, verily, I say unto you, they have their Reward; but says
Christ to his Disciples (singling them out from these Hypocrite,) But thou
shall not be as the Hypocrite, but thou, when thou ^rayest enter into thy
Closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall ^eward thee openly. Thus
Gods Children loose the Hypocrites Reward.

But it will be objected, That this is spoke of private Prayer.

To which I Answer; It is true, if it be intended private from the ears of the
world, but if it be intended, private from him that sees in secret, then it is
false; for Christ's Exhortation is, that it should be private from the ears of
the world.

But it will be objected, That Christ says [Thou] which is in the singular
Number.

To which I Answer; That is true also, for Christ singles out his Disciples
from Hypocrites, as he did Israel from other Nations, saying, I am the Lord Thy
God which brought Thee out of the Land of Egypt; and yet it was to all his
Church that he spoke, as he does here to all his Disciples, to distinguish them
out from Hypocrites.

J. R.

Concerning Marriage and Divorce.
THe taking away my lawful Wife, and other men's Wives, in this Colony of
Connecticut in New England, contrary to the Rule of Gods Word, is the reason of
my publishing this Treatise of Marriage and Divorce.

Genesis 1.27. So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he
him; Man and Female created by them. Thus was the Woman created in the Man, as
appears in the 5th Chap. v. 2. Male and Female created he them, and blessed
them, and called their Name Adam. in the day when they were created. So that it
appears they were created in one Body, and were one flesh and bone, Mal. 2.15.
And did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the Spirit. Thus we see God
created the Man and the Woman in one Body, yet had he the residue of the
Spirit, and could have created him singly and distinct in two Bodies; Upon the
consideration of this, says the Prophet, to the Husband, Therefore take heed
to your Spirit, and let none deal treacherously with the Wife of his Youth; for
the Lord, the God of Israel says, that he hates p^ting away. Which does
import, forasmuch as God created the Man and Woman in one Body; so that he made
them one in their first Creation, and therefore hates a Separation, after they
are united and become one flesh, by the Union of Marriage. Genesis 2.21, 22, 23.
And the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and he took
one of his Ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the Rib which the
Lord God had taken from Man, builded he a Woman, and brought her unto the Man;
and Adam said, This is now Bone of my Bones, and Flesh of my Flesh, (...) shall
be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Thus was the Woman taken
taken out of the side of the Man, near his heart, and then brought to him by
God, to be joined to him again by a Marriage Union; and when Adam saw her, he
said. This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, because she was of
him, even taken out of him, and now brought to him again by God, to be joined
to him, and therefore (says the Lord in the 24th Verse) shall, a Man leave his
Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they shall be one flesh: Thus
has God joined them together, showing, that a man shall leave his Father that
begot him, and his Mother that brought him forth, and shall cleave to his Wife:
So that God ordained a separation from Father and Mother, but a perpetual Union
between a Man and his Wife; they are to pass their days together by Gods
decree, and none can separate them, without high Contempt against Gods
Authority, by violating his Ordinance of Marriage, for God has thus joined
them together, and has decreed that a Man shall thus cleave to his Wife, and
that she shall be subject to him, and not to another Man, and that her Husband
shall rule over her; so that the Wife (by this Law of God) is bound to her
Husband so long as he lives, ( Romans 7.2 1 Cor. 7.39.) and by no means can be
loosed from this Bond of Union and Subjection to her Husband, without the
breach of Wedlock, which in Scripture, the Punishment is equaled with the
punishment of Murder, Ezekiel. 16.38. And I will judge thee as Women that break
Wedlock and shed Blood are judged.

But may there not be such Marriages as are not of God, and therefore may
lawfully be separated? Yes, there may, but the separation must be only granted
by the Man, and upon no other cause than Fornication, because God made Man in
his own Image, so that he is the image and glory of God, but the Woman is the
glory of the Man; for the Man was not created for the Woman, but the Woman for
the Man, 1 Cor. 11.7, 9. So that God brought the Woman and gave her to the Man,
that he might be her Lord and Governor, Genesis 2.22, Chap. 3.12, 16. So that she
was given to him to be a glory to him, as the Church is given to Christ, John
10.29. chap. 17.6. she is his peculiar Treasure in this Life; for she is given
to him by God himself, and is his only peculiar Treasure, next to his Heart,
and none can take that from him which God has given to him, without the
greatest Unjustice in the World, that can be done to a (...) she is not only
given to him, but bound to hi^ by the Law, so long as he lives; she is a bound
Subject to him during his Life, being bound to him by God, to be in subjection
to him; so that she has no power to put him away who is her Lord and Master;
Judges have no power to take her from (...), if they do, it is high Contempt
against the Throne of God; for it represents the Mystical Union between Christ
and his Church, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. and therefore it is written, What God has
joined together let (...) ^an put asunder, Mark 10.9.

Neither can a man lawfully himself put away his Wife, but only upon a Marriage
not made by God; for when God brought (...) to Adam she was a chaste Virgin,
Undefiled, without any guile or deceit, and so Adam received her from the hand
of God; for God puts no Harlot upon a man, instead of a Virgin or chaste Woman,
to be his covenanted Wife: for it does signify the Mystical Union between
Christ and his Church, who is presented to him as a chaste Virgin, 2 Cor. 11.2
as Eve was to Adam; but if a Man take a Woman to be his Wife, taking her for a
Virgin or Chaste Woman, and when he has taken her, finds that he is ^heated,
and that she has committed Fornication, and is defiled, this Marriage is ^ot
(...) God; for he is not the Author of dece^; and therefore it is in the power
of her Husband to give her a Bill of Divorce, except (...) take her after he
bath the knowledge of her Defilement, if so, then he may not put her away all
his days; so that nothing is accepted by which a man may put away his Wife,
save Fornication only; and this Doctrine Christ taught to his Disciples, in h^^
Sermon upon the Mount, limiting a Divorce only upon this one thing, Mat. 5.31,
32: It has been said, Whosoever puts away his Wife, let him give her a
Writing of Divorcement; but I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his
Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery. Here
Christ condemns all manner of Separation* where the Marriage is of God, and
plainly testifies, That he that puteth away his Wife, causes her to commit
Adultery^ and be that marrys her commits Adultery also.

The Lord in his Doctrine to his Disciples thus makes void that liberty of
Divorce that Moses gave under the Covenant of the Law to Israel; after this the
Pharisees came also to him, tempting him, Mat. 19.3. etc. and saying unto him,
Is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause? His answer

(...)
