Abraham THE PASSENGER HIS PRIVILEGE AND DUTY Described in an Election-SERMON
at Boston N. E. May 30. 1705.

By Joseph Easterbrooks A. M. And Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at Concord.

John 8. 39. If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the Works of Abraham.
Gal. 3. 29. And if ye be CHRIST's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs
according to the Promise. Notandum est, non de ^no aliquo particulari Opere bic
ag^; sed de generali pie (...) Vivendi Principio. Vocatio enim Abrae tractatur,
quae communis est Typus vitae omnium Fidelium. Calvin. BOSTON: Printed by
Bartholomew Green. Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of
the Townhouse. 1705.

Abraham the Passenger HIS Privilege and Duty.
GENESIS. XII. 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will Bless
thee, and make thy name great; and thou shall be a Blessing.
WHEN the World was deeply immerst in Idolatry, God was pleased from his
Sovereign pleasure, to call some out of darkness into his mavelous light,
shedding down upon them the Saving and Regenerating influences of his Spirit,
whereby they were enabled willingly to turn from Idols to Serve him, who is the
true and living God.

Amongst the famous Worthies that the Sacred History makes mention of in the
new World, was Abraham; who lived about the Twenty first Century from the
Creation: He by the abundant Grace of God bestowed upon him, exceeded all, in
those two comprehensive Graces, viz. a fixed Faith, and a filial Fear. In
Faith, in that he readily believed all Gods Promises, which seemed to have
insuperable difficulties in the way of their accomplishment; Who against hope
believed in hope, and staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief; but
was strong in faith, giving Glory unto God, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20. Hereupon that
honorable Title, the Father of the faithful, was given unto him.

He had such an awful fear of God, as that he stuck at nothing in order to a
compliance with his revealed Will: as it appears in his ready submitting
himself to that Painful Ordinance of Circumcision; he being then well nigh an
hundred years old: in offering up his only begotten Son by Sarah as a
Sacrifice; which is testified from Heaven by an Angel, Genesis 22. 12. And also in
leaving his Native Country, and Kindred, at the Command of God.

This his Country was Ur of the Chaldees, which lay between those two great and
noble Rivers Euphrates and Tygris, therefore called in the Hebrew Tongue,
Aram-Naharajim, or Padan-Aram: and in the Greek Tongue, Mesopotamia,
whereabouts was the Garden of Eden, or Paradise; as some Learned men judge.
Though this Country was blessed with a fertile Soil; when God orders his
removal, he presently attends his pleasure, (...) himself with his Family and
Kindred to Haran: and from thence to (...); which might be about four hundred
Miles: His call is set down Verse the first; which was given to him in
Mesopotamia; an account of which we have in Act. 7. 2, 3. That this was an
Evidence of Faith and Fear, is declared by the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 11.
8.

In trans^tu, Two things seem not unworthy of our consideration; viz.

1. That Gods People are sometimes called by Him, to remove from the places of
their Nativity, into a Country afar off. This call of God is not now Immediate,
as Abraham's was: but Mediate; namely, when they cannot Live comfortably where
they are, and have a plain prospect of mending themselves in another Land; as
in this Chapter, it is related that Abraham went down into Egypt upon the
account of the Famine in Canaan, without any Immediate Command from God. So Lot
removed himself from Abraham; they not being able, by reason of the Multitude
of their Cattle, to Live Peaceably together. Or when they cannot enjoy the
Ordinances of God with Peace and Purity: this Latter was the case of our Pious
Predecessors, the first Planters of this Land: Many of which had fair
Accommodations, and very considerable Estates; who yet for the Satisfaction of
their Consciences, accounted it far more eligible to turn their backs upon all
the good things, in their own Native Country, and expose themselves and their
Families to great hazards, and difficulties, by Sea and Land; than to abide
where they were. Surely, it was not to gain great Estates: but for the
promotion of Religion, and the advancement of their own and their Posterities
Spiritual good, that was in their Eyes; which made them to come from a fruitful
Land, into this Jeshimon, and uncultivated Wilderness. And God was in a signal
manner present with them, who obtained their desired end, in the peaceable
enjoyment of Gods Ordinances; and having all of them ascended into those
glorious Regions that are above, have left their Posterity in possession of the
good things of Gods House; which we yet through the bounty of our Merciful God,
enjoy without molestation and rigorous Impositions.

Will it not now be an hazardous attempt in any, to introduce that into our
Congregations, which is diametrically opposite to the great end of our Worthy
and Religious Fathers, in their coming over into this Wilderness? ( v. 3.) Who
did not separate from the Church of England, as denying it to be a true Church;
their departure from thence was an orderly Secession, having the Countenance
and Encouragement of the Supreme Authority of our Nation. Therefore they did
not deserve to be Stigmatized with that ill title of Schismatics.

But have we not cause to bewail the irreligious folly of many that have
planted themselves in such remote corners of this Land, for the sake of Worldly
conveniences, that they might live as Lambs in a large place; so as that they
have not been capable of enjoying the Ordinances of Christ, and by that means
have seemed to bid defiance, not only to Religion, but to Civility it self: and
such places thereby have become Nurseries of Ignorance, Profaneness and
Atheism. But has not God left upon them the marks of his sore displeasure?
whereby many such places are become ruinous heaps; upon which God has in
Righteousness stretched the line of confusion, and stones of emptiness.

2. Another thing observable is: That compliance with the revealed. Will of
God, is usually followed with manifold Blessings. These Words as they stand
related and are tacked to the first Verse, plainly hold forth this Truth: there
are none that do any Service for God, but they are rewarded for it. In keeping
thy Commands there is great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. This our Savior with
Solemnity declares, Luke 18. 29, 30. Verily, I say unto you, there is no man,
that has left House or Parents or Brethren, or Wife or Children, for the
Kingdom of Gods sake, who shall not receive manifold more in this present time,
and in the World to come Life Everlasting.

When men Serve and obey God, though not in a sincere manner, yet they have not
missed of a reward from God: as Jehu, who at the Command of God destroyed the
house of Ahab, and the Worshippers of Baal, which he did with respect to his
own Worldly Interest; yet his Posterity, according to that promise of God, Sat
upon the Throne of Israel to the fourth Generation. And Nebuchadnezz^r did
Service for God in ruining the proud City of Tire, where little Booty was found
that might countervail his great pains and labor: He therefore gave him the
rich and opulent Kingdom of Egypt; as it is fully expressed in Ezekiel. 29. 17. ad
finem. Then surely such as obey God in an upright manner, they shall not miss
of a full Recompense. If we look back into the Old World we shall find two
Persons that did Eminent Service for God, viz. Enoch and Noah, who walked with
Him, and trod Antipodes to that licentious World, refusing to run with them in
the same excess of Riot. Those were signally owned and rewarded; the one was
personally translated into Heaven; and the other with his Family preserved,
when by that universal Deluge, the whole race of Mankind were swept away.

Sometimes God confers Riches upon such as obey him; as he did upon Abraham,
David, and many others: and such as have not much in the World, what little
they have, is accompanied with a Blessing, and their Spirits are well satisfied
with what they have. Indeed the shortest way to be rich, is not by enlarging
our Estates; but by contracting our Desires. Upon such God bestows Honor, as
it is promised, 1 Samuel 2. 30. For them that honor me, I will honor. Prove. 3.
16. In her left hand are riches and honor. There is a silent Dignity in
reproached Piety; and a silent Ignominy, in exalted Iniquity. Herod feared John
knowing that he was a just man, Mark. 6. 20. Such also have Spiritual pleasures
having quietness and tranquillity of mind; that fear of God that passes all
understanding, keeps their hearts: This is a blessing that far surmounts all
Earthly enjoyments. David and Habakkuk could sit and sing, when great troubles
were surrounding them. Psalm. 17. Hab. 3. These keep a constant Jubilee in their
own bosoms.

In a word Eternal Life will be the issue, and happy result of a right Obeying
of God. This the Apostle Paul expected when about to bid Farewell to the World,
2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight Therefore there is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness. Yea, this is promised, Rev. 2. 10. ^e faithful to the
Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. And so Servants, that obey Christ
in their places, Col. 3. 24. How should this excite all Persons, especially
Superiors, to Obey the Commands of God: they should be steadfast, and
immovable in ways of Well-doing, knowing that their labor will not be in
vain; for God will not deny his Word; but will give a full accomplishment to
his promises. Godliness has the promise of the Life that now is, and that
which is to come: as we find it accomplished unto Abraham, according to the
promises that he here makes to him in the words read.

Which are compounded of a Promise and a Precept.

1. Here is a copious Promise. God having called Abraham from his own Country,
does not leave him destitute: He gives him a Country far better than that which
he left; which he plainly promises, Genesis 12. 1. And is necessarily implied in
this Promise of a numerous Posterity, or making him a great Nation, as the
Stars of Heaven, as the Dust of the Earth, Genesis 13. 10. He engages that he
will bestow upon him Spiritual Blessings. I will bless thee; that is
Spiritually. He farther promises to make him a great Name. Name in Scripture,
has a double acceptance; and so it denotes (1.) Dignity, viz. Riches,
Eminency of Parts and Gifts, nobleness of Birth; so it may be taken in Genesis 6.
4. They were men of Renown, and as the Hebrew has it, Men of NAME, Numb. 16.
2. (2.) Authority; So Name is frequently taken in Scripture, as in that form
used in the Administration of Baptism, Phil. 2. 10. Acts 3. 6. and 4. 17. These
two are separable; Persons may be Honorable by virtue of their Birth,
Breeding, and great Estate, and yet destitute of Authority: Both these were
bestowed on Abraham, who was endowed with Riches, both internal and external.
He had also great Authority, who was a Ruler over a vast and numerous Family;
and the Sons of Heth call him Lord, and a very great Prince, which in the
Hebrew is expressed by the Name of God, a Prince of God; that stands in the
room of the superlative degree. And be sure, his Posterity, many of them, were
Rulers and Kings, Genesis 17. 6.

2. We have an express Precept; Thou shall be a Blessing: Or as it is in the
Original, Be thou a Blessing: and so it is rendered by Junius and Tyemelius,
Esto Benedictioni; were it in the future tense as it is translated, yet it may
be looked upon as a Command; for not only Negative Commands are set down in the
future tense, as in the Decalogue; but also Affirmative, as in Mal. 1. 6. where
in the Original, it is in the future tense; A Son shall honor his Father, Mal.
2. 7. Lev. 19. 2. compared with 1 Pet. 1. 16.

Abraham was to be a Blessing, not only in that he was to be the mediate
Progenitor of the Messiah, in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be
blessed; but also he was to be a Blessing in his own person, by his Usefulness
to others, in the due improvement of the many temporal and spiritual blessings
that in abundance God had bestowed upon him. There is a great difference in
being blessed in a passive, and being a Blessing in an active sense. Many are
blessed with Riches, excellent Gifts and Authority, but are not Blessings in
their Places, but the contrary.

The words read, with what precedes, may admit of this Paraphrase: Abraham! I
have exalted my self to show mercy to thee, by giving thee an effectual Call,
whereby thou art brought nigh to me; making a remarkable distinction between
thee and many others, in conferring upon thee my powerful Spirit, whereby thou
art made willing to become a follower of me. And I have bound my self by many
great and precious Promises, that I will Crown thee with a numerous Posterity,
and advance thee to great Dignity and Authority, whereby thou will be
advantaged with opportunity and ability of Glorifying my Name, and doing good
to others: I do therefore expect, and peremptorily require thee, to the utmost
of thy ability to be a rich Blessing unto all persons that thou stand
related to.

The words may be resolved into this short Proposition, viz.

DOCTRINE. That they who are Signally Blessed by GOD, are to be Blessings unto
Men.

Or, Such as God does advance to places of Dignity and Authority; they are, in
an especial manner, by a faithful improvement of them, to promote the Good of
others.

There are three Assertions, which may be Prelimenary to what follows; which
are plainly legible in the Text; Viz.

1. That GOD is the Author and Giver of every Blessing. As it is three times
declared in the Words: He is the Father of Mercy; Every good and perfect gift
comes down from God, Jam. 1. 17. Whatever Mercies are bestowed upon us; we are
to acknowledge them to be the free and gratuitous gifts of God; the many
pleasant streams of Mercy that flow in upon us, and follow us; they come down
from Heaven; all our fresh Springs are in God. He gives large measures of
Wisdom to some; whereby they are fitted to rule and govern others; and he
exalts men to high Places of Authority, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. He sets a Crown upon
the heads of some, vesting them with Supreme Authority, to whom he gives a
Spirit of Government, as he did to Saul and David. To others he gives power to
become Rich, making their Labors successful: Hence we are to acknowledge God
in all the Ways of Mercy wherein he Walks toward us; rendering to him the
Tribute of Praise; both Verbal, and Practical that is due unto Him. We must,
with the Psalmist, say, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto our Sovereign Lord
be the Praise of all our ^ollations of Good, and Salvations from Evil. The
denial of this is Sacrilege, and a robbing of God.

2. GOD, according to his Sovereign Wisdom, is pleased Variously to distribute
Blessings to the Children of Men. Upon some he bestows more, both of Internal
and External Blessings, than he does unto others: He does not with an equal
measure dispense his gifts, which will not render God justly chargeable with
Unrighteousness, as though he were a Respecter of Persons. As God is Judge,
with him there is no respect of Persons, Act. 10. 36. The high as well as the
low; the Prince as well as the Peasant shall fare alike; to them shall be
distributed Rewards and Punishments according to the Nature of their doings,
Romans 2. 6. ad 12. Ephesians. 6. 8, 9. But as he is a Sovereign Benefactor, he gives
out larger measures of Blessings to some, than he does to others. In gratuitis
non datur (...). May not the High Possessor of Heaven and Earth do with his own
as he sees meet, Mat. 20. 15. Some God advances to high places of Dignity and
Authority, whose Cups run over with an affluence of many good things, while
others are kept in a low, mean and straitened state, Prove. 22. 2. The Rich and
the Poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of both; that is, not only of
their Persons, but also of their Condition. Some are abased, while others are
elevated: He Crowns one with a Crown of Thorns, but another with a Crown of
Gold: He puts a Scepter into the hand of one, and a Shovel into the hand of
another. We cannot all be Top-branches, as a great Lord of our Nation once
said. It is one of Solomon's observations, Eccl. 10. 7. I have seen Servants on
Horses, and Princes walking as Servants on the Earth: He calls such as sit
upon the Dunghill, advancing them to Thrones, 1 Samuel 2. 8. Some ride upon the
High Places of the Earth, when others are passing through the dark Valley of
the Shadow of Death. Thus God dealt with Abraham, whom he exalted above many
others: This is a plain evidence of Gods Sovereign Wisdom, and it is necessary
for the upholding of Order amongst men: Did all stand upon a Level, there could
not possibly be any Order; for Order is, AEqualium inaequaliumque apta
dispositio; a fit disposing of equal and inequal; as gives to every thing and
person their due and proper place.

3. These Blessings which the Sovereign Hand of God bestows upon men, are to be
improved so, as that they may be Blessings to all such as they stand related
to. This is here called for and required. Thus did David and Nehemiah improve
their Ability and Authority, for the furtherance of the good of others.

There are two Queries that call for an Answer, in order to the clearing up of
this Truth before us.

Quest* Who they are that may be said to be Blessings, in the Improvement of
the Signal Blessings of God bestowed on them?

Answ. In general: All truly Sanctified Ones, as Abraham was; who having the
Image of God fairly drawn upon them, are made partakers of the Divine Nature:
who being called out of the World, do not fashion themselves to a compliance
with the Evil Customs and Immoralities that are abounding: but are transformed
in their Minds so as rightly to Know, and sincerely to Do the Holy Will of God:
who labor to please God, and to walk worthy of his peculiar Grace bestowed
upon them. These are Excellent Ones in whom God's Soul takes pleasure; for
whose sake the World is upheld: These are God's Jewels, whom he so regards,
that as long as they are here in the World, he will not destroy it; but will
Exercise Patience to long Suffering; these are the Wheat, for the sake of which
the Tares are not plucked up, and burnt. These are the Pillars of the places
where they Live. In a word, they are the Chariots and Horsemen that defend the
World; who by their Faith and Prayer stand in the Gap, as Moses did, to prevent
the irruption and breaking in of Divine Wrath; and keep the gracious presence
of God with them amongst whom they Live: This is intimated to us by the
Prophet, Isa. 6. ult. The holy Seed shall be the substance thereof. The Word
rendered Substance, signifyes a Pillar, which is made use of to support the
building. Of this use, are Gods own People; who are called the holy Seed: Also
that in Isa. 65. 8. Where there is an allusion to an Husbandman that espies
some Grapes, which gives hopes of the recovery of the Vine; he then lays aside
thoughts of cutting it down: So the Saints of God are a Blessing; for whose
sake he will spare a People, and not utterly destroy them. It is often said,
that for David's sake he would continue the Kingdom of Judah. And we know, that
for Paul's sake, near three hundred Souls were Saved, Act. 27. 24. Others, that
are not truly gracious, being in high Places of Authority, may have their
hearts so wrought upon by the powerful Spirit of God, as that they may be
Useful and Serviceable. The Earth helped the Woman, Rev. 12. 16. that is, (as
it is interpreted by some) great Rulers that had little or no Religion in them;
for their own ends were helpful to the Church of God. So Cyrus and Darius, were
very useful to the People of God in promoting their return to their own Land,
and rebuilding of the Temple. Particularly,

1. Such as are Religious, who set an high Value and Price upon the Ordinances
and Institutions of our Lord Jesus Christ, and are Willing to further and
promote them. Such an one was Abraham, who, wherever he came, set up Altars
unto God, to Worship him, and call upon his Name: The Word which is translated
Blessing, is a branch that Springs from the Hebrew root in KAL, which properly
signifies to bow the Knee; which is that natural Ceremony which is used in the
Worship of God, and is put for Praying to Him, Psa. 95. 6. by which the Saints
obtain blessings. By this Abraham Saved Let from those scorching flames that
devoured the Inhabitants of the Plain.

Thus were Josiah and Nehemiah Blessings, who purged the House of God, and took
care that the Sabbaths were Sanctified, and not profaned. Such as God, in his
Wise Providence, does advance to places of Authority, they become Blessings
when they make it their principal care to promote and Set Up the Worship of God
in their Dominions. Now the Power of Magistrates, relating to the Worship of
God, is of an External nature; which lies in taking care that duly Qualifyed
Persons be sent forth, and authorized to Preach the Word, and Administer the
Seals of the Covenant; that they be able to Feed the People of God with
Knowledge and Understanding. In order thereunto they are to Endeavor that
Schools and Colleges be Erected, whereby Persons may be furnished with
Learning, and so become (...), able to Teach: That People attend upon the
Public Worship of God: And Suitable Provision be made for the faithful
Dispensers of the Gospel, whereby they may be Encouraged in the right discharge
of the Work incumbent on them. We shall find in the Sacred History many
Instances of Religious Kings and Rulers, who thus did, and were thereby great
Blessings to their People. For it is evident, that where Religion, according to
the Word of God, is set up and countenanced by Magistrates; there the Blessed
God Dwells, and conferrs many Blessings: For wherever God records his Name,
there he will come and bless his People, Exodus 20. 24. But where the Worship of
God is laid aside; generally omitted, or greatly corrupted; there outward
Blessings are removed; and sore distresses come in their room: As it is
expressed in 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5. So it was in the Reign of Ab^z. that Idolatrous
King of Judah. Therefore such as use their Authority, and their Estates to
uphold the Ordinances of God; they are Public Blessings to the Places where
they live. This has been the Happiness of New England from the beginning.

2. Such as are Just and Righteous in all their Ways and Actings. Thus was
Abraham, who is styled the Righteous Man, as some understand that in Isa. 41.
2. Who was Righteous, not only by the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, Genesis 15. 6. but by Inhaesion; which he manifested in his Commerce with
the Children of Heth, Genesis 23. 10. Righteousness should be to all men,
especially to Magistrates, the girdle of their loins, Isa. 11. 5. Thus it was
with Job, Chap. 31. 38, 39. Such should be able to make such a Challenge as
Samuel did; Whose Ox have I taken? 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4. And to avouch with Paul,
that they have corrupted, wronged and defrauded no man, 2 Cor. 7. 2. When
Rulers are careful to distribute Justice without Partiality; abhorring Bribes,
which do blind the eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Judgment of the Righteous,
as it is expressed in Exodus 23. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 19. And having to do with Equals,
in making Bargains and Contracts, which is called Cummutative Justice, they
endeavor to keep a good Conscience, willing in all things to Live Honestly;
Such are Blessings, as Nehemiah was, who bore a severe Testimony against the
Oppression of the Jews, Chap. 5. They who constantly wear the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; they honor the Christian Religion. This is a necessary
requisite in a Magistrate, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that Rules over men must be just,
Ruling in the fear of God. It is not enough that Magistrates see to the
Observation of the first Table; that Religion flourishes; but also, that the
Second-Table Duties be performed; that Righteousness be exalted, and have an
uninterrupted passage; which is the most compendious way to draw down Heavens
Blessings upon a People.

3. Such as give all diligence to perform their Relative Duties; and do not
willingly step out of their Places, or Omit what is required of them. Thus
Abraham was a faithful Ruler over his numerous Family, instructing them in what
did appertain to the honor of God, and their best good. This is testified of
him by God himself: Genesis 8. 19. I know that he will command his Children, and
his Household after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him. Thus was Joseph, his great-grand-Son, who, as a Son, was a blessing to his
Father: as a Servant, he was a blessing to Potiphar his Master, Genesis 39. 5, 6.
God blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake; As a Prisoner, he was a
blessing to the Jailer, Genesis 39. ult. And after his advancement by Pharaoh, as
his Viceroy, he was a wonderful blessing to all the Kingdom of Egypt; as he was
a Father to Pharaoh, in seeking his honor, and maintaining his right: So he
was a Father to the distressed Egyptians, and his own Relations.

GOD, in his All-Wise Providence, does fix all Persons in this or that
Relation; and of his condescending Grace, has given an express account of his
Will, how all should act therein. Now while Persons, whether Superiors or
Inferiors, do act in their Places with Faithfulness, filling them up with
Duty, they are blessings: and indeed this is needful to evince the truth and
reality of their Piety toward God, and Love toward men. If we be not
Relatively good, we have reason to question whether we be Really good. The
World would be a quier Habitation, did all mind their own proper Duties, and
keep within the bounds and limits of their Places and Callings. There are none
so Great Blessings in their Places as Magistrates and Ministers, who are
careful and conscientious in the due discharge of their Duties. It is to be
noted, that the neglect of Duty in one Relate, will not give a discharge to the
Correlate, to omit the doing of his Duty; as it is evident in that of a Master
and Servant: Though the Servant has a cruel and crabbed Master; yet he ought to
attend the performance of his own proper Duty, 1 Pet. 2. 18. Servants be
Subject to your Masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, etc. Hereby the sincerity and strength of Grace will be
made manifest. Should Magistrates be somewhat defective in their places; yet
that will not countenance Subjects to neglect their Duties.

4. Such as are of a Quiet and Peaceable Spirit, who labor to keep Amity and
Unity in Societies. Such an one was Abraham, who showed it in his fair and
amicable proposals that he made to Lot his Nephew; who though he was his
Superior, yet was willing for peace sake, to recede from his own right, Genesis
13. 8. Such as have a tender regard to the peace and unity of a Society, and
abhor to do any thing that may hazard it; they are Blessings where they live:
as such are blessed in the account of our Savior, Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the
Peacemakers; so they are undoubtedly Blessings: These do prevent a world of
evil, and make way for much good. Contention is a great and voluminous Evil,
exceeding baneful and destructive to the spiritual and temporal weal of Persons
and Societies: Such therefore as prevent, and extinguish it when begun, they
are happy ones; who are like unto the Blessed GOD, who is the Author and Lover
of Peace. Such may be said to be good, and do good. When our Officers are
peace, and our Exactors righteousness, as it is Prophesied that there shall be
such in Gospel days, Isa. 60. 17. When they are healers of breaches, and
restorers of paths to dwell in; then such are Eminent Blessings.

5. Such as are of a Public frame of Spirit, who are studiously careful to do
what lies within the compass of their power, for the furtherance of the good of
Others. Thus was Abraham, who with importunity did intercede for the Sodomites;
who also did expose himself and his many Servants to danger, that he might
rescue Lot out of the hands of his Enemies. Such as are ready to sacrifice
their Estates, and lay themselves open to great difficulties and dangers for
the promotion of the good of others; they deserve to be owned as great
Blessings. Such an one was Nehemiah, who denied himself, laid aside his ease,
turned his back upon the pleasures of the Persian Court, and was willing to
engage with manifold difficulties, in traveling from Shushan to Jerusalem;
which was Nine hundred miles. All this he did to advance the good of his
Afflicted Brethren in Judea. Moses and Paul showed themselves to be endued with
a public frame of Spirit in those hyperbolical imprecations of theirs upon
themselves, Exodus 32. 32. Forgive their sin; if not, blot me out of thy Book:
Romans 9. 3. I could wish my self accursed from Christ, for my Brethren. It is
usually said, No man is born for himself: God has so ordered all Creatures,
that they have a dependence each upon other, Hos. 2. 21. 22. The Sun and
Fountains they constantly teach men a Lesson of Self-denial and public
Spiritedness; the one is sending down its warm and fructifying beams; the other
is sending up its sweet and refreshing streams. Surely such as Divine
Providence has fixed in public Stations, they are to have hearts
proportionated thereunto. Those Excellent Persons that were the first Beginners
of these Plantations, were endued with largeness of heart to promote the Weal
of this whole People: The College which has been of abundant use to this whole
Land, is a standing Monument of it. Had not the First Planters been men of a
Noble and generous Spirit, seeking the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ,
and the good of the whole; we had never arrived to that growth and maturity
that we are at this time. It will be the honor of such that succeed them in
Dignities and Authority, to tread in their footsteps; whereby they will become
great Blessings.

Quest. The other Query is, Why those that are signally blessed, are to be
Blessings?

Ans. 1. Because this is to answer the end and design of God in the bestowal of
his Blessings: which is, that men may be put into a better capacity of doing
good, than others are. The more good God bestows upon any, the more Service to
his Name he looks for from such. As for those that are by God called into
Places of Authority over others, from such he looks for great Diligence in
order to the furtherance of the good of others; as it is expressed in Romans 13.
4. He is the Minister of God for good. People are not made for Rulers, but
Rulers are set up for the sake and good of People. Whether in case of man's
perseverance in that state of integrity in which he was first made, there had
been need of Magistrates to Govern men, is not so easily determined; though Order
then as prescribed in the Fifth Command, would have been observed. But now
there is an apparent necessity of Magistrates, partly to restrain men from
those exorbitant motions that their ^usts would unavoidably instigate them
unto: and partly to provoke them to the doing those duties, that the Law of
God, and light of nature dictate ought to be done. So that the End of God in
furnishing persons with intellectual abilities, and clothing them with
Authority, whereby they are called to the exercise of them; is to promote the
weal and benefit of others. This is expressed by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
where people are required to pray for Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinate,
that their Councels and Purposes may be so disposed by God, that under them we
may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; whereby it is
plainly intimated, that the advancement of persons into Places of Authority, is
intended by God for the spiritual and temporal weal of People and Societies.
And therefore for such as are set over others, to use their power for the hurt
and oppression of such as are under them, is a plain perverting of the end of
God in the bestowal of those Blessings upon them. Hence for the preventing of
this, God has given Rules in his Word to people that have liberty of Choosing
their Magistrates, to direct them in Electing such as are rightly qualifyed,
who will study to promote their good, and will abhor to do any thing that is
inconsistent with their weal.

2. Because this does directly tend to the Glorifying of God. When persons that
stand higher than others, are careful to make a right use of those advantages
that God puts into their hands, they become very serviceable to the Name and
Honor of God: Those by their well-ordered Conversation do greatly encourage
others to an imitation of them: For the Examples of such are very influential
upon others. Such will practically rebuke others that are scandalous in their
actions; and they will be afraid to do those things that are opposite to the
Laws of God, and just Laws of men; as the Apostle intimates, Romans 13. 3. Rulers
are a Terror to evil works. But then when God in great anger does suffer Evil
Persons to bear Rule; there follows upon it an overflow of Wickedness, Psalm.
12. ult. The Wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. As it
is most evident in the History of the Kings of Israel and Judah: Then the Name
and Honor of God is laid in the Dust, his Ordinances spurned at, and the
Faithful Dispensers thereof contumeliously treated: which made way for the
utter overthrow and captivity of the Jews by the Babylonians, as it is
expressed, in 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.

This Truth Treated of presents before us,

I. Matter of Sorrow and Heart-grief, in that there be so many found in the
midst of us, that are not Blessings in their Places: Who though they be not
clothed with Authority, either Political, or Ecclesiastical, yet being Endowed
with intellectual abilities and many outward Blessings, do greatly abuse them,
whereby they become Curses and Plagues to the Places where they Live! Are there
not with us Contentious Persons? Who like the Salamander, Love to Live in the
Fire and Flames of Contention: Who cast Firebrarnds into Families, and
Societies; and improve their wit and interest to foment and continue them; who
push men on to Law Suits, by means of whose evil counsels not a few have been
undone: By means of such litigious persons, who are filled with pride and
prejudice, whole Societies are sometimes put into a flaming posture; such are
an abomination unto God, Prove. 6. 16, 19. Among such as are hateful to God, are
such as Sow strife among Brethren: Such must needs be grievous burdens unto
men, when they are so loathsome unto God. With us are such as are very Unjust,
who boggle at no Unrighteousness, so as they can get out of the reach of man's
Law: by means of such we are under an ill character abroad in the World. Such
wickedness of this kind is hardly found in places that want the light that has
so plentifully shined upon us. This Sin of Unrighteousness, where it has
abounded, it has made very fearful desolating Judgments upon Gods visible
People. In the several Indictments that are drawn by Gods Prophets against the
Israelites and Jews: We shall find that this Sin of Unrighteousness was a
principal Article. Though God does usually bear witness in his Providence against
men for their injurious and cheating practices, by blasting those Estates, that
by fraud, extortion and oppression have been raked together, Jer. 17. 11. 1
These. 4. 6. Yet such is men's great love to the World, and little fear of God,
that they will deal Unrighteously. With us are such as commit Lewdness, and are
resigning up themselves to their Sensual Lusts; who spend much of their
precious Time; and not a little of their Estates, in Public Houses;
transforming themselves into beasts: Who Live in Chambering and Wantonness, in
Rioting and Drunkenness; who act as though they were sent into the World for no
other end, than to gratify their brutish Lusts. It is pity that any Heathenish
Custom should be imitated by the People of God, that directly tends to the
furtherance of Intemperance. With us are those that profane Gods Holy Sabbaths.
Though these and other Scandalous Evils have been born Witness against from the
British Throne once and again; yet how do they prevail, and threaten the
overthrow of Religion! Some may wonder that so many in this Land of Light, and
means of Grace, should arrive to such an height of Wickedness. This certainly
proceeds either from the nature of some of these Sins, which naturally tend to
beget a Stupefaction of the Mind and Conscience, Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom, and
Wine, and new Wine take away the heart: Or from Gods Righteous Judgment in
giving men up to their own hearts Lusts, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Israel would have
none of me, so I gave them up to their own hearts Lusts. And we know that the
richest Soil produces the rankest Weeds. This Land was at first Sown with
excellent Seed, they were a chosen Generation, a peculiar People zealous of
good Works: God planted here a Noble Vine; but how are we turned into the
degenerate Plant of a strange Vine? How many are there among us that may justly
be accounted Burdens and Plague Sores? Surely the reiterated Judgments of God
upon us do give in full Evidence to this sad Truth: These Sinners in Scripture
bear the ignominious name of Fools, and Madmen; who are not only mischievous
and hurtful to themselves, but also to all that are round about them.

II. This Truth presents us with matter of Joy and Comfort, in that there are
yet with us that are truly and properly Blessings in their several Places and
Capacities: For whose Sake we may hope that after the Righteous God has in
Mercy chastened us, for our revoltings from, and decays of Love to Himself,
and his Ordinances; and thereby brought us to a true sense of our Sins, and
thereby wrought in us a sincere purpose to amend our Evils: He will Save us,
and make us a Praise and Glory. With us are many Pious Ones, who are glorious
within; being adorned with the Graces of Gods Holy Spirit, who are endeavoring
to Walk with, and act for God, in their respective Capacities; Striving in all
things to please their Heavenly Father, and to Walk Worthy of him, who has
Called them to his Kingdom and Glory. I believe there are as many real Saints
in this Land, as in any Land or Nation in the World, for the quantity of
People. And that which is to be minded, is, That our Magistrates and Ministers
are Pious and Religious, who are Seekers of God, and do sedulously set
themselves to promote the Spiritual, as well as the Temporal Weal of Gods
People in this Wilderness. We have yet many Praying Abraham's, Nehemiahs,
Elijahs and Jeremiahs, that are pleading with God, and Crying with Tears,
saying to God, O spare thy People, and give not thy Heritage to become a prey
to the Heathens! We read of Gods readiness to spare Sodom and Gomorrah, if
there were but ten Righteous Persons among them: and are there not among us
more than an hundred times Ten? Yea, we find God ready to Pardon his People, if
they could but find a Man, Jer. 5. 1. That is, a faithful and zealous
Magistrate: and are there not many such with us? Who desire to do Justly, show
Mercy, and walk humbly with their God: Who though they may be defective (and who
is not?) yet are endeavoring to Rule and Direct this People, over whom they
are Set, according to the Integrity of their hearts, and Skilfulness of their
hands. Yea, are there not several Well-qualifyed Persons with us, who are
prepared in a good measure to act in the Place of Magistracy, and Ministry? If
we take measure by Gods acting with his own People of old: We may foster and
maintain Hopes within us, that God will not as yet reject us, nor Write a
Loammi upon us. Though it is true that in Gospel times God may justly make
quicker Work now with (...) visible People, by bringing sore and ruinating
Judgments upon ^^^m, than he did upon his People heretofore; in regard of the
greater plenty of Light, that has shined upon, and Love that has been shown
to us. I would not venture to say any thing of this nature, to lull any asleep
in a Secure and Sinful State. Let us therefore know, We that have received more
Mercies, and have enjoyed greater Privileges than others; if we remain in an
Unbelieving and Impenitent State; We shall be liable to bear and suffer greater
measures of Woe and Wrath, than others, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all
the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.
Our greater exaltation to Heaven will make way for our great depression in
Hell, Mat. 11. 23. All such will find that their Church-Privileges and formal
Performances of Duties, will be but as a Paper-Wall against a consuming Fire:
as the Jews, in Jeremiahs time, found it by sad and woeful experience.

To such as are our Political Fathers:

Let me with much Respect and deep Humility address your Excellency: Much
Honored SIR, The Unerring Hand of Divine Providence has Set you on High,
making you the Head and Chief Ruler, under our Gracious Sovereign, of the
People of this Province; Placing you in the Seat of Justice and Chair of
Honor: whereby you are in a Capacity of being a Rich Blessing to this People
of God. It Is to be hoped that the Sense of Gods great goodness in your
Exaltation to so High a pitch of Honor and Authority; together with the
Consideration of His signal Mercy in effecting Salvation from great and
imminent Dangers heretofore; and especially of Late; (upon the account of which
we have abundant reason to give Thanks to God) will influence your Heart into a
Willingness to improve your admirable Accomplishments for the furtherance of
the Welfare and Safety of this People, over whom you are made Chief Ruler; by
Encouraging such as are Religious; and discouraging such as are Profane and
Vicious; Rewarding the One, and Punishing the Other. Doubtless, when Moses that
Renowned Ruler of Israel had made a Serious reflection upon the peculiar Mercy
of God in preserving his Life, that was in eminent danger by means of that
cruel Edict of Pharaoh; as also Gods remembering him when Swimming on the River
in a little Canoo made of Bulrushes; putting him into a near Relation to the
King of Egypts Daughter, whereby he had a liberal Education in the Court of
Pharaoh* all this wrought his heart into a forwardness to lay out himself for
the Honor of God, and the good of his own afflicted People. Honored SIR, You
have had very fair Copies heretofore in those that have been Governors of this
People, presented before you (from One of which, who was Eminent for Parts and
Piety you have immediately descended) after which, if by the assistance of Gods
Spirit, you endeavor to Write; You will be, as they were, a signal Blessing to
this People; by which you will confute the Jealousies and Censures of some; and
answer the Hopes and Expectations of others: and so a Blessing will come down
upon you, and yours.

As for those Honored Persons that are concerned in the Government of the
People in this Province; viz. The Honored Deputy Governor, and the
Counselors, that may be Chosen this Day* Honored SIRS, You are called to Sit
with his Excellency at the Helm, to guide and order the affairs of this
Province, in a Stormy and Tempestuous time: therefore you have need of much
Prudence and Patience, that you may act aright in order to the promotion of the
Welfare and Safety of this People. That one Title, which is Superior to all
others; viz. that you are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. that intimates to you that you are
to be Blessings. That Title Elohim is the first of those Hebrew Names, that are
given to GOD, which we find in the first line of the Bible: Who having by His
infinite perfections Erected this Stately Edifice of the World, and furnished
every Room thereof with variety of Creatures, has an absolute and Underived
Authority to Rule and Govern all Things. This Name and honorable Title He has
fixed upon you whereby He tells you that your Power is derived from Him, and
that as He has set you above many; so you are to imitate Him in Goodness and
Usefulness; that by the sweet and benign Influences of your Authority you
become Instruments in furthering the Good and Benefit of all such as are under
you, by a due and right Regulation of the Affairs of this People of God, and
that you in an especial manner show it in advancing Religion and Godliness,
taking care that the House of God be not forsaken, and his holy Sabbaths be not
profaned. About those, Nehemiah that Pious Ruler acted with an holy Zeal, as
we may see in that Book which bears his Name.

It concerns those worthy Gentlemen, the Representatives of this Province, to
be very careful in putting in their Suffrages for Councillors, that they be
Persons duly Qualified, who may give grounded Hopes that they will in all
things act so, as that they may be Blessings to this People of GOD: and that
they readily concur in making such Acts and Laws, as apparently tend to the
Furtherance of Piety, and Equity. If it might not be accounted too much
boldness, I would propose One thing to such as have the power of Legislation:
Whether it be not needful that there be something Enacted to quicken under
Officers, as Tything-men, Constables, and Grand-Iurors, to a more Vigorous
accomplishment of those Promisory Oaths that Annually they take, in the
Suppressing of Intemperance and Disorders, that seem to be growing among us. It
is to be feared, That several of those Officers do forget their Oaths, thinking
that unless Complaints drop into their Ears, they are no way concerned to act
in their Places.

Let me say a few words to the Ministers of the Gospel, not for their
Information, but for their Excitation to the doing of those things that they
fully know.

Reverend Sirs, The many Honorable Titles that by the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures are fixed upon Ministers; as Lights of the World, ^^-workers with
Christ, Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, and Ambassadors of Christ: These with
many others do point out our Duty, that we should so act in our Places* that we
may be Blessings, in being Serviceable to all that we stand related to; by a
diligent improvement of all our Abilities for the advancement of the Spiritual
and Eternal Weal of the Souls of men. It is most certain, that the Ministry is
a Signal Blessing, and one of those Royal Gifts which our Exalted Lord Jesus
gave to his Church, when he Rode in Triumph into Heaven; as is evident by what
we find in Ephesians. 4. 10, 11. Isa. 30. 20, 21. Hereupon we are bound to give a
plain and faithful Declaration of the whole Counsel of God, so far as we are
able: That solemn charge which is usually given to Ministers at their
Installment into this Sacred Office of the Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. ought
frequently to be minded by us. And it should be our great care to maintain the
honor of Gospel Truths which we publish; by an unstained and unspotted
Conversation. We are not only (...) rightly to divide the Word of God, and as
faithful Stewards, to give to every one their portion: But withal, we are (...)
to walk aright, transcribing the Laws of the Gospel in our lives and actions.
Such as did bear the Vessels of the Sanctuary, were to be holy in a peculiar
manner; the Priests were to be void of bodily defects, they were to have their
Urim and Thummim; as also a Bell and Pomegranate: the meaning of which we are
not ignorant of. If our Actions do not correspond with our Instructions and
Reprehensions; they will be in a great measure insignificant. We shall pull
down with one hand, what we build up with the other. We are by the Purity of
our Doctrine, and Piety of our lives, to endeavor to win men to Christ, and to
bring them out of love with their evil ways; in a liking of the good Ways of
God, and so we shall save our selves, and those that hear us. In a word, the
Honor of the blessed God, the Welfare of men's Souls, and our own Peace in a
Dying Hour, are arguments very cogent to provoke as all to a faithful discharge
of the Duties of our Places. One thing I would propose, viz. That we all
endeavor after Unity in our Affections, and so far as we can, in our
Apprehensions. It is a good rule delivered by some: In necessariis Unitas, in
non necessariis Libertas, in utrisque Charitas. We are all well agreed as to
Fundamentals of Doctrine and Order; we should therefore exercise Charity
toward such as may differ from us in matters that are not so plainly revealed
in the Word about Church Discipline, and may be looked upon as matters of a
prudential nature; forbearing to brand such as differ from us, and do not so
fully concur with such things as have been practiced, with the ill Titles of
Apostates, and Subverters of the Order of the Gospel.

I shall conclude with a few words to all: Let us all act so as we may be in
our respective places Blessings; In order thereunto,

1. Let us become the true and sincere Servants of God, resolving to Obey, and
be Subject to him in all things. It is our honor, and it will be our comfort,
to be able to say with Paul, that we are the Servants of God, striving in all
things to glorify his name, Act. 27. 23. Let our Wills be resolved into Gods
Will; this will constitute us good m^n, and render us Blessings: according to
the saying of an Heathen, (...), a Good man is a common good; which agrees with
what Solomon says, Prove. 29. 8. Wise men turn away wrath.

2. Let us be Thankful for the many Privileges and peculiar Mercies that we are
at present possessed with. Though it may not be so well with us as it has been;
yet be sure it is far better with us than it is with many others. That we have
our Titles to our Houses and Lands confirmed to us, so as that we need not fear
a Writ of Ejectment to be Served upon us, for want of a Patent: That we have a
Government set over us, is a mercy to be minded: Tyranny is accounted more
eligible than Anarchy. Without Government and Magistracy the World would be as
one styles it, Magnum Latrocinium, q. d. a great Den of Thieves and Robbers:
Might would bear down Right. Men, like Dogs, would try their titles with their
teeth; and all difference between Meum and Tuum would be abolished. But that
which challenges our thankfulness is, that we are Governed by Religious
Magistrates, who reckon it to be their Duty to be at all times, Utriusque
tabulae Custodes, by means of which the ways to our Solemn Assemblies do not
mourn; and so we are a blessed People, in that we hear and know the joyful
Sound, and may with joy draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation, walking in
the light of Gods Countenance, and may expect also to have redress of wrongs
and injuries done unto us. Unsensibleness of Gods Mercies, and our
unthankfulness for them, is one of our provoking Evils; therefore that we may
obtain Blessings from God, and a removal of his Judgments; let us, every one of
us set the Crown of Praise upon Gods Head, and be inwardly affected with his
peculiar favors bestowed on us. Let us be Prayerful; all such have been
Blessings in their places, as Moses, David were, who frequently with fervency
were applying themselves by Prayer unto God for all manner of Mercies suitable
and needful for themselves and others. The calamitous nature of the time does
require of us the performance of this Duty, Psalm. 50. 15. We never find a Saint
of God in Affliction, but we find him upon his knees, as is evident in Jacob,
David, and others. Prayer rightly performed, has a kind of Omnipotency in it;
as Moses, Elijah and others their Prayers had. This is that Golden Key, which
being oyled with Tears, and turned with the hand of Faith, will unlock the
Cabinet of the Promises, and thereby many Blessings will be flowing in upon us:
And in an especial manner, let us Pray for our Rulers, as it is plainly
required without any exception or limitation: This Command was given when Nero
that monster of men for wickedness, was Emperor, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Would we have
our Magistrates to be Blessings: Let us strive with God in our Prayers for
them. The hearts of Kings and Rulers are in the Hand of God, who can dispose
all their purposes and councels, so as that they shall conduce to, and issue in
the Good and Weal of his People. Did People turn their malicious Prating
against Magistrates and Ministers, into ardent Praying for them, they would
both honor themselves, and the Name of God, called upon them.

Let us stand clear from rash Judging and Censuring our Rulers. Certain it is,
that People are not competent judges of the actions of Magistrates: it is a
usual saying, that there are Arcana Imperii, Mysteries of State, to the bottom
of which, People are not able to dive.

Let us not entertain groundless Jealousies of our Rulers. This has put People
sometimes into an unquiet, yea, into a rebellious Posture; and at no time they
prevail so much as when distress and hardships have been predominant: as we
find it in Isa. 8. 21. They shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry,
-- they shall fret themselves, and Curse their King, and their God. We have
instances of this in Scripture, as of Moses, Exodus 14. 11, 12. whom the
Israelites were ready to Stone, as the Jewish Historian says, but his Meckness
overcame their Madness. And David was in great hazard of his Life when he came
to Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30. 6. The People were greatly distressed, and they spoke of
Stoning of him. We should root out all hard thoughts of our Rulers;
Endeavoring that our hearts be filled with Love to them: thereby we shall
construe all their actions in the best sense; and so live a quiet and peaceable
Life under them.

Let People account it their Duty to Contribute to the Comfortable and
Honorable Support of their Rulers: This is expressly required, Romans 13. 7. Our
Savior exemplifyed this Command in his own Practice: who wrought a Miracle
that he might have Money to pay Tribute, Matthew. 22. 21. which he did partly to
prevent Offense, and partly to see an Example to all Christians in after
Generations. The height and dignity of their Places calls for it, for God
allows his Vicegerents, viz. The Chief Magistrates to Live at an higher rate
than others, that so they may maintain the Honor of their Places. Their Fare,
their Raiment, their Buildings, are to transcend others. It Is to be hoped that
our Honored Rulers have a Sense of the Low Estate of the Generality of this
People.

Let us fill up our Lives and Places with Duty: be like our Savior, who went
up and down doing Good. Let us put on bowels of Compassion, and be
communicating to such as are in necessity, and strive to help Sinners out of
their Sinful Ways, hereby we shall be blessings.

To Conclude, Let us all endeavor to amend what is, and has been amiss,
unfeignedly returning unto God. As one Sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.
ult. So many Repenting and Reforming Sinners may procure much good: whereby we
shall be Blessings in our Places. God has signalized his Mercy, not only in
making many Promises of much good to Penitents, but he has also accomplished
them unto such; as he did to the Israelites, Judge. 10. 15, 16. Let us say with
the Church, Lam. 3. 4. Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord;
And with them, Hos. 6. 1, 2. Come, and let us return unto the LORD: for he has
torn, and he will heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two
days will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall
live in his sight. Thereupon we may expect that God will be with us, as he was
with our Fathers; He will not leave or forsake us. And in these perilous and
burdensome times, the Eternal God will be our Refuge, and underneath us will be
his Everlasting Arms. Unto Him be Glory in the Church by CHRIST JESUS,
throughout all Ages, World without End.

AMEN.
FINIS.

