Parental Wishes and Charges. OR, THE ENJOYMENT of a Glorious Christ, Proposed,
as the Great BLESSEDNESS, which Christian PARENTS desire, both for Themselves,
and for their CHILDREN. In a DISCOURSE, now put into the Hands of such PARENTS,
as would be Assisted in their Duty, by putting such Things into the Hands of
their CHILDREN.

CHRISTUS noster Amor, CHRISTUS que Honor, Omnia CHRISTUS.

Boston, in N. E. Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, 1705.

OMNIS Anima accedat and CHRISTUM; quia omnia CHRISTUS est nobis. Si a vulnere
curari desideras, CHRISTUS medicus est. Si Febribus aestuas, Fons est. Si
Gravaris Iniquitate, Justicia est. Si indiges auxilio, Virtus est. Si Tenebras
fugis, lux est. Si Cael^m desideras, Via est. Si cibum quaeris, Alimentum.

Ambros. HUIUS Ego Vivus, Mortuus HUIUS Ero.
Parental Wishes and Charges.
Psalm. XC. 16. Let thy WORK appear unto thy Servants, and thy GLORY unto their
Children.
I Show you now a Pastor of a large Flock, at Prayer for his Flock. The Cares
and Prayers of your Pastors for you, O our Dear People, will presently be
described unto you. How can you hear them, and not fall in with them, to make
such Cares and Prayers your own, for your selves and for your Children!

We have before us, A Prayer of Moses the man of God. Indeed, he must be a man
of Prayer, that would be a man God. But what will the Prayer of sue an one
mainly turn upon?

The Great GOD, having promise unto His People, a SAVIOR, and GREAT ONE, the
Faith of Good me lived continually upon the Promise of that MESSIAH, until it
was accomplished. In every part of the Old Testament, we therefore find the
Saints of God, looking and longing for the coming of the MESSIAH. And here we
find our Moses doing so; Moses, one of the most Admirable, and Angelical men,
that ever lived upon Earth; An Angel rather than a Man. That Illustrious man of
God, having Bewailed the miseries, of a Generation many ways perishing under
the mortal wrath of Heaven, he petitions for those Blessings to be bestowed
upon them, which might relieve, their miseries. The Sum and the Chief of all
Blessings, is desired in the words now before us; The Appearing of the WORK and
the GLORY of God. I make no Question, that by the Work of God, and His Glory,
or His Glorious work, His MESSIAH is (...). Moses thinks, (...) of the Messiah,
this would (...) all that was amiss. Happy (...), happy the Children, that have
the (...), the (...), the Christ of God, (...) to them, with His Blessed (...).
This is to be our Doctrine.

The (...) CHRIST of God, (...) Glorious (...) of God; And the (...) and for
then Children.

We thus proceed upon it.

(...) CHRIST, we may (...) Work of God the most (...) that can be (...); a
(...) the (...) whereof surprises all (...). Come with me my Hearers, and now
let Men eat the food of (...).

(I) We have a CHRIST: And what is our CHRIST, but Gods Work (...) we never
should have had Him. This is one of the Expressive Titles, by which our mighty
Redeemer, is in the Boo^ which Testifies of Him, described (...) us; He is the
Work of God. The gladness of the Saints in Him, at the Arrival of the Great
Sabbatism, is thus Expressed Psalm. 92. 4. Lord, Those have made me gla^^ through
thy work. We read, Isa. 28. 21. The Lord will do His work, His strange work. I
find the Ancients Expounding this, concerning the Incarnation, and the
following Humiliation, of the Son of God. But because you may reckon the Gloss,
a strange Gloss, we will not insist upon it. Yet, let it not seem Strange, if
we say;

First; The whole Contrivance of a CHRIST, and of our coming to Blessedness in
and by a CHRIST, it is, The Work of God. The whole Mystery of CHRIST is called,
Luke 7. 30. The Counsel of God. The Curious, and Mavelous and Exquisite
Contrivance of a CHRIST, none but GOD is the Author of it. It is a Contrivance
above the reach of Creatures, The infinite GOD Himself contrived it, That His
own Son should become a CHRIST, in Uniting Himself unto a Man; and that He
would make Worlds (...) CHRIST (...) Him a (...) Ones to be brought unto (...)
by him, and with (...) World. If GOD (...) and, (...) it, (...) There is (...)
new and (...) Eternal (...). Well, (...) It is (...) the Work (...). And it
will be no (...) is the (...) It (...) not be (...) out such an acknowledgment
(...) Deuteronomy. 32 3, 4. (...) God; The ROC^^, His WORK, (...)

(...) There is a special Work of God, in the whole (...) of a CHRIST,
Exhibited unto the world. (...) of what has been done, in the (...) of a CHRIST
it is all (...) every Article thereof, (...) Dei. When we see a CHRIST, in the
Exhibition which our Gospel makes o^ Him, it must needs be with that
Exclamation, What has God wrought! Upon the whole Dispensation of a CHRIST, we
must fall down with Astonishment, and Cry out, Psalm. 118. 23. This is the Lords
Doing, it is mavelous in our Eyes! What was the Birth of our CHIRST? It was
the Work of God; And He was Conceived, through the Holy Spirit of God
overshadowing His Virgin Mother. What was the Death of our CHRIST? It was the
Work of God. It Pleased the Lord to bruise Him in it, and He Groaned, suffer
thy Terrors, O God. What was the Resurrection of our CHRIST? It was the Work of
God; God Raised Him from the Dead; Yea, God Revived His work in the midst of
the Years, when He Raised Him. The Judging of the world by our CHRIST, whose
Work will this be? We read, God shall Judge the world by that Man. And if we
have an Heart any of us to Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Work of
God, even this Faith also is the Work of God; We read, Col. 2. 12. Faith is of
the Operation of God.

(II.) The Work of God in the CHRIST of God, is a most Glorious Work: There is
a matchless Glory in the Work. This is another of these Expressive and
Endearing Titles, by which our Lovely Redeemer is proposed unto us. He is, The
Glory of God; Numberless are the sentences in the Bible which have called him
so. Hence, when the coming of our Lord was at hand, it was said, Psalm. 85. 9.
Surely, His Salvation is nigh them that fear Him, that Glory may dwell in our
Land. [Compare, Jam. 2. 1.]

More Particularly.

First; The CHRIST of God, is the most Glorious Object that ever was. There was
a Luminous, and Fiery, and Heavenly CLOUD, wherein the God of Heaven did from
the Beginning sometimes render His Majesty visible to his Peculiar People. That
Bright CLOUD, which was the Shechinah, or special and sensible Habitation of
God, was called, The GLORY. Multitudes of passages in both Testaments, refer to
the Consolations, which the Faithful had in that splendid and wondrous and
glorious Appearance of GOD among them. Well, But GOD now Inhabits after a more
intimate manner in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Not a Cloud, but a Man, a most
Excellent MAN, has the Son of God now taken for his visible Habitation. The Son
of God Inhabits Him: Oh: Why should he not be the Praises of His People! The
Son of God has said, This is my Rest forever; Here will I dwell, for I have
desired it. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is now, The GLORY. And all the Fulgid and
Flaming Glory of the heavenly CLOUD, is now but a Pavilion round about Him. HE,
HE, is the Glory in the City of God: The Light of that City, proceeds from this
Glory of the Lord. [See. Rev. 21. 23.] No mortal E^e can approach the Light of
that Glory: No man can, see it and live! Then, said, and well said, the Devout
Austin, Let me Die that I may come at the the sight! Indeed, There is is no
other Object so Glorious. Who is our CHRIST? He is the Lord of Glory. Who is
our CHRIST? He is the King of Glory. Who our CHRIST? He is the Branch of (...)
Lord, Beautiful and Glorious. Our CHRIST, he is the very Sun in the right
Expanse of heaven. The most Glorious Archangels, do like the twinkling Stars,
there disappear before him. The Heavens do Praise thy Wonder, O Lord! All the
Angels in heaven, are ^wallowed up in Praising and Adoring and Extolling the
Glory of that wonderful One. They wonder at Us, too, and they Complain of us,
and say, Oh! Children of Men, why, why are you no more affected with the Glory
of your wonderful Redeemer! Never, No, Never was there any Glory observable any
where, but that Glory is Transcendently to be observed in our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. ^s there a Glory in Riches? Our Glorious CHRIST has Unsearchable
Riches. Is there a Glory in Dominion? Our Glorious CHRIST has his Throne
Established in the Heavens, and His Kingdom Rules over all. ^s there a Glory
in Understanding? Our CHRIST is One that knows all things. Or is there a Glory
in Goodness, in Virtue, in Holiness? Our CHRIST is Glorious in Holiness,
Fearful in Praises. Oh! the Glory! the Glory! -- Solomon, what art thou in all
thy Glory? What is the Glory of all the works of the hands of God? It retires
into obscure Darkness, when set by the Glory of the Son of Man, whom God has
Crowned with Glory and Honor, and set over the works of his Hands: Draw near,
O all ye Lovers of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and Gaze upon the Glory of your LORD!
Say, What Glory, what Glory is it, that you Discover in him? A Beloved Disciple
shall answer for you; I will take that as your Answer; Joh. 1. 14. We beheld
His Glory, the Glory as of the only Begotten of the Father.

Secondly; In the Work of Redemption by a CHRIST, there is a Glorious Display,
which the God of Glory has made of his Infinite Perfections. The Attributes,
the Perfections of the Great GOD; they are his Glory. Every Work of God
Proclames the Glory of his Attributes. From heaven, and from every work of God
under the Cope of heaven, there is that Voice heard; There is a Glorious GOD,
that Made us all, and that Rules us all: Oh, Glorify the Maker and Ruler of the
world! But the Attributes of GOD no where shine forth with such a radiant
Glory, as in the Redemption of men by our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Upon that Work all
Heaven rang with Acclamations; Luke 2. 14. Glory to God in the Highest! Here,
here, in this work indeed, the most High God is Glorified unto the Highest that
is possible!

Where does the POWER of God appear in the Glory of it? Oh! the Glorious Power,
that caused our Immanuel to be Born of a Virgin! And that United (...) Man unto
the Second Person in God! Behold, a Person of such a rare Constitution, that it
might be said, There is One who was born about Seventeen Centuries ago; and
yet, He is from Everlasting (...) Everlasting. It might be said. There (...)
One who slept in a Cradle; and yet, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Him.
(...) might be said, There is One who died (...) a Cross, and lay in a Grave;
and yet, ^e is forever ^^dg'd in the Bosom of God. ^^d shed his Blood; and yet
his Divinity suffered not. Man fills Heaven (...) Earth; and yet his Humanity
has not (...) Ubiquity. Oh! the Glorious Power tha^ Constituted such a Person!
Oh! the Glorious Power that carried Him through hi^ vast Undertaking to Redeem
us, and Raised Him from the Dead, and set Him in the Heavenly places! None but
a Gabriel, a Name confessing the Power of God were proper to bring the Tidings
o^ such a Redeemer!

Where does the WISDOM of God appear in the Glory of it? All the Treasures of
Wisdom are laid up in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. It is an Abundant wisdom, a
Manifold wisdom, a Glorious wisdom, which darts forth its glittering Rays,
in this work of God; The Son of God becoming the Son of Man, and the Mediator
between God and Man. Oh! the Glorious wisdom, that furnishes the Mediator, with
a Nature wherein to Do and to Die for us, and with a Nature that can make all
Efficacious! Oh! the Glorious wisdom that Reconciles the Justice of God in
Punishing of Sin, with the Goodness of God in Pardoning of the Sinner! No
Understanding of man can sail over all (...) Boundless Ocean of Wisdom, which
^ere is in that Great Mystery of Godliness, God Manifest in flesh. It is a
wisdom, ^en of Angels, with Amazement, with Ravishment. It is a Plan laid by a
God, whose Understanding is Infinite!

Where does the MERCY of God appear in the Glory of it? Let the Redeemed of the
Lord say, His Mercy endures forever: It is Demonstrated in their being ^o.
What but a Glorious Mercy, would Pity and Rescue, such perishing, such
unworthy, such miserable Outcasts (...) What, but a Glorious Mercy could
relieve miserable Sinners, and remove our horrible Guilt, heal our Ignorance,
cleanse our Filthiness, and release us from our Slavery? It Is done by our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, submitting to be Miserable for us. O Give Thanks; The Lord has
Remembered us in our low Estate, because His Mercy endures for ever. Mercy is to
do all that is to be done for a Sinner. What is that Mercy that has broke forth
in a CHRIST given to sinful Men, who deserve not a Redeemer, but a Destroyer,
Destruction to the uttermost!

Would we see the TRUTH of God in the Glory of it? We may see it in the
punctual Accomplishment, which the Promises of God, have had in ou^ Lord JESUS
CHRIST. Oh! Glorious Truth Not one good thing has failed, of all that was
foretold by thee, concerning the coming of Him that was to break the Serpents
Head. When was see the CHRIST of God, we see most gloriously fulfilled, the
Word of God. He is, The Word. In him God fulfills his Word. Every thing has
fallen out just according to the word. Look upon a JESUS, and upon all that the
Lord spoke unto the Fathers, about a Savior for us; and then Cry out; O
Glorious Lord God of Truth; Great, great is thy Faithfulness!

The SOVEREIGNTY of God, His most Sovereign Grace: where shall we see the Glory
of it appearing? It appears most Gloriously, when we see Fallen Angels
irrecoverably Damned, but Fallen Men recovered unto good Terms with Heaven. It
appears most Gloriously, when we see among Men, some Appointed to obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ, others of ^^d Ordained unto Condemnation. In our
CHRIST, we see those things done, for which the Highest Reason, is, The Good
Pleasure of the most High God. Oh! Sovereign and Glorious Grace, that so loved
the world, as to bestow a CHRIST upon the Chief of Sinners in the world!

But then the Holiness, the HOLINESS of the great GOD: His Glorifying of
himself, and his Abhorring and Revenging of Sin, which rebels against his
Glory: Never was infinite Holiness displayed, as it is in the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. Holy and Reverend was the Name of our God, when He sent Redemption to
His People. Oh! the Glorious Holiness, that required such a Sacrifice for Sin,
as was of more account, than if all Earth and Heaven too had been made a
BurntOffering unto the Lord! When the only Begotten and the dearly Beloved Son
of God, became a Surety for Sinners, God (...) Him not! Our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
in the midst of His Dolorous Agonies, Cried out, O my God, my God Thou art
Holy! Behold, O Christians Behold that Man, who is God Blessed forever, yet
once made a Curse for us. Behold that Man, who is the Joy of the whole Heaven,
yet once weltring under the Torments of Hell. Behold that Man in whom the Son
of God for ever dwells with Delight, yet Clouded with Darkness, and Horror, and
Dimness of Anguish! Then Cry out; O Great God Thou art an Holy God; And, There
i^ none Holy as the Lord: Oh! Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts, how Great is
the Glory of thy Holiness?

My hearers, You are come, where you see, the Glory of the Lord.

II. In the Enjoyment of a CHRIST Appearing to us, as the Work, the Glorious
Work of God, there is laid up the Great Blessedness desired by every Godly
Christian. Two Instructions ly plainly before us.

First. Our Enjoying of a CHRIST, is in His Appearing to us. It Is by the Seeing
of a CHRIST, that we come to the Having of a CHRIST. Some Enjoyment of a CHRIST
is to be attained in this world. But this Enjoyment lies in (...) Fiducial
Sight of him. Hence we read, Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy Name will put
their trust in thee. The Scripture does Reveal much of a CHRIST unto us; and
the Spirit which indicted the Scripture does assist us to Receive What the
Scripture does Reveal. We Enjoy a CHRIST. when we Receive him, and Apprehend
the glorious work of God in him, as he is tendered unto us, in the Evangelical
Revelation. But the whole and full Enjoyment of a CHRIST, is not attained,
until we come unto the world that is to come. And this Enjoyment will be in the
Immediate Sight of him. Hence we read, 1 John 3. 2. We shall be like Him, for
we shall see Him as He is. There will a Day come, when the Sun of Righteousness
will Irradiate us with his Directest Influences. We shall one Day be in the
presence of the Lord, and walk all the Day long in the light of His
Countenance: A Day, when we shall be presented Faultless before the presence of
His Glory with exceeding Joy; A Day, when we shall see His Face, and the Lord
God will give us ^^ght, and an Eternal Day. Hasten, basten, O thou Day o^ God*
We shall than indeed Enjoy a CHRIST, and be forever with the Lord.

Secondly. Every Godly Christian expects his Great and Chief Blessedness in
this Enjoyment. Here, he says, here, Even this is all my Salvation and all my
Desire; If HE that shall be the Just Ruler over men, will please to shine as
the light of the Morning upon me. As the Prophet said unto the person that
Entertained him, What shall be done for thee? I will say it unto the Believer;
Christian, What shall be done for thee? Would thou have all the Riches and
Pleasures and Honors of the Earth heaped upon thee? I know the Reply that such
an one will make It is the guise and mark of every Godly Christian, to Cry out
with a flaming Soul, as the Martyr did in the Flames, None but CHRIST! None but
CHRIST! A Godly Christian looks upon Acquaintance with a CHRIST, as the
Inchoation of his Blessedness. He is of that Judgment; Phil. 3. 8. I count all
things but loss, for the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
He ^oks upon Admission to a CHRIST, as ^e Consummation of his Blessedness. He
(...) of that Judgment; Phil. 1. 23. To be with Christ, is by far the best of
all. A CHRIST, he is the light of God. The Real Christian says, Lord, In thy
light, I shall see light: all the light, and all the good, that my Soul can
wish for. A CHRIST, He is the ALL of every sincere Christian. He subscribes to
that; Col. 3. 11. Christ is ALL. His Language is, Christus meus et Omnia; If
CHRIST be mine, ALL is mine. The Alsufficiency of a CHRIST, is most
affectionately Celebrated by every serious Christian. We read, Col. 1. 19. It
pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell. And it Pleases, it
Comforts, it Revives the Christian, to see that Fullness in him. He sees that
Alsufficiency in a CHRIST, which will yield him Everlasting Satisfaction; that
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Holiness, and Redemption, which will answer all
of his Necessities. Tell him of, A CHRIST, A CHRIST; his heart even leaps
within him at the ^ound of that Name. A CHRIST; that is to (...) A Storehouse
of Truth; a Fountain of Grace; enough to make amends (...) the Absence of every
thing else. Though I should have nothing else ve^ if I have a CHRIST, I am a
possessor of all things. A CHRIST; The very Heaven of Heaven it self. It Is the
Top of HEAVEN, to be with him, and behold his Glory.

III. Good men who Enjoy a CHRIST, are greatly (...), That their Children may
be partakers with them, in the Enjoyment or so great a Blessedness. All men do
Naturally desire a Blessedness for their Children. There is in Men by Nature,
an inexpressible Stor^ee, and Passion, for the Blessedness of their Children.
It Is a very (...) man, who Enjoyes any Blessedness, and Wishes not the like
Enjoyment for his Children too. But now, it is the Distinguishing property of
Good men, to pitch upon this Blessedness for their Children; A CHRIST; A
CHRIST! Oh, That they may Know Christ, and Love Christ, and Serve Christ, and
by a Christ be saved from the^^ Sins! THIS is the Blessedness chosen by all
^^ligious Parents, for their Children, a thousand times rather than Thousands
of Gold and Silver.

First. Good men are very sensible, That without a CHRIST, their Children ^re
very Miserable. As we read 2 Cor. 4. 3. 1^ our Gospel be h^d, it is hid unto
them that are lost. So will all Virtuous Parents conclude; If a CHRIST be hid
(...) from my Children, they are Lost, they are Lost; All the Gain of the whole
world will not profit them. Good men remember, That their Children are,
Children of Death, and, Children of Wrath, and have the Dreadful Wrath of God
lying upon them. But they also remember, That none but a CHRIST can deliver
them; It Is JESUS, who Delivers from the wrath to come. Good men remember, That
their Children are the woeful Slaves of the Devil, who Leads them Captives to do
his will. But they also remember, That none but a CHRIST, can Redeem them out
of their Slavery: This is the Lord, who Redeems rom all Iniquities. When one
that is a (...) of God, has a Child bor^ unto him, he thinks, Alas, If God
bestow not his CHRIST on this Child it had been Good that it never been born.
And Good men have such sentiments about their Children; Better, Better my
Children should be clothed with Rag^^ than be without the Righteousness of
CHRIST for the clothing and covering of their Souls. Better, Better, my
Children should be Despised Beggars, than that they should be Despisers of
CHRIST, and of his Great Salvation. Better, Better, my Children should be
Blind, than that they should be without a Sight of the worth of a CHRIST.
Better they should be Lame, than that they should not Run to a CHRIST at his
Call; better they should be Captives to Turks, and Moors, and Indians, than
that they should not be the Servants of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Ah, Lord; how
can we bear to see them in this Condition?

Secondly. Good men are very sensible, That by their Means, their Children are
become so very Miserable. It was the Law of Equity, Exodus 21. 19. He that
wounded another, shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. Now Good men see, that
there are Deadly Wounds of sin on the Souls of their Children; But they
Reflect, Ah! My Child, my Child: It is I that have so cruelly Wounded it! This
Awakens them to study, what they may do, that these Children may have a CHRIST,
for to heal them of their Wounds. Good men see Original Sin in their Children,
which is a Spring of all Wickedness and Confusion; An Evil Frame; An Evil
Heart; An Heart of Stone. But Good men see, and with ^leeding Bowels own, That
their Children have derived from Them all this ^adness, and are nextly Beholden
to ^em for their Original Sin. Quickly (...) their Thoughts now fly away to
this ^^int; Lord, Let my Child have a CHRIST. Let the Blood of thy CHRIST
cleanse my Child from the sin which I have conveyed unto it. Let the Grace of
thy CHRIST cure my Child of the harm, which my Sin has done unto it!

Thirdly. Good men are very sensible, That if their Children have a CHRIST,
they are then sure of Blessedness; they have Blessedness enough; they are
sufficiently and admirably provided for. We read; Romans 8. 32. How shall He not
with Him also freely give us all things? Thus will Good men say; O my God; If
thou will give thy CHRIST unto my Children, thou will in Him give them all
things, and what is more than all? That worthy man Claviger, would say, If I
may see the Fear of God in my Children, Satis mih^, satis Filijs et Filiabus
prospexi, an Ample Provision is made for them. They that have the Fear of God
in them, will say concerning their Children; If I may see my Children possessed
of a CHRIST, I shall not be very sollicitious what other Possession I may leave
unto them. Good men should not be sollicitous to lay up the Great Things of
this world for their Children. Seek thou Great things for them? Seek them
not. The Children are very often undone, by having too Large Portions of these
Bewitching and Perishing Vanities. It had been well for many Children, if they
had not been endowed with such large Portions, to be the Fuel of their
Debaucheries. But Good men know, that if their Children have a CHRIST, they
then have the Promise, both of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come. They know, That if their Children have a CHRIST, whatever changes or
sorrows come upon them, they shall all work together for their good. They know,
that if their Children have a CHRIST, they shall most certainly be kept by the
mighty Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. This, this causes them to be
in an inexpressible Travail of Soul for their Children, that an Interest in a
CHRIST, an Union with a CHRIST, may be obtained for them.

APPLICATION.
And now; Hear the conclusion of the matter. Hear, and come to a Resolution.

First. Can you hear, That a CHRIST is the Work of God; and not resolve, To
make it your work to study a CHRIST? Sirs, The study of a CHRIST, it should be
our main Business, our main Delight. Oh! say with him; 1 Cor. 2. 2. I have
determined not to know any thing, so much as JESUS CHRIST. God bring us to
unite in this Disposition; That most Honorable and Magnificent Work of God,
which there is in the CHRIST of God, Lord, my Spirit shall be Enquiring after
it, and Affected with it, until I have no more Spirit left unto me!

Again. Can you hear, That a CHRIST is the Glory of God; and not resolve, To
ascribe unto this CHRIST all the Glory that can be? Sirs; To be mightily taken
with the Glory of a CHRIST, who is Altogether Lovely, it is the principal Action
and Symptom of one that Believes to the saving of the Soul. Oh, come to a
consort with the Heavenly Doxologies, Rev. 5. 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was
stain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Blessing. Fall down before the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and say, Glorious
LORD, I will not, I dare not Reproach thee by Unbelief. The Doors of my Soul
are set open; O King of Glory, come into my Soul. And show me, show me, what I
shall do for thy Glory!

Once more, Can you hear, that our Great Blessedness lies in the Enjoyment of a
CHRIST; and not resolve, To be afraid of a Christless condition, as a cursed
condition? Souls, If ever you be Redeemed from the Curse of God, it must be by
the CHRIST of God. You find it said, Let thy Work appear unto thy SERVANTS. You
are no Servants of God, if you tremble not at being Strangers to CHRIST.
Strangers to CHRIST, are strangers to the Good One; strangers to all Good;
strangers to Blessedness. Take the solemn Warning of God, O all you that
neglect and refuse a CHRIST, who offers to Save you unto the uttermost; I
earnestly testify unto you; You are under the terrible Curse of God; and, Woe,
Woe unto you, if you continue so!

Finally. O PARENTS; What will you now do, that your poor Children may Enjoy a
CHRIST, as well as you; That your CHRIST may be your Childrens too? If you are
Pious Parents, yea, if you are not Ostriches and Sea Monsters rather than
Parents, you will do all that you can!

Well then; Teach the Children; Teach them, Who CHRIST is; Why CHRIST came;
What CHRIST has done, and is willing to do, for us; and How, they shall close
with CHRIST, in all his Offices, for all his Benefits.

Charge the Children, Charge them, to Learn CHRIST, and Prize CHRIST, and Give
themselves up to CHRIST. Set before them the Tenders of a CHRIST; and ask them
to Accept what is Tendered; Leave them not until they have declared unto you
their Acceptance of it.

Bring the Children to CHRIST. We read, Mat. 19. 13. There were brought unto
Him little Children. Oh! Bring every one of them unto him, and Cry unto him
with a wondrous Importunity; Lord, Lord, Let my Children be thine. Cause them
to Know thee, Love thee, Glorify thee! Be thou Precious to them; Do thou take
them under thy Conduct; Guide them by thy Counsel; Bring them to thy Glory. And
bring the Children under the Word of CHRIST. See that they Read the Word, see
that they diligently attend on the Preaching of the Word. After the Word has
been Preached unto them, do you speak to them of it, and mind them, what they
should now go alone, and beg of God in fervent supplications. Restrain them
from those Licentious Practices, to which our Young People so much abandon
themselves, on the Evening after the Lords Day; the most Criminal Evening, they
say, in all the Week. Our Children will be Ruined, Religion will be lost among
our Children; except those Licentious Practices be retrenched and reformed.

I Bless God; some of our Young People, do make a more Profitable and
Commendable Improvement of that Evening. They Associate and Assemble in that
Evening for Exercises of Piety. May their Example Encourage Others to the like
Exercises. (...) is pity but the Visits of their Pastors (...) to them, as they
have time and strength for it, with suitable Exhortation, may give
Encouragement unto them. No Pains, no Pains, are too much, that our Children
may have a CHRIST Effectually set before them.

[9 d. 5. m. 1699. Quo Die. Natus mihi Eilius, et CHRISTO a me Baptizatus.]

[On the Lord's Day Evening; To my YOUNG MEN.]
AND now, Come, ye Children, Hearken to me, and I will Teach you that Fear of
the Lord, that shall bring you to the Enjoyment of Him. The Inference will now
be Irresistible. If Godly Persons desire above all things, the Enjoyment of a
CHRIST, as the greatest Blessedness for themselves, and for their Children,
certainly it becomes, it concerns our Children to desire this Blessedness for
themselves. Yea, if ever they become Godly Children their Godliness will first
show it self, in their Desiring of this Blessedness. Oh! If once our Children
were come to this Language, A Christ, A Christ, for a Perishing Soul! Then
should we begin to hope, that they will not Perish, Then, and never till then,
should we see upon them, the Hopeful Beginning of those things that accompany
Salvation.

But how shall they be prevailed withal? Nothing that we can say, though we
should speak with the Tongue of Angels, will be prevalent upon the Blinded and
Hardened Minds of Sinners. But, --

O Thou Almighty Spirit of Grace; Thou art stronger than all the Powers of
Darkness, which holds the Minds of our Young People in such a deplorable
Captivity. Oh! Do thou Exert thy Strength, and Glorify thy CHRIST, and conquer
and persuade our Young People, to Embrace Him as the Greatest Blessedness, and
awaken them into those Agonies, that shall never give them any Rest, until they
are Blessed with an Interest in Him.

In Expectation of what the Holy Spirit of God breathing in His Word, may do
upon the Souls of our Young People, we will now set before them, Why they
should pursue such a Blessedness as the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST, and How
they shall obtain such a Blessed Enjoyment.

Will you be advised, O our Young People, Why you should look after the
Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST?

First; Methinks, In that Expression, A Glorious CHRIST, you may see that
intimated, which may admonish you, that you cannot have a Greater Blessedness,
than the Enjoyment of Him. Glorious things are to be spoken of thee, O thou
blessed Enjoyment! Children, you have GOD for yours, if you have CHRIST for
yours. As CHRIST is, the True God, the Great God, the Most High God; so, to
Enjoy Him, is the Truest, the Greatest, the Highest Blessedness, And his Office
and Offer is, to bring you unto GOD. How Joyfully may you now sing, Lam. 3. 24.
25. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul; therefore will I hope in Him: The
Lord is good unto them that wait for Him, to the Soul that seeks Him. Good!
Yea, An Infinite Good! There is enough in Him, to suffice Himself, and enough
to suffice and fulfill the Desires of all the Souls that come unto Him. The
Knowledge of GOD, you have it if you know JESUS CHRIST, whom to know is Life
Eternal. The Favor of GOD, you have it, if you are Favored and Accepted in
His Beloved CHRIST. Fellowship with GOD; Truly our Fellowship is with the
Father, if it be with His Son JESUS CHRIST.

The CHRIST proposed unto your Enjoyment, as He is the Manna of Angels, thus He
is the Wonder of Angels; And may we not imagine, that our Contempt, of Him, is
the Wonder, and the Anger of Angels? Oh! Could we look into the City of God! --
You are Astonished, O ye Heavens, and you are very Disdainful at our Infidelity.

A CHRIST; Who, who shall declare His Excellency? Children, If there were
proffered unto you, the Enjoyment of this World, in all the Glory of it, a
little Time were enough to Relate all that you are to Enjoy. We read, The
Tempter showed our Savior, Luke 4. 5. All the Kingdoms of the world in a
Moment of Time. It is a moral and witty Gloss, that Ambrose has upon it; In
momento enim cuncta illa praetereunt. They last but for a Moment; If they are
not shown in a Moment, they cannot be shown at all. Oh! But the Enjoyment of a
CHRIST; An Eternity, an Eternity, is little enough, to Relate all the Glory
that is contained in it. God the Father is forever Beholding His CHRIST, with a
Divine Contemplation and Satisfaction. The Object of the Contemplation is the
SON of God. The Satisfaction in that Object, is the SPIRIT of God. Arise, my
dear Young People, Arise to an Unspeakable, Ravishing, Heavenly Communion with
the adorable Trinity; You do it, when the SPIRIT of God, affects you with a
prospect of what you shall Enjoy in having the SON of God for yours!

My Errand unto you, is, to Espouse your Young Souls unto the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. And what Objection can you have, against being Espoused unto such a
Glorious ONE? Oh! Could we see that King in His Beauty! -- Either take up with
Him, and be wondrously taken with Him; or say, He that made the world, is not
so Good an Enjoyment as the world; say, He that fills Heaven and Earth, is not
an Enjoyment that will Fill the Soul of man. Say, He that lives forever in the
Bosom of God, is not an Enjoyment worthy to be laid near unto the Hearts of
men. Blasphemous Unbelief! Alas, Alas, That any of my Children should be led
into thy Blasphemies, O thou Evil Heart of Unbelief!

Solicited Souls; Look through the Universe; Who who, is there so worthy of your
Esteem, as the Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST! Can Mammon stand in Competition,
with him that is the King of Heaven? Can Satan be as desirable a Master, as he
that is the Lord of Angels? Bring all other things, and lay them in the
Balance with the Lord JESUS CHRIST; they will all be found less than the light
Dust of the Balance, and lighter than Vanity it self: They will but help to
set off an inestimable JESUS.

My Children: I cannot give over pleading with you, till a Glorious CHRIST
appear unto you, as he does to the Holy Myriads, which are in his Realms of
Light attending on him.

I will go on.

Secondly; The Things that a Glorious CHRIST will do for you; will these do
nothing with you? Will the Thought of what you shall Enjoy in and from the
Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST make no Impression upon My Children; We wish you
all the Blessings that can be imagined; more Blessings than you can ask or
think. Oh! If we could see you brought unto the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST,
we should see you invested with all such Blessings; the sight would make us
Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. It was of old said, Phil 4. 19.
My God shall supply all your Need, according to His Riches in Glory, by CHRIST
JESUS. Oh! What a Rich supply of Glorious Things, would a CHRIST JESUS heap
upon you! We wish, that to Evil may happen to you in this world; That whatever
looks like Evil in any of your Circumstances, may really work for Good; That
you may want Nothing that shall be for your Good. Oh! ^f our Glorious CHRIST
were yours, ^t would be so! We wish, that in the world to come, you may have a
part in that Rest which remains for the People of God; That you may get safe
into the City of God, and find Mansions in the Heavenly Places of that City
provided for you; That you may be brought nigh^ to God, and have God become all
in all unto you, and be filled with all the Fullness of God. Oh! If our Glorious
CHRIST were yours, it would be so!

Be assured of it, Children; The Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST, will bring you
to an Inheritance, beyond all Humane Comprehension. For, if you become United
unto the Son of God, you do your selves become the Children of God. And then!
What follows? Romans 8. 17. If Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and
Joint-Heirs with Christ. The Inheritance which the Great GOD will bestow upon
his Children, can be no small Inheritance. No, Children, You shall Inherit all
things; yea, the Great GOD Himself will be your Inheritance.

What shall I say? You have no Righteousness of your own, wherein you may dare
to appear before God the Judge of all. But come to the Enjoyment of a Glorious
CHRIST; From that moment you become Owners of a spotless and splendid and
glorious Righteousness; A Righteousness more acceptable to God, than the
Obedience of all the Angels in heaven; A Righteousness wherein you may venture
to stand before the Judgment Seat of God.

You have grievous Maladies on your Souls; None can Cure your Maladies. But
come to the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST; From that moment, the Cure is
begun. The Lord our Healer takes you into his hands; He will never Desert what
his healing hands have undertaken, till he present you Glorious, without spot,
wrinkle or blemish, before his Father.

You are to Die in a little while; and you are by Death to be stripped of all that
you Enjoy in this world. But come to the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST; Then
Death it self will be your Gain; By Death you shall Gain a Deliverance from all
Pain, and all Sin, and all Temptation; You shall Gain a Paradise, where the
Blessed JESUS will visit you with his Consolations.

In a word; In the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST, you will have, what will
make up the want of every other Enjoyment! It is a memorable passage, Isa. 9.
1. At the First time, He made Vile the Land of Zabulon, and the Land of
Naphtali; so in the latter time He shall make it Glorious; Even the way of the
Sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles. The People of the Country here
described, were afflicted with an Early Captivity; The Assyrian Captivated
them, and committed fearful and bloody Depredations upon them. Well, but says
our God, I will make them Amends for these Afflictions. What Amends? It
follows, The People that sat in Darkness have seen a Great Light. A CHRIST, a
CHRIST, coming and shining upon a wretched Country makes Amends for the most
severe Calamities; The Country is Glorified in such a rare Enjoyment! Are you
Poor? In a CHRIST, you Enjoy a Goodly Heritage. Are you Sick? In a CHRIST you
Enjoy the Saving Health of God. Are you Reproached? In a CHRIST you Enjoy an
Advocate, Have your friends forsaken you? In a CHRIST, you Enjoy a Friend of
more Value, than all the Friends in the Universe. How, how can you subsist
without Him?

If you are Deaf to all these Charms, I will go on, Thirdly, to tell you; That
except and until a Glorious CHRIST be yours, you are infinitely miserable. I
tell you truly; The most horrible Article of Misery that ever was uttered, is
that; Ephesians. 2. 12. Without CHRIST. And I will tell you Something about the
Misery of them that are Without CHRIST: I say, Something of it; For, truly to
be without CHRIST, is to be beyond all Expression Miserable.

Oh! That the God of all Grace, would cause these things to sink down into the
hearts of our Young People, and therewith infuse a concern for a CHRIST into
them!

First; By our Fall from God, we are all become very Miserable: And, O my Young
People, Who but a Glorious CHRIST can Deliver you from the Numberless and
Exquisite Miseries, into which you are Fallen? It is most sure, that by our Sin
and Fall, we have made our selves miserable Creatures. We have Sinned; and our
Lamentation may be that; Lam. 5. 16. Woe unto us, that we have Sinned. Children;
You have Sinned, and you are Estranged from God, you are Abhorred by God;
surely, this is to be very Miserable! You have Sinned, and you are sunk into an
Ignorance of God, into an Enmity to God; surely this is to be very Miserable!
You have Sinned, and your Minds are Infected, your Wills are Depraved, your
Affections are all out of Order; the Powers of Darkness hold you in Chains of
Darkness. And is not this to be very Miserable? Every one of you is a Sinner;
and the Voice of every Sinner may be that; Romans 7. 24. Oh! Wretched one that I
am; who shall Deliver me! Now, if you have a CHRIST, you have a Deliverer. But
if you are without a CHRIST, Oh! Wretched Ones that you are; you have none to
Deliver you! Could you Deliver your selves from your Miseries, or could any one
else Deliver you; Then to be without a CHRIST, would not be so Miserable. But,
Isa. 10. 3. What will you do in the Day of Visitation? To whom will you flee
for Help? Says the Lord; Without me they shall Perish among the Prisoners of
Desperation. What will become of a stung Israelite, if he look not unto the
healing Serpent? We read, Act. 4. 12. There is not Salvation in any other. None
of all your Miseries would ly upon you, if you had a CHRIST concerned for the
relieving and removing thereof. But while you are without a CHRIST, all your
Miseries continue unrelieved and unremoved World without end. All our Help is
laid upon a CHRIST. Ah, Christless One! Ah, Helpless One! What will become of
thee.

Secondly. To be without a Glorious CHRIST, is to be under the Guilt of Sin,
But then, Behold, my Young People, Behold, how Miserable! If it could be said,
Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Blessed is the man whose Transgression is Forgiven, and whose
Sin is Covered; Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord Imputes not Iniquity;
Then it must be said, Undone is the man, to whom the Lord Imputes Iniquity.
But so Undone art thou, O Young Man, if thou art a Christless one. It is a
Miserable thing to be under the Guilt of sin. But he that is Christless cannot
be Guiltless. It was said, 1 Cor. 15. 17. If Christ be not Raised, ye are yet
in your Sins. And it may be said, If Christ be not yours, ye are yet in your
Sins. While a man is without a Glorious CHRIST, he is Unjustified; for every
Unbeliever is Unjustified; We are Justified by Faith. We read, Joh. 3. 18. He
that Believes not, is Condemned already. The Violated Law of God, has passed a
sentence of Condemnation upon the sinner. None but a CHRIST can make
satisfaction to the Violated Law; And he has done it for those that are in him.
He that is without a CHRIST, is himself under obligation to satisfy the Law of
God for himself; he is obliged in dreadful Bonds to become a Sacrifice unto the
formidable Justice of God. Oh! Miserable Plight! We read Romans 8. 1. There is no
Condemnation to those that are in CHRIST. But horribly Condemned are they that
are without a CHRIST. There is no way for a sinner to come at a Pardon, but by
the Atonement of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. His only Plea is, That the Blood of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST has made Atonement for him. A sinner has no way to become
Righteous, but by having the Righteousness of the Lord JESUS CHRIST placed unto
his Account. He must plead, That the Lord JESUS CHRIST has fulfilled all
Righteousness on his behalf. He that is without a CHRIST, is without that
Atonement, without that Righteousness. O Young People, If you are Christless,
Let these Thoughts force themselves in upon you, Any One Sin lying upon me,
were enough to make me for ever Miserable. But, What shall I do? Where shall I
fly? That have been Guilty of Thousands of Sins, and every one of them all
Unpardoned unto this moment! Oh! my Unpardoned Soul: Thou art a most Miserable
Soul.

Thirdly. Can the dreadful Wrath and Curse of God, make any person Miserable?
Then, O Young People, To be without a CHRIST, is to be Miserable. Sin, Sin, has
laid us all under the Wrath and Curse of God. While we are without a CHRIST, we
are without Him, who bore the Wrath and Curse for His People, and who alone can
Redeem us from that Wrath and Curse. A Christless person is under the Wrath of
God. We read, Joh. 3. 36. The Wrath of God abides on him. He is under the
Curse of God. We read, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. All the Curses shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee.

Miserable sinner; The Wrath of God like a Consuming Fire, is burning against
him. The Great GOD is every Day Angry at him. There is the Anger of God, in all
His Dispensations toward him. Nothing that he does is pleasing to God. He
Languishes perpetually under the Displeasure of God. He is a Child of Wrath; he
is obnoxious to that Wrath, at which, you Quake, O ye Mountains, you Melt, O ye
Hills, you are Thrown down, O ye Rocks; And, Who can stand before that
Indignation? The Curse of God haunts him; There is a Curse in all that happens
unto him. There is a Curse Embittering all his Enjoyments. The Curse makes him
the worse for every thing. He may have some Temporal (...), but he has no Real
Blessings in his Comforts. Like the Cursed Mountains of Gilboa, he has no Rain
or Dew of Spiritual and Heavenly Blessings Falling from Heaven upon him.
Nothing does him Good! Prosperity beguiles him; Adversity hardens him.
Ordinances make him no better than he was before, Oh! Miserble Sinner! How
can thou hear of any Miseries, and thy Heart not Faint, and even Die away
within thee?

Fourthly. He that is without a CHRIST, is a Slave of the Devil: But certainly,
O Young People, to be such a Slave, is to be very Miserable. Until a man get
into the Hands of the Savior, he is in the hands of the Destroyer. We are in
the Kingdom of Satan, till we are translated into the Kingdom of our Savior.
[See, Col 1. 13.] Until a man be in CHRIST, he is not a Child of God. And he
that is not a Child of God, who is is he? We may tremble to speak it; but we
find it spoken by the mouth of God; 1 John 3 10 Either the Children of God, or
the Children of the Devil. Yea, but every Child of Satan, is a Slave to him.
How Miserable is Sinner without a CHRIST? Satan has Possession of him; Satan
Enslaves him; Satan Deceives him; Satan Befools him. He is Blinded by Satan;
Satan hinders him from a true sight of Sin as it is, and from seeing the things
of his Everlasting Peace. He is always at work for Satan; and at last Satan
pays him his wages. he cannot resist the motions of Satan; and Satan that has
been his Tempter, at last becomes his Tormentor. He is in the Snare of Satan,
and led Captive by Satan to do his will, Oh! Miserable Captivity! Worst than
any Captivity among the Monsters of Africa!

Fifthly; Will you be sensible of it, O Young People? The Christless are under
the Dominion of a worse Tyrant than the Devil himself: Sin, Sin, has Dominion
over them that are without a CHRIST. It was said, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not
have Dominion over you, for you are under Grace. But if you are not under
CHRIST, you are not under Grace, and Sin will have Dominion over you, They that
are without a CHRIST, say concerning Him, They will not have Him to Reign over
them. God in His just Vengeance then says, If it be so, then let Sin Reign
over them. Sin Swayes the Scepter in every Unconverted and Unsanctified Sinner.
The filthy Lusts of Sin, the Desires of the Flesh, and the Desires of the Mind,
are not only Raging but also Reigning in the Sinner, until he submit unto the
Scepter of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. He is, Tit. 3. 3. Serving diverse Lusts. A
Miserable Vassal! He has no steps ordered in the Word of God, but, Iniquity has
Dominion over him. He is always toyling to Gratify his Loathsome Lusts; his
Lusts precipitate him into Criminal and Multiplied Follies; he feels himself
ruined by following the Dictates of his Lusts, and yet he cannot help it, he
must follow them. He knows that his Lusts damnify him in all his Interests,
and yet he is hurried on unto Evident Confusion. Or, perhaps his Lusts put out
his Eyes; but still he grinds for them, till he dies upon the spot. Judge, O
all Young People that have come to any Exercise of Reason, Judge, whether this
be not to be very Miserable?

Sixthly: Certainly, my Young People, It Is a Miserable thing, to be in hourly
Danger of Easeless and Endless Miseries. In the Damnation that waits for the
sleeping Sinner in the other world, and slumbers not, there are
incomprehensible Miseries; which cannot without horror be thought upon. Oh! the
Miseries of an Eternal Banishment from God, into Outer Darkness, where there is
weeping and wa^ling and gnashing of Teeth! Oh! the Miseries of being siezed by
the Justice of the Holy God, and having His Terrors, like Flashes of hot
Lightning shot into an Enraged Conscience! Oh! the Miseries of being made
Companions to Devils, in those unknown Torments, the Smoke whereof shall ascend
for ever and ever! What a Miserable thing it is to be in hourly Danger, of being
dragged away, down, down! into these Miseries! Miserable art thou then, (...)
One. It was a Miserable thing, Deuteronomy. 28. 66 Thy Life shall hang in doubt before
thee, and thou shall Fear Day and Night, and shall have none Assurance of thy
Life. This, This is thy Condition, O Christless Young Man. It Is to walk on the
very Brink of the Fiery, and the Horrible Pit! In the Morning, the Christless
Person may say, For ought I know, I may be plunged into all the Miseries of the
Damned, before the Evening. In the Evening, the Christless Person may say, For
ought I know, my Soul may be sent among the Damned, before the Morning. Every
Lords. Day, our Christless Young People may Cry out; For ought I can tell, I
may before this Week be out, be broken in the place of Dragons, and roaring
with the Devil and his Angels. That man reckoned himself Miserable enough, who
sat at a Table full of Dainties, but had a sharp Sword hanging all the while,
by an Hair just over his head. Such, even such is the Condition of the
Christless. The Sword of the unappeasable Indignation of God, is hanging over
their heads; if only the Rotten Thread of a Frail, Vain, Dying Life, should
break, which every day, it is a wonder it breaks not! They are struck with a
Flame entering into their Souls, and a stroke that cannot be cured in Eternal
Ages. O our Children; How can you bear, how can you dare, to continue in this
Condition? Shall we hope, that you are at last, more than almost Persuaded,
into some Anguish of Soul for the Enjoyment of a Glorious CHRIST! In hope of
it, we will now leave with you, our brief and plain Advice,

How to look after that Enjoyment?

And you shall have all in One word.

The Direction.
Let a Glorious CHRIST, be Heartitily, Thankfully, Joyfully Received, as He is
Offered.

Be it known to you, O Children, and be you astonished at it; An Offer of a
Glorious CHRIST, is made unto every one of you all. In all the Distresses that
are upon your Souls, you have that Offer from a Glorious CHRIST; Isa. 45. 22.
Look unto me, and be you Saved. He that said unto the Blind, What will thou
have me to do unto thee? And unto the Lame, Will thou be made whole? HE Offers
unto every one of you, I am willing to be thine; I am willing to do for thee,
all that can make thee Happy for Eternity. With a Soul full of Agony, Receive
the Glorious CHRIST, Receive His Glorious Offer.

Look upon all the Offices of a Glorious CHRIST; and with a Consenting Soul,
Declare; Lord, I am willing that thou be the PRIEST, by whose Atonement alone I
propound a Reconciliation with God.

Lord, I am willing, that thou be the PROPHET, on whom alone I rely to lead me
in the Paths of Righteousness.

Lord, I am willing, that thou be the KING, to whom alone I repair, for
Government, and Protection.

Look upon all the Benefits of a Glorious CHRIST; and with a Complying Soul,
Declare; Lord, Thou art my WISDOM; Oh! Make me Wise unto Salvation. Thou art my
RIGHTEOUSNESS; My whole Dependence is on thy Obedience to make me Righteous.
Thou art thy HOLINESS; May thy Lively Influences upon me, make me very Holy.
Lord, Thou art my REDEMPTION; Oh! Redeem and Pay me; make me Victorious over
the Enemies of my Salvation; Redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave; Bring
me to the Fullness of Joy which thou have prepared for thy Chosen in the
Heavenly Places for evermore.

Children, When you do thus, you are no longer without a Glorious CHRIST. A
Glorious CHRIST is now become yours. This Day Salvation is come to that Soul.

And, O Lord; Thy Servants, to whom thy Work has appeared, will Rejoice and be
Glad all our Days, because thy Glory now Appears unto our Children.

THE CONSENT.
In Imitation of the Virgins Answer to the Angel. [Luk. i. 38.]
GReat GOD; Thy Chosen People shall
Each one to Thee be Called home:
And to a Choice of thee they All
On thy Heart-conq'ring Call shall come.
God, Father, Son, and Spirit, make
Tenders that overcome us quite:
I Will be your GOD; He says: I Will take
In you, as in dear Sons delight.
The Lord-Redeemer does propose
To Pay for us a wondrous Price;
To guide our Ways; to quell our Foes;
And Lodge us in Eternal B^iss.
Dissolved by such sweet Rays of Grace,
Darted from Thee, most Gracious Lord;
Behold, Thy willing Servant Prays,
Fulfill to me thy Glorious Word.
JESUS, Our Holy Surety did
Work out a Righteousness complete;
Sinners, It Is yours, He says, to Plead,
Righteous before Gods Judgment Seat.
Our Sin, of Enemies the worst,
This, God will Pardon and Subdue;
It Is this, O God, for which I thirst!
Sins Death, Saints as their Life Pursue.
When Tempted, our kind Friend on High,
Succors will send us down from thence;
To Him, we in Temptations fly;
And Favors He Will by them dispense.
Dissolved by such sweet Rays of Grace,
Darted from Thee, most Gracious Lord;
Behold, Thy willing Servant Prays
Fulfill to me thy (...)
Our Spirits Born from Heaven above,
God will for Heavenly Flights prepare;
Then them to Paradise remove,
And Blessed Visions grant them there.
Our Cleansed Bodies from the Grave,
He to our Spirits will restore;
In them we shall New Mansions have,
Bright, Strong, And, death shall be no more.
So in the CITY of our God,
Him we shall Serve, and Love, and See:
O (...) of our Long Abode;
How Long, till we arrive to thee!
Dissolved by such sweet Pays of Grace,
Darted from Thee, most Gracious Lord;
(...), Thy willing Servant Prays,
Fulfill to me thy Glorious Word.
FINIS.

