THE Negro Christianized.

An ESSAY TO EXCITE and ASSIST that GOOD WORK, The INSTRUCTION OF
Negro-Servants IN Christianity.

Josh. 24 15. As for me, and my House, we will Serve the Lord.

Psalm. 68.31. Ethiopia shall soon Stretch out her Hands unto God.

Boston, Printed by B. Green. 1706.

THE Negro Christianized.
IT is a Golden Sentence, that has been sometimes quoted from Chrysostom; That
for a man to know the Art of Alms, is more than for a man to be Crowned with
the Diadem of Kings: But to Convert one Soul unto God, is more than to pour cut
Ten Thousand Talents into the Baskets of the Poor. Truly, to Raise a Soul, from
a dark State of Ignorance and Wickedness, to the Knowledge of GOD, and the
Belief of CHRIST, and the practice of our Holy and Lovely RELIGION; It Is the
noblest Work, that ever was undertaken among the Children of men. An
Opportunity to Endeavor the CONVERSION of a Soul, from a Life of Sin, which is
indeed a woeful Death, to Fear God, and Love CHRIST, and by a Religious Life to
Escape the Paths of the Destroyer; it cannot but be Accptable to all that have
themselves had in themselves Experience of such a Conversion. And such an
Opportunity there is in your Hands, O all you that have any Negroes in your
Houses; an Opportunity to try, Whether you may not be the Happy Instruments, of
Converting, the Blackest Instances of Blindness and Baseness, into admirable
Candidates of Eternal Blessedness. Let not this Opportunity be Lost; if you
have any concern for Souls, your Own or Others; but, make a Trial, Whether by
your Means, the most Brutish of Creatures upon Earth may not come to be
disposed, in some Degree, like the Angels of Heaven; and the Vassals of Satan,
become the Children of God. Suppose these Wretched Negroes, to be the Offspring
of Cham (which yet is not so very certain,) yet let us make a Trial, Whether
the CHRIST who dwelt in the Tents of Shem, have not some of His Chosen among
them; Let us make a Trial, Whether they that have been Scorched and Blackened
by the Sun of Africa, may not come to have their Minds Healed by the more
Benign Beams of the Sun of Righteousness.

It is come to pass by the Providence of God, without which there comes nothing
to pass, that Poor Negroes are cast under your Government and Protection. You
take them into your Families; you look on them as part of your Possessions; and
you Expect from their Service, a Support, and perhaps an Increase, of your
other Possessions. How agreeable would it be, if a Religious Master or Mistress
thus attended, would now think with themselves! Who can tell but that this Poor
Creature may belong to the Election of God! Who can tell, but that God may have
sent this Poor Creature into my Hands, that so One of the Elect may by my means
be Called; and by my Instruction be made Wise unto Salvation! The glorious God
will put an unspeakable Glory upon me, if it may be so! The Considerations that
would move you, To Teach your Negroes the Truths of the Glorious Gospel, as far
as you can, and bring them, if it may be, to Live according to those Truths, a
Sober, and a Righteous, and a Godly Life: They are Innumerable; And, if you
would after a Reasonable manner consider, the Pleas which we have to make on
the behalf of God, and of the Souls which He has made, one would wonder that
they should not be Irresistible. Show your selves Men, and let Rational
Arguments have their Force upon you, to make you treat, not as Bruits but as
Men, those Rational Creatures whom God has made your Servants.

For,

First; The Great GOD Commands it, and Requires it of you; to do what you can
that Your Servants, may also be His. It was an Admonition once given; Ephesians. 5.9.
Masters, Know that your Master is in Heaven. You will confess, That the God of
Heaven is your Master. If your Negroes do not comply with your Commands, into
what Anger, what Language, Perhaps into a misbecoming Fury, are you
transported* But you are now to attend unto the Commands of your more Absolute
Master; and they are His Commands concerning your Negroes too. What can be more
Expressive; than those words of the Christian Law? Col. 4.1. Masters, give unto
your Servants, that which is Just and Equal, knowing that ye also have a Master
in Heaven. Of what Servants is this Injunction to be understood? Verily, of
Slaves. For Servants were generally such, at the time of Writing the New
Testament Wherefore, Masters, As it is Just and Equal, that your Servants be
not Over-wrought, and that while they Work for you, you should Feed them, and
Cloth them, and afford convenient Rest unto them, and make their Lives
comfortable; So it is Just and Equal, that you should Acquaint them, as far as
you can, with the way to Salvation by JESUS CHRIST. You deny your Master in
Heaven, if you do nothing to bring your Servants unto the Knowledge and Service
of that glorious Master. One Table of the Ten Commandments, has this for the
Sum of it; Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self. Man, Thy Negro is thy
Neighbor. It Were an Ignorance, unworthy of a Man, to imagine otherwise. Yea,
if thou do grant, That God has made of one Blood, all Nations of men, he is
thy Brother too. Now can thou Love thy Negro, and be willing to see him ly
under the Rage of Sin, and the Wrath of God? Can thou Love him, and yet
refuse to do any thing, that his miserable Soul may be rescued from Eternal
miseries? Oh! Let thy Love to that Poor Soul, appear in thy concern, to make
it, if thou can, as happy as thy own! We are Commanded, Gal. 6.10. As we have
opportunity let us Do Good unto all men, especially unto them, who are of the
Household of Faith. Certainly, we have Opportunity, to Do Good unto our
Servants, who are of our own Household; certainly, we may do something to make
them Good, and bring them to be of the Household of Faith. In a word, All the
Commandments in the Bible, which bespeak our Charity to the Souls of others,
and our Endeavor that the Souls of others may be delivered from the Snares of
Death; every one of these do oblige us, to do what we can, for the Souls of our
Negroes. They are more nearly Related unto us, than many others are; we are
more fully capable to do for them, than for many others.

To deal yet more plainly with you; Secondly; With what Face can you call your
selves Christians, if you do nothing that your Servants also may become
Christians? A Face that has been Baptized into the Name of the One GOD, in
Three Persons, may Blush to continue unconcerned, Whether the Name of that God,
be ever Known or no, in the very Families that belong unto them. Are they
Worthy to be counted Christians, who are content though a part of their Families
remain Heathen, who do not know God, nor call upon His Name? We read, 1 Timothy
5.8. If any provide not for his own, and especially those of his own house, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. And what is he, who does
Provide nothing for the Souls of those whom God has made his own; that their
Souls may be fed with the Bread of Life, and clothed with the Garments of
Righteousness, and Healed of the Deadly Wounds which their Fall from God has
brought upon them! What is he, who is willing that those of his own House
remain Strangers to the Faith, and Wretched Infidels? Householder, Call thy self
any thing but a Christian? As for that Worthy Name, -- Nomen Depone, Do not
pretend unto it; Thou art not Worthy of it. If thou will Name the Name of
CHRIST, in denominating thy self a Christian, then Depart from this Iniquity,
of leaving thy Servants, to continue the Servants of Iniquity. It will be found
a Maxim that Fails not; That no man can Really and Heartily be of any Religion,
without some Desire to have that Religion Propagated. For a man to Profess a
Religion, and care not a Straw, Whether any body besides himself be of it;
certainly, That man's Profession is not worth a Straw; it can be no Sincere
Profession. It is Natural for men, to promote their own Religion. Shall
Christians fall short of Mahometans, or of Idolaters? The Pagan Japonians, were
too much in the right ont, when they concluded a certain Worldly Generation of
Europaeans, to be no Christians; Because they declined the doing of any thing
for the Propagation of Christianity. The Christians who have no concern upon
their Minds to have Christianity Propagated, never can justify themselves. They
say they are Christians, but they are not; What they are, we know not. All
along the Pagans themselves, have made it the main Stroke in the Definition of,
A Good Man; He is One who does all the Good that he can. The greatest Good that
we can do for any, is to bring them unto the fullest Acquaintance with
Christianity. Will Christianity allow him then to be, A Good Man, or, which is
the same thing, A Christian, who refuses to do this Good, for the Servants that
are under his influence? All genuine Christians are to be looked on as the
Children of the Faithful Abraham, who is therefore called, The Father of the
Faithful. Now of this our Father, did Heaven take it for granted; Genesis 18.19. I
know him, that he will Command his Children, and his Household, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord. He had some Hundreds of Servants belonging to his
Household: He obtained, that the Slaves of his Household should Know the Way of
the Lord; He, then Commanded, that they should Keep that Way. Now, Christianity
is, The Way of the Lord. Householder, There are Servants pertaining to thy
Household. It is a mighty Power which thou have over them; A Despotick Power
which gives thee numberless Advantages, to call them, and lead them into the
Way of the Lord. Art thou Regardless of bringing them into Christianity? Then
thou do not Walk in the Steps of our Father Abraham; and art not like to
call him thy Father, any otherwise than the Rich Man in the place of Torment.
We are very sure, That where the Spirit of Christianity has had its true
operation, it has from the Beginning Shone forth in most Lively Essays, to
diffuse the Light of the Glorious Gospel, unto such as have been Perishing for
the Lack of that Vision. All Ecclesiastical History, down from the Book of, The
Acts of the Apostles, to this Time, are filled with admirable Examples, of a
Zeal flaming in the Hearts of Christians, to Christianize the rest of the
World. Christianity, Whither art thou fled! Return, Return, O Beautiful
Daughter of Heaven, Return, Return, that we may look upon thee. What shall we
then see, but a vast company of Christian Householders, filled with zealous
contrivance and agony, to see their Houses become Christian Temples, and a
glorious CHRIST worshipped and obeyed by all their Households! Yea, we read
concerning some of the Primitive Christians, that with a Prodigy of Charity,
they have bound themselves in the Quality of Servants, to Pagan Families,
merely that they might be in a way to Christianize the Families; And their
successes were Wonderful. But what shall we say of it, When Masters that would
be thought Christians already shall even refuse to have the Servants in their
Families duly Christianized? Pray, deal faithfully; Don't mince the matter;
say of it, as it is; It is a Prodigy of Wickedness; It is a prodigious
Inconsistency, with true Christianity! Householder, art thou a Christian? Then
the Glory of a precious CHRIST is of such Account with thee, that it afflicts
thee to think, that any one Person in the World should be without the Sight of
it. And how can it be, that thou should be negligent about bringing to a
sight of the Glory of God, in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, the Folks of thy own
House, upon whom thou art able to do a great deal more than upon the rest of
the World? Art thou a Christian? Then thou do Pray for thy Servants, that
they may become the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Children of God,
and not fall short of entering into Rest. What! Pray for this; and yet never do
any thing for it! It is impossible, or, such Praying, is but Mocking of God?
Art thou a Christian? Then thou art apprehensive of a dreadful Danger,
attending the Souls of them who know not God and obey not His Gospel: It Is thy
persuasion, That if our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that are left; and
the Ungospelized Souls are in danger of an Eternal Banishment from the Favor
and the City of God. Can a Christian see his own Servants in this condition,
and not be sollicitous to have them saved out of it? No; When such Christians
appear before the Glorious LORD, it will be in vain for them to plead, that
they called him LORD, and owned Him for their LORD. If they did it why did they
not bring their Servants under the Government of the LORD? Verily, He will say
to such Christians, I knew you not? Suppose that Language were heard from the
mouth of a Master concerning a Servant; If I can have the Labor of the Slave,
that is all I care for: Let his Soul go and be damned for all me! would not
every Christian say, This were Language for the Mouth of a Devil, rather than
for the Mouth of a Christian! Would not every Christian cry out, Let him not be
called a Master, but a Monster that shall speak so! Consider, Syrs, whether
Deeds have not a Language in them, as well as Words; a plainer Language than
Words.

But we were saying; the Condition of the Servants! This invites us to say,
Thirdly: The condition of your Servants does loudly solicit your pains to
Christianize them; and you cannot but hear the cry of it, if you have not put
off all Christian Compassion, all Bowels of Humanity. When You see how
laboriously, how obsequiously your Negros apply themselves, to serve you, to
content you, to enrich you, What? have you abandoned all principles of
Gratitude, or of Generosity? A Generous Mind cannot but entertain such
sentiments as these: Well, what shall I do, to make this poor creature happy?
What shall I do, that this poor creature may have cause, to bless God forever,
for falling into my Hands! The very First Thought which will arise in a Mind
thus disposed, will form a Resolution, to get these poor Negroes well
instructed in the things of their Everlasting Peace; It cannot be otherwise!
The State of your Negroes in this World, must be low, and mean, and abject; a
State of Servitude. No Great Things in this World, can be done for them.
Something then, let there be done, toward their welfare in the World to Come.
Even a Papist calls upon us; ['tis Acosta:] Barbaris pro liberate erepta fidem
Jesu Christi, et vitam hominibus dignam reddamus. In the mean time, it is a most
horrid and cursed Condition, wherein your Servants are languishing, until
Christianity has made saving impressions upon them. A roaring Lion who goes
about seeking whom he may devour, has made a secure of them: Very many of them
do with Devilish Rites actually worship Devils, or maintain a magical
conversation with Devils: And all of them are more Slaves to Satan than they
are to You, until a Faith in the Son of God has made them Free indeed. Will you
do nothing to pluck them out of the Jaws of Satan the Devourer? Especially
since you may justly imagine them crying to you, in terms like those of the
Child whom a Lion was running away withal; Help! Help! I am yet alive! O Souls
deaf to the cry of Souls, Pity, Pity the Souls of your Negroes, which cry
unto you, Have pity on us, O our Masters, have pity on us, whom the holy God,
has justly delivered over into a woeful Slavery to the Powers of Darkness: And,
Oh! do something, that the light of Salvation by the glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST
may arrive unto us. A SOUL, Ignorant of God and His Christ, and vicious in all
the affections of it, and that neither knows nor likes the Things that are Holy
and Just and Good, and that has no illumitions from Heaven ever visiting of it,
but is in Great Folly wandering down to the Congregation of the Dead; Such a
Soul is a terrible fight! It can be no other than such a Soul, who does not
count it so. Neighbors, you have such a fight, in all your Negroes, as long as
they are left a People of no understanding. The uninstructed Negroes about your
houses, appear like so many Ghosts and Specter, You may, without being
Fanciful, imagine that like so many Murdered Ghosts, they look very Ghastly
upon you, and summon you to answer before the Tribunal of God, for suffering
them to perish in their miserable Circumstances. Most certainly, Syrs; The
Blood of the Souls of your poor Negroes, lies upon you, and the guilt of their
Barbarous Impieties, and superstitions, and their neglect of God and their
Souls: If you are willing to (...) nothing done toward the Salvation of their
Souls. We read of, People destroyed for lack of knowledge. If you withhold
Knowledge from your Black People, they will be Destroyed. But their Destruction
must very much ly at Your doors; You must answer for it. It was a (...) charge
of old brought in against the Jewish Nation; Jer. 2^.34. In thy skirts is found
the Blood of Souls. It were to be wished, that in the Skirts, the out-borders,
the Colonies and Plantations of the English Nation, there might be no room for
such a charge. But surely, Things look very Black upon us* You have your selves
renounced Christianity, if you do not receive that Faithful saying of it, and
most Awful one: Every one of us shall give account of himself to God. But then
Remember, that one Article of your Account will be this: You bad poor. Negroes
under you, and you expected and exacted Revenues of profit from them. Did you
do any thing to save them from their Blindness and Baseness, and that the Great
GOD might have Revenues of glory from them. Alas, if you have not thought and
cared and Watched for the Souls of your Negroes, as they that must give an
Account, You will give up your Account with Grief, and not with Jac; very
Grievous will be the consequences. A Prophet of God, might without putting any
Disguise upon the matter, thus represent it; God has brought a Servant unto
thee, and said, Keep (...) Soul, Touch it, and Help it, that it may (...) be
lost; if thou use no means to save the^^ Soul, thy soul shall certainly smart
for it. Vain Dreamer; can thou suppose that the Negroes are made for nothing
but only to serve thy Pleasures, or that they owe no Homage to their Maker? Do
thy part, that they may become a People of so much Understanding, as to
Understand who is their Maker and their Savior, and what Homage they owe unto
Him: Else, He that made them will not have mercy on them. Yea, but Thy claim to
His Mercy will be less than Theirs. More Stripes will belong unto thee.

On the other side, Fourthly: Oh! That our Neighbors would consider the
incomparable Benefits that would follow upon your Endeavors to Christianize
your Negroes, and bring them to a share with your selves in the Benefits of the
Heavenly Inheritance. If your care and cost about the cultivation of your
Negroes, be laid out upon such a Stony and Barren Soil, that you can (...) no
Fruit of it, yet it is not all thrown away. The blessed God will approve and
reward what you have done; Think, Though my Negroes will not prove a part of the
Israel of God, an will not be gathered unto the Lord, yet my work is with my
God, and what I do is glorious in the Eyes of the Lord. But it is very
probable, You may see some good Success of your Travail. And then! Oh! the
Consolations that will belong unto you! Christianity does Marvellously befriend
and enrich and advance Mankind. The greatest Kindness that can be done to any
Man is to make a Christian of him. You Negroes are immediately Raised unto an
astonishing Felicity, when you have Christianized them. They are become amiable
spectacles, and such as the Angels of God would gladly repair unto the Windows
of Heaven to look upon. Though they remain your Servants, yet they are become the
Children of God. Though they are to enjoy no Earthly Goods, but the small
Allowance that your Justice and Bounty shall see proper for them, yet they are
become Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ. Though they are
yo^^ Vassals, and must with a profound subjection wait upon you, yet the Angels
of God now take them under their Guardianship, and vouchsafe to tend upon them.
Oh! what have you done for them! Happy Masters, who are Instrumental to raise
their Servants thus from the Dust, and make them objects for the Nobles of
Heaven to take Notice of! But it will not be long before you and they come at
length to be together in the Heavenly City. Lazarus there lies down at the same
Feast, with his Master Abraham. There was Joy in Heaven, when your Servants
first came to taste that the Lord is Gracious: and it cannot but be a vast
Accession unto your Joy in Heaven, to meet your Servants there, and hear them
forever blessing the gracious God, for the Day when He first made them your
Servants. If these Consolations of God be small unto a Man, truly, he has very
Bad Symptoms upon him.

Yea, the pious Masters, that have instituted their Servants in Christian
Piety, will even in this Life have a sensible Recompense. The more Serviceable,
and Obedient and obliging Behavior (...) their Servants unto them, will be a
sensible and a notable Recompense. Be assured, Syrs; Your Servants will be the
Better Servants, for being made Christian Servants. To Christanize them aright,
will be to fill them with all Goodness. Christianity is nothing but a very Mass
of Universal Goodness. Were your Servants well tinged with the Spirit of
Christianity, it would render them exceeding Dutiful unto their Masters,
exceeding Patient under their Masters, exceeding faithful in their Business,
and afraid of speaking or doing any thing that may justly displease you. It has
been observed, that those Masters who have used their Negroes with most of
Humaninity, in allowing them all the Comforts of Life, that are necessary and
Convenient for them, (Who have remembered, that by the Law of God, even an Ass
was to be relieved, When Sinking under his Burden, and an Ox might not be
Muzzled when Treading out the Corn; and that if a Just man will regard the Life
of his Beast* he will much more allow the comforts of life to and not hide
himself from his own Flesh:) have been better Served, had more work done for
them, and better done, than those Inhumane Masters, who have used their Negroes
worse than their Horses. And those Masters doubtless, who use their Negroes
with most of Christianity, and use most pains to inform them in, and conform
them to, Christianity, will find themselves no losers. by it. Onesimus was
doubtless a Slave: but this poor Slave, on whose behalf a great Apostle of God
was more than a little concerned; yea, one Book in our Bible was Written on his
behalf! When he was Christianized, it was presently said unto his Masters,
Philem. 11. In time past he was unprofitable to thee, but now he will be
profitable. But many Masters whose Negroes have greatly vexed them, with
miscarriage, may do well to examine, Whether Heaven be not chastising of them,
for their failing in their Duty about their Negroes. Had they done more, to
make their Negroes the knowing and willing Servants of God, it may be, God
would have made their Negroes better Servants to them. Syrs, you may Read your
Sin in the Punishment.

And now, what Objection can any Man Living have, to retund the force of these
Considerations? Produce thy cause, O Impiety, Bring forth thy strong reasons,
and let all men see what Idle and silly cavils, are thy best Reasons against
this Work of God.

It has been cavilled, by some, that it is questionable Whether the Negroes
have Rational Souls, or no. But let that Brutish insinuation be never
Whispered any more. Certainly, their Discourse, will abundantly prove, that
they have Reason. Reason shows it self in the Design which they daily act
upon. The vast improvement that Education has made upon some of them, argues
that there is a Reasonable Soul in all of them. An old Roman, and Pagan, would
call upon the Owner of such Servants, Homines tamen esse memento. They are Men,
and not Beasts that you have bought, and they must be used accordingly. It Is
true; They are Barbarous. But so were our own Ancestors. The Britons were in
many things as Barbarous, but a little before our Saviors Nativity, as the
Negroes are at this (...) if there be any Credit in Caesar's Commentaries.
Christianity will be the best cure for this Barbarity. Their Complexion
sometimes is made an Argument, why nothing should be done for them. A Gay sort
of argument! As if the great God went by the Complexion of Men, in His Favors
to them! As if none but Whites might hope to be Favored and Accepted with God!
Whereas it is well known, That the Whites, are the least part of Mankind. The
biggest part of Mankind, perhaps, are Copper-Coloured; a sort of Tawnies. And
our English that inhabit some Climates, do seem growing apace to be not much
unlike unto them. As if, because a people, from the long force of the African
Sun and Soil upon them, (improved perhaps, to further Degrees by maternal
imaginations, and other accidents,) are come at length to have the small Fibers
of their Veins, and the Blood in them, a little more Interspersed through their
Skin than other People, this must render them left valuable to Heaven then the
rest of Mankind? Away with such Trifles. The God who looks on the Heart, is not
moved by the color of the Skin; is not more propitious to one Color than
(...). Say rather, with the Apostle; Acts 10.34, 35. Of a truth I perceive,
that God is no respecter of persons; but in every Nation, he that fears Him
and works Righteousness, is accepted with Him. Indeed their Stupidity is a
Discouragement. It may seem, unto as little purpose, to Teach, as to wash an
Aethopian. But the greater their Stupidity, the greater must be our
Application. If we cannot learn them so much as we Would, let us learn them as
much as we Can. A little divine Light and Grace infused into them, will be of
great account. And the more Difficult it is, to fetch such forlorn things up
out of the perdition whereinto they are fallen, the more Laudable is the
undertaking: There will be the more of a Triumph, if we prosper in the
undertaking. Let us encourage our selves from that word; Mat. 3.9. God is able
of these Stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham.

Well; But if the Negroes are Christianized, they will be Baptized; and their
Baptism will presently entitle them to their Freedom; so our Money is thrown
away.

(...), If this were true; that a Slave bought with thy Money, were by thy
means brought unto the Things that accompany Salvation, and thou should from
this time have no more Service from him yet thy Money were not thrown away.
That Man's Money will perish with him, who had rather the Souls in his Family
should Perish, than that he should lose a little Money. And suppose it were so,
that Baptism gave a legal Title to Freedom. Is there no guarding against this
Inconvenience? You may by sufficient Indentures, keep off the things, which you
reckon so Inconvenient. But it is all a Mistake. There is no such thing. What
Law is it, that Son the Baptized Slave at Liberty? Not the Law of Christianity:
that allows of Slavery; Only it wonderfully Dulcifies, and Mollifies, and
Moderates the Circumstances of it. Christianity directs a Slave, upon his
embracing the Law of the Radeemer, to satisfy himself, That he is the Lords
Freeman* though he continues a Slave. It supposes, (Col 3.11.) That there are
Bond as well as Free, among those that have been Renewed in the Knowledge and
Image of Jesus Christ. Will the Canon Law do it? No; The Canons of Numberless
Councils, mention, the Slaves of Christians, without any contradiction. Will
the Civil Law do it? No: Tell, if you can, any part of Christendom, wherein
Slaves are not frequently to be met withal. But is not Freedom to be claimed
for a Baptized Slave, by the English Constitution? The English Laws, about
Villians, or, Slaves, will not say so; for by those Laws, they may be granted
for Life, like a Lease, and passed over with a Manor, like other Goods or
Chattels. And by those Laws, the Lords may sieze the Bodies of their Slaves
even while a Writ, De liberate* probanda, is depending. These English Laws
were made when the Lords and the Slaves, were both of them Christians; and they
stand still unrepealed. If there are not now such Slaves in England as
formerly, it is from the Lords, more than from the Laws. The Baptized then are
not thereby entitled unto their Liberty. Howbeit, if they have arrived unto
such a measure of Christianity, that none can forbid Water for the Baptising of
them, it is fit, that they should enjoy those comfortable circumstances with
us, which are due to them, not only as the Children of Adam, but also as our
Brethren, on the same level with us in the expectations of a blessed
Immortality, through the Second Adam. Whatever Slaughter the Assertion may make
among the pretensions which are made unto Christianity, yet while the sixteenth
Chapter of Matthew is in the Bible, it must be asserted; the Christian, who
cannot so far Deny himself, can be no Disciple of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. But, O
Christian, thy Slave will not Serve thee one jot the worse for that Self-denial.

The way is now cleared, for the work that is proposed: that excellent WORK,
The Instruction of the Negroes in the Christian Religion.

A CATECHISM shall be got ready for them; first a Shorter, then a Larger;
Suited at to their poor Capacities.

They who cannot themselves Personally so well attend the Instruction of the
Negroes, may employ and reward those that shall do it for them. In many
Families, the Children may help the Negroes, to Learn the Catechism, or their
well-instructed and well-disposed English Servants may do it: And they should
be Rewarded by the Masters, when they do it.

In a Plantation of many Negroes, why should not a Teacher be hired on purpose,
to instill into them the principles of the Catechism?

Or, if the Overseers are once Catechized themselves, they may soon do the
Office of Catechisers unto those that are under them.

However, It Is fit for the Master also Personally to enquire into the progress
which his Negroes make in Christianity, and not leave it Entierly to the
management of others.

There must be Time allowed for the Work. And why not The Lord's Day? The
precept of God concerning the Sabbath, is very positive; Remember the
SABBATH DAY, to keep it Holy. Thou shall not then do any work, thou nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant. By virtue of this
precept, we do even demand, The Lord-Day, for the Negroes: that they may be
permitted the Freedom of The Lord's Day, and not be then unnecessarily diverted
from attending on such means of Instruction, as may be afforded unto them.

To quicken them unto the learning of the Catechism, it would be very well to
propose unto the Negroes, Agreeable Recompenses, and Privileges, to be
received and enjoyed by them, when they shall have made a good progress in it.
Syrs, A Mohammedan will do as much as this comes to, for any one that will
embrace his Alcoran. Oh, Christians, will not you do more for your Generation,
than the Children of this World for theirs. And it is to be desired, that the
Negroes may not learn to say their Catechism only by rote, like Parrots; but
that their Instructors, may put unto them such other Questions relating to the
points of the Catechism, that be their Answers, (at least of YES, or NO,) it
may be perceived, that they Know what they Say.

But it will be also needful and useful, to uphold a more particular Conference
often with the Negroes; and in conferring with them, to inculcate on them such
Admonitions of Piety; as may have a special tendency to Form and Mould their
Souls for the Kingdom of God.

Having told them, Who Made them, and Why He made them, and that they have
Souls, which will be Wretched or Happy forever, according as they mind
Religion; then tell them;

That by their sin against God, they are fallen into a dreadful condition.

Show them, That the Almighty God is Angry with them, and that, if they Die
under the Anger of God, they will after Death, be cast among Devils; and that
all the Stripes, and all the Wants, and all the sad things they ever suffered
in this World, are nothing, to the many Sorrows, which they shall suffer among
the Damned, in the Dungeon of Hell.

Tell them; That JESUS CHRIST is a Savior for them as well as others, and as
willing to save them out of their dreadful condition, as any others.

Show them, That JESUS CHRIST, who is both God and Man in One Person, came, and
Kept the Law of God, and then Offered up His Life to God, on the Cross, to make
amends for our Sin; and that JESUS CHRIST invites Them as well as others, to
Look to Him, and Hope in Him, for Everlasting Life; and that if they come to
JESUS CHRIST, they shall be as Welcome to Him, as any People; Though He be the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, yet He will cast a Kind Look upon Sorry
Slaves and Blacks that Believe on Him, and will prepare a Mansion in Heaven for
them.

Tell them; That if they Serve God patiently and cheerfully in the Condition
which he orders for them, their condition will very quickly be infinitely
mended, in Eternal Happiness.

Show them, That it is GOD who has caused them to be Servants; and that they
Serve JESUS CHRIST, while they are at Work for their Masters, if they are
Faithful and Honest Servants, and if they do cheerfully what they do, because
the Lord JESUS CHRIST has bid them to do it; and that, if they give themselves
up to JESUS CHRIST, and keep always afraid of Sinning against Him, it will not be
Long before they shall be in a most Glorious Condition; It cannot be Long before
they Die, and (...)! they shall Rest from all their Labors, and all their
Troubles, and they shall be Companions of Angels in the Glories of a Paradise.

Discourse with them, on these things, till their Hearts burn within them. In
Discourse with them, at length put it unto them;

Well; Do you desire to Know the Only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom He has
sent?

Is it your Desire, that JESUS CHRIST may Save you from the Guilt of Sin, and
the Curse of God?

Are you willing to put your self into the Gracious Hands of JESUS CHRIST, and
be Ruled by all His Holy Laws?

Do you wish that the Blessed Spirit of the Lord, may Enter your Hearts, and
make you Know and Love and Choose the things that please Him?

Who can tell, but that while you are propounding such things to the poor
Negroes, their conquered Souls may Consent unto them, and by that Consent open
a Well that shall Spring up, and Spread out, unto Everlasting Life?

But in a Special manner Teach them to Pray. Teach them and Charge them every
Day to fall down on their Knees before the Lord; with Supplications of this
Importance.

Heavenly Father; Give me thy CHRIST; Give me thy SPIRIT; Pardon my Sins; Make
me thy Servant; Bring me to Heaven. Amen. Or, As they get further on, they may
Pray after this Manner.

O Great GOD; Thou have made me, and all the World.

Make me truly Sorry for my Sinning against my Maker.

Let thy Glorious CHRIST Save me: and help me to Know, and to Take His Great
Salvation.

Teach me to Serve Thee, O Lord. And make me a Blessing unto those that have me
for their Servant.

Bring me to a part in Heaven among thy Children for ever more. Amen.

Perhaps, the LORDS-PRAYER, by this Paraphrase may be brought down unto some of
their Capacities.
[Our Father which art in the Heaven.] HEavenly Father. Thou art my Maker; Help
me to own thee as my Father: Pity me, Relieve me, as one of thy Children.
[Hallowed be thy Name.] Let me and all men Glorify thy Name; and let thy CHRIST
be Glorious and Precious to me, and to all the World. [Thy Kingdom Come.] Teach
me thy Laws; and cause me, and all men, to Love and keep those Lovely Laws.
[Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.] Give me to Do heartily all that
thou Command me to Do; Give me to Bear Patiently all that thou orderest me
to bear. And let me begin the Work of Heaven while I am on Earth. [Give us this
Day our Daily Bread.] Thou know what is Best for me; Lord, let me want
nothing that shall be good for me. [And Forgive us our Debts, as we Forgive our
Debtors.] I have Sinned against thee; O Pardon all my Sin, for the Sake of my
Savior. Do Good to them that have done Evil to me, and do not Leave me so much
as to wish Evil to them. [And lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from
Evil.] When I am Tempted to Sin, Oh, Let not the Temptation be too hard for me;
and Let not the Devil be my Master. [For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory for ever. Amen. O Lord, Every thing is at thy Dispose; Thou can
do every thing. Be merciful to me, and all the Glory of the Mercy shall be
thine for ever more. Amen.
We will now proceed unto our CATECHISMS.
A SHORTER CATECHISM; For the Negroes of a Smaller Capacity.
Quest. WHO made you and all the World?

Answ. The Great GOD made me, to Serve Him.

Q. Who Saves the Children of Men from all their Miseries?

A. JESUS CHRIST, who is both God and Man, Saves them that Look unto Him.

Q. What will become of you, when you Die?

A. If I Obey JESUS CHRIST, my Soul will go to the Heavenly Paradise. If I
continue Wicked, my Soul will be cast among the Devils.

A LARGER CATECHISM, for the Negroes of a bigger Capacity.
Q. WHO is that Great GOD, whom you and all Men are to Serve?

A. The Great GOD, is the Eternal Spirit, who Made every thing, and is every
where: And there is no God but He.

Q. How many Persons are there in the ONE GOD?

A. In the One GOD, there are Three Persons; The Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit.

Q. Where is the Rule, which God has given us to Serve Him?

A. The Rule to Serve God is in the Bible, and I must Labor to Know and Do,
what is in the Bible.

Q. What was our Condition, when God Made the first Man, at the Beginning of
the World?

A. God made One Man, and One Woman, Adam and Eve, in His own Image, Holy and
Righteous.

Q. Into what Condition are we now fallen?

A. Our first Parents did Sin against God, by Eating Forbidden Fruit, and made
themselves, and all their Children Miserable.

Q. What is the Misery of our present Condition?

A. My Heart is full of Sin; My life is full of Sir; I am under the wrath of
God for Sin; I am a Slave to Sin and Satan.

Q. Who is there to Save us from our Misery?

A. JESUS CHRIST is my Great Savior; and there is none but He to Save are.

Q. Who is JESUS CHRIST, Our Savior?

A. JESUS CHRIST is the Son of God, who took the Man JESUS, the Son of the
Virgin Mary, into One Person with Himself.

Q. What has JESUS CHRIST our Savior done for us?

A. JESUS CHRIST kept the Law of God, which we have not kept; He then Dyed for
us on the Cross; and Rose from the Dead, and went up to Heaven.

Q. What will JESUS CHRIST our Savior do for us, if we come to Him?

A. God will be my Friend, and will fit me for Heaven, and take me to Heaven,
if I Believe on JESUS CHRIST.

Q. How may we See that God is become our Friend, through JESUS CHRIST?

A. I shall be Sorry for my Sin, and I shall be afraid of Sinning any more, if
God receive me to His Mercy by JESUS CHRIST.

Q. Whom do you now choose to Serve?

A. My Savior shall be my Master; He is a Good Master; He has Bought me to
Serve Him; and He will make me a Child of God.

Q. If you Serve JESUS CHRIST, what must you do?

A. I must Love God, and Pray to Him, and Keep the Lord's Day.

I must Love all Men, and never Quarrel, nor be Drunk, nor be Unchaste, nor
Steal, nor tell a Ly, nor be Discontent with my Condition.

Q. If you desire to Obey JESUS CHRIST in this World, What will be your Portion
in another World?

A. If I am a true Servant of JESUS CHRIST, my Soul will go into a Blessed
Paradise when I die. My Body will be Raised from the Dead, at the Day of
Judgment. I shall then be Happy, with Angels, in the City of God for ever.

Q. What will become of them, who do not Obey the Lord JESUS CHRIST?

A. The Souls of the Wicked are thrown among Devils; and at the Day of
Judgment, JESUS CHRIST will Judge them to be cast into Everlasting Fire.

Q. What must you do, that you may Do Good, and come to Good?

A. I can of my self do nothing that is Good; But I will cry unto the Good
Spirit of God to help me.

ADDITIONALS.
I. THE TEN COMMANDMENTS, are a very Material Part of the Instruction to be
bestowed upon the Negroes. As soon as may be, they should be told, That the
Great GOD Spoke from Heaven, Ten Commandments. And that all Believers on JESUS
CHRIST, must Labor to Keep those Commandments, and be Troubled and Ashamed,
and beg Pardon for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST, if they break them.

Quest. WHAT is the First Commandment?

A Thou shall have no other Gods before Me.

Q What is the meaning of this?

A. I must Worship the only True God, (...) Him only.

Q. What is the Second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image.

Q. What is the meaning of this?

A. I must Worship God only in such Ways, as He Himself has appointed.

Q. What is the Third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain.

Q. What is the meaning of this.

A. I must make a Right Use of all those things, whereby God makes Himself
known unto us: and I must not Swear profanely.

Q. What is the Fourth Commandment?

A. Remember the Sabbath Day to Keep it Holy.

Q. What is the meaning of this?

A. I must not Work nor Play on the LORDS DAY, but Spend it in Works of
Religion.

Q What is the Fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and Mother.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A I must show all due Respect unto Every One; and if I have a Master or
Mistress, I must be very dutiful unto them.

Q. What is the Sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Kill.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A I must not hate nor hurt any One; I must use all Good Means to Preserve my
own Life, and the Lives of others.

Q. What is the Seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Commit Adultery.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. I must Shun all the Filthy Lusts of the Flesh; and if I be Married I must
be true to my Companion.

Q. What is the Eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Steal.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. I must not take any thing without Leave of the Right owner; And I must use
honesty both in getting what I may, and in spending what I have gotten.

Q. What is the Ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not hear False Witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. I must never tell a Ly; And I must be tender of the Good Name of Every One.

Q. What is the Tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Covet.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. I must be Patient and Content with such a Condition as God has ordered for
me.

II. IF the Negroes might Learn to Read the Sacred Scriptures, which make Wise
unto Salvation, Vast would be the Advantage thereof unto them. Until that might
be accomplished, would it not be Advantageous unto them, to make them Learn by
heart, certain Particular Verses of the Scriptures?

These, among the rest.

Psalm. 86.9. All Nations whom thou have made shall come and Worship before
thee, O Lord; and shall Glorify thy Name.

Joh. 3.16. God so Loved the World, that He gave His only Begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in Him, should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

Romans 14.10. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God, which brings Salvation has appeared unto
all men; Teaching us, that denying all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should
Live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, in this present World.

Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7, 8. Servants, Be Obedient unto them that are your Masters -- as
the Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the Heart; with Good Will,
doing Service as to the Lord, and not unto men; Knowing that whatsoever Good
thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord.

III. WHY should not the Negroes be taught, The Creed? In that which goes under
the Name of, The Apostles Creed, there are several Articles, which were
Successively introduced in Later Ages. The Articles more unquestionably derived
from the Apostles, made a Shorter Collection. Here you have it for them.

I Believe in God the Father, the Almighty.
And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord.
I Believe in the Holy Spirit;
The Resurrection of the Body:
And Life Everlasting. Amen.
IV. SOmetimes Negro-Children, are cast into our Families. If a Christian
Master or Mistress, will with all due Solemnity, Engage to bring up those
Children in Christianity, and to do their best that they shall be the Servants
of JESUS CHRIST, We will say, Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not
be Baptized, who have been Devoted unto the Service of the Glorious Lord, by
those who have the Disposal of them? Consider, Genesis 17.13.

However, it is to be hoped, that the Elder Servants as Black as they are, will
shortly be the Candidates of Baptism. And, As the Negroes grow ripe for
Baptism, it is fit the Doctrine and the Des^^^ of Baptism, should be thoroughly
Explained unto them. A brief Institution, shall here be tendered.

Q. Do you choose the Great GOD for your God?

A. Yes. I choose God the Father for my Father; I choose God the Son, for my
Savior; I choose God the Spirit for my Leader. And I Look for the Blessedness,
which He has Promised for His People in a better World.

Q. Do you Rely upon JESUS CHRIST alone, to bring you to Blessedness?

A. I Repair to JESUS CHRIST, Hoping in Him, to be made Righteous, and Holy,
and Happy.

Q. Do you heartily devote your selves to the Service of the Glorious Lord?

A. I Desire that I may Know the Lord, and Serve Him with a Perfect Heart, and
a Willing Mind.

Q. Is there any thing that you desire, as a Token of this?

A. I Desire to be Baptized.

Q. What is to be Signified, by the Baptism which you desire?

A. I would give my self up to the glorious LORD, whose Name is in Baptism to
be put upon me.

(...) would hope to have my Soul (...) from my Sin, by the Blood and the Grace
of the Lord.

I would Resolve to Serve the Flesh, and the World, and the Devil no more: and
no more Dirty my self with Sin, after I have been Washed for the Lord.

And I would Expect, that the Body thus Baptized, shall be Raised from the Dead
unto Everlasting Life.

James 5.20. He which converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save
a Soul from Death.

FINIS.

