The Second Part of the Mystry of Fox-Craft

Introduced with about Thirty Quotations truly taken from the Quakers Books,
and well attested by Men learned and Pious; proving all, and more than all the
Charges in F. Bugg's Bomb of half a Sheet, which Mr. Talbot reprinted and sent
to the Quakers at their General Meeting at Burlington in 1704. where he
appointed time and place for them to meet him, and promised in F. B 's stead to
prove the said Charges against them in the face of the Country. But they
finding their Cause would not bear that Test, refused to meet him; but have at
last published a bulky Book of 14 Sheets, entitled, The Bomb-Searcher, etc.
therein denying themselves to be guilty, as by the Bomb charged.

But it is herein Proved,

I. That the Bomb-Searcher (Caleb Pusey) and his Brethren who Approve his said
Book, are Possessed with a Lying Spirit. II. That they make it their whole
business to deceive. III. And that by their Denying, Excusing and Hiding their
Blasphemous Notions and Doctrines they are Self-Condemned.
(And therefore I design that this shall end the Controversy between Them and
Me.)

Concluded with a Postscript, Proving the Impossibility of Reconciling
Quakerism to Christianity, from the Writings of Robert Barclay, the Quakers
most Learned Apologist.

By Daniel Leeds.

A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, Reject,
knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being Condemned of
himself,

Tit. 3.10, 11. Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible
in New York. 1705

The 2d Part of the Great Mystery of Fox-craft.
The Quakers Contempt of the holy Scriptures, and Eralting their own Writings.
THe distinction between Moral and Christian, the making holy life Legal, and
faith in the History of Christ's outward manifestation, has been a deadly Poison
these later ages have been infected with, to the destruction of godly Living.
Quakerism a New Nickname, page 6. W. Penn.

No Command in Scripture is any further obliging upon ANY man, then as he finds
a Conviction on his Conscience, page 71.

And their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter --
Feeding upon the Letter, which is Death, which feeds you Serpents, Dogs and
Swine. Several papers, etc. by G. F. page 45 46.

G. Fox charges Chr. Wa^e with Blasphemy for affirming, that the Scriptures are
the Word of God. Great Mystery, by G. F. page 246.

Note, G. Fox says of his own writings, Friends, to you all, this is the Word
of the Lord, This is the Word of God. Several papers, page 60, 61, 62.

Their denial of the Trinity in a blasphemous manner.
WE need quote none but W. Penn to prove this, for the Quakers have plainly
expressed by his mouth what they hold concerning the Trinity, who calls the
Doctrine that God is One in Substance, but Three in Persons or Subsistences, an
impertinent distinction, a most absurd Blasphemy; and calls this Trinity a
Fiction. Sandy Foundation, page 12, 13.

Their denial of Jesus to be Christ the Son of God, and underval^ing his Person
and Suffering, etc.
THe seed of the Promise is an holy and spiritual Principle of Light, Life and
Power, that being received into the heart bruiseth the Serpents head. And
because the seed, which cannot be that Body, is Christ, as testifies the
Sciptures, etc. Christian Quaker, W. P. page 97, 98.

Christ, whose Person is above the Clouds, and a Christ within; but how provest
thou two such Christ's, says G. W. Truth defend. page 23.

Faith in a Christ without men, contrary to the Apostles doctrine (says G. W.)
page 65.

Christ's human Blood, or the Blood of his Humanity, the Apostle does not tell
us of, 1. Pet. 1. Christ's Blood is Spiritual (says G. W. page 66. 67.

The Light which every one has, that comes into the world, is sufficient to
salvation without the help of any other means or discovery: To say, otherways,
is contrary to Christ, (says G. F. Great Mystery, page 47.)

And they that professes a Christ without them, have a Christ without them,
and another Christ within them, here is two, etc. says G. F. p. 254.

If there be any other Christ but he that was Crucified within, he is a false
Christ. page 206.

The Devil was in thee [ Christoph. Wade] and thou says, thou art saved by
Christ without thee, and so have recorded thy self a Reprobate, etc. page 250.

Justification by the righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own
person, wholly without us; And boldly affirmed [by W. Penn] in the name of the
lord, to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an arm of the sea of Corruption, that
does now deluge the whole world. Serious Apol. by G. W. and W. P. p. 148.

But that the outward person [Jesus Christ] that Suffered was properly the son
of God, we utterly deny (says W. P. etc. page 146.)

W. Penn denis that Christ has made satisfaction for the sin of man, either as
he was God, or as he was Man, or as he was God and Man, Sandy Foundation etc.
page 20, 21.

The Apostles preached the Word nigh in the heart and mouth, so he did not
preach a visible Christ with flesh and bones, as you o^ Paul preached God that
made the world, not far from every one; but you preach a visible man with flesh
and bones, at a great distance, above, where the stars are* W. Baylyes works,
page 600.

For they [the disciples] loved his Person for the sake of the frame and
quality of the spirit that dwelt in him, or else what was his Person, being
mean and contemptible, to them more than another person? Let none mistake, I do
not slight it, nor the Person of any of his Brethren, etc. page 307.

It plainly appears that the Sufferings of the People of God [ viz. Quakers] in
this age is a Greater Suffering, and more unjust then in the days of Christ or
of the Apostles, or in any time since -- What was done to Christ was done by a
Law, and in great part by the due execution of a Law. Edward Buroughs works,
page 273.

Of their denial and Contempet of the Ordinances.
I Affirm, by that one Scripture [ Heb. 9.10.] Circumcision is as much in force
as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb, as Bread and Wine; they were both
Shadows and both Elementary, and perishible. And we can testify by the SAME
Spirit by which Paul renounced Circumcision, that they are to be rejected, as
not now required. Reas. against Railing by W. P. page 108, 109.

Their Pretense to Infallible Discerning, fi^less Perfection and Equality with
God.
NEither have you [Priests] the Word of God in your hearts, nor Christ, which
is Eternal and Infallible; all which the Quakers have to Judge Persons and
things. Great Mystery, by G. F. page 5.

The Quakers have a spirit given beyond all the Forefathers since the days of
the Apostles in the Apostasy, and they can discern who are Saints, who are
Devils, and who Apostates without speaking ever a word, they that be in the
power and life of truth. page 89.

G. Fox quotes his opponent, saying, Will a discerning of Gospel Mystrys, prove
a power to discern the state and condition of souls, what it shall be to all
eternity. After some words G. F. Answers, So who are come up into the Bishop,
Christ, they are one soul, they know the hand of God which the soul lives in
(which is the power) and so knows it from Eternity to Eternity. And so ye
Priests which do not discern the soul, and its state to Eternity, and from
Eternity, ye are not in the Mystery of the Gospel, which gives liberty to it --
And you five Priests have shamed your selves that do not know the soul from
Eternity to Eternity. page 229.

It is the Doctrine of Devils, that preaches, that men shall have sin, and be
in a War-fare, so long as they be on earth page 101.

The Quakers are in the Power of God, and in the Authority of the Lamb, above
all houses, and into houses creep not, but are UPON the Throne. p. 31.

For who comes to the spirit, and to Christ, comes to that which is perfect,
who comes to the kingdom of heaven in them, comes to be Perfect, yea, to a
perfect man, and that is above any degree. Great Mystery page 318.

G. Fox qutes his opponent saying, They cannot be perfect here or hereafter in
Equality, but only in Quality: He answers; Christ makes no distinction in his
words, but says, Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is, and be you
merciful, as he is. And as he is, so are WE; and that which is prefe^^ and
merciful as he is perfect and merciful, is in Equality with the same thing,
which is of God, and from him. Great Mystery page 282.

We, whose Names are underwritten, have at the request of Daniel Leeds,
carefully examined the foregoing Quotations, and do testify, That they exactly
agree with the Books out of which they are taken.

Samuel Miles, Evan Evans, John Talbot, Missionarys. Tho. Crawford,
Missionarys. Aeneas M"kenzie, Mis. George Ross, Mis. George Muirson, Mis. Thor.
Moore. Mis.
Note, I could bring three hundred Quotations, of these and such like Heresies,
as their denying the Resurrection of the Body that dies. Their denying, The
future Judgment, The locality of Heaven and Hell, etc. But my design is to be
compendious and short, as more suiting this time of day, Mankind inclining
rather to converse with the living than the dead; for long discourse^ of
Controvesy of this nature are become tedious, as I see by C. Pusseys books,
which have therefore exchanged the Monthly Meeting for the Tobacco Shop.

Besides, The Author of the Snake, etc. has effectually handled this
Controversy, and mortally wounded the ill shaped Brood of their monstrous
Heresies, so that my doing any thing of this kind, would have been needless if
the works of that worthy Author were as easy to come at in these parts;
therefore I come briefly to the matter.

The Bomb searcher, page 9. Before he begins with the charges, he takes up the
last thing in the bomb to answer first, which is a harmless word of Mr.
Talbot's, who had called F. Bug, HONEST Francis. But this they cannot bear:
What! call him Honest whom they say is a Devil Incarnate. This is unsufferable.
Therefore C. P. musters up his forces to prove F. Bugg dishonest, the sum of
which is this, That whereas he the said F. B. having obliged himself to give
his Daughter a Portion and his Wife a Joyn^ure, but finding himself in debt,
could not perform his obligation to his Wife and Daughter, but honestly sold
his Estate to pay his debts. Behold, what bad luck Friend Caleb has: Sure his
Wits were in his Mill-hopper when he brought this to prove F. B. dishonest;
for, this proves him to be of an honest mind. Nay, but hold, the Quakers know
he is a very Devil, for he writes against them, and they have the spirit of
discerning [as you see before] G. F. says, They can discern who are Devils, and
who Saints without speaking a word. But have they not as bad luck here too? is
not G. F. a deceiver in saying this? Yes, verily for Fox himself did not
discern his intimate friend Ezekiel Woolley, at whose house he used to lodge in
London, till it was told to George, that he the said Woolley had got his
Neighbor, the Watch-makers Wife with child.

Next, comes a matter of weight and seriousness, S. Eccles had said, That the
Blood of Christ was no more than the Blood of another Saint; and C A^kins said,
They [the Quakers] deny our imagined God above the stars. As to the first of
these, C. P. says, G. W. has disowned, and therefore calls it inveterate hatred
in us to quote it again.

Answ. This is a piece of Fox-Craft in C. P. yea, great deceit; For G. W. does
not disown it, but contrary ways, makes an ungodly defense of it in his Book,
Light and Life, page 58. [which page he entitules, The Blood of the
New Covenant spiritual] where he argues. That the blood outwardly shed by
wicked hands, was not the Blood or Life of Christ; for (say he) it is not in
being; and therefore renders him a dead Christ. Thus Blasphemously does he
defend this very expression of S. Eccles, instead of disowning it* I have this
Book of G W. by me, to show to all that doubt of the truth of it; in which Book
G. W. indeed speaks highly of what they call their spiritual Blood of their
Christ or Light within. But [as you see before] he rejects the human Blood of
Christ. G. Fox says, Christ in the Male and Female is the seed, and the seed
Christ -- And the Blood of the seed cleanses from sin, Gr. Mystery page 299,
281. And this seed W. P. denis to be the Person born of the Virgin, but says,
it is a principle of Light in man [as you see before] so that it is this imagined
inward Blood and not the human Blood, that C. P. also means; by which he
deceives the unwary Reader: Therefore he ought to make public satisfaction for
offering both by a lie and Jesuitical meaning thus to betray the ignorant and
simple hearted into this blasphemous notion of the Blood of Christ.

But, Secondly, As to C. A's denying the imagined God above the Sars, C. P.
says, They have disowned both the passage and the Author. But this also is a
piece of Fox-Craft; for they do not disown the same Doctrine, (as you see
before) W. B. asserts the very same Doctrine, which the Quakers own and
Justify. They did indeed disown the said Atkins after he was hanged for
felony, and I never heard they disowned him before; for they owned him after
he had lain with Simons his Maid in Norwich Goal, because he confessed the fact;
for he continued a traveling Preacher afterward. But this Bomb-Searcher would
make his Reader believe that they disowned Atkins because of that doctrine;
which is deceit, and still confirms F. B's Charge, That the Quaker-Writers and
Preachers make it their whole business to deceive.

Now, before we come to the Charges in the Bomb, I take notice, the Quakers in
page 6. of the Preface, confess, That if we can prove those Charges, they own
themselves neither fit for Religious nor Civil Societies. Though this be a mere
vaunt, a sham, and they intend it for nothing else but Mockery; yet they are
hereby manifestly Self-Judged and Self-condemned; for they know that not only
these, but many more as erroneous Charges has been often proved upon them, so
as that they never dare venture to refer the cause between them and their
Adversaries to indifferent men.

He enters, page 14. upon the first charge of their Contempt of the holy
Scriptures, which is fully proved in the Quotations, page 2, 3 for though I
have not now the books by me that calls them Beastly Ware, an Idol, etc. yet to
call faith in the history of Christ's Manifestation ( viz. the New Testament) a
deadly Poison, as W P. does; This I take to be as great a contempt as can be
put upon the Scriptures.

But here C P. to defend or excuse their Rage against the Scriptures, says That
G. F. said that a Priest said, that the Letter of the Scripture is God. But I
cannot think that the Quakers heartily believe that this is not a lie of th^^r
Fox. For they know full well, that there has been many Proofs brought (not only
by others, but some by me) showing that it was his constant practice to abuse
and belly the Books and Sayings of his Opponents* And the Quakers in their
Answers to those proofs, have not yet offered to disprove one of them, and yet
they will insist upon this, which though it looks like a lo^d Lie, yet they know
we cannot disprove it, because Fox quotes no man's Book for it.

But suppose that some mad man or other had said the letter of the Scripture is
God, does this justify Fox in calling them Serpents Meat, etc. and yet call his
own Writings The Word of God? Friend Caleb seems here to be got into a vein of
Jesting or Comical dissemulation; for he would have it, that it is only the Ink
and Paper, the Letter that they quarrel at, as if their own Books were not made
of Paper and Letter as well as the Bible. But Fox says, Feeding upon the
Letter, which is Death, which feeds you Serpents, Dogs and (...). Now they know
that no man eats the Ink and Paper, but it is the Doctrine they feed on; and
therefore this stills shows their design is only to deceive. I have showed in
this years Almanac from matter of fact, that they still hold the same Opinion
of the scriptures, even while with the next breath they will say, they believe
them of divine Authority.

Secondly, Their blasphemous denial of the holy Trinity is plain page 2, 3.
whereby the Quakers excluded themselves from being Protestant Dissenters; They
can have no benefit of the Act of toleration that denis the Trinity of three
Persons in the Godhead, as it is declared in the 39 Articles [which every true
Quaker does deny] And this the last page of that Law expressly declares.

Thirdly, That they deny Jesus to be Christ the Son of God, this is proud by
almost every Quotation on that head at page 3. And yet this Bomb-^ercher has
the impudence to say, this is an abominable, a notorious falsehood and brings
long quotations to prove the contrary. But here lies a Snake in the Grass, as I
shall discover anon, and that there is need of large railing, to hide their
vile Opinion on this point.

Fourthly, Their neglect and contempt of the Ordinances is showed but short in
page 3. because their practice proves it without Quotations. But if they are
not content with this, they may look in News out of the North, page 4. where Fox
calls Baptism and Christ's Ordinance, the Sacrifice of Cain. And page 14. what
the Apostles calls the Table and Cup of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10.21. Fox calls, The
Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils.

Fifthly, That they undervalue the Sufferings of Christ, by affirming, their
own Sufferings to be greater and more unjust. This is plainly said at page 3
and is not denied, but excused by this Bomb-S^earcher.

The Sixth Charge being proved in the first, I Will say no more of it, seeing he
is silent in it.

Thus these Charges in the Bomb are briefly, yet fully proved by the Quotations
before, Notwithstanding the great noisy long Preachments and railing in the
Bomb-Searcher to drive his Reader from the Scent o^ those vile Errors. But
there is need of it for that purpose.

I shall now for confirmation, enlarge a little upon their denial of Christ,
and their Arts to hide their monstrous Notion of him.

The Quakers having rejected the outward Christ and his Blood, as having no
faith therein, but only in what they call their Christ or Light within (...)
place Salvation there, and in the Blood of this Light within, as is before
showed; which coming to be publicly noted, looked so odious and Antichristian,
that they, (to avoid the odium) have Jumpt into tricks and arts of the ancient
Heretics, to deceive by double meanings, viz. to make seeming Christian
Confessions, but mean not a word of it, as Christians mean. They own a Personal
Christ, and a man Christ without them, but mean it only of what they call the
Light within all men, which they say it without them also of T. Ellwood in page
97. of his answer to G. Keiths Nar. is as plain in this as any of them. Christ
was truly man (says he) before he appeared in the outward Body, and that not
only in his People, but out of or without them also; How long before? Even from
the beginning (says he) so W. P. denis that Person born of a Virgin to be the
seed promised, Genesis 3. But says, it is a principle of Light in the heart, (as
you see before.) Thus the Quakers Christ was a Man not only before he was made
of a Woman, but even before any woman in the world was made. This is new
doctrine, and is their foundation Error, whereon they build all the rest, and
whoever will take the pains to read G. Fox's Great Mystery, page 246, 249, 205,
211. will there see that nothing will serve him but for the Light within to be
whole Christ, God and Man, Flesh, Body, Blood and Bones, and denis that Christ
has any Body that is absent from his People, and is now in the Presence of his
Father in Heaven without them; where he also holds, That it was God the Father
that was born of the Virgin, or took human Nature.

I have this Great Mystry by me, and would gladly show it to all who doubt of
the truth of these Things.

Now to discover the Snake aforesaid, you must note, the Quakers have many
times been urged and provoked to let the world know whether they believe in a
Christ without them, now in haven, and whether they believe Christ is now and
forever to come really a Man, in true and proper humane Nature without all
other men? But they would never answer, Yea, to these Queries; but go round
about 'em, and on every side, and seem to confess all, and much more, and yet
mean nothing but to deceive. Thus this Bomb-Searcher, page 27. of the last part
of his Book, to the first Query [ Do you believe in a Christ without you, etc?]
says, if we mean that Christ is in heaven without us, as to his outward
personal persence, and in us by his spiritual appearance, it is their faith, as
well as ours.

Now observe, the deceit of these sincere Quakers. The Query is not whether
they believe Christ is in heaven without them (though even this they do not
believe, but in their meaning aforesaid) But the Query is, Do you believe IN a
Christ without you, etc. ( viz. believe to be saved by a Christ without you)
This was the Query, and here it is that he deceives his unwary Reader, by
hiding his head in a ho^e, like a Woodcock, and thinks no body sees him; he
might have spared his long preachments of Quotations (full of such deceit as
this) that he there brings from their Books to prove that they can say, Yea to
those Queries, as well as we; for only these three simple Letters YEA, honestly
expressed, would have done it, without all this. O but then they are sensible it
would have given the lie to their former Doctrine before quoted, which they
say, is their faith still, viz. That faith in Christ without m^n is contrary to
the Apostles doctrine. And that the outward Christ is not the proper Son of
God. And That Christ without is the false Christ. And that they are Reprobates
that say they are saved by Christ without them. And much more to the same tune,
which they must disown if ever they come to own Christianity.

But in short; their Disobedience to the Commands and Ordinances of the outward
Christ is sufficient, without Quotations to prove that they deny him. For they
cannot show wherein they obey so much as one command of Christ, any more then
the Jews do, who also deny him.

Nay, I could show wherein the Jews own more of Christ then the Quakers own;
for the Quakers would make nothing of Christ but moral virtues. What is Christ
(says W Penn) but Meekness, Justice, Mercy, Patience, etc. Address to
Protestants, page 119. where also he declares moral men to be Christians; and
you see before, he calls it a deadly Poison to make any distinction between
Christian and Moral. Thus the Quakers are forced upon this shift to allow moral
heathens, Turks and Jews to be Chaistians, because they have no other way in
the world to prove themselves Christians; there is only this difference, the
Jews and Infidels are the better, as being more free from deceit, because they
make no pretense to Christianity, and the Quakers do.

But how strange is their delusion, who cannot see that at this rate there was
no need at all of the holy Apostles being sent to the Jews and Heathens to
preach the Gospel of Peace and Salvation by Christ crucified. Nor indeed could
there be any need of Christ's coming, and being crucified. But the Quakers
^ainly say as much, for their Books tell us, that his coming in the flesh, and
being crucified was but a figure, and for our example, as I have formerly
showed.

Lastly, Why will this Bomb-Searcher so dissemble, as to imitate the Christian
in owning (as before) that Christ is personally without us, and in us by his
spiritual influence, seeing in their Books they call it nonsense? Christ or the
Spirit in his people, the beams of Christ without us, is nonsense, so G.
Whitehead, Light and Life, page 26. I say, why will he thus make it his
business to deceive in every thing?

An Appendix, with some Gleanings.
I Shall in the first place insert a large Quotation from W. (...) Sandy
Foundation (before Quoted, for their denial of the Trinity) being a precious
Book with the Quakers, which was wrote against the Trinity, and Christ's
satisfaction, which Book they now keep up in England, for fear of the Law and
outward Powers; But here, having the power in their own hands, they are bold
with it; and as if they would bid defiance to the Law, as well as to
Christianity, they direct (page 76) where it is publicly to be seen at
Philadelphia, and recommend it to be read by sober persons; wherefore to show
further of the arts used by these Quakers, for the destruction of Christianity,
I also recommend to every considerate Reader what here follows, truly quoted
out of that Book.

Sandy Foundation, page 16, 20, 21, 22 He begins, page 16. thus; The vulgar
Doctrine of Satisfaction, dependent on the second person of the imagined
Trinity, Refuted, etc.

Note, Then he goes on some pages to refute it, and brings his reasons to prove
that Jesus Christ did not make satisfaction to God for our sins. And in page
20. he calls this following an Absurdity, viz.

I. That the Finite and Impotent Creature is more capable of extending mercy
and forgiveness than the Infinite and Omnipotent Creator -- For admitting God
to be a Creditor (says he) or he to whom the Debt should be paid, and Christ he
that pays it on the behalf of man, the Debtor, the Question will arise, Whether
he paid the debt, as God, or Man, or both?

Not as God, (says he.)

II. Because if Christ pays the debt as God, then, the Father and Spirit being
God, they also pay the debt.

Not as man (says he.)

III. The Justice offending being infinite, his satisfaction ought to bear a
proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ, as Man, could never pay, he being
FINITE, and from a finite cause, could not proceed an infinite effect; for so
man may be said to bring forth God.

Not as God and Man.

IV. For where two Mediums or Middle Propositions are singly inconstent with
the nature of the end for which they were at first propounded, their
Conjunction does rather augment, than lessen the difficulty of its
accomplishment.

V. But Admitting one of these three Mediums possible for the payment of an
infinite debt, yet pray observe, the most unworthy and ridiculous consequences
that will attend the impossibility of Gods pa^doning sinners without a
satisfaction.

VI. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own [debt] it follows, that in
the payment of his own, the case still remains equally grievous, since the debt
is not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only, and by consequence we
are no better provided for salvation then before, owing that now to the Son
which was once owing to the Father. Thus William Penn, with much more to the
same purpose.

Now I desire to observe three things from the Quotation First, We see he denis
that Christ either did or could pay our Debt, or make satisfaction to God for
man's sin; which is horrible to think on; Yea, he argues expressly against any
sort of Satisfaction made by Christ for our sins, as a thing Ridiculous and
Nonsense, as every reader may see.

Secondly, In page 62. I find this Bomb-Searcher puffing out a bag of wind at
me (as his term is) for adding the word [ Debt] to W. P's last Paragraph
between the Crotchets. But it being nine years since I wrote that Book, he
mentions, I know not whether I added the word or took it so from another
impression, of W. P's however, now I own I have added it, and here offer to
stand or fall by the Judgment of all good Christians, whether I have done ill
therein, or not; yea, let any Quaker show, if he can, wherein it alters the
sense of the passage. I say, it does not: it is as blasphemous without it, as
with it; So all to whom I have showed it, say that W. Ps words bear the same
sense either with or without that word [ Debt] It Is only more plain with the
wore Debt, to mean capacities. For it is nothing else but the Debt of our sins
that W. P. there treats on. And Christ did pay a Debt that was not his own, but
ours, otherwise we had perished eternally: This is Christianity, contrary to
W.Ps. Antichristian Notion, That Christ could not pay what was not his own.
And I would desire the Quakers to tell in their next print, What it was that
Christ was to pay, or did pay, of his own, as W. P. there words it (seeing he
denis that he paid any thing for us) and why they were so civil as not to say a
word to that other agreeable passage which I quoted from R. Huberthorns works,
page 20. where he affirms, Christ was capable of Repentance. This they thought
was easiest answered by silence. But pray tell us, what had Christ to repent
of, or what did Christ owe to God of his own? And whether these sayings do not
smell too rank of blasphemy with good Christians, though by deceitful Arts you
may hide it from your Followers:

But though C. P. spends several pages to Banter me for adding this word [ Debt]
yet within 4 pages he himself is guilty of the same thing, viz. of adding words
to a passage of W. Ps and that to alter the sense too, as I shall show next
page hereafter.

Thir^, Observe, that I have several times printed that W. P. in his Sandy
Foundation terms Christ, as Man, A FINITE IMPOTENT CREATURE; But C. Pusey in
his Book, Satan's Ha^binger, page 31. boldly denysit, in these words, I do
affi^m there is no such saying or Irreverent Expression in the whole Book^ W.
P's, No, neither Expressly nor Implicity, nor so much as Consequentially. Note,
These are his words; therefore I entreat the Reader to look back to page 10.
where Finite Impotent Creature is expressly and in page 10. line 25 he affirms
the same implicitly and consequentially, and in part expressly too, in these
words, Which JESUS CHRIST as Man, could never pay, he BEING FINITE. Note, here
he implies that Christ was too weak, too Impotent to make infinite
satisfaction, he being Finite; And a man that is Finite, is consequentially a
Creature. Now since it appears that W. P. does say it Implicitly and
Consequentially and [at least] in part Expressly too; and yet C. P. denis it to
be said any of these three ways, he ought therefore to make Public
satisfaction for this wretched Abuse, this double falsehood, especially seeing I
have more then once in print offered to make this very Passage as the touch
stone of Trial between his writings and mine, that if 4 or 6 indifferent men
Judge it to be as he says, I would burn my Books, or what else those men should
assign me to do. But if they found it as I say, he should do the like. This, I
say, I have offered, but could never bring him to it. And yet is he so
shameless, as still to ^ssert the same thing against me, and call on me for
satisfaction for abusing W. Pen^

Now I come to page 66. where I find C. P. guilty of the same thing whereof he
accuses me but just before, viz. he adds a word to that Passage of W. P.
before quoted in Quaker^sm a New Nick, page 6. for he makes it run thus, Faith
in the History of Christ's outward Manifestation [Christianity] has been a
deadly poison, etc. The word [ Christianity] he adds, and says it should be so
by the Table of Errata, which made me look into that Table, but there is no
such direction there, as all may see, who have that book: therefore this is
falsehood and deceit, such as his Friend G. Whitehead seems to be ashamed to
act; for I look upon G W. to have twice the wit of C P. for deceit, yet he in
his Book, Truth and Innocence, page 54. vindicates this Passage of W. P. as it
is, without adding the word [ Christanity] he was more honest then this
Bomb-Searcher, for he found no need of it. But C. P. goes on till he also
thrusts in the word [ only] and now it is pretty handsomely dressed, and runs thus,
Making faith [only] in the history of Christ [Christanity] has been a deadly
poison. And now, forsooth, W. P. and St. Paul are fit company, and both of a
mind. W. P. is not without good Company (says he) for he has Paul on his side.
And to prove that St. Paul says the same with W. P. he quotes Romans 1 8. and
8.13. Your faith has been spoken of throughout the world; If ye live after the
flesh ye shall dye; but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye
shall live. Behold! are not his Wits got again into his Mill-Hopper? for are
these words of St. Paul any thing like that doctrine of W P? O miserable shift!
to defend their vile stuff, rather then confess and repent!

Note, he calls on me for satisfaction, because the word [ Debt] was added, as
aforesaid, though between Crotchets, only to make the passage more intelligible
to mean readers. But let him give satisfaction for adding those words on
purpose to alter W. P's sense, though he has mist of his purpose; for let him
take it as he has mended it, yet the making faith [ only] in the history of
Christ [ Christanity] cannot be a deadly poison; I am sure no true Christian
dare say it.

But this Bomb-Searcher is Jack on both sides, for as here he adds words, so I
find (in page 8. of the last part of his book) he takes words out of a passage
of G. Fox, where G. F. says, He that has the same Spirit that raised Jesus
from the dead, is equal with God. Now Friend Caleb is for leaving out the words
[ he that hath] so then it runs thus, The same spirit that raised Jesus, is
equal with God, which is all one as to say, God is equal to God. This he makes
to the size of G. F's Divinity, viz. to teach the Christan World, that God was
equal to God.

Well, seeing C. P. has so good a hand at mincing and mending blasphemy, there
is just such another piece of work for him to mend of the same G. F's it is in
the last quotation. page 4. upon that Text, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is. And [says Fox] as he is, so are WE, and that which is perfect as he
is perfect, is in Equality, etc.

Now it is but taking off the first six words [ as he is, so are we] and then it
will run thus [That which is perfect as he is, is in Equality,] etc. And so
it is as cleaverly mended as that before, and is just as good sense. Or if he be
disposed to make his Reader merry by mending it any other way, we will not only
hear him, but also help him to more such Jobs of work, which by that time he
has finished, we hope to see the Quakers proud imagination of a sinless
perfection and Equality with God to tumble down a pace

In page 72. I find he is still washing the Blackemore white, viz he would clear
the Quakers from that vile Contempt of the holy Bible, in a Passage brought
against it by Jos. Coal, viz. How deplorable a thing is it (says he) to see
such hypocritical intruders ( viz. Protestant Ministers) stand in a Pulpet with
such a brazen faced Book as is their unjust corrupt and perverse Bible in their
hands.

Note, here J. C. in the first place (and then the other Quakers who again
reprinted it since J C's death) joins with the most profane Papist thus to
blaspheme our Bible. For in page 40. Coal declares positive, That it does not
concern him to answer it. No, he brings it as an Arrow from the Papists Quiver,
and shoots it at the Bible, and then leaves it to the Protestants to think what
they please of it. And yet they would seem now to be ashamed of it, but will
not blame their Prophet J. C. and the other Quakers for several times Printing
it against our Ministers and the Bible, which still shows they only design to
deceive.

I Now come to the last part of his Book, being his Reply to the Mystery of
Fox-Craft, and find in page 6. that he says, G. Fox did not assume to himself
the compiling of that Book called, The Battledoor of the interpretation of
about thirty Languages, but that it was J. Stubs and B. Furley that put G.
Fox's Name to the several pages of that Book.

Note, this still confirms and discovers it to be a Cheat put upon the World;
for else why should another man put his Name to what he is not the Author of,
nor does not understand? Thus it comes out by little and little; for it being
found out that Fox had not the gift of Tongues, as the poor Quakers to my
certain knowledge (I for one) were made to believe; he is therefore forced to
this half confession, that though Fox did it not, yet that it was done however by
the Quakers, i. e. Stubs and Furley. But this is also a cheat or lie, for they
hired a Jew to do the greatest part of it, or procure it to be done, and gave
him eighty Pounds in Money for his pains, and there was also twelve bottles of
Wine given over and above to make the Jew and his associates drink. And here
the Fox is found out in his silly craft in preaching down the Wisdom and
Learning of the world, and yet deceitfully made use of it to raise his own fame.

In page 14. he finds a real fault in my Book the date of the year of the
dispute of G. F is printed 1699 instead of 1659. so in my this years Almanac
John Benn^t is printed for John H^lliard, which are escapes of the Press, and
C. P's. Books are incident thereto as well as mine.

In the same page he brings on the Oath of Abjuration, by which the Quakers of
the Council and Assembly of New Jersey engaged to Lord Cornbury to defend the
Queen and her Successors to the utmost of their power against all their
Enemies, and that as defend is commonly understood too; and yet, at the same
time declared they could neither fight nor pay toward it, i. e. neither do it
in Person nor Estate.

Now I desired him to tell me how the Quakers could do this, and promised him a
reward if he could tell me; But I find it has driven him into a Net. He says,
page 15. he is no way obliged to tell me how. No, he is not obliged; Why?
because he nor all the Quakers in the world have not art enough to do it. And
thus they are confounded, being self condemned.

And whereas I had showed how binding and positive the Act of Abjuration was
made, and the Quakers had made a Proviso to make it all void, therefore he
argues that they (the Quakers) do in that no more then is common for Kings and
Parliments, to do [No, they have done no more] For he says, Kings, Paliaments,
etc. often in their Laws, after positive commandings, make particular Proviso's
for mitigating, etc. Note, Here they must set themselves up tantamount with
Kings and Parliaments, and because the Queen and Parliament had made no Proviso
in that Law, therefore the Quakers may do it. Why? because it is common for
Kings, etc. to do it. This shows the height of the sphere wherein these Saints
imagine themselves to move, even to be Controulers of the Laws of Kings and
Parliaments, at least here they would be, and this they have declared to be
their Right and Heirship, as I have else where showed.

His insinuating, That I have broke my Oath, as a Councillor, in publishing it,
and that the Governor is concerned to take notice of me. That is, my printing
how the Quakers had taken this Abjuration Oath, which was done in the face of
Country and Coffee-House News the same week, he would have to be a breaking my
Oath as a Councillor. This only bewrayes the persecuting spirit; it will show
its grining Teeth sometimes. I pray God keep them from having power to bite me
as they did poor Banks, one of their Opposers, who they caught carrying his
goods on horses through Pensilvania, and cast him into Philadelphia Prison, and
took his Goods from him, even his whole estate.

Next, comes on their Reply to what I asserted, how some Quakers near
Burlington took up arms on a report that a party of French were near. And they
bring long certificates and denying the matter, as if they were mumbling of
thistles. And though they quibble, and are in some things Comical, intimating
that their Guns and other Weapons that they carried were only to scare folk,
and to hurt no body, and that they fight only with spiritual Weapons, etc. yet
because they deny not the thing in substance, as charged, and having spoke to
it in my Almanac, I therefore dismiss this head, with only giving a quotation
from the great Fox himself, showing what they intended against worldly Powers,
when time serves, viz.

Sound the Trumpet, Sound an Alram, call up to the Battle, gather together for
destruction, draw the Sword, hew down all fruitless Trees that cumber the
ground, hew down all false Justice, which is not Justice; hew down all the
Powers of the earth, cleanse the land from all filthiness; purge from the
dross, the filth and corruption; slay Baal, ^aalam must be slain, and all the
Hirlings turned out of the Kingdom, who have pretended that God sent them; the
Sword of the Lord is drawn against you all, Woe and Misery to all ye Priests, ye
blind Priests. See News out of the North, page 31. 32. 1654.

Note, Some may say, here is bloody work, had it gone on, and Oliver turned
Quaker. But let us not mistake, did they not mean all this to be Spiritual, and
Spiritual Weapons?

I Answer; No; for in page 19. the Interpretation is plain So you must be cut
down (says Fox) with the same Power that cut down the King (meaning K. Charles
1.) who reigned over the Nations, whose Family was a nursery for Papists and
Bishops, etc. Therefore I hope they will not say the Executioner was all
Spirit, he had also flesh and bones; nor that the Block was a Spirit, nor the
Ax a Spirit.

Next, as to Magistracy, which they ever accounted a cumbersom Tree, and
therefore hear what they intend against it, page 20.

Sing all ye Saints ( viz. Quakers; for none else will have cause to sing) Clap
your hands and be glad, for the Lord Jehovah will reign; And the Government
shall be taken from you pretended Rulers, Judges, Justices, Lawyers and
Constables; all this Tree must be cut down, etc. If you ask, By what power? The
answer is ready, page 19. So you must be cut down by the same Power that cut
down the King, who reigned over the Nation, etc.

Note, This may be compared with what I have (in print) formerly showed how
that their chief Prophets have asserted the Right and Heirship of the Quakers
to all the Kingdoms and Dominions under the whole Heavens, and that their King
(the Light within) may Command them to fight for it, though, they say, they
believe he will not yet make use of them in that way, not for the present.

In page 21. he begins to muster up a troop of falsehoods against me, every one
of which returns upon his own head. As for instance; I had said, page 5. of
Mystery of Fox-Craft, That we see by G Fox's first Letter, he could not write
the date of the year. Now this C. P. says is false. But I will let the Reader
see it is true; for that which Fox writes for the date of the year is thi^ 16^9.
Here let all men judge whether it does not appear by this that Fox did not know
how to write the date of the year. Now when this Bomb-Searcher has made me
Satisfaction for this abuse, I will show him wherein he is as false in every
one of the rest; for to what edification can it be to make Replies to such a
profuse Scribler, to such inconsiderable Lies? But this is his method
throughout, as if he were possessed with the Spirit of Baal^ two lying Prophets.

I had told him how he copyed after the London Quakers, in his answers to me;
Therefore that he may make a Book of something, he writes several pages to show
that I have also copyed after the Author of the Snake, G. K. etc. Alas for him!
have I not told him, that I cannot do better than to follow the example of good
men. But for a Quaker to copy after other men is Conjuration, by their own
doctrine; for G. F in Saul^ Errand, page 7. says, What is not spoken from the
mouth of God, is Conjuration. Therefore if he had no where copyed after others
(as I would show he has, if it would edify) yet he is still as much a Conjurer,
if all he has written be not immediately from the mouth of God; and that it is
not, I have sufficiently showed, unless from the mouth of the God of lies. And
thus this Conjurer imploys his time to set up a man of straw, that he may have
something to fight against

In the Margent of the Mistry of Fox-Craft, page 4 there is a touch of the
uncleanness of their Preachers; therefore to be even with us, he tell me, page
21. that if it was their way, they could also calumniate some Clergymen among
us for Miscarriages (and then instances Rode-Island Minister) But thanks his
God, that has taught them otherways. Behold, the deceit, the confusion of
this; for here even with the same breath he throws a secret calumny on
Rode-Island Minister, and yet says, it is not their way, their God has taught
them otherways. This shows what sort of a God it is that has taught them, even
the God of lies

But by the way, let me tell these Quakers, That the Clergy and
Quaker-Preachers are under different Circumstances: The Clergy know themselves
(and ALL men) to be frail sinners, often drawn by Temptations into sin, and
therefore find a continual need of praying to God for Pardon, upon Repentance.
But this the Quaker-Preachers disclaim, they are two proud. W. Penn mocks at
our Liturgy for having a confession of sin in it. And you see before that G. F.
calls it the doctrine of Devils to acknowledge a being in a warfare while we be
on earth; Nay, he declares, That they (the Quakers) are Perfect in Equality
with God (as you see before) This is a desperate and deplorable state for poor
mortals to be possessed with: It Is the height of Lucifers Pride. Therefore it is
upon this account, that we sometimes expose their failings, to show them their
sins; for there is no other way to humble them. But if they would come down
upon the level with other mortals, to own themselves sinners, 1 John 1.8, 9.
and pray for pardon; I should then think it a great evil to expose the private
failings of any of them.

But as to his thanking God that has taught them otherways than to calumniate
people, or publish their Miscarriages; here he further shows himself to be
wretchedly false, and that in the very next page before, where he casts a ^^se
and lying calumny on our Burlington Magistrates, insinuating that they made men
drunk to make them swear falsely. This way of the Quakers to wound Peoples
Reputations, is inhumane and base, in that they do it secretly in the dark
(where men have not the opportunity to defend themselves) and then to act the
hypocrite in saying, God has taught them otherways

La^ly, Whereas he banters me for writing ill of some who are long since dead
and he hopes at rest with the Lord, But are not the Quakers guilty of this* Yes
they have done it with a Vengeance, and without any cause too; (...) I will
give from W. P's Guide Mistaken, page 18. where he (...) ^^eadfully sentences
all the Clergy alive and dead for Ages past. (...) (says he) have been s^
universally, through AGES, the very Ba^e (...), as that abominable Tribe, for
whom the Theater of Gods most (...) is reserved to Act their ETERNAL TRAGIDY
upon -- (...) for them but Woes and Plagues, who have made drunk the (...) etc.
Serious Apology, page 156. where he also says, That if they should treat that
^ccursed stock o^ Hirelings (the Clergy) ten thousand times more s^a^^^y, (...)
had been but enough, etc.

Thus after he has Damned all the Clergy, not only of the present Age, but
through Ages past, and that universally too, in as dreadful words as can be
uttered, he is sorry he cannot do it in words ten thousand times worse; for he
declares they deserve it, even these Clergymen who many Thousands of them were
doubtless at rest with God long before W. P. or his Quake^is^ was born into the
world. And yet, these Quakers will make demure mouths at us, and tell us, it is
not their way, their God has taught them otherways; yea, even thisself same W.
P. in his Reas. against Rai^ page 163. declares, That he would not for more
worlds, than there are stars in the firmament, so voilate the Laws of Charity,
as to speak ill of the deceased; no, not their deceased Opposers. And thus they
show us what a lying God they are taught by.

Therefore I must now say to this Bomb-Searcher, C. P. as their own Prophet E.
Buroughs says to his Adversary in page 148. of his works, And as to the rest
of thy book, which I have not meddled with, thus much I say of it, I suppose,
you will confess, it was given forth by one Spirit, and it is proved, some of
it is given forth by a Lying Spirit, then let the Reader judge what the rest
can be.

Thus, to be measured by the Rule of one of their chief Prophets, they must
not, they cannot deny, especially it being offered and referred to; by one,
who, I am sure, is their well-wishing Friend,

Daniel Leeds.
October 12. 1705.
Postscript.
THe learned Robert Barclay, whose Apology the Quakers have revised, amended
and reprinted in great Numbers (and given of them to the Nobility, Gentry and
Clergy of England, about eight or ten Thousand) as their Standard, instead of
the Works of their FOX-Apostle, which I hear they have let fall, after they
were upon the Stocks, as if they would (to save whole their Infallibility,
silently slip by the grossest of their Blasphemy and Nonsense, and shape it up
in a more artificial Trim, as the Proverb says, Older and Wiser.

But yet, I must here let them know, that their learned Barclay's Writings
afford us sufficient Proof of the Impossibility of Reconciling Quakerism to
Christianity. The Author of the Snake, etc. page 183, 185. of his second,
Defense, gives us a notable Instance about his confounding Justification and
Sanctification, making them both to be one, and performed within men; whereas
Christianity makes them to be different things: Justification being wrought by
Christ in his own Person, wholly without us, and but once performed; but
Sanctification is the Work of Christ by his holy Spirit in our hearts, and
daily to be renewed.

I shall here give you another Instance from the said R. B's Works, and would
have the Quakers try their Wits to see if they can reconcile the same.

R. B. page 895. of his Works, affirms, That the Historical Faith and Knowledge
of Christ, is not commonly given to the Quakers, or to be expected by them, or
any others, by the Spirit, but by the Scriptures.

But in contradiction to this, p. 48. he affirms, That the Spirit teaches every
true Christian whatsoever is needful for him to know. -- By this Light of God
[in the heart] all true knowledge in spiritual things is revealed. Prop. X.

Then back again, page 95, 96. he affirms, That the Historical knowledge or
outward profession of Christ is absolutely necessary to be believed, where God
affords the Opportunity of knowing it; -- Yea (says he) it were a damnable
Unbelief not to believe it, when declared.

Now the first and last of these three Quotations, are Christan, and the
middlemost is Quakerism, which together runs thus;

It Is Damnable Unbelief not to believe the history of Christ, where it may be
known.

This historical belief is not given to men by the spirit.

And yet, The spirit teaches all true knowledge, and whatever is needful.

This needs no comment, I could show several such like Contradictions and
Confusion in R. B's endeavors to mix Quakerism with Christianity, just as
Coyners of bad Money, mix it with some good Money, to make the bad pass current
unsuspected.

There is an instance in page 170 of his Apology, That shows his accomplishment
in Quaker-Pride. He there calls the Apostles of our Lord and Savior by the
name of outward Apostles: This is to intimate, that they (the Quakers) are
inward Apostles, and they always prefer the inward above the outward; for as it
sufficed for the Apostles and Elders to fall down and worship before the
Throne; so G. F. says, The Quakers are UPON the Throne (as in the Quotations
before.) Thus while they Banter others for Pride in wearing Lace and Ribands,
they themselves are possessed with the most abhorrent Pride of Lucifer.

Lastly, Behold a monstrous clash of Quakerism and Christianity between R. B.
and W. P. The one calls it a Damnable Unbelief, not to believe the history of
Christ, and the other calls it, A deadly Poison to believe it.

But their Books are so full of such confused stuff, it would be almost endless
work to collect it. Therefore I and others who by the mercy of God have escaped
out of this City of confusion, Mystery Babylon, cannot forbear calling others
after us; some have done it late, even at the point of death, as Mary the Wife
of Mr. H^^lo^k^ of Burlington, daughter of R B a Quaker; she on her Deathbed
bewailed her dark state and condition of being trained up in Quakerism,
ignorant of the knowledge and faith of the true Christ, cailling on her Sisters
and Quakers about her, to take warning by her, and not delay to seek after
Christ in time. Mr. T. Revell, his Wife, and those about her, not Quakers, will
testify that this dying woman uttered those and the like words, with an
affecting zeal; testifying a return of Gods great love in her heart before she
departed. Therefore let those people know, that it is not the exchanging the
life of a P^bl^^a^ for an outside Holines^, while the inside is full of such
Rottenness in Faith and Principles, that will stand them in stead in the day of
account.

An Additional Postscript.
SInce the former part went to the Press, I met with the Quaker two-handed
Almanac for the Year 1706. by J. (...) and C Pusey.

As to J. ^ he in his Almanac, 1705 endeavour^d by bantering Scoff^ etc. to
ridicule me* To which I returned a (...) answer (...) mistake happened, where I
charge him with saying, O (...) d^^k, and it should be said one quarter. Now
(...) ^nt^^e in fact, yet I Am sorry it happened, for truly 'twas no design, but
an oversight in transcribing. But my small touch of an answer might^ly raises
his Quaker-zeal against me, so that he not only renders me A stupid Dunce and
Ignoran^^, but also An unparrallel'd ^lag a^^, ^^pu^ent Filcher, impudent Liar,
unciv^lly Impudent, base Insinuator, lazy A^^mal, ^s^^id Animal, A Forehead
hand enough to give the Lie to all Mankind, (...) ^^^cter, poor stupid
Creature, and Rhedan a^t^us or Judge of H^ll, etc.

Now I think none dare say of this Fury, that it proceeds of Good Will,
therefore I shall at present give him no other answers but only send him back
the two last lines in the Month of February o^ his own Almanac, where he
himself tells us his dewlling place, in these words;

Where Good Will's ^an^^^g, there is a k^^d of Hell,

There Men, so unlike Men, so Bru^t^^ dwell.

As to Caleb Puss^y, he has only printed his old stuff over again, the very
same which was in his last years Almanac word for word (to which I have
formerly made Reply) and has added nothing new but an Advertisement, wherein he
(as common Strumpets call honest Women (...)) cries out (...) Abuses and black
Charges, which, he says, they have proved against (...) Yes, they have proved
them just as I have before showed, by Lying and Sham Answers, on purpose to
deceive. And as I have before noted, Their chiefest Preachers are the greatest
Deceivers; yea, those who write not, as well as those who write. As for
instance, John Saltkill, a Preacher of Renown, lately come from England, who,
when he was in this Country before, being at the house of Sam. Carpenter in
Philadelphia, with some other Quakers, took occasion to speak of the printed
Sheet, called, G. Keith's broad Sheet of about 50 blasphemous and
Antichristian Quotations, taken from their friends books, of which he the
said, J. Saltkill said, That there (...) not one Quotation in G K 's broad
Sheet, but what friends might safely stand by and justify. And yet this man
with his tongue as smooth as Oil, and a bewitching Tone, deceives the People,
by pretenses to Christianity contrary to his own faith. Note, This Passage was
told me by a Quaker then and there present, who obliged me not to tell his
Name* And I would be just to him and all men; for I am not ignorant of their
punishment to such as tell Tales out of School; though it is nothing but the same
Jesuitism as runs parrallel with their whole Works, as I have sufficiently
showed.

Again, T. Chalkly, who is so wily a Preacher, that he makes some that are not
Quakers think him to better than most of 'em, I have his Letter that he writ to
me at ^^^-^^our, where in he condemns me to hell because I had cautioned the
People at ^gg-^^^our against believing that the Light within all men was
sufficient to Salvation without any other means. His words are these, By the
Light within (says he) we mean nothing but God and Christ; and is not God and
Christ sufficient without other means? O Daniel! into what a bott^ml^s^ pi^ art
thou ^a^en?

Behold, Christian Reader, then late serpentine method of wording their matters
to deceive; But will not the Quakers say these things are lies? yes: and indeed
I and all m^n must be liars, except themselves, if it (...) as their Prophets
teach, viz. That the Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they; s^^e Quaker^
Challenge, p. 3, So G. FOX before.

Last of all, (...) Readers pardon, if some errors of the Press pass
uncorrected, because I live at so great a distance, and have not the
convenience of doing it. So no^ am I to (...) that this was published no
sooner, it having been finished by me and sent to the Press several Months
since, and has been hindered by other business.

FINIS.

