IMPRECATION Against the Enemies of GOD, Lawful and a Duty. As it was Delivered
in a SERMON at the Lecture in Boston, before HIS EXCELLENCY and the GENERAL
COURT, March 20th. 1707. And now Published at Their Command.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Exodus xvii 10. So Joshua -- fought with Amaleck: And Moses, Aaron, and Hur,
went up to the Top of the Hill

v. 11. And it came to pass, when Moses held up his Hand, that Israel prevailed
--

v. 12 -- And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands; -- and they were steady until
the going down of the Sun

v 15 And Moses built an Altar, and called the Name of it JEHOVAH-Nissi. (i.e.
The Lord my Banner.)

Boston in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Nicholas Boon, at his Shop near the
corner of School-house lane. 1707.

PRINTED by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR, at the Desire of the Council
and Assembly.

Isaac Addington, Secr.
BOSTON: 21st. of March 1707.
Imprecation Against the Enemies of GOD, Lawful and a Duty.
Psalm LXVIII. 1. Let GOD arise, let his Enemies be scattered; let them also
that hate Him flee before Him.


THESE Words begin a Triumphant Psalm of David's, the Subject whereof is the
Majesty and Power and Mercies of God, displayed in the Salvations of his
Church, past and to come. The Triumphs of the GOD of Israel are here
Celebrated, in a Style and Expression Lofty like the Place wherein He dwells,
and Great as the Works they praise. There is a Mixture of History and
Prophecy, a Review of the Glorious things which God had wro't for his Church
from the days of Moses, and a Prediction of the greater Salvation by the
MESSIAH to come; His Victorious and Triumphant Ascension, and leading Captivity
Captive. v. 18.

The Occasion of the Psalm seems very obvious, though particular-Passages in it
are Intricate and Perplexed; so that One of the Critics said of it, that there
are almost as many Shelfs and Labyrinths in it, as there are Verses and Words,
and that it merits to be called the Trial of the Wits of Interpreters, and
their disgrace: Yet (I say) the Occasion of the Psalm seems very plain, and
that it was Composed for and used at that Illustrious Solemnity in David's
Reign, the Translation of the Ark of the Covenant from the House of Obed-Edom
unto Zion; for the words of the Text, which are the Exordium of the Psalm, are
the very same that Moses always used at the Removal of the Ark: Numb. 10.35.
And it came to pass when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, LORD,
and let thine Enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before
thee!

This then was the Original of the Text, being the words of Moses, the Lords
Prophet, and the first Ruler of Israel, and Ancient as the first Redemption of
His Church, and the days of their Travels in the Wilderness; where the Lord Led
his People like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. As soon as the
Tabernacle was reared up, and the Ark of the Testimony was in its place, etc,
Then a Cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle. The Cloud of the Lord was upon it by day, and Fire was
on it by night, in the sight of all the House of Israel, throughout all their
Journeys. And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle, the
Children of Israel went onward in all their Journeys: But if the Cloud were not
taken up, then they Journyed not, till the day that it was taken up. No doubt
it was a very joyful sight to that People when the Cloud rose up, God therein
appearing to 'em to be making good his Promise, and leading them to Canaan: And
the Phrase agree to their very sight, Rise up Lord! for there was a visible
Appearance to their Senses of his doing so, as the Cloud was taken up.

It is very probable, that this Form of Prayer at the taking up of the Ark, was
by Divine Appointment to be for ever used on this Occasion and Solemnity, as
often as the Levites should ever be called in all future Generations to
Officiate in Bearing the Ark: At least it is past doubt that Moses at first
spoke these words by Inspiration, and Inspired David retaining them as the most
Apt and Ancient, and the best that could be on the great Occasion.

This Famous Prayer consists of two Petitions, one giving the Reason of the
other.

Let God arise. It is spoken after the manner of men, as when we implore speedy
Succor of another, we suppose his Rising and hastening to our Relief. It Is a
Phrase usual in Scripture, and Significant of Gods affording timely and present
Help unto His People who trust in him; and equally of his taking speedy
Vengeance of His and their Enemies. Psalm. 12.5. For the Oppression of the Poor,
for the sighing of the Needy, now will I arise, (says the Lord) I will set him
in safety from him that puffs at him. 102.13. Thou shall arise, and have
mercy upon Zion. Jer. 2.27. In the time of their Trouble they will say, Arise
and Save us. So also in Inflicting Judgment, God is said to Arise: Isa.
14.22.33.10. Job 31.14.
What shall I do when God rises up, and when he visits, what shall I answer
him?

To both Senses the Phrase is necessarily determined in the Text: The First is
implied, soil. Gods timely appearing for the Protection and Defense of his
People; for the Ark (at the Removes of which the Words were uttered) was the
Glorious and Special Psalm. 132.8. 1 Samuel 4.3. a Sam. 15.24, 25. Jer. 3.16. Rev.
11.19.
Symbol of Jehovahs Presence, and his giving Strength unto his People: Hence
it is called, the Ark of his Strength, and from this Conception about it the
Army of Israel in Eli's time sent for the Ark of God into the Camp to Save 'em,
and received it with Shouting in their vain Confidence: So also when David was
flying before Absalom, Zadock and the Levites were for bearing away the Ark of
the Covenant of God, as a Pledge of the Divine Presence and Assistance with the
Afflicted King; but his Care of it, and Reverence to it, was too great to
suffer it, and he had a more just apprehension of a right Trust in God, then to
build merely on the outward sign of Gods Presence and Power.

The other Sense is in words expressed: Let God arise, and let his Enemies be
scattered, let them also that hate him flee before him. This is the Express
Reason of the Petition, that the Enemies of God might be put to Confusion and
Flight, be bro't to Ruin and Destruction upon his Arising.

Observe here, That the Enemies and Haters of God are One; and so likewise are
the Enemies of God and Israel One: those that hate his Church hate him, and
it is a most Consolatory Cosideration that the Great GOD holds 'em to do so.

Yet note, that they are considered here as Gods Enemies, and not Ours
personally: The Enemies of his Name and Glory, his Truth and Cause, his Church
and Kingdom, and that Implacably; As such, Vengeance is here imprecated on
them, and against such we may and ought to pray: It Is best to carry 'em to God,
and leave 'em to his Judgments written against 'em.

And you cannot but remark the high Devotion and flaming Zeal, which this
Prayer breathes: Such a Zeal for Gods Honor, and such Love to his Interest and
People, as God who is here invoked is wont Himself to express. And what a Noble
Trust and Dependence on God alone is here expressed! Let God arise! they look
to Him, they build on his Appearing for them, and not on any Arm of Flesh.
Finally, The words speak a most glorious Faith and Confidence; Let God arise,
let his Enemies be scattered, i. e. Let God arise and they will be so, they
shall be so, there needs nothing more to discomfit 'em: and so indeed the
Hebrew runs, in the Future Tense.

Thus I have as briefly as I could fully, set this Copious Prayer in its true
Light: You easily see how fruitful it is of Noble and Divine Truths, and how
many rich Observations I might offer from it; I shall select One only, the
plain scope of the Text, and what I designed in the Choice of it: Namely,

DOCT. That the People of God ought by Earnest and Fervent Prayer to be seeking
to Him for the Overthrow and Destruction of His and His Churches Enemies.

PRAYER is our Duty, and our rich Privilege in all Cases and Circumstances
whatsoever. We owe this to God, and His Honor calls for it; we need it our
selves, and it is an unspeakable Favor, Mercy and Advantage to us. The Command
is, Ephesians. 6.18. Pray always with all Prayer, and Supplication in the Spirit,
watching thereunto with all perseverance: Phil. 4.6. In every thing (...)
Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known unto
God.

It Is what the Saints have always abounded in: from Abraham to David, from
David to Elias, from Him to Daniel, etc. And above all out Blessed Savior has
taught it to his Church for ever, both in repeated Precepts and his own
Heavenly Practice. A most Reasonable Duty to the Great God and our Merciful
Redeemer! Whose we are, Who gave us Being, in whom we live, on whom we depend,
from whom we receive all that we have, all that we can have, and more than we
know of! (Who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20.) To whom we are by our Baptism devoted and consecrated, being
bought with a Price, the precious Blood of Christ, who also is our Advocate,
and ever lives to present our Prayers.

Prayer is the least Acknowledgment that can be of God, his Providence, his
Written Word, and all Spiritual Blessings in Christ; and the least Testimony we
can give of a Religious Reverence and Veneration toward Him; of Gratitude,
Love, Trust and Submission to Him; and surely there can be no more meet and
proper, or Nobler Use of Speech, which Faculty is given us for this End, to
utter aloud the devout Motions and Resentments of our Minds, in way of Homage
to the Great GOD, and for His Honor and Glory.

Moreover, Fervency Romans 8.26, Col. 4.12. St. Luke 22.44. 1 These. 3.10.
must accompany all our Prayers, if we expect they should be acceptable and
Prevalent. St. James puts these two together, Jam. 5.16. The Effectual Fervent
Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much: And the Psalmist says, With my whole
heart have I fought thee, -- I entreated thy Favor with my whole heart, Ps.
119. 10.18. This is but decent and necessary, because the Object to whom we
address in Prayer is the Most High and Holy GOD, whose Name is Glorious and
Fearful, and before whom the Serephims cover their Faces! It Is an awful thing to
have to do with the Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth! we should not dare to
trifle with Him! Moreover, The things we ask in Prayer are of the last Weight
and Importance, and if we have a pressing sense of our Needs, and a real Desire
of the Blessings we request, we cannot but be earnest and servent in Spirit. In
a word, Prayer is a Sacred Exercise of great seriousness and solemnity, and
nothing can be more Indecent and Criminal than a light and common, a cold and
indifferent frame of Spirit in it; But the Mind ought to be Intent, Desire
Strong, the Affections vigorously moving, Grace in its lively Exercise, and
then (like Israel) we Wrestle with God and as a Prince we do prevail.

This I could not but hint of Prayer in General, and now have the same thing to
observe and make good of that particular Branch of Prayer, the Imprecation of
Judgment upon the Enemies of God. I shall therefore show, that this is one Part
of Prayer, and that we ought to be Earnest and Fervent in these Addresses to
God.

I. Imprecation of Judgment on the wicked Enemies of God and his Church is one
part of Prayers; etc we ought to make it one Article in our Petitions, that God
would blast their Designs and Attempts against his Truths, and Ways, and
Interest, confound their wicked Counsels, Scatter 'em in their evil
Enterprises, bring down their Power and Pride, and execute the Judgments
written against them. We have many Examples of this part of Prayer in the Holy
Scriptures Psalm. 5.10, 7, 6.9.59, 13.69.24. etc. 79.10, 11, 125.5. (...)
especially in the Book of Psalms: I will mention two only, Psalm. 94.1, 2. O
Lord God, to whom Vengeance belongs, O God, to whom vengeance belongs, show
thy self! Lift up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a Reward to the
Proud! Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? etc.
Psalm. 83.1, 2. Keep not thou silence O God: hold not thy peace and be not
still, O God. For lo, thine Enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee have
lift up the head. -- v. 13, 15, etc. O my God, make them like a Wheel: as the
stubble before the Wind. -- So persecute 'em with thy Tempest, and make 'em
afraid with thy Storm. -- Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea,
let 'em be put to shame, and perish.

Nor can it be said, that these Prayers do not agree to the Spirit of
Christianity. They did agree to the Unequaled Meekness of Moses, and to the
exalted Devotion of David: Nay they do agree with the Goodness of that Frame,
which we are sure the Blessed Spirits in Heaven are always in; for so the Souls
of them that are Slain for the Word of God, are represented to be crying with a
loud Voice, Rev. 6.10. How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not judge and
avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth! And thus the Divine heard the
Angel of the Waters say, Rev. 16.5, 6. Thou art Righteous, O Lord, which art,
and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus: For they have shed the
Blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink; for they
are worthy. Now if both Prayers and Praises are uttered on this account in
Heaven above, are they not decent and becoming, and agreeable to pure Religion,
in the Church here below?

But you will expect that I do both state and limit this point, and then offer
something in Proof of it. Take then a few Rules about praying against others,
even the most wicked Enemies of God, and then a few Reasons to prove it to be
lawful, decent and necessary.

First, The Rules, which we ought to govern our selves by in this Case, are
such as these.

1. We must be sure that we do simply consider 'em as Gods Enemies and not our
Own, and that there be no private Grudge on personal accounts. For this would
spoil our Prayers, and be an Asking God to gratify our private Spleens, which
he abominates in us. Therefore we must nakedly confider those, whom we pray
against, as the Public Enemies of Gods Truth and Holy Religion.

2. We must therefore be sure that we can prove 'em to be so, before we venture
to pray against 'em. This will put restraint upon a hasty Zeal, which is apt to
mistake, and to judge them whom Christ receives. 'Twill also manifest a due
sense of our Ignorance and Fallibility; and prevent many a bitter Reflection,
full of shame and sorrow, the certain fruit and punishment of Vain-Confidence
and Criminal Rashness. I wish that all Parties among Protestants would
seriously lay this Rule to heart, lest in the Integrity and Honesty of their
Hearts they run into the Disciple's Error, Luke 9.49. Master, we saw one
casting out Devils in thy Name; and we forbad him, because he follows not us.
And Jesus said, Forbid him not: for he that is not against us, is for us. You
must observe, that Moses in the first Use of our Text, prayed against those
Enemies and Nations, whom he know God had devoted to destruction, and whom
Israel were going to root out, and take possession of their Land: And a like
Warrant we have to pray against the Romish Antichrist, the Daughter of Babylon
that is to be destroyed.

3. However sure we are that a Person or Party do deserve the Judgments and
Rebukes of Heaven, as Public Enemies of the true Ways of God, yet if there
has been any thing of Personal. Opposition, Contests, Affronts Wrongs either
given or received, Be sparing, suspicious, and lay Restraint upon thy self:
Dare not to trust thy own heart, where it is so easily partial and biased, lest
Regards to self are blended with those to Heaven, and Heaven be dishonored and
offended. And if men are apt to justify and guide themselves by the Psalmists
Example in this Case As Psalm 7.35.^2.^4.55.59.69.70.109, etc.
, we must know that as we have not his Grace, so much less have we his
Infallible Guidance and Inspiration, to safeguard and warrant us. Mr. Vincent
therefore tells us, That David and the other Prophets are no Examples for us to
follow in this matter, for they knew by a Prophetic Spirit Gods Intentions
concerning the Persons whom they prayed against.

4. We must be sure that it be not from a Spirit of Cruelty, nor from any want
of Charity and Compassion, nor from a delight in the Griefs and Ruin of any of
our Fellow Creatures, that we Imprecate Judgments on them. When we are forced
into it, it should be only from a sense of Duty to God, and what we owe unto
His Honor, Cause and Members: It must not be from Ill Will to men: it should
be from a grieved Spirit, that the Wickedness of men necessitates it, that men
will bring down the Wrath of Heaven on their own Heads, and will not live in
Holiness, and in Peace, and be happy. And then we do Imprecate in a Gracious
Spirit, like that wherewith the Good God does Inflict Judgment, Who does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. So the Prophet could
denounce the Judgments of God against Moab in the Spirit of tender affliction
for her, Isa. 16.11. My Bowels shall sound like an Harp for Moab, and mine
Inward parts for Kir-haresh.

5. When we pray against the Enemies of God, some have though it it should rather
be for "their Restraint than for their Hurt, but to be sure it should be for
their Conviction and Conversion, rather than Destruction. We should pray for
their Repentance, and Recovery from the Error of their Ways, and from their
bloody Counsels: that God would Enlighten their Minds and turn their Hearts:
that the Light from Heaven might Strike them to the Ground, and the Scales fall
off from their Eyes: that if it please God he would yet use 'em, as he did
Persecuting Saul, to be eminently Serviceable to the Truths which they destroy:
And finally, that God would even judge 'em with this merciful Intention, as the
Psalmist prayed of old, Psalm. 83.16. Fill their Faces with shame, that they may
seek thy Name, O Lord.

6. Vengeance must not be Absolutely imprecated on any, but on supposition of
their Implacable Malignity against God, which God only knows; or where he has
Revealed it to be so, and has expressly devoted unto destruction: As we know
that the Great Whore and Mother of Abominations is; As to which Accursed
Interest in general therefore, Charity and Pity are shut out for Ever.

7. And Lastly, In all such Prayers against the Enemies of God and His Church,
we must preserve a perfect Submission to the Will and Good Pleasure of God;
leaving it to Him to judge in his own Time Way and Manner, not daring to
prescribe our Tho'ts to Him, nor pretend to be privy to His; When, Where or How
His Decrees shall take place, be bro't about or effected. All this we must for
Ever submit to God in Adoring Manner, with humble and contented Minds: It Is
eno' for us assuredly to Believe that His Day is coming, that the Vision is for
an appointed time and will not tarry, and to have Hearts to pray with
Earnestness and Joy, Even so Come, Lord Jesus! Come quickly!

Such Rules as these we ought to go by in praying against the Enemies of God
and of His Church. I pass,

Secondly, To name some Reasons and Arguments, which do prove it Lawful and
Decent, Necessary and a Duty to pray against 'em.

1. It is a proper and fitting Expression of Zeal against Sin and Errer. These
are found among the Enemies and Haters of God; the Habitations of Ignorance and
Cruelty are there. Here are Corruptions cherished, maintained and defended:
Here Impostures are hatched, vended and vindicated: Here the Truth is
blaspheem'd and outrag'd; damnable Heresies are furiously propagated by
Violence and Force; the Blood of Saints thirsted after and greedily drank down:
Hence come the Discords, Confusions and Wars in the Earth; they come of Men's
Lusts, and Errors Originally of Hell, Adopted and carefully nursed up by the
Romish Apostasy, Her fruitful, Spurious, acknowledged Issue. The Death of these
we ought to seek, the Extirpation of Error and of Lust, which destroy men's
Souls, dishonor God, and turn the World upside down. Surely we should pray for
a stop to be put to such Guilts! O let the wickedness of the Wicked come to an
End, but establish the Just! -- For her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God
has remembered her Iniquities; -- therefore shall her Plagues come in one day
--.

2. It is but a meet Expression of Love to the Church and Members of Christ in
the World. The Church's Preservation, defense and safety, Establishment and
Enlargement, Purity and Reformation, Peace and Tranquillity, Comfort and Joy, do
depend on the Judgment of its implacable Enemies. Their fall is the Church's
Security and Triumph, Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostle and
Prophets! the Persecuted Saints are herein delivered, honored and Avenged; to
Them we owe our first and superior Love, next unto what we owe to the LORD
Himself, nay he reckons it to Himself, and it is our Love to His Name and
Glory. For Zions sake therefore we should not hold our peace, and for
Jerusalems sake we should not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. Isai. 62.1. This
was a strong Motive to the Psalmist in the Content, v. 2, 3. As smoke is driven
away, so drive them away: as wax melts before the Fire, so let the wicked
perish at the Presence of God: BUT let the Righteous be glad, let 'em rejoice
before God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice.

3. And Lastly, The Glory of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is
greatly consulted in such Prayers. The Glory of the Being and Providence of God
is so: for by this it appears terribly to a wicked and Infidel World, that
there is a God, and that Zions God reigns; that Verily there is a Reward for
the Righteous, verily he is a God who judges in the Earth! and that He whose
Name alone is Jehovah is the Most High over all the Earth! v. 4. Extol him that
rides upon the Heavens by his Name JAH, and rejoice before Him.

God has the Glory of his Holiness and Justice, and his Holy Angels laud him
for Ever, saying, -- They are Worthy! And of His Truth, both in his Promises
and his Threatenings, Even so, Lord God Almighty! true and Righteous are thy
Judgments.

It is to the Great Glory of Divine Power: especially when these Enemies of God
are High and Mighty upon Earth, and they are nevertheless made to know that
there is a God above them: So God gets Himself a Name on a haughty Pharaoh, a
blaspheeming Senecharib, and a vaunting Nebuchadnezzar; He makes the One to
know -- Who is the Lord, and puts a hook into the Others Nose, and causes the
Virgin, the Daughter of Zion, to despise him, to laugh him to scorn, and to
shake the head at him; and the Last He humbles, and forces to confess that
there is A Most High, the King of Heaven, to Praise, Extol and Honor Him,
whose Dominion is Everlasting, all whose Works are Truth, and His Ways
Judgment, and those that walk in Pride He is able to abase.

Moreover, God has the Glory of his Compassion and Mercy to His Church: He
confirms his Inheritance when it is weary, -- and prepares of his Goodness for
the poor. v. 9, 10.

Finally, The Wisdom of God is sure to shine forth Gloriously: Mysterious
Wisdom, in defeating the deep Polices, craft and subtilty of man, turning their
Counsels backward, and taking them in their own Snares! Surprising his Church
with Salvations in Unexpected Way and Manner! snatched from among the pots, v.
13. and on a sudden raised and beautified as the Wings of a Dove covered with
Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.

For these plain Reasons we ought to be seeking to God in Prayer for the
Overthrow and Destruction of His and his Church's Enemies: these are the Ends
of such Prayers, the proper Motives to 'em, and what do justify us in 'em; not
only arguing 'em to be lawful and decent, but a Duty and of necessity. And the
same Reasons do oblige us.

II. Unto Fervency and Earnestness in such parts of Prayer; which should have
been the Second General Head of Discourse, the Text breathing a very sensible
Zeal and Flame; as also the Elect, whom God will avenge, are said to Cry day
and night. If we should not be Zealous against Sin, and in Earnest when the
Glory of God lies at stake, and if we ought not to be hearty and fervent in
Love to Christ and his Interest, what should Inspire us to be so?

Moreover, The Enemies of Christ and of his Church are zealous in their
Opposition and Enmity. Zealous in their Idolatrous Invocations, and in numbering
their Ridiculous Prayers, like the Priests of Baal in Elijahs time, who
together with their Antic Gestures, and bloody Rites, held their Yell from
Morning to Evening, O Baal, hear us! Furious (like Jezabel, their Patroness) in
hatred of the Truth, and persecuting the Prophets of the Lord to Death, to
exterminate pure Worship from the Earth! So zealous (it may be) as to bind
themselves with detested Vows, and take the Sacrament on it that they will
imbrew their hands in Blood! Surely then we should find Zeal too, and be very
Jealous for the Lord God of Hosts, for his People, and our Holy Religion; and
against the Spirit of Antichrist and all its Abominations! A manly, rational,
meek Divine Zeal should put us on praying, and the Lord would answer by fire,
and burn up his Enemies.

USE. I will Improve the Doctrine in a few devout and practical Reflections.

I. If Imprecation should be made against the wicked Enemies of God and his
Church, in Solemn Prayer unto God, we learn thence how Profane it is to use
this Mode of Speech on light and trivial Causes, how horrid and cruel it is to
make our Neighbors the Objects of 'em, and how Unnatural and Monstrous a thing
it is to make them against our selves. The least that can be said of it in
either of these Cases is, that it is a profane Taking the Name of God in vain:
But one would never guess it, if 'twere not so often proved, that men could
turn a thing so Awful and Solemn into a Jest and Play, nor dare to direct the
Pointed Lightning to their own heads, or wish it on their Neighbors. Yet this
vile Use do men too often make of Imprecation, sometimes wantonly, sometimes
maliciously, always profanely.

Some cruelly and unnaturally Imprecate against their own Souls, on trivial
Causes and in a strange kind of Jest and Sport, wishing damnation to themselves
every day they live! the only Prayer they ever make it may be! Others in
Vexation and discontent do the same to their Limbs or Life; and God, whose holy
Name is impiously profaned. hears their hideous Wishes, and sometimes
judicially seals and affixes an Amen to 'em, saying, Yes, Profane man, equally
an hater of thy self and Me, inherit the wished Curse.

Sometimes men bestow their direful Imprecations on Others, sportively very
often, and often from passion and sudden wrath, and too often from a bitter
Malignity, and Implacable hatred of their Persons. A Crime that Christianity
utterly detests, whatever our Provocations may be, strictly requiring us to
love our Enemies and forgive men their trespasses, to bless them that curse us,
and to pray for them that despitefully use us. To. 12.14. Bless them which
persecute you, bless and curse not. Not but that we may have a sorrowful
Resentment of Wrongs, and may go to God, with whom it is best to leave our
selves and others. -- I Mourn in my complaint and make a noise, because of the
Voice of the Enemy, because of the Oppression of the Wicked; for they cast
Iniquity upon me, and in Wrath they hate me. -- They curse inwardly: My Soul,
wait then only upon God, for my Expectation is from Him. -- Do thou for me, O
God the Lord, for thy Names take: because thy Mercy is Good, deliver thou me.
-- That they may know that this is thy Hand, that thou, Lord, (...) done it:
let them curse, but bless Thou! --

Sometimes these barbarous and bloody Execrations have put on the Reverend Face
of Sanctity and Religion, and Zeal for God and His Truth: and so the Men of one
Party, Sect and Opinion in Religion have, with much solemnity (...) pretended
Devotion, Anathematized and damned all that differ from 'em. This has been
peculiarly the Guilt of Rome: And we should learn to spue out this Leven, for
it is very apt to taint us in our Disaffections to one another, even where men
agree in all the Fundamentals of Religion; whence it is that so many Thousands
stand Excommunicate in men's Tho'ts and on Records, whom the Lord Jesus Christ
will own and embrace.

Indeed there was among the Jews a Form of Adjuration or Imprecation, scil. GOD
DO SO, AND MORE ALSO. The most Eminent Saints used it, but in a devout and
awful manner, and upon weighty and serious Occasions: And so used, it was
properly a part of Religion, as much as the taking an Oath is when we are
called to it; for this also is a solemn Appeal unto God, and a tacit Invoking
his holy Vengeance in case of Falsehood, which Vengeance does therefore follow
Perjury. So (I say) Imprecation was of old used as an Act of Religion and
Worship, in devout manner. Thus Eli adjur'd Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.17. God do so to
thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me --.So Ruth unto Naomi: The
Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me, In this
manner David once and again Swear and bound himself 2 Samuel 3 35.19.13.
and so Solomon swear by the Lord, 1 Kings ^ ^3.
saying, God do so to to me and more also, if (...) have not spoken against his
own life: and St. Paul with like Solemnity 2 Cor. 1.23.
asserts his Veracity by calling God to Record on his Soul. These Instances
show that the thing is Good, if it be used lawfully.

But as every act of Religion may be abused and profaned, and then looks
horrid, so do profane Imprecations more especially; it is so Insolent and
daring a Dishonor to the Name and Authority of God. Yet good Men have
sometimes rashly fallen into it, but have deeply repented of it, as David did
of his passionate Resolve against Nabal: 1 Samuel 25.22. So and more also do God
unto the Enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the Morning
light: but there follows a full proof of his Repenting of those blooly Words,
v. 32, 33. where he blesses God, and blesses Abigail, that he was kept from
shedding blood and from avenging himself.

But how many Graceless Creatures are there, who make a Trade of this and other
Acts of Profaneness, and repent not, nor do their hearts seem to smite 'em. I
might produce many dire Examples out of History, of Persons who have been
dreadfully punished by God, as they have wished against themselves in their
cruel Passions: But there is one Select and terrible Scripture Instance, which
alone I will leave with you to think of; and the rather to let you see of what
kind of Person this Impiety might be expected; and how severe and exact Heaven
is to fulfill and perform the cursed Wish. Let Jezebel be the Instance ( that
Woman Jezebel, "the Type of the Romish Whore, drunk with the Blood of Saints)
of whom we read, 1 King. 19.1, 2. that when Ahab told her all that Elijah had
done, (how he had encountered the Priests of Baal, exposed 'em, and at his
order the convinced Multitude had in their zeal slain 'em) this enraged Woman
then sent a Messenger unto him saying, So let the gods do to me and more also,
if I make not thy life, as the life of one of them by to morrow about this time
The like Instance we have, a King 6.31. Act 23.14.
. Thus she imprecated against her own Life: Words worthy of her lewd Mouth, and
agreeable to her outrageous and bloody Spirit! And in a little time God did to
her as she had wished, and more also than what she had threat'ned Elijah, and
than he had done to her Idolatrous Priests; for she was not Slain barely, but
in an uncommon way and manner, being thrown out of a Window; dashed to death on
the Pavement, trodden under foot, and eaten of dogs. Well did Jehu call her the
Cursed Woman! Cursed from her own Mouth, and the Curse confirmed by the God of
Heaven, who heard and executed what her lips had uttered.

In short, let us learn to abhor this Savage Spirit, which pure Religion bids
the last Defyance to; it being equally void of Reverence to God or Mercy to
Men, equally against Nature and against Grace.

II. Here is a Serious and Affectionate Call to Prayer, for our People, and
Churches, and for the Interest of Christ in the World. For what is it to Pray
against the Church's Enemies, but to be lifting up a Prayer for the Church it
self? It Is in effect the same thing, and they are mutually implied in each
other. The same Reasons and Arguments incite equally to either, and therefore
the proper Inference and Exhortation from the preceding Discourse is this, Pray
for the Peace of Jerusalem! Psalm. 122.7, 8, 9. Peace be within thy Walls, and
Prosperity within thy Palaces. For my Brethren and Companions sake I will now
say, Peace be within thee. Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy Good. So in the same Breath wherein the Psalmist prays, Remember, O
Lord, the Children of Edom, he took special care himself not to forget
Jerusalem, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her Cunning:
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy.

Millions of Prayers are daily going up to God from his Church, in every part
of the World, against his Enemies; and such hands as Moses held up High and
Steadily in the Mount, and hearts like his breathing out this Short Petition,
would utterly scatter every Amaleck, and put the Haters of the Lord to a
perpetual Rout. God has fulfilled his gracious Promise, and has set Watchmen
upon Jerusalems Walls, who do (...) hold their Peace, day nor night: Isa. 62.6,
7. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not Silence, and give Him no Rest,
till He establish, and till He make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth.

III. Salvations received should be looked upon at Answers given unto Prayer,
and demand Returns of Solemn Praise and Thanksgiving. When God has Risen up and
smote his Enemies, our Prayers against them are Answered, our Petition is given
us; as indeed of late years the Church's Prayers have been most signally, in a
Series of great Successes and wonderful Victories over the Powers of the Beast;
and I need look no further than our Context for the proper Acknowledgments and
Thankful Praises, which such gracious Answers of Prayer should constrain from
us: v. 11, 12. The Lord gave the Word, Great was the Company of those that
Published it. Kings of Armies did flee apace, and she that tarried at home
divided the spoil. v. 26. Bless ye God in the Congregations, even the Lord from
the Fountain of Israel. v. 28. Thy God has commanded thy strength; strengthen,
O God, that which thou have wro't for us. v. 32, 33, etc. Sing unto God, O ye
Kingdoms of the Earth; O Sing Praises unto the Lord, Selah: To Him that rides
upon the Heavens of Heavens, which were of old; Lo, He does send out his Voice,
and that a Mighty Voice. Ascribe ye strength unto God: His Excellency is over
Israel, and His strength is in the Clouds. O God, thou art Terrible out of thy
holy Places: the God of Israel is he that gives strength and power unto his
People: Blessed be God.

IV. If we may Pray against the Enemies of God and his Church, for their
Overthrow and Destruction, Then also we may Seek and Endeavor their ruin and
downfall in LAWFUL WAR. It Is you see what we can Pray over, and may trust in God
for his Blessing on. For though Christianity abhors the Principle of Propagating
the Truth by Force of Arms; or of making War on others because they are the
avowed Enemies of God and his Church; yet if through the overruling Providence
of God we come to be in a just War with such, we may the more confidently hope
that God will make it Subserve to his own Glory in their Overthrow, and we can
plead before Him, that they are His Enemies, and Pray that He would Arise and
Scatter 'em.

This gives the GOVERNMENT Confidence in their Councels against the Enemy, and
heartens the Christian Soldiers in their Marches and Engagements; to be Strong
and to Play the Men, for the People and Cities of their God; for as many
Prayers are following 'em, So who knows what Arms God will use for the Fall of
the Man of Sin, against whom so many Prayers are continually ascending. What we
may Pray for, we may also endeavor, at the plain and loud Call of Providence.
The Psalmist would have been glad to have used his Hands as well as Tongue, to
have drawn his Sword as well as Pen, against Devoted Babylon: Psalm. 137.8. O
Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed! happy shall he be that rewards
thee as thou have served us.

And being that God has cast our day in a time of War with the Antichristian
Enemy, I would crave leave to offer this Comfortable Assurance to YOUR
EXCELLENCY and the HONORABLE COURT, Your Officers and Troops; That we bear you
in our Hearts, and on our Knees to God, and follow our Brethren in their
wearisome Marches, and through all their Dangers, with our earnest Cries to
Heaven for their safe Conduct, Success, Victories, and a Triumphant Return. We
also stand ready as our Office binds us, and Your whole praying People, bound
by their Holy Profession, to ascribe and give the Glory to God of all his
merciful Appearances with You, in blessing Your Councels and Enterprises. We
have an ARK to take up and bear before You, even the Exalted NAME of the
Victorious REDEEMER! We have a MERCY-SEAT to come before, -- And we thank GOD
on Your Behalf (the Fathers of the Congregation) who have lately called us to
Enquire before it, for and with you On a Day of Prayer at the Council Chamber
in Boston, Friday, March 7.17^7.
; Admonishing us herein of our Duty and Privilege, if we could have forgot it,
and leaving us a happy Testimony of Your own devout Dependence.

V. And lastly, Let us be Cautioned and Directed to earnest Heed and Care, lest
we be found our selves among the Enemies of a HOLY GOD, and so the Efficacy of
our Prayers be hindered, and our Imprecations turned at last against our selves.
Let us be Exhorted to Universal Holiness and a General Reformation; for if we
regard Iniquity in our hearts, and retain it in practice, the Lord will not
hear our Prayers, and the Scripture concludes us Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, whose End is Destruction! and then while we pray -- So let thine
Enemies perish, O Lord --, we forget that we Invoke upon our own Heads. For
verily; Irreligion, Disobedience, Profaness or Hypocrisy are equally Enmity
and Odious to God, as are corrupt Doctrine, Superstition, False Worship and
bloody Principles adopted into Religion.

What great Difference is there, though there be Error and Impostures with our
Enemies, and the Truth held in Unrighteousness with us! Worship Corrupted with
them, and the pure Ordinances neglected or profaned by us! Idol Images with
them, and Idol-lusts with us! more Bloodiness with them, but aggravated
Immoralities of other kind with us! Aggravated (I say) under our superior
light and advantages! and stricter Bonds! Our Sins being more bold and
insolent, base and ungrateful, false and treacherous in the sight of Heaven
than theirs.

For does not the Holy God most resent Sin in his own Professing People? Exodus
32.10 Deuteronomy 9 19 Ezekiel 6 9. Amos 2.13. Isa 63 10.
and will He not punish it in them? Levit. ^6.15, 16, 18. Amos 2.4, 6. Lam.
1.8, 14.
Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth; therefore I
will punish you for all your Iniquities. Will He not disown us? Hos. 1.9. Call
his Name Lo-ammi; for ye are not my People, and I will not be your God. And has
not God threatened to use his real Enemies as the Instruments, by whom to avenge
the Quarrel of his Covenant Deuteronomy. 28 48.49 Psalm. 78.61, 62. Joshu 23.13 Judge
2.14, 15.
?

It behooves us therefore to judge our selves this day before the Lord our God:
Have we been a People faithful in his Holy Covenant? Or are we a penitent and
reforming People? If not, what Confidence have we that God will hear and bless
us? What Efficacy are our Prayers like to have? What hurt will they do our
Enemies, if we be as wicked as they? as barren under better Means, and as Cold
and dead under more Awakenings!

Traitors that we are to God, to our selves, and Country! We side with our
Enemies in their ill designs upon us, by retaining our provoking Lusts! we
betray and deliver up the Interest of Christ! we provoke God to forsake the
Land, and the Ark will not save us! We show no real Regard to our Churches, nor
to our Brethren in the Field! We blast our own Prayers, and cherish worse
Enemies within us, than those that can invade us from without!

We must therefore put away the Accursed thing from among us, or our Trouble is
from our selves, and God will trouble us. Let us be zeal us and repent.
Especially lay out your Zeal against Immoralities, and for Practical Godliness.
Let us join heart and hand for Truth and Holiness, and against the open
Neglect, I had amost said Contempt, of Divine Institutions. Let us be Spirited
[to recover and establish Government in our Churches,] and to maintain a Godly
and strict Discipline. Finally, Let our Civil Rulers see to the Execution of
those good Laws, which we have against Open Wickedness, and to provide for
Religion and Literature in After-Generations; that there may be an Instructed
and Godly Seed after us, excelling us, as They have done who are gone before us.

Then would the LORD awake for our Help, and put our Enemies to a perpetual
Reproach; the Haters of the Lord should submit themselves, and our Time would
be for ever! He would Set up his Tabernacle with us, and His Soul would not
abhor us! He would Walk among us, and be our God, and we should be His People!
The Cloud of his merciful Protection would cover us, and rest over us! We might
Set down the ARK of His Covenant, and say, -- Return, O LORD, to the many
Thousands of Israel! AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 3. line 9. read, did agree. line 20. read, retained.


