A LETTER, About the Present State of Christianity, among the Christianized
INDIANS OF NEW ENGLAND.

Written, To the HONORABLE, Sir William Ashhurst, GOVERNOR of the
Corporation, for Propagating the GOSPEL among the Indians, in New England, and
Parts Adjacent, in America.

Boston, in N. E. Printed by Timothy Green. 1705.

A LETTER, To the Honorable, Sir WILLIAM ASHHVRST, About the Present State of
Christianity, among the Christianized Indians, of New England.
SIR,
THE last Letter wherewith you Honored us, Dated in August, gives us to
understand, how Acceptable it would be, to receive a fresh and late Account, of
the Progress made in Evangelizing the poor Salvages in this Country: And we
shall, as under all the Obligations imaginable to do it, Endeavor your
satisfaction in a Point so worthy to be Enquird after; hoping that our Account
may as Good News from a far Country, prove no ungrateful Entertainment.

In the Magnalia Christi Americana, or, History of New England, Published at
London, Two or Three Years ago, there is, The Life of our Memorable ELIOT; In
which there is a Letter to Dr. Leusden, a Professor at Vtrecht, relating the
Success of the Gospel among our Americans; and a full Commentary upon every
Article of that Letter, declaring Who were Employed in that noble work, and How
they managed it. And in another part of that Book, there is a long Chapter,
Entitled, The Triumphs of Grace, or, A Narrative of the Success which the
Gospel has had among the Indians of New England; a Narrative, as well Attested
as it is Remarkable. We shall not now Transcribe any Paragraphs of that
History; because it is easy to have recourse unto it. But they that would
insinuate, as if the People of our Profession, in America, (who are for
Embracing and Diffusing, the Holy Religion of Christ, in the Original Purity
wherein His Gospel has given it unto us, without Humane Additions and
Inventions) did nothing to Propagate the Religion we Profess, will there find a
sufficient Confutation.

We will now proceed, where that History leaves off; and lay before your
Honor, the present Circumstances of the Evangelical Work among our Indians.

There were in the Southern parts of this Province, about Four or Five Years
ago, (when your Commissioners here sent a Couple of English Ministers, who were
Masters of the Indian Tongue, to visit them,) no less than Thirty several
Congregations of Indians, who commonly Assembled every Lords Day, and a great
part of them to Lectures on other Days also, for the Worship of the Great GOD,
and our Lord JESUS CHRIST. We cannot understand, That the Number of the
Congregations, is considerably altered from what it was, when the Gentlemen,
who then Examined their Condition, brought us that Report of them.

Indeed, the Number of Indians in this Land, is not Comparable to what it was
Fifty Years ago. The Hand of God, has very strangely wasted them; and the War
which they began upon the English in the Year, 1675. hastened a strange
Desolation upon whole Nations of them. Almost all that remain under the
Influences of the English in this Massachuset Province are so far
Christianized, as that they Believe there is a God, and but One God, and that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Savior of the World. Mr. Experience
Mayhew, who is Grandson, to the Old Gentleman that first Instructed the Indians
on Martha's Vineyard, and like his Grandfather, a Laborious Teacher among them,
informs us; That there are about One Hundred and Four-Score Families of Indians
on that Island; and that of these there are no more than Two Persons, which now
remain in their Paganism. He is at this Time, gathering another Church of
Indians, whereof he is himself to be the Pastor.

In the Indian Congregations, there were, at the Time of our last Visitation,
(which we said, was about Four or Five Years ago,) about Thirty Seven Indians,
who were the constant Preachers of the Gospel unto them, in their own Language;
In which they have Catechisms, and Bibles, and Psalm-books, and other Books of
Piety; Translated by the vast Labors of worthy Englishmen.

Besides these, there are Seven or Eight English Ministers, who have Learned
the Indian Tongue, and Visit the Indian Assemblies, and Pray, and Preach among
them, and give such Directions, as they see needful for their Affairs. The
Indian Ministers, very frequently apply themselves to these English ones, for
their Advice, about Instructing their Flocks under their Charge. And some of
the English Preachers, do constantly spend every Lords Day, with the Indian
Assemblies; having taken the Charge of them.

How the Ordinary Congregations among the Indians are inclined, and how
instructed, may be a little apprehended, from some Lines in a Letter, now lying
before us, Dated not many Weeks ago, from a very Valuable Servant of God,
namely, Mr. Samuel Danforth. He says; They met me at Little Compton about two
Months since, to hear me Preach: Had you been there with me to see how well
they filled up the Seats; with what Gravity they behaved themselves; what
Attention they gave; what Affection they showed; how powerfully Pa^quachoise
[an Indian, ^ Prayed; (for I put him upon it, to Pray, having never before
heard him Pray, and being willing to have some Trial of his Abilities, in order
to his Approbation for Office;) how melodiously Jonathan George [another
Indian] set the Tune for the Psalm, and carried it out; and how dexterously the
Young Lads of Twelve Years old, could turn to the Proofs through out the Sermon;
and how Thankful they were to me at the last, that I would take so much Pains,
as to come so far from home, to Preach to them; I am sure, you would have been
much affected with it.

Though there are some Congregations of the Indians, which are not Advanced unto
all the Privileges of the Evangelical Church State, Combining for, and
Enjoying of, all special Ordinances; yet a considerable Number of them are so.
Some New Churches have been lately formed, and filled; and more will quickly be
Gathered. They have Pastors and Elders of their own; Ordained, some times by
the Hands of English Ministers, and sometimes by the Hands of Indian Ministers,
in the presence of the English; all after the solemn English manner. And by
Admonitions, and Excommunications, Publicly dispensed, they proceed against
Scandalous Offenders, when any such are found among them.

We shall here insert, an Extract of a late Letter, from Mr. Josiah Torrey, an
hopeful Young Man, who has Learned the Indian Tongue, and begins to Preach to
them in their own Language. He having been an Eyewitness of their proceedings,
writes to us in words following.

Their Gravity, and diligent Attendance in the Time of Worship, with the
affectionate Confessions of such as are Admitted into the Church, make me hope,
that many of them may have the work of the Spirit wrought in them, according to
the working of the mighty Power of God. Their method, respecting those that are
Admitted into their Church Communion, is more according to the manner of the
Churches in the Primitive Times, than is now practiced among the Churches in
most parts. The person to be Admitted, stands forth, in the midst of the
Assembly; and first makes Declaration of his Knowledge, and sometimes desires
Informations in Things more arduous and doubtful. And then, he makes a
Confession of Sin; which they do, (as I have seen,) with Tears and Trembling,
like him in the Sixteenth Chapter of the Acts. And then, he gives an Account of
Experiences he has had, of Convictions, Awakenings, and Comforts, in which they
are large and particular. After which, (much Counsel and Exhortation, to remain
steadfast in the Faith and Ways of the Lord, being given them, by their Pastor
and Elder, they are Admitted. I would (and not ungroundedly) hope, That
Additions are made unto the Church daily of such as shall be Saved. There are
many, which maintain a Christian Conversation, and are to be accounted, not
Almost, but Altogether Christians. And this does Encourage the Preaching of the
Gospel to them, when we see, it pleases God, to make it His Power unto
Salvation.

About the Manner of performing the more Stated Exercises of Religion, in
Public, among the Indians, there needs no Account but this; They are Conformed
unto the English. But we have now before us, a Letter very lately received,
from as knowing and as faithful a Person as could be Enquired of, wherein he
speaks a little more particularly.

He says; You may Remember, That your self, with some others, were pleased
once to bear me Company, to a Lecture at Assawampset, and were an Eyewitness,
of their Grave, Serious, Attentive Deportment, in their Exercises, and of their
Excellent Singing of Psalms, with most ravishing Melody. They begin their
Exercises with Prayer; Then Sing a Psalm; Then Preach; and so Conclude with
Prayer. The Administration of Sacraments among them, is like Ours, and as they
we^^ ^^^ght by their Apostle ELIOT. His Name is of wonderful Authority among
them; and the Rules he gave them, for the Form of Marriages among them, and for
Admonitions and Excommunications in their Churches, are not to be found fault
with by any, but it will provoke them. Not long since, an Indian Lodged at an
English man's House one Night; and the next Day he visited me, and asked, Why
the man at whose House he Lodged, did not Pray in his Family? Seeing that Mr.
Eliot taught the Indians to do it every Day, Morning and Evening: he thought it
strange, that the English should direct them to Pray in their Families, and yet
not do it themselves. But at last, he entertained the Distinction; That there
were Matchet English men, as well as Matchet Indians; and that some English did
not practice, as they had been taught to do. [ Matchet; that is to say,
Naughty, or Wicked.]

The same Gentleman, thus proceeds in that Letter.

To your last Enquiry, What I think there may be of Piety among them? Sir, I
think, that there were many of the Old Generation, who were instructed by the
Reverend ELIOT, and others, which Died in the Lord, and the First Fruits of
them are in Heaven, as an Earnest of more to follow. I think, the Censorious
English among us, are not to be the Rule for our Charity about them. Yet let me
say; I could never yet Enquire of any Plantation, or Assembly of Indians, but
the most Censorious English would grant, There were Three or Four Persons in
that Plantation, who, they verily believed, were Sound Christians, though they
Condemned the rest. Whereas a Charitable man, would have reckoned these Three
or Four, to have been the most Eminent for Peity among them; and have granted
the rest, to have such a measure of Knowledge in the Gospel-method of
Salvation, and to be so ready to submit with most admirable Patience to the
Church Censures among them, and so Penitent in their Confessions of their
Faults, and Fearful afterward of Relapsing into the same or like Faults; as
might be a just Foundation to hope, That they are Traveling the right way to
Heaven.

The Frenchified Indians in the Eastern parts of this Province, have by their
long Wars upon us, denied us an Opportunity to Christianize them. While Sir
William Phips was our Governor, we had One Years Peace with those Indians; And
in that Year, we furnished the Governor, with a Preacher, to carry the offer
of the Gospel unto them. But while the Preacher was preparing for his Journey,
they perfidiously broke out into New Hostilities; by which our Attempt was then
defeated. When the Earl of Bellomont became our Governor, we had a longer
lucid Interval of Peace with them. In this time, there came several of their
Chief men to Boston, whom the Governor sent unto one of us, to be discoursed
about matters of Religion. When they were told; That they ought to Worship none
but that God, who made Heaven and Earth, and, That the Worship of Graven
Images, Crucifixes, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, was displeasing to the
Great and only True God; they stood like men amazed; they replied not a word.
They were then told, That we would send Ministers unto them, who should
instruct them in the true way to Eternal Life, if they would receive them:
Whereupon they declared, They were not willing that any should be sent unto
them. The French Priests have made them, rather twice more the Children of
Hell, (more averse to true Christianity,) than while they were mere Pagans. Yet
we gave not over. We found our Applications to English Preachers ineffectual;
we applied our selves unto Indian Preachers, in hopes, that some such might be
prevailed withal, to run the desperate Hazards of carrying the Gospel unto that
Foolish people, and imparting to them the Oracles which might make them Wise
unto Salvation. But while we were prosecuting this Design, they treacherously
and barbarously murdered near an Hundred of our Peo-who, upon the Faith of a
Peace, which they had just before Sworn to, were Lovingly treating them in
their Houses; and Commenced that grievous and bloody War, which is not yet
ended.

We have heretofore been at considerable Expenses, to Encourage the Essays of
Good men, to Christianize the Mohegin Indians, in the Colony of Connecticut.
But they have been Obstinate in their Paganism; and their Obstinacy has put a
stop at present unto our Endeavors; which yet we will Revive, as soon and as
well as we can.

A most Exemplary Indian Minister, whose Name is Japhet, has of late made
several Visits among his Country men the Pagan Indians, about the Narraganset
Country; and God has Crowned his Endeavors with considerable Successes. We
Resolve to give him all possible Encouragement.

We have left no Stone unturned, that we might obtain some Able and Faithful
Missionaries, for the Five Nations, that are some Hundreds of Miles distant
from us, to the Westward. All that we have hitherto accomplished, is, That we
have Supported and Rewarded (and at this Day continue to do so,) the Pains of
several Dutch Ministers, who proceed as far as they can, in Communicating the
Knowledge of GOD and CHRIST, unto those distant Salvages. And of late, they
have seen some desirable Successes of their Ministry.

The main Support, that we have had for the Expensive part of this Work, has
been from the Revenues, remitted hither, by the Honorable Corporation, for
Propagating the Gospel among the Indians. But then, the Liberality of Pious
men, among our selves has also been Employed this way, upon multiplied
occasions. Particular Gentlemen in this Country, have often Devised Liberal
Things, to promote Christianity among the Indians. Besides many other
Expressions of Charity toward them, given by others, we ought not to leave
unmentioned, the Meeting House, which Mr. Samuel Sewall, (the Secretary to your
Commissioners here) has Built for them; and the Books, the Publishing and
Scattering of which Mr. Edward Bromfield, (another of your Commissioners) has
more than once procured to Fortify them against their Peculiar Temptations, and
Enlighten them in the Mysteries of God.

The Studies of your Commissioners, are now Engaging more Particularly, upon
the Intentions, of bringing the Indians into the most Compact and English
Circumstances, that can be Proposed. But this must be a work of Time; and in
the mean time, though we could with the Evangelical Work among the Indians had
less Difficulties to Clog it, yet we have Reason to be glad, that so much of
Christianity and Prosperity does attend it, as there does.

As the Conversion of the Natives to our Holy Religion, was One Special Thing
propounded, by those Good Men that first Planted this Country, when a wast and
vast Wilderness; so the Salvation of the many Natives that have been here
Converted unto God, has been richly worth all the Pains and Costs therein
Expended.

We render to Your Honor, and to the Honorable Corporation, our most grateful
Acknowledgments of all Your Pious Care, to forward a Work, wherein the Name of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the Weal of many Souls, are so greatly Concerned:
Recommending You to the Divine Favor, we Subscribe,

SIR, Yours to Honor and Serve; Increase Mather. Cotton Mather. Nehemiah
Walter.
Boston, N.E. March 2. 1704, 5.

