A Discourse Concering EARTHQUAKES.

Occasioned by the Earthquakes which were in New England, in the Province of
Massachusets-Bay, June 16. and in Conecticot-Colony, June 22. 1705.

Also, Two SERMONS, SHOWING, That SIN is the Greatest EVIL; AND, That to Redeem
TIME is the Greatest WISDOM.

By Increase Mather.

Boston Printed by Timothy Green, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the
West End of the Exchange, 1706.

There shall be Great Earthquakes before the Lords Coming.
Luke XXI. II. Great Earthquakes shall be in diverse Places.


IF we compare Lukes Gospel with that written by Matthew, we shall find that
our Lord Jesus Christ signified to His Disciples that the Temple should be
subverted, the Jewish Nation made the subject of Divine Vengeance, and that
this world should come to an End. They privately enquired of Him, what should
be the fore-running sign of His coming to accomplish the things which He had
thus Predicted. In answer to that Enq^iry, Christ mentions several Signs of His
coming.

1. One is the rising of False Chri^ts, in the Eighth Verse of this Chapter.
The Jews rejected the true Messiah, for which cause they were punished and
plagued with False Christ's, which proved a sore Judgment to that sinful People.

2. Another Sign mentioned is that of Commotions, in the Ninth Verse; by which
intestine Seditions may be meant. The Histories of those Times, inform us that
the Galileans took up Arms against the Samaritans, in which Mutiny no less than
Twenty Thousand men were Slain. This Commotion caused a great Consternation
throughout the Land.

3. The Lord tells them, that Nations and Kingdoms should rise up one against
another, Verse the Tenth. The Jewish Nation rose up against the Roman Nation.
Distinct Provinces are called Kingdoms. Those in Syria and in Judea rose up one
against another. These were Signs of fatal Calamities hastening, on the Jews,
and did indeed make way for it.

4. A Fourth Sign of the Lords Coming is that in the words before us to
consider of, viz. Great Earthquakes, and this in diverse Places.

Wherefore the DOCTRINE now to be Discoursed on, is,

That Earthquakes are Signal Works of GOD, of which there will be Great Ones,
and this in diverse Places before the Lords Coming.

The Doctrine may be Opened and Confirmed in several Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
An Earthquake is the Work of God. There is not the least thing comes to pass
without His Providence. Christ said to the Disciples, Not a Sparrow falls to
the Ground without your Father, Mat. 10. 29. Then we may be sure so great a
thing as an Earthquake is not without His Providence. The Earth cannot shake it
self; and it is beyond all the Power of all the men in the world to make an
Earthquake. But God who made the Earth, can make it tremble when and where He
pleases: Job 9. 6. He shakes the Earth out of its place, and the Pillars
thereof tremble. There have been Earthquakes which were Supernatural Miraculous
Works of God: So was that on Mount Sinai, when the Lord Descended upon it in
Fire, and the whole Mount Quaked greatly; Exodus 19.18. And that which swallowed
up Corah and his Company with all their Houses, Numb. 16. 32. And that which
hapn^d in the days of Vzziah, which put the People of Jerusalem into a great
Consternation. Of this the Prophet Zechary takes notice, Zec. 14. 5. Ye shall
flee like as you fled from before the Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of
Judah. The Jewish Historian reports, that a great Mountain before Jerusalem was
removed and broken in pieces by that Earthquake, and that all the Highways
were stopped by the fall of it, and the Kings Gardens of pleasure ruined
thereby. Some Interpreters conceive that then Amos his Prophecy was fulfilled;
Amos 3. 15. I will smite the Winter house with the Summer house, and the house
of Ivory shall perish. And those Earthquakes which were at our Saviors Passion
and Resurrection, were Supe^natural. So was that which ha^^ed when Paul and
Sitas Prayed and ^ang Praises unto ^od, when they were in Prison; Suddenly
there was a great Earthquake, so that the Foundations of the Prison were
shaken, and all the Doors were opened, and every ones Bands were loosened; Act.
16. 26. This was Miraculous. Not only Christian, but some Heathen writers,
inform us that when Julian the Apostate, out of his hatred of Christ,
Encouraged the Jews to Rebuild the Temple, an Earthquake overturned what they
had begun to Build, and Fire breaking out of the Ground consumed all the
Work-mens tools, which caused them to desist from that Enterprise. Supernatural
Earthquakes are Effected either by the Almighty Power of God alone, or, by
Angels as the Instruments of His Providence; Mat. 28. 2. There was a great
Earthquake; for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven^ But many times,
Earthquakes proceed from Natural causes. This Earth on which we stand, is not a
continued substance of Earth; for then it would be impossible that ever there
should be an Earthquake, without a Miracle. But there are in the bowels of the
Earth great Caverns or hollow places, and mighty Lakes and Rivers, which wash
away the Earth, and sometimes wash it away so far as that it sinks with its own
weight; and then both Men and Houses are swallowed up: and from thence it is
that great Rains and Floods do sometimes produce Earthquakes, and that which
before was dry Land, is turned into a lake of Water. There are also
subterraneous Fires, and bituminous, sulphurous Exhalations, which are like
fired Gunpowder within the Earth, causing it to shake and tremble. But
notwithstanding there are Natural causes of some Earthquakes, nevertheless,
they are awful Works of God. Prodigious Storms have Natural causes, yet those
Stormy winds fulfill the Word of the Lord, Psalm. 148. 8. As we have formerly
from the Scripture largely Discoursed. Thunder and Lightning proceeds from
Natural causes, yet is it the Lords voice, Psalm. 29. 3, 4. The Voice of the
Lord is upon many Waters, the God of Glory Thund^eth, the Voice of the Lord is
Powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty. So an Earthquake is the
Voice of the Lord, Ver 8. The Voice of the Lord shakes the Wilderness, the Lord
shakes, the Wilderness of Kade^h. There never happens an Earthquake but God
speaks to men on the Earth, by it: And they are very stupid, if they do not
hear His Voice therein.

PROPOSITION II.
Earthquakes are Signal. They are Providence which deserve to have a Remark
set upon them. Wherefore the Prophet Amos Expressing the date of his Prophecy,
which was in the Reign of Vzziah, he says, It was two Years before the
Earthquake, Amos 1. 1. Implying that that was a Remarkable Providence, and
which ought not to be forgotten. Especially when there are Great Earthquakes or
(...) in diverse Places, the Providence of God therein is Signal. Indeed all
Eminent Providence are so. They do Signare, they declare and signify something
that is notable, either as present or as to come Eminent Judgments are Signal.
The Ten Plagues which came upon Egypt were so. They are called Tokens, Psalm.
135. 8. Who sent Tokens in the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh and upon
all his Servants. And Eminent Deliverances are Signal. When the Jews demanded
that Christ should give them a Sign of His being the Promised Messiah, He
answered them, That no Sign should be given to them, but the Sign of the
Prophet Jonas, Mat. 10. 39. Since Jonas was kept alive in the Whales belly
three Days, and then cast alive on the shore to Preach to the Ninivit^s, that
was a Sign that God sent him; so since our Savior after He had been three
Days in the Grave, was raised from thence, that was a sure Sign of His being
the Messiah whom God had promised (...) send into the world. Remarkable
Pro^vidences are Signal. So are Earthquakes.

It will be said, But what are they Sign of?

(...). They are not always a Sign of the same thing. Nor does God always
send them on the same design. Only there is one thing which they are always a
Sign of; They are always^^ a Sign o^ the Power of the Great GOD. As the Earths
abiding in its place is from the Power of God. For what is there besides. His
Hand to uphold it? Job 26. 7. He stretches out the North over the empty place
and hangs the Earth upon nothing. The Arm of Divine Omnipotence is the Pillar
which keeps the Earth from falling; Psa^ 65. 6. By His Strength He sets fast
the Mountains. Whereby it appears that He is Girded with Power. So His making
the Earth to shake is an Effect of His Great Power. He is Mighty in Strength;
and it is manifest in that He Removes the Mountains, and Shakes the Earth,
making the Pillars thereof Tremble. Job 9. 4, 5, 6.

But to speak more Particularly.

1. Earthquakes are sometimes, and indeed usually, a Sign that Men have Sinned,
and that God is Angry. Certain it is, that if men had never Sinned, they had
never been terrified with Earthquakes. Therefore at the time when God caused
the Law to be Proclaimed there was anEarthquake; signifying His Holy anger
against those that should Transgress that Law. The Scripture often speaks of
Earthquakes as a sign of the Wrath of God b^rning against a sinful world. He
overturns the Mountains in His Anger, Jo^. 9* 5* At His Wrath the Earth shall
Tremble. Jer. 10. 10. The Mountains Quake at Him. Who can stand before His
Indignation? His Fury is poured out like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by
Him, Nah. 1. 5, 6. God therefore threatens to Visit men with Earthquakes as a
terrible* Judgment; Isa. 29. 6. Thou shall be Visited of the Lord of Hosts,
with Thunder and with Earthquake, and with great Noise: And there (...) awful
instances Recorded in the Script^^e of horrendous Earthquakes, which were the
Effects of Divine indignation for the Sins of men. It was Thunder and Lightning
and an Earthquake which Destroyed ^he Sinners in Sodom and Gomorrha, causing
all their houses as well as themselves to sink down into an horrid Lake. They
were Prodigious Sinners, therefore a Prodigious Earthquake brought upon them
Eternal Desolation. So when Corah and his wicked Crew by means of an
Earthquake, went down alive into Hell; it was because they had highly provoked
the Lord by Sinning against Him: Numb. 16. 30. If the Earth opens its mouth and
swallow them up with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick into
the Pit, then you shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord. When
there was a formidable Earthquake in the Days of King Vzziah, the Jewish
writers tell us, that it happened at that very time when he was presumptuously
offering Incense in the Temple, contrary to the Comma^dment of God, for which
he was also smitten with an incurable Leprosy. Yea, sometimes Earthquakes have
been a sign of the Displeasure of God, when the Earth has only trembled without
destroying any person. So was that Earthquake which happened at the time when our
Savior CHRIST was Crucified, Mat. 27. 51. I know some Ecclesiastical writers
say, that Earthquake destroyed several Towns in other Lands, but none in the
Land of Judea. Nevertheless, it came as a Sign of Divine Anger kindled against
the Jews, for their Crucifying the Son of God, which was such a Sin as the
Earth trembled under it. Surely then if dismal Desolations are caused by
Earthquakes, the Anger of God is written in legible Characters, for all the
world to read and tremble. Whole Towns (as anon you shall hear) far greater
than Boston, with all the People in them, Men, Women and Children, have in less
than half a quarter of an Hour after the Earth has begun to shake, gone down
alive into the Pit. Would such a thing be, if God were not infinitely
displeased by the Sins of men?

2. Sometimes Earthquakes in a Literal sense, are Prognostics of Earthquakes
in a Metaphorical sense. They are a Sign of State-quakes, of Church-quakes, of
Kingdom-quakes, of Province-quakes, Great Changes and Revolutions in the world,
are in the Scripture called Earthquakes. The mighty Changes to be brought on
the Jewish Church and Nation, first by the Babylonians, and after that by the
Romans, are Predicted by the Prophet, saying, The Foundations of the Earth do
shake, the Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved, the
Earth is moved exceedingly, Isa. 24. 18, 19. That wonderful Revolution when the
Roman Empire, of Pagan became Christian, is doubtless intended by the Great
Earthquake under the sixth Seal, Rev 6. 12. When Constantine was established in
the Imperial Throne, there was a sudden and very astonishing Change of affairs,
which is fit^y compared to a Great Earthquake. For that changes the po^iture
of the Earth, by Exalting Valleys and Depressing Mountains, and turning the
course of Rivers, that they run another way; and sometimes are wholly absorp't
thereby. Thus it was when that good Emperor was settled in the Throne. Pagans
who had been the only men in Authority, were removed from their high places,
those Mountains were levelled; and Christians who were like low Valleys before,
were put into Chief places of Power and Trust. The Civil Government was altered
with Religion. Officers and Governors were new molded throughout all the
Provinces in that Empire. This was a great Earthquake. Notwithstanding the
Empire was become Christian, God was resolved to destroy it; to avenge the
Blood of the Martyrs, which had been shed under the Heathen Emperors. Those
Wars which brought mighty deva^tations and alterations on the Empire, are
denoted by the Trumpets spoken of in the Revelations, which were to cause
Earthquakes, Rev. 8. 5, 6. The first of those Trumpets did (according to the
judgment of the (...) Interpreters,) begin to Sound in the Year of our Lord
Three Hundred Sixty Five, when also there was in a Literal sense the greatest
Earthquake that ever had been known in the world; and this as a Sign of those
Calamitous Changes which were ha^tning on the Earth.

3. Sometimes Earthquakes come as a Sign both of great Judgments to the World,
and of signal Mercy to the Church of God. Thus when the Children of Israel were
brought out of Egypt, although Moses does not mention any thing of an Earthquake,
yet nevertheless, it is evident from other Scriptures that there was one then.
For the Psalmist speaking of Gods bringing His People out of Egypt, by the
hands of Moses and Aaron, says, The Earth trembled and shook, Psalm. 77. 18.
That proved an happy Earthquake to the Children of Israel, but it presaged
ruin to Pharaoh and the Egyptians. So in Joshuahs time, when the River Jordan
was dried up, there was doubtless an Earthquake; as is intimated, Psalm. 114. 5.
6, 7. What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? Thou Jordan, that thou
wast driven back? Ye Mountains, that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little Hills
like Lambs? Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord. That Earthquake was
a Sign of Gods Presence with His People, and a Presage of Destruction to their
Canaanitish Enemies. It seems also, there was an Earthquake when the Children
of Israel were in the Wilderness, and ready to take possession of the Land of
Canaan, which struck the E^omites and other Enemies with a great Terror. This
we gather from a passage in Deborahs Song, Judge. 5. 4. When thou ^entest out of
Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the Earth trembled. And
when Jonathan surpriz^d the Garrison of the Philistines, There was trembling in
the Host, the Garrison trembled, and (...) Earth quaked, so that it was a very
great Trembling. This was a Sign of Gods Favor to Jonathan, and of Ruin to
the Philistines. We read that when the Apo^tles had Prayed, the place was shaken
where they had assembled together, Act. 431. Which was a sign of Gods gracious
Presence with them, that their Prayers was heard, and that by their Preaching
the Gospel, there would be great shakings in the world, and changes for the
better. But the happiest Earthquake that ever was, was that when Christ Rose
from the Dead; signifying that He had conquered Death, and that by virtue of
His Resurrection, all true Believers on His Name, shall have a Resurrection to
Eternal Life.

PROPOSITION III.
Before the Lords Coming there will be Great Earthquakes, and this in diverse
Places. Our Lord Himself mentions Earthquakes as a sign of His coming near at
hand. We are to consider that there are several Comings of Christ spoken of in
the Scripture.

1. There is His Providential Coming. When He Executes Judgments upon men then
He comes to them in the way of His Providence. And this coming is firstly (though
not ultimately) intended in the words before us. Our Savior having intimated
to the Disciples that He would come to Execute Vengeance on the Jewish Nation,
and to put an end both to their Civil and Ecclesiastical State, they prayed Him
to tell them what would be the Signs of His coming to do it; He answers, Great
Earthquakes in diverse places, will be one sign of it. Accordingly we find in
Histories, that it was thus. In Neroes Reign (which was not long before the
Destruction of Jerusalem,) Twelve Cities were Destroyed by Earthquakes at one
time, and Thirteen Cities at another time, in which Cities many Jews perished,
and on that account the warning was the more solemn to those that dwelt in the
Land of Judea. And but Six years before the Destruction of Jerusalem, Three of
the most Famous Cities in Asia, were overthrown by Earthquakes. Thus were the
words of Christ dreadfully Verified. The Lord seldom visits any Town or
Country with Desolating Judgments, put He first gives them warnings of it by
one means or other, and many times by Earthquakes. A Roman Historian observes,
that the City of Rome never felt an Earthquake, but some terrible Judgment soon
followed. In the Scripture before us, it is said, There shall be Earthquakes in
diverse places, the next words are, And Famines, and Pestilences. Earthquakes
sometimes are Prodromous of those other Judgments.

2. There is the Lords Personal Coming. He will come in Person to Judge the
World at the Last day. The same Signs are mentioned of His Providential Coming
to Judge the Jews, and of His Personal Coming to Judge the Earth, because the
former was to be a Type of the latter, and as sure as that Has been, the other
Shall be. And without doubt a little before the Day of Judgment, Earthquakes
will be multiplied, and other Prodigious Signs more than ever since the world
began. This Age has seen more of such awful Providence than the former Age
did. And the next Age (if Christ does not Himself come to Judge the Earth
before this Generation is passed away) is like to see more of such tremendous
Works of God, than ever we have done. And when the Great Day is come indeed,
there will be the greatest Earthquake, both in a Literal and in a Mystical
sense, that ever was since the world began. For then the last Vial of the Wrath
of God will be poured on the Earth, and then there is a Great Earthquake, such
as was not since men were upon the Earth, so M^ghty an Earthquake, and so
Great, Rev. 16, 18.

We proceed to the APPLICATION of the Doctrine, which has been Opened and
Confirmed.

USE I.
How ought the Children of Men to Fear and Tremble before that Almighty GOD,
who makes the Earth to Tremble under them? The thought of His Dreadful Power
should make all Mortals to stand in awe of Him. When God manifested His Power
in a miraculous Deliverance of the Prophet Daniel, the greatest man then
living, made a Decree that in every Dominion of his Kingdom, men should tremble
and fear before the God of Daniel, Dan. 6. 26. How Dreadful is His Power who
with His Voice can make the Earth to shake? As when the Law was given, His
Voice then shook the Earth, Heb. 12. 26. Such is His Power as that if He does
but touch the Earth with His Foot, or with His Finger, or but cast an angry
Look upon it, presently it falls a Trembling: Psalm. 104. 32. He looks on the
earth and it trembles, He touches the hills and they smoke. When an
Earthquake comes what does it say? It does like the Angel in the Revelation, It
says with a loud Voice, Fear GOD, for you know not but that an hour of
Judgment is near unto you. The thought of Earthquakes should make men walk in
the Fear of God continually: And the rather for that, there is no place has
assurance of not being visited therewith. It is true, that Earthquakes have
been oftener in some parts of the world than i^ other places; but there is no
Land totally free or exempt. I may tell you, that places which were once Famous
for the Religion which ^hined in them, have afterward perished by Earthquakes.
The City of A^ttoch was that in which the Christian Name was first heard of,
which City has been Destroyed by Earthquakes. In Smyrna there was an Holy
Church* Our Savior reproves most of the Churches in Asi^, but the Church in
Smyrna is not at all blamed, yet Smyrna has been R^ined by Earthquakes.
Therefore let us not be High-minded, but Fear: Not with a Slavi^h but with an
Holy Fear. When God ^^rds an Earthquake with a Commission to Destroy, it is the
formidablest Judgment which men in this world are subject unto. Partly in
respect of the Extent of it. For not only whole Towns, but whole Countries have
been swallowed up at once by this devouring Judgment. Historians tell us, that
the Country called Bojano sunk with an Earthquake, and is now a standing Lake
of Water, in which Disaster there Perished Thirty Thousand persons. The Land
where Sodom and Gomorrha stood, is sunk for the compass of Eighteen miles in
breadth, and about Eighty miles in length; so that all that delicious Country
is become a sulphurous Lake, which bears the name of, the Dead Sea. Also, in
respect of the Suddenness and the Unavoidableness of it. Oftententimes
miserable Mortals have been surp^ized with it, when they had not the least
thought of any such thing. Men may more easily escape the Destruction of other
Judgments, than of this: When the Pestilence comes, they may possibly escape by
a timely Removal to another place: Or when Enemies come, by getting into
Garrisons or strong Holds. But when a sudden Earthquake comes, there is no
escaping. And if it finds men in their Sins, their immortal Souls are like to
Perish with their Bodies. Was it not so with the Sinners in Sodom? An
Earthquake swallowed up their Houses, and all the Bodies in them. But what
became of their Souls? Does not the Scripture say, that they are suffering the
Vengeance of eternal Fire? Jude 7. All these things considered, shall we not
Fear GOD? Shall we that call our selves Christians be worse than the Heathen
Romans? of whom it is said, that when they law the Earthquake they feared
greatly; Mat. 27. 54. Oh! The hardness of the Hearts of men. The senc^l^^s
Earth will sooner. Tremble before the Power of God, than their Hearts will
Tremble. Therefore the holy Prophets have sometimes turned themselves from Men,
to speak to the Stones and to the dead Earth, which would sooner be affected
than they. Thus the Prophet that was sent to Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. 2. He Cry^d
against the Altar in the Word of the Lord, and said, O Altar, Altar, Thus faith
the Lord. And then the Altar was rent, but Jeroboams Heart Rent not. It was
harder than the Stones of the Altar. So when Jeconiah was hardened in his Sins,
the Prophet speaks to the Earth; which would sooner hear the Word of the Lord
than be; Jer. 22. 29. O Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the Word of the Lord.
Certainly, if Earthquakes will not make men to Fear God, their Hearts are
harder than the hardest Earth, yea, than the Rocks themselves, which Tremble
before His Dreadful Power.

USE II.
If Great Earthquakes in diverse Places are forerunners of the Lords Coming,
we the^ have at this Day, reason to expect that (...) Notable Coming of the
Lord is near at hand^* We may say, as in Zeph. 1. 14. The Great Day of the Lord
is near, it is near, and hastes greatly. For the Signs of it are appearing
more and more. And in special that Sign of Earthquakes in diverse Places. In our
Days there have been astonishing Earthquakes: Yea, God has been shaking the
Earth in all Quarters of it. In Asi^ there have been terrible Earthquakes, as
at Smyrna, and the places adjacent. And in the East Indies, Five years ago. One
writes from thence that which is Remarkable. He says that there was a noise
like Thunder heard in the Mountains about Tangarouse, and that Seven Hills were
sunk by an Earthquake in one place, and Nine in another: That several Rivers
were stopped, and their course altered; That the high Land between the Batavian
and Tangaren Rivers, which were before that a Wood, are by the Earthquake
changed into an open Field, wholly de^ti^^^e of Trees, the surface of the
Ground being covered with Red Clay. This Earthquake was in January 1699. In the
Year 1695, there were direful Earthquakes in the Motucco Islands. One writes
from thence to his Correspondent in Am^erdam, that a Noise like the hardest
Thunder was heard, and at the same time an Earthquake which blew up a Mountain*
and that it seems evident, that in those Parts and Seas there are ^ubterra^^ous
Fires, which have a mutual commu^^cation one with another, which he says may
probably cause a sudden subversion of them, and consequently a notable
al^eration of the worlds Globe.

But especially in Europe, there have been (...) Earthquakes in diverse Places:
As (...) Italy Eighteen Years ago, and since that, both there and in diverse
other Places. The Year 1692. is famous for the Earthquakes in Europe. It was in
that Year, (September 8th.) that God made the Great City of London to shake, to
the no little Amazement of the Inhabitants although the Earthquake lasted but for
a minute, and through the Gracious Providence of God, no hurt was done thereby.
It was in other Lands at the same time. And some write, that the Earth (...)
for the compass of Two Hundred and Sixty Miles square. In the latter end of
that Year, was the great Earthquake i^ Sicily, the like where unto no History
give^ us an account of. A Town there in which were Six Thousand People was
overthrown in a moment, and not one of the Inhabitants left to bring the tyding
of what had befallen them. The Famous City of Catania in which there was an
University, and many Persons of Quality, and about Twenty Four Thousand
Inhabitants, was swallowed up in one minute, with a noise as terrible as if a
Thousand Canons had been discharged at once. The number of Souls which Perished
in those (...) Earthquakes, supposed to be above an Hundred and Forty Thousand.
The last Intelligence which we had out of Italy, gives an account of renewed
Earthquakes in diverse place there. And the City of Rome it (...) has been
shaken, to the great Terror of the Inhabitants, who are mostly Ecclesiastics,
(and are not they the False Prophet mentioned in the Revelations?) so that the
Pope has caused processions to be made for the averting the wrath of Heaven
from that City; which I am persuaded will ere long be swallowed up with an
Earthquake, like as Sodom was: For it is said, that the Beast and the False
Prophet shall be cast alive into a Lake, Rev. 19. 20.

But let us come back into America: Has not the Earth been shaken there too? In
the Southern America, the City of Lima was Seventeen Years since totally
overthrown with an Earthquake, not one House left standing, and many of the
Inhabitants buried in the Ruins of the City. Nor has the Northern America been
Exempted. Was not the Island of Antigua, visited with frightful Earthquakes
Fifteen Years since? One then wrote to his Correspondent here, that the Earth
was seen to heave, and roll like the Waves of the Sea, that Rocks were thrown
from the Mountains, Houses shattered, and some Points of Land were swallowed
up. And have we forgotten what God did in Jamacio Thirteen Years ago, when two
Thousand People (Whites and Blacks) perished by the Earthquakes there? And now
Behold, the Earthquakes are come into New England; although through the great
Mercy of God no hurt has been done thereby. We see then, that the Lord is
shaking the Earth all the world over. And is there not some Great and Notable
Day of the Lord at hand? Moreover, there are at this Day, Great Earthquakes in
a Metaphorical sense. Nations are shaking, mighty Kingdoms are shaking; yea,
the greatest Kingdoms in Europe are so. The German Empire, (although it is not a
full Fortieth part of what the Roman Empire once was,) is a great Dominion, but
it is shaking. The Kingdom of France, the greatest in Europe, is shaking. Is
there not an Earthquake in the bowels of that Kingdom? The Kingdom of Spain is
shaking. And the Kingdom or Republic of Poland is shaking. Great Wars which
shake Nations, are mentioned as Signs of the Lords Coming; Hag. 2. 6, 7. I will
shake the Seas, and the dry Land, I will shake all Nations and the desire of
all Nations shall come. When there are great Sea Fights, the Lord shakes the
Sea. Is it (...) at this Day? When there are great Battles fought on the Land,
the Lord shakes those Lands. Such things may raise our Expectations, that the
Day of Redemption draws nigh. It is foretold, that there shall be a Great
Earthquake, in order to the Resurrection of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 13. Is not
that very Scripture now f^l^illing? It is Prophesied, that in the latter Days
there shall be a Great Shaking, that all the Men on the Earth shall shake at
the Lords Presence, and Mountains shall be thrown down, Ezekiel. 38. 19, 20. That
Day is coming, and not far off.

USE III.
Let us make a due Improvement of the Earthquakes, which the Lord has (...)
Vi^^^ed us with. It would be great Atheism and Impiety to slight such awful
Works of God. What does the Psalmist say of such Persons? P^al. 28. 5. Because
they regard not the Works of the Lord, (...) the Operation of His Hands, He
shall Destroy them, and not Build them up.

QUESTION.

But what is the Improvement which we ought to make of this Providence?

ANSWER.

First. We should be very Thankful to God for His Mercy, in that this
Earthquake did no harm. God has let us see His Power and His Goodness at the
same time. Not any Person hurt, nor so much as one House overthrown! God that
made the Earth to shake, could have made it to sink under us, or Houses to have
fallen, and proved the Graves of you that dwelt in them. But we see, that He is
^oth to make us as Admah, and set us as Zeboim, all our Sins notwithstanding.
He has only given us Warning, without Striking so much as one Blow. It was
Piously Expressed by a Great King, who being concerned at the appearance of a
Blazing Star, when some said, We ought not to be dismayed at the Signs of
Heaven, replied, But we ought to Fear God, and to Admire His Goodness, who
gives us warning before He strikes us.

Secondly. This Earthquake should awaken us unto Prayer and Repentance. So it
was with Christians in the Primitive Times; Earthquakes set them a Praying.
Eusebius has Recorded a memorable Letter of the Emperor Antoninus, to his
Subjects, who were not Christians, as neither was he himself. You (says he)
would faign have me to Persecute and Destroy the Christians, whereas I
understand there never happens an Earthquake, but they go and Pray to their
God, that He would turn from His Wrath. And in that, they show more Religion
than you do, why then should I to gratify you destroy them? Thus that Emperor.

There was a considerable Earthquake in England, in the Year 1580. Although no
considerable harm was done by it. The QUEEN who then swayed the Scepter, (our
Famous Queen ELIZABETH,) and Her Council, did there upon call upon all Her
Subjects, throughout the Kingdom, to be instant in Prayer, that the Wrath of
God, which the Earthquake was a sign of, might be averted from the Land. And as
this should awaken unto Prayer, so unto Repentance and Reformation, without
which Prayer will not be acceptable. They that have Repented, should by such
Providence be awakened to renew their Repentance. But, Oh! that Sinners would
Repent and Turn to the Lord. As for some of the Elect of God, Earthquakes have
occasioned their Conversion. They have cast away their Idols when they have
seen God arising to shake terribly the Earth; Isa. 20. 20, 21. Thus it was with
the Jailer: An Earthquake made way for his Conversion, so as that he began to
have serious Thoughts with himself, what he should do to be Saved, Act. 16. 30
Alas! That there are so many who need Conversion. There is one sin (I wish
there were not more than one,) that is become a prevailing Iniquity, that more
than a few are concerned in it, and had need Repent of it, and Turn from it; I
mean, that sin of Excess in Drinking. The Scripture speaks of the Earths
Reeling to and fr^ like a Drunkard, I^a. 19. 20. Justly may the Lord cause it
to do so, then there are so many Drunkards Re^^ing to and fro upon it.

Thirdly. We should Endeavor that our Hearts may be taken off from the Earth,
and set upon things which cannot be Shaken. The Earth is but a tottering
Foundation to Build upon. That which men have been Lab^uring for many Years, an
Earthquake may come and Destroy it all in one Minute. Our Houses may be shaken
down thereby; but an House in Heaven cannot be shaken. That Is a City which has
Foundations, Heb. 11. 10. And an House there has Foundations; that is to say,
it can never be overthrown. Nothing in this World is sure and stable. A man may
have a Kingdom, and be shaken out of it; as Nebuchadnezzar was, and several in
our Days have been. But they that have an Interest in Heaven, have a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28.

Fourthly. We should be Prepared for whatever Changes may come upon us. We know
not what shall be on the Earth: It may be the Providence of God will shake our
Foundations. Our Charters are the Foundation on which our Civil Liberties
stand: What if the Lord should shake those Foundations, in this Province, and
in the Neighbo^r Colony? For there have within these few Days past, been
Earthquakes in both of them. And our Sins deserve such a Judgment; and there
are Vipers in our Bowels, Endeavoring to bring such a Death upon us. We know
not what Shakes may be near unto us. However, there is one Change, and a great
one too, which is not far from us. Death brings a great Change along with it.
And it may come suddenly. Therefore we should be always Serving God, that so
Death may not find us Unprepared. There was a Town in Switzerland Des^royed by
an Earthquake, only one House escaped. It so fell out, that the Good man of the
House was Praying with his Family, when the Earthquake happened. If Earthquakes,
or any other unexpected Judgment should overtake us suddenly, let it find us
Praying, or doing something or other that shall be Pleasing to God.

Fifthly and Finally. Let us Labor to be such, as that no Earthquake shall be
able to Hurt us. Is that possible? Yes it is, by making sure that it find us in
CHRIST. And then if it Kill us, it (...) not Hurt us, but rather hasten our
Eternal Salvation. A Godly man may Perish in an Earthquake, as well as the
Ungodly, but it shall not Hurt him. He will be in Heaven the sooner for it; and
what Hurt is there in that? If we are Built upon CHRIST, we need not Fear any
Earthquake in the World; Psalm. 46. 2. We will not Fear, though the Earth be
Removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. -- Ver.
7. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Our Lord JESUS
CHRIST is that Lord of Hosts, who is the King of Glory. He is the God of Jacob.
It was He that Jacob Prayed unto saying, I will not let thee go, except thou
Bless me. If by Faith we make Him our Refuge, we are safe Enough; we need not
Fear. If our Souls are Built upon Him, we are Built on a Rock, which cannot be
shaken. All other Rocks may shake under us. I am told, that Two men who were on
a Rock the other Day, when the Earthquake happened, felt it shake under them. But
JESUS CHRIST is the Rock of Eternity. Let us make sure that our Souls are Built
upon Him, then we are safe Forever. Then are we Wise Builders; and it is said
of the Wise Builder, that be Built his House on a Rock, and the Rain descended,
and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and Beat upon the House and it Fell
not, for it was Founded on a Rock.

SIN Is the Greatest EVIL.
Joh. XVII. 15. -- The Evil.


THIS Chapter contains the most Heavenly Prayer that ever was made upon Earth.
And it was the last Prayer which Christ made with His Apostles. From the Fifth
to the Twentieth Verse, we hear Him interce^ding for those Eleven whom God had
given to him. There are diverse Arguments with which our Savior urges his
Requests on their behalf. In special, in that He was now leaving them in an
Evil World, and in that the World did hate them for His sake, and because they
were not of the World; but did Preach and Practice things very contrary to the
course of the world, and were therefore the greater Objects of the Compassion
and Favor of God: In this Verse there are two particulars Expressed.

1. Christ declares what He did not Pray for with respect to his Disciples. He
did not Pray that God would take them out of the world; that is to say, not
that he would do it as yet. Although Christ loved them and desired their Company
in Heaven, nevertheless, He would not have them removed thither before their
work on Earth was finished. As long as God might have more Glory by their
living, than by their dying, He would not Pray them out of the world.

2. The Lord declares positively what was the special thing which he requested
for them, viz. That they might be kept from the Evil. There is the Evil One,
and the Evil Thing. The Evil One, is the Devil. The Evil thing, is Sin: And
that is here intended. Christ does not Pray that His Disciples should be kept
from the Evil of Affliction, or that the should be wholly preserved from Satan^
Temptations. Only that those Temptation might not prevail over them, so as to
cause them to Sin in such sort, as to loose their Interest in Him. Sin is said
to be not only An Evil, but The Evil. It is the Evil of Evils; the worst Evil
that can be mentioned, or that can be Prayed against.

Wherefore the DOCTRINE to be insisted on, is,

That Sin is the Greatest Evil.

There are Two things before us to be Enquired into.

I. How it does appear that Sin is the Greatest Evil?

II. What Sin is so?

Quest. I. How does it appear that Sin is the Greatest Evil?

Answ. I. In that it is most contrary to the Blessed God. It is an Evil
committed against Him; I^a. 42. 24. The Lord He against whom we have Sinned. It
is true, that some Sins are in a more especial manner against Him. Sins against
the First Table of the Moral Law have God for their Object, who is peculiarly
wronged by them; and Sins against the Second Table have Men for their Object.
The Scripture makes a difference of sins, according to that distinction, 1 Samuel
2. 25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Therefore the Prodigal
confessed, that he had sinned against Heaven, and against his Father too, Luke
15. 18. Nevertheless, all sin is against God. A man cannot sin against his
Neighbor, but he does at the same time sin against God. When Joseph was
Tempted to wrong his Master, he said, How can I do this great Wickedness, and
Sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. David sinned greatly against Vriah, and against
Bathsheba, and against his own Soul, and yet he said in his Con^e^^ion to God,
Against thee, Th^^ Only have I Sinned; h. e. against thee Chiefly, Psalm. 51. 4.

For,

1. Sin is a violation of Gods Holy Law. The Scripture gives us that
description of sin, 1 John 3. 4. Whosoever commits Sin transgresses the Law,
for Sin is a transgression of the Law. Men by sin transgress every Precept of
the Divine Law: Jam^ 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, is guilty of all. In a Chain that has many Links, if one of them
is broken, the Chain is broken: So if one Commandment of the Law is
transgressed, the whole Law is broken. Besides, It is truly asserted, that God
never gave any Law, or established any Ordinance or Precept whatsoever, but it
has been broken by Sin. Yet it may be truly affirmed, that the le^st tittle of
Gods Law, is more dear to Him than all the World. Christ therefore said, Till
Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
Law, till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 18. So then the least ^in is worse than the
destruction of the world. If Heaven and Earth should Perish, there would not be
so much Evil in it, as there is in the least Sin* The Law of God which is so
dear to him, and so much valued by Him, sin is a Despising of it. It is said of
sinners, that they cast His Law behind their backs; as a man does a thing which
he greatly despi^eth, Neh. 9. 26. What does sin say? It says that which is
very bl^^phemous. It says, that GOD has not Power to make such Laws. It makes
His Commandments to be of none Effect, Mat. ^5. 6. Sinners take away the
Authority of the Law, and Jurisdiction of the Lawgiver. They will be their own
Lawgivers, and not have God to appoint what Laws He pleases to keep them in
subjection. They say, We are Lords, we will come no more at thee, Jer. 2. 31.
Yea, Sin says, that the Laws which God has made, are not Good Laws. Sinners by
not keeping them, say they are not worth keeping. That they are Bad Laws,
better broken than kept. Should men in Express words speak thus, they were
guilty of high Blasphemy; yet implicitly they say as much when they sin against
God. They speak Evil of the Law, and Judge the Law to be not as it should be,
Jam. 4. 11. And therefore sin is an exceeding Dishonor to the Name of God. For
thus to despise the Law, is to reflect on the Lawgiver; Romans 2. 23. By
breaking the Law thou dishonourest God. That Glory which is due to God, men by
sin give it to another, and His Praise to graven Images. Yea, (which is a
dreadful thought) they give that Honor to the Devil, which is due to God
alone. For when a man is tempted to sin, God says, Do it not, O do not that
abominable thing which I hate. But the Devil says, Do it. So that the Question
then is, who is most worthy to be honored with Obedience, God or the Devil?
Now as the Jews said, Not Jesus, but Barabbas; so Sin says, not God, but the
Devil. So it was in the first sin that ever man was guilty of: God said, Do not
Eat of the forbidden Fruit, the Devil said, Do Eat of it; so that when man
sinned, he hearkened to the Devil rather than unto God. What hideous Blasphemy
is it, to say, God is not to be Obeyed, or to say, the Devil is to be Obeyed?
Yet this is the Cursed Language of Sin. And when men give way to Sin and Satan,
they practically say as bad as all this.

2. Sin is injurious to the Blessed God, in that it has defaced and spoiled His
Works. They were all Good and Beautiful as they came out of his Hands, but sin
has brought a Curse and a Blast upon many of them. Yea, such a Curse as the
whole Creation groans to be delivered from it. Sin has put all out of Order,
and has brought Confusion and Desolation on the works of God. If a man shall
show his Art in framing an excll^nt piece of Workman^hip, and another shall
come and break it and trample it under foot, the skil^ull Artificer looks on
himself as abused: so it is here. God has showed His infinite Wisdom in framing
the world, but Sin has undone the world, so that there needs a Restitution of
all things.

3. Sin strikes at the very Being of God. Men by sin deny the God that is
above. They say that there is no such God in Heaven, as his Word and Works
declare that there is; Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart that there
is no God. Sinners are fighters against God, and haters of Him. They are
called, the Haters of the Lord, Psalm. 81. 15. He that hates another, wi^heth
him out of the world. Sin is a Practical denial of the Essential Attributes of
God. It denies the Omnipresence, and so the Omniscience of God, without which
He could not be God. Sinners are apt to think, that if there is a God, that He
is afar off in Heaven, and not on the Earth. As I remember Calvin on Psalm. 115.
16. speaks of one, who in an Athei^tical way, would recite that Scripture,
which says, The Heaven of Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth has He given to
the Children of men. God keeps Himself in Heaven said he, but he is not
concerned what men do on the Earth; immediately he was smitten with horrible
Torment in his bowels, and then he Cried out, O God have Mercy on me! O God
have Mercy on me! One present upbraided him, saying, But now thou saydst God
did not know what is done on the Earth, why then do^t thou in thy misery, Cry
to Him for help and mercy! But what does the Lord say to such Athei^tical men?
Jer. 23. 23, 24. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off?
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him? Do not I fill
Heaven and Earth; says the Lord? The Lord complains of the Jews, that they
said, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the Earth, Ezekiel 8. 12. Not
that they said so in words. If any one had asked them, Do you not think that
the Lord sees you? They would certainly have said, Yes, we do believe it. But
the Language of their sinful actions was, The Lord sees us not. A sinner
denies and desies the Almighty Power of God; Job 15. 25. He stretches out his
hand against God, and strengthens himself against the Almighty. Hence sinners
are said to Tempt God, and to speak against Him, Psalm. 78. 18, 19. They Tempted
God, yea, they spoke against Him, they said, Can God prepare a Table in the
wilderness? Yea, they Reproach Him. The Soul that does ought Presumptuously,
the same Reproaches the Lord, Numb. 15. 30. He does in Effect say, that the
Lord is either an Ignorant or an Impotent God, that either does not know how He
has been abused, or is not able to avenge it. The Blessed God is the Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts. The Father is Holy, the Son is Holy, the Eternal
Spirit is Holy. God is and cannot but be Holy. Holiness is Essential to his
Nature. He is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, He cannot look on Iniquity.
But Sin stands in the greatest Opposition to the Holiness of God. And men by
giving way to sin, practically say, that he is not so Holy and so Just to
Punish sin as he has declared concerning Himself. God hates Sin with an
Infinite and Eternal hatred. But sinners think that he hates sin no more than
they themselves do, Psalm. 50. 21. Thou thoughtest that I was such an one as thy
self. Thus we see how Sin is against God; and in that Chiefly does the Evil of
it appear. For God is the Chief Good: And that which is most contrary to the
Greatest Good, must needs be the Greatest Evil.

II. Sin is Exceeding Hurtful to the precious and immortal Souls of Men. Other
Evils may hurt us as to our Estates, or Names, or Bodies, but not as to our
Souls without Sin. A Philosopher could say, that his Enemies could only destroy
the Case, but not the Jewel which was is it; meaning that they could only hurt
his Body, which is like the Case, in which the Precious Jewel, viz. the Soul is
contained. A great Truth this is. Our Lord himself has declared no lets, Mat.
10. 28. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul.
Then that which hurts the Soul is a greater Evil than that which hurts the
Body. Who can declare the worth of a Soul? What shall a man give in Exchange
for that Soul which is more worth than all the World, That then which is
injurious to a Soul, that is more worth than all the World, how Exceeding Evil
is it? But this is true of Sin; Prove. 8. 36. He that Sins against me wrongs his
own Soul. Sin Robs the Soul of that which is its chief Glory, viz. the Image of
God; Romans 3. 23. All have Sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Man in
his first Estate had all the Perfections united in him, which are to be found
in other-Creatures; but the chiefe^t of all was that of Holiness, without which
(as one says truly,) the Angels in Heaven would be Damned Devils and the
Saints in Glory Damned Ghosts. But this Sin has utterly Deprived men of Look
all the world over, you will not find one Unregenerate man that has the least
spark of Grace, or Holiness in his heart, Romans 3. 10. There is none Righteous,
no not me Sin deba^eth the Soul: it causet^ it to become a slave to the vilest
Master that can be; Tit. 3. 3. Serving diverse Lusts. A more ignoble Servitude
there cannot possibly be. Sin makes the Rational Soul to become a slave to the
Sensual Soul in men. The rich Fool in the Gospel, said to his Soul, Soul, take
thing Ease, Eat and Drink. One of the Ancients observes, that if he had the
soul of a Swine in him, he could not have spoken more Brutishly. Sin turns Men
into Beasts. It makes those that in their first Creation were a little lower
than the Angels, to become like the Beasts that perish. Hazael said to the
Prophet, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this? 2 King. 8. 13. As if he
had said, he must be a Dog and not a Man, that shall do such things as thou
saye^t I shall do. And yet afterward he proved himself to be as savage a
Beast, as the Prophet told him he would be. The Scripture would not call wicked
Men Dogs and Swine, if sin had not debased their very souls, and made them
vile. Nay, that which is worse must be said, Sin has turned the Soul into a
Devil. Christ says of Judas, He is a De^il, Joh. 6. 70. Because he had a false
Heart in him, and was such another Hypocrite as the Devil. In the Scripture,
Sinners are called the Devils Children, because their Souls resemble him. The
poison of Sin which the Devil has infused into them, makes them like him. If a
man is bitten with a Serpent, he will presently be like that Serpent; his Body
will be of the color of the Serpent that has bitten him. Thus the Old Serpent
having poy^on^d the Souls of men, they are in quality very like unto him. The
Devil is the vilest and most accursed Creature in the whole world. What an Evil
is Sin then, which has made the Souls of men so like unto him? Moreover, Sin
wounds the Soul. It makes the Soul sick, and to need healing. Hence is that
Prayer, Psalm. 41 4. Heal my Soul, for I have Sinned. So then sin is the Souls
sickness. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, (faith David) who heals all thy Diseases.
Every sinful Lust is a Disease of the Soul. Sin is the Souls mortal Enemy; and
therefore is said to War against it; 1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from Fleshly Lusts
which War against the Soul. It strikes and wounds the precious Soul. It makes a
sad wound in the Conscience. What is Conscience, but the Soul reflecting on it
self? It leaves a sting behind it: So that in Laughter the Heart is Sorrowful,
the end of that Mirth is Heaviness, Prove. 14. ^3. Sinners in the midst of their
mirth, have inward wounds and bleeding of Conscience; and afterward they are
in heaviness. When their pleasure is over their pain begins. Indeed, this wound
is not always felt when it is first made, but it is not less dangerous to the
Soul for that. But in the latter end, sin will be sharper than a two edged
Sword. Prove. 5. 4. At last it will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an
Adder. It may be many Years after the sin has been committed, Conscience will
fall a bleeding (...) it. As it was with Joseph's Brethren, Twenty Years after
they had sinned against him, they Cried out, We (...) verily Guilty concerning
our Brother, Genesis 42. ^^. It may be the wounds which sin has giv^^ to the
Conscience, will be felt on a Deathbed; or if not, to be sure immediately
after Death it will be ^o. For the Soul of a sinner is no sooner out of his
Body, but he has a sad remembrance of all the sins of his life part. Therefore
when ^ives was Dead, and his ^^ul in Hell, it was said to him, Remember that in
thy life time thou had thy good things, Luke 16. 25. He remembered it, and how
he abused those good things in sinning against God, instead of serving and
glorifying God, who had bo^ntifully bestowed those good things on him. This
di^mal remembrance will never be worn out of the soul of the sinner. Cain
remembers to this Day how he Murdered his Brother Abel, although that sin was
committed above five Thousand Years ago. The Sodomites remember how wicked they
had been, although they have been suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire these
three Thousand Years and more. All the Fire of Hell can never fetch out the
Guilt of sin, nor the tormenting remembrance of it. Judas remembers how he
betrayed his Master, although that Treason was committed above sixteen Hundred
Years ago. The Guilty remembrance of sin is written on the Table of the Heart
with a Pen of Iron, and with the Point of a Diamond, Jer. 17. 1. These wounding
Reflections of Conscience are the Work that dies not; and sin is the Corruption
which breeds that Worm. A most painful and incurable Wound in the soul with
this be to the sinner that shall dye in his sins. The Body which receives a
wound from a poisoned Arrow, is in intollerabl^ pain: But that's nothing to the
pain and aug^i^h which the poysonful: Arrows of sin cause in the soul. It is
therefore said, a wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14. Horror of
Conscience in the Extremity of it, is Hell upon Earth. I knew one many years
ago, in the City of Gloucester in England, who being in horror of Conscience for
a great sin committed, Cried out, I am in Hell, I feel the Flames of Hell
scorching my Soul. In a word, Sin is the mortal Poison of an immortal soul. It
had poisoned the souls of all the men in the world to Death, if it had not been
for one Antidote, namely the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ. No other Remedy in
the world can fetch the Venom of Sin out of the Soul. As when the Children of
Israel were bitten with the Fiery Serpent, if they looked not on the Brazen
Serpent they were sure to Dye, there was no other Remedy for them. Sin is that
Serpent which has bitten and poisoned the immortal Souls of men, if they look
not with an Eye of with on the Blood of Jesus Christ, they will most certainly
Dye of that wound. We see then that Sin de^troyes the Soul. As it is said of
one particular sin, it is true of every sin not Pardoned in the Blood of
Christ, He that does it destroys his own Soul, Prove. 6. 32. A sinner, what is
he? He is a Murderer of his own Soul. He lays violent hands on his own Soul;
that's implied when it is said, that he Wrongs his own Soul, Prove. 8. 36. The
import of the Hebrew word there used is, that the sinner is a Vultur to his own
Soul. He does by sinning as it were prey upon, and tear his own Soul to pieces.

You will say, But are not the Souls of men Immortal? How then can Sin Destroy
them?

I Answer. The Soul is not subject to a Natural, only to a Spiritual Death.
There is a Threefold misery which sin brings upon the Souls of men, which are
the Souls Death.

1. It causes a separation to be made between the Blessed GOD and the Soul.
That Is the greatest Misery that possibly can be, and the saddest Death. For in
Gods Favor and Friendship there is Life; yea, His loving Kindness is better
than Life, Psalm. 63. 3. Therefore to be cast out of His Favor is the greatest
Death. If the Con^^^^ Pipes are removed from the Foun^^in, from whence they
receive all the water that is in them, no water can flow into them. God is the
Fountain of living Water. The Soul that is separated from Him has no Life in
it. Now Sin and that only, is the Evil that separates the Soul from God: I^a.
59. 2. Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins
have hid His Face from you. Sin dissolves the league of Amity between God and
the souls of men; Jer* 6. 8. Be instructed O. Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart
from thee. My Soul, says the Lord is united to you, ( viz. in respect of the
Covenant between God and them) but if you sin I Will be your Friend no longer.
Men by their sins bid God depart from them, Job 21. 14. They say unto God,
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Therefore He does
depart from them, and then their Life, yea the Life of their soul is gone.

2. Sin keeps the Soul out of Heaven. It caused the Apo^^ate Angels to be
detruded and excluded thence, although that was their native Countr^y. They have
suffered an Eternal Banishment never to come within the Palace of the Great
King any more. Adam was Ejected Paradise for one sin, and a flaming sword (...)
him from entering there any more. Thus does sin cause the soul that shall Dye
under the guilt of it, to be forever Excluded Heaven, Rev. 21. 27. There shall
in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. The man that indulgeth himself
in the wilful breach of one Commandment, will find the Gate of Heaven shut
against his soul; Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one if these least
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom
of Heaven. He shall never come there. The Souls life is in its happiness. In
Heaven there is fu^^ess of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore; but sin dep^ives
the Soul of all that Happiness. Banishment is a kind of Death. It is Death to
an immortal soul to be Bani^hed from the presence of God in Heaven for ever.

3. Sin causes the Soul to be cast into Hell. There are but those two places
for the souls of men to be disposed in to all Eternity. Either they must be in
Heaven, or in Hell world without ends. Now that's the destruction of the
immortal Soul: When it is cast into Hell it is destroyed; Mat. 10. 28. Fear not
them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear
Him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. The soul that is Damned
is Killed. This does Sin bring an undone soul unto at last. It brings it down
to the Chambers of Death. The Dead are there, and her Guests are in the depth
of Hell. This is called the Second Death. The first Death is of the Body, the
second Death is of the Body and Soul too. The thought of that Death may strike
Terror into the Heart of the ^toutest Sinner living. There was a very
Courageous man, who said to a Minister that put him in mind of the Second
Death, I (said he) have been among drawn Swords, and in the midst of t^undring
Canon, and I never knew what Fear meant, but now you tell me of a Second Death,
it makes my Heart to quiver within me. The Horrors and Terrors of that Death,
no Heart is able to con^^ive, nor any Tongue to express. The pangs of it are
Eternal, as well as Intol^^rable. The things which are seen are Temporal, the
things which are not seen are Eternal. As the Life, so the Death which is not
seen is Eternal. It is therefore called the Wrath to come, I These. 1. 10 It
shall last as long as an immortal soul shall live. After it has continued for
Millions of Ages, there is as much to Come as ever there was. This Second and
Eternal Death consists chiefly, in the immediate impressions of the Wrath of
God on the soul. If but a spark or one ^ealding drop of that wrath fall on the
soul, it cannot be endured: As we see in such men as Francis Spira; and in
those who in horror of Conscience do madly destroy themselves. But what will it
be when that Sea of Fire shall be let in upon the soul, or when the soul shall
be cast into it, to float forever amidst those waves of Death? The Infinite
Wrath of God is the Lake of Fire, in which the Devil and his Angels, and the
miserable souls which go out of the world Christless, must burn and roar in
throughout Eternal Ages. This is the Second Demonstration of the Doctrine
before us, That Sin is the Greatest Evil.

III. If we compare Sin with other Evils we shall see that is the Worst and
Greatest Evil that can be mentioned. There are Four things which men esteem as
Evils, Sin is worse than any of them, or than all of them put together.

1. It is a greater Evil than Affliction. There is more of Evil in one sin,
than in all the Afflictions in the world. For sin makes those over whom it
reigns to be Evil. It makes the man to be an Evil man; Mat. 12. 35. An Evil man
out of the Evil treasure of his Heart brings forth Evil things. Sinners are
called by the Name of Evil: Psalm. 5. 4. Neither shall Evil, that is the sinner
dwell with thee. But Affliction does not make an Evil man. No man is the worse
merely for his being Afflicted. He may be the most Afflicted, and yet the Best
man in the world. Holy Job was so. God gave him that Character, There is none
like him on the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and
escheweth Evil, Job 1. 8. Yet was he the most Afflicted man on the Earth. JESUS
CHRIST the Son of God was a man of sorrows. By reason of Afflictions His Visage
was warred more than any man's, and His Form more than the sons of men. Yet
never was there Man in the world to be compared with Him for Holiness and
Good^^s. And our Afflictions are some part of our Conformity to Christ. But sin
does the contrary, it makes us unlike to Christ. In some cases it is a Duty to
chose Affliction. Moses chose to suffer Affliction, rather than to enjoy the
Plea^^^es of sin. The case may be so cir^^m^tanced with a man as that he must
of necessity either sin or suffer: Then it his Duty to choose to suffer rather
than to sin. When Job under his unparalleld Afflictions uttered some impatient
words, Elihu reproved him, saying, Take heed, regard not Iniquity, for this
thou have cho^^n rather than Affliction, Job 36. 21. In^^mating that men ought
to choose any Affliction, yea, the greatest that can be, rather than the least
sin. Sin may not be chosen in any case. Although a man could escape never so
great Evils by chu^ing to sin, he might not do it. Or, if he could obtain never
so great Good by committing a sin, he might not do it. When Austin was asked
whether a man might not tell a Lie to save his Friend, No (says he) thou
may^^t not do it to save his Life, nay, if thou could save his Soul by
telling a Lie thou may^^t not do it. The Honor of God is to be valued and
preferred above any man's Life in the world. And this is according to the
Scripture, which says, that we may not do Evil that Good may come, Romans 3. 8.

2. Men look upon Death as a greater Evil than Affliction. All that a man has
will he give for his Life. Death is called the King of Terrors, Job 18. 14. It
does as much exceed other Evils, as a King does excel other Men. But sin is
more Evil than Death. Solomon found it more bitter than Death, Eccle^. 7. 26. A
Christian* should say, rather let me dye than sin. For a man may Glorify God by
dying, Job. 21. 19. but he cannot Glorify God by sinning. And therefore he
ought to Embrace the most terrible Death that men can inflict upon him, then to
commit the least Sin. The Hebrew Martyrs did so. They were tortured, not
accepting deliverance, Heb. 11. 35. The Tyrant Antiochus told them that if they
would but eat one mouthful of Swines flesh which then was forbidden by the
Ceremonial Law, their lives should be spared; but they chose rather to be
tortured to death than to Sin a^^inst their Consciences although it were but in
a Ceremony. We have ^^ewed that Sin separates the Soul from God; but Death does
not so. I am persw^ded (says the Apostle) that Death cannot separate us from
the love of God, Romans 8. 38. Nay, Death brings the Soul of the true Believer
unto a full Enjoyment of God: Being absent from the Body, they are present with
the Lord.

3. Sin is a greater Evil than Hell. For Hell is only against the benefit and
happiness of the Creature, but Sin is (as has been showed) contrary to the
honor of the Creator. For Him to be dishonour^d is incomparably a gr^^ter
evil, than for all the Repr^bate Creatures in the World to be destroyed. Hell
has something that is good in it, namely, considered as that which is the
punishment due for Sin. The punishment of Sin is good, but Sin is in no respect
good. It is only Evil, and has no good in it. Hence God neither is nor can be
the A^thor of Sin. He cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any man.
But He has ^ made Hell to be a place of ^orment for Sinners, that so the glory
of his Justice and Holiness may be manifested to men and Angels for ever. Isai.
30. 33. Tophet is ordained of ^ld, He has made it deep and large, the pile
thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of
Brimst^ne does kindle it. Nor would there have been such ^ place as Tophet,
that is Hell, if it had not been for Sin. It (...) Sin that has kindled the
fire that is ^nquenchable. Sin has filled the Bot^^mle^s Pit with all the fire
and brim^^one which is there. It is Sin that has filled it with those Treasures
of ^rath which can never be consumed. And therefore sin is to be more drea^^d
than Hell it self. It was a great Expression of a Great man, who said, He had
rather be thrown alive into the Flames of Hell, than to do a thing which be
knew was a Sin against God.

4. Sin is worse than the Devil. This Evil thing is worse than the Evil One.
For it is Sin that has made the Devil to be so Evil as he is. He was once among
the Morning Stars, the Sons of God shouting for joy: But Sin has made him that
was once a glorious Angel, to become the most accursed Creature in the whole
Universe. Sin has done more mischief than ever the Devil did. It has been by
the hand of Sin that he has done all the mischief that ever he did to any. Sin
has ruined the World. Sin has brought a Curse on this Visible Creation under
which it has been sighing and groaning for almost these six thousand years. And
sin has turned millions of glorious Angels into damned Devils; it is then more
Evil than the Devil himself. A man had better have his Body possessed with a
Legion of Devils, than that his Soul should be under the dominion of one sin.

We proceed to the Second Enquiry, viz. What Sin is it that is so Great an Evil?

For Answer. In the First place let me say, That Original Sin is the Greatest
Sin. Sin is the Greatest Evil, and Original Sin is the worst of Sins. This is
often in the Scripture by way of Emphasis, called Sin. It is the most Sinful
Sin. It is impossible to call it by a worse Name than it self. Therefore the
Apostle speaks, as in Romans 7. 13. That Sin might appear Sin, working Death in
me by that which is Good, that Sin by the Commandment might become exceeding
Sinful. If men see another fall into some grievous Actual Sin, they esteem him
a very Guilty person, and so he is. But their own Original Sin makes them more
Guilty before God, than any Actual Sin. For there is in this Sin the most
prodigious and astonishing Enmity against the Blessed God. It is an universal
Contrariety to the Will of God in every thing. This Sin is always opposing
what God would have to be done. The Flesh is Lusting against the Spirit, and
those two are contrary, Gal. 5. 17. The Carnal mind is Enmity against God, not
subject to His Law, nor indeed can be, Rom, 8. 7. The Carnal Mind is not only
Inimicous, but Enmity it self against God. This is that Sin which has filled
the woeful Souls of men with hatred of God, Romans 1. 30. The Truth is, (and a
dreadful Truth it is) that Sinners have the greatest Enmity against God of any
thing in the world. For they dislike nothing so much as Holiness. Hence as long
as they continue in a state of Sin, they cannot but hate God, who is Holiness
it self, more than any thing. This Sin is an Enemy to whatever God ^pproveth
of. And whatever God is against, this Sin is for it; and therefore for it
because God is against it. That's the consideration from whence the Apostle
inferrs the exceeding Sinfulness of this Sin. It takes occasion by the
Commandment to provoke men to Sin. The Law which was given to prevent Sin, is
through the horrible Corruption of Nature, an occasion of men's Sinning. If a
Torrent of water a dammed up, it swells the higher. Such Torrent of Sin is
Original Corruption. Hence it is that Sinners are the worse for those things
that should make them the better. They are the worse for Mercies. The more
Kindness the Lord shows to them, the more do they abuse and dishonor His Name,
Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Romans 2. 4. They fight against God with the Blessings He bestows
on them. The Means of Grace which He favors them with, the Gospel it self is
an occasion of Sin to them, Act. 13. 45. God visits them with Afflictions, to
humble them and to prevent sin in them, but they are the worse for them, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. Hos. 7. 1. It argues a man to be exceeding sick, when he is the
worse for the Medicine that should heal him. This discovers the malignity of
the Disease. Thus, inasmuch as the Law, the Gospel, Mercies, A^^^ictions do
occasion men to sin against God more, that manifests the exceeding Sinfulness
of their Natures. This sin of Nature is vertually all Sin. It contains in the
bowels of it, the Cursed spawn of every sin, Romans 7. 8. Ephesians. 4. 19. There is no
sin, great or compar^tively small, against either the First or the Second Table
of the Moral Law but it is contained in this Sin, Mat. 15. 19. There is no sin
that ever was committed in the world, but that sinful Heart which is in every
man, would cause him to commit that sin, if God should give him up to be as bad
as that sin which is in him would have him to be. We see that some men are mere
Devils Incarnate. Some of the Roman Emperors, Nero, Caligula and others, were
so wicked as that if Devils were clothed in Flesh, they could hardly be more
Wicked. Now Original Sin is the same in other men that it was in them. It is
owing to the Restraining Grace and Providence of God, that all men are not so
bad outwardly as some are. For the Heart of man is a sink of Sin, an hell of
Abominations. Nor is there any abomination on Earth or in Hell, but it is in
the Corrupt Nature of man to become Guilty of it. It cannot be Expressed, what
an abounding Iniquity Original Sin is. It is a Fountain of Sin. It wa^ said of
sinful Jerusalem, As a Fountain casts out her Waters, so she casts out her
Wickedness, Jer. 6. 7. The same is to be said of the Heart of the sinner: It is
a Sea of wickedness which is alway^ working up Corruption, Isa. 57. 20. The
Wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up Mire
and Dirt. This Sin is never idle, but is always working, Rom 7. 5. It is the
Author of of all Actual Sins, Jam. 1. 15. It has been the Mother of Millions of
Millions of Actual sins. It is the Sinning Sin. Now as it is true, that this is
the Greatest Sin, we must moreover say, that Sin in General is the Greatest
Evil. There is no Sin that can be mentioned, but it is a Greater Evil than any
thing else which is not Sin. Although some Sins compared with others are small.
Nevertheless, there is no Sin which is in it self a little Evil. The Sins which
men may think are small, if duly considered will appear to be no small Evils.

Several things may be mentioned, which Confirm the Truth before us.

1. The Holy God has Punished seemingly little Sins after a terrible manner
Adams Sin in Eating the forbidden Fruit was indeed an heinous Transgression,
yet Carnal Hearts are apt to think it was a small Offense. For him to steal an
Apple, or a Grape, or whatever the forbidden Fruit might be, was that any great
Evil? It was. And as small an Evil as men imagine it to be, he and all his
Children must Dye for that one Offense, although but once committed. That one Sin
as light as men make of it, has brought Death upon all the men in the world,
Romans 5. 12. And there are awful Instances Recorded in the Scripture, of Gods
Punishing seemingly little Sins after a Dreadful manner. The man that gathered
Sticks on the Sabbath Day, God commanded that he should be stoned to Death for
it. Uzzah did but touch the Ark, and that with a Pious intention, yet because
in so doing he transgressed the Law, he Dyed before the Lord. When the People
in Bethshemeth did but look into the Ark, probably to see whether the
Philistines in whose hands it had been, had taken nothing out of it, a small
transgression men would think; but the Lord smote them with a great slaughter,
that Fifty Thousand and Threescore and Ten men Dyed, so that the men of
Bethshemeth Cried out, Who is able to stand before this Holy Lord God? 1 Samuel
6. 19. 20. The Angels that Sinned, what was their sin? Was it not the
entertaining a proud thought in their hearts, and for this no man knows how
many millions of them were cast down to Hell, and are reserved in Everlasting
Chains of Darkness, for the Judgment of the Great Day.

2. It is the Character of a Child of God, that he would rather choose any evil
than the least sin. He had rather suffer any thing, than comply with that which
he believes is sin, 1 Job 3. 9. He that is born of God cannot sin So far as he
is born of God, of as things in the world, he cannot end (...) sin; some
persons have in their nature an Antipathy against certain things, and if those
things are forced upon them they will oppose and strive to the (...) most of
their life. Such an Antipathy there is in the heart of a true Child of God
against Sin. Not but that the holiest Saints on earth do often sin, but then it
is either through ignorance; they do not know that what they do is sin A sincere
Christian sometimes does that which is sinful, which if he did but see the sin
in that thing, he would sooner die, than do as he does.; or else it is because
they are under the present power of temptation: When they come out of that
temptation, they will abhor themselves for what they have done, and do so no
more, Job 40. 4. and 42. 6. When a Child of God is himself, he will rather
submit to the most tor^enting death, then consent to the least sin, as you
heard but now the Hebrew Martyrs did. And if we read Martyrologies, we shall
meet with many Instances confirming the Truth before us. One had his life
offered to him, on condition that he would give ^at one halfpenny toward the
building of an Idolatrous Temple, but he chose rather to suffer the most cruel
death that his Enemies could in^^ict upon him. Others have been pro^^^ed life
if they would be present at in Idolatrous Worship, though but for the time;
they would rather die than commit that sin.

3. There is not the least sin that can be committed, but if it is pardoned, it
as cost the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, to obtain the forgiveness of it.
Not only the greatest, but the least sins must be expiated with that precious
Blood. No less a Sacrifice was necessary, Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding of blood
is no remission. And no other Blood, but the Blood of the Son of God, could
ever obtain the remission of any one sin. The Law denounces Eternal Death for
the least sin, Romans 6. 23. Gal. 3. 10. So great is the Demerit of the least
sin, as that nothing less then what is infinitely Meritorious, could make
satisfaction for it. There is not an idle word which any man has spoken, nor a
vain thought which has at any time been entertained in his heart, but he must
lie and die for ever in unquenchable fire, because of that sin, except Jesus
Christ the Son of God has shed his Blood to purchase a pardon for it.

Notwithstanding the hour is spent, Let me enlarge a little further in some
Application of this Doctrine. It is this very day Forty four years since I
began to Preach the Gospel in this place. The first Subjects I then insisted
on, were concerning the Evil of Sin, and concerning the Excellency of Christ.
The Lord grant (if it be His will) that I may leave you, and finish my Course,
insisting on the same Subjects with which I began my Public Ministry among
you. And the Providence of God does oftentimes order it to be so.

We proceed then to Apply the Doctrine. First, by way of Instruction, and
several things are to be Inferred.

Inf. I. If Sin is the Greatest Evil, then to be kept and delivered from Sin is
a great happiness. A man had better fall into many Afflictions, than into one
Sin. It is therefore a very great mercy to be kept from falling into scandalous
sins, such as Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Thefts, and the like Crimes. There have
been some whom God has kept all their days, that they never fell into any sin
which the World looks on as shameful and scandalous. Yea, some who are
Unregenerate, and in a State of Sin, yet are they civil moral men: They have
Externally kept the Commandments from their Youth up, Mat. 19. 20. Paul before
his Conversion was touching the righteousness of the Law blameless, Phil. 3. 5.
It must be acknowledged that Re^training Grace is not so great a mercy as
Converting Saving Grace, nevertheless a great mercy it is. God said to
Abimelech I with held thee from ^i^ning against me, Genesis 20. 6. This was a
mercy to him* for if he had committed the sin he intended, he had been a dead
man. God sometimes lays the restrai^ts of his Providence on Sinners, that
they cannot do the evil they would do; He hedgeth their way with thorns. When
Balaam was going on a wicked design of mi^che^ to the Lords People, the Lord
stopped him in the way, which was a present mercy to him; for had he gone on,
his ruin had been sooner. Suppose men should die and perish in their
Unregeneracy, yet their being restrained from vicious courses is a mercy to
them, for that such sins leave an eternal blot of In^amy on the names of those
that have been guilty of them; A wound and dishon^ur do they get, and a
^^proach which shall not be wiped away, Prove. 6. 32. Nor will their damnation
^n Hell be so great as it would have been, if they had dyed under the guilt of
abominable crimes: But then to be delivered from the guilt of all sin, is an
i^exp^^^^ible mercy and happine^^* A man that is greatly in debt, would count
himself happy, if another would pay his debts and save him from the rigor of
the Law. Our Sins are our greatest debts: As for Believers Christ has paid
their debts, and procured an acquittance for them: Therefore happy are they.
The guilt of one sin is able to sink a Soul into Hell: There is no standing
under the weight of the Curse. Now it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Law to do them. How great
then is their happiness, who, although they have been guilty of many and great
sins, are delivered from the curse due on that account; and to be delivered
from the dominion of sin, is no less an happiness, then to be delivered from
the damnation of it: For there cannot be a greater misery, than for a man to be
a Slave to sin. There was nothing more to be trembled at, in the curse of the
Law, than this, that the Sinner should be under the dominion of his sins:
Therefore no greater happiness than to be delivered from that misery. Romans 6.
14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law but
under Grace. Men that have been Slaves in the hands of Turks or of Indians who
have dealt cruelly with them, if they are set at liberty, do they not count
that deliverance an happiness? But what then is it to have their Souls set at
liberty from the cruel and cursed bondage of Sin?

Inf. II. The patience of God toward the world, and his mercy toward his
People is wonderfully great, yea, infinite. How wonderful is his patience
toward a sinful sinning world. The Name of Long suffering may well be given to
him, Exodus 34. 6. Sin is an infinite wrong to his Divine Majesty: It strikes at
his Crown and Dignity. Yet there is not a day, nor a minute of a day, but
innumerable millions of sins are committed against him: And there are many
thousands in the world who are denying and defying of him continually. There
are a great many Atheists and Blasphemers on the Earth; They set their mouth
against Heaven, Psalm. 73. 9. A late Writer speaks of one City, in which there
were fifty thousand Atheists How many then are there in the World? And thus
have men been provoking the Eyes of his Glory from one age to another for many
generations: And for all this, God does not as yet set the world on fire: None
but a God of infinite patience could bears with such Indignities. But as for
his people he does not only forbear them; but forgive them upon their repenting
and believing in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ: He then forgives their sins
freely, fully, and for ever. Some of his Elect have been as great sinners as
ever lived on the face of the earth. What a Sinner had Paul been before his
Conversion! How injurious to God and to His People! He was a Blasphemer and a
Persecutor and Injurious, but (said he) I obtained mercy; 1 Timothy 1. 13. If the
mercy of God had not been Infinite, he had never found mercy: The grace of the
Lord was exceeding abundant toward him: For God did not only pardon him, but
made a special favorite of him: He made him to be an Ambassador of Heaven, and
accepted of great Services from him. If we had done a million part of that
wrong to men, which we have done to God, they could never forgive us. Wherefore
the Lord says, let the wicked turn unto the Lord and he will have mercy on him,
and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon. For faith the Lord, My thoughts
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways; as the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts, Isa. 55. 8, 9. The mercies of God are infinitely above the mercies of
man. Nothing less then infinite mercy could pardon one sin, no, not the least
sin. For there is high Treason in it against the In^inite Majesty. But God
pardons thousands of millions of Traitors, and this too such Traitors as have
renewed their Treasons and Rebellions millions of times over. It may astonish
us to think of it. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because He delighte^ in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. All the mercy
and goodness which is in Creatures, in all good men and Angels, put it all
together, is less then a drop to the Ocean, compared with the mercy of God. For
his mercy is as He Himself is, infinite and eternal, Psalm. 103. 17. The mercy
of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him.

Inf. III. If Sin is the Greatest Evil, then what a Great and a Glorious
Savior is JESUS CHRIST? For He ^aveth men from the greatest Evil, even from
Sin, both as to the Dominion and the Damnation of it; Mat. 1. 21. You shall
call His Name Jesus, for He shall save His People from their Sins. None but
Jesus Christ could ever make satisfaction for so much as one Sin. It would
break and beggar all the Angels in Heaven to pay for one Sin. But Jesus Christ
has purchased a Pardon for many Sins. It was said of one who had been a great
sinner, Her sins which are many are forgiven, Luke 7. 47. Not one of those many
sins was forgiven, nor ever had been forgiven, but by means of Jesus Christ.
Oh! the infinite Merit of the Blood of Christ. For it is that which has
purchased our Salvation. We are Redeemed by the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ.
Well may it be called Precious Blood, since by the Merit thereof, we are saved
from all our sins. There is more Merit in the Blood of Christ, than there is
Demerit in all the Sins of all the Elect of God. Christ's Righteousness exceeds
all their Unrighteousness; Romans 5. 17. Much more they shall receive abundance
of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness, by Jesus Christ. It must needs be
so, because Jesus Christ is the Son of God. The Obedience of Christ is the
Obedience of God. The Blood of Christ is the Blood of God, and therefore
Infinitely Meritorious and Satisfactory to Divine Justice. How many are the
Sins Christ has purchased a Pardon for? How great was the Debt which He has
paid? David con^esseth that innumerable Evils had taken hold on him, and that
his Iniquities were more than the hairs of his Head, Psalm. 40. 12. If the sins
of one man are so many, what are all the Sins of all the Elect of God? They are
more in number than there are Drops of water in the Sea, Ezr. 9. 6. Our
Iniquities are increased ever our heads. In a deep River which is over a man's
head, how many Drops are there? And faith he, Our Trespasses are grown up unto
the Heavens How many Sands are there in a pile that should reach up unto the
Heavens? More Sins than this have men been guilty of. If the World were turned
into Dust, the Sins of men are more than those Atoms would be. How Precious
then is that Blood which has made Atonement for such an Infinite Number of
Sins? Yea, and for the greatest Sins and Sinners. This is a Faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ saves the Chief of Sinners.
And He has made Atonement for a World of Sinners too: 1 Job. 2. 2. He is the
Pr^pitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the
whole World. Oh! Most Glorious Savior. Well might the Prophet call Him, A
Savior and a Great One, Isa. 19. 20.

The Last USE is for Exbortation; If Sin is the Greatest Evil in the world,
then above all things in the world, let Sinners endeavor after the Pardon of
Sin.

CONSIDER I.
There is no Sinner among us but there is a possibility of his obtaining a
Pardon for all his sins. Because of the Infinite Mercy of God this may be: He
will abundantly Pardon. Isa. 55. 7. Thy sins have been many, but the mercies of
God are more. Thou have been guilty of abundance of sin, but there is a greater
abundance of Mercy with God. Thy sins have been great, but the Mercy of God is
greater; Romans 5. 20. Where Sin abounded Grace did much more abound. It was a
most blasphemous word, which Francis Spira (...) in his Despair, That his Sin
was greater than the Mercy of God. And as there are no limits set to the Mercy
of God, so the Obedience of Christ is infinitely Meritorious. It is able to
Justify the most Guilty sinners in the world unto whom it shall be imputed:
Romans 5. 19. By the Obedience of One shall many be made Righteous. And God in
the Gospel offers a Pardon to the greatest sinners in the world, in case they
will Repent and Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ. It (...) His
Commandment that Repentance and Remission of sins through His Name should be
Preached to all Nations, Luke 24. 47. There never were men in the world Guilty
of a greater Sin, than those Jews that Crucified the Son of God. Nevertheless,
those very sinners as many of them as Repented and Believed had that and all
other sins forgiven to them.

CONSIDER II.
What a Blessed thing it is to have Sin Pardoned: P^al. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is
the Man whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered; Blessed is the
man unto whom the Lord imputes not Sin. Blessed man! Blessed man is he. This is
a mercy which makes all other things to ^e mercies. If a man's sins are
Pardoned, then mercies are given in mercy to him. He may then be ^ure that all
the Blessings bestowed on him, proceed from the Love of God toward him. Yea,
common, outward Blessings are fruits of the Love of God to his Soul. He^^kiah
could therefore say, Thou have (...) Love to my Soul delivered me from the ^it
of Corruption; thou have c^st all my ^ins behind thy Back, I^a. 38. 17. Thus
when God gives Health, or any other Temporal Blessing to a man, in case his
sins ar^ Pardoned, it is in Love to his Soul. Nay, Afflictions are then
Mercies: They shall all work together for good. Such an one may entertain
Affliction with great Comfort: As Luther did, who said, Lord, Now afflict me if
thou will, for I know my sins are Pardoned. And the Blessedness of the Pardoned
sinner is the greater, in that God will never revoke His Pardon. For that is
contrary to His Everlasting Covenant, in which He has said, I will be merciful
to their Unrighteousness, and remember their Sins no more, Heb. 8. 12. As for
Temporal Blessings and Mercies, the Lord does only lend them to His Children,
and calls for them again at His pleasure; But Pardon of Sin is a Mercy not lent
but given, and shall never be recalled. He will never Repent of His bestowing
this Gift, Romans 11. 29.

CONSIDER III.
The Doleful Misery of an Unpardoned Estate. Sinner, God is thy Enemy. Thou art
His Enemy, and ha^t by thy Sin made Him to be thine; Le^ 26. 21, 24. If you
will walk contrary (...) me, I will walk contrary unto you. That Is Misery
enough. As all Happiness is in having God to be a Friend. If God is for us who
can be against us? So if a man has God to be his Enemy, if he has no other
Enemy he is a miserable man. But if God is his Enemy, Creatures will be so too.
No Creature will then come, but it will be ready to plead and avenge the
Quarrel of its Creator. The Law has Condemned thee to Die, Joh. 3. 18. He that
Believes not is Condemned already. Thou art only under a Reprieve: It may be
the Sentence of Death may be Executed upon thee before another Week, before
another Day. The Angel of Death stands ready with a Slaughter weapon in his
hand: If God shall but say, Strike NOW, thou art a Dead and a Damned Creature
the next moment.

In order to the obtaining the Pardon of Sin, you can not but know that Two
things are necessary, Namely, Repentance toward God, and, Faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ. Oh, then Repent of Sin: Mourn for it. What a sad thing is it,
that sinners (...) mourn for any Evil but the Greatest? When^s sorrow for ^in
should be the great^^^ sorrow. It should last all a man's life long. For other
things we are not to mourn always: For the loss of outward Comforts, suppose
Children or other Relations, we are not to mourn always; but we must continue
mourning for Sin all our days. (...) went out of the world reading the
Penitential Psalms. But then there must be (...) turning from Sin, and from all
Sin; Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Where there is true Repentance there is a
turning from all scandalous Sin in life and conversation, and from all other
Sin in heart and affection. Do it, and delay not. So did the Prophets of old
Preach to sinners; Jer. 25. 5. They said, Turn ye NOW every one from his Evil
way. Oh, that Young men would consider of it: Remember NOW thy Creator in the
Days of thy Youth. By Delaying thy Repentance one Day, thou maye^t loose thy
Soul for ever. Boast not thy self of tomorrow, thou knowe^t not what a Day may
bring forth. It may be Death may surprise thee, and where art thou then? Where
will thy Soul be then? Or that which is worse than Death may come upon thee.
God may be provoked to give thee up to Judicial hardness of Heart. If thou do^t
resist the motions and strivings of His holy Spirit, it may be He will say, Let
him that is Unjust be Unjust still, and let him that is Unclean be Unclean
still. Remember the Fig Tree which the Lord Cursed, saying, Let no Fruit grow
on thee hence forward for ever. Therefore Repent NOW. But all the Repentance in
the world will never save a man's Soul without CHRIST. If a man should weep Seas
of Tears for his sins: If he should forsake them all, and live like an Angel
for many Years after, yet must he perish for ever because of his past
Trangressions, except the Righteousness of Jesus Christ be imputed to him; And
that is only by Faith. Therefore venture not to sleep this night before thou
ha^t given thy self to Jesus Christ. Do it with a sincere Heart, and all thy
sins shall be as if they had never been. I Conclude with the words of the
Apostle, in a Sermon which he Preached a^ Antioch; Act. 13. 38, 39. Be it known
unto you, Men and Brethren, that through this Man is Preached unto you the
Forgiveness of Sins; and by Him all that Believe are Justified from all things,
from which they could not be Justified by the Law of Moses.

Preached at BOSTON, Sept. 9. 170^*
It is Great WISDOM To Redeem the TIME.
Col. IV. 5. Walk in Wisdom toward them that are without, Redeeming the Time.


THIS Epistle of Paul to the C^loss^ans, is much the same with that to the
Eph^sians; (...) being a contraction of that. The (...) method observed by the
Apostle (...) Discourse first Doctrinally, and then Practically. So he does in
all his Epistles to the Churches, and particularly in this. The two first
Chapters in it are Doctrinal, the two last are Practical. There are many
Christian Duties Exhorted unto, one of which is in the words before us. In
which we may observe;

1. The Duty, namely, To walk in Wisdom. Christians meet with difficult
Temptations in their way, on which account great Caution and Wisdom is
necessary.

2. Here is the Object with respect whereunto this Wisdom is to be Exercised,
Toward them that are without. That is to such as were without the Pale of the
Visible Church. The Church is a Sacred House: Believers are within that House;
Unbelievers are out of Doors; they are not admitted into the Temple.

3. The Apostle ^hews how this Wisdom is to be Manifested, viz. By Redeeming
the Time. That Is the work of Wisdom, and an Evidence of Christian Wisdom.

Wherefore the DOCTRINE to be in^i^ted on, (...)

That it is (...) Wisdom to Redeem the Time^

For the C^^^^ing of the Truth before us, there are Two things to be Enquired
into.

I. Who are they that Redeem Time is they ought to do?

II. How it does appear that it is Great Wisdom to do so?

Quest. I. Who are they that Redeem Time? Or, when may a man be said to do so?

Answ. I. They that are duly careful to improve Seasons of Grace in order to
their own Spiritual and Eternal advantage, may truly be said to Redeem the
Time. God is pleased to give unto men a Day of Grace: A Day wherein He offer
Grace and Mercy, and Heaven to them; 2 Cor 6. 2. Behold now is the accepted
Time, behold now is the day of Salvation. If before that Day is done, sinners
will seek unto the Lord for that Grace without which they must Eternally
perish, they may obtain it. The Prophet therefore said, Seek ye the Lord while
He may be found, Call upon Him while He is ^ea; Isa. 55. 6. While the Day of
Grace continues He may be found: He is within call; but when that day is (...)
is gone, and no more within call. And (...) are many sinners whom He favors
(...) a Day, so with special means of Grace. The Word and Ordinances of God are
so To improve them accordingly, is to Redeem the Time. When the Gospel is
Preached to men, it is Day with them. This Day will not last always Joh. 12.
35. Yet a little while is the Light with you, walk while you have the Light
lest Darkness come upon you. Wherefore men are concerned to improve this day
well in order to obtain Grace and Salvation; and if they do so, they Redeem the
Time. Moreover, the Lord vouchs^fes means of Grace, not only that so sinners
may get Grace, but that Saints may grow in Grace. And if they do under the
dispensation of the Gospel grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savi^ur Jesus Christ, they then Redeem the Time. When an Edifying Sermon is
Preached, that is a time for Christians to gain good to their own Souls. Now to
lay hold on it, and improve it for that end is a R^deeming of Time. It is
recorded concerning Mary, that she sat at Jesus feet* and heard His Word, Luke
10. 39. She would by no means be diverted from hearing Christ Preach, although
for that season she neglected her, worldly concerns: In doing this, she
Red^emed Time. Diligently to attend unto (...) word Preached, is to grow in
Grace. Christ therefore said to the Disciples, Take ^eed how you hear, for
whosoever has to him shall be given, Luke 8. 18 If Christians that have Grace
take heed how they hear, if they duly improve advantageous seasons for hearing
the Word, they shall have more Grace given to them. The like is to be said with
respect unto Sabbaths and Sacraments; when Christians improve them unto
Souladvantage, they Redeem the Time. And so they likewise do when they are much
in Prayer to God. The man that Redeems his Time, will have his constant times
for Prayer. Such an one was Cornelius, of whom it is said, that he Prayed to
God always, Act. 10. 2. Because he kept up his constant daily seasons for
Prayer, and would not omit them. The Time that is spent with God, is Time well
spent.

II. They that are duly careful to improve opportunities to Glorify God, and
do Good to Men, Redeem the Time. The Greek word KAIROS, which is here
translated Time, signifies Opportunity, or seasonable Time. That article of
time which is fit for doing such a thing. Sometimes the Providence of God puts
into the hands of men a great Opportunity or Advantage to promote the Glory of
His Name. So it is with those who are in a Public Capacity; They have greater
opportunities than others to promote the Glory of God in the world. Magistrates
have so by being a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to, them that do Well.
And the Ministers of the Gospel in a singular manner, are advantaged with
opportunities to Glorify God by promoting the Good and Salvation of the Souls
of men, whereby God will be Glorified throughout Everlasting Ages. Yea, all
Christians have Opportunities more or less to Glorify God, by endeavoring the
good of men, especially of His People. To do good to men is to glorify God: As
we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men, especially to the
Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. To do thus is to Redeem the Time. Walk in wisdom
toward them that are without, Redeeming the Time; h. e. Do all the good you
can for those poor Unbelievers: Cain them to Christ if you can possibly, by a
wise and holy Behavior toward them. To do that is wisdom. He that wins
Souls is wise. The man that is duly careful to improve whatever Talents God
has trusted him with for the good of others, is that wise man that Redeems
Time. God distributes Talents to men according as it plea^eth Him. They that
improve them as they should do, are wise Redeemers of their Time. To one the
Lord commits a Talent of Riches: he is blessed with a greater Estate than
others. The Providence of God sets before him Objects in respect whereof he has
an opportunity to do good, by using that Talent. It may be there is some poor
body to be relieved, or some pious work to be promoted; now to take hold on
this occasion, and not to let it slip is to Redeem the Time. Another has a
Talent of Knowledge committed to him. The Divine Providence gives him an
opportunity to Instruct and Enlighten and Edify those that need Illumination.
To improve his Talent accordingly, is a Redeeming of the Time. When men are
careful not to let slip opportunities of doing good, so far as they are
c^pable, and God shall call them to it, they Redeem the Time. They know not how
soon their opportunies may be taken from them, and therefore are concerned to
improve them well; which to do is to Redeem the Time, and to do like Wise men.
Wherefore the Apostle said to the Ephesians, See that you walk Circumspectly,
not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the Time, because the days are Evil, Ephesians.
5. 15, 16. It was then a time of Persecution; they had reason to expect that
their Persecutors would take from them their Estates, and all their
opportunities of either getting or doing Good, and therefore were to use their
present Advantages. A Christian that is desirous to do all, the Good he can,
and does embrace all Opp^rtunities accordingly, is one that Redeems the Time.

III. They that Deny themselves out of respect to the Glory of God and the Good
of Men, are such as Redeem the Time. The Original runs thus, Buying out the
Opportunity. When a man b^yeth a Commodity, he parts with something for it.
Thus he that is willing to forego his Carnal Interest out of respect to Gods
Interest, and His Peoples good, buys an Opportunity. Such an one was Abraham;
who out of respect to Religion, and lest the Name of God should suffer, refused
great Riches when offered to him by the King of Sodom, Genesis 14. 23. And thus
did Nehemiah part with that Salary which of right belonged to him, because of
the Fear of God, Neh. 5. 15. And thus did the Apostle Paul, who could say, I
sought not my own profit, but the profit of many that they might be Saved, 1
Cor. 10. 33. The words before us are a Metaphor alluding to Merchants, who will
deny themselves of Pleasure out of respect to Gain. Such Christians as deny
themselves as to their own Ease and outward Advantage, that so they may be the
more serviceable to God and to His People, are they that Redeem the Time.

IV. They that ende^v^ur to recover Lost Time by a double Diligence, may be
said to Redeem it. It is impossible for a man to Redeem or Recover lost Time in
a Physical or Proper sense, but in a Moral sense, namely, when the
consideration of his having lost so much of his Time formerly, makes him the
more diligent for the future. Thus it was with the Blessed Apostle; he
considered sadly that he had lost a great deal of Time whil^^t in his
Unregenerate Estate, being Converted to Christ after the other Apostles; 1 Cor.
15. 8. Last of all He was seen of one, as one born out of due time. And then
how did he be^^ir himself? He labored more abunda^^ly than they all. Although he
did not Outlive all the other Apostles, yet he Out-did them all. It is supposed
that he was Conver^ed when Twenty Five, and Martyred when he was Sixty One
Years old. It may be questioned whether there was ever a man in the world that
did so much service for Christ as Paul did, in the space of Four and Thirty
Years. The Children of Israel dispatched more way toward Canaan in the last
year of their being in the Wilderness, than in almost Forty years before. Thus
when Christians shall do more good in one year, than in many years before, they
may be said to Redeem the Time. Men that are in a Journey, if they have
loytered away some part of their time, will mend their pace that so they may
come to the end of their Journey before Night overtakes them. Thus when
Christians mend their pace, when they become more active for God, and more
^seful and fruitful than formerly, and ripen for Heaven going thither with a
great and a swift pace, they Redeem the Time. It was said of the Angel in the
Church of Thyatira, that his last works were more than his first, Rev. 2. 19.
When it is thus with Chri^^ians, that their last works are their best works,
and their last days are their best days, they are the men that will be found
Redeeming the Time.

Quest. II. How does it appear that it is great Wisdom for men thus to Redeem
the Time?

For Answer; I shall mention some plain known Truths, which we can never hear
too often, nor think too much of.

I. We may reason from the Preciousness of Time. When men have a precious
Commodity, they are choice of it: They are loath to loose it. And they would not
act like rational Creatures if they should want or mi^pend it. That would argue
great folly and want of judgment. Now Time is the most precious Commodity which
men in this world are possessed of. The wise man say^s concerning those brutish
men who spend their time in D^bauch^ries, that their Precious Life is hunted
after Prove. 6. 26. If Life is Precious, then Time is Precious And therefore it
has the name of a Price given to it, because it is of Exceeding great worth,
and highly to be valued* Prove. 17. 16. Wherefore is there a Price in the hand
of a Fool to get wisdom, who has no heart unto it? When a sinner has Time
allowed him to get saving Knowledge, but improveth it not, then there is a
Price in the hand of a Fool that wants wisdom to use it. Men say of some Jewels
that they are invaluable, because the worth of them is not known, and therefore
cannot be Expressed. Truly, such a Jewel is Precious Time. We may say of it, as
it is said of Wisdom, it is more precious than Rubies; all the things thou
can desire are not to be compared, with it. We may judge of the worth of Time
by these two Considerations.

1. All the things which this world can afford, are worth nothing when once
Time is gone. The world passes away and the lusts thereof. The things of the
world all of them, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, Earthly Pleasures, Profits, Honors, they all End with Time. The things
which we see signify nothing to men, when their Time is swallowed up with an
Endless Eternity. The things which are Seen are Temporal; they do not out-last
Time: As for the things which are Eternal, they are Invisible, they are things
not Seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18. If then a man should gain as much of this world as ever
any one did; yea, if he should gain the whole world, (which is more than ever
any one man since Adam had the sole possession of) what would it signify to
him, when his Time is gone? Christ said, What is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? So what will the World profit a
man when his Time is Ended, and his Soul gone into Eternity? What will the
World be to him though he has gained never so much of it, when God shall take
away his Soul? Then Time is Precious.

2. We may judge of the worth of Time by the Price which they whose Eyes have
been opened to see the worth of it, have set upon it. As to in^^^nce in Dying
Persons. When Death comes to shut the Eyes of the Body, it opens the Eyes of
the Soul. It is often with a Dying man as it was with Bala^m. He is the man
whose Eyes are (...); he forth things which before he did not see. Men's (...).
He can see the worth of Time then. A great Person on a Deathbed Cried out, I
would give a world of Wealth for an inch of Time. I have heard of another being
at the point of Death, uttered such words as these, If I had ten Thousand
Worlds, I would give them all on condition might live but One Day longer in
this world. And most certainly it is so with Millions in Hell. They would give
worlds, if they had them to give, for one of those Days of which they have
mi^pent many thousands. But will Time be Precious then, and is not so now? It
is therefore great Wisdom now to Redeem it. Tha'ts the First Demonstration of
the Truth before us.

II. When Time is past and gone it can never be Recalled again. And therefore
it is Wisdom to make a good improvement of the present Time. Yesterday will
never be here again. Other things a man may loose and find them again. If ^e
has Silver or Gold or precious Jewels, ^e may loose them and find them again.
But there are Two precious things which if they be lost can never be recovered
again, one is a Precious Soul, if that be lost it can never be recovered; and
the other is Precious Time: There Is no regaining that. Some have lost their
Names and recovered them again. All innocent men that have done so shall
recover them again, in the world to come if not in this world. Some have lost
their Places and Dignity, and been re^tored to it again. As Pharaohs Cup Bearer
after he had been a while degraded and impri^oned was exalted and re^tored to
his place, and delivered the Cu^ into the Kings hand after the former manner,
Genesis 40 13. But the Time which a man has lost will never be restored to him
again. For Death puts an End to his Time forever. As it is said with respect
unto the Roman Monarchy, as under its ^^st head Antichrist, when the Time
allotted to him is once Expired, when the Seventh Trumpet shall sound, there
shall be Time no longer, Rev. 10. 7. So it may be said concerning Men, when
once Death has overtaken them, Time shall be no longer. For men do not Die; and
after that Live again in this world. It is appointed for them Once to Die, and
then they go hence and are no more. If a man Dye shall be Live again? No; He
lies down and rises not until the Heavens be no more. As the Cloud is
consumed and vani^heth away, so he that goes down to the Grave shall come up no
more, he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him
any more for ever: The Eye that has seen him shall see him no more, Job 7. 8,
9, 10. No more! No more! No more! must he have Time allowed him on the Earth.
If men after they have misspent all their Days, might live again, and have more
Time allowed them, their Folly in not Redeeming the present Time would not be
so great as now it is. But Temporal Life is not like the Sun, that sets and
ri^eth again the next day. No: This Sun when once it is set ri^eth no more;
but then the Days of Darkness are many, innumerable many. Nor is there any
thought that does sting and torment the miserable Souls in Hell like this, we
had Time given us to Repent, and Pray, and make sure of an Interest in Christ,
and to Serve and Glorify God, but we lost and let slip that Time, and now must
never see those days again, which like Fools we spent in the service of Sin and
Satan, with the neglect of God, and Christ, and our ^ own Salvation. The terror
and torment of this Thought will be inexpressible. Like a gnawing Worm that
dies not, and like a fire that never can be quenched.

III. It is but a short-Time that men have to be in this world. The Time that
is past can not be r^called, and that which remains will soon be gone: And
therefore it is great Wisdom to Redeem it, to improve it so as to answer the
End for which God has given it to us. The Apostle to take men off from being
overmuch concerned about temporal things, ^ayes, The time is short, 1 Cor. 7.
29. The time is Contracted, or Furled as the Original word there imports.
Mariners when they come into the Harbor, Furl their Sails; and then they
quickly Land. Thus it will not be long before we come to an End of our Voyage. A
short Time will Land us all in Eternity, Job says, Man that is born of a Woman
is of few Days* Job 14. 1. He that is born of a Woman brings Sin, and
therefore brings Death into the world with him, which in a while will put an
End to his Time in this world. David says, that his Days were but an hands
breadth; but a span long, Psalm. 39. 5. A span was the shortest measure in use
among the Hebrews; wherefore that is made use of to denote the brevity of man's
life. And the Apostle says, What is your Life? It is a Vapor which appears
a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14. How soon does a vapor or a
little smoke in the Air vanish? Hence our time on the Earth is called a
Pilgrimage. Here we are Strangers and Travelers. Travelers don't use to abide
long in a place. They are here to day and gone to morrow. An Inn is not an home
to dwell in, but to sojourn in for a short time. This world is only an Inn.
Strangers should be careful what they do, and how they behave themselves. So
should Christians while^^ in this world: ^. Pet. 1. 17. Pass the time of your
sojourning here in Fear. Nothing can be more Foolish than for men to dream of
Immortality in this world. It was a vain boast of Paracelsus, that he could by
certain Medicaments cause a man to be immortal. And yet he could not prolong
his own life so as to live to old Age, for he dyed before Fifty. There have
been Alchymists in the world who have made the like pretense: And in the last
Age, those that passed under the Name of Rofacrucians. A late Learned writer
has discovered who was the Founder of that Society, a Libertine who formed an
impious design of putting a Cheat on the world. A way with such Impostors. The
Scripture tells us, and the Experience of every Age proves it, that men have
but a short time to be on the Earth. The longest liver has but a short time of
it, compared with Eternity. Yea, his Age is as nothing before the Eternal; as
David confe^^eth, Psalm. 39. 5. Eternity is a Day that has no Sunsetting. It is
(as one well Express^th,) A Time that can never be Measured: A Sum that can
never be Numbered. Let a man think of a Thousand Years, nay of Millions of
Millions of Ages, all is nothing to Eternity. It is a Sea without either bottom
or banks. Time is a spot on this side Eternity. And what a little of that spot
is man's Life? All Time is but a Moment to Eternity, and man's Life is but a
Moment of Time. Besides, there are many who do not live so long as according to
the ordinary course of Nature they might. Some that, God takes them out of the
world betimes, because the world is not worthy of them. And there are many who
by their Sins provoke the Lord to shorten their Days Because they have been
wicked overmuch, they Die before their time. Solomon ^ayes that the Days of the
Wicked shall be shortened, Prove. 10. 27. David tells how much; more than half,
Psalm. 55. 23. They shall not live out half their Days. There are some Sins
which have a Natural tendency to shorten life. Intemperance does so. Debauched
persons seldom live long. It is said of the young. Adulterer, Prove. 7. 23. A
dart strikes through his Liver. Oftentimes such Persons are struck with a
Consumption of the Liver, which in a little time kills them. They that have
been Prodigals of their Time, have no reason to expect God will trust them with
it long.

IV. The Time which remains is very uncertain. Therefore it is Wisdom to Redeem
what is present, lest it be gone suddenly. No man knows how soon his Time may
End. The wise man tells us, Man knows not his Time, Eccle^. 9. 12. Whether he
shall have any Time or no for the future he knows not. Indeed Hezek^ah knew
that he had Fifteen Years time to be on the Earth: But that was by an
Extraordinary Revelation. There is not a particular man in the world that knows
he has so long to live. Although there are many that shall live a longer time
than that, but it is not known who they are that shall do so. Who is there but
may say as Isaac did, in Genesis 27. 2. I know not the day of my Death. Young men
are apt to say, Isaac was an Old man, and might well think that he had not long
to live, but we have a long time before us. It may be not. Is it not said, They
Die in Youth, Job 36. 14. Most of those that come into the world, go out of it
again before Old Age. Nor does any Young man know at what Age he shall Die;
whether in his Youth, or in his Middle Age, or in his Old Age. For this reason
it is Wisdom to be always Watching; that is to be always Redeeming the Time:
Mark 13. 35, 36. Watch ye therefore, for you know not when the Master of the
House comes, at Evening, or at Midnight* or at the Cock-crowing, or in the
Morning; lest coming suddenly He find you Sleeping. The Children of men are
always in danger of Death. The Water may Drown them; or the Fire may Burn them;
or the Air may ^oy^on them: For (as one observes) Every pore in the Body is a
door at which Death may Enter in. It may be Death will come and put an End to
thy Time without giving thee any warning by Sickness. And therefore it is
Wisdom whil^^t men have Health, to improve the^^ short Time in preparations for
Eternity. A thousand Accidents not thought of may put an End to their time in
one moment* The Scripture tells of Seven and Twenty Thousand men, who lo^t
their lives at once in a moment, by the falling of a Wall which crushed them to
Death. A thing which they little dreamed of, 1 King. 20. 30. Little did they in
Sod^m and Gomorr^^ when they saw it was a fair Sun-shining Morning, imagine
that e^re Night an horrible Tempe^t would carry them out of the world. Have we
not known some, and some Godly persons too, that the Fire of God from Heaven,
that is Thunder and Lightning has in less than a minute struck them Dead? And
have there not in our Days been Earthquakes, by means whereof Thousands have
Perished, who had not a quarter of an Hours warning to prepare for Death and
Eternity? There are many that if they did but know how little Time they have to
be in the world, would not spend it so unprofitably as they do. Wherefore
Christ says, But know this, if the Good man of the House had known in what
hour the Thief would come, he would have matched, and would not have suffered
his house to be broken up: therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as
you think not, the Son of Man comes. Many there are that if they knew that
they had but one Year to live, they would improve their short time otherwise
than they do. Whenas it may be they have not one Month, nor one Day to continue
on this side of Eter^^ty. We read of one that said to his Soul, Thou ha^t Goods
laid up for many Years. But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul
shall be required of thee; then whose shall these things be which thou ha^t
provided? Luke 12. 20. Well might he be called a Fool, since he vainly presumed
upon a long time to come, and had spent his past time only in providing for
this world, and not for another which is E^ernal, and into which he was
immediat^ ^o go. Now I^ it is Folly for men considering the uncertainty of
their Lives to neglect the present opportunity, then to redeem it is Wisdom.
None of us know, but that this Week may be our last Week, this Day our last
Day, and therefore it is Wisdom for us to Redem our Time every Week, and every
Day.

V. Men must be accountable for their Time. Therefore it is wisdom to Redeem
it, that so they may be able to give a good Account. Thus the Apostle, 1 Pet.
1. 17. If ye call on the Father who without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work, pass the Time of your sojourning here in Fear.
Christians have reason to be afraid of mispending their Time, lest when the
Judge calls them to an account, they should not be able to give a good account.
The Day will certainly come when Time shall be no longer, and then every man
must give an account how he has spent his Time, Luke 16 2. Give an account of
thy Stewardship, for thou must be no longer Steward. So the Lord will say, Give
an account of thy Time, for thou must have Time no longer. All Talents must be
accounted for. A reckoning Day will come; as in the Pa^able of the Talents is
Expressed, Mat. 25. ^9. Therefore Time which is a great Talent, men must be
accountable for to Him that has trusted them with it, who keeps an Exact
account what time every one has had: Not only of what Years, but of what Hours
men have Enjoyed. Christ said to the Disciples, The very Hairs on your Heads
are all numbered. Then we may be sure that the Hours of our Life are all
numbered. And if it be true, (as it cannot but be true, because He who is Truth
it self has spoken it,) that every Idle word that men shall speak they shall
give account thereof in the Day of Judgment, Mat. 12. 36. Much more shall they
give an account of every Idle hour. And as men shall be called to an account
concerning what time they have Enjoyed, so concerning, what opportunities and
advantages they have had for the Improvement of their time: what means of Grace
they have Enjoyed, what Ministry they have lived under and how long. The Lord
caused it to be r^corded that the Jems had lived Twenty Three Years under the
Prophet Jeremiahs Awakening and Soul melting Ministry, Jer. 25. 3. In that Day
the Lord will say to a man, Thou did^t live in such a Count^ey so long: but how
did^^ thou spend thy Time there? To another, Thou did^^ go so many Voyages to
Sea; but how did^t thou spend thy Time when at Sea? To another, Thou did
sojourn in such a Family for so many Days; but how did^t thou spend thy Time
there? To another the Lord will say, I favour^d thee with singular means of
Grace: Thou did^t hear above a Thousand Sermons, and good Books were put into
thy hands to Read, but what improvement did thou make of them all? Now that
man that shall be able to give a good account of his Time, the Day of Judgment
will be a most Joyful Day to him. If Christ shall then say to him as He did to
Nathaniel, Joh. 1. 48. When thou wast under the Fig Tree, I saw thee. I saw
thee often Praying to God, and Praising of Him, and Mourning for Sin. I know
thou did spend thy Time well: Thou wast always doing something or other that
was pleasing to me: Thou did^^ husband thy time and talents well; and now I
will reward thee for it. Here Is a Crown of Eternal Life and Glory for thee. But
on the other hand, as for those that will be able to give no good account of
their Time, the Day of Judgment will be a Dismal Day to them. Yea, it will be
so not only to those that lived long unprofitably in the world, but, to Young
men also, who have consumed their Time in the Vanities of Youth: Eccl. 11. 9,
Rejoice O Young man in thy Youth. Walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the
sight of thine Eyes; But know thou that for all these things God will bring
thee into Judgment. For spending thy time in these things God will bring thee
to a terrible Judgment. The Lord said concerning Jezabei, I gave her space to
Repent, and she Repented not; I will cast her into great tribulation, Rev. 2.
21, 22. When Jesus Christ the Son of God, shall at the Day of Judgment say to a
Young man, I gave thee a space of Twenty years to Repent, and thou Repentedst
not. And shall say to another, I gave thee a space of Forty years to Repent,
and thou Repentedst not. And to another, I gave thee Fifty years time, and yet
thou Repentedst not. Will He not say, Cast the unprofitable Servant into outer
Darkness.

VI. It will be with men to all Eternity, according as they improve or neglect
their Time. It is therefore great Wisdom for them to Redeem Time, and infinite
Folly for them not to do it. They are wise that are wise for Eternity. They
that in Time seek the face of God so as to obtain. His favor through Jesus
Christ, are happy to Eternity. This one thing was the substance of the Sermons
Preached by the Holy Prophets of old, Hos. 10. 12. It is time to seek the Lord,
until He come and rain Righteousness upon you. The more Time we have, the
greater will be our Glory in the Eternal Kingdom, if Time has been spent and
improved as it ought to have been. But they that neglect their Time until time
shall be no longer afforded to them, will be miserable to Eternity. A late
Writer speaks of a wanton Lady who Dyed not long since, that had by the Example
of her Ungodly Unhappy Mother, spent her Time in vicious Courses: but when she
was Dying, her Mother ^^anding by her Bedside, she uttered such dismal words
as these: It is now too late for you to speak to me of God; You have undone me.
I am going to Hell before, and you will follow after me. Oh, remember that as
Time leaves a man or Woman, so Eternity will find them. The world to come is
no Seed time, only an Harvest in which men shall Reap the fruit of what they
were doing in Time, whether it were Good or Evil. None shall be Prebationers in
the other World. For there they are fixed down in an Unchangeable E^^ate. The
Great Gulf of Eternity is then fixed, which there is no passing through. So
that a man by loosing his Time may be Eternally undone. By loosing his Time, he
may loose his immortal Soul, so as that the Redemption of his Soul shall cease
for ever. He that shall spend away his whole Lifetime in the service of Sin,
or in a careless neglect of God, and of his own Soul, and Salvation by Christ,
will be a miserable Creature throughout the never Ending Ages of Eternity. It
is then the greatest Wisdom, and of infinite Concernment for them that have
mi^pent the Time past of their Life, to do so no longer, but now to Redeem the
Time.

We proceed now to some APPLICATION of the Doctrine which has been ^h^s Opened
and Confirmed.

USE I.
It is to be Lamented that there are so many among us that do not Redeem the
Time as they should do. This is for a Lamentation, and shall be for a
Lamentation.

1. Are there not those that spend their time very Irreligiously? More like
Heathen than like Christians. How do the Heathen spend their Time? Only in
seeking after the things which concern their Bodies with the neglect of their
Souls. They live without Prayer to God in Jesus Christ from day to day. And are
there not some who go under the Name of Christians that do so? The Lord may
complain of them as He did of His People of old, Jer. 2. 32. My People have
forgotten me Days without number. How many Days have some lived without any
Prayer to God? They have been Days without number. And how are the seasons of
Grace neglected? Sinners know not in this their Day the things of their Peace:
they know not the time of their Visitation. Are there not those that seldom
come to hear the Word of God Preached? Some not on the Lords Day, many never on
a Lecture Day. Yea, some that once did frequent Lectures now do it not. This
has been and is the Sin of Professors, and Church members in New England.
Although the waters of Life are running at their doors, they will not step out of
doors to taste of them. Some pretend they have no time. They must mind their
Callings. So they should But if they were such Christians as they ought to be,
they would do as Mary did, they would Redeem time from their worldly Occasions,
to hear the Word of Christ. And they would remember what Christ has said, Mat.
6. 33. Seek ye First the Kingdom of God, and His Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added to you.

2. Are there not some whose Time is very much spent in Pactimes. In Sports,
Diversions, and Recreations. It is lawful to spend some time therein. Yea, it
may be a duty when Health requires it, and a Redeeming of Time, if thereby we
are made more fit for Service; but when there is an Excess therein Precious
time is wasted. There are Lawful Recreations which one may Sin greatly by
consuming too much time in them. The Famous Bohemias Martyr John Huss, not long
before his Death, bewailed it that in his Younger years he had spent too much
of his time in Playing at Chess, and wrote to a Friend of his, to Pray that God
would forgive him that Sin: And yet that is a lawful sort of Play. But then
there are some Sports which are Sinful, and no time ought to be spent therein.
So are Stage Plays, and Mixed Dancings, and those Diversions in which Cruelty
is Exercised on Dumb Creatures, which some Ungodly Youths in this Count^ey have
delighted themselves with; I mean that which they call Cock-Scaling. It is a
vile thing to take Pleasure in, or Sport with the misery of Dumb Creatures, who
had never been miserable if it had not been for the Sin of men. I remember it
is mentioned in the Life of a late Eminent Minister in England, that seeing a
number of Young men going to divert themselves with that foolish Pastime, only
spoke this word to them, Friends, Jesus Christ did not come into the world to
set up such Sports as these: Which struck the heart of one of them, so as that
he became a Serious Godly Young man, and forever abandoned that and all such
Vanities. There are other Recreations, which although some defend them, it is
very questionable whether they are not in themselves Sinful. Of this sort are
those infamous Games of Cards and Dice. Because of the Lottery which is in
them, the generality of Divines both Ancient and Modern have vehemently Decried
and Condemned them. Among many others Lyranus has Nine Reasons to prove the
unlawfulness of them. But to want so much time as some do in those Vanities is
certainly an heinous Sin. It is a good Rule which Divines give, That thing
which a man dare not Pray over, let him avoid it. But where is the man that
ever did seriously Pray over his Cards and Dice? It is matter of Lamentation
that ever such things as these should be heard of in New England, and that so
many of the Young Generation should be Corrupted with them.

3. There are many who spend their Time Unprofitably. Yea, that have done so
all their Days. It was said of Onesimus, that in time past he was
unprofitable, but now he is profitable, Philem. 11. Alas! there are many that
this latter cannot be said of them, that now they are profitable, only the
former, that in the time past they have been unprofitable. Who is the better
for them? They cumber the Ground. Such persons may tremble at their Doom; Luke
13. 7. Cut it down, why cumbers it the Ground. And when they are cut down, what
will be done to them? Another Scripture answers that question, Mat. 3. 10 Every
Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire. Are
there no Idle Persons to be found among us? Parents Idle, Children Idle. Idle
Men, and Idle Women. And how do some of these spend their time? The Scripture
tells you how, 1 Timothy 5. 13. Wandering about from House to House, and not only
Idle, but Ta^lers also, and Busy-bodies, speaking things which they ought not.
And are there not some that Smoke away their time? Time is a precious Commodity
that lies upon their hands, they know not how to dispose of it. But do you not
know that an hours Idleness is a Sin as well as an Hours Drunkenness? Yea, that
Idleness is a great Sin. One of the Sins for which Sodom was in that fearful
manner Destroyed, was an abundance of Idleness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Moreover, there
are some who although they are not altogether Idle, nevertheless, they spend
their Time Unprofitably. It may be in Reading unprofitable Books. Some read
Profane Books. Such as come from the Stage, whose vile design is to Corrupt
good manners. Others spend their time in reading vain Romances. It may be if
they had spent half that Time in Reading the Scriptures, and Books that show
unto them the way to Eternal Life, they might have been Converted thereby. But
what are they the better for Reading Romantic Stories? It is mere loss of time.
And do not some spend much Time in unprofitable Discourse? Do not they that
frequent Public Houses do so? What shall be said of Tiplers? Prove. 23. 30.
They tarry long at the Wine. There are that spend much time in the Tavern, or
in the Alehouse: They tarry long there. And what is their Discourse there?
That which is very Unprofitable, and many times very Sinful. It may make a man's
heart tremble to think what account some Church Members will give to Christ at
the Day of Judgment, for the time they have spent at the Tavern and at the
Coffee House. And it is to be Lamented that Professors Generally mispend much
of their Precious Time in Unprofitable Discourse. It may be for Hours together
not one Edifying word; but such Frothy Discourse as it is a shame to mention. One
gives an account of a number of men met together, all of them pretenders to
Religion, but their Discourse was too vain. One in the company more Serious and
Pious than the rest, writ down in Shorthand what they said, they not knowing
what he was writing, and anon he says, Sirs, Will you now hear what your
Discourse has been? You spoke these words, and then repeated them; and to
another, You said thus, and then repeated what he said; and so to the rest; and
now said he, Did you remember that of every Idle word that men shall speak,
they must give an account at the Day of Judgment? Did Christians in the
Primitive Times Discourse after this rate think you? This put them to the
blush; they were all ashamed, and amazed at their own foolish Discourse. Time
spent in holy Conference, is Time Redeemed. Wherefore the Apostle having said,
Walk in Wisdom, Redeeming the Time; his next words are, Let your speech be
always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, that you may know how you ought to
answer every man. Therefore Unedifying Discourse is contrary to this Duty of
Redeeming the Time.

USE II.
Oh! Then Redeem the Time. We are not Wise if we do it not. This is the
greatest wisdom, and yet the weakest of us may attain unto it. Few of us are
capable of being wise Philosophers, or wise Statesmen: But here is a greater
wisdom that the meanest of us may Excel in. He that Redeems his Time is wise to
Salvation, and that is to be wise indeed. Let it not be said of any of us,
there was a Price in the hand of a Fool that had no Heart unto it.

CONSIDER I.
We have lost Time enough already. The time past of our Life which has been
misspent, may suffice us, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Alas! There are some among us that have
lost all their time. They have done nothing to any Soul-saving purpose, since
they came into the world. Are there no Unregenerate ones here before the Lord
this Day? If God that sent an Angel to set a Mark on those that did mourn for
the Sins of the Times, Ezekiel. 9. 4. should send an Angel into this Congregation,
to set a Mark on the Foreheads of all that are truly Regenerate, how many
would there be found without that Mark upon them? Are there not some here that
have lived Twenty Years, nay Forty Years, who are still in their Natural
Unregenerate Estate? All your time has been lost. The Unregenerate man has been
Sleeping all his days, and in a deal Sleep too; Ephesians. 5. 14. A make thou that
Sleep, and arise from the Deal, and Christ shall give thee Light. Has not
that man who never did one Good work in his life, lost his time? This is true
of every Unregenerate man, of every Unbeliever: He is to every Good work
Reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. Is not that Time lost which has been sp^nt in the
service of Sin and Satan? Yet thus it is with those that are still in their
Natural Unregenerate Estate. Their whole Lifetime has been spent in that woeful
Service. And they that are now Regenerate, should remember what they were in
Time past; how many years it was that they lived without God in the world, and
the thought of that should make them now to be the more careful to improve
their Time to the Glory of God, and their own Salvation, and the Good of men.

CONSIDER II.
The mispence of Precious Time will sooner or later cause sad Reflections of
Conscience^ It may be in this Life, by sorrowful Repentance. If God intends
mercy to the Soul of him that has mi^pent his Time* the remembrance of it will
be bitter to him. It was so with Ephraim; He (...) on his thigh, and did bear
the Reproach of his Youth, Jer. 31. 13. It was matter of sorrow and shame to
him, to remember how he had mi^pent the Time of his Youth. It may be the
remembrance of misspent Time will be a terror and a trouble on a Deathbed. It
is reported concerning our Famous Prince Henry, that a Young Noble man visiting
him on his Deathbed, He said to him, Ah! Tom. How do I wish for those Hours
again which I and thou have spent in vain Sports. A Famous Earl who dyed in
Ireland, in the Year 1576. did on his Deathbed with great Penitence and hopes
of Pardon, beway1 his not having spent his Time so Religiously as he should
have done. I could tell you of a very Holy Man, (Dr. Harris) who had for many
Years spent his time well, and done great services for the Church of God,
nevertheless, when he was near his Death, he professed that nothing troubled
him so much as the loss of Precious Time, therefore (said he) Work, work apace.
An Eminent Divine speaks of one whom he knew, the occasion of whose Conversion
was, he heard one on a Deathbed Cry out, O Can you call Time again! O can you
call Time again! I am undone to all Eternity, if you cannot call Time again. It
may be when it will be too late the remembrance of Lost Time will be terrible.
As Hagar when all the water in the Bottle was spent, lift up her voice and
wept, Genesis 21. 16. So it will be with Sinners when they see all their time is
spent, they will lift up their voice and weep. They will do as Esau did, when
he saw that he had lost his opportunity and was come too late for the Blessing,
He Cried with a great and exceeding bitter Cry, and said, Bless me, every one
also, O my Father, Genesis 27. 34. But then it was too late. If he had, come and
Cry^d sooner, he would have got the Blessing. But thus it is with many poor
Creatures, when their immortal Souls are gone out of their Bodies, and Eternity
has fa^^ned its Iron Teeth upon them, they wail like Dragons, they mourn for
the loss of Time with tears of Blood. O the roaring Lamentations which there
are in Hell. They are alwas making that doleful Cry, Oh! that we had made a
better use of our Time! But now our Sun is set forever. Had we spent that time
in Prayer to God, and in Mourning for Sin, which we consumed in Vanity, we had
gone to Heaven, whereas now with our Time all our Hopes are lost forever.

By way of Direction.

First. Let us watch against those things which will make us loose our Time.
There are Time-devourers, beware of them. Other Thieves men will watch against
them. They are loath to be Robbed of their Gold or Jewels. But shall we suffer
our selves to be Robbed of our Golden Hours, of that Precious Jewel of Time?
Beware of an Excess in Diversions and Recreations. Some have spent whole days
therein. Yea, many daye^ since they have been in the world, who never spent one
whole day in their lives in Secret Prayer, and in Mourning for Sin. Consume not
Time in tedious fruitless Visits. A man that is choice of his time, will
neither care to give them nor to receive them. That Famous Divine Ursin, had it
written over his Study door, Aut paucis age, aut me Lab^rantem adjuva. Either
dispatch your business quickly, or assist me in my work. Vain Companions are
Time-devourers; Let Young men beware of them. They will Entice thee to the
Tavern or to the Alehouse, there to spend thy time in Drinking and Gaming, and
if thou wou^^^st leave them, they will say, Don't go yet, stay a while longer.
Thus has many a Young man lost his Time and his Soul too.

Secondly. Be careful to allow a due Portion of Time for Religious Duties. The
Seventh part of time is due to God by the Law of Creation. The Sabbath Day
should be spent in Religious Exercises, either in Public or in Private. For
Persons to mi^pend their time on the Lords Day, is an hain^us Sin. There is the
Guilt of Sacril^dge in it. But besides that, there are Religious Duties to be
performed every Day; Psalm. 145. 2. Every Day will I Bless thee. So should we
read the Scriptures daily. That Convert spoken of in, Act. 8. 28. when he
traveled abroad, would carry his Bible with him, and read in it as he sat in
his Chariot. Say not we have not time for this. The Kings of Israel who because
of the Public business lying upon them, had less time to spare than their
ordinary Subjects, were nevertheless Enjoyn^d to write out a part of the Bible
with their own hands, and to read therein all the days of their Life, Deuteronomy.
17. 18 19. It is reported of the Emperor The^d^sius, that he transcribed the
whole New T^^tament with his own hand, and would be often perusing of it. And
of a Prince in Transylvania, that he read over the whole Bible Twenty Seven
times. The Lord Cromwell (that great Reformer in King Henry 8. his Days) as he
trav^lled a long Journey, got the whole New Te^tament by heart. Few Great men
in these Days spend their time in Journeys so profitably. Dr. Gonge would never
go to Sleep before he had read Five Chapters in his Bible. This he began when
he was a Young Student in the University of Cambridge, and held on in it, all
his days. Some very Learned men that had been hard Students, have on Deathbeds
bewailed it, that they had read the Scriptures no more. So did Salmasius,
professing that if he might live another Year, he would spend his Time chiefly
in reading and meditating on the Holy Scriptures. Another Learned Man on his
Deathbed said, He repented of all the Time pact of his Life, except that which
he had spent in Communion with God, or in doing Good.

Thirdly. Let us think often on those things, Meditation whereon will have a
tende^cy to cause us to Redeem the Time. The things before mentioned concerning
the Preciousness of Time, the Shortness of it, the Uncertainty of it, the
Account that must be given for it, the Eternity which depends on the
improvement of it, were they fr^quently and deeply Meditated on, how could. it
be but such Persons would Red^em their Time? Remember the near approaches of
Death. Do you think of it Sirs? Death! Death! Death is near at hand. Consider
Moses his Prayer, P^al. 90. 12. Teach us to number our Days as that we may
apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Alas! Men hardly number their Years, much less
their Days. If they did think they had but. a few Days to live, they would
apply their Hearts unto Wisdom; they would be so wise as to Redeem their Time.
And think often of the Invisible Eyes which are upon you, observing how you
spend your Time, who see you although you do not see them. The Eyes of Holy
Angels (...) upon you. The Jews say, Angels write down in a Book how men spend
their Time, and that at the Day of Judgment they will produce that Book. But to
be sure GOD writes it down in the Book of His Remembrance. Oh think on it!
Moses was a man that Redeemed his Time* He saw Him that is Invisible, and that
made him do so. He remembered that the Eye of God was upon him, Heb. 11. 27.
Forgetfulness of this is the cause why men mi^pend their Time.

Fourthly and Lastly. Let us set before us the Example of our Holy Lord JESUS
CHRIST. HE Redeemed His Time so as never man did. HE never in all His Life
misspent one Minute of Time. We should Endeavor to be as like Him as possibly
we can. He said, I must work while it is say, J^h. 9. 4. As long as the Day of
Life continued, He was always at work for God, He did sometimes Deny Himself of
His necessary Food, that so He might lay hold on an opportunity of doing Good.
When His Disciples Prayed Him saying, Master, Eat, He said to them, My Meat is
to do the Will of Him that sent me, and to Finish His Work, Jo^. 4. 34. If He
did but take a Journey from one Town to another, He would Redeem the Time, and
be doing Good wherever He came; Act. 10. 38. He went about doing Good. Let us
then follow Him who has set us that Example for our Imitation. Do we hope to be
with Him after Death? Then ought we so to walk as He walked. And if we thus
Redeem our Time, within a few Days, we shall hear JESUS CHRIST say, Well done,
thou Faithful Servant, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Amen! O Lord.

THE END.

