A Mid-Night-Cry FROM THE Temple of God TO THE Ten Virgins Slumbering and
Sleeping, Awake, Awake, Arise, and gird your Loins, and trim your Lamps, for
behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye therefore out to meet him.

Written by John Rogers

John 7.7. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of
it, that the works thereof are evil. To the Christian Reader.
John Rogers, a Servant of Jesus Christ, to the ten Virgins, Grace and Peace be
unto you, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved
us and washed us from our (...) in his own Blood; and has made us heirs with
himself of that eternal Kingdom, which he by birth is an heir born unto; being
the only begotten Son of (...) Father, (...) the first that rose from the dead,
and is ascended far above all Dianity whatsoever, being the Prince of the Kings
of the Earth and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, and we
shall reign (...) the earth? To him b^ glory and dominion forever, and ever,
Amen.

Beloved Brethren, I have written unto you in this following Treatise,

First, Concerning the one only true God, distinguished into Three, according
unto his Properties.

And Secondly, concerning the state of the two Adams, with the two
Ministrations, handed down from them to us their Children; the first
Ministration proceeding from the Tree of Knowledge and Death to us, the second
Ministration proceeding from the Tree of Life to us; by the first came the
knowledge of the Law, and by the second life from the dead.

And, Thirdly, concerning the several Ministrations of Water Baptism, and what
the use and end of them was, and is, together with the Lords Supper, and what
it points at.

And, Fourthly, a description both of a dead and living Faith.

And, Fifthly, how that Jesus Christ is our King, Priest and Prophet, and how
that these several Offices of his, is both seen and felt, by every one that is
born of God; so that they do not believe him to be so, only from the report of
the Scriptures, but they are eye and ear witnesses of the truth of the
Scripture, by seeing his several Offices operating and working in them, both by
a sensible seeing, hearing and feeling: And how that all others that make a
profession, and meddle with his Ordinances, are Antichrist and false Prophets,
who deceive the world and themselves, being Ministers only of the Letter.

And, Sixthly, concerning the Christian Sabbath, or Gods seventh day Rest,
which Jesus Christ, through faith, brings us into.

And, Seventhly, an exposition upon the ^ Cor. 11.4 showing that that Covering
is a covering pla^'t by God in nature, for the woman to cover her head with,
but not the man.

And, Lastly, concerning Marriage and Divorce, with all things relating
thereunto, by Scripture Testimony, without regard to any other Law or Custom
whatsoever.

Breth^rn, though I have written to you at Midnight, yet my lamp was well
trimmed, so that it gave me a clear light to write by; for I have not been
slumbering and sleeping, and thereby neglecting the triming of my Lamp; for if
I had so done, it would have given me but a dull light; and therefore as I have
been thoroughly awake, and my lamp well trimmed, so that it gave me a clear light
in my writing to you; so I desire you not to go about the reading of it,
between sleeping and waking, and while your lamps want triming; for then you
will neither have light enough to see what you read, nor your senses wake
enough to understand it; and so by this means you may pass a dreaming judgment
against me and it, that may injure your selves, not knowing whether i^ be a
Voice founded before the Bridegroom^ face or not, and so he may come upon you
as a thi^ in the night, while you are slumbering and sleeping, and your vessels
empty of (...), and your lamps ready to go out, Awake, Awake, therefore, and
arise tri^ up your lamps, that you may be in a readiness to enter in with the
Bridegroom to the Marriage of the Lamb; for some will be unprepared, and while
they go to buy Oil the door will be shut, and then they will call and say,
Lord, Lord, open unto us; but he from within, will answer and say, Verily I
know you not from whence you are; then will they begin to say, We have taught
in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name, and done many wonderful works, in
thy name: but he will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye
workers of Iniquity. Then shall they see many come from the East, and from the
West, and from the North, and from the South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; but these, the Children of the Kingdom, shall
be shut out in outer darkness; and therefore faith our Lord, Strive to enter in
at the strai^ gate; for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall
not be able.

Friends and Brethren, I have found it no small matter, to enter in at the
strait gate and to keep the narrow way that leads unto life, for it bath lead
me to forsake a dear Wife and Children, yea, my house and land, and all my
worldly enjoyments, and not only so, but to lose all the friendship of the
world, yea, to bury all my honor and glory in the dust, and to be counted the
offscouring and filth of all things; yea, the strait and narrow way has lead
me into Prisons, into Stocks, and to cruel Scourgings, mockings and derision,
and I could not keep in it without perfect Patience under all these things; for
through much Tribulation must we enter into the Kingdom of God; for it is
written, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution; and
it is he only that overcomes that shall be crowned with ^lory, and therefore
no man warring in this war-fair ought to entangle himself with the affairs of
this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier.

I have been a listed Soldier under his banner, now about thirty two years,
under him whose name is called the Word of God; who is my Captain and Leader,
that warreth against the Devil and his Angels, against whom I have sought many
a sore battle within this thirty two years, for refusing to subject to the said
Devil or Dargons Laws, Ordinances, Institutions and Worship; and for
disregarding his Ministers, for which transgressions, I have been sentenced to
pay hundreds of Pounds; laid in Iron Chains, cruelly scourged, enoured long
Imprisonments, set in the stocks many hours together, out of the bounds of all
human Law, and in cruel manner, And thus after the war had continued, and been
carried on twenty years, and I under these Trials still, I was sentenced to pay
a fine of twenty shillings, or continue in the Prison till I did, for
prophaining the Dragons Sabbath, which they ignorantly call Gods Sabbath; and
though it be true that he is the God of this world, and that the Sabbath he sets
up, is the Sabbath of the God of this World, yet I knowing in my self, that he
was not my God, and that if I should be subject to his Ordinances and
Institutions of worship, I should offend my God in so doing; and considering,
as I was in the Prison, that he made an offensive War against me, I not being
one of his kingdom, and that I was able to engage war against him, and against
all his power, I being on the strongest side, and considering who was my
Captain and Leader, and how well he had armed me for the battlel, I thought it
my wisdom, to make open proclamation of war against him, accordingly I did in
writing, and hung it out on a board at the Prison Window, but kept no Copy of
it, but strangely met with a Copy of it, many years after, and here follows a
Copy of it,

John Rogers a Servant of Jesus Christ, does here make an open Proclamation of
War against the great Red-Dragon; and against the beast to whom he gives Power,
and against the false Church, which rides upon the beast; and against the false
Prophets who are established by the Dragon and the Beast, and against the Image
of the Beast. As also a Proclamation of Derision against the Sword of the
Devils Spirit, which is Prisons, Sto^^^ Whips, Fines and Revilings; all which
is to defend Doctrines of Devils: And because I would leave none in ignorance,
I shall explain the fore mentioned things: the great Red Dragon, is that old
Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world; the Beast is
the Powers of this World; the false Church, is the Church which they have
established, and stand to maintain, which is upheld by them; the false Prophets
are the Ministers which they set up and maintain with great sums of Money; and
the Image of the Beast is that form of Worship, which is set up by the Powers
of this World, and maintained and defended by them, which is Doctrines of
Devils. And for as much as I do here make open Proclamation of war against you
[in the name of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (who rides upon the White
Horse, and is my Captain and Leader, whose name is called the Word of God] I
doubt not but that you will have on your Armor, to wit, the Armor of him that
gives you Power, and is your Captain and Leader, which Armor I shall here
describe unto you, for an Helmet, the fear of destruction; and the breast plate
of Sin, and your loins girt about with Lies, and shod with the preparation of
Disquietment; and above all, having the shield of Fear, and the Sword of the
great Red Dragons Spirit, which Sword is before described, and Fight Valiantly
for the head of your Church, and hope for no Victory.

I shall also give a word of Exhortation (...) you my fellow Soldiers whose
names are recorded in the Lambs Book of Life; Fear not though all the world has
wondered after the Beast, and they have worshipped the Dragon which gave Power
to the Beast, and have worshipped the Beast, saving, Who is like unto the Beast?
Who is able to make war with him? And though it was given unto him to make war
with our former Brethren the Saints, and to overcome them, and to kill them,
yet he not discouraged; for the night is far spent, and the day of the glorious
gospel is now at hand, the day of our Victory draws on a pace; regard not your
stuff, remember Lots Wife, your Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in
the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ.

John Rogers.

This Proclamation of War, was in the first Month, and in the year 1694. It did
not hang long at the prison window, before a Captain who also was a Magistrate,
came to the Prison window, and told me he was a Commission Officer, and that
proclamations belonged (...) him to publish, and so he ^ook it away with him,
and I never hear^ (to my knowledge) any thing more about it from the Authority
themselves, but I heard from others, who told me, they were present and heard
it read among the Authority with great laughter and sport at the fancy of it.
But the Dragon which deceives the whole world, fitted all his forces against
me in great fu^y; for one of his Ministers, a Preacher of his Doctrine, not
many days after this Proclamation made complaint to the Authory against me, as
I was informed, and after understood it to be so by the Authority, and that he
had given evidence of blasphemy against me; though nothing relating to my
Proclamation; and this following warrant and mittimus was issued out against
me, while I was in New London Prison, which I took no Copy of also; but the
Mittimus it self came to my hand, as strangely as the Copy of the Proclamation
did; of which here follows a Copy.

WHereas John Rogers of New London, has of late set himself in a furious way,
in direct opposition to the true Worship, and pure Ordinances, and holy
institution of God; as also on the Lords Day passing out of Prison in the time
of public worship, running into the Meeting house, in a railing and raging
manner, as being guilty of blasphemy.

To the Constable of New London or County Marshal, these are therefore in their
Majesty's name to require you, to impress two Sufficient men, to take unto
their custody the body of John Rogers, and him safely to convey unto Hartford;
and deliver unto the Prison-keeper, who is hereby required him the said John
Rogers to receive into custody, and safely to secure in close Prison, until
next Court of Assistants held in Hartford. Fail not: this Dated in New London,
March 28th, 1694.

James Fitch. Assist.

By this Warrant and Mittimus, I was taken out of New London Prison by two
armed men, and carried to the head Goal of the Government, where I was kept
till the next Court of Assistants, and there fined five pounds for reproaching
their Ministry, and ^o sit on the Gallows a quarter of an hour with a Halter
about my neck; and from ^^ence to the Prison again, and there to continue till
I paid the said five Pounds, and give in a b^nd of fifty Pounds not to disturb
their Chu^ches; where I continued three years and 8 months from my first
commitment. This was the Sentence, and upon a training day, the Marshal came
with eight M^squ^teers, and a man to put the halter on, and as I past by the
Train band, I held up the Halter and told them, my Lord was crowned with
Thorns for my sake, and should I be ashamed to go with an Halter about my neck
for his sake? Whereupon the Authority gave order forthwith, that no person
should go with me to the Gallows save but the Guard: The Gallows was out of the
Town; when I came to it, I saw that both Gallows and Ladder were newly made; I
^^ept up the ladder, and walked on the ^allows, it being a great square piece
of timber, and very high, I stamped on it with my feet, and told them I came
there to ^mp it under my feet; for my Lord had Suffered on the Gallows for me,
that I might ^sape it. From thence I was guarded with ^he said eight
Musketeers to the Prison again, being come there, the Officers read to me the
Courts sentence, and demanded of me, whether I would give in a bond of fifty
Pounds not to disturb their Churche^ for time to come, and pay the five pound
fine? I told him, I owed them nothing, and would not bind my self. About five
or six months after there was a Malefactor taken out of the Prison where I was
and put to death, by reason of which there was a very great concourse of
People, to behold (...); and when they had executed him, they ^tept in the
street near to the Prison where I was, and I was taken out (I know not for
what) and tied to the carraige of a great Gun, where I saw the Country Whip,
which I knew well, for it was kept in the Prison where I was, and I had it
often times in my hand, and had viewed it, it being one single line opened at
the end, and three knots tied at the end, on each stran a knot, being not so
big as a cod-line; I suppose they were wont, (when not upon the Dragons
service) not to exceed forty stripes, according to the Law of Moses, every lash
being a stripe; I also saw another Whip lie by it with two lines, the ends of
the lines tied with twine that they might not open, the two knots seemed to me,
to be about so big as a wallnut; some told me they had compared the lines of
the Whip to the lines on the Drum, and the lines of the whip were much bigger;
the man that ^d the execution, did not only strike with the strength of his
arm, but with a swing with his body also; my senses seemed to be quicker, in
seeing, hearing, discerning, or co^pr^hending any thing at that time, than at
any other time; the Spectators told me, they gave me threescore Stripes, and
then they let me loose, and asked me, if I did not desire Mercy of them? I told
them, No, they were cruel Wretches; forthwith they sentenced me to be whipped a
second time; I was told by the spectators that they gave me sixteen Stripes;
and from thence I was carried to the Prison again; and one leg chained to the
^ill; a Bed which I had hired to this time, at a dear rate, was now taken from
me by the Jailer, and not so much as straw to lie on, nor any covering, the
flower was hollow from the ground, and the planks had wide and open joints; it
was upon the eighteenth day of the eight Month that I was thus chained, and
kept thus chained six weeks, the weather cold; when the Goa^er first chained me
^e brought some dry crusts in a dish, and put them to my mouth, and told me, he
that was ex^^uted that day had left them, and that he would make me thankful
for them before he had done with me, and would make me comply with their
Worship, before he had done with me, though the Authority could not doit: and
then went out from me, and came no more at me in three days and three nights;
nor sent one mouthful of Meat, nor one drop of drink to me; and then he brought
a pottinger of warm broth, and offered it to me; I replied, Stand away with thy
broth, I have no need of it. Ay, ay, (said he) have ye so much life yet ^n you?
and went his way. Thus I lay chained at this Cill fix weeks, (...) back felt
like a dry stick, without sense of feeling, being pust up like a bladder, so
that I was fain to lie upon my face; in which Prison I continued three years
after this, under cruel sufferings; but I must desist, for it would contain a
book of a large volumn to relate particularly what I suffered in the time of
this imprisonment; but I trod upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the
Dragon I trampled under my feet; and came forth a Conqueror, through faith in
him, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and has overcome death it
self for us; and him that bath the power of it, also, who is the De^il. But
this long war has kept me waking and watching, and looking for the coming of
the Bridegroom, and earnestly desiring that his Bride may be prepared, and in
readiness, to meet him, in her beautiful Garments; being arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 1.9 9.
And be says unto me, write, blessed are they which are called unto the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb, and he faith unto me, these are the true sayings
of God.

Salutation to William Worth, of Nantuckit, thy Letter I received.

Salutation to Theader Eccleston of London, thy Letters I received, (...) the
year after the date of them, and but a few days after the writing of this book
one of them bearing date, the 1st of the 12 Month, 1705, the other the 12 of
the 12 Month 1705, but the books I received not.

Salutation to all that have written to me in a Christian love, and to all that
love the Lord Jesus i^ sin^erity.

This is the sixth Book printed for me, in single Volumns.

Concerning the only true God.
BEfore the beginning there was one only true God, in whom was life, being a
Spirit of himself from eternity, not distinguishable, as Father, Son, Lord or
Creator, tell time began^; for he was not a Father before he had a Son, nor a
Creator before the Creation was, neither did he declare himself to be a Lord,
^ill he had made himself, a Lordship, as appears thoughout the first chapter of
Ganesis; for the name Lord is not to be seen there, nor till he had made
himself a Lordship, Genesis 2.4. etc.

The second was the Word, which did proceed (...) God, and was God; by which
word all (...) were created, as appears ^an. 1.3. And God said, Let there be
light, and there was light; v 6. And God said. Let there be a firmament in the
midst of the waters, etc. and it was so, v. 9. And God said, let the waters be
gathered together into one place, etc. and it was so, v. 11. And God said, let
the earth bring forth grass, etc. and it was so, v. 14. And God said, let there
be lights, etc. and it was so. v. 20. And God said, let the waters bring forth,
etc. and it was so. v. 24. And God said, let the earth bring forth ^he living
Creatures, etc. and it was so.

Thus we see this Word was in the beginning with God, and it was God, for in it
was life, and it did then proceed from God, and created every creature, as
appears by those forementioned verses in Genesis Thiis the very word, which John
speaks of, John. 1.1. etc. In the beginning was the (...), and the word was
with God, and the Word was God; all thing were made by it, or by him, this is
the same word John speaks of also in his first Epistle, first verse. etc. That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our
eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of
Life, This Word of Life, did proceed from God, and by it were (...) all things
created, according to Paul's testimony, Coll 1.15, 16. who is the Image of the
invisible God, the first born of every Creature, for by him were all things
created, that are in Heaven, and that are in the Earth, and he is before all
things; this is Jesus Christ, who was the Son of God, before he was the son of
man; according to Paul's testimony, Ephe. 3 9. who created all things by Jesus
Christ; as also Heb. 1.2. has in these last days spoken to us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things; by whom also he made the worlds,
(note this last (...), to wit, by whom also he made the worlds) Thus it appears
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, before he was the son of man; he being
that Word which did proceed from God, by which Word all things were made, and
without it was not any thing made, that was made. Thus Jesus Christ as he was
the Word, or Son of God, had a beginning; for he was the first born of every
Creature, even the beginning of the creation of God, being that Creating Word
which did proceed from God and therefore his name is called the Word of God,
Rev. 19.13. And though he had a beginning, as he was the Word, yet he had no
beginning of days, as he was that eternal life which was from eternity, not
being distinguishable, till time began.

And the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, by the father, in the name of the
son, is the Third; and these three are but One God; for the Father is a Spirit,
the Word is a Spirit, and the holy Ghost is a Spirit; and these three are but
one God, one Life, one Spirit; and this Life, this Spirit, or this God, was not
a Father before the Son was brought forth, according to what is written Prove.
3.22. etc. And in creating all things, he became a creator; and in making
himself a Lord-ship, became a Lord; so that he was the only God, from eternity
before he was a father, or before he was the Word, or before be was a Creator,
or before he was a Lord, yea, before he was distinguishable; for the word of
God was the first born of every Creature, and is the second, being brought
forth of God before the Creation was: for by him were all things created both
in heaven and in earth, and the Spirit by which we are sanctified is the Third,
and proceeds from the Father and from the Son, being of the same nature, the
same life, the same spirit, given to us by measure, out of Gods fullness; for
in the Father and in the Son, is the fullness of the Spirit, even without
measure; so that the Father, Word and Spirit, is but one eternal God; though they
are three that bear record in heaven, concerning the Word being made flesh, or
Jesus Christ taking hold of our nature, and so becoming flesh and blood with
us, being conceived in the womb of the virgin by the holy ghost through the
over shadowing of the most high; and thus he became man in process of time,
that through death he might overcome him who hid the power of death, and bring
to light a Resurrection from the Dead, and so deliver those who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage; for Jesus Christ as he was
that creating word, was only spirit and life, but not flesh and blood with us,
but when the word was made flesh, then Jesus Christ became man; who was before
only the Root of David, as he was the word, but now is become his offspring,
and a ^^t Mediator.

And when this creating Word took hold of our nature, and became man, it spoke
with a man's voice, and said to the Wind and Sea, (...), and it was so, Matt.
8.26. It said to the le^er, Be clean, and it was so, v. 3. It said to the deaf,
Hear, and it was so. It said to the blind, See, and it was so. It said to
Lazarus, who had been four days dead and buried, come (...), and it was so.
According to what we read in the first of Genes^, before the Word was made
flesh; for it was the same creating word, that is now made flesh, according to
John's testimony, John 1.14 which is now become both God and Man, in union, so
that now he is not only the fountain of the water of life, but also is become
the Tree of life, and lamb of god which takes away the sin of the world, so
that the fountain of the water of life proceeds from the throne of god, and of
this lamb, and waters the garden of god, according to that figure, Gen 2.10.
and makes the branches of the Tree of Life fruitful branches: which Tree
grows on either side of the River of the water of life, in the midst of the
garden of God.

The Scripture does plentifully show, that Jesus Christ was the eternal God,
before he was man, and that he took hold of the seed of Abraham and David, and
laid down (...) life to redeem us from our vain conversation: and as the
Apostle John does set forth Jesus Christ in the beginning of his gospel, and in
the beginning of his first Epistle, to be the eternal Word, or God the Creator
of all things; so also toward the ends of those Books, he sets forth Jesus
Christ in his suffering, to be a Mediator, and our Propitiation, by whom we
have not only the Remission of our sins, by the sheding of his blood on the
Cross, but also Sanctification from the defilement of sin, by that water that
came out of his side on the Cross; John 19, 34, 35, 36. But one of the
Soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and
water; and he that saw it, bear record, and his (...) is true; and he knows
that he (...) true, that ye might believe; for these things were done, that the
Scripture might be fullfilled, Ab^ne of him shall not be broken. We may observe
from what the Apostle John here says in his Gospel, that visible tokens were
seen on the Cross of Christ, by this Apostle John, of Christ's Mediatorship, as
he was the Son of man, in three things, to wit, by the Blood, and by the Water
that came out of his side, and in that a Bone of him was not broken; which
three things, did answer to the figure under the law; for it was not the blood
of Bulls and Goats that could take away sin, but the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin; Secondly, that living water under the law, in
which they put the ashes of an heifer, and called it the water o^ Separation,
and said, it was a purification for sin, was but a figure of the fountain of
the water of life, which proceeds from the throne of God, and of this lamb,
which the Apostle John (...) on the Cross, out of whose (...) came forth a
visible token of it, and this is the water which is for the puritication of
sin; and the T^ra thing is, although he was crucified between two Theives, and
the Soldiers had order to brea^ their legs, came and break the legs of the
first and second, yet they broke not the legs of Jesus; that the Scripture
might be fullfilled (which said in the figure of him) a bone of him shall not
be broken, Exodus 12.46. Number. 9.12. which things were fulfilled in him, who was
the substance of those shadows; this Record John gives us in his gospel, of
what he saw (...) record of, and tells us that he knows that he says true,
that we may believe.

But it may be objected, that this is but the witness of a man, of what he saw.

To which I answer; The Apostle, John was not un^^^^ble of this objection, as
will appear in his first Epistle which will be ^eedful to be considered in its
place, and to see what further record John can produce to prove the truth of
it; In the first Epistle of John, 5.4. says he, And this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our says, in the (...) he querieth, Who is he that
evercometh the World? (and then answers the question) He that believes that
Jesus in the Son of God: and in the 6. v. he shows, that this faith must be
in the sacrifice of his body; for says he, This is he that came by water and
blood, even Jesus Christ. Here he alludes from what he has made record of in
his Gospel, of what he saw concerning Jesus Christ, when he was upon the cross,
having made his soul an offering for sin, out of whose side John saw the blood
and water come forth, not by Water only, says be, but by Water and Blood, for
Jesus Christ was that fountain of living waters, before he partook of flesh and
blood with us; and therefore says John, not by Water only, but by Water and
Blood; and says he, It is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit
is truth. Now this witness of the spirit of God (to every one that believes
that Jesus is the (...) that ^^me by Water and Blood) is greater than the
witness of Men, because this Witness is immediate from heaven; and therefore
greater than the witness of Jo^n, of what he saw concerning Christ on the
Cross; and this witness confirms the truth, to the believer) of what John
bear record of, for the witness of the Spirit of God sent down from heaven, in
Christ's name, is the Record of the Father, of the Word, and of the Holy Ghost
in Heaven, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God and the Savior of the World;
and these Three are but One God, one Life, and one Spirit in heaven above all;
and says John, there are (...) bear witness in earth, the Spirit, the Water,
and the Blood, and these three agree in one, yea, they agree in that witness
from ^^aven t^^t Jes^^ is the Christ; for (...) in his Blood, we have a
^en(...) in ourselves, of the ramis(...) of our ^ns, for where Remission is,
there is no more (...) upon the Conscience for sin; here is the witness in
earth, a second witness that a believer in Christ (...) he is sprinted (...)
evil Conscience by the blood of (...) Christ,) is, his earthly body is washed
with pure water, which water was represented by thus visible water (...) saw
come forth out of Christ's (...), when (...) with the Spear, which water so
eleanseth the heart and inward parts of the believer, so that he is not only
clean in his own sight, but has a witness in his earthly body, that he is
clean in God's sight, being cleansed with that water which did proceed from the
Throne of God, and of that Lamb of God which this Apostle saw on the Cross:
This is a second witness in earth: The third Witness in earth, is the Spirit of
every believer, with these other witnesses, witnesses to himself, with Gods
Spirit sent down from heaven in Christ's name, that he is a child of God; and
these three Witnesses agree in one, with that witness from heaven; and they are
in union one with the other; and says the Apostle John in v. 9. If we receive
the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of
God, which he has testified of his Son, he that believe then the Son of God,
has the witness in himself.

Here are three things to be taken notice of, in these forementioned words of
the Apostle; the first is the witness of men, what it is; and the Second is the
witness of God, and what that is; the Third thing is, be affirms that every
one that believes has the witness in himself. As to the first of these three
witnesses, is the Apostle John himself, with the rest of the Apostles and
Penmen of the books of the new Testament, who have testified that Jesus is the
Christ, the Savior of the world; The second witness to confirm the ^^uth of
this witness, is God himself from heaven, which witness is greater then the
first, and that which these (...) to is to confirms to the believer, that Jesus
is the Christ, the Savior of the world; Now this witness of God to the
believer, is greater then the witness of men; for God sends forth the spirit of
his Son from heaven, into the heart of the believer, which Spirit it self
bears witness to and with the believers spirit immediately, that he is a
child of God, and an heir of eternal Life, through faith in the blood of Jesus
Christ; and thus every on that believes has the witness of God in himself,
and can set to his seal, that the Scripture is true concerning Jesus Christ,
and his sufferings, by immediate Revelation from heaven.

Heb. 10.5. etc. Wherefore when he co^neth into the world, he faith, Sacrifice
and Offering then would not, but a Body have thou prepared nos. Here is three
things to be observed, The First is the Voice of the Spi(...) of Christ
speaking, when he comes into the World; The Second thing that is to be
observed, is, where the voice of the Spirit of Christ says when he comes into
the World, to wit, sacrifice and and offering thou would not. Here we may
observe, is a rejection of the shadows of the offering of the Body of Christ;
and the Third thing to be observed, is, that it is a Body that God has
prepared Christ, for to offer for sin, which is the substance of those
thadowing Sacrifices, verse. 6, 7. In burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for sin,
thou had had no pleasure, then said I, Lo I come in the volumn of the book it
is written of me, to do thy will, O God. Compare these two verses with v. 9.
Then said he, lo I come to do thy will, O God; he takes away the first (faith
the Author) that he may establish the second; that is, he takes away burnt
Offerings and Sacrifices for sin, in which God had no pleasure, that he may
establish the second, says the Apostle; that is, that Christ might do the will
of God, by the offering up of his own Body, for this was the will of God,
according to what is written in the volumn of the book; and therefore it is
said in v. 10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all; and that he came thus to do the will of God.
And, Secondly, we may observe, that by the which will we are Sanctified, to
(...), through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ; so that our
Sanctification from sin, comes by the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ, as
appears also in v. 14 for by one offering he has perfected forever them that
are sanctified. Now sanctification is the work of the Spirit, and the purchase
of the Spirit or God for us, is with Christ's Blood, and therefore it is
written, he has washed us from our sins with his own blood^ Under the Law the
High Priest was ordered to go into the inward Court of the Tabernacle, or
Temple within the vail, called the Holiest of all, once every year, not without
Blood, which he offered for himself and for the errors of the people, which was
a figure for the time then present till Christ came, and took on him our
nature, who was the substance of that figure, being the High Priest over the
House of God, which is the true Tabernacle or Temple which God has pitched,
and not man; for the Saints Bodies are the Templ^oy God, where Christ, the High
Priest, does his office in; and the inner Court, within the vail, which is
called the Holiest of all, where was the Mercy Scat of God, which did represent
Christ's entering into a body of flesh, or being veiled with our Nature, which
body of flesh was the Holiest or (...), which Christ entered into, and offered
his own blood for (...) through the eternal Spirit, by which offering he has
purged our Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God; and by this
offering of his Body and Blood, ^e has purchased for us that heavenly meat and
drink; by which food we are Spiritually nourished, and it bears the name of the
purchase of it, for the name o^ it is derived from the offering up of the body
and blood of the lord jesus christ, because that was the price of the purchase
of it; and therefore, faith Christ, the bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world: whosoever eat^th my fle^h and drinks
my Blood bath eternal life; thus he said because he purchased it for us with
his flesh and blood on the Cross: Thus the name of this heavenly meat and
drink, is derived from the purchase of it, according to David's words,
concerning the water of Bethlehem, 1 Chr^n. 11.19. My God for bid it me, that I
shall do this thing; shall I dr^^k the blo^d of these three men? Thus he calls
the water of Bethlehem the blood of those three men, because they put their
lives in jeapardy to procure it for him; Thus it appears that Jesus Christ is
both God and Man, and is the one only sacrifice for our sins.

Concrening the first Adam, his original Nature, and the state he stood in.
THe first Adam did originally proceed from the earth, for God formed him of
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and
he became a living Soul; and likewise out of the ground the Lord God formed
every Beast of the Field, and every Foul of the Air, and gave Adam dominion
over them, and over all the Earth; and God planted a Garden east ward in Eden;
and there he put Adam, whom he had formed; and out of the ground made the Lord
God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the
Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden; and the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil. Thus Adam was crowned with glory and honor, having dominion over the
works of Gods hands, having all things put under his feet, and in this he bore
the image of God; and thus was he placed in the Garden of pleasure and
happiness over all Gods Works, but was subjected under a Law from Gods Throne,
the punishment of the breach if it, was a temporal death; with other temporal
misery, executed upon himself and upon his Posterity; for by this one Offense
Death reigns over all men, in whom all have ^nned, and fell with him, who was
the head and root; this first sin was not against a spiritual Law, as now
transgressions are; for he had not the knowledge of good and evil, for that
Tree was a figure of the spiritual Law of God; for by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin, which was the fruit and effect of that figure; for the name of
it opened the mystery it represented; for upon that Transgression, the eyes of
them both were opened, and a divine light shined into them; which was the work
of the Law written in their hearts, or the knowledge of good and evil ministered
unto them, and unto all their Posterity, successively, that by this knowledge
of the Law in every man, the second Adam might judge every man according to
their works, at the Resurrection of the Body, whose Sentence and Judgment will
be the second Death; but the sentence and punishment of Adams first fin^ was a
dispossession of Paradise; he being sent forth to till the ground, out of which
he was taken, till he should return unto dust again; for this was the sentence
and punishment of that sin, and it extended no further then the first death, or
death of the Body; for it was a Transgression, by which he lost his birthright
and his blessing, even the dispossession of his happy enjoyments, with a
temporal death; this was the extent of his punishment.

He was not the Son of God by Generation but (...) Creation, and therefore not
a proper Heir of God: but is a figure of him that was to come after him, Romans
5.14. for he had only an earthly nature, being only of the earth earthly, but
not par^aker of the divine nature, no, not while in his innocent state; but he
being the first born of flesh and blood, was the head and root of all mankind;
so that we all stood and fell in him. Thus by one man, Sin entered into the
World, and death by this one man's sin, passed upon all men, in whom all men
have sinned, and are under the punishment of that Sentence, to wit, In the
Sweat of thy face that thou (...) bread, till thou returnest unto the ground,
for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art and unto dust shall thou
return. I say, all men are under the punishment of this Sentence; but it was
the purpose of God to take hold of our nature, and to rule over all his works
himself; so that the first Adam was made in the Image of God; but was not God,
but was subjected under God by a Law, but the second Adam was the Lord from
heaven, a quickening Spirit, who created Adam in his own likeness and gave him
dominion over the works of his own hands, who afterward was made flesh, or
took hold of our nature, and became man, as the Scripture faith, he was in the
world, and the world was made by him, but the world knew him not; Neither does
the world know us his Children, because they knew not him; it was he that
formed the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which is
in the midst of his garden, for he was that eternal Life which was before the
world was made, and after became a Tree of Life, in the midst of the Garden of
God; he also formed the Tree of Knowledge, that was in the midst of the garden
of God, which was a figure of his righteous Law, by which Law comes the
knowledge of our duty to God, and the knowledge of our disobedience to God.

Our first Parents while in an innocent state, had not the knowledge of good
and evil, which knowledge was the light of the spiritual law of God; for their
first sin was a transgression in the figure; but immediately upon that
transgression, the eyes of them both were opened; but an opened eye cannot see,
without light, for whatsoever makes any thing manifest to the eye is light; so
that the fruit of the Tree, was a light unto Adam, and he has ministered it
unto all his Posteritv; and by this Light, will God judge the World, by that
man whom he has appointed; for when God past that sentence of death upon Adam,
he also promised, that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head:
This Seed is the Tree of Life, for he is the resurrection and the Life; for as
death came upon all men by the first Adam, so will there be a general
Resurrection of the Body, and an eternal Judgment by the second Adam; for he
that has the power of death is the Devil; but he that has the power of the
Resurrection is Jesus Christ, who has taken hold of our nature, and so become
flesh and blood with us, and so came under that Curse of the Law, past upon
Adam and upon his Posterity for that first sin; for he under-went hunger,
weariness, and death it self, all which was the effect and fruit of that first
sin, tho'he knew no sin; and thus he came under the Curse of the Law for our
sakes, even unto death, but saw no corruption; for God raised him from the
dead, and thus he overcame, death it self, which is our last Enemy, and has
brought to light a Resurrection from the dead, so that as death came by the
first Adam both temporal and spiritual; so likewise a Resurrection from the
dead, comes by the second Adam, both spiritual and temporal.

In a word, the two Trees in the midst of the garden of God represented the
state of the two Adams, and their Posterity; the Tree of Knowledge, represented
the ministration of the Law, to the first Adam, and from him, to his posterity,
that by it we might understand what state he stood in, even under the Law, by
which Law came the Knowledge of Sin; and so death by sin. The Tree of Life
represented the state of the second Adam, by whom we have received the
Atonement, whereby we have not only the remission of our sins past, but by him
we are thoroughly reconciled to God, and have the assurance given us of eternal
life, and all through free Grace: So that both Ministrations come from the same
God; as thus, The Law from a King will never save the life of a Traitor, yet
this law gives light to all his Subjects, to teach them their duty, of
Subjection to their King; but the Kings Law may be the death of many a Traitor;
but the same King, out of his free grace and mercy, may send forth a Pardon by
the hand of his Son, under his hand and seal, to save the ^arytor from the
Justice of his Law; but these are two Ministrations from one King, and two
contrary acts; the one on purpose to kill the Traitor, the other on purpose to
save him alive, and the knowledge o^ the first, will not make known the second;
the first Ministration of the Law, is a Tree of Knowledge and death to the
Traitor; the second Ministration is a tree of life to the Traitor; for in the
first, nothing is to be seen, but the Cherubims and flami^^ (...) of Gods
Justice, to put in (...) the breach of his Law.

The first Adam was not God, but he was man only; and therefore (...) were not
one in the (...) were two distinct Natures, the one and (...) divine and
^^iritu^. Nature, who was (...) Christ the Creator; the other only (...) and
fleshly nature, who was only M^n; for the first Adam was only made in the Image
of God, but God purposed in himself, before the world was made, to take our
nature, and so become man, and not the nature of Angels, or any other Creature,
and to rule over all the w^r^s of his own hands; and this the first Adam was a
(...) of: to wit, of Christ's coming in the (...) in that body born of the
Virgin Mary And Eve (was a figure of (...), or the new Jerusalem) who was taken
out of the side of Adam, being (...) his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and
these fleshly union, represents that spiritual union between Christ and his
Bride, whose Children are born of her womb, and suck her breast and are dandled
on her knees, and she is taken out of his side, being bone of his bone and
flesh of his flesh; and if she be our Mother, then God is our Father.

And that Garden in Eden does set forth the happy state of Innocence; for
Innocence is a garden of pleasure, though upon the Cross with Christ; for there
the Cherubims and Flaming Sword cut down the Innocent for our sakes, that we
the guilty might escape; for he was numbered with the Transgressors. And thus
by him we return into the garden, and take of the Tree of Life, and eat, by
which means we come to escape the second death; seeing the Cherubims and
Flaming Sword has cut him off, out of the land of the living, so that our body
of sin, or old man, is crucified by the crucifying of the Innocent upon the
Cross for us.

The first Adams innocent and glorious state was envied by that fallen Angel,
who was more Subtle then any beast of the field; and he has obtained the name
of a serpent, because he has with his poisonous Sting given the first Adam and
his Posterity a mortal wound, and is become the God of this world, ruling Lord
and king in them, having gotten the power of death over them; but God be
thanked, that we have gotten the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord; so that
we can now say, O death! where is thy sting? O Grave! where is thy victory?

And the river that went out of Eden to water the garden, represents the River
of the Water of Life, as clear as Cristal, which proceeds from the Throne of
God, and of the Lamb, and waters the tender plants of Gods garden, and makes
them grow and be fruitful.

The Sum of the matter is this; Adam was made in the image of God, and all
things put under his feet, and he himself subjected under a Law; the punishment
of the breach of it was a dispossession of his happiness, with a temporal Death
that was to follow, and so ^ring him to the dust again, out of which he was
taken; He transgrest, sentence was past upon him, and he turned out of
Paradise, and sent forth to till the ground, till the extent of his punishment
was ins^ (...) upon him: Cherubims and (...) sword were set to keep the way of
the (...) Life, that he might know of a certainty that he was a Son of death
after this his first transgression was committed; the Tree of Knowledge
ministered unto him a divine light, the eye of his spirit was opened, that by
the light, he might see. Thus the spiritual Law of God was written in his
heart, so that he knew what his duty was; in a word, he had the knowledge both
of good and evil in himself, he is now beco^e his own keeper; God appoints
another head, in his stead, who was the promised Seed of the Woman that should
be of his seed; and thus the elder was to serve the younger; the younger is the
man whom God has appointed to judge the first Adam, and all his Posterity; by
this knowledge of his law, ministered to Adam, by the fruit of the tree of
knowledge: Now if Adam comes to commit a second sin, it must be against this
spiritual law, written in his heart; the punishment of it is the second death;
his judge is Jesus Christ; the time of his tr^al and judgment, will be, when
the execution of his first sin is ended, then shall he rise out of the dust to
judgment, and come before his Judgment seat; the judge will be Jesus Christ;
the Law which he will judge by, will be the Light in him, or law written (...)
his (...), his Accuser will be his own thoughts, the Witnesses will be his own
Conscience with himself; the Sentence will be the second Death.

Now on the contrary, Adam after his first sin, was enlightened with a divine
light, so that he had the knowledge of his duty in himself, knowing both good
and evil, he now following this light, so exactly, as not to transgress against
it at any time; so tha^ his thoughts excuses him before the judgment seat of
Christ, and his Conscience with himself, bears witness, that he has not
rebelled against this light, then the Judge will say, Come then blessed, etc.
for thy reward is of debt, and not of Grace; But there is not a just man upon
the earth, that does good, and sins not; for if there were such a one, he
stands in no need of a Savior, for Christ did not come to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

In the next place, let us make enquiry, how shall Adam come to inherit eternal
life, in the world to come, having sinned a second time? As to his first sin,
there is no escaping the punishment of that, for sentence is already past, but
as to his sinning against the light within, his sentence will be after the
Resurrection of his body; in that world which is to come. Is there no means or
way for him to escape that Sentence which (...) to come? yea verily, there is,
though his transgressions have been never so many, or never so great, but it must
be through faith in the promised seed of the Woman, because Adam himself, had
been Lord and King of this World, but now is brought into a state of mortality,
by the subtilty of the serpent, who having disthron'd him, and gotten into it
himself, and is now become the God of this World, ruling in man, and so is
become their head; but God having promised that the seed of the Woman, shall
bruise his head, which victory Christ obtains through his divine power, who had
power to lay down his life, and to take it up again; I say, that Adam through
faith in this conqueror, (who also is the judge of the world to come) comes to
obtain the Pardon and forgiveness of his sins past, and comes to be made
partaker of Christ's divine nature, and thus comes to be the Child of God by
adoption, and through this faith he comes ^o be purified in his inner man, and
through this faith, he stands, and is kept by the mighty power of God working
in him, being lead by a divine power, which he never had before, even by the
Spirit of Truth, which is the life of that light, so that now he walks in the
light of life; for though the light and life be one in God, yet it was not so in
Adam till now the two natures come to be united by faith in the promised seed.
Thus Adam comes to have access to the Tree of Life, but it is through the death
of his Mediator; for the Cherubims and flaming Sword turn and execute the
Justice of the Law (due to Adam for his sin) upon the innocent, as is written,
for Christ has also once suffered for fins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit. Thus Adam sinned, and Christ suffered for it, being put to death in the
flesh, that Adam migh be quickened by the Spirit, and this Spirit, is the fruit
of the Tree of Life; thus the sinner comes to reap that which another sows.

The Remission of our sins, comes through faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ,
who has received the promise of the spirit, and sent it in ^o our hearts, by
which spirit we are sanctified, and by which spirit our Justification from sin,
though faith in his blood, is made known to us; for the spirit of life is the
effect and fruit of the Tree of Life; and not one drop of the spirit is handed
down to us, from the first Adam, nor any manifestation of our salvation by any
light that comes that way; for it is by the tree of life that we come to have
the light of life, and not by the tree of death, which is the tree of knowledge,
or light of the law of God, handed to us from the first Adam; but the
Pro^lamation of Gods free Grace to Sinners, is when and where, and to whom he
is pleased to make it known; for the Election of God stands not in works of
this spiritual law, after one transgression committed against it; for then a
just judgment will follow, except God of his own free grace is pleased to
forgive the transgression; so that after transgression, the election stands in
Gods choice; for if a king will choose out a Traitor from many, and forgive him,
this is no wrong to the rest, neither ought their eye to be evil, because the
King is good and merciful to his Enemy; for now the election stands in him that
call^th, for it is now through free grace in Christ; for God never
^ore-ordained any man to damnation, but his judgment is just, for his
transgressing of the law, and Gods call to undone sinners, is by his own
spirit, in his bride who faith, Come and take of the water of life freely. And
this voice is founded to the world, only from the second Adam, which i^ the
voice of his Spirit and Bride. When once a man has transgressed against this
spiritual law in the heart, he is under the condemnation of his sin, and then
it is nor in his willing or running that ca^ save him, but in God that shows
mercy; for man is in a Covenant with God, to keep his law, or be condemned by
it; for when God made that covenant with ^l, to keep that li^tera^ Law written
on stone, which was but a figure, and they brake it by making a Calf, Mose
interceeded with God for them, to forgive their sin: The answer of God was, I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will show mercy to whom I
will show mercy. (Gods Election stands only in the divine nature, which is in
Christ; for as Jesus Christ came down from heaven, and took hold of our Nature,
and became flesh and blood with us, so through faith in him we are made
partakers of his divine Nature, and so come to be the Children of God, by being
born of the Spirit; and thus we come to have the nature of God united to our
nature; and this nature the first Adam had not, while in a state of Innocence;
and before a man is thus born, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, nor understand
the things of God, because he is in the flesh, and not in the Spirit; and thus
by being made partaker of the nature of the second Adam, or Tree of Life (who
is a quickening spirit in his divine nature) we come to escape the Corruption,
that is in the world, through lust; and in this nature God chose us, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy with his own holiness; by which
nature we come to bear the Image of his Son, who is the first born among many
Brethren, in this nature; for he was the first born of every Creature, and was
that promised Seed that should bruise the Serpents head, whom Adam was made in
the image of; and the seeds or these two Adams are two nations, and two manner
of people, and the elder shall serve the younger, the elder being born after
the flesh, but the younger by promise; and no man since the fall of Adam, was
justified, or freed from his sins, but through faith in this son of promise,
which God did from time to time reveal to those whom he of his free Grace did
call, and pointed at, as by the Sacrifices of Abel, Noah and Abraham, as also
the birth of Esau and Jacob, representing the states of the two Adams, as also
in Ishmaet and Isaac, the one being born after the flesh, the other by promise;
the prophecy of Enoch and all the Prophets which was the voice of the Spirit
and Bride, to guide the faith of Gods Church in him who was to come, and bruise
the serpents head.

But the first Adam banded down to us only the light of the Spiritual Law of
God, by which law comes the knowledge of sin, and so death by sin, for this law
ministers only death and condemnation to the sinner, convincing, reproving and
condemning him for his sin; but it is the second Adam that handeth down to us
the Spirit of life, through faith in his blood; and this Spirit is the token
and evidence of our justification from sin. It was this Spirit of Christ in
Noah, who was a pleacher of righteousness to the old World, till at last the
Lord said unto him, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that be
also is flesh; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years: Thus the
spirit of the Lord in Noah strived to reclaim the old world with long patience,
while the light of his righteous law was condemning them, in themselves, till
at last the flood came and swept them all away.

Likewise, God gave his good Spirit to the seventy Elders in the Wilderness, to
assist Moses in the instruction of his people, as appears Numb. 11.17, 25, 29.
compared with Noh. 9.20. Yet they perished in the wilderness, because of
unbelief, after Gods long patience had been extended toward them, as also Noh.
9.30. Yet many years did thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by
thy Spirit in thy Prophets; yet would they not give ear, therefore gave thou
them into the hand of the people of the Land.

Concerning Baptism.
FOrasmuch as Adam, who was the head and first born of mankind, fell by
transgression, God was pleased to ordain another head of Adams seed, whom he
appointed head of his Church, over all things under God, both in Heaven and in
Earth, and has chosen us in him, from the foundation of the world, and he
being a second Adam, and a younger brother, God made known this his purpose to
Adam, in his fall, by promising that the seed of the woman should bruise the
Serpents head; and from that time forward, God pointed at him by signs an
figures, to guide the says of his Church to him her head, in whom she was
chosen from the foundation of the world; and he being a second Adam, and
younger Brother, was pointed at by Abel, not Cain; by Isaac, not Ishmael, by
Jacob not Esau; David, not Saul, with many other signs and figures, before the
Law of Moses was given; whose ministration did wholly and alone point at his
glory, hopour and dignity, and all the Prophets Prophesied of him; yea, both
Law and Prophets pointed at him, to guide the faith of Gods Church to him, the
seed of the Woman, promised by God in the beginning, to bruise the Serpents
head; for that glory which is now put upon that seed of the woman, and shall be
yet more abundantly seen, he had it with the Father before the world began;
that is, it was in the purpose of the father before the world was, so to
glorify him; and when the time was come, that the Church was delivered of this
man child, which was to rule in Gods throne, God sent John the Baptist, (for
among them that were born of women; there was not a greater Prophet than he,
who was filled with the holy ghost from his mothers womb,) to go before his
face to proclaim him to his Church and People in Israel, by publishing his
glory, honor and dignity, by a new Ministration, directly pointing at his
Priestly Office, for in his humiliation, he was least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
though greater than John the Baptist, who came to purge and cleanse his People
from their sins; thus he came to be servant unto all. Behold the Lamb of God,
(says John the Baptist) that takes away the sin of the world, yea, the
Prophets prophesied of this Messenger, that was to proclaim him to Israel, as
is written, Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me; and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple; for
the Law and Prophets were until John the Baptist, pointing at this promised
seed, and since that time the kingdom of God is preached, by a new
Ministration, still pointing at him, who was to be head of all things: and
John's Ministry is called the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; Mark 1.1.
etc. for his Baptism did preachremission of fins, through faith in Jesus
Christ, and did figure out our Salvation through the Spirit that should be
given in his name; so that the faith of Gods Church might be rightly guided,
and she not be bewildered by wrong imaginations; for thus God guided his Church
even from the first promise of him; and therefore John was sent Baptizing with
Water, so that by a visible sign, the Church might perceive how Christ should
purify them from their sins; and therefore, said John, he shall Baptize you
with the holy Ghost, and with fire; he adding fire with the holy ghost, is,
that they may conceive aright; for as fire purifies the silver from the cross,
or water from uncleanness; or the san that cleanses the wheat from the chaff;
so does Christ purify us from our fins, which none other can do; and he being
the seed of the woman or made of a woman, was made under the law, yea, and past
under John's Ministry also, (for so it became him, for whom are all things, to
fulfill^ll Righteousness) which was the last Ministry that pointed at his
coming; in which Ministration God the Father proclaimed him to be his beloved
Son in whom he was well pleased: Thus God himself pointed at him in this
Ministration, as also God had before signified unto John, how he should know
him, whom he proclaimed to Israel, who was to baptize with the Spirit; for said
John, I know him not, but he that sent me to baptize with Water, the same said
unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost; and I saw and bear record,
that this is the Son of God, says he; for immediately there was a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and
immediately upon this voice from heaven, the Devil drives him into the
wilderness, and there he was in the wilderness forty days tempted of the Devil;
yea, he was te^ed in all points as we are, sin only ev^d.

And after this he (...) and of Judea, and entered into his Office, for the
Father loves the Son, and has given allthings into his hand, says John the
Baptist; and when he was come into the land of Judea, there he tarried with his
disciples, and baptized, John 3.22. and John was at this time baptizing also,
v. 23. for John was not yet cast into Prison, v. 24. for his ministry was to
continue till Christ was manifested to Israel; so that Jesus and John the
Baptist, were both baptizing at one and the same time; Jesus in the Land of
Judea, and John in Enon near to Salem; the Disciples of John and the Jews,
seeing that another came and baptized besides John v. (...) then there arose a
question between some of John's disciples and the Jews about purifying; and well
might this question arise, upon a new ministration; for they knew that John's
Baptism pointed at a purification, whereupon John's disciples repair to John v.
26. and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou
bear witness, behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him; and well
might they go to John with this question to enquire, for John's Commission was
proper to himself, and not to any of his disciples; for he was a servant, and
could not give forth a Commission to another to baptize; and they knew if any
other had attempted, by presumption to have taken on themselves his Ministry,
it would have been as the offering of strange fire, which the Lord commanded
not; for the baptism of John was from heaven, and proper only to himself to
baptize, and not another, and all held John as a Prophet in power to that
office particularly, and no other person; and therefore this was a Mystery,
that neither John's disciples, nor the Jews, could comprehend; and therefore
John's disciples repair to him, to inform him in the matter, that another was
baptizing in the land of Judea, giving him an account who it was; for John's
Testimony of Christ was, that he that came after him should baptize with the
holy ghost, and with fire, which was the Baptism they expected would have
followed John's Baptism, according to John's Testimony; but Gods ways are past
finding out, till he discovers them, for Gods purpose was to proclaim the
name of his beloved Son in a higher degree than under John's Ministry; but when
they come to John, he quickly gives them light in the matter; for he was a
burning and a shining light, his answer to them is v. 27. a man can receive
nothing except it be given him from heaven: thus John soon opens the matter to
them, that Christ the Son of God, had his authority from heaven, to empower his
disciples to baptize in his name; and further says John to them, Ye your
selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but am sent before
him, he is the Bridegroom, and has the Bride; I am his friend, and rejoice to
hear his voice; he must increase, but I must decrease; the Father loves the
Son, says he to them, and has given all things into his hand. Thus John soon
satisfies his disciples, that Christ was the Son, and had power from heaven
given him to empower his Servants to baptize in his name, yea, under this
Commission, they did not only baptize, and preach in his name, but did all
manner of Cures, and cast out Devils; for the Father glorified the Son, and
gave all things into his hand, who had power to send forth his Apostles in his
own name, to do all these things, to his glory and honor; and though the Apostle
John calls this new ministration of Water Baptism, the Baptism of Christ,
saying, Jesus Baptized with his disciples, and that he baptized more disciples
then John, and that all men came to his Baptism; yet it is to be understood, he
did it by his Commission; for says John at the end of the matter, Jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples. So that we may see, God is still
guiding the says of his Church by outward signs, that their faith may be in
their head, Christ Jesus, giving honor to him to whom all honor is due, as
Son and Heir of all things; and this baptism was still to guide their faith
aright to Christ as being already come, and suddenly upon it, under this
Ministration, those mighty works did break forth, while John was in Prison; for
as soon as John had heard by his disciples, that Christ had given Commission to
others, his Ministry d^^reast at once, (...) cast into Prison; for Christ sends
forth these in his own name, to Preach and Baptize, and to cure all manner of
Diseases, to cleanse the Leapers, raise the Dead, and to cast out Devils; and
John heard of those mighty works in Prison, and sent two of his disciples to
enquire whether they were done by him that was to come after him, whom he had
preached, or by some other Prophet; but the Lord returned him a satisfying
answer, That it was he. Then suddenly Herod beheaded John in Prison, and
immediately heard of these mighty works also, and said unto his servant, This
is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do
show forth themselves in him, but Christ's same did still increase more and
more, according to John's Testimony, who said, I must decrease, but he must
increase; for John did no miracle under his Ministry; but Christ's glory is set
forth more and more, from one Ministration to another.

But the Spirit is not yet given forth, which John in his Ministry did point
at, neither was it to be given, till Christ should be glorified with a
Resurrection from the dead; for though the Father did glorify the Son in John's
Ministry, with that lovely voice from heaven, and in the Apostles Ministry,
with mighty signs and wonders, which they did in his name, yet in his
Sufferings he was least in the Kingdom of Heaven; for he came nor for to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

Thus we have gone throw two Ministrations of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
both carried on under elementary figures, being signs of Sanctification by
Jesus Christ, that the Master may have the glory alone, of the virtue or thing
thereby signified, because it is divine, as he is divine, and comes down from
heaven, and therefore is to set forth his glory alone, who is the Lamb of God,
and has the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth; as John
says, I have need to be Baptized of thee.

After these two Ministrations, the Lord of life and glory was crucified for
our sins, as before was said; he did not come to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a Ransom for many; and after, was raised for our
Justification, and suddenly upon his Resurrection, gave a new Commission to his
eleven Apostles, which was to be a standing Rule in his Church, till he should
come a second time, as he was the Seed of Adam, Abraham and David, yea, in that
body which was born of the Virgin Mary, and after crucified, dead and buried,
but did not see corruption, being raised from the dead by the mighty power of
God, though crucified through weakness, as he was the seed of Adam; yet now
lives by the Power of God, and will appear a second time, without sin unto
Salvation; for in his first appearing, he was made sin for us, who knew no sin,
that is to say, he was made a sacrifice for our sins, so that through this
Sacrifice, we might be made the Righteousness of God, but he will appear a
second time, without sin unto salvation, that is, he will appear a second time
and deliver us from all Sorrow, Pain and Misery whatsoever; yea, from Death it
self: and this will be the Salvation that he will appear in a second time, and
has settled in his Church stated Ordinances in his last Commission; still to
guide the faith of his Church, that they may not be bewildered in their
imaginations concerning him.

Matt. 28.18. etc. All authority is given unto me, in heaven and in earth, go
ye therefore, and make all the Nations Disciples, baptizing them into the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and so I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world, Amen.

This Translation all the latter Translators seem to agree unto, and therefore
I mention it. In the first place let us examine, when and where this Order or
Commission was given unto them; where it was given, is to be seen in the 16 and
17 v. Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a Mountain, where
Jesus had appointed them; and when they saw him they worshipped him, but some
doubted. In the next place, let us search the time when, in Mat. 26.31, 32.
Then said Jesus, all ye shall be offended because of me, this night, etc. but
after that I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee: Compare this
with the 28 Chap. 7 and 10 v. and they testify, that very early on the first
day of the week, while it was yet dark the Angel of the Lord, and the Lord
himself, sent Mary Magdalen in great haste, to tell his disciples, that they
should go into Galilee, there they should see him; which was the place he
appointed to meet with them, the night in which he was betrayed: And in the 16.
v. it is said, Then the Eleven disciples went away into Galilee into a
Mountain, where Jesus had appointed them. And in the 18. v. it appears that
there, and then, he gave them this Commission. Thus is appears, that this
Commission was delivered to them in Galilee, and immediately upon their first
sight of him after his Resurrection. In the next place, let us view the
Commission, with the Orders and Promise annixt to it; first, They are to go
under his Authority; secondly, they are to disciple the nations; thirdly to
baptize them; and, fourthly, to teach them to observe all things which Christ
had commanded them to teach; and, fifthly, A promise is joined to the
Commission, to wit, that Christ himself will be with them always, even unto the
end of the world. From hence we may observe, that this promise is not made only
to them; but to all that should after believe through their word, successively,
even to the end of the world. In the next place, we are to consider, here is no
account, what it was he did order them to teach the rations to observe, neither
have we and account, what baptism this was that they were to baptize with; and
those are necessary things to know, and by the commission it self we cannot
know them; And though the Lord declared them to the Eleven Apostles in private,
yet they were to make them public to the whole world; and therefore we are to
consider, we must come to know them by the Apostles Doctrine and Practice; for
this was the way Christ did then intend to make them known by; the next thing
in order to know what they did teach, and with what baptism they did baptize
with, is to come to their Ministration under this Commission, seeing that was
the way Christ did then purpose to make it known by to the Nations.

I question, Whether they entered upon their Ministry, as soon as they received
their Commission? Answer, No, for they received their Commission in Galilee, as
before has been proved; and immediately upon the Resurrection of Christ, but
he assembled himself with them forty days after this, and commanded them to
wait at Jerusalem for the promise of the Spirit, which John the Baptist
foretold of; saying, Is shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with Fire,
Acts 1.4, 5. But, says he, wait for the promise of the Father, which, says
he, ye have heard of me; for John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost not many days hence. From hence we may observe,
that Christ puts his Apostles in mind of that Promise, which the Father
promised by John the Baptist concerning himself how that the Son should have
that (...) put upon him, as to baptize with the holy Ghost, and signifies it to
his twelve Apostles that the time is now at hand, that John for^told of, as in
the 8th. v. But ye shall receive power, after the holy Ghost ^^ come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. From hence it appears, that
the Apostles themselves had need to be baptized by Christ, as well as John the
Baptist.

Now while they were waiting at Jerusalem with one accord, in one place,
suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it
filled all the house, where they were sitting; and there appeared unto them
cloven Tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them; and they were
all filled with the holy Ghost. This is the Baptism which John foretold of;
now we see they are endued with power from heaven, under a second Commission to
preach the Gospel to all the world, their first was only to the house of
Israel; now in the prosecution of their Ministry, we shall come to see, what
was before commanded to them in secret, in their Commission, to ^it, what they
were commanded to tra^^, and with what Baptism they were to Baptize with under
this Commission; for here is of all Nations under heave, prepared in a
readiness, to hear the Doctrine, and to see with what Baptism they were
commissionated to baptize with, (...) that they may publish it throughout the
whole world, even at the very in^^im of the time that they are empowered to
enter into their Ministry, under the aforesaid Commission; and John's Testimony
is fulfilled concerning Christ's Baptism, who baptizeth with the holy Ghost and
with sire, before the eyes of all Nations under heaven. So that it appears, he
that gave the Commission, baptizeth with the holy Ghost and with Fire,
according to John's Testimony; but what Baptism they that were commissionated to
baptize, it does not yet appear what it was with, Acts 2.14, But Peter standing
up with the Eleven [Note, it is a mutual voice] and said unto them, Hear these
words, Jesus a man approved of God, ye have taken and by wicked hands have
crucified, whom God has raised up where of we all are witnesles, etc. Now when
they heard this they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to
the rest of the Apostles, (note this that they enquire of Peter and of the rest
of the Apostles, what their duty is, accordingly they give them a particular
account, First, To Repent, and Secondly, To be baptized, every one of them, in
the name of the Lord, for the Remission of sins; and, Thirdly, The Apostles
make an absolute promise unto them, that upon these terms they shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. Here it appears plainly, what Doctrines they were
ordered to preach, and what Baptism they were ordered to Baptize with, under
this Commission; for now they have discovered it to all nations under heaven at
once. First, As to their Doctrine, they preach a crucified Christ to them, and
testify to them, that God has raised him from the dead; and that they are his
witnesses of the truth of it; this is their Doctrine which they go to disciple
them into the belief of; and it is such a Doctrine which was never before
preached, which Doctrine did prick them to their hearts, and made them cry out
to know what was required of them to do? The Apostles answer is, Repent, and,
Secondly, be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins;
and, Thirdly, the promise they the aforementioned things being done, they
shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. So that this Baptism which they were
to baptize with, in this Commission, was such a Baptism, as they could baptize
them with, before they received the holy Ghost; for the gift of the holy Ghost
was that Baptism which the Apostles themselves were at this time baptized with,
before their eyes, and is proper only to Jesus Christ to baptize with, who has
the Spirit without measure, and who alone can baptize with it. So that it
appears, this Baptism which the Apostles were to Baptize with, under this
Commission, was to guide their faith, in that doctrine which they taught them,
to wit, in Christ's death and Resurrection, by which faith they should come to
obtain the Remission of their sins, and also come to receive the gift of the
holy Ghost from him who alone is able to baptize with the Spirit, and thereby
to seal to their Ministry and Apostleship. And we have here a further account
that they which gladly received his Word, were baptized, and continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer:
Thus they taught them, as they were ordered in their Commission; for their
order in their Commission, was, To teach them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you, says Christ; and such as received their word, continued
in their Doctrine steadfastly. And among other things, we have here an account,
that they taught them the Ordinance of breaking of Bread, which was to be a
guide to their Faith, that by the death of Christ, his Church comes to be fed
with the Bread of Life from heaven, and is to continue in his Church, to show
forth his death till he comes, who has purchased by his bitter Death, this
living Bread sent down from heaven, to feed and nourish his Church with.

Seeing it was the purpose of our Lord to let all the world know, what Baptism
they were commissionated to baptize with in this commission, by their public
Ministry, let us therefore go on, and view what baptism they did baptize with,
and their Successors, who had their information from the Apostles mouths; for
it was the Promise of Christ, in that Commission, to be with them, and with
their Successors, in their Ministration, even unto the end of the world; so
that we must be guided by their Doctrine and Practice, which is a standing
Rule, which Christ has set in his Church, even unto the end of the world.

In the 8th Chap. of the Acts, we have an accourt, that Phillip had an
immediate Call of God, to the work of the Ministry, who was the Apostles
Successor in their day and time, who had information from their Mouths, what
their Orders in that Commission was, who followed their foot steps, came to
Samarita and there preached the Gospel to them, and both men and women
believed, and were baptized. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem,
heard that the Samaritans had received the Word of God, they sent unto them
Peter and John, (these are the two chief of them, which received the orders and
directons from Christ's own Mouth, from whom Phillip had his directions,) who
when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might recive the holy
Ghost; for as yet, he was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized
into the Name of the Lord Jesus; for so all the latter translators agree to,
that it is the same word that is in the Commistion, to wit, into the Name of
the Lord Jesus; so likewise, where Paul thanked God, he baptized only Crispus
and Gaius of the Corinthians lest (says he) any should say I had baptized into
my own name, using the word into according to the Commission; so that it
appears, these which Paul baptized with Water, and these which Phillip baptized
before they received the holy Ghost, they both baptized them according to the
Commission, to wit, into the Name of the Lord Jesus. Now both these Ministers
were Successors to the twelve Apostles being afterward immediately called to
preach the Gospel, and received this Ordinance of Baptism, by tradition, from
the Apostles, who delivered it to the Church by Christ's order, to be a settled
Ordinance, to guide the faith of the Church in Christ's death, for the Remission
of her sins, that the Church might not be bewildered in her imaginations,
concerning the Remission of her sins, but might know it to be by the death of
Christ, which Baptisin points at; as will appear more evidently hereafter

So that by this Baptism, they baptized them into a profession of the Name of
Jesus Christ, believing that the Remission of their sins came only and alone by
the meritorious Death of Jesus Christ, by whom they are justified; and upon
this Faith and Baptism Christ himself, as Savior, baptizeth them with the holy
Ghost, by which Baptism he seals his name upon them; for it is he only that
has the Seal of the living God, and so seals us to the day of Redemption, by
his holy Spirit; but not the Apostles, nor any other Minister.

And as I before said, when Peter and John were come down, they prayed for them
(whom Phillip had before baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus, that is,
into the faith of the Lord Jesus,) that they might recive the holy Ghost; for
as yet he was fallen upon none of them, (says the Scripture,) but only they
were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesns; then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the holy Ghost. Thus was Phillips Ministry and Baptism
confirmed by the Apostles, and Christ himself from Heaven, so that their
Doctrine and Baptism under that Commission, was confirmed to their Successors
immediately from Heaven; and so Phillip goes on in his Ministry, by the
immediate motion of the Spirit of God, and baptizeth the Eunuch, as is written,
they both went down into the water and he baptized him.

And in the 10th of the Acts, we have an account, that the Angel of the Lord
appeare^ unto Cornelius, and bid him send for Peter, for (says the Angel) he
shall tell thee what thou ought to do. Thus we may observe, that the
Apostles successors were to be informed of them, what they ought to do; for
Christ delivered his Orders to them and directed their successors to receive
them from their months; so that what they did and taught, was Gods mouth to us;
and the Orders they received, was immediate from Christ's mouth. Now when Peter
was come to Cornelius, he tells him how they slew Christ and hanged him on a
Tree, and how that God raised him from the dead, and that they were his
witnesses of these things; and while Peter was thus speaking, the holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard him: Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid Water,
that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well
as we? and he commanded them to be baptized, in the Name of the Lord. From
hence we may observe, That Cornelius was ordered to send for Peter to be
informed what he ought to do; Secondly, when Peter was come to him, he preached
Christ crucified to him and how God raised him from the dead, and c. And,
Thirdly, how that while Peter was speaking, the holy Ghost fell on all them
that heard him. Fourthly, Let us take notice of Peter's Answer, by way of
question, Can any man forbid Water, says he, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Here is two things observable; the
first is, Peter uses it as an undeniable argument, that these ought to be
baptized, seeing they had received the holy Ghost; and, Secondly, he that was
sent of God, to teach them what they ought to do, commands them with Authority
to be baptized in the Name of the Lord, from whom he had his Commission to
baptize; and this was immediately upon their entrance into their Office, under
their last Commission; for in their first Commission, they were sent to preach
and to baptize, only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but not to the
Gentiles, as has been already proved; but under this Commission, they are to
preach and to baptize all Nations; and this Cornelius was the first of the
Gentiles that Peter was sent to, under this Commission, immediately upon his
receiving power to preach and baptize under it, as appears in the first of the
Acts, 8. v. But ye shall receive Power, after the holy Ghost is come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jer^salem, and in Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth. In the 11th chap. of the
Acts, it appears, that the Angel did not only bid Cornelius send for Peter, to
be informed by him what he should do, but told him also, that Peter should
speak words whereby he and all his house should be saved; which salvation was
preached to him through Christ crucified; he readily believes the Doctrine, and
God seals his Salvation to him, through this faith in Christ's Blood; and
Baptism is an Ordinance stated by God, to guide the faith of his Church in
Christ's Blood alone, for the remission of sins; and when Peter saw that the
holy Ghost sealed to Cornelius his salvation, through faith in Christ's Blood,
said he, Can any man forbid Water? his words employed, seeing our Authority
under Christ's Commission to preach and to baptize, is seen to be from heaven,
and therefore under this Commission, he commands them with Authority to baptize.

And as to the Apostle Paul, though he was immediately called of God to preach
the Gospel, (as all Gods Ministers are,) yet he was the Apostles Successor, and
therefore must receive his orders successively; for he comes under the order of
their Commission and therefore when the Lord first appeared unto him, Paul
said, What shall I do Lord? and the Lord said unto him, arise, and go into
Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for
thee to do. Thus he is ordered to receive his Directions from his Predecessors,
they must be Christ's mouth to him, which is agreeable to the Scriptures handing
them down to us, from their mouth; for when Annanias came to him, to inform him
what he should do, and had laid his hands on him so that he had received his
sight, and was filled with the holy Ghost, why tarriest thou (says Annania^)
arise and be baptized, Acts 22.16. compared with Acts 9.17, 18. Thus it appears
that baptism is a stated Ordinance in the Church, by Christ's Commission to his
Apostles, and none since called in particular, immediately of God to baptize,
though they are called of God immediately to preach the Gospel; but it is to be
practiced as an Ordinance delivered to the Church, according to Paul's
Testimony, (...) Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in
all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you. Thus the
Church of Christ, is to be in the practice of the Ordinances of Christ from the
information of the Scriptures, as Cornelius and Paul, who were the Apostles
^uccessors, were to be informed from the mouth of their Predecessors,
concerning the Ordinances of Christ, so that Cornelius and his house were
commanded to be baptized; but we have no account that Peter was the Person that
baptized them, another might do it; so likewise Paul was commanded to be
baptized, but we have no account that Annanias was commanded to do it^ though he
was Christ's mouth to teach Paul the Ordinance, and to require him to arise and
be baptized, as Peter was Christ's mouth to Cornelius, and commanded him to be
baptized; so than they were Christ's Mouth to show them their duty: but some
others might baptize them; for Baptism is a figure delivered to the Church, to
point at Christ's Death and Resurrection, by whom we have obtained remission of
sins; and there is no virtue in it self, but it is a necessary figure, of our
salvation by Christ's Death; so that Paul might well say he was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; for a necessity was laid upon him to do the
one, but not the other: but it appears by Paul's words, that they were all
baptized; for says he, was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into
the the Name of Paul? which speech is directed to every individual person in
the Church of Corinth, as much to one as to another, and therefore imports, as
Christ was crucified for them all, so they were all baptized into his Name,
with thi^ baptism, which he himself baptized so fe^ of them with; and he gives
the reason, why he thanks God he baptized no more of them, to wit, lest any
should say that I had baptized into mine own name; and we read frequently of
Paul's baptizing in other places, all which shows, that that Institution of
baptism, given in that Commission to the Apostles, was attended by the Churches
of Christ, and Paul^ baptizing so few of the Corinthians, and yet his words
showing, that they were all baptized, does manifest that it was a necessary
thing to be done by the hands of others, and not to be omitted, and that it was
attended duly by the Churches of Christ.

We have an account in Acts 19. that Paul found certain disciples, of whom he
enquired, Whether they had received the holy Ghost, fince they believed? and
they answered, they had not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost;
and he said unto them, Into what then were ye baptized? From hence we may
observe, that Paul understanding that they were Disciples, he took it for
granted that they were baptized, which shows is was a general practice in the
Church, their answer to Paul is, With John's Baptism; Paul's reply to them is,
That John baptized unto Repentance, to believe on him who was to come after
him, that was on Christ, says he; and when they heard this, they were baptized
into the Name of the Lord Jesus; and when Paul had laid his hands on them, the
holy Ghost came on them. Here we may observe, that Paul acts by the same Rule
as Peter and John did; for when they heard that there was some that believed,
and were baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus, they went and laid their
hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost. And, no doubt but multitudes,
that were baptized with John's baptism, which was to believe on him which was to
come after him, were after baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus; for John
was sent before to make ready a people for the Lord, and it is said, that all
Judea, and Jerusalem, was baptized of John in the River of Jordan; and after
when Jesus came into the Land of Judea, and tarried with his disciples, and
baptized, it is said that all men came to him, and that he made and baptized
more disciples than John, though he himself baptized not; for he did it by his
Commission, and it is evident, that these were baptized into the Name of the
Lord Jesus with Water by Paul, and that he afterward laid his hands on them,
and then they received the holy Ghost, Acts 19.5, ^.

And the Apostel Peter, who was one of the eleven, to whom the Orders under
that Commission was given, has left in writing, a plain testimony concerning
Water Bap^ism, 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto even Baptism, does also
now save us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, by the resurrection of of Jesus Christ. Whereas he
says, the like figure, he alludes from the Destruction of the old World, and
the Salvation of Noah and his house by Water, which was a figure of the
Churches Salvation by Christ, the promised seed to come, who was to be her
head, and the Savior of her Body; Baptism [saith he] is the like figure; so
that he speaks of Baptism as it is a figure, delivered to the Chruch, now
saves us [saith he] that is, it is a figure of our salvation by Christ; he
speaks by the figure, as Christ, does in the like case, when he gave his
Disciples the Bread and Wine, which were but figures, saying, This is my Body
which is broken for you; and when he gave them the Cup of wine, he said, This
is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many; yet these were but
figures of his Body and Blood, as Baptism is a figure of our Salvation by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, not [saith Peter] the putting away of the filth of
the flesh; that is, the figure only washes the outward man, but we have the
answer of a good Conscience by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which Baptism
is a figure of; but the washing of the filt^ of the flesh, is only the work of
the figure, and the figure is to point out how we come by this Baptism, which
cleanses us from our sins; for it is not Sufficient for us to know, that it is
the Spirit that baptizeth us from out sins, but the main thing is to know how
we came by the gift of the Spirit; and this knowledge is to be guided by the
figure; for Peter tells us in the 18. v. That Christ was put to death in the
flesh, that he might bring us to God; for we come to cease from sin, by his
Suffering in the flesh for us, 1 Pet. 4*1. he also being quickened by the
Spirit, and so raised from the dead, by the Resurrection of his, the spirit
flows from the head into the body, and cleanse^^ us; and thus we come to have a
good Conscience toward God, even by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; so that
our good Conscience comes by our Spiritual Baptism, and our Spiritual Baptism,
comes by Christ's Death and Resurrection, so that our good Conscience is the
answer or echo but not the voice, but the figure points at the voice, but not
at the echo, and therefore for any to say, I am baptized with the Spirit, I
have no need of the figure, is great ignorance, under a high notion of a
conceited knowledge, not yet seeing what the figure points at; and it is a
naked contradiction of plain Scripture Testimony; for when Paul had received
his fight, and was filled with the holy Ghost, says the Lord Jesus to him by
the mouth of Annanias, whom he sent to direct Paul what to do, Why tarriest
thou? arise, and be baptized. And when the holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius and
his house, the Lord Jesus commanded them (by the mouth of Peter, whom he sent
to teach them what they ought to do), to be baptized; and Peter, who was one of
the Eleven under that Commission, makes a challenge, by way of question,
saying, Can any man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? And so he that the Lord sent to teach
them what to do, upon this very reason, of seeing them baptized with the holy
Ghost, commands them to be baptized, (and it is evident) with Water.

So that while such as these are judging their Brethren, which wanted the light
to read the book of their directions, who only ^dolize the book, from an
excellent name that it has, but have no light to read it by, and they
themselves coming to see morning light appear, have been so transported a^ the
sight of day light, that they have thrown away the book of their Directions, as
a useless thing; and tread it under their feet, and have bewildred themselves
in day light, and brought themselves into a worse condition than their
Brethren, whom they judged, because they had not morning light to read the
book, and will come off with greater shame, for throwing away their Masters
Book of direction, and treading it under their feet, though they had morning
light to have read it by, so that it might have been useful to them, ^ho' not
to the other.

What Baptism is a figure of, and how it ought to be Administered.
BAptism as it is a figure, it is to guide our faith aright, that through our
faith in the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, we come to dye to
sin, and are quickened or raised up together with him, to newness of life; for
our body of sin is crucified, dead and buried, through the offering of the Body
^f Jesus for us, so that we have a sight, sense and feelling in own selves, of
what the holy Scriptures bears witness of, concerning Jesus Christ being that
one sacrifice for sin, so that we can see to our seal to the truth of the
Scripture^ by the virtuous effects (of the suffering of Jesus Christ) operating
in us, through the application of the Spirit, which not only mortifies and
kills sin in us; but also in his name it quickens, and raises us up to newness
of life; so that the outward figure represents that the death and burial of our
body of sin, comes by the death of Christ for our sins: so that his death,
burial, and resurrection, with our death to sin, and resurrection out of a
state of sin, into a state of righteousness, is repersented in this outward
figure; as also the resurrection of the body, which also comes by Christ, is
held forth by this outward figure, and therefore says the Apostle, Romans 6.3,
4, 6. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were
baptized into his death, therefore we are buried with him, by baptism, into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life; knowing this, that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed C^l.
2.12. buried with him, in baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, through
the faith, of the operation of God; who has raised him from the dead, ^ Cor.
15.2^ Else what shall they do, which are Baptized for the dead if the dead rise
not (...) why are they then bapti^ed for the dead^ Thus it appears, that the
figure should be administered by a burial in the Water, as it is a figure not
only of our death to sin, by the death of Christ for our sins, as also a
Resurrection to newness of life, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; but it is
a figure also of the death and resurrection of our body, which resurrection
comes by the second Adam. And God instructed his Church and People of old, by
the like figure, as Noah and his house, being eight persons, were Saved by the
like figure, in an Ark or Coffin, being buried in the water, and yet obtained
salvation in that figure; for he and his house represented the New Creature, or
new man in Christ, but the old World represented the Old Man, or body of sin
that was to perish, and rise no more, till unto judgment. And also Israel was
baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, unto Moses; for they went down into the
midst of the sea, the waters being a wall on their right hand, and on their
left; and thus were they buried in the Cloud and in the Sea, in this baptism
unto Moses, which was their salvation, held forth in that figure, for they were
a figure of the New man, whose salvation came by the death, burial and
resurrection of Jesus Christ their head; but the Egyptians represented the body
of sin, which was to rise no more till unto the second judgment, but Israel got
the Victory over Death. Baptism is the like figure, which figureth out our
salvation by Jesus Christ; our body of sin being dead and buried with him, who
suffered for it on the cross, and also, we are raised together with him, to
Newness of life; so that we have already gotten a good Conscience toward God,
by having a part in the first Resurrection with Christ, who will be the judge
of the second death.

Concerning the Lords Supper.

When God delivered his people out of Egypt, he ordained an Ordinance in his
Church, called the Lords Passover; which Ordinante did point at Christ, who was
the real Lamb of God, figured out by that Ordinance, which was to guide the
faith of Gods Church to the promised seed of the Woman, till he should come;
which Ordinance continued in the Church, till it was fulfilled in the Kingdom
of God; (...) very night, in which Jesus eat (...) he was betrayed, though he
freely offered up himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from our vain
Conversations; and in the time of his eating that Passover with his Disc^ples,
he instituted a new Gospel Ordinance to guide the faith of his church in
himself, as being already come, as the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 5.7. for eve^
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, he having thus once appeared by the
Sacrifice of himself, to put away sin, has left an Ordinance with his Church,
called the Lords Supper, to be observed by his Church, till he shall appear a
second time, without sin unto salvation; for in his first appearance, he was
made sin for us, (...) knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. And all the Sacrifices for sin before his coming, was to guide the
faith of his Church, to this one Sacrifice, which they all pointed at, that the
Church of God might believe and know, by these Ordinances before appointed of
God, that God had ordained them another head, in the room of Adam, who by his
disobedience, brought death and misery upon himself, and upon all hi^
Posterity, but by the righteous Life, bitter Death, and glorious Resurrection
of this second Adam, a Resurrection from Sin, Misery and Death, is brought to
light; so that this Lamb of God, is the one and only sacrifice for our sins, as
the Apostle Peter says 1 Pet. 1.18. for as much as ye know, that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot, who verily was foreordained before the foundation
of the world, yea, God chose us in him our head, before the foundation of the
world, and by his free grace called us in him, that we should be holy, by being
made partaker of that holiness, which was with him before the foundation of the
world was laid, and therefore the Lamb of God, that was sacrificed for us, is
worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Glory, and
Strength, for he was slain for us, and has purchased for us the true and
living bread of life, yea, God the father has sealed our salvation to us, by
the Blood of this Lamb of God. And our Lord Jesus Christ, (at the cessation of
that Passover, which was to guide the faith of his Church in him that was to
come, till he should come and fulfill that Ordinance in the Kingdom of God, by
the sacrifice of himself,) has settled a New Testament Ordinance in his
Church; to show forth his death till he shall come a second time in glory;
which Ordinance is to show, that his Church has the remission of sins by the
sheding of his Blood, and to show and to keep in memory, that the Bread of
Life, which is given us, is purchased for us by his bitter death; this is the
end of Christ's settling this Ordinance in his Church, that his Church may
ascribe that glory to him which is due to him, who has purchased these things
for us at so dear a rate; so that this Ordinance is not so much to set forth
the gift, as it is to set forth the price that purchased the gift for us; for
if a man will give his own life, to save the life of his friend, this is a
price of great value, worth the consideration; but Christ has laid down his
life, to redeem ours, while we were his enemies. And therefore for any to say,
I have bread from heaven, by which I live, and am daily nourished by it; the
outward Bread can but feed my outward man, I have drank of the Spirit of Life,
which is the Cup of my Consolation, by which I shall thirst no more; this makes
my heart glad more than a Cup of Wine, which will only refresh the outward man.

To which I Reply; Do thou glory in this excellent gift of Meat and Drink,
which thy soul is (...) with, and not tremble at the consideration of the
unvaluable Price that thy friend gave to purchase this heavenly food for thee,
whilst thou wast his Enemy, and therefore thou are come to disregard his
Ordinance, which is to put thee in mind of it, which was with no less price
then his Body and Blood; so that it is the Body and Blood of thy Friend, which
thou do eat and drink, who gave his own life to redeem thine. And therefore I
advise thee to take heed, that whilst thou art so much glorying in the gift,
thou come to forget thy obedience to the giver, in looking at his Ordinance of
so little value, in comparison of the gift, which he bath purchased for thee,
with his Body and Blood, as not to be worth thy while to attend his Ordinance,
which is to put thee in mind of the Price which purchased the gift for thee.

What the Lords Supper is to show forth, and how it is to be administered.

IT was the Apostle Paul that delivered this Ordinance to the Gentile Church,
he being called of God to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles; and
his call was some time after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and after the
giving of the holy Ghost in that plentiful manner to the twelve Apotles, who
under that gift of the Spirit, were end^ed with power from an high, to go forth
under their second Commission, to preach the Gospel to all the world,
accordingly they did, to all nations under heaven. At this time, this Apostle
Paul was a Persecutor of the Church in its flourishing state; for it was said
before his Call, Acts 6.7. The Word of the Lord increased, and the number of
the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; for after the Resurrection and
Ascension of our Lord, he sent the Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, to
abide with them forever, according to the promise which he had made to them,
the night in which was betrayed, John. 14.16. and I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, This
Comforter is his divine Presence which did appear to them after his bodily
presence was withdrawn from them. Now after these things, the Lord Jesus
appeared to Paul, with his bodily presence, and of his free grace called him
into the faith of himself, which was the last sight of him, before Paul wrote
the 1 Cor. 15.8. And this Apostle gives the Corinthians an account, (...) after
these things, that he received of the Lord this Ordinance, which he ^^d
delivered to them, Cor. 11.23. etc. For I have received of the Lord, that which
also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, and when he had given Thanks, break it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me:
After the same manner also, he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this do ye as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lords Death till he come.

From hence we may observe, that this Ordinance was delivered to the Gentile
Churches, by the order of Jesus Christ, after he had plentifully manifested
unto his Apostles, and their successors, his divine presence, by a clear
manifestation of his Godhead, (...) their own souls; and the end of it was, to
show forth his death, which was the purchase of the holy Chest for us; for
says the Apostle to them, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lords Death till he come; for at this time, when this Ordinance
was delivered to them, his bodily presence was withdrawn from his Church and
People, but they were in the enjoyment of his divine presence; for he did not
leave his Church comfortless; for their Comforter was with them, and dwelt in
them, and was the object of their Faith and Hope, though his bodily Presence was
withdrawn from them, for a time; but he has left this Ordinance with them, to
keep in memory the unvaluable Price which he gave to purchase this Comforter
for them, which Comforter is the Fruit of the Tree of Life, which we come at by
the death of the innocent, who was cut down by the Cherubims and flaming Sword
of Gods Justice, due to us for our fins, that we might escape the judgment of
the second Death; and he has left this Ordinance with his Church, to keep in
memory his Death, which is our life; for his Body and Blood was the purchase
and Redemption of our Life, from the second death: so that we really eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, seeing this spiritual meat and drink (which we live
by) was purchased for us with his Body and Blood; and this Ordinance is to keep
the purchase of it in our memory: for the purchase is abscuted from us, though we
enjoy that which is purchased; for the ordinance is to show forth the death of
him that is absented, till he come, who was the sacrifice for us, or Lamb of
God, who has washed us from our sins in his own blood; for it was the price of
his Blood that has purchased the holy Spirit for us, by which spirit we are
justified, and sanctified; so that the ordinance is to guide our faith in that
one Sacrifice, offered for our sins; and therefore when he divided the Bread
among them at Supper, he said, This is my Body which is broken for you, this do
in remembrance of me: As much as if he should say, This Ordinance is to put you
in mind, that by the sacrifice of my body, I have purchased this Bread of Life,
which is divided among you. After the same manner he also took the Cup, when he
had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, this do as often
as ye drink it in remembrance of me: As much as if he should say, This Cup is
to put you in mind, that you have obtained the remission of your sins, through
the shedding of my Blood; under the Old Testament they offered the Blood of
Bulls and Goats, to guide the faith of Gods elect to this Blood, of the
New Testament, which is the substance; and our Lord Jesus has left this
Ordinance with his Church to guide her faith in his Blood already shed for us;
saying, This do in remembrance of me; and says the Apostle, for as often as ye
eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come; and
this coming of the Lord, the Apostle does not intend to be in his divine
Nature, but in our Nature, as he offered himself, for it was the coming of him,
who had been dead, that this Ordinance directed their faith to look for, a
second time; for he exhorts those very persons, in the 2 Cor. 13.5. saying to
them, Examine your selves, whether you be in the says, prove your own selves,
know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Here it appears, that Christ was with them, and in them at this
very time in his divine nature, except such as were reprobates; for it was his
divine nature in them, which brought them out of a reprobate state, and made
them worthy Communicants; for this self examination was to be in a special
manner, before they came to this Table, as appears in the 1 Cor. ^^.28. But let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup,
Compare this with the following vers^. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discrning the Lords
Body. Thus is appeareath, that such only who are partake^s (...) the Lords Body
offered for them; and the purchase of, it is Christ's divine Nature, manifested
in our Nature, in which nature our Election stands, or our justification and
our sanctification stands, in this divine nature, which we are made partakers
of, through faith in Christ; and out of this nature we are in a Reprobate
state, and unclean in Gods sight; let our conversation be never so blameless in
the sight of man, yet out of this nature, we are unclean in Gods sight, and
unworthy Communicants, and do but eat and drink our own Damnation, not
discerning the Lords Body offered for us, and are guilty of his Body and Blood.

As to the Administering of this Ordinance, it was first Ministered by our Lord
himself, and after delivered by him to Paul, and by Paul delivered to the
Gentile Churches, as appears in the 1 Cor. 11. the time attended was at
Supper time; they did not only eat Bread, but eat their Bread, with their other
meat.

Here follows some account concerning a dead Faith, which never purifieth the
Soul, which faith Hypocrites live and dye in a vain hope.

secondly, concerning a Living Faith, by which faith Gods Elect come to know
Jesus Christ to be an acceptable Sacrifice for their sins, through the
Sanctification of the Spirit.

First, As to a dead faith, there may be a belief, by the hearing of the ear,
which may beget either a terror in the soul, or a comfort; as thus, the ear
hearing that there is a terrible God, that will execute the fierceness of his
wrath against the guilty, and the heart believing the truth of it, it may beget
a terror in the guilty; on the contrary, the report of Gods free and rich Mercy
in Jesus Christ to the worst of sinners the heart hoping and believing the
truth of it, it may beget a joy and comfort in the worst of sinners; and yet
they never come to Repentance, so as to deny themselves, as to break off from
their sins, and son never come to partake of that Mercy of God by Jesus Christ,
and yet may at times, yea, at every thought of it, rejoice in hope, while in
the land of the living, and yet perrish eternally; and no doubt but this may be
the state of a great part of the world, where the report of Gods Mercy in Jesus
Christ is heard; upon which report they may imbody themselves into Church
fellowship, and idolize God^ Ordinances, having a very high esteem and partake
of them, though altogether unworthily; and so continue in a Church fellowship,
and in breaking of Bread in Paryer, with the mouth and lips, and with an
unclean heart; yea, and all done in as exact a form as possible can be
imitated, from the report of the holy Scriptures, and think all they do is duty
to God, through their ignorance, by reason of a bad Conversation, and yet when
they shall come before his judgment seat, their consciences will testify
against them, that it was all done in hypocrisy: and they shall receive their
portion with hypocrites even in the hottest place of hell fire, where they
shall ever be tormented, not only for their actual sins, in transgressing the
law of God, but chiefly for their hypocrisy; and yet in the time of their
doing of those dead works, they thought them to be their duty to God, through
their ignorance, by reason of a bad conversation, though all the time their (...)
them, that they lived in their fins; yet they considered not that the sacrifice
of the wicked was an abomination to the Lord: This is the very state of
Hypocrites, whose portion shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, who
considered not in the day of it, that God required of them the fruits of
Righteousness, which they did not bring forth, but were dead in their sins and
trespasses, and so offered to God only the Prayer of the Wicked, even as the
hypocrites did of old, Isa. 1.11, etc. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, when ye come to be seen before me, who has
required this at your hand, to tread my Courts? The New Mons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting; your New Means and your solemn Feasts my Soul ^a^e^h, they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them; and when you spread forth your hands
I will hide mine eyes from you; when you multiply prayers I will not hear. And
the reason why these thing were (...) on to the Lord, was because they were
attended with an unclean heart, (...) 16, 17, 18 (...), and this is the very
path that Hypocrites now (...) they will (...) in the Sinagogue, or public
(...) and under a pretense make long prayers, shaking their heads, and lifting
up their unholy hands, with an unclean heart; these shall receive the greater
damnation; for by these hypocritical lying signs and wonders, they would
deceive the very elect, if it were possible; These are the generation that are
pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness: These are
they that say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than
thou: These are they that make clean the out side of the Cup and Platter, but
within are full of extortion, and excess: These are they that have a form of
Godlyness, but deny the power thereof: These are they that have been judging
and condemning those that have obtained clean inside, through the
sanctification of the spirit of truth, and have laid down their lives for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, and yet have not meddled with the outward figures of
the New-Testament^ These are they which draw near to God with their mouths, and
honor him with their lips, but their hearts are far from him. And thus they
cover themselves with an out side profession, but not with the spirit of the
Lord, adding sin to their sin, even hypocrisy to their transgression: These
are they that are a sinoke in Gods nose, a fire that burns all the day, whom
God will recompense into their own bosom, the works of their own hands; for
their Faith is a dead Faith, and their Prayers are dead works, and their coming
under the outward figure of Baptism is a Lie; for they are not clean from their
sins, and their partaking of the Lords Supper, is their eating and drinking
their own damnation, being guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, not
discerning his body. These are they which have not on their wedding Garment,
who shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Concerning a Living Faith.
BUt when any hear the report that the Scriptures make of Gods Mercy in Jesus
Christ, or by hearing it preached, and so to hope in it, as to cry to God with
a true heart, yea, with a godly sorrow for sin, God sends forth the Spirit of
his Son into them, which Spirit reveals to them his love and pity in Christ
Jesus, and gives them a certain knowledge that all their sins past are freely
forgiven them, so that there remains no longer any fear of Gods wrath; for
where remission of sin is, there remains no guilt upon the Conscience, and
therefore there can be no fear of wrath, for this spirit sanctifies the inward
parts from the defilement of sin, and not only so, but shows its strength
against the power of sin; for this Spirit is Christ in his Godhead, and is a
spirit of greater power and authority, than the power of sin, that rules ^n the
Children of Disobedience, so that it makes us free from sin, Romans 6.18, 21.
Job. 8.56, and so consequently free from the fear of Gods Wrath, yea, it is the
comforter of the soul, for it gives the soul a sight of God, yea, it gives a
sight of what the ear before did only hear by the report of the Scriptures, but
now the eye sees the truth of what the Scriptures before made report of, and
can say in truth with Job, I have heard of thee with the hearing of the ear,
but now mine eye see thee; yea, the mouth can truly say with the Samaritans, We
believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know
indeed that this is the very Christ, the Savior of the world; for now the soul
has received the end of its hope; it did ho^e to mercy and forgiveness of sin,
through the report that the Scripture made of Go^s Mercy by Jesus Christ, but
now the repenting Sinner has fully received the end of his hope, and does
believe by the sight of the eye, that his sins are forgiven him, and that he is
fully reconciled to God by Jesus Christ; for this knowledge cannot be only from
the report of the the Scripture, or preaching of the Gospel, but must be by the
sight of the eye, in seeing that God has done the work in us; for if our faith
be only upon the Scriptures report, or preaching of men, it is only the
Hypocrites Faith, who hopes in Gods Promise of Mercy, and yet notwithstanding
live and dye in their sins; for it is the Spirit of God that gives us that
which we hope for, the Scriptures do but make a report of Gods Mercy in Jesus
Christ, to the penitent sinner, and the penitent sinner believing in that
Promise, does patiently wait under hope for it, by earnest Prayer and Godly
Sorrow for sin; upon which patience and hope God sends the spirit of his Son
into their hearts, and then they receive the end of their hope; for a man hopes
no longer, because he now rejoices in that he has received the end of his
hope, even the salvation of his Soul; for the spirit of God it self witnesses
to us with our spirit, that we are the Sons of God; and this is the end of our
(...) for can we ho^e for that which we have already received; for we having
already received the spirit of adoption, by it we come to see that we are the
Sons of God; so that our faith is now by the sight of our eye, as is written,
Job. 20 8. And he saw and believed; for the state of the sinner is like the
leper, that did believe that Christ was able to cleanse him; but when Christ
had cleansed him, he obtained the end of his hope, and by the sight of the eye
did see and believe that he was cleansed: This is the state of every penitent
Sinner; for they receive the spirit of faith, and this faith is a living faith,
and does as much excel the Hypocrites faith, as the receiving of a thing does
excel the fancy of a thing; for a man cannot give his evidence that a thing is
true, by the report of it, though he believe it to be true. It was a true report
that the Queen of Sheba heard of Solomon's glory, but when her eyes came to see
the King in his glory, it did far excel the same of what she did hear of him in
her own Country; it would rejoice the hearts of condemned Traitors, only to
hear a report that their King was minded to grant a pardon for them, but if it
never came forth, their joy perishes with them: This is the joy of the
hypocrites hope: But when the Kings Hand and Seal comes to the sight of their
eyes, O how glad are their hearts! with what boldness can they go into his
presence, with thanksgiving and joy! This is the very state of every repenting
sinner, they have the pardon of their sins under the Kings Seal, and rejoice in
that their own eyes see it, under the hand and seal of God, written and sealed
upon their own hear^s, with the Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 1.22 who has
also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Thus Gods
Children have received in earnest from Gods hand, his Spirit in this life to
confirm to them their certainty of their everlasting happiness, ^ Job. 5.10. he
that believes on the Son of God, (...) the witness in himself; so that the
Children of God have not only the Seal of God, and witness of God, but also he
has given them his spirit in earnest, to confirm to them the certainty of the
Remission of their Sins, and to confirm to them their he^^-ship of eternal
Life; so that their faith is not upon a (...) report but from the fight of
their (...) Scripture is the witness of men, of what they were eye witnesses of
and we believe their report, as the Queen of Sheba heard of Solomon's glory by
them (no doubt) that were eye witnesses; but she could not believe that his
glory was so great, as the same of it was; but when she took that journey from
the uttermost parts of the earth, and came to behold the King, says she, The
one half was not told (...), Thou exceedest the same thereof; so the holy
scripture is the report of them that were eye witnesses of the Majesty and
glory of Christ, and we believe them to be true, by hearsay, according to what
the Apostle Peter says, Acts 5*32. And we are his witnesses of these things,
and so is also the holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him; This
Testimony of the holy Ghost is immediate from God, to every one that does obey
him, and is a greater witness than the Scripture, because it is immediate from
the mouth of God; but the Scripture is from a second hand, and not immediate,
being the witness of men, of what they saw and heard; but says the Apostle
John 1 Job. 5.9, 10. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater; he that believes on the son of God, has the witness in himself; So
that the faith of Gods elect, is from the sight of their own eyes, and in
hearing the Voice of God with their own ears, immediately from his own mouth;
and this is the state of Gods faithful Children; for they behold the face of
God in his holy Temple, and hear his Voice, according to the testimony of the
holy Scripture, Hebr. 11.27. By faith Moses forsook Egypt, as seeing him who
was invisible, Isa. 6.5. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone, for mine eyes
have seen the King the Lord of Hosts, Job 42.5. But now mine eye sees thee,
yea, every one of Gods faithful Children do behold the glory of the Lord, with
open face, as in a glass, 2 Cor. 3, 18. for that spirit sent into our hearts is
the Lord Jesus in his divine nature, as in the 17. v. for the second Adam is a
quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. If any man have not this spirit in him, he is
none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. neither is he in this faith; for it is the sight of
this spirit in us that is the ground of our faith; for it reveals to us our
salvation by Christ, so that our faith is from the sight of our own eyes, and
from the hearing of Gods Voice with our own ears, who testifies to us. That
Jesus is the Christ, our Anointed Savior, 2 Cor. 4.13. It is this spirit that
speaks in us, and teaches us what Gods will is, 1 Job. 2.27. But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you: This anointing is
the Spirit of truth, which all Gods faithful Children are anointed with; for it
is the Oil of gladness which Christ was anointed with above his fellows, for he
has the spirit without measure, because in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, that is, he is very God, it is this spirit in us, that is the
Righteousness of Christ and made ours, for through faith in him we come to
receive it; it is this spirit in us which is the very strength of God made
perfect in us, against the strength and power of sin; yea, this Spirit is Jesus
Christ in his divine Nature dwelling in (...), 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves
whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? for it is the
living creating Word of God, that made all things in the beginning, that gives
us strength against the wicked One, 1 Job. 2, 14. I have written unto you Young
men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked One, This is that very Word which created all things, and
after was made flesh, and is become a great high Priest unto his people, being
called of God as was Aaron; And his people know in themselves the truth of the
Scriptures Testimony of his being so; But they that are in a dead faith only
believe him to be so by the report of the Scriptures, but are not made
partakers of the benefit of his Priestly Office, and therefore have no
experimental knowledge of the Truth of the Scripture; for he is not their high
Priest, though they hypocritically profess him to be so, not being partakers of
the benefit of his Priestly Office. Now the reason of the difference of these
two states is this, though the first tidings of the report that Jesus Christ is a
High Priest, comes by the Scripture, and they both believe the report by one
and the same faith at the first; yet they do not both take the same course, to
be benefited in his Priestly Office, for the one does endeavor to be benefited
in his Priestly Office by Repentance and earnest Prayer and Supplication to
God, for the pardon of all these sins, hoping to obtain it, accordingly they
do; for upon this Repentance and hope, God confirms to them the truth of the
scriptures Report, in taking away the guilt of their sins from off their
Consciences; for where remission of sin is, there remains no more guilt upon
the Conscience; for God sends the Spirit of his Son into their inward parts,
and sanctifies them and makes them inwardly clean and holy; and thus their
historical faith is become a living faith; for now they are come to know the
truth of the Scriptures report; so that now their faith is from an inward
sight: But the other takes another course; for they believing the scriptures
report, concerning Christ's Priestly Office, with a dead faith, or an historical
faith, they come to obtain a dead hope of mercy and forgiveness of their sins;
and upon this faith and hope, they imbody themselves into an outward Church
fellowship, and partake of the Ordinances, and under this dead faith and dead
hope, they offer to God abundance of dead Prayers, and all this is done in
their sinful state: So that these never come to know the certainty of the truth
of the Scriptures report, nor see the state of the other; and so much the
exacter they walk according to the letter of the Scripture, (though they have no
fellowship with the Spirit of God) so much greater is their delusion.

But the other are really freed from the guilt and polution of sin, through
Christ's Priestly Office, according to the Scriptures testimony, Romans 6.18.
Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of Righteousaess. 22. v.
being now made free from sin, and become servants to God, for by this one
Offering he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified; Heb. 10.14; Thus
they came to have real peace with God, and come to see this wonderful and
admirable change wrought in themsevles, through the Scriptures Report
con^erning Jesus Christ being a great high Priest, in the house of God, who
has offered such an acceptible Sacrifice to God, by the sheding of his own
Blood, that they are assured in themselves of the remission of their sins; for
before the remission of their sins, they had the Spirit of fear attended them,
being then under the guilt of sin, but now though faith, in the offering of the
body of Jesus, they have received the spirit of Adoption, and can truly call
God Father, in a full assurance of faith; for the Spirit of Adoption is the
object of their faith; for it has sanctified their inward parts, and cleansed
them from all sin so that old things are done (...), and all things are become
new, according to what is written, 2 Cor 5.17. Therefore if any man be in
Christ, he is a New Creature, old things are past away, behold all thing are
become new. This wonderful change has God wrought in every one that is
interested in Christ's Priestly Office; for they see this great work wrought in
themselves, with their own eyes, for the old things which are now gone away,
were the effect and fruit of their body of sins, but now their body of sin is
nailed to the Cross of Christ, that is, Christ has suffered for them on the
cross, and this Offering God has accepted for a full Satisfaction, and has
signified it to them, by freeing them from their sin, and so creating all
things a new in them, so that now they are become new Creatures; and all that
are under a profession of being Christians, and do not see this change wrought
in themselves, they are Hypocrites and Anti-christians, and are not interested
in Christ's Priestly Office, and do but lie, in saying, Christ is their Priest,
for they are none of his Church, but are of the Synagogue of Satan, according
to what is written, Rev. 3.9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of
Satan which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, they shall come
and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. But all that
are entrusted in Christ's Priestly Office, see this great work of Mortification
and Sanctification wrought in themselves, and can say in truth, that Jesus
Christ is their Priest, not because the scripture said he is a Priest, for
these are eye witnesses of the truth of it, being partakers of the benefit of
it, according to what is written, Gal., 3.1. before whose eyes Jesus Christ
has been evidently set forth, crucified among you; the Apostle speaks in this
place of Scripture, of the effect and benefit they saw with their own eyes, and
felt in their own bodies, of Christ being crucified for their sins; for Christ
was crucified on the Cross long before those Galatians received the Gospel, and
they lived in another Country, and not where Christ was crucified, but the
benefit and effect of his suffering did so operate and work in them, through
faith, so that they were eye witnesses of the truth of it, beholding it with an
invisible eye of faith.

And whereas the High Priest under the first Testament, did his Priestly Office
in the temple of God, which temple was made with hands, which things were but
shadows of heavenly thing; but Jesus Christ is a high Priest of the real Temple
of God not made with hands, being tipified by those high priests under the old
Testament; so likewise the Saints Bodies, or Church of God, was tipified by that
Temple built by Solomon; for that temple was but a figure of the true Temple of
God, as appears by these following scriptures, Acts 7.48. But Solomon built
him an house, howbeit the most high dwells not in Temples made with hands, as
faith the Prophet, (...) the Saints Bodies are the true Temple of God, where
God dwells, and where Christ does his Priestly Office in, as says the
Scripture, Heb. 3.1, 2. compared with the 5. and 6. verses. Wherefore, holy
Brethere^, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and high
Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him who appointed
him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house, and Moses verily was faithful
in all his house as a Servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be
spoken after, but Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we; as
also 1 Timothy 3*15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought
to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye
also as lively Stones are built up, a spiritual house. Here Peter alludes from
those hewn stones which Solomon pr^pared to build up, that house, which was a
figure, and therefore ^s;aith Peter, ye are lively stones, built up a spiritual
house; agreeing with the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. In whom all the building
fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom we also
are builded (...) an habitation of God, through the spirit. This is the real
Temple of God, where God dwells, and ^s (...) be seen in his holy Habitation.
This (...) the Temple of the New Testament, which Testament is written on the
fleshly Tables of the hearts of Gods Children, with the spirit of the living
God, Rev. 11.19. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen
in his Temple, the Ark of his Testament; This is the Temple and Ark of the
New Testament, in this Temple God dwe^s, and this is the real Ark of Gods
strength; for this Temple is the Saints Bodies, where the spirit of God has
its habitation, and where his mercy is extended from his Mercy Seat, and where
the Ark of his Testament is to be seen, his Testament being tested on the
fleshly tables of the hearts of his children; but the Temple of the
Old Testament was built with hands, and the Testament tested on the two Tables
of stone, and the Blood of this Testament was the Blood of Beasts, being all a
body of figures, 1 Cor. 6.19. What! know ye ^ot, that your body is the temple
of the holy ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God? 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know
ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you? If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy for the Temple
of God is holy, which Temple ye are (...) Temple of God with (...) for ye are
the Temple of the living God, as God has said. I will dwell in them, and walk
in them, and will be their God and they shall be my People. Thus it appears
that Gods Church is a holy people, and that their bodies are his temple or
habitation to dwell in, where they behold his face, and where Jesus Christ
ministered in, in his Priestly Office, for no man (...) God at any time but as
the only begotten Son, which (...) the bosom of the Father, (...) brought us to
the sight of him, through his (...) having purified our sinful bodies, and
(...) them a fit habitation for God to (...) his holy spirit. Thus those that
are (...) indeed come to see the truth of the Scriptures fulfilled in
themselves; (...) are come into such a (...) as to (...) with their own eyes,
that their body which had been once a body of (...) is (...) and made a holy
body, and is become Gods Temple; so that he (...) and they that are sanctified,
are (...), as Christ says, (...); and this is the union and fellowship, which
is between God and his Church (...) Body is Christ's Body, (...) Spirit,
according to what is written 1 Cor. 6.17. But he that is (...) Lord is one
Spirit; yea, as he is, so are we in this world, says the Apostle John, 1 John
4.17.

And, (...), Jesus Christ, is not only a great high Priest, who has offered an
acceptable Sacrifice unto God for us, but is also a great Prophet, to teach his
people immediately by his Spirit, and no man can truly call him Lord, but by
this Spirit which reveals him so to be, according to Scripture Testimony; for
we know that he dwells in us by the Spirit which he has given (...); and
this his spirit is given us, to lead (...) into all truth, for as he is a great
Prophet, so he teaches his Church immediately, according to what is written,
Isai. ^^, 1^. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. This immediate
Teaching which the scripture bears witness to, that Christ ever taught his
Church with, the false Church knows nothing of it, for her body is the
habitation of sin, she never having obtained any freedom by Christ, from that
state, for they are such as Christ speaks of, Job. 5.37, 38, 39. (...) ^ ^ ^ ^
^ (...) are three (...) observable, from these word^ o^ Chri^s;ts, by which he
di^tinguisheth the talse Church from the true.

The first thing, is, These have neither heard Gods Voice at any time, nor
see^n his shape, so that such, Professors as these, are wholly alienated from
any right knowledge of God; but all Gods Children have both heard his voice
immediately with their own ears, and seen him with their own eyes, as
appearesth in the following Chapter, Job. 6.45, 46. It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God, every man therefore that has
heard and has learned of the father, comes to me; not that any man has seen
the father, save he which is of God, he has seen the father. Thus it appears
plainly, the reason why the one has a living faith, and the other but a dead
faith, because the one has a faith in God only from the report of the
scriptures, but are altogether alienated from any right knowledge or
acquaintance with God; but the faith of the other, is from their hearing of
Gods voice immediately, with their own ears, being taught by him, and in seeing
of him with their own eyes; for their Bodies are his Temple, where they see his
face, and here his Voice, for his word abides in them, says the scripture, 1
Job. 2.14.

The second thing to be observed, is. That Christ exhort^ these litteral
professors to (...) the scriptures, for [saith Christ] they are they which
testify of me, but ye will not come to me, that ye might have life? From these
words of Christ we may observe the difference between these that are in a ^ead
faith, and his church which are in a living faith; for says Christ, ye will
not come to me that ye might have life; so that it appears, these had not life,
but were dead in sin, and therefore could not have a living faith, while in
this state; for they were wholly alienated from any knowledge of the life of
the Son of God; but the scripture testifies, that he that has the Son, has
life, and he that has not the son of God, has not life; for it is written, in
him is life, and the life is the light of men; but these litteral Professors
had not this life abiding in them, and therefore were in a state of darkness,
but Gods church has this life in them, and therefore they are the light of the
world; for this life is the light of the world, and lights every one that
comes into the world, with the light of his law, and every one that believes
in him, with the light of his Gospel; for this life is very God manifested in
his children; and the scripture testifies, That they both see him and hear his
voice, 1 John. 1.2.3. for the life was manifested and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you, that eternal life which was with the father, and
was manifested unto us; that which we have seen, and heard, declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with
the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. Thus Gods Children declae, him whom
they have seen with their own eyes, and heard his voice, with their own ears,
according to Scripture testimony; for says Christ, They are they which
testify of me; and all those that are in a living faith, have received the
scripture testimony, and have gone to Christ for life, by their directions, and
have obtained is, for the holy scripture is the voice of the spirit and bride,
which testify of Christ.

And the Third thing to be observed, from Christ words, to these scriptural
Professors who are in a dead faith, which faith they have attained unto, by the
report of the Scripture, but never come to know the truth of the report; for
says Christ to them, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, and ye will not come to me, that ye might have life; thus they
expected to obtain eternal life, (...) which could not give it them, and (...)
would not come unto Christ, where they might have had it; for the scriptures
are they which testify of him, (...) them we cannot have eternal life; for
they are only our Counselor, to give us directions which way we shall come to
obtain it, and also they contain some signs or aligores, to guide the faith and
judgment aright, of those that have already attained salvation by Christ; so
that those figures are beneficial only to such, and to no other, being only
outward signs of Spiritual benefits, which those that have obtained eternal
life, are partakers of, to keep in their memory, by what means they come to
partake of those spiritual benefits; for the holy scriptures are given us by
the inspiration of God, and are profitable to teach us, and to reprove us, and
to instruct us, in the way of righteousness, but they cannot give us life, that
come^ from Christ alone, for when by the scriptures counsel and directions, we
are come to Christ he gives us life, by which life we are quickened who were
before dead in our sins; and this life which he gives us, is the light of the
world, and we are the lamps that contain it; while we retain and keep the life;
for this life which we have received, was in the beginning with God, and was
God, according to John's Testimony, 1 Job. 1.1. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life; for the life was
manifested, and we have seen it. Now when we, by the directions of the
scripture, are come to Christ, and of him have received this word of life, it
comes to be our teacher; for Christ, as be is a great Prophet, teaches us
immediately by this Word of Life, which he has given us, and the scriptures
bear witness to the truth of it, for says Christ, The scriptures are they that
testify of me: And therefore let us view what they testify concerning this
immediate teaching, wherewith Jesus Christ teaches his Church with; for the
New Testament is not a writing, which is written with Ink, in a book, but the
scriptures, is a writing written with Ink in a book; and they are they which
testify of the truth, of this spiritual writing, or immediate teaching of God,
which these litteral of scriptural ministers never saw not understood any thing
of it, being unlearned men in this lesson; for it is a peculiar thing sealed up
among Christ's Desciples, it being (...) I (...) written with Christ own Spirit
upon the hearts of his disciples, as the scripture testifies, 2 Cor. 3.3.
compared with the 6. v. For as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart,
who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament or Covenant, not of
the letter, but of the Spirit. From this Text of Scripture we may note. That
the Apostle Paul tells these Corinthians, That they are the Epistle of Christ
ministered (says he) by us, that is by Paul, and some others, who were
Ministers of this spiritual Epistle, written by Christ with his own Spirit, not
with ink, says he. Now we know the Bible is written with ink, but this writing
is with the spirit of the living God, and it is this Ministration that brings
them into a living faith, because this Epistle is written on their hearts with
the spirit of the living God, not upon Tables of stone, says he; for that
which was written upon two Tables of stone, was the Old Testament or Covenant,
and the Blood of that Testament or Covenant, was the blood of Beasts; but the
Blood of the New Testament or Covenant was the Blood of Jesus Christ, which was
figured out by the Old Testament, written on stone, and dedicated with the
blood of beasts, who also, says he has made us able Ministers of (...)
New Testament, that is, of this Epistle (...) Christ^ written on their hearts
with his (...) This is the Epistle of their In(...) which is to disciple them
in his own doctrine, by his immediate teaching, as he is a great Prophet; and
be made Paul with some others, able Ministers of the New Testament, which was
f^zured out by letters written on Stone, called the Old Testament or Covenant,
which Paul here testifies that they were not Ministers of the said letter; for
that was the figurative (...) and was abolished, as in the 13. v. (...)
Testament written on stone, and dedicated with the Blood of Beasts, was but a
pattern, to figure out the substance, which was to be fulfilled by Christ; and
this Epistle of Christ's, held forth by the scriptures, never was known or read
by any, but his disciples; for the false Church and false Teachers, are
ministers only of that which is written with Ink in and Book, but understand
nothing of the New Testament, which the book bears witness to; for they are
ministers of the Letter or Old Testament, written on two Table of stone, and
dedicated with the blood of Beasts, but know nothing of the New Testament
written on the hearts of Christ's Disciples, and dedicated with his own blood,
which is the substance of these figures, which they are ministers of, which
Paul declares himself not a Minster of Thus the Testimony of Christ, and the
Law of the Spirit of Life, is bound up and fast sealed among his Disciples,
they have it, and read it among themselves, Isa. 8.16. And thus satan's
Ministers transform themselves, as Ministers of Light, in their midnight
darkness, and deceive themselves and the world, with their scriptural or
litteral doctrine, H^b. 8.8. Behold, the days come (says the Lord) when I will
make a New Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of J^^^^,
(compare this with the 10, 11, 12, verses) For this is the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my
Laws into their mind and write them in their hearts, and will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People; And they shall not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for all shall know
me from the least to the greatest; for I will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness and their sins and their in^quities will I remember no more.
This text of ^cripture is a repetition that the Apostle makes of the prophet
(...) prophecy concerning the New testament, Jer. 31. And the end of the
Apostle, in treating upon it, is to show the abolishing of the Old Covenant
written on stone, as appears in the last verse, in that he says, a New
Covenant he has made, the first old, now that which decays and waxes old,
is ready to vanish away, says the Apostle; now that which vanishes away, is
(...), this old Covenant, written on stone, and made with the house of Israel
and (...), and dedicated with the blood of (...) and Goats, was but a pattern
of heavenly (...), and therefore God, by the Prophet, (...) from the figure, to
the substance, for that testament was written on stone, and dedicated with the
blood of beasts, being a figure of the remission of sins; so the New Covenant
is written on the hearts of Gods Children, and dedicated with the Blood of
Jesus Christ, in which Covenant there is really remission of sins; for God is
merciful ^to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities, he
will remember no more. Now as that Covenant was made with Israel and Judah
after the flesh, this new Covenant is made with the true Israel of God, with
such who are a Israelites indeed, and with such of Judah, who are Jews
inwardly, and are circumcised in their hearts, by the Spirit of God; and all
these do know the Lord, from the least of them to the greatest, for God is
their God, and they are his People, and are all taught by him; for he has put
his Laws into their mind, and wrote them on their hearts with his own Spirit,
so that they are divinely inspired, being thus taught by him, so that they have
no need to teach very man his neighbor, and every man his brother, for they
all know the Lord, being all taught by him, to love one another; for they are
divinely inspired with this love, it being ingrafted in their hearts by Gods
spirit; for it is the doctrine of Christ, and the fulfilling of the law; and
therefore says Paul, as to brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you,
for you your selves are taught of God, to love one another, 1 Th^s. 4.9. And
therefore by this love, they know that they are translated from death unto
life; but these litteral Teachers walk in darkness, notwithstanding their dead
faith, and cannot assure their own hearts, that they are the children of God,
because their names are not written in the book of Life, 1 John. 2.20. etc. But
ye have an Unction from the holy one, and knew all things. Thus the, scripture
te^tifieth to this unction of Gods spirit, by which his children come to know
all things needful for them to knew, for this the immediate teaching of Jesus
Christ by the unction of his spirit; I have not written unto you ^aith the
Apostle, because ye know (...) the truth, but because ye know it, (...) of the
truth they had by the (...) of the spirit of truth; and (...) confirm them in
it, (...) he, Let that therefore (...) which ye have heard from the beginning
for this Apostle had told them what this was, which was from the beginning, in
the first sentence of this his Epistle, and in the first sentence of his
Gospels, for this is the Word of Life, which was from the beginning, that
created all things, and after was made flesh, and is in Gods Children, and is
their teacher; and in the 26. v. he gives them the reason of his writing to
them concerning these things, saying, There things have I written unto you,
concerning them that seduce you; but in the next words, says he, But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abid^th in you, and ^e need not that
any Man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. From hence we may
observe, That Seducers are w^nt to endeavor to seduce Gods Children from the
teaching of this unction; by which Christ teaches them; but says Christ,
Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me. Thus the
Scriptures testify of Jesus Christ's divine teaching, and so does all Gods
Ministers likewise and teach according to it, as the Apostle says, ye need not
that any man teach you, but as this anointing teaches you. But as Paul was not
a Minister of the letter, written on stone; so seducers are Ministers of the
letter, written on Tables of Stone: and as the Apostle John was a Minister of
the teaching of thi^ Unction of the Spirit, and has left Record behind him in
writing, to confirm the truth of it; so Seducers are Ministers of that which is
written with Ink in the Book, endeavoring to seduce from this divine teaching,
knowing nothing of this doctrine, for they think to have eternal life in the
Scriptures, and therefore they imbody themselves into a Church fellowship, and
partake of the outward figure of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and live in the
practice of formal and dead prayers, (...) are in a state of sin, and death all
the time, having no fellowship with this word of life, neither do they know
there is such a thing in the Children of God, by which they are immediately
taught; for these false prophets are not of God, but are of the World, and they
speak of the work, and the world hears them, says the Scripture; for the
world can see litteral and visible things, but cannot see nor receive spiritual
things, therefore, said the Apostle, he that is not of God, hears not (...);
for he that is not of God, is unlearned in this lesson of the Spirit of God,
never having learned it, and therefore cannot understand the things of God,
neither can they know them; but those that are thus taught of God, by this
teaching they understand the things of God. Thus Jesus Christ teaches his
Children immediately by his spirit, though his bodily presence is gone away, yet
he has sent us an advocate or comforter to abide with us forever even the
spirit of Truth; and this promise he made to his Disciples the night in which
he was betrayed, Job. 14.16, 17. And I will pray the father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever, even the spirit of
Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it se^th him not, neither knows
him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Thus it
appears by the Testimony of the Scripture, that the world sees not this
Teacher, neither knows him, but God's Children do know him, for he dwells
with them, and in them, and is their teacher, as appears also in John 13.16.
How about when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth,
for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak, Thus it appears by the Testimony of the scripture, that this Spirit is
the guide of Gods Children, and speaks in them, and shows them what it
hears from the Father, and from the Son. Thus the Children of God, are
immediately taught of God, and know what his Doctrine is, for they hear it with
their own ears immediately, from his own mouth; for he does manifest himself
unto them, but not unto the World, as appears in (...) 14.21, 22. Thus we
have the Testimony of the Scriptures, that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is his
immediate teaching, by his Spirit, in his Children. And says the Appostle
John, If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not
(...) your house, neither bid him God speed, 2 Job. 10.

And thirdly, Jesus Christ is not only a great high Priest, and a great
Prophet, but he is also a great King, even the Prince of the kings of the
earth, according to what is written, Rev. 19*16. And he has on his ve^t^re,
and on his thigh, a Name written, King of Kings, and Lord, of Lords Heb. 1.8.
(...) unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O God, (...) (...); a Scepter of
Righteousness is (...) Kingdom. And he is not only a great King, but also a
victorious Conquer^ur, as appears by Scripture Testimony, Rev 19.13. He was
clothed in (...) Blood, and his name is called the Word o^ God. Thus he is
represented to (...), to set forth his Victorious Acts, even as if his garments
were sprinkled and stained with the blood of his Enemies; and he is entitled
with the Name of his Godhead, to wit, his Name is called the Word of God; this
is that Word which was made fleth; and this is that Word which Christ told the
Jews, they had not abiding in them; this is the man whom God has appointed to
judge the World in Righteousness, Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a day
in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has
Ordained. 1 Timothy 6.15 Which in his times he shall show, who is the (...), the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But his Kingdom is not of this world, as he
is the ^on of man, for he will (...) in the World to come a^ vi(...) the first
Adam did over all the works of Gods hands; for he is the only begotten Son of
his Father, and therefore is heir of all things; so that the kingdom and
heirship belongs to him, by birth, but his kingdom is not of this world, Job.
18.36.

But my purpose at this time is to treat only upon his Kingly Power, manifested
in the hearts of his Children, in this world, that the ten Virgins, to whom I
direct this my Epistle to, may examine themselves, whether they are ruled by
his Kingly Power, or not; for there is nothing written concerning him in the
Scripture, but the truth of it is confirmed in us, immediately by his Spirit,
if we order our conversation aright; for as there is virtue seen and felt, that
proceeds from his Priestly Office, to purge and cleanse us really from sin, and
from his Prophetical Office, to teach us immediately by his Spirit, so likewise
there is seen and (...) a mighty Power from his Kingly Office, in (...), and
this will appear evidently by scripture Testimony; for if we observe things
only from the letter of the Scripture, without any (...) or sensible feeling of
virtue ^^^wing from Christ, we are under a great (...), being in a carnal dead
state; for when the Galations turned back from the (...) of the Spirit of
Truth, to the works the Law, and so observed commands meekly from the
Scripture, the Apostle (...) being bewitched, Gal. 3.1, 2. (...) Galations, who
bath bewitched you, etc? received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by
the hea^ing of Faith? And therefore let us come to self-examination, that we
may not be deceived in our selves, what state we stand in; for if Jesus Christ
be our King, then we are ruled by his kingly Power, if not, then we are Rebels
and Hypocrites, if we make a profession to be that which in reality we are not;
for if he be our King, then the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
which proceeds from his kingly Power, has freed us from the law of sin, which
was in our Members, which Law proceeded from Satan's kingly Power, and kept us
in subjection to him; for if it be not thus with us, he has not led Captivity
Captive, that is, we have not seen him ascend on high, into his kingly Throne
in victory, above the kingly power of Satan; for we still remain the Captives
of sin, not having obtained any deliverance by Christ; but if we be subjects of
his kingdom, then we have a sensible feeling in our selves, of his kingly power
ruling in us, as appears by his answer to the Pharisees, Luke 7.20, 21. And
(...) as demanded of the Pharisees, When the Kingdom of God should come? he a
sw^^^ them, and said, The Kingdom of God (...) with Observation; neither shall
they say, lo here, or lo there; for behold the Kingdom of God is within you.
From hence we may observe, that these Pharisees were such as were enquirers of
him, when the Kingdom of God should come? his answer to them was, The Kingdom
of God comes not with observation; this answer is Negative, that is, it does
not come by Observation; which answer shows what their imaginations were about
it, to wit, that it would come by observation of prescribed Rules of Worship to
be observed outwardly, from Christ's first and second answer, which are negative
Answers; for secondly, says he, neither shall they say, lo here or there, as
much as if he should say, not in this outward observation, or in that outward
observation, for behold, says he, the Kingdom of God is within you; as much as
if he should say, if ye come to behold the Kingdom of God, it must be in your
selves for it is there that Christ rules in his kingly Power by his Spirit,
Ephesians. 3.16. That he would (...) you, according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might, by his spirit, in the inner man; This strength, is a
strength that proceeds from his kingly Power, and is a strength that is
stronger than any forcible power of sin, and it is manifested in our inner man;
for when it is manifested in (...) it is the very Strength and Power of
Righteousness; and it is this apparent manifestation of Christ in us, that is
the ground and object of a living faith, verse. 20. Now unto him that is able to
do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think, according to the Power
that works in us. This Text does tell us of the great Power of God, who is
able to do exceeding abundantly above all we ask or think: Now those that
profess the Name of Jesus Christ, and yet never felt this Power, are wholly
ignorant what it is, so that they cannot set to their Seal that the Scripture
is true, when they read these Scriptures; but those that have felt this Power
in themselves, they look upon the Scripture with another eye, and can set to
their Seal it is true; for the working of this Power in them confirms the truth
of its Testimony; for says Paul, according to the Power that works in us,
Gal. 1.11. Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious Power. Thus
Gods faithful Children are strengthened by his glorious Power, James 1.21.
Wherefore lay apart all (...) and superfl^^ty of naugh^tiness, and receiv^ with
meekness the ingrafted Word, which i^ able to save your Souls. This Word, which
the Apostle speaks of, which is able to save our Souls, is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; and i^ (...) once come to be ingrafted into us, it strengthens
us, with Might in our inner man, for it is the divine nature of Christ, which
if we come to be made partaker of it, we shall come to escape the corruption
that is in the world through lust; 1 Job. 2.14. I have written unto you Young
Men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you; and ye have
overcome the wicked one. The Apostle in this place, speaks of a spiritual
growth, from Ba^es to Young Men who are come to the prime of their strength in
Christ, and are able to encounter with the Prince of this World, who is the
wicked One. That these Young Men have overcome, and this victory is by the Word
of God that abides in them, so that this great strength, by which these young
men overcome the wicked One, is (...) Christ's kingly Power manifested in them;
for this ingrafted Word, is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two edged
Sword, as appears, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 1 Job. 4.4. Ye are of God,
little Children, and have overcome them, because greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the World. Here the Apostle speaks to little Children or
Babes in Christ; for, says he ye are of God, and have overcome them; that i^,
th^se little Children have overcome the false Prophets, by coming to the sight
of the kingly Power of Christ manifested in them; for these false Prophets are
Ministers of the Letter, and think to have eternal life by the Scriptures; but
these babes in Christ were now come to see that which the false Prophets were
ignorant of; and therefore had overcome them; for these false Prophets were not
able to overcome these little Children, by their Scriptual Doctrine, because
greater was he that was in these little Children, than he that is in the World;
for he that is in the World, is the Prince of Darkness, who rules in the
Children of Disobedience, and transforms himself into an Angel of Light in his
Ministers; and his Ministers are they who flatter God with their mouth and
lips, while their hearts are after their Covetousness; and by their
hypocritical Prayers in public Assemblies, yea, and some of them burning up
their eyes, and lifting up their unholy hands, and shaking their heads, with an
hypocritical Heart, using all these hypocritical gestures in public
Assemblies, in the time of their Prayers, and by these hypocritical and lying
signs and wonders, they deceive the world, preaching the letteral part of the
Scripture to them, and some of them setting whole Congregations, to wit,
Drunkards, Swearers, Liars and Coveteous Persons to sing holy men's Psalms, and
all this done with an unclean inside; and thus they transform themselves, as
the Ministers of Righteousness, by these hypocritical Prayers and letteral
Sermons, which are lying signs and wonders to deceive; for all these things can
Satan's Ministers act and do; but says the Apostle John, Little Children, ye
have overcome them, for greater is he that is in you, than be that is in the
World; for though he that is in the World can act all these great signs and
wonders, in his Ministers, to deceive the World with, yet greater was he that
was in these little Children; for Jesus Christ was in them, as a mighty King,
ruling in them (...) Righteousness, having vanquished Sin and Satan, and set
them at liberty; so that these little Children, (...) to know Christ's voice,
from the voice of these Strangers; for by his Priestly Office, he has
justified and sanctified them from their sins; this work they saw done in
themselves; and by his prophetical Office, he taught them immediately, by his
Spirit, so that they hear his voice with their own ears; and by his Kingly
Power he manifested himself to be greater than the God of this World, for he
had dis-thron'd him and took possession of them himself so that they saw him to
be greater than he that is in the world, with their own eyes: And thus they
overcome these false Prophets, because greater was he that was in them, than he
that is in the world.

Concerning the Christian Sabbath, upon Heb. 4.4. etc.
For God spoke in a certain place of the Seventh day, on this wise, And God did
rest in the ^s;eventh day from all his Works. This certain place is in the
second of Genesis ^ v. ^ for when God had finished all his works, in six days, and
had made Adam on the sixth day, which was the finishing work, or the last (...)
thing he made he then rested from all his works^ which seventh day had no
evening or morning a^er^b^d to it, because neither a natural nor artificial day
was intended by it; for it began, when the world and all things in it were
perfectly finished; so that it was Gods eternal Sabbath, having no more work to
do; and it was no sabbath or rest to Adam, from any labor, for he had done
(...); for Gods seventh day rest began when Adams first day of his being made a
living Soul began; and the day of God^ rest or sabbath, was the day which he
blessed and (...); but this was no sabbath to Adam, for he had done no work to
rest from; neither did God put any labor on man or beast, before Adams
transgression; and that seventh day which God rested from his own work was the
day which he blessed and sanctified. And the fourth Commandment only makes a
repetition, how God blessed and sanctified this seventh day or Sabbath of his
own rest, from the works of Creation; and commanded a sign to be kept by
Israel, of their entering into it by faith; so that it was the seventh day of
his own Rest, that he blessed and sanctified, mentioned in the fourth
commandment, and not that sign commanded to the Children of Isael in the old
Covenant. In the 5th v. says he, If they shall enter into my rest, Now if we
consider, Adam in his first creation entered into Gods seventh day rest, or
sabbath; for Gods seventh day rest, and Adams first becoming a living soul,
began at one and the self same time, he being Gods finishing work, or the last
thing which God made. v. 6 seeing therefore that some must enter therein, and
they to whom it was first preached, entered not in because of unbelief, seeing
therefore that some must enter therein, says the Apostle; that is, enter into
Gods rest or sabbath, and they to whom it was first preached, entered not in
because of unbelef; that is, though Israel was delivered our of Egypt, and after
had the Gospel reached to them, yet they entered not into the land of Canaan,
which was a type of God People entering into Gods Rest, and that because of
their unbelief; so that i^ appears, as Adam entered into Gods sabbath, in his
first Creation, and was turned out of it, to labor, because of his
Disobedience, and Israel could not enter into Canaan, which was the figure of
entering into Gods rest again, because of their unbelief; so that it necessarily
follows, that a Christian must enter into Gods Sabbath, by faith, for by faith
we come to enter into Adams innocent state, for he entered into Gods Sabbath, in
his lanocency, and was turned out of it in his Disobedience, to labor. 7th v.
Again be limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day, after so long a time;
as it is said, to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: Thus
says the Apostle, he limitteth a certain day, that is, God limitteth a certain
day, when he says in David, as is written in the 95. Psalm, To day, after so
long a time, that is, after so long a time, that they had been in the
possession of Canaan, which was the rest which God swear, after they came out
of Egypt, that they should not enter into because of their unbelief; and they
all perished in the Wilderness, and their children after them, entered in, and
after they had possessed it, from the time, that Joshua possessed them of it,
unto David's time; which was so long a time, God says to them, by his spirit,
in David, To day if ye will near his voice, harden not your hearts; for in
saying, to day, he limitteth a day in David, saying, to day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts that is, as your fathers did, that came out or
Egypt, and so entered not into my rest, that is, into Canaan; which was a figure
of Gods eternal Rest or Sabbath, 8th v. for if Jesus had given them rest, this
Jesus was Joshua the Son of Nun, as in the margent, v. 8, who brought them into
Canaan, and possessed them of that rest, which was a figure of the true and
eternal Rest; and the Apostle to prove it to be so, says, if Jesus had given
them rest, that is to say, the true rest intended, then would not he afterward
have spoken of another day of rest, after so long a time of their possessing of
this rest, for they had been in the possession of it, from the time of Joshua,
unto the time of David; and then God spoke in David after all this time of
their possessing this rest, which Joshua possessed them of, saying, in David,
as appears Psa^ 94, ^. v. etc. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your heart, a^ in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the
wilderness, when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works; forty
years long was I gr^^^ed with this generation, and said, it is a people that do
err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways, unto whom I swear in my
wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Thus David limiteth a day, in
saying, To day, if ye will hear his voice; which imports, if you will not
hear his voice to day, you are in the same danger as your fathers were in, of
falling short of entering into Gods rest; by this, the Apostle proves, that
there remains a rest, or the keeping of a Sabbath, to the People of God, being
an illusion from Adams entering into Gods rest, or seventh day sabbath, which
afterward was [for his transgresson] turned out of it, to till the ground, and
so to eat his Bread with the Sweat of his face. Thus the Apostle is proving,
that by faith in Christ we come to re-enter into Gods rest again, being
dispossessed of it by our first Parents transgression, And the seventh day rest,
from bodily labor, was assign, Exo. ^^*12. etc. Ezekiel. 20.12.20. which sign was
to guide the faith of Gods Church to Christ the promised seed to come, who was
the Joshua, to bring then into Gods Rest again, which Adam entered into in his
first Creation, which was the seventh day, which God blessed and sanctified,
spoken of in the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20.11. for in six day as the Lord
made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day (...) hallowed it; so that this
blessed and sanctified day was the day before sin entered into the world, even
while Adam abode in Gods sabbath, or rest; for the Sanctity is not in the sign,
but in the substance, for man's working six days, and resting the seventh, i^
the sign which God commanded Israel to observe for a sign, that Christ, the
promised Seed, should bring his people into Gods seventh day sabbath again; but
Gods rest or seventh day sabbath, from his own works, is the substance, which
we are to labor to enter into by faith, and not by the work of the law, which
was once a sign or shadow, but is now abolished; and therefore we are
forbidden in Col. 12.21, 22. saying, Touch not, taste not, handle not, which
all are to perish with the using, after the commandments and doctrines of men:
and if we be risen with Christ, to seek those things which are above these
rudiments; for the body or the substance is of Christ, Col. 2.16, 17. 9th v.
There remains therefore a rest to the People of God. or the keeping of a
Sabbath to the people of God; and this the Apostle asserts, having before
proved the truth of it, to wit, That there remains the keeping of a Sabbath to
the people of God, though Adam by transgression was dispossessed of it; yet it
remains recoverable again, through faith in Christ. 10. v. For he that is
entered into his rest be also has ceased from his own works as God did from
his; whereas the Apostle says, for be that is entered into his own rest, is an
argument drawn from the foregoing verse, to wit, there remains therefore a
Rest to the people of God; for if there remains a rest to the people of God,
then of necessity every one of them must cease from his own works, as God did
from his; for when God entered into his rest, he ceased from his own works, so
did Israel in the sign, tested on stone, and called the old Covenant; and so it
is with every one that does the like under the New Covenant which contains the
substance, which covenant is dedicated with the blood of Christ, for he that is
entered into his rest, he has ceased from his own works, as God did from his,
Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed are
the dead which dye in the Lord, from hence forth, yea, says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labor, and their works do follow them. But Adam
entered into Gods Sabbath, or seventh day rest, in his first Creation, and no
into his own rest, because he had done no work, but because of his
transgression, he was turned out of it, to eat his bread with the sweat of his
face, and then his work and labor began; and that blessed seventh day of Gods
rest, became a cursed day of labor to him, and to his posterity, they being
separated from Gods rest, or seventh day sabbath; and our Lord Jesus came under
this Curse, for our sakes, to bring us out of this cursed day of labor, into
Gods blessed and sanctified seventh day Rest; and when Christ had finished his
work of Redemption for us, he entered into his rest, having ceased from his own
works, as God did from his v. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that
rest, lest any manifest after the same example of Unbelief^ Whereas the Apostle
says Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, that is, into Gods
seventh day Sabbath, where Christ our fore runner, is entered into, to rest with
God, in that seventh day Sabbath of eternity, that has neither evening nor
morning to it, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief, faith the
Apostle; that is, fall short of this eternal Rest, as Israel did, in the
wilderness, and so entered not into that rest, called Gods rest, because it was
a figure of it. v. 12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper
then any two edged sword. In this 12. v. is to set before us that severe
sentence that did proceed from Gods mouth against them, which was the sword of
his Justice, to cut them down in the wildernes^ because of their Unbelief and
Disobedience: and thus they fell short, and entered not into his rest,
according to what is written, 1 Cor. 10*11, 12, Now all these things happened
unto them, for Ensamples or types, and they are written for our Admonition,
upon whom the ends of the world are come, wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall, this fall here spoken of, is such a fall as
Isreal's was in the wilderness, for they fell by Gods just Judgments, twenty
four thousand sell by the plague at one time; and many of them fell by fiery
Serpents, and other judgments. This book written to the H^brews is chiefly to
open the signs and sha^dows of the Law under the first Testament, written on
stone, and dedicated with the blood of bulls and goats; and he begins in the
first place upon the Gospel Sabbath, which he exhorts them to labor to enter
into, for the sign of it was tested on stone, which was the old Testament, in
the reading of which Testament, there was a vail on their hearts, so that they
could not look steadfastly to that which is abolished.

An exposition upon 1 Cor. 11.4, 5.
EVery Man praying or prophesying, having his Head covered, dishonors his
Head. But every Woman that prays or prophecieth, etc.

In the first place, let us examine into the Apostles writing, to see and
understand what this Covering is, that he is treating upon; seeing that it is a
decent covering for the woman to be covered with, in the presence of God and
Man, but an undecent coverning for the man to make use of it, to cover his head
with, in the presence of God and man.

And Secondly, To examine into the matter, whether this be not something, which
God has placed in nature, both in the Male and in the Female, and whether the
ignorance of the times, has not taken up some vain custom in the room thereof;
and therefore let us turn our eyes from the worlds Custom in the matter, and
look upon what the Apostle says, about it, and he will tell us plainly, before
he leaves the matter, what covering it is he intends, which is to be seen in
the 13, 14 and 15 verses, ^^dge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray
unto God uncovered, does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have
long hair, it is a shame unto him, but if a woman have long hair, it is a glory
to her; for her hair is given her for a Covering. From hence we may plainly
see, it is a covering placed (by God) in nature, and given only to the Woman to
cover her head with, and nature teaches the woman to make a covering of it,
and to cover her head with it; for says the Apostle, her hair is given her for
a covering; but contrary wise, nature teaches the man, not to make use of his
hair, to cover his head with it, as the woman does, because God has not given
it to him for a covering, is be has to the woman; and therefore nature it self
teaches the Man, not to wear his hair any longer than is for his comfort; for
says the Apostle in the seventh verse. A Man indeed ought not to cover his
head, for as much as he is the image (...) and glory of God; but the Woman is
the glory of the Man. So that God has given this covering to the Woman, in
sign of her subjection to him, who is made in the Image of God.

Therefore for the man to make use of his hair for a covering, as the woman
does, dishonors himself, who is the head; for as much as he is in the Image
and glory of God, but the Woman is made to be a glory to the Man, by her
subjection to him; and her subjection to him, is her glory in the sight of God;
for she was made for him, and not the Man for her; for this cause (says the
Apostle) in the 10. v. ought the Woman to have power on her head, because of
the Angels: for as the Angels are made ministering Spirits before him, in whose
image man was made, so is the woman an help, as before him, who is made to be
her head and she is to be a glory to him, by her subjection, and has power
given her of God to cover her head with her hair, in token of it.

Thus it appears, by what the Apostle writes to this Church, that the man
praying to God, and prophesying to m^n, with his head being thus covered,
dishonors his head; when as God has not given him his hair to cover his
head with, as the woman does, and ought to do. And therefore every woman
praying or prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her head, (for
says the Apostle) her Hair is given her for a Covering.

Thus it appears, that it is the hair that the Apostle is treating upon, and
that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair, and much more for a man to pray
or prophecy with it on his head in the presence of God and his Church, when as
it is not given him for a covering, as it is to the Woman, so that it ought not
to be on the man's head, as any time, but ought to be on the Woman's head at all
times, and the Apostle tells them, saying, We have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God, that is, to wear long hair, ^s appears in the 14, 15,
16. verses Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair, it is a shame unto him; but if a woman have long hair, it is a Glory to
her; for her hair is given her for a covering? But if any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

But as to any garment of the body, that is decent in Gods sight at one time,
is decent at all times; for God has not ordained is to be an honor to him, in
putting off any garment, that is decent to wear before him (for we are at all
times in his presence) except we have an immediate command for it, as Moses and
Joshua had, who were commanded to take off the garment of the feet when they
came before God, Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5*15. But we read, God commanded his
Ministers, when they came to Minister in his presence to put a garment on their
head, as appears Ez^k. 44, 18, 20. They shall have linen Bonnets upon their
heads, etc. nor Suffer their locks to grow long.

To the Reader.
What I have written in the following Treatise, has been from no other
president but the holy Scriptures themselves, without regard to any other law
or custom whatsoever.

Marriage was an Ordinance of God from the beginning, and is to continue to the
worlds end; being no ways altered by the Gospel, and that precept written by
Moses, which gave liberty of Divorce, was written only because of the hardness
of their hearts, to whom he wrote it, and is made void by our Savior; for a
Marriage made by God, ought not to be separated by Man, upon any account
whatsoever; and therefore our Savior allows a Divorce, only upon a
defraudulent Marriage; for such a Marriage is not of God; for Christ allows of
no Divorce, but only upon Fornication, which is an act done before Marriage, by
which the man is beguiled, and therefore has liberty (if he sees cause) to
give her a bill of Divorce, because he found her not a Maid or chaste Woman,
and therefore was defrauded and beguiled by her. And Christ makes a clear
distinction between Fornication and Adultery; for a thing must be known by the
name of it, otherwise how shall we distinguish one thing from another? and
therefore our Savior makes a full and clear distinction between Fornication
and Adultery, as is to be seen, Mat. 5.31. But I say unto you, that whosoever
shall put away his (...), saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to
commit Adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits
Adultery. From hence we may observe, he does not say, whosoever puts away
his Wife, saving for the case of Adultery, but Fornication; secondly, he does
not say, He that puts away his Wife, causes her (...) commit Fornication, but
Adultery: And, thirdly he does not say, he that marries her that is divorced,
commits Fornication, but commits Adultery: so that Christ makes a very
clear and plain distinction between fornication and Adultery. And again, he
says a second time, Mat. 19.9. And I say unto you, whosoever shall put away
his Wife, except it be for Fornication, and shall marry another, commits
Adultery; and whosoever marries her that is put away, does commit Adultery. He
does not say, whosoever puts away his Wife, except it be for Adultery, but
for Fornication. And, secondly, he does not say, He that puts away his Wife
and marries another, commits Fornication, but Adultery: And, thirdly, he
does not say, Whosoever marries her that is put away commiteth Fornication,
but does commit Adultery. So that Christ makes a clear distinction in both
places, between Adultery and Fornication; for Fornication is an act done in a
single state, and therefore cannot be called Adultery, though it be an act of
whoredom. When the Scripture comprehends both these acts, it says,
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 15 for Adultery is to
distinguish the act alter Marriage, from the act done before Marriage, as in
Ezekiel. 16.31, 32. And have not been as an Harlot, in that thou scornest hir^,
but as a Wife that commits Adultery, which takes strangers instead of her
husband. And both Make and Luke, which have made Record of our Saviors
Testimony against a Divorce, both witness that our Lord testified against a
Divorce upon any account after a lawful Marriage, Mark 10.11.12. Whosoever
shall put away his Wife, and marry ar^ther, commits Adultery against her;
and of a Woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she
commits Adultery. Here we may observe is no allowance at all for a divorce;
for he speaks concerning the state of two which God has joined together, as in
the 9th v. What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

By the law of Moses it was death, without mercy, for a Damsel to beguil a man,
by marrying with him, after she had committed Fornication, Deuteronomy. 22.13, etc.
compared with the 20.21. v. But our Lord has placed the liberty of a divorce,
in the room of that severe Precept, but after God has joined two in a Marriage
Covenant, there is nothing to be acted by man in way of separation; for she
remains a man's Wife, though an Adulteress, and her Husband cannot discharge her
from that sin, by giving her a bill of divorce; for in so doing he becomes
guilty by our Savious testimony, and causes her to proceed in that sin; for
she ought either to be reconciled to her Husband, or remain unmarried, 1 Cor.
7.10, 11. For she is not free from her Husband, neither can he free her,
neither can she be freed from him by man, but by God only, who joined them in
one; for, says Christ, what therefore God has joined together, let no man put
asunder, Mar. 10.9. So that a Divorce may be granted by the husband, when God
has not joined them together; for if he find her guilty of Fornication, when
he has taken her, then he is at his liberty, whether he will accept of her;
but if he accepts of her, as not being a Virgin or a chaste woman, she becomes
his lawful Wife, he may not put her away all his days. And by the law of Moses,
if a Man lay with a Virgin, he was to endue her to be his Wife, except her
Father refused to give her, and was not tolerated to put her away all his days,
Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29 Exodus 22.16, 17. And for any besides the husband to give a bill
of Divorce, is a contemptuous act, both against Gods Law and Gospel, Deuteronomy.
24.1.3. Ma^^. 19.9. In the beginning God made but one man, and called his name
Adam, and out of him he made a Manness or Woman, and brought her to Adam, that
there might be a reunion, unseperable, for that end to multiply and increase,
and replinish the earth in that lawful union of Marriage, by the appointment of
God, and sometimes by plurality of Wives, as appears in Abraham, who designed
no other Wife than Sarah, yet afterward married his maid. Servant, which thing
was of God, and was a figurative thing, as Gal. 4.22. compared with the 23. ^
etc. As also Jacob designed to serve only for Rachel; but it was the design
and purpose of God, to build the house of Israel by Jacob and his four Wives,
in that Lawful union of Marriage.

Yet, notwithstanding that, Poligamy was allowed of God, and no where forbidden
by any Law of God, but Laws prescribed by Moses to suit such a state, as in
Deuteronomy. 21.15, etc. Exodus 21.10. And many of the holy Prophets and servants of
the Lord had plurality of Wives, yet it is no ways convenient among Christians,
as appears by Scripture Testimony; for Moses left directions behind him
concerning such Kings as were to rule Gods Church, under the Law, not to
multiply Wives to themselves, Deuteronomy. 1^. 17 And Solomon not following his
directions, it proved a snare to him, 1 King 11.4. And likewise the Apostle
Paul under the Gospel, left directions behind him, that Bishops and Deacons
(who where to be Leaders and Rulers in Gods Church) were to be the Husbands of
one Wife, 1 Timothy 3.2.12. And that which may prove a snare to the leaders of Gods
People, may be the like to any particular member in the Church; for says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient for me; that is to say, as to his Christian state; for a Christian is
not to entangle himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him
who has chosen him to be a Soldier; and therefore ought to keep himself as
free as possible he can from all shares and cumbrances of this World, that he
may attend upon the Lord without distraction; and therefore the Apostle Paul
commends a single life to be most free from carefulness, where God gives the
gift of Continency; but where he does not, it is better to marry then to burn;
for Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, and is a remedy
against Fornication.

The taking away my lawful covenanted Wife, and other men's Wives in this Colony
of Connecticut in New England contrary to the rule of Gods word, is the reason
of my publishing this Treatise: of Marriage and Divorce.

Concerning Marriage and Divorce.
GENESIS 1.27. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created be
him, Male and Female created he them. Thus was the Woman created in the Man, as
appears in the 5 ^ chap. 2. Male and Female created he them, and blessed them,
and called their name Adam i^ the day when they were created; so that it
appears they were created in one body, and were one flesh and bone, Mal. 2.15.
And did not he make one, yet had he the residue of the spirit, and could have
created them single, and distinct in two bodies; upon the consideration of
this, says the Prophet, to the husband, therefore take heed to your spirit,
and let none deal treacherously against the Wife of his Youth; for the Lord the
God of Israel says, that he hates putting away; which does import, for as
much as God created the man and woman in one body, so that he made them one in
their first creation; and therefore hates a separation after they are united
and become one flesh, by the union of Marriage. Genesis 2.21, 22, 23. And the Lord
caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he took one of his
Ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the Rib which the Lord God
had taken from Man, builded he a Woman; and brought her unto the Man, and Adam
said, this is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called
Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Thus was Woman taken out of the side
of the Man, near his heart, and then brough^ to him by God, to be joined to him
again, by a Marriage union; and when Adam saw her, he said, This is now bone of
my bones, and flesh of my flesh, because she was of him, even taken out of him,
and now brought to him again by God, to be joined to him, and therefore (says
the Lord, in the 24 v.) shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to
his Wife, and they shall be one flesh. Thus has God joined them together,
showing that a Man shall leave his Father that begot him, and his Mother that
brought him forth, and shall cleave to his Wife; so that God ordains a
separation from Father and Mother, but ^ perpetual union between a Man and his
Wife; they are to pass their days together by Gods decree, and none can
separate them without high contempt againsts Gods Authority, by violating his
ordinance of Marriage; for God has thus joined them together, and has decreed
that a Man shall thus cleave to his Wife, and that she shall be subject to him,
and not to another Man, that her Husband shall rule over her; so that the Wife
(by this law of God) is bound to her Husband so long as he lives, Romans 7.2. 1
Cor. 7.39. And by no means can be loosed from this bond of union and subjection
to her husband, without the breach of Wedlock, which in scriptore, the
punishment is equ^lled with the punishment of Murder, Ezekiel. 16.38. And I will
judge thee, as women that break, Wedlock and shed blood, are judged. But may
there not be such Marriages, as are not of God, and therefore may lawfully be
separated? yea, there may: but the separation must be granted only by the Man
(upon no other cause than fornication) because God made man in his own Image;
so that he is the Image and glory of God, but the Woman is the glory of the
Man; for the man was not created for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man, 1
Cor. 11.7, 9. So that God brought the woman and gave her to the man, that he
might be her Lord and Governor, Genesis 2.22. Genesis 3.12.16. So that she was given
to him, to be a glory to him, as the Church is given to Christ, Job. 10, 29.
chap. 17.6. She is his peculiar treasure in this life, for she is given to him
by God himself, and is his only peculiar treasure next to his heart, and none
can take that from him which God has given to him, without the greatest
unjustice in the World that can be done to a man; for she is not only given to
him, but bound to him by the law, so long as he lives; she is a bound subject
to him during his life, being bound to him by God, to be in subjection to him;
so that she has no power to put him away, who is her Lord and Master: Judges
have no power to take her from him, if they do, it is high contempt against the
throne of God; for it represents the mystical union between Christ and his
Church; Ephesians. ^*31, 32. and therefore it is written, What God has thereofre
joined together, let no man put asunder, Mark 10.9.

Neither can a Man lawfully himself put away his Wife, but only upon a Marriage
not made by God; for God puts no harlot upon a man instead of a virgin or
chaste woman, to be his covenanted Wife; for it does signify the mistical
union between Christ and his Church, who is presented to him as a chaste
virgin. 2 Cor. 11. ^. As Eve was to Adam, but if a man take a woman to be his
Wife, taking her for a virgin or chaste woman, and when he has taken her,
finds that he is cheated, and that she has committed fornication, and is
defiled, this Marriage is not of God; for he is not the Author of deceit; and
therefore it is in the power of her husband to give her a bill of Divorce,
except he take her after he has the knowledge of her defilement; if so, then
he may not put her a way all his days; so that nothing is excepted by which a
man may put away his Wife, save fornication only; and this doctrine Christ
taught to his Disciples in his Sermon upon the mount, limitting a Divorce only
upon this one thing; Mat. 5.31, 32. It has been said; whosoever shall put away
his wife, let him give her a writing of Divorcement, but I say unto you, that
whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes
her to commit Adultery, and he that marries her that is Divorced, commiteth
Adultery. Here Christ Condemns all manner of separation, where the Marriage is
of God, and plainly testifies, that be that puts away his wife, causes her
to commit Adultery; and he that marries her, commits Adultery also.

The Lord in his doctrine to his disciples, thus makes void that liberty of
Divorce, that Moses gave under the covenant of the law to Israel; after this
the Pharisees came also to him, tempting him, Mat. 19.3. etc. and saying unto
him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause^ His answer to
them was, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them
Male and Female, and said, for this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother,
and cleave to his Wife, and they twain shall be one flesh; therefore they are
no more twain, but one flesh; what therefore God has joined together, let no
man put asunder: Which doctrine they could not deny, upon which they query the
reason, Why then Moses commanded them to give a writing of Divorcement, and to
put her away? Moses (says he) because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered
you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it was not so. Thus he stops
their Mouths, and confirms the truth of his doctrine, before taught to his
disciples; and further says unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife,
except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery; and
whosoever shall marry her that is put away, commits Adultery; so that i^
plainly appears, that Moses end in giving them that precept, was of two evils
to prevent the greater; for the husband through his hard heart, Deuteronomy. 24.3.
hating her, lived in the sin of murder, 1 John 3.15. and violated the main part
of his Marriage Covenant, which is unity and love, and though the bill of divorce
^id wholly violate the Marriage Covenant, yet it was the less evil of the two,
to live in the sin of Adultery, than in the sin of murder. And the Apostle
confirms the truth of this Doctrine of Christ, against the act of cutting off,
1 Cor. 7.10, 11. And unto the married, I command, yet not I, but the Lord, let
not the Wife depart from her husband; but and if she depart, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband; and let not the husband put away
his Wife. Here it plainly appears, that the Woman is bound by the law to her
husband, so long as he fiveth, as in v. 39 so that if she depart from her
husband, God requires her either to remain unmarried, or else to be reconciled
to her husband, and (says he) let not the husband put away his Wife; so that
she is limited to one of these two things, let her departure be upon what
account soever; for says the Apostle, Romans 7 3. So then if while her husband
l^veth, she be married to another man, she shall be called an Adulteress; for
the husband is the head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church,
Ephesians. 5 23. So that the Wife is bound to be in subjection to her own husband, as
the Church is to Christ, and can with no more lawfulness be joined to another
man, (while her husband lives) than the Church can with lawfulness be joined
to another head besides Christ; for as the Church are the members of Christ's
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. ^o is the wife to her husband,
Genesis 2.23. And he said, This is now bone of my bones, and fle^h of my flesh; so
that what God has joined together, ought so to continue, till God himself (who
joined them together) seperates them.

And if a Man hate his Wife, and gives her a bill of Divorce, and marrys
another in her stead he commiteth Adultery against her, Ma^^ 10*11. and if a
man's wife depart from him, and commits Adultery with another man, and repent of
her evil deed, her husband ought to forgive her, and to be reconciled to (...)
as Christ does forgive his Church; and if he refuse to forgive her, he can
obtain no forgiveness from God, Mark 11 25, 26. Mat. ^ 14, 15 Col. ^ *13. But
if she repent not, and refuse to be reconciled to her husband, though he give her
a bill of Divorce, and all the judges of the earth confirm the said bill of
cuting off, and marry the sa^^ woman to another man, yet she remains in Gods
fight, as much ^n Adultress after all this is done, as she was before the
Divorce was given; for no act can make void Gods act, to prevent judgment
against the breach of Wedlock; therefore no separation can be just, that will
in any measure prevent Gods sentence against an Adultress; they may be
instruments in so doing, to harden the Adultress in her Adultery, so that she
may live and dye in her sins, and so perish eternally; for God will by no means
clear the guilty; so that there must be a separation from that unlawful union,
otherwise there is no forgiveness with God. But the state of the Man stands
otherwise, than the state of the Woman does; for she can be given but to one
man, she can have but one head, and serve but one Master in that state.

But David (who was beloved of the Lord, yea, a man after Gods own heart, save
in the matter of Vriah) had many lawful Wives, and the Lord gave more into his
bosom if he had seen cause to have taken them, as it to be seen 2 Samuel 12.8.
yet it would have been unlawful for David to have put away any one of them; for
every one of them were bound by the law of God to him, as long as he lived; and
though his wife Micha, (through her Fathers means) had lived a long time in the
act of Adultery yet after he was come to the Kingdom, he sent and demanded his
Wife, and took her again, he gave her no bill of Divorce, for that would have
been unlawful; and when ten of his Concubine Wives were defiled by his Son
Absalom, he gave them no bills of Divorce, for that would have been unlawful,
for if they had been married to other men, by liberty from him, hi^ kingdom
would have been defiled by Adultery, Bills of Divorce would have made way for
them to have lived in the Act of Adultery, and therefore he shut them up in
Widowhood, until the day of their death: So that it appears, when God joins
more women to a man than one, the Marriage is lawful, being made by God, but
the Woman can be subject but to one Man, she can have but one head to rule over
her; so tha^ it appears, the state of man, and the state of the woman is quite
differing; for the man is made in the image and glory of God, and therefore is
the head of the Wife, as Christ is the head of the Church, but the woman is the
image and glory of the Man, and therefore the man is the Woman's head, and is to
rule over her, as God or Christ is the Man's head, and is to rule over him; so
that there can be no bill of Divorce against the man, to take away his wife
upon any account, without high contempt against God; for God is the giver, and
the man is the receiver, and therefore has the dominion over the woman, as
Christ has over the Church, so that if a Man may be set free from subjection
to the only true God, (who is his only true head,) and be subject to, and serve
another God, without being guilty of Idolatry, then may a woman be freed from
her first husband, who is her only true head (by God's decree) and became
another Man's Wife lawfully, without being guilty of Adultery, but not else; for
God has made the one parallel with the other.

In Scripture, a man's Wife is reckoned up with his other earthly treasure, as
appears Exo. 20*17. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not
covet they Neighbors Wife, nor his Man servant, nor his Maid servant, nor his
Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors. As also when Moses left
directions about the election of a King, he shows the several snares and
temptations that a King might be ensnared with, though lawful things in
themselves, and reckons Wives in with other earthly treasures, Deuteronomy. 17*16,
17 But he shall not multiply Horses to himselt, etc. Neither shall be multiply
(...), that his heart turn not away; (...) shall be greatly Multiply to himself
Silver and Gold. The Danger that lay (...) multiplying Horses, was left the
King should trust in his own strength, and so forget the God that always gives
the victory, without having regard, either to few or many; the danger that lay
in multiplying many Wives, was left they should turn away the Kings heart from
following after the only true God; and the danger that lay in the multiplying
to himself Silver and Gold, was least his heart thereby should be li^ted up
with his great treasure and riches, and so forget God. Thus we may ^^e lawful
things in themselves may not be expedient, for we see also, that Paul appointed
both Timothy and Titus (who were to ordain Elders) to choose out such for
Bishops and Deacons as were the Husbands of one Wife; for the care of the
Churches lay upon them, and therefore they had need to be free from the cares
and cumbrances of more Wives than one.

And thus the Scripture shows, how the state of the Man, and the state of the
Woman differ, so that both in the books of the Old Testament and New, there was
given no liberty for Judges to grant bills of Divorce, to cut off a man's wise
from him, neither does it stand with human reason, but is a mere wo^ of the
Divil, in this night of Apostasy; for by the testimony of Moses in the law, and
by the testimony of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, none but the man was to give
the bill of Divorce, under whose power alone God has subjected the Woman, as a
figure of his subjecting the Church under the power of Christ alone: Ephesians. 5.22,
23, 24.

And whereas the name Concubine, is in this our day applied to Harlots, it is
an evil thing; for by Scripture account a Concubine is as lawful a Wife as a
Wife that is a Queen, though not so honorable; for the word Concubine is to
distinguish from a more honorable Wife, as when Jacob took ^o Wife, his Wives
handmaids to be his Wives, those were called his Concubines, and yet were his
lawful Wives, as appears by the Testimony of the holy ghost in the scripture,
Genesis 37*^. Joseph being seventeen years old was feeding the flock, with his
Brethren, and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah,
his Fathers Wives. Here they are called Jacobs Wives by the holy Ghost; And
also in Genesis 25.1. Then Abraham took a Wife and her name was K^^^urah; yet this
Wife which Abraham took after the death of his first Wife is called a
Concubine, in the 6. v. and yet as lawful a Wife as Sarah was, though not so
honorable; for the word Concubine is to describe her low state, but lawful
Wife. I^ Judges 19. it appears evidently, that a Concubine Wife, is as lawful a
Wife, as a Wife that is a Princes, in the first verse, it is said, A certain
Levite who took to him a (...); in the margent it is said, that the original
has it, a Woman, a Concubine, o^ Wife, a Concubine: In the third v. he is
called her Husband, in the 4th and 5th v. it is said, The Damsels Father said
to his Son in Law; in the 26 and 27. verses he is called her Lord, which is the
highest term that can be put upon a lawful husband, as is written, Sarah obeyed
Abraham, calling him Lord, which is the ^it^e that Christ bears over his
Church, Ep. 4*5. Thus it appears that a Concubine Wife, is as lawful a Wife, as
a Wife that is a Queen, although not so honorable. In Solomon^ S^ng, when he
sets forth the spouse of Christ, how she excels both high and low, chap. 6*8*9.
There are threescore Queens, and foure-score Concubines, and Virgins without
number, my Dove, my Undefiled is but one, etc. The Daughters saw her and
blessed her, Yea, the Queen and Concubines, and they praised her. Judge. 8*30,
31. It is said of Gideon^ That he had threescore and ten Sons, for he had many
Wives; and his Concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a Son called
Abimelech, compare this ^th chap 9.18. and it will appear, that ^e had taken
his Maidservant to Wife, and that this name Concubin^ was to distinguish her
from his honorable Wives, v. 18. we have risen up against my father this day,
and have slain his Sons, threescore and ten Persons, and made Abimelich the Son
of his maidservant King; thus was she his Conc^b^ne Wife, but not his Harlot,
but Jeptha was not the Son of a Wife, but a Harlot, (...). 11.1, 2. Now Jeptha
was a mighty Man of Valor, and he was the Son of an Harlot, and Gilead begat
Jeptha, and Gil^ads Wife bear him Sons and his Wives Sons grew up, and they
thrust out Jeptha, and said unto him, thou ^halt not inherit in our Fathers
house, for thou art the Son of a strange Woman* Thus the Scripture makes a
distinction, between a Concubine and a Harlot, but test^ieth that a Concubine
is a lawful Wife; compare the second of Sam. 12.11. with chap. 16.22 T^^ says
the Lord, behold I will rasse up (...) against (...) of thine own house, and I
will take thy (...) before thire eyes and give them unto thy neighbor and he
shall ^e with thy Wives in the (...) of this Sun. chap. 16 22. So they spared
Absalom a tent upon the top of the house, and Absalom went in unto his Fathers
Concubines, in the sight of all Israel. Here is appears that God himself
calls David's Concubines, his Wives. 1 (...). 1.32. it is probable that K^tu^ah
was Abraham's Maidservant, as well as (...), which is the cause she is called
his Concubine, when Kings married Wives below their degree, such Wives were
called their Concubines.

And for as much as all Women came out of the loins of one Man, so likewise
has God Ordained, that there (...) be a reunion, by a conjunction in Marriage,
for the procreation of Children, and therefore it is written Genesis 1.28. And God
blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the Earth. And, secondly, God has ordained, that this re union shall be a
solemn Covenant of Marriage, and that unseperable, till death it self; that
there be no mixture in the Female, for that is confusion, and tends not to
the procreation of Children; for though one Man may beget Children by many Women,
for as much as all Women came out of the loins of one Man, yet the Woman can
conceive but by one Man, and therefore ought to have but one head.

And, thirdly, this unseperable union of Marriage, is a remedy against
Fornication: for as every Herb and Fruit tree, has its seed in it self, so
has man also his seed in himself, and does with all other naturals, naturally
yield the same, it being the very work and decree of God; Man has no reason to
expect any divine strength from God against Fornication, but by the lawful use
of the Woman 1 Cor. 7.2 To avoid Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife,
and let every Woman have her own Husband, v. 9. If they cannot contain, let
them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn. Mat 19.10, 11. His
disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his Wife, it is not
good to marry; but he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save
they to whom it is given, seeing this is the very work of God in nature, a
Christian has no grounds to expect any immediate divine strength against it,
as against Passion, Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Hatred, Drunkenness and the
like, which are not things placed by God in nature, as this is; for they are
the seed of sin, sown in the heart by the wicked one, which are to be rooted
out and by the spirit of God mortified; but the other is the Seed of Nature,
which God has created for the multiplication of Mankind, in the union of a
lawful and honorable Marriage.

And fourthly, the Woman was not made only for the Generating work of man but
to be as an object of his delight before him, a (...) Companion or help meet
for him, that they might each of them delight themselves in one another
Society, she being given to him by God, to be the object of his greatest
Delight, and most choicest treasure in this life; to set forth the unspeakable
love, and unspeakable unity between Christ and his Spouse, Genesis 2.18. Prove.
5.18, 19. Ephesians. 5.32. And to be a help and comfort each to other, in sickness
and in health.

And in this state of Marriage, as the Husband represents Christ, ought to walk
in his place as a Man of Wisdom, and love his Wife, even as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, even so ought the Man to love his Wife as
himself, and not to be bitter against her, but tender hearted, giving honor to
her, as unto the weaker vessel. And as the Wife in this state of Marriage, does
represent the Church of Christ, so ought she to submit her self to her own
Husband, as unto the Lord; and as the Church is subject to Christ, so ought the
Wife to her own Husband, in every thing, Ephesians. 5.22. etc. and to see that she
reverence him, being adorned with a meel and quiet spirit, which is highly
esteemed of God; and they (...) living together in love and unity, their
pravers will ascend up before God as sweet Incence offered upon the golden
Altar, which is before the throne of God; and let cash one render that due
courtisie which God has ordained in that state; for the Wife has not power
other own body, but the Husband; and the Husband has not power of his own
body, but the Wife; and therefore ought not to d^fr^ud one the other, except it
be by a mutual consent, while they give themselves to fasting and prayer, and
so come together again, that Satan tempt them not, for their incontinency 1
Cor. 7.4 5 Joel 2.15, 16.

The holy Scriptures prescribes no Ceremonies in Marriage i^ gives us an
account how Boaz gave public notice of his Marriage with Ruth, chap 4.9, 10,
11. And also it gives us an account, that our Lord and his disciples were
called to a Marriage, where they drank Wine, Job. 2*1, 2. etc. which shows
there was public notice given of it. And when Laban gave his Daughter to
Jacob, he gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast, Genesis
29.21, 22. This (...) was practiced both by the (...) and (...) volantarity.

The Scripture ^^^ews, the Father has the disposing of his Virgin, and a
Widow the disposing of her self, Exo. 22.17. 1 Cor. 7.39.

I find nothing in the books of the New Testament, that forbids a beleiver
marrying with an unbeleiver, but it shows that Paul's judgment was, that they
were sanctified one to another by their Marriage, 1 Cor. 7.14. though their
Marriage was made in their heathenish state; so that their Children were not
begotten in uncleanness, but were steemed holy upon that account.

And whereas the Apostle says 1 Cor. ^*39. concerning a Widow, she is at
liberty (says he) to be Married to whom she will, only in the Lord; I
understand it has relation to her steadfast union in the Lord, though she Marry
with whom she will; but it is very certain, that it is the duty of every
Christian to ask counsel of God in so great a concern, and to have the will
subject to Gods will in the matter, and in so doing, we may have confidence in
directing (...) in our proceeding.

Advertisement.
Whereas there is a printed Law in her Majestys Colony of Connecticut,
Entitled only Heretics, in the preface to it, they say, To prevent the danger
persons are in, of being poisoned in their judgments and principles by
Heriticks etc.

Which said Law, the Queen by advice of her Council has condemned, repealed,
and declared it void and of none effect, it being contrary to their Charter.
And indeed there is a good hand of God in the Queens Act, for I know of no sect
worse poisoned in their Judgments and Principles by gross heresy, than the
Church of New England; and it is very evident that Heretics have ever
persecuted the true Church under abusive Titles, as Deceivers, Heretics,
Quakers, and the like abusive Titles, which they themselves are guilty of; for
Erroni^us Persons, Principles and Practices are condemned by the Scriptures of
Truth; so that they have no other way to cloak themselves under their Delusion
and Heresy, but by casting such (...) titles on the Children of God, and so
persecute them, and burn their Books; for Satan's design in making use of these
deluded persons, thus to act, is to suppress the Truth, under pretense of
Heresy; as for instance, I shall begin with the Master of the house, whom they
called Belz^bub, the Prince of Devils, Mat. 12.24. he went by the name of
Deceiver, Mat. 27*36. Paul by the name of Heretic, Acts 24.14. Luthers Books
were burnt under pretense utterly to suppress Heresy; the worthy Martyrs in
Queen Mary's time, suffered death under the Name of Heretics; and those worthy
Martyrs in Boston in New England, under the name of Quakers and Heretics; and
my Books by this Law now repealed, have been condemned and burnt, under
pretense of Heresy, though I have made fair proffers at their general Court to
reward any person well for their time and pains, that would endeavor to show
me any one error in them, but none have yet publicly appeared.

John Rogers,

And here follows the Queens and her Councils act against the said Law.
At the Court at Kensington, 11th day of October, 1705.
Present The Queens most excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness, Prince Gorge of
Denmark. Lord Arch Bishop of Canturbury. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord
President. Earl of Renelaugh. Mr. Boil. Mr. Secretary Hedges. Mr. Secretary
Harley. Lord chief Justice Holt. Lord chief Justice Trevor. Duke of Somerset.
Duke of Ormond. Mr. Vernon. Mr. Earl.


A Representations from the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, being
this day read at the board, upon an Act passed in her Majesty's Colony of
Conneticut, entitled only Heretics; whereby it is enacted, That all who shall
entertain any Quakers, Ranters, Adamites and other Heretics, are made liable
to the penalty of five Pounds, and five Pounds per week for every Town that
shall so entertain them; That all Quakers shall be committed to Prison, or be
sent out of the Colony; That whosoever shall hold unnecessary discourse with
Quakers, shall forfeit twenty shillings; That whosoever shall keep any Quakers
Books, the Governor, Magistrates and Elders excepted, shall forfeit ten
shillings; and That all such books be suppressed; That no Master of any Vessel
do land any Quakers without carrying them away again, under the penalty of
twenty Pounds.

And the said Lords Commissioners, humbly offering, that the said Act be
repealed by her Majesty, it being contrary to the Liberty of Conscience,
indulged to Dissenters by the Laws of England, as also to the Charter granted
to that Colony, Her Majesty with the advice of her privy Council, is pleased to
declare her Disallowance and Disapprobation of the said Act, and pursuant to
her Majesty's Royal Pleasure thereupon, the said Act passed in her Majesty's
Colony of Connecticut in New England, Entitled, Heretics, is hereby Repealed,
and declared Null and void, and of none effect.

Sined John Povey.


