The Bomb Searched And found stuffed with False Ingredients, being a Just
Confutation of an abusive Printed Half-sheet, called a BOMB, originally
published against the QUAKERS, by FRANCIS BUGG. BUT Espoused and Exposed and in
print offered to be proved by JOHN TALBOT.

To which is added

First: A large Appendix, treating of the Real Differences that are in diverse
respects between the QUAKERS and their Opposers and the Quakers Doctrine,
Practice, and Deportment, in those Points Justified, from Scripture and the
ancient Protestants.

Secondly; diverse Testimonies added of those called Fathers of the Church, to
the Light, of Christ, Inspiration, the Spirit's Teaching; Silent meeting etc.

Thirdly: diverse of D. L's. abuses to the Quakers; being herein more fully
manifested than has hitherto been published.

Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me:

Acts 3^.13 But ye are Forgers of Lies; Ye are all Physicians of (...)

Job 13. ^^ But this I confess unto thee, that after the way (...) the GOD of
my Fathers; (...) things which are written in (...) Prophets:

(...) Printed at Philadelphia by Reynier Jansen. (...)

To the READER
FRIENDLY READER, The unjust way and manner of our Adversaries (...) our
Principles, has been so often and so aptly laid down and published by our
Friends, that we think, in respect thereof, (...) in this praise to recite the
words of two of them lately published in our Friend Daniel Philips (...) styled
vendict Veritat's The First of which (...) Book per our Honorable Friend and
Elder of the Church, WILLIAM PENN: One who (...) himself justly (...) ^^plains,
(...) the effects of this unfair dealing, and therefore very fit to speak to it
and He does in these following (...), viz: Some of the unfair and unreasonable
methods generally taken by our Enemies, of which we have so justly and often
(...), is as follows: I must not give my own sense of my own words: which is
certainly one (...) Cases in the World, never denied to any man, (...) those
that desire and deserve to be thought reasonable; but it seems their exposition
must be made mine to support their charges and palliate their Envy against me:
Whereas nothing can in common sense or with truth he called any man's Faith,
that he solemnly denies to be his Faith; but rather one of their making that
impose it upon him; this is our sad case with respect to the dealings of our
Adversaries.

Secondly But a man's own Writings shall not be suffered to speak for
themselves, the briefer or obscurer passages must not be allowed to (...) by
those more plain and conspicuous, but the exposition of a declared enemy Now
though, every man is Judge of another man's words when they are full and plain:
yet no man in Justice ought to be ^^finitive on a charge, before the person
whose words they are, is heard, to give his own sense or meaning by them when
their obscurity is objected against: Where things are only transiently
mentioned, being not the subject matter that in other places are distinctly and
amply treated upon, perhaps not three pages off, they shall w^ve the clearer
and fuller passages, and dwell on the more unperfect and obscure expressions to
abuse the (...): -- dropping explanatory words, in the beginning, middle or end
of the (...) Sentence or Paragraph. The Next is adding of words to (...), or
send a Passage (perhaps somewhat shortly express) to the sense they would have
it bear -- And it is with some or all of the those unfair practices the
generality of our Antagonists have treated Us and our Christian Profession -- I
have, above most Men, felt the effects of this unfair dealing. And truly, many
of us have cause to say with that eminent Servant of the LORD: Every day they
wrest our words; all their thoughts are against Us for evil, Psalms 56: 5:

It was by the same method that the ancient enemies of Christianity ^ sed to
pervert the right way of the LORD, as Celsus, Porphyry, Julian etc. And the
same means were employed by the Opposers of the Reformation to defame it, and
the Instruments thereof

Let the Writings of any of the Members of any of the Churches of ENGLAND,
GERMANY and FRANCE, at the time of the Reformation be consulted, and it will
appear that they made the same complaint, (...) do, of the injustice,
partiality and abuse of their adversaries in reference to the misgiving of
their Principles, abusing of their Writings, and rendering them not only
erroneous, but inconsistent with Government; so that they might Fire the Civil
Magistrates upon them as the Jews would have done the Romans upon the Primitive
Christians, as enemies to Caesar etc.

Now observe here; the above has been and is the exact method of our
Adversaries, as was the method of the Adversaries of the ancient Christians and
first Reformers.

The Next is the Author himself in the Introduction to the said Book, who there
tells us how Origin an Ancient Defender of the Christian Religion complained in
his day against the Christians then Adversaries, particularly against one
Celsus for abusing the Scriptures, taking them by piece meal, as our
Adversaries now do our Friends Writing: Origens words being thus, viz: Celsus
his hatred of us, more than love to Truth has induced him to collect some
instances which may be Interpreted to Our prejudice, passing by all those that
would have turned to our advantage.

Now the like, say we, have our Adversaries done by us at this day. Upon which
the said Daniel Philips proceeds and truly says: That they have misconstrued
our words, and forced them to a sense they never intended. If any one of Us
have explained his sentiment concerning any Article of the Chirstian Faith a
thousand times never so Orthodoxly, that is by our opposers passed ever in
silence, ^ut if he has dropped any Sentence that may be wrested to an ill
sense that is represented as the Standard of his belief, heterodoxly aggravated
to the utmost of their abilities: As the Promulgators of the Christian Religion
were generally Tradesmen, ignorant of the Learning then in vogue; so the first
Publishers of our Principles were mostly illiterate persons, unqualified in
outward appearance for so great an undertaking, as they had none of the great
of the Earth to advocate their case, no more have we: Wick^^st had his John, of
Gaunt, Luther his Duke of S^xoniay, Calvin the States of Geneva, and Francis
the second king of France to Patronize their Followers; for which reasons it is
not surprising if their adherents increased; but for Us to stemm the tide as; I
may say, against the whole world, is really wonderful. As their writings were
sifted by their enemies, and read chiefly with an expectation of finding some
passage to carp at; So have Ours been. O! THE JOY and TRIUMPH of him that first
espie^^ sentence which will seemingly bear an ill construction: as there are
several passages in their writings not so well guarded as thy might have been;
the like may be found in our Treatises: As the Professors and Priest of that
age were their greatest Persecutors; so their Successors have been the
principal men that have mocked, reviled and spoken all manner of Evil
undeservedly against us etc.

And which sort of men, together with some envious backsliders, we may now say,
have occasioned us to publish these Sheets.

F:B our old Apostate Adversary having in the year 1702, published in England,
Printed paper called a BOMB etc. and stuffed with invective Slanders against
our Friends, and insinuating things to be our principles, which we sincerely
deceit and abhor; and which Bomb (...) are since told by a Friend (...) from
England was soon answered by a Christian: in D: L's own account (viz): by a
Presbiterian, Usher to a School in the City of Norwich, under this title (viz):
Mr. Bugg's Bomb obstructed in it is motion, and hammered about his own pa^e, to
(...) viz: the Bomb we suppose John Talbot G: K's. late traveling Companion
caused here to be reprinted, because at the foot thereof here is a kind of
Advertisement subscribed with his name: and the said Bugg having concluded his
said Slanderous Bomb with these words, (viz:) lastly, I cannot enlarge but let
them appear pursuant to my challenge and all these things and more, I offer to
prove upon them, (...) much more, which I refer to the next (...) the said John
Talbot in his Advertisement tells us. Since honest Francis (...) is not here to
do this g^od se^v^^e for Friends meaning to prove the Charges in the said Bomb,
that he would (...) much for us, or rather more, if we desired it, at the (...)
Yearly Meeting; upon which there was a Paper drawn upon (...) and signed by
diverse Friends in behalf of the (...) said Talbot on the second day of our
said Yearly Meeting (...) was signified to him, that since the charge against
^s (...) sure had reached further than any verbal account of a (...) was like
to do, which often ends in noise and Tumult and leaves (...) Auditory, the
impartial which seldom happens under great uncertainties, if not (...)
mistakes and cannot repair the injured reputations of those that are
recriminated though never so (...); that thereof we ^ooking the press, to be the
only proper method to (...) contoversies as had arisen (...) with which if he
(...) Gods Assistance except (...) answer from them or some other of our
Communion; but (...) complying with our said reasonable proposal, he by a few
lines thrown in at our Meeting House (...), after having therein offered to
take D: L's Almanac, and (...) C. P's as he called it, and try them by Friends
books tells us If those prints (...) not do, it is in vain to print, seeing in
our answer there remains falsehood, as he says (...) this (...) us out funny
(...), that he (...) to make good the many black and false (...) contained in
the said bomb against us according to our said proposal; nor that they would so
much as (...) so to prove the many false charges against our Friends Contained
in the (...) D: L's Almanac and Trumpet (...) by our Friend C: P: and not
withsstanding which the said D: L Continues his false charges from time to time
against us without making any (...) any notice of what our said friend has
particularly alleged (...) on that account and for which he has particularly
(...) against him, as in postscript to Proteus page 28 and in the Philadelphian
Almanac for this present Year 1705 (...) thought (...) to p^blish herein
diverse of the said Charge, which (...) could they prove upon us (...) well
assured they (...) then be justly said of us, Thus we are neither fit for
Religious nor (...) Society.

(...) Being said is the said Bomb which is now John Talbot's place to prove
(...) manner as it is Charged^, That our whole business is to (...) etc

And they ^^^ceeding her as aforesaid from time to time against (...) of our
(...) order to prove this (...) as they have charged which they surely ought to
do) (...) It Is not, a (...) given from a dispute and (...) a partial (...) too
that will be sufficient to clear the Acused of the injuries (...) throughout
England and Athence: No ^he must public Dispute would in Comparison to that
(...) but as it were in a corner.

And now in as much as we have hinted only general terms those false Charges
contained in the said Bomb and others Dispersed in D: L's books we think it fit
and necessary herein to make a particular Collection of some of them and in
defense of the Truth and (...) good men so much scandalized by (...) Persons,
as also to detect them for so grievously abusing them (...) have taken the
pains and Trouble to lay down and recite diverse of our Friends words and
passages (out of their books which have been by D L etc Abused) so large that
we hope may satisfy any impartial enquirer even such who would not rather find
us to be in the wrong (...) in the Right that it is in their books the
falsehood remains (...) to prevent mistakes in any briefly (...) wherein much
of the difference (...) Suggestions of our Adversaries may place our difference
where it cannot viz: (...) If we deny Christ to be both true God and perfect
Man and as If we deny the Holy Scripture Resurrection and (...) for so our
friends have sometimes Opposed or refused to Express our faith in Christ etc:
According to the too (...) and Inscriptured Conceits which some opposes would
have observed upon us; yet the Difference betwixt us and them from the
beginning to this day, we never understood to be, for that any professed Faith
in Christ's appearance, as outwardly, at Jerusalem, His outward (...),
Miracles, Dying for our sins Outwardly, shedding His most glorious blood for us
outwardly, Rising for our justification outwardly, Ascending into Heaven,
continuing to be our Advocate and Intercessor his coming outwardly to judge the
quick and the dead at the last and general day of Judgment, when all that are
in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and come forth; those that
have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and those that have done evil, to
the Resurrection of Condemnation; Justification by him alone, without any merit
from, or by the best of our own works, but saved by the Mercy of God, through
the merits of his dear Son, our Lord: yet so as it must be by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost Tit: 3.5 we say we differ not with
any for that they profess faith in these things. for we testify to, and truly
believe them to be all sound and Christian doctrines.

And now friendly Reader to conclude, tho Controversy at this time, (especially
about Religious matters) is in it self no ways pleasant to us, yet consider,
that as we are but in the defensive part, so we look upon it (...) as our
reasonable duty to add this our Mite in the defense of the Truth we profess,
desiring that it may be lived and walked in by our selves and all people.

The Courteous Reader is desired to take notice that the publication of this
had not been so long delayed had not the want of paper been the occasion of it.

THE INTRODUCTION
AS for JOHN TALBOT's giving FRANCIS BUGG the Epithet of honest FRANCIS ^as we
have said in our answer to his Challenge that seems to them that know him
altogether Jronical; now that that was not there said without some grounds and
cause appears not only by the many lies and falsehoods he has from time to time
these many Years past been detected for by many of our Friends, as well as for
his diverse manifest falsehoods contained in this ver^ Bomb, as we ^^^ll
evidently make appear, but also by what an Ancient Woman Friend ^^e of F: B's
Old acquaintance named Anne Dockw^^ has in her book printe^ 1669. Entitled An
Apostate Conscience exposed etc. Said of him, Therefore be pleased First to
take notice of some hints that the has writ of him; and see what she writes
out of his book called, the Quakers detected writ two Years after he turned to
the Church of England, He there giving a relation how he came to be a Quaker,
in which relation having spoken of their Doctrine of the Light, their
practices. Conversation and deportment, and what simplicity attended their
Ministry in the beginning. He then adds and says page 14. I was still more and
more Confi^'d that it was a dispensation of the Love of God sent as a
visitation to Mankind; being thus persuaded I resolved to bear the Cross and
did utterly despise the shame that attended them and their message and was not
behind any of my Equals both in doing and suffering for the testimony thereof,
as some among them can still bear me witness and in this manner we went on for
many Years and loved one another with love unfeigned, and doubtless God blessed
our Meetings with the Comfortable Enjoyment of his presence etc. Note here we
may see how (...) ^ly he was made to Confess on the Quakers behalf and though
this was (...) a Churchman, yet doubtless he had not then wholly Forgotten the
Days of his Espousals, which since he seems quite to gave done* And let us now
examine whether it was not to than the Cross, which at first he says he was
content to (...) him ^ecome so^^* To resolve that, the Author tells that she
having heard he had conformed to the Church of England, asked him the cause,
and that his Answer was, what would you have me to do? The Statute of Twenty
pound per month will be put in Execution against me and I have suffered enough
already. Well, by this we may a little guess at his honesty toward God. Let us
next see how he has been (as by the said Authors relation, page 57) toward
men. She says, upon the Bishop of Norwich his not only reo^mmending him as an
object of Charity deserving the bounty of well disposed persons, but also
Certifying that he appeared to him a sober, honest and industrious man. This
last the said Ann Dockwray says, will be matter of Admiration to all
inquisitive people when the real truth of this concern is known; for besides
the many lies told of particular friends, and for which she has there ^^^^cted
him she having as above been acquainted with him many years she tells us A^ to
his honesty and industry if he had been an honest and industrious man as the
Bishop says, he would not have lost his time and neglected his trade for near
twenty years as (said she) I can make appear out of his own books and spent a
good Estate in scribbling against the Quakers to no purpose, as will further
appear and run many hundred pounds in debt more than he was able to pay and his
Creditors most have lost much money by him if this project with the Bishop and
some of the Clergy did not take which was a thing doubtful by his own
confession in his 20: Book page 147.

There may (says she) be much more said upon this accoun^ I will instance but
few of them In or about the year 1697; He married his Daughter, made great
Feasting and Entertainments that was said to be very chargeable; and promised
three hundred pounds portion with her upon the marriage and at the same time he
was indebted many hundred pounds more than he was worth. He also gave Bond to
make his wife a Jointure of some part of his, Estate which he has since sold
to his Son. Those things (says she) he has confessed to me and others etc.
page 53. And as to his writing lies against us, she says, that when he was
told of it by some friends. His answer was His pen would run too quick
sometimes. These things considered, we hope, we may be very well ex^^^ed for
saying what we did in answer to ^: T^^s giving the said Bugg the Epithet of
HONEST FRANCIS.

And now, whereas of late years you have been so busy to call upon us to deny
our ancient Friends writings from your very ^^^^^iting perverting and false
quoting them, or from your taking advantage of a word or a few words (though well
meant, yet) not so well guarded as we could have wished they had been, or of
here and there a word or two which possibly might be either misprision of
Transcriber, Printer or Corrector in either Book or Errata; though the sense you
put upon them as also the passages themselves, if unfound, have been denied to
be according to our Principles; yet you very unfairly continue to cite them
against us. As in the case of Solomon Eccles his un^ound expression^ saying.
The blood of Christ was no more than the blood of another Saint. And that of
Christopher Atkins saying. Your imagined God above the stars; and your carnal
Christ etc: is disowned by us. As to the first G:W: says, he has disowned
that comparison about (...) and says, Solomon Eccles was not in the Counsel or
Wisdom of God therein. And for the last, both the Passage and Author have been
also disowned by us, see Antidote page 224 225. Truth and innocence etc: page
52. Yet your inveterate haired of us, and your unjust dealings toward us have
been such, that you repeat the same things over and over, ^ our Principles, as
if they had never been answered, or disowned at all. Now we ask would you be
w^^ling the Papists or others should put you upon disowing those Eminent
primitive Pro^^st^ (...) as William ^y^d (...) William Thorp Sadeel, Martin
Luther etc: about Succession Priesthood, ^orced Maintenance, Priests Annual
Wages Tithes Oaths Universities, restrained Preaching, Women's Preaching etc:
^^cited in this Appendix, under the penalty of being entitled to those recited
and manifest Doctrines of theirs, which though held by them; yet too much opposed
by you both in Doctrine and Practice? Surely, if they should so put you to it,
it would be a great pinch upon you; your doctrines and practices in those
respects being so manifestly contray to those famous Reformers; as well as it
is contrary to ours: whereas most of those things you so loudly charge against
us as heresies and blasphemies etc: are your own ^^^^ations, perversion or
down^^ght nothings viz: there are no such words as you cite, and which our now
business is partly to make complaint against you for, and put you to the proof
of^ and do expect you should in print make good those charges in the Bomb and
D: L's Almanac seeing J: T: has espoused them both making good the
Scripture-Proverb viz: Like Priest like people.

Caleb Pusey not only tells D: L: of diverse falsehoods contained in his Trumpet
and other Prin^s; but also plainly tells b^^h where they are and what they be:
and therefore now we call upon them to prove in as public a manner as they
have charged or else we do Justly expect they should as publicly acknowledge
they have wronged us: Pray do not trifle with us, nor flout at us about
infallibility as some of you have done, because we cannot retract th^^ ^or
errors which is your manifest perversions etc: and yet at the same time refuse
to do us justice by proving or retracting what you have so unjustly charged
upon us; however ^f among the many writings that our friends have writ these
fifty years or upwards there appear any passage that is not justifiable, be it
misprision of C^^rkship faults in printing, slip of the pen; or if by comparing
the rest of his works it appear an error of the mind, we hope we never shall
vi^di^ate in such case.

We find Calv^^^s ^^ed by Daniel Philips for saying thus. Vind: Very page, 64.
Li^: 3. Cha: N: 25.
Because Christ dwells not without us but dwells in us Now would it not
(...) charity to tell the Calvinist people that they deny Christ to be without
us? Surely it would; yet it is like such a slip as that can scarce be found in
all, or any of our friends books, at least uncorrected.

And now we shall desire the Candid Reader, that in reading the following
charges against these men, and our observations on them that he read and
consider them very impartially; but before we recite them we also request the
Reader that he would be Pleased to take the advice given by these eminent
^ersons following concerning the reading of books.

The first is the famous John Lock, who says thus To have one's words exact^
quoted, Cited by the said D: P: pa: 97, 98.
and their meaning interpreted by the (...) and visible design of the Author in
his whole discourse b^ing a right that every writer has a ju^t claim to and
such as a lover of truth will be very wary of v^^^ating

The next is Bishop Rider in his Demonstration of the Messiah, who is of an
opinion, That we are to be governed as to the sign^fication of a word by the
contex^ and subject matter.

Js^dor^s is of an opinion That a man must not take little piece-meals by
themselves and put that sense upon them that ^^rst comes into his head but he
must weigh every word and examine the context, the subject matter in which it
treats on, and why it was written so.

Now this Justice is wanting in our present adversaries; therefore let the
reader bu^ ^^ke these famous men's advice in the reading of our friends books;
let him but honestly examine the context, and the subject matter of which ^
^rears and why it was so written; and I doubt not at all but we shall appear to
all impartial and sensible people to be such as deserve not that odious
Contractor given us by these men.

And so we proceed (...) ^rges and begin first with the Bomb; the charges in
which is J: T's task now particularly to prove; in which although we have
corrected above twenty to them, yet we find but four places quoted by them out
of our friends books, and they grossly abused; and there being so many charges
and so few quotations produced as proof: it therefore we had no other reasons
to reject J: T's printed challenge, yet that of it self had been sufficient for
now should we weigh every word, examins the Context and Subject which it treats
on, and why it was so written? How should we have the^ meaning interpreted by
the plain and visible design of the Author in his whole discourse, as the above
persons have laid down as a right and just method to be taken in reading of
books if we know not a reasonable time aforehand what the books and pages are
in order thereto? but seeing, as to the Bomb, it is otherwise, our method
therefore of showing our books, as herein after advertised, will have the less
effect in relation to satisfy the inquisitive and unprejudiced reader;
therefore, as to that, we can but take the charges as they have given them,
which are as follows.

Bomb. First by their contempt of the Holy Scriptures, calling them Dust Death
and Serpent's meat beastly ware (...) f^ol etc.

Ans: This with many other things have been so often answered that we think it
merely needless to say much more of it; and as to the word Dust, it was no ways
spoken in contempt of the Holy Scriptures; but it was written against some few
of old who ran so far into an extteam as to Deify as it were the very letter of
the Scriptures, which, to be sure, may be termed Dust; and that there were such
Priests see G: F's Great Mystery page 261; how one Roger Atkins affirmed That
the Letter of the Scripture is God. And Richard Stoaks affirmed that the
Scripture is God. And Jeremiah Jves affirmed, it was an error to say, the
Letter of the Scripture is carnal. ibid: page 111.

Now, though our friends in those days have seemed to some to run something into
an extreme by using such expressions as they did in opposition to such extremes
of those sort of priests, whose said crooked expressions did need straightning:
we hope they are not to be condemned for using endeavors as they did for that
end. As for the word Death, Vind: Veritatis, page, 192.
as D: Philips says, what difference is there between ^aying, the Letter
kills, and the Letter is death; for the Apostle in Cor: 2.3 6. says, The
Letter kills; and is not the sense the same, though differently worded; and
surely as the Apostle used not any slighting expression of the Scripture; no
more, we are well satisfied, did G: F: etc. As for the words, Serpents meat,
see also what the said D: P: shows us in the same page, how the adversary
abusively joined those following words together; which are not so in G: F's
book viz. Your word is carnal. The Letter and the Light is carnal. The Letter,
and so dust is the Serpents meat etc. Now to this D: P: aptly answers and
says, whereas, in that page there are twelve lines between, The Light is
carnal the letter, and so dust is the Serpents meat: in this intermediate space
G: F: treats of Infants Baptism and the Lord's Supper: from these two Subjects
coming between two Propositions. I conclude, no man that understands a
Proposition will say, Sober Expostulation pa: 104.
So dust is the Serpents meat is predicated of the Letter, consequently no
ways respects the Scriptures.

As for those words Beastly ware, we are, as to that, also much abused, G: W:
says. I have examined the said book out of which the said expressions have
been pretended to be taken, I find no such gross expressions, as calling the
Scripture, beastly ware, but diverse severe reflections upon the covetous,
persecuting priests in those days; writ by some prisoners at York-Castle, 1653:
A brief Discovery, pa: 9.
and what is there called beastly ware, is not the Scriptures* but what
Babylons Merchants sell for a large price (i: e.) A rabble of notions heaped up
in the brain all the week; and which they sell for lucres sake etc: calling
them also (...) merchants, costly Sermon-makers who persecuted the pure truth
the Saints lived in: but not a word of calling the Scriptures beastly ware; and
I am persuaded such blasphemy and contempt of the Holy Scriptures was far from
the thoughts of the said prisoners and that which they would have abominated
and rejected with abhorrence, if they had been charged therewith.

As for the word Jdol, seeing there is no book quoted, we only say thus, that
to set up any creature so as to call it God, is to idolize that creature; but
in those days, as above, some Priests did so set up the Letter, which is a
creature, so as to call it God. What then did they less than idolize the
creature?

But now, to show that our friends have from the beginning had a high and
reverend esteem of the Holy Scriptures, see first what G: F: says of them in
answer to those very priests that said the Letter was God etc. In answer to the
said Roger Atkins he lays down the said Roger's words, and answers thus, the
priest having said the Letter (...) the Scripture was God, it was asked, If the
Letter Paper and Ink was God? And he said it was God, and brought Io^n, 1: to
prove it. And again, he said the Letter was the word of God, G: F: answers. The
Scriptures of Truth, they are the words of God and were all learned of God.
Great Mystery, page, 261.
^o the Scriptures are not God, but they were holy men of God, which learned of
God which spoke them forth. And in his answer to the said Richard Stoaks, he
says, Ibid. pa 111.
And the Scriptures of Truth are not God, but are his wo^d^ that cannot be
broken And in his answer to the said (...) holding that the Letter of the
Scripture is not carnal G F: (...) The Letter of the Scripture, Paper and ink,
we cannot say is spiritual, but that which it speaks of is spiritual.

And Edward Borough says, (...) page, 104.
the Scripture is a declaration of the word, and what is written of, is the
word [mark that] Again he says, I do honor the Scripture above other
writings, and give them the authority, Ibide^.
esteem and respect due unto them, and more I dare not.

And in the book called Several Papers etc: published by G: F: in the year
1654, there it is said thus concerning the Scriptures, they are a true
declaration of that word which was in them that gave or spoke them forth, and
are of no private interpretation; but were given forth to be read, and
fulfilled in the Saints as they were given forth by the Holy Ghost, without
adding or diminishing; and were not given forth for men to make a trade of or
get money by: but as they are, they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.

1655. page, 2.
And Richard Farnsworth in his book called The Scriptures Vindication says (in
answer to a priest saying that we say the Scriptures are not the word of truth)
that the Scriptures are words that proceeded from the Spirit of Truth we do not
deny but own, and so they are words of truth: but that the Scriptures are the
word of God and eternal life as thou would have them to be, thou can not
prove. And in his book called The Holy Scriptures cleared from scandal, He
says, the Scriptures I own, and that holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost. And such have the benefit and comfort of the Scriptures as
they are guided by the Holy Ghost etc. Multitudes of instances of our truly
owning the Holy Scriptures we might produce, but this we hope is sufficient to
satisfy any sober enquirer, and detect the falsehoods of these our false
accusers.

Bomb. 2dly. They deny the ever-blessed Trinity in a most blasphemous manner.

Ans: This F: B: produced against G: F: concerning which take G: W^ (...) in
his Sober Expostulation page 9^: which notwithstanding all their clamours, is
the substance of what may (...) respect against us: G: W: answers thus A gross
calumny also (...) blasphemed nor opposed Scripture-Trinity (...) of the
Father, Word (viz ^ the Son) and Holy Ghost but objected against Subsistences
or Substances unscripturally by some supposed of or applied to the Deity.

Bomb. Thirdly, They deny Jesus to be Christ the Son of God.

Ans: This abominable falsehood (...) ^cked charge has been often brought
against W: P: for which see his own vindication in the preface to the abovesaid
D: P's book, upon the place thus I can hardly comprehend how any man that
desires to be just, and had not much rather we were in the wrong than in the
right, (which must-shew the worst of minds) (...) affirm that I denied Jesus
Christ who, I believe laid down his life without the gates of Jerusalem for the
sins of the world to be the son of God, because I said that the body or outward
person that died could not properly be the Son of God, but rather the body or
person of the Son of God; (...) and making the term body and outward person to
be synonimous or the same (...) which distincti^^ I was only (...) to make
because Thomas J^^^er, against whom I wri^ had laid down his proposition (...)
the doctrine of Le Middleton, who assert^ Go himself to ^a^e died as well as
his body which the Scriptures tell us God had prepared of the seed of Abraham
for his beloved Son to do his will in as the scope of ^he place and context and
particularly the confession made by me to Jesus Christ as the Son of God as
page 149 of the Apology does (...). (...) W: ^'s own words who ^ said page 149
of the (...) book (...) to above, also expressly in our name says That we
believe in one Lord Jesus Christ his [speaking above of God Almighty] ONLY SON
and express Image of his Substance, who took upon him flesh and was in the
world, and in Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and
Mediation perfectly did and does continue to do the will of God, to whose holy
Life, Power, Mediation and Blood we only ascribe our Sanctification,
Justification, Redemption and perfect Salvation. He that can read this and yet
say we deny Jesus to be Christ the Son of God, must surely be very much blinded
with prejudice.

As for the Bomb's fourth charge about Baptism and the Supper he merely begs
the question in saying we neglect, contemn and deny the Sacred Ordinances of
the Gospel, namely Baptism etc: for we do not understand that by Scripture
those outward things, as eating bread and drinking wine, and sprinkling Infants
having sureties called Godfathers and Godmothers to promise that the child
shall forsake the Devil and all his works etc: were any of the Ordinances of
the Gospel: Concerning all which having already answered so many Objections
about it, we see no need to say more of it here. But see R: Barclay's Apology,
and Thomas Lawson's Treatise of Baptism etc.

Bomb. That they undervalue the Death and Sufferings of our Savior, by
affirming not only their own sufferings to be not only greater but more unjust
than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and blessed Martyrs.

Ans: This we know Francis Bugg has long ago laid to the charge of Edward
Borough, concerning which though we grant that passage of E: B's was not safely
worded, yet we really believe, considering (according to the above Isodorus his
advice) the Context, the Subject of which it treats, and why it was so written,
his meaning was no^ ^n the least, to undervalue the Death and Sufferings of our
Savior, nor to set up or compare our friends Sufferings to his, as in
themselves; but that they were more unjust, according to the Laws of men: Those
Persecutors who put our Savior to death of old having a Law, as they thought,
for what they did, saying we have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die: And in
Queen Marie's days they persecuted according to their unjust Laws; but those
Persecutors that Edward Borough spoke of, E. B's Works page 273.
being about the year 1657 used an Arbitrary Power condemning our friends
without Law for saying THEE AND THOU; and for not pulling off the Hat etc: For
which they had not so much as pretense of Law. Hereby, says he, it appears the
sufferings to be more unjust (viz:) in the Persecutors (meaning than in the
days of Christ, the Abostles and Martyrs) because what the Persecutors of old
did to the people of God, they did by a Law, and by the due execution of a Law;
but now many are caused to suffer deeply, whom the transgression of no Law,
good or bad (says he) can be charged against, and others suffer without the
due execution of a Law. Again (says he) many now suffer cruel things about
trivial and foolish matters, as for not pulling off a hat, or for theeing of
men. Again (says he) hundreds have suffered upon suspicion when nothing at all
can be charged against them, and this is contrary to Magna Charta. Is it not
clear that these words of E: B's are very naturally construed above to be his
intent and meaning? though we still say they were not safely worded: However it
does not follow from his, or any other friends words or sentences mistaken or
misworded, that therefore they are not true Ministers etc: as to the main of
their ministry; 1 Samuel: 16: 6 7.
for was not the Prophet Samuel mistake when he took Eliab to be the Lord's
Anointed? Was not that Eminent Apostle, Peter something blameable when Paul
withstood him to his face; because, says he, he was to be blamed, Gal: 2 11:
Yet surely these men were friends of God Ministers of Christ (...) Apostles etc.

As for his saying, we overvalue our own writings. ^ow knows he that? for
though sometimes our Friends, writing by way of caution or exhortation to any,
have said, To you this is the word of the Lord, or the like; It is no more to
be understood of the letter, or paper and ink (which was what our friends
opposed to the word of God) than the word of the Lord through the good men of
old, and Prophets was meant only such when they so often cried to the people,
saying, Thus says the Lord etc: neither did they intend that it was the
Letter, Paper and Ink that was the word of the Lord; but it was the Spirit of
Christ who is the Word of God speaking in and through them to the people; and
this may surely be safely said in a degree and measure by such through whom the
Spirit of Christ speaks to the people in this day, but we do not say in the
same degree, for we prefer the Holy Men's writings called the Scripture to all
the books extant in the world,

We now come to other charges against us in the Bomb, which we expect J: Talbot
should also prove as publicly as there charged, or else that he should as
publicly acknowledge he has wronged us; seeing he has so far espoused it, as
to offer to prove it. The first is.

Bomb. I cannot but advise all to beware of their Leaven, knowing that what
they declare touching the faith of Christ crucified, they mean not a word o^
what they say.

Ans: Behold to what a PRODIGIOUS sort of Omniscience do these men pretend to,
even to the knowing the very thoughts and meanings of men, and even contrary to
what they profess and declare, yet in the mean time flout at us about
infallibility and discerning, when a greater degree of discerning can surely
scarce be pretended to than to pretend to know men's meaning^ though contrary to
what they constantly profess and declare; but blessed be the Lord our thoughts
excuse us in this (...); and hereby we know we are in the Truth and that the
Bomb's charges are false in this matter, because our hearts condemn us not, for
which cause we have confidence in God; which confidence we hope and desire, all
the attempts and stratag^ms of the adversary will never be able to shake. Are
such men fit to detect the want of Charity in others, who are themselves in
such a superlative degree of uncharitableness toward others?

Bomb. They tell us that the Name Jesus and Christ belongs to every member as
well as as to the head, meaning, as well to every believing Quaker, as to
Christ the head.

Ans: Here he imposes again upon his reader a meaning as if we held and meant
none members of Christ but such as are called Quakers: We believe and hope
there are other sheep which are not of this fold, and we assume not any more to
our selves, but what the saints had ever a right to. I know the substance of
this objection has been often cited from an ancient book of our friend Isaac
Pennington sti^ed a Question to Professors page 27: And has often been
answered by our fri^nds, see G: Whitehead's An^^dote page 151. What I: P: said,
was by way of question, and he concludes his question with this caution (viz:)
So that the Name is not given to the Vessel, but to the Nature, to the heavenly
treasure, to that which is of him in the Vessel, to that which the Lord from
heaven begets in his own Image and likeness of his own substance, of his own
seed, of his own Spirit and pure life etc: But for the word Jesus it is the
Bomb's addition, Isaac Pennington has not there the word Jesus mentioned: Yet,
though Jesus signifies a Savior and therefore a name most properly and
peculiarly belonging to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; yet we find the
Saints are called Saviors also.

As it is said Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion and judge the Mount of Esau:
Obadiah, 20.
From whence the margin refers to 1 Timothy: 4 16 (...) Apostle tells him (...) by
taking heed to himself, and continuing in his doctrine, he should save both
himself and those that hea^d him: And though no man ought to assume the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ; yet we see that holy man Stephen called Joshua that led
the Children of Israel over Jordan etc: by the name of Jesus, Asts 7.45.

As for Edward Burrough's saying in the year 1656 to the Priests and Professors
that we had sufficient cause to cry against them, and to deny their Church,
their worship and their whole religion: His next following words explain his
meaning (viz:) as not being in the power and by the spirit of the living God,
as commanded of him, or practiced [mark practic'd] by his saints; so that it
appears it was their practical, not their professing part that E: B: chiefly
struck at.

Bomb. That our Service Book bottomed on divine authority etc: is idolatrous
because we pray: O Son of David have mercy on us.

Ans: A very notorious falsehood. We deny the charge. We Esteem it no ways
idolatrous to say, O Son of David have mercy upon us. And we deny the
Service Book to be bottomed on divine authority; it has been rather composed,
and kept up by humane authority, there being no Scripture-rule directing, nor
pretense of any being required of God to set up such a limited form of worship;
however we deny it not for the reason the Bomb, as above, alledg^^h

Bomb. For, let but a Quaker and a Christian happen to dine together and if the
Christian as in duty hound, shall but say* Good Lord pardon all our sins etc:
and all for Jesus sake, the Quaker will sit with his hat on his head, as a
testimony against this known duty etc.

Ans: Where is now the Bomb's charity; thus by wholesale, with his foolish and
overtly distinction, to unchristian us; however, we are no more convinced than
the Bomb has proved that when we dine it is our bounden duty to say Good Lord
pardon our sins etc: There is no precept nor practice for it in all the
Scripture; however it is not the words but the custom and manner of it, without
waiting for the motion of life to a duty, that occasions our testimony against
joining with it, and seeing they say they are in duty bound to use the like
words when they go to meals, how is it then that so many of themselves so often
sit down thereto and use no words at all, and others not those words? neither
are those words to be found in any of their Graces which they have ordered to
be said before and after mean: but yt we say, to pray for Jesus Christ's sake,
is to pray, petition and give thanks in the name, and for the sake of a dead
God, is like the rest of his nauseous stuff and abuses. Edward Borough says
not a word of praying in the name of Jesus, nor for Christ's sake in either of
the pages cited by the Bomb: It Is true in 1655 he writ sharply against the
priests of that time, who were so often praying and petitioning the then powers
against our friends, as in the Westmorland petition may be seen; which
petitions and prayers were too much hearkened unto by them: which caused our
friends to be greatly persecuted by those powers; therefore it is no wonder we
find Edward Borough in page 101, telling them, as he does, that the beast was
risen in defense of them, and then told them how they prayed to their dead
Gods, and preached to their ignorant people against God's heritage: But not a
word of a dead God, or of praying to God or Christ or Jesus do we find in that
page, nor in any part of that Chapter, nor in any part of page 518 cited also
by the Bomb. O what do you, PRETENDED CONTENDERS FOR THE FAITH and Mysteries of
the Gospel, think will be the end of your thus abusing and belying men!

Bomb. Your whole business is to deceive.

Ans: When he has proved this as publicly as charged, we shall then grant he
has done good service for friends; but till then we shall sit down well
assured of the contrary; however, no honest or judicious man should so
publicly and in such a lavish manner accuse his neighbors, but should as
publicly, when required by the accused, either make good what he says, (...)
as publicly acknowledge his fault: One of which we expect from him, as he
would approve himself such; for we utterly deny this lavish and monstrous
charge.

Bomb. They tell us, All that preach Christ without and bid people believe in
him, as he is in heaven above, are false Ministers, Witches and Devils etc.

Ans: As he has produced no proof; so we provoke him to prove it, if he can,
(that is to say) that we, meaning the Quakers, ^ Col: 13.5.
thus tell them; for though we believe and know Christ to be within all who are
not reprobates, yet we believe that he is in heaven above also, whither, in the
fight of his disciples, he visibly ascended, according to Acts 1, 11^ and the
general belief of Christendom: And therefore, whereas in the first impression
of William Smith's Book it was said, that they are false (Ministers) which
preach Christ without, and bid people believe in him as he is in heaven above,
and that by some means or other the word [only] being wanting next after the
word above, it was added in the second Impression about thirty years ago, which
makes the passage read sound and well; for, as above, if Christ be not ^n us as
well as without us, we are Reprobates.

Bomb. They render the Holy Scriptures to be of no more Authority than Aesop's
Fables.

Ans: This is as false, as it is alleged without proof. We own the Scriptures
to be given forth by divine inspiration and that they were written for our
learning that we, through patience and comfort of them might have hope; and that
all Christian Doctrine ought to correspond therewith and that what is otherwise
ought to be rejected: But we abhor such thoughts of Aesop's ^ables, see above.

Note that though that one man Solomon Eccles dropped such an unjustifiable
expression, as that the blood of Christ was no more than the blood of another
Sa^nt; yet we do not find but our friends upon all occasions disown the
passage, see this Introduction.

Bomb. They are no other [mark, no other] than the spawn of the Ranters.

Ans: Here this Challenger may, if he please, challenge his Brother Bugg, or
Bugg him; and the Snake both of them; and the Quakers them all for lying, and
Bugg for a Contradicter of himself; seeing in the Bomb it is said We are no
other than the spawn of the Ranters; yet Bugg in his Book called the Quakers
set etc: page 17. says we are the Jesuits natural and undoubted Issue, though
like other Bastards, we are ashamed to own our fathers; so that one while we
find we must be squintingly hinted at, as in the title page of the Almanac for
the year 1704 for being the spawn of diverse Sects another while the spawn of
the Ranters only, another while the Jesuits undoubted Issue; another while the
Snake page 335, tells us Simon Magus is our Father: And thus our poor, but
self-interested and prejudiced adversaries being in the net, pudder themselves
about us; but the more they flutter, the faster they are in the net; and
notwithstanding the false and contradictory account of these our implacable
adversaries, they have made no proof of our being any other, and we own
ourselves no other than the true Successors of them that were Esteemed as
Deceivers, and yet true: As unknown yet well known etc: 2 Cor: 6, 8.

Bomb. That their owning Jesus Christ is indeed no more than a ^^^^er mystical
Romance. That the tendency of all their reasoning a^^^ instituted Religion is
to debauch mankind.

Ans: This is said by him (...) us; and he ought (...) publicly to prove it,
or so acknowledge (...) fault: The tendency of our Religion is rather to purify
and change mankind by the Spirit of Judgment and burning in the inward parts
etc: but not to debauch them. O horrid Slander! And our owning Jesus Christ is
in much plainness and sincerity.

Bomb That their Principles improved are destructive to all humane Society.

Ans. But as he has attempted no proof, so we are very sure he never can, That
we have such prodigious destroying principles. It Is well known our Principles
te^d to the preserving and not destroying either men or the humane Society of
m^n: but what does he talk of our Principles when but a little ^^g^er in the
said Bomb, speaking of our Books, which contain (says he) their Principles if
they had any. Now would any men of sense or Justice so confidently proclaim to
the world in print that we have Principles destructive to humane society, when
at the very same time they ^^ection whether we have any Principles at all.

Bomb. They are Cheats Liars and Impostors, and implacable enemies to the
Christian Religion. As vile Impostor's as ever were.

Ans. One would think that a professed Minister of the Gospel, who is so tender
of his own reputation so as to enter process against his neighbor in defense
of it should (as he would approve himself a disciple of the Master he
professes, and as one taught by him to do to others as he would have others do
to him be tender of his Neighbors reputation also: For how can our reputation
be more criminated than by telling us, we are Liars, Cheats as vile Imposters
as ever were: And that our whole business is to dece^^e etc. And though men may
struggle a while to preserve their reputation, yet such unjustifiable courses
such preposterous abusing honest men by wholesale will make but s^^w steps
toward i^ in the eyes of honest and just men.

Bomb. And since the Quaker Prophets have plainly declared in print, their
aversion to gave liberty of ^onscience to the Episcopal Church (...) works of
Richard Hubberthorn pa. 228. Edward Buroughs works p^ 615. why should we so
far encourage them as to hear their (...) ^^^^ings.

Ans. (...) desire all to take notice that from this we are cautio^ against
^earing Minister and Prophets that are not for giving Liberty of Conscience,
which indeed is in it self a good caution; because Persecuting Ministers cannot
be good Ministers; for it is those who walk after the flesh that persecute those
who are walking after the Spirit and they that walk after the flesh cannot
please God; but the true Ministers exhorted people to live after the Spirit,
and if any opposed, they were meekly to instruct those that opposed themselves:
but it is no where said in Scripture that they were to persecute them.

Now we think the right application of this should deeply affect diverse of the
Priests of our times, who are frequently to this day Persecuting abundance of
conscientious people who though they do not join with them nor go to hear them
yet these persecutions are only because for Conscience sake they cannot comply
with the unchristian way of forcing men to maintain them. So that according to
their own argument (and a good one in it self it is) all people may esteem that
a justifiable reason (if there were no other) not to hear them; but this is not
all, for as in other places they persecute us for the above cause, so both here
and there too many of them most grievously abuse and belie us, not only as
above is shown but also in this very passage, for there is no such thing as any
aversion in any of our Prophets as he calls them) to give liberty of Conscience
to the Episcopal Church in either of the said pages. Edward Burrough's 615 page
is an answer to the Anabaptists and not one word against liberty of Conscience,
either to them or to the Ediscopal Church or any Church or people whatsoever.
And Richard Hubberthorn is so far from showing an aversion to liberty of
Conscience to any, that he much blames his then Adversaries who were also
Anabaptists for that they were not for tolerating all persuasions, and
continuing his discourse to page 31. there tell them, that if they had been of
Christ's Spirit they would have professed toleration and not destruction to all
persons in matter of religion: So that the Bomb is as false in this matter as
it is argument is good against going to hear those who are averse to give
liberty of Conscience.

Bomb. How frequent is it with the Quakers to charge our Communion Table, to be
the Table of Devils etc.

Ans. This is spoken to and answered in the Philadelphian Almanac 1704 to
which we do not find they have made any reply, we may see there how it was such
as Drunkards Railers ^^d Cursed speakers that met together in the fellowship
which G. F. so called, to which we may truly add that the fellowship of Gross
Liars false Accusers, and those who are not for giving Liberty of Conscience
can be no better.

Bomb. How can we, if we have but a spark of zeal for our holy religion which
our Martyred Ancestors suffered in the flames for go and hear such blasphemous
wretches.

Ans. Mere s^^ff imposed upon the people, as if those famous Martyrs suffered
in the flames for maintaining any of those things concerning which you and we
differ, and therefore concerning which we query. Did those famous Martyrs
suffer in the flames for that they held sprinkling Infants, having Godfathers
and Godmothers so called and for taking that called the Sacrament and for
calling them Gospel ordinances? surely no; but for that they did not do it in
the popish way and manner. Did they suffer for that they held Oaths to be
lawful? surely no; but some of them rather the contrary. Did they suffer in the
flames for maintaining a common Liturgy? or was it not rather for not using it
after the popish way and manner? Did they suffer in the flames for holding
visible Priesthood under the Gospel? or for maintaining that none should
publicly teach or preach to the people or be Ministers, but such as had
received an outward Ordination from ^ Bishop (...)? Surely no. Did they (...)
for maintaining and keeping (...) of the Black Coat, White Su^plice, Tippet
Hood, O g^^^s etc: in the Church? Surely no.

(...) suffer in the (...) or otherwise for holding that (...) and forced
maintenance was due to a select number of (...) the Clergy; Surely no; but some
or them ^he rather the contrary, as John Wickli^ William Thorp, William
Swinderly, Walter Brute the B^le^^^s etc: whose opposing of Tithes was made a
principal argument against them by the Papists see the first Volume of Martyrs
etc. Anno 1700.
Lastly Did they suffer in the flame for ^^g^^ing and vilifying the Light of
Christ in men? which you (...) witness the three Norfolk Rectors in their late
book called the Quakers Principles etc page 57.
O^^^ing it a whimsical witness the Light within ^^^^h'd from Terra (...). -- 7.
Again A^ Imaginary Christ, -- 49.
the Light within; A Go^ Image: The Light can be no Rule to us; -- 6. B
ou^ insinuate it to be a spark from the devils ^org^ etc:

(...) they contradict all this; for in page 49 they tell us, If we say the
Spirit it self is our Rule, it is no more than to say, the Light within us, or
the Light, the Spirit of God shed into our hearts is so* Observe how these
three learned Rectors blasphemously vilify the Light of Christ, calling it a
whimsical (...) a spark from the Devils forge etc. who yet in the same book
(...) be the Light which the Spirit of God sheds into our Hearts etc. what is
this but to say the Light (...) on the Spirit of God (...) our Hearts is a
whimsical witness etc. Observe (...) 52 they say that every man has a Light
within him, (...) which w^ ^incerely declare we have (...) say the ^^gh^ can be
no rule to them; now what is all this but to say they seriously declare th^^
have acted according to a rule that can be no rule to them, O MONSTROUS
CONFUSION and Darkness of these learned Rectors in their dark attempts against
the true Light of Christ, who enlighteneth every man that comes into the World
and which Jo^n was sent to ^ear witness of, that all through him might believe!

Now concerning these and many other things it is about which we differ with
our present opposers; but for which we no where find that those blessed Martyrs
did ever suffer in the flames or otherwise. And though they held and maintained
some things (if being then early in the day of breaking forth of Gospel Light)
that ^^me i^ in ye dark night of Apostasy, yet walking according as they then
saw things, and maintaining those Truths made known (...) them to their death.
they were doubtless esteemed in the eyes of the Lord as precious Sufferers and
Martyrs, ^x^elling one thing after another; and tho many unscriptural or Popish
practices were still retained, yet they were after, not at once but by degrees
laid (...), and for which Doctor Burnet says they the reformers gave (...)
reason (viz.) That it was no wonder that Corruptions which had been creeping in
a thousand years were not all discovered and thrown out at once* Bridge, of the
Reformation 2 Book pa: 161. And indeed we do not find but what we and all
sincere Protestants hold it our duty rather to suffer for than submit to. And
the Author of Light shining out of Darkness etc: tells us aonther story in page
84 about the first Reformers and their sufferings who after having used diverse
Arguments out of the Ancient Protestants as Luther etc: against the necessity
of personal Succession Outward Ordination, and the Clergy's monopolizing the
Public Ministry to themselves, so as none should publicly preach or pray but
themselves; which corruption those first Reformers bo^^ly testified against, as
contrary to the nature of the Gosp^^^-Covenant: Their Arguments (says the said
Author) as much as they are exploded now were the bottom of the Reformation,
and those upon whose foundation we now ^^and, did venture their Lives their
Fortunes and their Souls hereupon: So that, according to which it appears that
the Reformation and the bottom upon which those first Reformers stood, was not
founded upon, but against that which you since plead for and practice (to wit)
Personal Succession, Outward Ordinatination, Restrained preaching with more too
tedious here to mention.

To conclude, amongst all the above false charges of the Bomb as w^ justly call
them, if J: T: can but do this part of what he calls a good Office for friends
and publish it as far as it is i^ the Bomb charged and challenged, viz. To prove
that what we declare touching our Faith in Christ Crucified we mean not a word
of what we say and that our whole business is to deceive: then we must needs
say whatever service h^ ^^ght do in it for friends, yet it might doubtless in
an extraordinary manner so approve himself a person capable to work such
Miracles as that of the Popish Transubstantiation would not out do it; because
by so doing he must certainly prove that to be which is not: But O MISERABLE
PROPAGATORS OF THE GOSPEL IN FOREIGN PARTS ^ thus through envy o^ abuse ^n ^onest
people (under pretense of doing it) by false accusations contrary to the Gospel
and common Morality.

AN APPENDIX etc.
It Is no wonder (...) to see our Christian Profession as also the Professors of
it so much scandalized and abused as it and they is and are this day by some
busy Priests, and envious backsliders; seeing interest (which, according to the
proverb, cannot lie ^icks so near to the one, and prejudice (which eats life)
and ^anker is so deeply ^eared in the heart of the other; nowhere herein we sit
down in true satisfaction, for that, as to those Doctrines and Principles of
Christianity which they so falsely accuse us of denying, we are conscious to
our selves that we believe and profess them as to the main in common with the
generality of (...) ^^her Protestant Professors; and which we shall here give a
touch of: And first of the Scripture: -- Though, because Christ is so plainly in
Scripture called the Word of God, and that therefore we do not call the
Scripture so; yet we have ever declared the Scriptures to be the words of God;
and that holy men writ them as they were moved by the Spirit of God: And that
they were writ for our learning, that we th^^ faith and patience of them might
have hope: and that all Christian Doctrine ought to be agreeable to them, and
that what is otherwise ought to be rejected, as aforesaid.

Then next, as to our belief in our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. John
8, 12.
We assuredly believe, according to Holy Scripture, that he is the Light of the
world; and that it is his life that is the Light of men. 1, 14.
And that every one that does evil hates the Light, 3.20.^1.
and will not come to it lest his deeds should be reproved: and that he that
does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God, 1, 9.
and that this is the true Light that lights every man that comes into the
world. And that all men ought to believe in this Light, 12, 36.
and to walk in this Light, that they may be Children of the Light: and that
such, who so walk, have not only fellowship one with another, 1 John 1, 7.
but the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses them from all sin^ and that this
Light, this treasure we have in our ^arthen vessel; and that it shines in our
hearts to give us the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor: 4:
6, 7.
We say, although we firmly believe this according to Scripture; and though we
believe this to be the inward and spiritual appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ; yet, as we always have, and if we see service for it, may produce a
cloud of witnesses out of our ancient and modern friends works, that we do as
firmly believe also in his visible and outward appearance, in his outward
Birth, Miracles, Dying for our sins, ^^^ing for our Justification, Ascending
into heaven, Coming to judge the quick and the dead at the great and general
day of Judgment; and that he is our Advocate and Intercessor, (...) heavenly
man Christ Jesus, and that his body is the same, for substance, which he had on
earth, as far as a glorious and heavenly body is the same for substance: And
that (...) Resurrection bodies will be the same so far as a natural and
spiritual body is the same; (...) 1: 15: 44.
for it is sown a natural body and it is raised a spiritual body And that as we
have been the image of the earthly, ^ -- 49.
we shall also ^ear the image of the heavenly. See Truth's Principles page 40.
published by our friends about forty years ago: And, as we have believed and
declared this Light to be Christ in his spiritual appearance; and therefore
have said it is sufficient of it self: Now what we understand thereby is not in
the least to d^^^eem Christ's outward sufferings etc;: but that it is
sufficient to guide direct, capacitate, and, through purging and cleansing,
entitule the soul to receive effectually the benefit of Christ's outwardly
dying for our sins risi^g for our justification, interceding with the father
for us etc: And as our Lord has so suffered for us in the outward; so we have
believed and ^o believe that the faith of it is indispensibly necessary to us,
and to (...) to whom it is, through the demonstration of the Spirit, preached, or
otherwise made known. see R: Barcl^y's Apology page 141. George Whitehead's
S^^er Expo^tulation page 81, 82. Mod^st Account by Caleb Pusey. This, and
whatsoever else of christian Doctrine, as contained in the Holy Scripture, we
faithfully have owned, and do own, and truly believe: And therefore we
sometimes are apt to think that the main motive which induced these men to be
so indefatigably industrious to make such noise against, and so notoriously
mis^render us to the world, in relation to our faith about those, and some
other Gospel Truths, is to amuse the world with wrong notions of our
difference, that so peoples time and thoughts which they spend concerning us
might be taken up therewith so as to be kept the more from employing them upon
that which we say and own to be, and are the real differences between us: as
being not only their having and maintaining practices and Doctrines unnecessary
and unscriptural, but that the most material of those we now produce are also
against the Doctrine and Judgment of diverse ancient Protestants and Fathers, as
we shall herein after make plainly to appear; but first we shall speak a little
about Gospel Baptism, the Supper [so called] Gospel Covenant, Worship etc: for
the satisfaction of the sober Enquirer.

And first, As for Water Baptism, Eating and Drinking Bread and Wine (which is
called the Lord's Supper) which some seem zealously to uphold, and call
Sacraments etc: As we find not that word in all the Scripture; so neither do we
find that ever those things were laid down by Christ or his Apostles as Gospel
Ordinances, or to continue to the end of the world; though we find that in the
beginning, or first breaking forth of the Gospel Dispensation some did practice
them: so did they also Circurcision, Purification, keeping of Easter Anointing
(...), Abstaining from blood, Washing of fee^ etc: The three last were not
only practiced, but at that time commanded expressly; and though those
Observations called Sacraments may have been practiced by some after one
manner; and by others after another from the primitive times to this day; so we
know G: Keith himself tells us, Circumcision is still practiced by some, as
Histories confirm; and the anointing the sick with Oil is still continued among
the Papists: Rector Corrected page 67, 68.
And that the seventh day of the week was long observed: And that abstaining
from eating blood and washing feet continued until Tertullian's days, Proreus
Postscript page 36, 27.
which we suppose to be about two hundred years after Christ's Resurrection;
and according to the express words of the said Author speaking of these things,
as above. The mystery of Iniquity began to work early, and soon after the
Apostles days, increasing still more and more until the dark night of Apostasy
came on so that the true discerning was in a great measure lost, what to
continue, and what to leave and forsake: And, says he, they continued some
things of no moment, as Observation of Days, Meats and Drinks, and other R^^^s,
which were but the shadows; and they discontinued and did forsake the best
things, even that which was the substance of Life it self and Therefore, as he
there says, the continuance of a thing cannot simply prove the necessity of
it, which if it could; then Circumcision, Anointing with Oil, washing of feet
etc: are still to continue no more than we do that of Water Baptism etc: We
know that while the outward Temple at Jerusalem was the place appointed of God
for worship to be made, that those offerings then stood only in meats, Heb: 9:
10.
drinks, diverse ^^shings and carnal ordinances imposed on them until the time
of reformation; -- 19.
Eating and Drinking outward meats and drinks, washing the bodies with outward
water with which also the priest sprinkled the book and all the people; but now
the time of reformation, which is the Gospel time being long since come, until
which time only these outward meats, drinks, diverse washings and carnal
ordinances (...) imposed on God's people and therefore long since at an End. So
(...) under the Law his people were washed with outward water, and Sprinkled
with the blood of Calves Goats etc: Even so under the Gospel the washing is to
be with pure water, and the sprinkling is to be that of a (...) from an Evil
Conscience; 10. 11.
and even as then the Circumcision was that of the flesh, (...) ^ 3.
so now they are the Circumcision which worship God in Spirit. And as then
there were diverse washings or baptisms so now as there is one faith, Eph^ 4: 5.
there is also one Baptism, And as the baptism was then with water; 1 Cor: 12:
13.
so now the Saints are baptized by one spirit into one Body and this drinking
is to be into one Spirit. (...): ^:28, -- 29.
And now he is not a Jew that is one outward, but he is a Jew that is one
inward, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit and not in the
Letter* The singing was then with outward instruments of music; now the
singing is to be in the spirit, Ep^: 5.19.
singing and making melody in the heart to the Lord. Their warfare was then
against flesh and blood throwing down the outward strong holds of the Enemies,
the Christians wrestling and warfare was not after the flesh but against
Spiritual wickedness in high places in order to bring into Captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, Ephesians. 6.12. 2 Cor. 10.3. etc.
their weapons and Armor then (to witt^ under the legal dispensation)
breast plate, shield, helmet, Sword etc: literally understood, the Christians
wopons were not Carnal but Spiritual, and their Armor was the breast plate of
righteousness, Ephesians. 6.
the shield of Faith the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit etc. then
the feast of Passover was to be kept with unleavened bread as literally
unddrstood, but the Christians Passover was to be with unleavened of Sincerity
and Truth etc. ^ Cor: 5, 8.
In fine as God's worship was then performed at Jerusalem, at the Temple there;
so now the Apostle plainly tells us, ^ Cor 6, 16. 1 Cor. ^, 19.3, 16. John 4,
24.
our bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghosts and our Savior as plainly tells
us, that the Father is not worshipped at Jerusalem; nor at the Mountain etc. but
as God is a Spirit, so they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth; and that it is such the Father seeks to worship him. And as we find
things thus under the Gospel (viz) the Temple of God to be the bodies of the
Saints and that the time of reformation is come in which ended the meats,
drinks, diverse washings and carnal ordinances, and the washing is now to be
with pure water, and the Sprinkling is to be that of the heart, from an evil
Conscience; and that the Baptism and drinking is to be by and into one Spirit,
and the singing is to be in the Spirit: and in short that the Father is to be
worshipped in Spirit. So that upon the whole we cannot therefore find it any
ways unscriptural to conclude that none of those things are now outwardly to be
practiced as Ordinances of the Gospel Commanded by our blessed Savior or his
holy Apostles; but rather that it is something besides the very nature of the
new Covenant as distinguished from the old, Heb. 8.10.
which new Covenant was, that God would write his Law in the heart and put his
Spirit in the inward part, and he would dwell in them and walk in them, and be
their God, and that they should be his People. But that many of those above
things, as has been said, were practiced by some outwardly in the Apostles
days, is true; and by the Apostle's words it seem^ they were not all of
necessity, then presently to vanish away, for in the same Chapter wherein he
was treating of the new Covenant as aforesaid, as minding those words, that the
Lord would make a new Covenant etc. He says thus (viz) in that he says a new
Covenant, verse 13.
he has made the first old; and then adds, now that which decays and waxes
old is ready to vanish away, [Mark, [ready to vanish away] but as he did not
say those things were wholly vanished away, so as above the then practice of
some shows that it was not so.

We come now to those other matters about which we differ from our present
opposers, the Priesthood and Gospel Ministry, (about which is a (...)
difference between us) and a little examine whether there be any such thing
under the Gospel as a Priesthood or Ministry assigned to any particular order
of Men; and whether none ought to minister publicly to the people, but such as
are ordained by some persons that have received outward power so to do by a
successive Ordination from the Apostles time to this day as is often alleged
against us, though the contrary of which the first protestant reformers alleged
against the papi^^ts, we find that as under the Law there were High priests
over the house or Temple of God, so under the Gospel we find that Christ Jesus
is the High priest of our profession, Heb: 10.21.3: 1, -- 6.
the High priest over the house of God, whose house we are, if we hold fa^t the
confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the End. And as the priest
Ships under the Old Covenant were to keep knowledge ^ and the Law was to be
learned from his mouth: Mal: ^:7.
so under the Gospel Covenant Christ Jesus (the High priest over the house of
God, in whom are all the hid treasures of wisdom and knowledge) says; Learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Not: 11: 29. Ephesians: 4: 8. 1 Pet: 4: 10.
^ Cor: 14: 31.
This is now our High priest who is a Minister of the sanctuary and of the true
tabernacle which God pitched, and not man; when he ascended on high gave gifts
unto men: and as Every man had received the gift they were to minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God: and they might
all prophesy one by one that all might learn and that all might be comforted.
And here all things were to be done decently and in good order, yet without
mentioning Ordination from a Bishop: But as there is no particular order of
priests assigned or ordained as ever we read of in all the New Testament, so we
find that many ancient and eminent protestants did boldly bear their
testimonies against such innovations, and therefore we justly charge those as
innovators who thus monopolize all public preaching and public praying into
their own hands, making an office and trade of it and limiting chiefly if not
wholly into the hands of men bred at the Universities or Schools of humane
learning; for is not this Quenching the Spirit, which the holy Apostle forbids,
1 Thessalonians: ^: 19, 20.
saying; Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophesyings. Ye may all prophesy
one by one etc: But that which further renders these men's practices unchristian
and unscriptural, is for that they compel the payment of tithes of forced
maintenance for preaching from such who belong not to their Communion, no^ ever
go to hear them preach, nor ever have any thing of them imprisoning,
dis^^^ining from if not ruining many families even to this day, who for
conscience sake cannot uphold such unchristianism; this is openly known
especially in Old England, of which more (...). We say we therefore charge them
not only for these practices as they are unscriptural, but as they are also
against the testimony of those they ^steem their predecessors the ancient
protestants and eminent reformers which by citation out of Authors plainly
appears by what follows. And (...) about succession.

(...) 1616.
John White who styles himself Minister of Gods Word at Ecles in his book
called The way to the true Church and dedicated to the Archbishop of York and
Bishop of London and writ against ^: D^ the Jesuit, who had allege against
those protestants ^s you n^w do against us) that the protestant Ministers were
not lawfully (...) for that they had not an outward and uninterrupted
succession or Bishops to ordain (...). He denied first that the Roman Church
could ^^ew a perpe^ (...) succession of prelates without interruption from St.
Peter. ^^: 403, 404.


2ly^ He does ^h^m that they must be reputed Apostles successors which believe
the Apostles doctrine, altho^ they love not this outward succession visibly
following one another. And by the Author of Light shining out of darkness^ we
find that Sadeel affirmed that personal succession is not necessary; Pa: 50, 54.
and that it is truth which upholds a Church but not a successive ministry.

And the famous Bishop Jewel in his Apology for the Church of England above 100
years ago, speaking against the Papists about Succession says that Gods grace
is promised to a good mind and to one that fears him and not to Seas and
Successions.

Right shining, pa. 81.
And Luther that famous Protestant reformer affirmed that there is no visible
and outward Priesthood under the New Testament but what has been entered by
Satan through the deceipts of men; and then instances St. Paul's saying, Who
has made us fit Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit. This (says he) is spoken of all Christians universally, -- pa. 86.
to show they are all Ministers of the Spirit: and a Minister of the Spirit is
one who teaches the Doctrine of saying Grace* Again says he St. Peter ^^th
(...) all Christians 1 Peter 2.9
That you may declare the power of him who has called you out of darkness unto
his Mavelous Light. And from the words of the Apostle to wit ^ let all be
done decently and in good order, -- ^^.
He says, the universal extent of the Ministry is not destroyed but confirmed;
for it is therefore necessary that order be observed speaking because all have
power to speak. Again says he, it is only in regard to order and Decency which
enjoins women to be silent in the Church, where men also are assembled and
speak; -- 89.
but if no men do speak it is a duty, a necessary incumbent upon women not to be
silent.

Again Rob. Barclay in his Apology Pa: 284. Says That the said (...) affirmed
that it was wickedly done of the Romish Priests and Clergy (...) assume
themselves only this Authority to teach and be Priests and Ministers etc. for
that every Good Christian not only Men but even Women also ^ is a Preacher. And
as for Women's Preaching, Daniel philips in his Vindiciae Veritatis Page 158,
cites William Tindal that famous Martyr, sayng: If Histories be true, Women
have Preached since the opening of the New Testament. And Cites again Reinenus
a Papist who affirmed that the Waldenses Opinion was that any Lay Man or Woman
might Preach. Now the Waldenses were very ancient Protestants vindicated by
Bishop Usher and persecuted by the Papists.

Now hear again Martin Luther, We do says he by Divine authority with
confidence and freedom of Spirit pronounce and declare to the Popish Priests
predecessors to our Clergy and all such [mark all such] as introduce a
Restrained Preaching. -- 8^.
Forasmuch as you do reign without a divine warrant, you are the Ministers of
Satan; and your Ministry together with your Priesthood was introduced by Satan
into the world to destroy the only true Ministry of the Spirit.

Again says he, speaking of the sh^veling Priests, Who are more Aliens to the
teachings of God than they who would be the Sole Teachers of men? Those Idol
Shpherds, Anointed Rogues rather than Priests: -- 86.
if all are taught of God, then all have the Spirit and Enduing of God. Now
mark this, And did ever any of our friends give harder language than Luther
did, as above.

Again says Luther, It Is a horrible thing I am going to say, -- 84.
I wish I might be found a Liar, but it is true, it is an irrefragable verity,
there are no Priests in the Holy Scriptures contra-distinguished the Laity; and
they have not their Establishment from the plain word of God, which is it not
all one as if it were from the Devil? Mark again, Is not this as harsh as G:
F's calling the t^^^e of Drunkards, Railers, and cursed speakers to be the
table of Devils? which passage you have so often clipped, abused and vilified,
leaving out the words drunkards railers and cursed speakers, they being such
whose table G: F: called the table of devils etc.

Again, William Dell who is styled Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Ganvil
College in Cambridge, says that true Teachers are content that other should
teach as well as they, Trial of Spirits pa: 41, 42.
and would not make a monopoly of the Ministry to themselves alone for worldly
advantage sake -- Wherefore those false teachers who are envious that any
should preach but themselves and their own tribe, because they get great
worldly advantage thereby; (whereas otherwise they would be contented that any
should preach) and so would have the civil Magistrate only to License them to
be preachers because of their degrees and orders; and to forbid all others,
they are all false teachers and Ministers of Antichrist.

Again he says of the generality of them, that they are not sent of o^ God nor
anointed by his Spirit, but ordained and appointed of men at their own desire
and seeking, for worldly advantage sake. Men who stan^ and Minister in the
Church, only in the strength of their Academical Degrees and Ecclesiastical
Ordination; but do not stand and feed the people ^n the strength of the Lord,
and in the Majesty of the name of their God, and this corrupt Ministry or
carnal Clergy have deceived the nations with a corrupt and carnal understanding
of Christ and of the Scriptures etc.

And (...) is to their Universitys and humane learning there attained in order
to fit them for this Ministry the said Del^ says, They that ^^ing in hum^^
^^^ing and Philosophy of men into the Church of Christ they also are true
Antichrists in so doing for herein they are contrary to and do ^ppo^^ Christ
the wisdom of God

Again says he If any think I have too deeply censured these Universities let
them know (...) ^one in this matter but as W^^kliff (...) holy men of God, and
happy in^^^ (...), have done before me. As (...) the Universi^ (...) Cast^es,
the (...) (...) they were never ordained o^ (...). Luther affirm^ that the
universities are one of the faces of Antichrist, a very comely sight to look
upon; and yet indeed are a very Chaos and open gate of hell. And then cites
Chrysostom to affirm and prove that humane learning does not fit men for the
Ministry of the Gospel, -- 127.
but is rather a hinderance thereto; and that the Grace of God only fits them
for the heavenly work. Luther says, that whosoever it was, -- 113.
whether Alexander of Hales, or Thomas of Aquine who first instituted
Universities, he was a (...) fallen from heaven to earth; In short he calls
them the s^ews of Antichrist: -- 87.
and to conclude here the Author says, that though the outward form of gross
Popery be taken away from them, as also from the rest of the people of this
nation, God having put it into the hearts of the civil power to reject it after
the light of the Gospel had begun to shine [mark begun to shine] in them, -- 88.
yet are the brains, heart, bowels, bones, marrow sinews and blood of the
Universities the self same now as heretofore, and though the outsides of them
have passed under a very little change, yet the inner parts of them remain as
before in the full strength of Antichrist's kingdom; yea many of the self same
outward Antichristian forms and follies still remain with them more than with
any other people in the nation; even to their bloods, -- 88.
caps, scarlet robes, doctoral ring, keys; gloves, their doctrinal dinner,
music etc. with abundance more this Dell has writ to lay open these
Universities, and the monopolizing Ministry that comes from thence; and he
being one of them had, one would think, reason to know what they were.

Next concerning Priest's habits.
There is no Scripture requiring them under the Gospel, and Didoclavius in his
Altar Damascenum pa: 889. cited by Light shining etc. pa: 203. says in
opposition to the Episcopal Garbs, that he cannot find to what purpose they
should affect a singular habit but to receive Salutations and addresses from
the people in Assemblies as did the Pharisees Matthew: 22: 5.6.7. the Apostles
did not distinguish themselves in their office from other men, whether
believers or unbelievers, they were known by their speech, and not their array,
to be Ga^^loans. Indeed we read there were some of Baals Priests among the Jews
that were atired in black, and therefore called Chemarims; which very name the
Lord unlearned to cu^^^; but we no where (...) afterward ordained them for
Gospel Ministers: and we read that the Jews at this day call the Monks
Chemarims. And so we think this might well deserve the peoples consideration
now, seeing we find not that any such nor any other distinguishing Garbs were
ever ordained of the Lord for Gospel Ministers.

Of Tithes etc.
This of Tithes and forced maintenance and preaching for hire is a master of so
great importance with them, that would we but retract our Christian testimony
in respect to the non-payment of them, doubtless we might soon find that we had
bid fair for an accommodation, and that then possibly they might be as easy
with us in other points as they are with other Protestant Dissenters who though
they own many of their practices to be unchristian as well as we and join not
in Communion with them, nor hear them any more than we do; yet paying them for
preaching, not to themselves but to others we now see how little they differ
with ym about other matters: but whilst the Priests stand justly chargeable
with preaching for hire and forced maintenance especially from those of another
Communion that never go to hear them. Is it not a duty upon them, since the
eyes of the people are so much opened as that so many thousands now see into
the unreasonableness and Antichristianism of such practices; instead of this
wrangling with and abusing of their peaceable neighbors, to prove these
practices by Scripture to be according to the practices of precepts of Christ
or his Apostles, seeing they own the Scripture be the Ru^^ of faith and
practice? (...) since our Lord speaking of false Prophets that should arise,
said; by their fruits you shall know them, ^ow do not their fruits clearly show
them to be (...) ^ai^e Prophets as the Lord Prophet cried out against, Mica.
3.5: 11.
for that they tought for hire and divined for mo^ey, and made the people err
and cried peace: but those wi^ put not (...) their mouths they prepared War
against them; and (...) would they (...) the Lord and (...) the Lord among us?
(...) the Priests of J. Talbots Communion (...) such as (...) our native
Country that we shall ^ay (...) more of it here than to cite some words of our
friend Robert Barclay in his Apology p: 339. complaining their cruelty, says
thus, viz. To give an account of their cruelty and several sorts of inhumanity
used against us, would make no small history: these Avaritious Hirelings have
come to that degree of malice and rage that several poor laboring men have
been carried hundreds (...) miles from their own dwellings and shut up in
prison, some two same three some several years together for the value of one
pound sterling and less,: I knew my self a poor widow that for the tithes of
her geefe, which amounted not to five shillings, was about four years kept in
prison thirty miles from her house. Yea they by violence for this cause have
plundered of men's goods the hundred fold, and prejudiced much more. Yea
hundreds have spilt their innocent blood by dying in the filthy noisome holes
and prisons; and some of the Priests have been so enraged that goods thus
ravished could not satisty them, but they must also satisfy their fury by
beating, knocking and wounding with their hands innocent men and women for
refusing, for conscience sake, to put into their mouths thus (...) R: Barclay.
And we have had an account that the last year there were diverse still in
prison, and about four thousand pound taken from our friends on account of
Tithes.

Indeed we read that Nichola^s Arnold^s answers the objecting of those words of
our Savior to wit Freely we have received freely give. [thus] We have not
received freely and therefore we are not bound to give freely. Which answers we
suppose may be true enough in the Priests; but what is that to the point for
though they may not have received freely; yet we clearly see by our Saviors
words that his Disciples have; and therefore they obeying his command do give
it forth freely.

As for their pleading the Law of the Land, that can be no Gospel Argument
which established not it is own doctrine by the Law of the Land, much less that
which is not so. But they say, people buy their Lands with the incu^^rance of
tithes upon them. We think that is not true, for the ^^nds are generally bought
free of all encumbrances whatsoever, besides the tithe is not challenged as the
tenth of the rent, o^ as there ^^ acre (...) the tenth rather of the increase
of ou^ ^^re and labor* How ever it is a good maxim that all Laws contrary to
the Law of God are (...) themselves (...) the Law of God is To^ (...) men as we
(...) even made in Pensilvania of elsewhere, whereby they should have been
forced to have paid toward the maintenance of the Quakers Ministry or Worship
houses, and whether they would not have esteemed that an unresonable
Imposition, had it been by tithes or any other forced maintenance^ but as there
is no Scripture for tithes or forced maintenance for preaching so we can prove
that it is against the testimony of diverse ancient protestants of which we shall
cite at present these following.

Walter Brute says that a priest receiving by bargain any thing of Yearly
Annuity is in so doing a Schismatic and Excommunicate. Crook's Works pa: 13.

William Thorp says, There is a Doctor, he thinks it is St Hierom, that says,
the priests that challenge now in the new Law, tithes, say in effect, that
Christ is not become man, and that those Priests that will challenge or take
tithes, deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and do the Priests office in the
old Law for whom tithes were granted.

Again, William Throp being accused of the Bishop for preaching openly and
boldly that Priests had not title to tithes, said in answer that in the new Law
neither Christ nor his Apostles took tithes, nor commanded the people to pay
tithes neither to Priest nor (...); and says he, after Christ's Ascension and
when the holy Apostles had received the Holy Ghost they travailed with their
hands and got their livelihood, when that they might thus do for busy
preaching; and that it was Pope Gregory the ^^nth that ordained in the year
1211 new tithes first to be given to the Priests now in the new Law etc. Note,
this William Thorp is called by John Fox in the book of Martyrs, a valiant
warrio^^ under the Triumphant banner of Christ.

The Snake in the Grass as cited by the Switch pa: 420 saying; Tithes are no
part of the typical or ceremonial Law, and nothing else of the Law was
abrogated by Christ, but the Switch presently produces Dr. Fulk to contradict
him on Heb: 7: saying the payment of tithes as it was a ceremonial duty is
abrogated by Christ.

He also produces Doctor Willet in his Synopsis of Popery, 5th. General
Controversy pa: 314. saying, the priesthood of the Law is altered or changed;
Ergo also the Law of the Priesthood, and so consequently the ceremonial duty of
tithes. He also produces Z^nchius saying, certain it is that the Law concerning
the paying of Tithes also was abrogated by Chist, pa: 224. But if any say, How
must those live that preach the Gospel? We answer first with the said William
Thorp, that since Christ (...) all the time of his preaching by pure alms of
the people and by (...) of him the Apostles lived in the same wise or else by
travail of their hands; all which is our practice where there is need; and thus
the preachers of the Gospel live of the Gospel. And we read that the Council of
Car^^age decreed that every Clergy man should (...) livelihood by same Artifice
or husbandry.

Of Oaths.
Here again we differ from them, because they say taking of Oaths is lawful. We
say because our Savior and his Apostle James expressly forbid it, that
therefore it is not lawful; and though Protestants now are generally against us
in this case, yet we could produce diverse ancient Protestants, as also diverse
primitive fathers, so called, on our side. Robert Barclay in his Apology pa:
549. prodoceth Hierom who says All things agree not unto us, who are Servants,
that agreed unto our Lord etc. The Lord swore, as Lord, whom no man did forbid
to swear: but unto us who are Servants, it is not lawful to swear, because we
are forbidden by the Law of our Lord. Yet, lest we should suffer Scandal by his
Example, he has no sworn, since he commanded us not to swear.

And William Thorp aforesaid, speaking against Swearing says, It was not his
opinion but the opinion of Christ and St: James, and of Chrysostom and of
diverse other Saints and Doctors. John Crooks works pa: 80.

And an Article charged against William Swinderly was, That no man ought to
swear for any thing; but simply without an Oath to affirm or deny: and if he
swears, he sins. Ibid:

Of Singing Psalms in the Church.
The Apostle says, He will sing with the Spirit; and exhorts the Ephesians
chap: 5. verse 17, 18, 19. Be not unwise, but understand what the will of the
Lord is; be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms Hyms and
spiritual Songs singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord. But as
the above author of Light shining etc: pa: ^07. says) the way of Psalms as it
is ordinarily used in the (...) that no foundation in the customs of the
Ancients. ^eza and (^ think) being much diverted with poetry, made his pastimes
to become a part of the vulgar devotion: Hence I have heard them styled ^eneva
^igs, and indeed says the said Author, upon my most severe thoughts to make
D^vidi^ Hymns, though better translated, to be a part of our rational service
toward God, to Sing in cases of Joy and sorrow, or on God's several dealings
with us, what he [David] did pen upon emergencies somewhat resembling, yet
differenced by a number of circumstances, it as absurd and ridiculous, as if
upon the like occasion^ we should select Epistles or Orations out of Tully, and
use them in common addresses one to another etc: And upon the whole we say, as
there is no precept or example in all the new Testament for such, way of
singing; so we cannot esteem it to ^e any part of divine Worship.

Concerning Common Prayer etc:
The Apostle tells us, that the Spirit helps our infirmities; and that we know
not what to pray for, as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us with groanings that cannot be uttered. Rom: 8: 26. And again says he
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians: 6: 18. Here we find that the Christians
of themselves knew not what to pray for, without the help of the Spirit; and
that the Spirit helped their Infirmities in order thereto: but the Common
prayer men know both when and what to pray for at all times as soon as they are
assembled together, their Common Prayers being prepared in their Common prayer
book aforehand, and thereby they know what they must pray for, and how they
must pray, whatever their present states, inward conditions or wants are; and
this from one Week, Month and Year to another. But whether this be according to
the Apostle's doctrine, as above (viz.) To watch that we might pray and
supplicate in the Spirit with all perseverance etc: is surely worthy the ^ue
consideration of all sincere Christians. And the Common Prayer men might also
consider, that as there is no Example or Precept, or such a Common Liturgy or
set form to pray by in all the New Testament* So according to their now great
friend George Keith's own former confession, set forms of Prayer were not used
in the Church till upward of three hundred years after Christ; and then surely
there is no Obligation on any to use it; but rather, in vain is such worship,
being taught by the commandment and precepts of men, and therefore cannot be
complied with by us who are well satisfied that it is so, though as Doctor Burnet
now Bishop of Salisbury said in his Abridgment of the History of the
Reformation, Book ^ pa: 161. That when they were in King Edwards days, about
altering the Common Prayer book from the Papists way to what it since has
been, that the Papists finding fault with the alteration, took occasion to say,
that the new doctrines and worship changed as fast as the fashions ^^d. And
that they were then answered by the Protestants, that it was (...) wonder if
corruptions which had been creeping in for a thousand years ^ere not discovered
at once, as above; and since they had been every age making additions of new
Ceremonies, it might be excused if the purging of them out was done by such
easy degrees. Which answer of the Protestan^s was very right and true; for
corruptions then left, have since been, (not at once) but by several degrees
and steps discovered and thrown out accordingly, and the spiritual worship
which our Lord set up, is be^^^ to be established in a good degree in its (...).

Of YOU to a single person.
As first it is acknowledged (we suppose) by all; that it is the only proper way
of speaking to distinguish whether we are speaking to one or more, so secondly,
it is the language in the current of the Holy Scripture given not only to all
sorts of men, from the King to the beggar, but also to God himself. And
thirdly, William Penn in his No Cross, No Crown, pa: 208. tells us, that Luthet
was so far from condemning our plain speech, that in his Ludus, he sports
himself with you to a single person, as an incongruous and ridiculous speech.
And that Erasmus, a learned man, bestows a whole discourse in rendering it
absurd; and that it is impossible to preserve numbers, if you, the only word for
more than one, he used to express one* and that Lypsius proves that the ancient
Romans all thou would and thee'd their Senators and Emperors; and that there was no
such thing as Cap honor and titular respects among them. And that Howell in
his History of France assures that pride and flattery first put Inferiors upon
paying a plural respect to Superiors, and Superiors upon receiving it, and that
the said Erasmus also said it was the corruption of flattery, and since they
count it a clownish and unmannerly way of speaking when given to men,
especially the poor to the rich in their addresses ^o them: Why then do they
give the same language to our great Creator (who gives us richly all things to
enjoy) in all their prayers and addresses to him? This therefore (...) not
sound speech, that cannot be condemned, which surely according to the Apostles
ought to be kept to both in doctrine and Communication.

Of respecting men's persons, ^^^ttering titles, subscribing your Servant etc.
Elibu says, I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my Master would
soon take me away.

And the Apostle James we know is very positive against respecting men's
persons, saying, My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the
Lord of Glory, with respect of persons. For if there come into your Assembly a
man with a gold ring in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in
(...) ^^aiment: and ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and
say unto him, sit thou here in a good place: and say to the poor, stand thou
there, Or sit here under my foot stool: are ye not partial in your selves?
James., 2.1, 2.3, 4. and in verse 9. adds, But if ye have respect to persons,
ye commit (...) and are convinced of the Law as transgressors. To which we
shall add Marlorat out of Luther and Calvin, cited in Light shining pa: 227
thus, To respect persons here, is to have regard unto the outward habit and
gar^, and accordingly to esteem or undervalue him, love or dread him. The
Apostle does signify that such respecting of persons does so repug^ the true
faith that they are inconsistent. -- He judges of the sincerity of faith and
charity by such difference; and makes the practice thereof to be against the
Light within them, so as that they who follows such usages, condemn themselves.

The Author in page 227, 228. cites of the works of the said Hierom (an ancient
father) an Epistle directed to a Noble Woman called Cel^ntia, part of which is
this. Our religion admits no respect of persons; nor does it lead us to value
the outward condition of men, but their inward frame of Spirit. With God, not
to serve Sin, is to be free; and to excel in virtue is to be noble. -- The
ransom of the poor and rich cost Christ an equal expense of blood, nor is it
material in what state a man is born, the new Creature has no distinctions,
but if we will forget how we all descended from one father, at least we ought
perpetually to remember that we have one Savior.

And then cites a passage out of Causabon in his book of Use and Custom, pa:
169. He is not counted a civil man now of late years among us, that thinks much
to subscribe himself Servant, tho, it be to his Equal or Inferior. Yet
Sulpitius Severus was once soundly chid by Paulinus Bishop of Nola, for
subscribing himself his Servant, in a Letter of his, Take heed hereafter how
you, being from a Servant called out unto liberty, do subscribe your self
Servant unto one who is your Brother and Fellow Servant. For it is a sinful
flattery, not a testimony of humility, to pay those honors to a man and a
Sinner, which are due to one Lord, one Master and one God. Note, how exactly
this agrees with the words of Christ. Call no man Master on Earth; for one is
your Master who is in heaven, (i. e.) call no man Maser who is not thy Master;
for otherwise he allows to call such so who are indeed so.

About vain and needless Apparel.
As for the vain Dresses and Modes of Apparel even at this time too much in use
among the generality of People, but especially among those called Chuch people,
we appeal to the sincere among them and all persuasions, whether such adorning
be according to the command of the Great Apostle of our Lord, which is that
women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shame fac'dness and sobriety;
not with broidered hair' or Gold or Costly Array; but as Women professing
Godliness with good works* plainly implying that those who adorn themselves
otherwise than in modest Apparel, are not such as women professing Godliness
ought to be, ^ Tim: 2: 9, 10. But rather like those of Old, whom the Lord sent
his Prophet to cry against, when he said, moreover the Lord faith, because the
Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with Stretched forth necks, and wanton
eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tink^ng with their feet etc.
To which the Lord threatened a day in which he would take away the bravery of
their tinkling Ornaments about their fe^t, ^^^ir Cauls and their round tires
like the moon, with much more, see Isaiah 3: 16. etc: and of whom it is said
(for that and their other Evils so what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord ^ ^^ing no more (...) oblations, Incense is
an ^^^mination to me; the New Mons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies* I
cannot away with, it is iniqu^^y, even the Solemn Meetings Isaiah* 1: 11, 13.

Again we find the Prophet threatened that is the day of the Lord's Sacrifice,
he would punish not only the Princes and the King's Children, but also all such
as were clothed with strange Apparel.

Here we see from the greatest to the least, the Lord was displeased with some
about their wearing strange Apparel; and are not the toyish dresses, and the so
often newly invented ^^^tostick fashions of Clothing to be counted strange
Apparel among the Christians, seeing their adorning ought to be in modest
Apparel etc.

About Plays, Sports and Pastimes*
We know we are exhorted to pass the time of our sojourning here in fea^ and to
work out our Salvation with fea^ and trembling* but for that the Lord's people
of Old, Exodus 32: 6.
when they had eaten and drunken did rise up to play was a great evil in them;
^ Cor: ^^ 7.
and for which the Lord was sorely displeased with them. And to show th^^ plays
etc: have been testified against by other as well as Quakers, see by Jeremiah
Tailers, Doctor Dubitt pa: 469 470. where he tells us that Mantua affirms it to
be unlawful to play at Tables and Dice, because invented by the Devil. And that
Chrysostom affirmed, that not God but the Devil found out plays etc: Now as the
Devil was the founder of them, is not he also the upholder of them this day yet
how frequently and publicly and without any Church censure have those of it is
Communion been found in the practice of those things; nay if they will but
believe what their friend G: K: once said, (not yet retracted as we hear of)
that not only the Laity are guilty, but their Ministers also; for (speaking of
them) says he, do they not make the people vain? Do they not teach the people,
that many things they use in eating and dringing and putting o^ Apparel, Games,
Plays and Commedies wherein there is much vanity, are lawful and no Sin in
them. As ^o^ dancing, we find the French Protestants were very strict in their
discipli^^ (...) dancing, and the Wa^denses defended by Bishop Usher as (...)
reformers, were so zealous against dancing that they affirmed that as many
steps as a man made in a dance, so many ^^ens he made to Hell Concerning, which
they also quote Augustine that ancient (...), saying, the miserable dancer
knows not that as many paces as he makes in dancing, so many ^eap^ he makes to
hell.

And Ambrose says, Plays ought not to be known among Christians.

Augustine speaking of Plays and Recreations, faith that they are more
pernicious and abominable than those idolatrous S^crifices which were of ^ered
in honor of the Pagan Gods, see No Cross, No Crown pa: ^10.

Now since you pretend that what you do against us by Citing (and we may justly
say, misciting; perverting and clipping) passages out of our Ancient friends
books, is that we may see them, and condemn them, or else be chargeable with
the Errors of them. What is not justifiable as we have condemned, so we shall
never refuse to condemn. Howbeit, by this your own Rule you are obliged to
retract or condemn the above passages of the ancient Protestants, your
predecessors books; or else you must be charged as owning them; and therefore
we ask, Did you ever condemn the above John White's book dedicated to the Arch
bishop of York etc. who denies an outward uninterrupted succession can be
proved or is necessary. Or Sadeel who affirmed that the personal Succession is
not necessary? Or did you ever condemn Luther for saying there is no visible
and outward Priesthood under the New Testament, but what has been entered by
Satan etc. Or for saying all such as introduced restrained preaching are the
Ministers of Satan etc. and that there are no Priests in the Holy Scriptures
contra-distinguished from the Laity? Or saying, every good Christian, (not only
men but Women also) is a Preacher* Or have you condemned William Dell Master of
Convil College at Cambridge for saying this Corrupt Ministry or Carnal Clergy
have deceived the Nations with a Carnal and Corrupt understanding of Christ and
of the Scriptures? Or for saying, they that bring in humane wisdom or the
Learning and Philosophy of men into the Church of Christ, are true Antichrist
for so doing? Or have you condemned Luther for saying, He that first instituted
Universities, was a Star that fell from heaven to earth; and that they are the
Stews of Antichrist^ Or did you ever condemn Chrysostom for affirming that
humane Learning is rather a hindrance than a help to fit men to the Ministry;
and that it is the Grace of God that fits them to the heavenly work? Have you
condemned Didoclavius speaking against Episcopal Garbs to distinguish the
Priests from other men? Or have you condemned Walter Brute for saying, that a
Priest receiving by bargain any thing of Yearly Annuity, is in so doing a
Schismatic and Excommunicate? Or have you denied William Th^rp, whom the (...)
of Martyrs calls a Valiant Warrior under the triumphant banner of Christ, for
saying That those Priest's that (...) or take Tithes, deny that Christ is (...)
in the (...) ^anc^^^s for ^^ying the law concerning the payment of Tithes was
abroga^ed by Christ Or have you Condemned the Council of Carthage for decreeing
that every Clergy (...) should get his livelihood by some Artifice or
Husbandry* Or Hi^^^m for saying It is not lawful to Swear, because it is
forbidden by the Lord? Or W. Swinder for saying, He that (...) Have you
condemned the Bishop of Nola for saying, To subscribe ones self Servant, who is
a freeman, is Sinful Flattery, not a (...) of Humility? Is Augustine condemned
for saying Plays and Recreations are more pernicious and abominable than those
Idolatrous Sacrifices which are offered in honor to their Pagan Gods? Or is he
and the Waldenses, whom Bishop User defends as true Reformers; Condemned, for
saying, As many paces as a man makes in a dance, so many leaps he makes to Hell?

We ask all this, because you say that what passages you charge, (though falsely)
upon us as Errors, unless we condemn them, we must be cha^geable with them.
Therefore by your ov^^ rule, if you esteem those above writings and sayings of
the Ancient Protestants and Fathers (you esteeming your selves their
Successors) to be Errors, You ought also to condemn them; but if you esteem
them as sound Christian Truths, then surely you ought all to endeavor a
christian conformity thereto: and when you so do, then will be laid aside your
pretended necessity of an outward personal sucession, and your outward and
restricted order of Priesthood. And then you will own that every good Christian
(both Men and Women) may be a Preacher; then you will hold that the Institutor
of Universitys was a Star fallen from heaven to earth, and that they are the
Stews of Antichrist, Synagogues of Satan etc: And then, you will own that
humane learning is not necessary to fit, but rather a hinderance to the fitting
of a Minister; and that it^s the Grace of God that fi^^s men for that heavenly
work. And then you will own that a Priest should not bargain for any thing of
an Yearly Annuity; and that the payment of tithes is abrogated by Christ. And
then you will own that it is not lawful Swear* and that he that Swears, Sins.
And then you will own that to respect persons for their habit and G^^^ is
inconsistent with the true faith; and that the practice thereof, by the
confession of both Luther and Calvin, is against the Light within us, and then
you will own that for a man who is a (...) to subscribe himself a servant is
not a testimony of Humility (...) ^^ttery; and according to Luther Erasmus and
Howell that you (...) only fit word (...), more than one (...) that to use it
to one is absurd, and an incongruous and ridiculous speech and that it comes i^
through pride and ^^attery. And then you will also own that every step that is
made in ^ dance is made toward hell. And lastly that Tables, Dice and Prays
were invented by the Devil etc.

And to conclude, as the above are the Testimonies of the An^ient Protestants
and Fathers, and, consistent with the Scripture, and for that you hold,
practice and maintain the contrary. This with other things and not with the
least prejudice to, or despising the person of any, nor any ways thinking
highly of our selves (but truly owning and loving what is good ^^ whomsoever it
appears nor with the least design of decrying or opposing, but sincerly
believing, and by God's assistance ready to maintain upon occasion against
Turks, Jews, Infidels or Heretics, the Doctrine of our blessed* Saviors
Visible, appearance in the Flesh, Dying for our Sins, Rising for our
Justification, Outwardly* Ascending into Heaven, coming again to Judgment,
Raising the dead, the Authority of the Holy Scriptures as given by Divine
Inspiration, with all other Christian Doctrine according to Scripture, We say
it is not these Doctrines nor things but the (...) and diverse other unscriptural
and lifeless Inventions, Traditions and Teachings of men, Slighting,
Disesteeming and Vilifying the Light of Christ and his free teaching within,
together with the above and many other vain Conversations and Practices that
from time to time have occasioned, and occasions many (who sincerely desire to
follow on to know the Lord) to withdraw from the many ways and the many self
Invented Worships and Conversations, and to cry within themselves and say after
this manner, Arise this is not our rest, it is polluted with Doctrines and
Inventions of men, with men made Worships, Superstion and vanity; therefore
come out from among them etc. and, we believe for Zion's sake, men will not
hold their peace and for Jerusalems sake they will not rest till the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
Larrip that ^^^neth, that the teachings of Christ and his free Gospel Ministry
may more and more have place in the hearts of the people. And that according so
Scripture, Prophecy of Gospel days, The Mountain of the Lord's house may be
established in the top of the Mountains and that the Nations may (...) into it,
and (...) to lift up Sword one against another, and so to (...) no more. That
(...) under his Vine, and under his fig tree where (...) ^ake him afraid. This
work being in measure begun in many, they are made often to cry one to another
after this manner, saying, O house of Jacob come ^ye and let us walk in the
Light of the Lord: In which Light men may more and more come to see and witness
the fulfilling of these precious promises of God made to them* that the Wol^^h
cruel and destroying nature in man may be so changed, Es^^: 11: 6^ (...) 25.
that as it w^^^, the sucking Child may play on the hole of the A^^, and the
Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard (...) down, with the Kid and the
Calf, and the Lion ^ the fatling together; that so a little Child may lead
them: for according to the Evangelical Prophecy and promise of God, they shall
nor hurt nor destroy in all his holy Mountain^ ^^t men will then more and more
see the need and benefit of sincerely, waiting upon, and reverently adoring and
worshipping, the Lord their God, drawing near to him in the Spirit of their
minds, and often crying unto him, that his will may be done on Earth, and that
their Souls may, be delivered from death, their hands from destroying each
other and, their feet kept from falling that so they may walk before God in the
Light of the Living Psa^ms 56: 13.

A Brief Abstract of Testimonies of Ancient Christians and Fathers, collected
from more large citations out of the Works of William Penn Robert, Barclay, and
of George K^ith also, concerning the Light, the Spirits Teaching, waiting in
Silence etc. whereby may be seen a great d^genetacy or Depravation in those in
our days, who so much slight the ^^gut as D: Leeds in his title page to
Almanac 1705 calling it their [to wit the Quake^s^] dark Light and inside King.

And in pa: 57. Of the Principles etc: the three Norfolk Rectors call it, A
whimsical witness, called the Light within f^^h^d from Terra Incognita etc: as
before said, and also indise^eeming our silent waiting upon the Lord our God.

But Chrysostom who^ lived (...) ^^ci^ed by W: ^^^^'s Christian Quaker, pa: 63;
^^^4. faith, Let ^^n^^clame the Light they are not ^^^^d, (...) their own
rebellion, who refuse to be saved by it* This he very Solemnly calls a ^eacher
or Instruct^r dwelling in man's nature etc: ^^ that without a teacher to
instruct, inspire, help and assist him in what ^^nds (...)

Tertullian, who lived anno 195, asserts that a life subject to the holy
Guidings of the Universal Light in the Conscience, is a kind of natural
Christianity, or to be naturally a Christian.

Athanasius says, the way whereby to attain to the knowledge of God, is within
us, which is proved from Moses, who faith, The word of God, is within thy
heart, and from this saying of Christ. The faith and Kingdom of God, is within
you etc.

Cleme^s Alexandrin^^ in his Admonition to the Gentiles says, I exhort thee
because I would have thee saved, and that would Christ also, who offers thee
life in one word, but thou' may say what is it? It is the word of Truth, the
incorruptible word which regenerates mankind, and leads them again to Truth,
the Spur that pricketh on to Salvation who expels destruction, chafeth away
death, and has built a Temple in mankind, that it may place God in man.
Christian Quaker pa: 62.

Lac^tanti^^, who lived Anno 315 says. The Law of God is made known unto us,
whose Light, like the Stars to the Marrines in the night season, clearly
discovers to us the path of Wisdom, that Law is pure and unspotted reason
defused through all the World, in it self unchangeable and eternal, which that it
may det^^r man from vice does faithfully by it is Injunctions and prohibitions
declare unto man his Duty R: B's Apol. p: 1.72.

Clemens Alexandrinus in his warning to the Gentiles faith, that the heavenly
Ambassador of our Lord, the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared
unto all etc: Hear ye therefore (says he) ye that are afar off, hear who are
near, cited by ^. ^. i^ Divine (...) Revel: pa: 154.
the Word is hid from none, the Light is common to all, and shines to all.
Again says he, it is not impossible to come unto the Truth and lay hold of it;
seeing it is most near to us in our own houses

The same Clemens says, there is a lovely or amiable thing in man, which is
called the Inspiration of God.

Gregory Na^ian^en says, The Sun enlighteneth the visible World, -- ^^ 163.
and God enlighteneth the invisible world, and the one makes us see the Sun,
the other makes us see God. Jerome who lived about 400 years after Christ,
says, the knowledge of God is in all men by nature; page 168.
nor is any man born, who is without Christ, and who has not in him the Seeds
of wisdom and righteousness.

Again the above Clemens directs men in general to go to the Light and Water
within themselves, pa: 164.
which he also calls the Light in ones own house.

J^stin Martyr in his Apology for the Christians unto the Emperor of Rome, pa:
158.
says, We have learned that Christ is the first born of God, and we have
declared that he is the reason or word to whom all mankind is partaker, and who
live with and according to the Word are Christians.

The said Justin on that Text, " And it shall come to pass that I will pour out
my Spirit upon all flesh, ^^^ 15^.
and on my Servants and on my Hand maids, and they sh^^^ ^^^ercise the Office
of a Prophet faith, Among us (meaning the Christians) are to be seen both women
and men, who have these Gifts from the Spirit of God.

Augustine says, There is an inward Master who teaches, Christ teaches, pa:
146.
his Inspiration teaches; where his Inspiration and Anointing is not the words
outwardly make but an empty sound.

Bernard says, surely to seek the Kingdom to God, and the righteousness
thereof, pa: 202.
ye shall endeavor rather to enter into your selves, than to go forth or to
ascend above. Again in his 108 Epistle he says, I pray thee return unto thy
heart.

Antiochus a Greek Author pa: 103. says, How good and seasonable a thing is
silence, pa: 19^.
the mother of the wisest thoughts; for the good Spirit ^^eeth multitude of
speech; therefore silence is the good mother of all virtues.

Bernard in his Epistle 341 says, The discipline of Silence seems burdensome
unto some; pa: 129.
but the Prophet considering that it was rather a strength than a burden,
says, In silence and in hope shall be your strengh, in silence (he says) and
hope; for it is good to wait for the Lord in Silence: for the consolation of
present things weakneth the Soul, but the expectation of future things does
strengthen it. Now this of receiving strength by waiting on the Lord in
silence, well agrees also with the Prophet in another place who says. Keep
silence before me O Islands, let the people renew their strength, Isaiah 41* 1.
Again another says, Be silent, O ^ll flesh before the Lord, Zachariah, ^: 13.
And this also agrees with the experience of many a Soul at this day, who have
often experienced the renewing of strength in the Lord, as they have been found
diligently waiting in the true silence of their minds upon him; and sitting
down in the nothingness of themselves, and in deep humility before him; and
such who so truly wait, the Lord is ready to teach them (according to the
saying of the wise man) to be more ready to hear, than to offer the Sacrifice
of fools, and also not to be (...) with the mouth, nor to let the heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God. Eccles^ 5^ ^, 2.

Again the aforesaid Justin Martyr, (greatly approved among all Christians) in
his first Apology for the Christians to the Senate of Rome, writes thus, that
Christ was in part known unto Socrates, for (says he) the Reason and the Word
[mark the Word] was and is in all men, even the same which foretold by the
Prophets things that were to come to pass.

And Augustine says, surely the Soul was before the Letter, and the Word
before the book, and the sense before the style etc: pa: 156.
Again says he, pa: 160:
The word that sounds outwardly is a sign or signification of the word that
shines within or inwardly, unto which the name of the word does rather more
agree.

Much more might be instanced than what is at the beginning of this Appendix,
out of the Holy Scripture concerning the Light of Christian (...) as also than
what has been here produced out of the Fathers; but at present we shall wave
them till further occasion offers. Howbeit by what has been produced from both
may be clearly seen the weakness and folly of those who term, such as turn from
the Inventions and Traditions of men to believe in, embrace and walk in this
Light, to be such as run after new Lights, as has been often, but very
foolishly objected against us: and indeed it is only said, but not proved, for
it is no other than an old Gospel Truth, (though much clouded and obscured from
men by the misty times of darkness, and by diverse humane inventions and
Traditions) that God is Light and as God is Light; so should we walk in the
Light, that we may have fellowship one with another, and that the blood of
Christ may cleanse us from all Sin. And this being the message they had to
declare of old, it is not novell but an old, necessary Gospel Truth, to declare
the same thing now in order that a man may attain the same end, (to wit) to be
cleansed from Sin, from which cleansing follows the Salvation of the Soul. And
now although these Backsliders and some busy Priests appear so implacably
virulent against us, rendering us as a people not fit to be tolerated etc: yet
we are satisfi^d that there are many sober judicious people, both of the Church
of England and others, that have other sentiments of us; and are more (...),
generous and just in their carriage toward us.

Doctor John Edwards in his free Discourse concerning Truth and Error, faith of
the Quakers thus, The Quakers are very strict and precise in their Looks,
Garbs, Speech and Behavior above other persons, and make great show of
Sobriety and self Denial; whilst they talk much of a Light within them, they do
not neglect the outward luster and shining of their lives: whilst men and women
of other persuasions (to their shame be it spoken) are given too much to vain
affecting of fashions, to pride of Apparel, to Lightness, Wanttonness and
Luxury, things highly unbecoming their holy profession, those persons in the
mean time abstain from the Sins of the time, and declare against the vanities
of the Age. I have read some of their books (as Barclays etc:) with great
delight, wherein they exhort to self denial, abandoning of Carnal pleasures,
Worldly lusts and Vanities and all Excess; and this with great warmth and Zeal,
and in pathetick and choice words ^ they excellently represent Temperance,
Charity, Gravity, Humility and other moral accomplishments; they worthily
extol a virtuous life, and fall into some noble Raptures, whilst they are
doing so. In a word they seem to preach nothing but a divine life and heaven.
see pa: 128, 129. Printed 1701.

And the Learned, Judicious and Religious Judge Hales, in his book entitled
The Judgment of the Lord.

Chief Justice Sir Matthew H^le. Of the nature of true Religion, ^air thus of
the Quakers, Take away some singularities, the men are as other men, some
indeed sober, honest, just and plain hearted men, and sound in most, if not in
all, the important Doctrines and Practices of Chistianity.

Now observe, the Bomb with his false fire lately thrown among us, ^aith
indefinitely, that the Quakers are Cheats, Liars, Impostors, and that their
whole business is to deceive. Yet we f^^ the above Dr. Edwards ^aith, They
worthily extol a virtuous Life, and neglect not the outward luster and shining
of their lives, while they talk much of a Light within them. And surely there
is no shining luster in Cheats, ^yars and Impostors; nor in them who make if
their whole business to deceive. And though the Bomb says, all their reasonings
about instituted religion is to debauch mankind; yet you see the ^ai^ Doctor
says, He has read some of their books, particularly Robert Barclays (where
our reasoning about instituted religion is largely treated on) with great
delight; but what sort of person would this render the said Doctor to be, to
read books with great delight; the tendency of which is to debauch mankind. And
whereas the Bomb says, The Quakers are as vile impostors as ever were, the
sink of all Heresies etc: Yet we see the said Judicious Judge Hales says, Take
away some singularities, they are as other men etc:

And whereas G: K: in his reasons for renouncing Quakerism pa: 14. speaking of
the Quakers, says, If a stranger should ask them what they are, he could
receive no other answer than that they are what other men are not etc:

Now note Reader, the account here given of the Quakers by this partial and
inveterate Adversary G: K: and when compared with the above account of the
aforesaid Doctor, what will it amount to, (seeing G: K: says we are only what
other men are not) but this, (so wit) that the Quakers a^stain from the Sins of
the times, but other men do not: the Quakers declare against the Vanities of
the Age, but other men do not: The Quakers keep up the outward luster and
shining of their Lives, and exhort to self-denial, abandoning all excess with
great We^^^^ and Zeal, but other men do not: the Quakers Extol a virtuous
life, so that they seem to preach nothing but a divine life and heaven* but
other men do not.

Now the reason why these men differ thus widely in their representations
concerning us seems very plain, for that on the one side some speak for self
interest; and others from deep prejudice; but the other side from a more
impartial and Christian observation of us, and from a more solid and sedate
Judgment concerning us.

And likewise concerning the Episcopal Clergy, the said Judge Hales says thus,
As to the Pope's supremacy they disdain it, but if you acknowledge not
Episcopal Government, if you swear not Canonical Obedience to your Ordinary, if
you submit not to the Liturgy and Ceremonies, Vestments and Music used in the
Church, you are at best a Schismatic.page 28.

Again of the Clergy says he, Observing, certain modes and forms, and the
rigorous observation of them are the common Road for attaining preferments or
favors of great persons; upon that account they exercise a mavelous fervor
of mind for them; and a vigorous opposition of all that come not up to them in
every punctilio, that they may thereby be taken notice of and employed as
useful and fit, and vigorous asserters and Instruments for this purpose. -- And
because pretense of Zeal for Religion carries a fair plausibility with all men;
therefore those very things that are but Engines of gain and profit, are
Christened with a specious name of religion: it was the making of Silver
Shrines for Diana, the art whereby the Artificers got their living, that made
the Outcry, Great is Diana of the Ephesiaus. page, 19, 20.

Note these above passages with much more are taken from the latter End of the
above Daniel Philips book, cited there by our friend Richard Claridge who a few
years ago, himself a Minister of the Church of England.

WE come now to examine some among the many more of Daniel Leeds false charges
against our friends; most of which have been in a more brief manner so charged
upon him already in print, to which he has made no reply.

First, We begin with his News of a Trumpet, page 6 [marked 7] where D: L*
cites Williams Penn from Sandy Foundation pa: 22, thus since Christ could not
pay what was not his own [debt] it follows that in the payment of his own the
case still remains equally grievous, since the debt is not hereby absolved or
forgiven men but transferred only.

Sandy Foundation pa: 22 truly and fully cited thus: But admitting one of these
Mediums possible for the payment of an infinite debt, yet pray observe the most
unworthy and ridiculous consequences that unavoidably will attend the
impossibility of God's pardoning Sinners without satisfaction.

Consequences Irreligious Irrational.
1. That it is unlawful and impossible for God Almighty to be gracious and
merciful, or to pardon Transgressors, than which what is more unworthy of God.
2. That God was inevitably compelled to this way of saving men, the highest
affront to his incontroulable nature. 3. That it was unworthy of God to pardon
but not to inff^ct punishment on the Innocent, or require a satisfaction where
there was nothing due. 4. It does not only disacknowledge the true virtue and
real intent of Christ's life and death, but entirely deprives God of that
praise which is owing to his greatest Love and Goodness. 5. It represents the
Son more kind and compassionate than the Father, whereas if both be the same
God, then either the Father is as loving as the Son, or the Son as angry as the
Father. 6. It robs God of the Gift of his Son for our Redemption, (which the
Scriptures attribute to the unmerited love he had for the World) in affirming
the Son purchased that Redemption from the Father by the gi^^ of himself to God
as our complete satisfaction. 7. Since Christ could not pay what was not his
own, it follows, that in the payment of his own, the case still remains equally
grievous since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred
only; and by consequence we are no better provided for Salvation than before,
owing that now to the Son which was once owing to the Father. 8. It no way
render men beholding or in the least obliged to God, since by their doctrine he
would not have a^ated us, nor did he Christ the last farthing; so that the
acknowledgments are peculiarly the S^^^s, which destroys the whole Current of
Scripture Testimony for his good will toward men. O the infamous portraiture
this doctrine draws of the Infinite Goodness! Is this your retribution, O
Injurious Satisfactionist?
Observe Reader, here is the whole page inserted verbatim, where thou may see
here is no such thing (as since Christ could not pay what was not his own
[debt] the word debt in the Crotchets, being but a Crotchet of D. L's envious
brain, both to render G: Whitehead and W: Penn inconsistent with each other,
(G: W: having there been cited by him, as counting T: Danson a blasphemer for
holding that Christ was not Innocent when he suffered for our Sins) and also to
render W: Penn to hold that Christ was guilty of Sin, [O horrible to think on!]
when he so suffered. But as the word debt there is not said D: L: ought
therefore to make satisfaction, by publicly acknowledging his fault at least.

Again says D: L: so here G: W: renders W: P's Doctrine blasphemous for
holding that Christ had a debt of his own to satisfy to God, as W: P: those
largely affirms, ^ly: Ibid.
pa: 22 of Sandy Foundation.

Observe ^^ndid reader, thou have the said 22 page cited above at large. Is
there any such words in any part thereof, as D. L: most abusively renders W: P:
largely to affirm, (to wit) that Christ had a debt of his own to satisfy to
God? ^urely no; for neither largely* nor any otherwise does W: P: in the least
affirm a^y such thing, but exactly contrary, where tho^ may see he there owns
there was nothing due from Christ, and that he was Innocent. It Is true it was
his own that he laid down, his own life that he give for a ransom Matthew: 20:
28. and therefore it was what was his own, according to W: P: that he ransomed
us with: but yet it follows not therefore that it was to pay a debt of his own;
for what he did therein was for us, as himself said, I lay down my life for the
Sheep, John 10.15 and if for the Sheep, then not to pay a debt of his own.
Therefore in fine, for that D. L: has here publicly exposed W: P: rendering
him largely to affirm that Christ had a Debt of his own to satisfy to God W: P:
having no ways affirmed, nor in the least intimated any such thing but the
contrary, as above; it is therefore a horrid abuse and public slander upon him
by D. L: for which he ought as publicly to acknowledge his fault.

3ly* See again his News of a Trumpet pa: 14. where he cites thus, Christian
Quaker by G: W: pa: 212. The man is mistaken if he suppose that we plead for
the righteousness of a Creature [i, e, Christ as many or men's own
righteousness, which he is enabled to perform, as the cause of our
Justification etc:

Note G: W: was here answering one Stephen Scandret, who it seems in his pa:
99. spoke of a four ^old righteousness, the fourth of which as he worded it,
was thus (viz) the perfect, everlasting and infinitely precious obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ; this last the best robe to be the righteousness of God
himself. Now G: W: having before spoken something about the other three, he
comes to the fourth. But the said S: S: having alleged that this fourth
righteousness is the perfect etc: obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ as above;
and this being said as it seems he thought, in opposition to the Quakers, whom
it is like, he also supposed, according to the then too much vulgar mistake, to
have held that the righteousness of a Creature, even man's own righteousness
which of our selves we are able to perform, was the cause of our Justification
etc: To rectify which mistake G: W: begins his reply, as is here under, truly
and more fully Cited than D L. has done it, which is this. The man (...) that
we plead either the righteousness of a Creature, or (...) righteousness, which
he himself is enabled to perform, as the cause of our Justification. For Christ
that strengthens us and enables us by his Power and Spirit dwelling in us to do
the Fathers will, he is the ground and cause of our Justification, and in him,
who is the beloved, are we accepted etc:

Observe here, We justly charge D: L: of abusing G: W: by adding those words,
as the Reader may see, [i, e, Christ, as man] to G: W's words there by making
the passage to look so erroneous as if we put a slight upon the righteousness
of Christ, as man, or what he did, as man, for us. But for that there is no
such words writ by G: W: but foisted in by D: L: therefore for this he ought as
publicly to acknowledge his fault.

4ly. Again D: L: in pa: 23. of his Trumpet cites G. Whitehead thus G: W's
Nature of Christianity pa: 29. "Christ has not the body of man*

But the whole page of G: W: truly cited, is thus to his opponent: see thy
manifest contradiction (viz.) a perfect Justification and redemption (of
sinners) without them, when no good is wrought in them (contra) but now it must
be done by Christ's appearance in believers, through Faith by his Spirit.

As also thou grantest that his appearing the second time, is without Sin to
Salvation, but when think thou that must be, is it in this life or
hereafter? thou say that after the bodily death you shall be raised out of
the Grave, and made partakers of that Salvation pa: 13. it is strange the
Salvation of sinners, yea of the whole world, as thy word is should be
completed at once above sixteen hundred years since, (from whence thou
should look upon us, whom thou revilest and condemnest to be in as good a
state as thy self) as yet to be so long after death looked for, how long is not
known to thee; or do thou look for Christ as the Son of Mary to appear
outwardly in a bodily existence to save thee according to thy words pa: 30? If
thou do; thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will see such an
appearance of him.

Observe here is the whole page, and as the then whole debate betwixt G: W: and
his opposer was, about the way and manner of obtaining Salva^^on by Christ: so
Robert Gordin it seems expected it should be done by Christ as the Son of Mary,
appearing outwardly in a bodily existence which occasioned G W ^ say if thou
do, thou may look till thy Ey^ (...) out etc. which pos^^^ly ^y this time may
be true in fact. And the G. W. opposes R. G's looking for Christ's appearing
outwardly in a bodily existence to SAVE MEN which was the subject then in
Controversy; (...) neither of which, nor yet any other ways does he deny Christ
to have the body of man, no^ that his body does exist outwardly. And seeing the
being or existence of Christ is of God head and Soul as well as body, it is
(...) ^re surely improper to say that Christ IS; but rather more proper, that
Christ HAS a bodily existence without us. To be short, D: L: having most
falsely accused G: W: of saying and holding such false doctrine, as that Christ
has not the body of man, G: W: saying no such thing; therefore for this he
ought to make satisfaction.

And note though D: L: has here falsely accused G: W: of denying Christ to have
the body of man, yet in the self same page, endeavoring to squeeze from him a
Contradiction, he quotes the same G: W: in answer to W: Haworth, (near thirty
years ago ^ largely owning Christ to have the body of man, [thus,] Christ did
rise in that body wherein he suffered, and in the same ascended into the
heavens. -- And it is so far circumscribed in the heavens, as it is capable of,
and as is proper to it; and tho it be Spiritual and Glorious, yet a body, and
therefore not in every place where God is. Note, this with much more, and of
older date, too tedious here to name, being near thirty years ago, It Is in vain
to tell us now we did not own these things till after Francis Bugg; the Snake
and G: K: had writ against us etc: a Story they have of late endeavo^red to
impose upon the Reader.

5 Again in his Almanac, on the month January 1703: he cities W: P: from
Quakerism a New Nick name etc: pa: 6. saying, Faith in Christ's outward
manifestation is a deadly poison these latter ages have been infected with, to
the destruction of goldly Living. This D. L. and G. K. have published over and
over; and therefore I shall cite the whole page 6. of W. P's said book* with a
few lines for connexion's sake, in pages 5 and 7 which is thus, Christianity
then is not an historical belief of the exterior acts the true Christ did in
that bodily, appearance, which is but historical Christianity, as our Adversary
weakly argues, pa. 4. for that was the least part of it, since Christianity is
that which brings to God; which thousands which believe the other, never arrive
at: but a firm belief in him that so appeared lived, (...), rose and ascended,
both as testified of in the Scriptures of Truth, and more especially as he
^eaks in upon the Soul by his divine discoveries, as the true Light
enlightening every man. This I call Christianity; and that man is a Child of
Light, who obeys that Light, a true Christian, who is Christ-like, a Child of
God, and heir of the promise, who is inwardly renewed and begot anew of the
incorruptible Seed and Word of God; for those who were Christians of Old, were
such as came to know Christ no more after the flesh, but as the second Adam,
the Lord from heaven, the quickening Spirit, who said I am the Resurrection and
the Life, really witnessing him to be that in themselves; wherefore they
believed, and upon repentance received remission of Sins and eternal Salvation.
And I do affirm that Christianity stands in the manifestation of a measure of
that righteousness, power, wisdom, truth and life in the Soul, which appeared
so gloriously in that Body at Jerusalem, to work repentance, then give
remission, so renew, redeem and finally save: And who (...) to be made sensible
of that heavenly treasure in their mortal bodies, and to improve it as good
Stewards, were possessors of true Christianity, and therefore right Christians,
the distinction betwixt moral and Christian: the making holy life legal, and
faith in the history of Christ's outward manifestation, Christianity, has been
a deadly poison, these latter Ages have been infected with, to the destruction
of godly living, and apostatizing of those Churches in whom there might once
have been begotten some earnest living thirst after the inward life of
righteousness.

Observe here are W. P's words verbatim, not only the whole page, but the whole
Section, placing the word [manifestation] in it is proper place, as it is
corrected in the Errata; and we see he did not call faith in Christ's (...)
manifestation a deadly poison, but on the contrary, it^s clear he did in
express words then own a firm belief in him that so viz. (...)) ^^s manifested,
lived, died, rose and ascended. But it was such as (...) a holy life,
slightingly calling that legal, and so making faith only in the history of
Christ being outwardly manifested, to be Christianity, was what W P so
testified against; but W. P. had a better and more Christian understanding,
than to render faith in Christ's outward manifestation, a deadly poison, but
'twas the slighting and excluding holy life, from having a share in
Christianity, calling that legal, as the place clearly shows that W. P. so
struck at. And truly though these opposers run so ati^t at him about it, yet W.
P. is not without good company on his side* he has the great and eminent
Apost^^ Paul, who told the Church at the Romans who had then faith in Christ's
outward manifestation) so as he tells them their Faith was spoken of throughout
the whole world. Rom: 1.8. yet he also told them that if they lived after the
flesh, they should dye; but if through the Spirit they should mortify the deeds
of the body they should live, 8.13. Again he exhorted the Hebrews, (who, to be
sure, had also faith in Christ's outward manifestation, for he called them his
holy brethren, and partakers of the heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1^) to follow
peace with all men, and holiness without which no man should see the Lord,
12.14. Here the Apostle, as well as W: P: enjoins the necessity of a holy life
upon them, who then already had the faith of Christ's outward manifestation: So
that we see, it was not that faith alone that was sufficient, as the Apostle
James also very expre^ly has it, saying, Faith, if it has not works, is dead
being alone. James, 2, 17. And that by w^^ks faith was made perfect verse 22.
You see then (says he again) how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only. verse 24. and again, That as the body without the Spirit is dead,
so faith without works is dead also. verse 26. So that we see the difference
betwixt what the Apostles, and what W: P: said in the matter, lies only in the
wording, but not in the doctrinal part; neither were the Apostles words at all
times nor in this case the fame, though their doctrine was. But to conclude, D.
L. having affirmed that W. P. did here call Faith in Christ's outward
manifestation, a deadly poison, it is a very great falsehood in him, and as
great an abuse upon W. P. for which the said D. L. ought to make satisfaction.

Again see D. L.'s Almanac, November month 1703 where he accuses G: F^x of
mangling and perverting a Priest's words, which if true, D: L. above most men
should have been silent, he being, in his observation thereon guilty of no less
tha^ base forgery against W. P. concerning which hear him, for says he, But
have they no cloak to cover these forgeries of G F's? Yes, the fluent Tong^ed
Penn has inverted such a cover as no Equivocating Jesuit could out do it,
it is in Penn's preface to G. F's Journal, in recommending of him, he says, it
proceeds from the one side of his understanding, which was toward the world,
which he there acknowledges was somewhat dark of weak.

Now the said Preface having been diligently perused, we do affirm D. L. has
most grievously abused W. P. in this matter also. That part of W. P's preface
wherein we find words most like to those wherein D L. has so extravagantly and
lavishly abused him; is this. W. P. as (...) it) (...) G F says in le^^ 16.
For his personal qualities, both natural, moral and divine, as they appeared in
his converse with (...) and in the Church of God, take as follows.

(...), He was a man that God endued with a clear and wonderful (...) other
Spirits, and very much a master of his own. (...) tho (...) next to the world^
(...) might found uncouth and unfashion (...), his matter was (...) very
profound, and (...) bear to be (...), but the more it was so, the (...) and
instructing it appeared; and as abruptly and brokenly as sometimes his (...)
would fill (...) him about divine (...) were often as Texts to more fairer
(...) beyond all Contradiction, that God sent him, (...) any share in his
Matter, or of his Ministry, and that so many great, excellent and necessary
truths, as he came forth to preach to mankind, had therefore nothing of man's
wit or wisdom to recommended them, so that as to man he was an Original, being
no man's Copy; and his Ministry and Writings show they were from one that was
not taught of man, nor had learned what he had by Study, no^ were they (...)
and speculative, but sensible and practical Truths, tending to Conversion and
Regeneration, and the setting up the Kingdom of God (...) the hearts of men
etc:

Now observe and behold Candid Reader, the great abuse of this person D: L: to
rende^ W. P. so as if he had acknowledged, first That G. F. was a (...), see
(...) that it [mark it] to wit, the forgery proceeded from one side of his
understanding etc: and thirdly, that W. P. did there acknowledge it was
somewhat dark or weak. All which the reader is here informed, we have just
cause to charge upon D. L. as a most notorious abuse and falsehood, there ^eing
no such passage in any part of the said Preface as he speaks of, nor any thing
like it. Therefore for this notorious abuse, he ought to make satisfaction by
public acknowledgment etc.

Again, since the above was written* we have seen the book called News coming
out of the North, about a passage in the title of which we find G. F. and the
reader much abused by this abusive man, in his Almanac, July Month 1904* where
he, D. L. speaking of a passage about Ordinances, Churches etc faith, viz: The
book out of which this passage is taken is entitled News out of the North,
written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is naked, and stands naked
before the Lord, whose name is not known in the World, risen up out of the
North, which was prophesied of, but now is fulfilled, called George Fox; thus
far D: L's false citation, for George Fox is not there mentioned, as well as he
has left out the last part of the said passage* as we shall make it appear by
fully citing it as follows (viz:) Written from the mouth of the Lord, from
one who is naked, and stands naked before the Lord, clothed with righteousness,
whose name is not known in the world, risen up out of the North, which was
prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled the army is coming out of the North
against you terrible ones, whose weapons are not carnal but spiritual. Here,
reader, is the entire passage* where first we observe D: L: has left out next
before the words (is fulfilled) the particle [it] which alters the sense; and
it no ways appeared here that G: F: by those words [which was Prophesie^] meant
it of himself, as D: L: would (...) by his so forging words there as G: F's
words, which are not so, (viz.) after the words [but now is fulfilled] he adds
and joins the words [called George Fox] to make the words look as if it was
writ to show that he, G: F: by whom that book was written, was in that place
intended and meant, which cannot so be proved; for the reader may see, first it
is not said, written by one etc: but from one. secondly there is not George
Fox, nor so much as the two Letters of his name subscribed to it, nor any other
ways is it in it* or at it, nor in any part of the title page. O false man! And
indeed the words in themselves seem to import thus (viz) that, by the North
therein mentioned that was prophesied of, did allude to what the Prophet
prophesied of bringing God's people out of the North Country, which was then
in measure fulfilled in a Christian and Spiritual sense, as more plainly
appears by the following words (which D. L: very unwarrantably left out) viz:
the army is coming out of the North against you terrible ones etc: as above.
And it seems that by the North we may understand an alluding to the place
whither the people had been driven, and from whence, at their return, they
shall, as says the Lord, come with weeping; and with supplication will I read
them I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a strait way wherein
they shall not st^mble, see Jerome: 16: 15 and 31: 8. Neither do we find in that
book called News out of the North, any thing that had the least tendency of
giving particularly any news out of the North literally speaking, so that, to
conclude, we find it a pie^^ of base forgery in D. L: First, to add those words
[called George Fox] and secondly, that he added them nineteen words, before the
passage was ended, to which he added them, and then quite leaving out the said
part. For all which public abuses he ought to make public satisfaction.

Again in his January month 1704. D: L: has it expressly thus. The Scriptures
(says Francis Howgil) are the Attire of the Whore, of false Church, which
brings none to know God (...) Christ. page ^11 of his Works.

This is also a great falsehood; and to show the Reader, the more plain, that it
is so, we have taken pains and transcribed from the beginning of the Chapter to
several lines after those words [the attire of the Whore] are mentioned, which
take as follows. For since the Apostles days, their foundation has been
taken, either Traditions, Imitations, Inventions of their own brain, or
borrowed things from the Jews in the first Covenant, or at the best, the Letter
has been the ground of their faith and foundation, which they have turned and
translated this way, and that, according to the wit and reason of every
particular Sect and opinion; and according to the understanding of their
private Spirit: now all these Buildings and Towers that men have builded up in
the Apostasy, they would fasten upon the writings of the holy men of God, and
so have raised an imagination of their own, and so would have the Scripture
prove what they say; and the writings of the Apostles, they all call the
Gospel; and the word of faith, and the Light of the Gospel, and the foundation
and the Tryer of Spirits, and the Touchstone, and say, it is the foundation of
their faith and religion; and so are all in the distraction, one envying
another, and persecuting one another about the words of Truth, spoken from the
Spirit of Truth, which cannot be understood again, but by the same Spirit, and
so all them that have not the Spirit of Truth, are in the Apostasy; and all
Sects, Judgments and Opinions that have risen up since the Apostasy from the
faith that has been once delivered to the Saints, when the Woman travailed and
brought forth a Man child, which after because of the D^agons power, fled into
the wilderness, and her Ch^^d was caught up unto God. ^ll the Faith and
Worship, that since is sprung up, since the Whore has sitten as a Queen in
Majesty, is all denied the Ground of her Worship, Laws, Traditions, Inventions,
and all their Invented Practices and Forms, and Images, and Likenesses are
denied and disowned, as to be the dress and attire of the whore, which has
(...) people through her enticing pretenses, and shows of holiness; when indeed
all is but spiritual adultery, and this must be all turned under again, the
Whore's flesh burned, and her attire plucked off, and her nakedness appear, and
her shame to them that have committed fornication with her, and they shall be
ashamed of themselves and of her, and abh^r themselves, and abhor her, and
destroyed shall she be; and the Lambs Wife shall be beautified and come out of
the secret place into open view, out of the Solitary wilderness, into the
beautiful place, that the Lord will bring^ her into. And after sai^^* And the
many changeable dresses of the Whore, many attires in which she has appeared,
and Imaginary Worships into which all have ^un, since they were Apostatized
from the faith, all this shall be disannulled and come to an end.

Observe reader, here is all that is mentioned of the attire of the Whore, is
there any thing here said as D: L: asserts, viz: that the Scripture is the
attire of the Whore, the false Church which brings none to know God or Christ?
No, we see it was the ground of their Worship, Laws, etc: that sprung up in the
Apostasy, since the Whore sat as a Queen, that had not the Spirit to give them
the understanding of the Scripture, and all the invented Practices, Forms and
Images of the diverse Opinions, which they all wrongfully pretend the Scripture
was the foundation of, when it was only their own twisting and turning them
etc: Was that he called the Attire of the Whore; but as to the Scriptures, we
see he expressly calls them the Writings of the holy men of God, words of Truth
spoken from the Spirit of Truth etc: but as the reader may see, he does not
call the Scripture the Attire of the Whore, the false Church which brings none
to know God or Christ, as this D: L: so very abusively, expressly renders him
to say; therefore for this also he ought to make satisfaction.

Again, see his May month 1704* he cites a passage of a blasphemous Letter,
which he says, was writ by John Audland to G: F: beginning thus Dear and
precious One, in whom is my life bound up, and my strength in thee stands, by
thy breathings I am nourished, by thee is my strength renewed. Blessed are all
they that enjoy thee; Life and strength comes from thee, Holy one etc:

Now as confidently as D: L: affirms this was from John Audland in a Letter to
G: F: without any pretense of proof that it was so. So we have many reasons to
believe the contrary, some of which are aptly laid down by our friend Joseph
Wyeth in page 483 of the Switch for the Snake, which reasons take as (...).

Some of our Adversaries, as the Snake page 115. pretended to give some pieces
of it, [meaning the aforesaid Letter] but have contradicted one another as to
the matter of it, by which contradiction in terms it is fully shown that they
could not all be right, as they pretended they were. Again says he, "this
pretended Letter from John Audland to G: F: was not so well contrived, but the
forgers who have heretofore given it with a date, have made it bear date from
Bristoll Anno 1665. this was a very unlucky oversight, which as it cannot now
be mended, so it absolutely overthrows the pretense of it is being his, because
John Audland was buried in Westmoreland the 24 of the first month 1663, being
the last day of that year, so that it appears he was dead about two years
before the date of the pretended Letter.

Now observe, since D: L: has expressly called it John Audland's Letter to G:
F: upon our disowning and denying it to be so upon such good grounds as above,
he ought to prove it as well as charge, and until he so do, how can we esteem
him less than a false accuser of us herein also; and fo as that for which he
ought to make satisfaction.

Again, D: L: in his January month 1704. has it thus, Josiah Coal page 115 of
his Works, brings a passage against the Protestant Ministers, saying, Consider
with your selves says he* How deplorable a thing it is to see such Hypocritical
Intruders stand in a pulpit with such a brazen faced book, as is their corrupt
and perverse Bible in their hands.

Observe, though D: L: in his Almanac 1705 disowns that he quoted those above
words, as Josiah Coals words yet we appeal to the considerate and impartial
reader, whether as he had cra^tily worded the above passage, unless any had
otherwise known the contrary they could be any otherwise taken than for Josiahs
words; and they were taken as such, though they were the words of a Papist, and
cited by Josiah Coal, as part of a whole Chapter, containing about three pages
in quarto of the Papist (but not above five lines about the Bible) whose book
against the Protestants or Sectarian Ministers, as the said Papist called them,
Josiah had there answered; and there being in that particular Chapter such
matters contained against other Protestants, as about their Ministers
Commission, the King being supreme head of the Church, singing Psalms etc:
which we neither held nor practiced, and that was therefore more proper for
them to answer than for him, which he left for them to do if they thought good.
But now if D: L: had not cited that part of the said recited Papist's Chapter,
which so contumpteously spoke of the Bible on purpose, to make it look like
Josiah's words, but the Papist's words, why was he not so plain as to tell
whose words they were? three words more would have done it' And further, why
did he not, since he now implicitly pretends he cited them as the Papist's
words, cite them truly as they stand in the said Josiah's book? no, then he
must have cited them, (being the Papist's words) confounding Singular and
plural; for thus they stand in the Papist's Chapter, viz: Reader consider with
your self etc: which so to confound singular and plural is not the Quakers way
of speaking, so that he might well know that to have so t^uly cited it, would
the easier have discovered the trick. But D: L's false citation is, consider
with your selves, to which he adds, [saith he] to make it look just like our
friend Josiah's words and language, plainly showing it was Josiah that he would
be thought to have meant, for no other [he] was he speaking about, so that all
his shifts and quiblings are too short to cover his baseness, and so we also
charge D: L: with being a base and false insinuater against us, for which in
justice he ought also to acknowledge his fault.

Again in his April month 170^ he cites Edward Borough thus. O thou North of
England, who (...) counted as desolate and ba^^en, and reckoned the least of
the Nations; yet out of thee did the Branch [Fox] spring, and the Star [F^x]
arise, which gives Light to all the regions round about; in thee the Star of
righteousness [Fox] appeared.

But Edward Borough truly and more fully cited is thus. O thou North of
England, who art counted desolate, and ^^^^en, and reckoned the least of the
Nations; yet out of thee did the Branch spring, and the Star arise, which gives
light unto all the regions round about; in thee the Sun of righteousness
appeared with woun^ing and healing, and out of thee did the terror of the Lord
proceed, which makes the earth to ^emble and b^ ^emoved; out of the Kings,
Princes and Prophets did come forth in the name of the Most High, which uttered
their voices as thunders, and laid their Swords on the necks of their Enemies,
and never returned empty from the slaughter. Though I ^e at the waters of
Babylon, in a strange Land* and as a Pilgrim and stranger destitute but not
forsaken, as dying, but behold I live, yet if I forget thee, let my right hand
forget her Cu^^ing etc:

Observe, as much of this passage is to be read and understood in a Spiritual
sense, so it was written in an Epistle by Edward Borough, when he was in the
Service of the Ministry in Ireland, and was directed to the Camp of the Lord in
England, to whom he writ in general* but as in the North of England, his native
place, the clear manifestation of the Truth did first most eminently break ^
^1th, and the Branch, the Star and Sun of righteousness did most eminently
appear, so he directed one part of the said Epistle particularly to them, as
above in part is mentioned. But that he there called G: ^: the Branch, the Star
or Sun of righteousness, names peculiar and intended only to Christ the Lord,
our Righteousness, we see is not so; for, as above appears, there is not the
name [F^x], no, nor is it in any part of the said Epistle, neither could it
follow by any consequence that G: F: was meant, for he did not spring out of
the North, but rather near the middle of England; but for that D: L: has so
pro^usely and wretchedly added in those places the word [Fox] on purpose to
defame our profession, and the professors of it: therefore for this great abuse
he ought to make satisfaction.

Again lastly. The last we shall mention at present is, where in his January
month 1704. D: L: having there alleged against our friends from Quakers Refuge
pa: 17. saying that we query whether the Pen man of the Scripture was Moses or
Hermes etc: the falseness of which I detected in Postscript to last years
Almanac, he quotes and cites G: F: thus, Then comes their great Apostle F^x in
his S^u^'s Errand, pa: 7, and says, The cursed Serpent is in the Letter, which
is Earthly and Carnal, Death, beastly ware, Ink and Paper; so these Serpents
feed upon dust, and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is
the Letter which kills.

Now that the falseness of this Quotation may also plainly appear, we shall
recite the whole page of the said book where any thing of the Scripture is
mentioned or spoken of: and begin with his Adversary's objection against him
thus.

Object: He said that whosoever took a place of Scripture and made a Sermon of
it or from it, was a Conjurer, and his preaching was Conjuration.

Ans. He that puts the Letter for the Light, when the Letter ^aith Christ is
the Light, he is blind, John 8.12. And they that say, the Letter and the Spirit
are insep^rable, when the Spirit says the Letter is Death, and kills* and
all that do ^^uly to raise a living thing out of a dead, to raise the Spirit
out of the ^etter, are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons, and so do speak
a Divination of their own brain, (...): 23: 16. and 29^ 9, 10.

" Object: Ge^ Fox said the Scripture was Carnal.

Ans: The Letter of the Scripture is Carnal, and the Letter is Death and
kills, but the Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor: 3: 6. which was in them that gave
forth the scrip^^^res, and that I witness which is Eternal and not Carnal; for
the Jews which had the Letter persecuted Jesus Christ* the substance. And so do
you now which have the Letter and not the substance: there were Ministers of
the Letter then, and Ministers of the Spirit; so there is now.

Observe now Impartial and Candid Reader, here is all in the whole page where
any thing of the Scripture is spoken to, and something more of the said Saul's
Errand verbatim. Have we not cause therefore to say, this virulent person is a
profuse scribbler, a false accuser, a Fo^ger o^ Lies, a Physician of no value.
We see here is no such passage, no^ can the passage be found, we verily
believe* ^n any book written by any friend of our Society; notwithstanding this
Adversary thus abusively lets loose his lavish pen against us; Is this the way,
as in his Almanac, January month 1705, he vainly talks of to war against Satan
transformed, thus to appear himself, whilst in his work, so grievously deformed
from Truth and honesty? And now for that he has taken such liberty from time
to time thus lavishly to abuse the living and the dead; he might do well
ingeniously to confess his fault, and do so no more, otherwise it is not being a
pretended contender for the faith, that will defend him from the portion of a
false accuser of the brethren: And now inasmuch as he has raised against us so
many lewd, abusive and false accusations, until he has as publicly
acknowledged as he has charged them, what credit can be given to him as an
Author. However, notwithstanding which, it is our desire and earnest prayer to
the Lord, to bring him to a sense of his evil works, and so to preserve us at
all times ou^ of Enmity against him, as that we can sincerely say, the Lord
forgive him if it be his will,

T^^s, friendly reader, is some of the many lies and s^and'rous abuses to say
nothing of the miscitations, Clipping of sentences, and perverting of our
friends writings, that this D: L: this poor pretended contender for the
Christian faith, which works by Love, and for Charity which envieth not, nor
v^^nte^h it self, is guilty of, concerning all or any of which we do not
remember he has made any reply, except about his quibling about Josiah Coal,
and of his so very falsely accusing W: P: from page 20 of Sandy Foundation, of
calling Christ as man, the finite and impotent Creature Therefore it is but a
poor Evasion in him to say, as he does in his Almanac January month 1705. that
it is almost too late in the day to give ^articular Answers to such stuff. An
idle, though confident evasion (as if he had from time to time r^pl^^d
sufficiently already) for here is produced so plainly against him, such and so
much of his own false and abusive stuff unanswered, so short of Christianity,
honesty of good neighborhood, that it must needs lie as an heavy odium upon
him in the minds of all our judicious and impartial neighbors or others that
may have the knowledge of it. Concerning all which, as we said before, we say
again, If he shall still persist in this manner of evil work against us,
without taking due notice by way of reply to our just defense, which from time
to time we have made, or acknowledging his faults as above, we hope we shall be
excused, if we do not think our selves obliged so particularly to answer him
as hitherto we have done.

And lastly, that the reader may see, we are willing to give our neighbors, or
others what reasonable satisfaction we can, concerning the Truth of what we
have here retorted upon D: L: in the above twelve particulars, as also in the
Bombs four quoted charges, together with the above Sandy Foundation and Josiah
Coal's Book, We have procured the books out of which their quotations are
pretended to be taken to be lodged one whole year, commencing the first of the
ninth month 1705 at the house of Robert Burrow in Chestnut Street in
Philadelphia* where any person may seasonably and soberly come and view any of
the said passages in order to satisfy himself, whether what we have here
transcribed out of their books, and our observations on them be not genuine; as
also whether in D: L's and the Bomb's charges or in our answers there remains
the falsehood.

Signed in behalf of the People called Quakers, by CALEB PUSEY.


