Some brief Observations MADE ON DANIEL LEEDS HIS BOOK; Entitled THE SECOND
PART OF THE MYSTERY Of FOX-CRAFT. Published for the clearing the Truth against
the false Aspersions, Calumnies and Perversions of that often-refuted Author.

By CALEB PUSEY.

With a Postscript by Tho: Chalky wherein D: L: is justly rebuked for falsely
citeing him

But this I Confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets Acts. 24. 14. By Evil report and good report:
As Deceivers, yet true,
As unknown, and yet well known
Cor: 6.8, 9. Printed at Philadelphia by Joseph (...) 1706

A few words to the Reader.
Courteous and kind Reader.
I am not unsensible of the diverse Censures and discouragement^ ^ ^an in our
times lies under that up ears in Public Controversy, about Religious ma^ters
my self bring in ^me measure a w^mss thereof; in my appearing from time to time
against this Dam^^ Leeds. One cries I do not like Controversy; I know not what
good it ever did. And concerning D: L: one says; I would never double my se^f
with such a Con^entions Wra^g^^r. Another ce^es Let him one he is not worth
answering. A virtuous Person says a^^ther. Another cries There Is no end of it.
Another calls it S^^dding. Another calls it quarrelling one with another. And
this some from C^^ren-men so called and some from others; but that which has
been my support through it all has been. I^t. A necessity I have found my self
by under to wipe away those reproaches and (according to my small ability
remove those ^^umbling-b^ocks which th^^ D: L: has from time to time
endeavored to cast in the (...) of the weak. 2 ^y. Because in the doing of ^r
as I have had Pea^e in my self ^ am ^ satisfied I have in the main had the
Concurrence of the Brethren in these undertak^ngs; which together with the
consideration I (...) had ^ to what would undoubted^y have been ^^d with grief
by many that are ^^ak and soverly by our moderate Neighbours^ but ^^anting y by
our e^v^ous Adversaries; had not our just d^s^nies been published again him
Experience of all which we have had in remote parts where D: L's works against
us have reached at times, and places when and where our an^wers have not been
heard of. I say the consideration of these things; has still overballanced the
above discouragement; and notwithstanding D: L's unju^^ way of ^r^atin^ us by
h^ many nay multitude of false a^cusations against us; (...) very
anchristian-like carriage toward us has ^ight frothy (...) s^ur^ilous
discourse, publicly ^^^ing thereby ^^nocent persons, and numbering them with
the guilty; and that in such a light and indecent manner as is altogether
unlike a Christian; as well as unbecoming the gravity of such a pretended
Contender for the Church-Faith: Yet I say, notwithstanding Dt^: is such had not
some leading men o^ the Society he is of so much ^^^tenanced him, as in these
parts they have especially of late publicly done; we should have still I
appeared against ^m^ as we have hitherto been cautious mostly to do) only as
single D: Leeds; but inasmuch; as he is so much coun^enanced by them, we think
it is but just they should be something int^tuled to his above evil practices;
until they have brought him publicly to condemn them.

D: L: by his title page seems to have done; I shall be well satisfied if he
hold on that mind for I do assure the reader that I love controversy so little
that whenever I writ against him; I still very inwardly desired it might be the
last.

Some Observations on D: Leeds book, called The Second part of the Great
Mystery of Fox-Craft.
First, I observe

IN his Title Page he boasts, of his Mr. Talbot's appointing time and place of
meeting our Friends, to prove the charges in the Bom^ against us; but he tells
not, that that peremptory challenge was soon answered by us in one half-sheet,
called False News from Gath etc. to which I further add, that according to the
Prover^ what is spoken may easily be misrendred or forgotten; witness that very
little discource P: Fretwel^ had with Elizabeth ^enton in the presence of M:
Wheat at Burlington; the one solemnly denies what was there alleged by D: L:
in his Almanac 1705. to be said about E: Fentons being Sprinkled, The other
offers to Swear the contrary. See Mystery of Fox Craft page 15. But that which
is published in print begun here and continued by them) will speak for it self
though it be never so much ^^is rendered in print or otherwise. And how easily
might that great falsehood of D: L's have passed current among many people;
(viz. that he had proved all the charges against us in the Bomb) if we had had
only a verbal dispute for it; seeing he sticks not, confidently to affirm in
the front of this his works; that he has in this his book so proved them
notwithstanding our prints on both sides compared makes it obviously appear;
that he has ^o so much as touched upon two thirds of them; so that I say, how
current might this fa^shood have passed among people and how incapable should
we have been, so undeniably and satisfactorily to have detected him if bar^ and
verbal say so^s after a dispute had been all we had had to have disproved him
by.

I come now (...) 2, ^ and 4 pages and as ^o his many and mostly often answered
quotations there brought and attested to, by his eight pious and learned men
(most of whom call themselves M^sionaries I observe ^^st tha^ though they say,
they exactly agree with the books and^ ^ yet it ap^^^rs otherwise and though they
seem to have squeezed them as c^^se to our ^^^^nds words, and to answer their
ends too, as they could possibly do, yet they have not escaped (...) their
fingers by (...) cabbling (...) dirty m^re. For W: Penn does not deny as they
her^ [ Ser^^ns Apol pa: 146] ^^stify (to w^^^) That Jesus Christ that suffered
was properly the Son of God. Those words Jesus Christ in the C^^^he^s bring
their false additions to what W: P: said; and this ^h^y do no^withstanding W:
P: ^xpr^^sly says in the next t^r^^^^g words that he that laid down his Life
and suffered his body to be Crucified by the Jews without the Gates of
Jerusalem is C^r ^^ the only Son of the most high God. These are his very
words. How then dare they bring him in to deny Jesus Christ ha^ suffered* to be
properly the Son of God: since in that very place he calls him the Only Son of
the most high God: And by the words outward Person it is as clear from his
following words, he meant only of his body saying (as proof that the outward
person that suffered was not properly the Son of God A body hat^ thou prepared
me sa^d the Son Then said W: P. The Son was not the body though the body was the
Son's. Now if that body tha^ died was properly the entire Son of God how is
then the Son of God of an eternal g^neratio^? And does ^ot the Apostle thus
distinguish w^ere he says he was made of the seed of David after the flesh:
but was declared to be the Son of God according to the Spirit of holine^s, etc:
Romans 1. 3 4 which is sure^y more then what is ^^^ward or i^able. In short their
adding those words [Jesus Christ] to W: P's words renders the Quotation not
exact^y to agree either with W: P's words or sense.

2dly Observe. These Eight Men ^^use W Pe^n in saying. That in page 20 and 21
of Sandy ^oundation he denies that Christ has made satisfaction for the Sin of
man. For, first W: P: denied not that Christ ma^^ satisfaction in a Scriptural
sense, which is, that God out of his ^^^^te love was so well pleased with what
Christ did when he suffered for our Sins as that he accepted of it as a
prop^^ions and most satisfactory Sacrifice on our behalf, B^^ ^h^ Doctrine
which W: P: opposed was, that God could not save us but by Christ suffering
(...) wrath and vengeance in the nature of a a^str^ct rig^d and full payment of
a debt for our sins, rendering thereby* as if God did not for Christ's sake
freely forgive us. And if this be to deny Christ to have made satisfaction for
our sins in any sense, then themselves deny it; for Dr: Stilling ^fleet then
Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the second, (since Bishop of Worcester)
preaching in favor of our Principle in this respect plainly says: Our
Adversaries (meaning the Presbyterians managed that Controversy with more zeal
than judgment and says he; none need think themselves obliged to maintain,
that Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the Sins of ^^en
considered under the notion of debts and that he paid the very same that we
ought to have done which says he) in the sense of the Law is never called
satisfaction but strict payment. Note here the said (...) distinguishes, just
as W: P: did, betwixt strict payment and satisfaction. Again (says he) Above
all things it is impossible to reconcile the fr^^ness of remission with full
payment. And again, It Is impossible the same debt should be fully paid and
forgiven. See his dis^^^^ of Christ's sufferings page 269 270. 272. cited in
Divinity of Christ by Geo: Whitehead page 85 86 87.

Now how does it behove D: L: and his learned A vo^chers well to consider how
the Church of England agrees with W: P: In this matter in saying, It Is
impossible the same deb^ should be fully paid and yet forgiven. An^ how they as
well as W: P: distinguish betwixt satisfaction and str^ct payment; opposing the
latter, but not the former. So says W: P: in the same book Not (says he) that
we deny but really confess that Jesus Christ, in life doctrine, and death
fulfilled his fathers will, and offered up a most satisfactory Sacrifice; but
not to pay God, as being otherwise unable to save men. see page 32. More I
could mention of their unfair q^otations but my design is brevity.

3dly. Observe That though these eight men ^^^ty that D: L's quotations exactly
agree with our friends book yet they say not a word that they are cited full
enough to show the Authors sense, when compared with the contex and subject
matter, as impartial me^ would do. To instance one, to render Geo: Fox, from
Great Mystery pag^ 246, as a contemner of the Holy Scripture, wherein to abuse
that good man and entire lover o^ the Holy Scriptures. They cite him calling it
blasphemy to affirm the Scripture to be the word of God; but as his reason is
m^re rendered, (to wit) because the Scriptures themselves give tha^ title to
Christ, but G: F: there calls the Scriptures expressly the Scriptures of Truth,
and God's words [Marktha] therefore had G: F: been quoted full enough to have
sh^wn his sense, which in justice they ought to have done (and one line more
would have done it) it would have ^iearl shown that G: F: was no contemner of
the Holy Scriptures.

4thly Observe. Notwithstanding this, these eight M^n seem to be wise enough ^o
steer so clear as not to testify that D: L's quotations prove all or any of the
charges in the Bomb as it ^^s titlepage he seems to intimate; no I verily think
especially for one of them though he has done too much yet would never be
brought to be guilty of so much extravagan^^y.

5thly Observe. That though in Bomb Searched, from page 14 to ^9 I produced near
twenty false particular and g^oss charge against us out of the said Bomb of all
which, though D: L: has not (...) upon above five or six of them ver^ he very
impudently (for (...) but right so to call ^e) aff^ms he has proved them all.
behold therefore now far this man is gone, which (...) inspious and lear^ed
ment^^^ countenance

6thly Observe. That of the said near twenty black charges ^g^^^^ us the late
Bomb ha^^ quo^ed, for proof ^ut o^ our book^ bu^ ^or two of them and that in
four places only; which notwithstanding is four too many because they are every
one false; there being no such words as the Bomb alleges in any one of the
sat^ places cited by him For which abuse, in Bomb Searched pa:.4 and.8 I
particularly complained against him y^^ D: L: has not in the least assayed to
prove so much as one of these cited charges to be true, and says he has proved
them a^l.

7thly Observe. As to the business page 5 about infallible discerning let them
b^^ look into page 15 or the Three N^^ fo^k Rectors book called The Principle
etc: they may see (...) that as ^^ Doctrines whether they be false teachers or
true 'tes evident we may certainly know whether they be false teachers or true
else why are we comminded say they to try Spirits which shows they may be
d^scerned of what sort they are though Satan does never ^o much transform himself
into an Angel of Light etc: Now what difference is there betwix ^ertainty and
Infallibility a ^^ing they so much reproach us about? And indeed if Christ's
Disciples are wholly d^ti^^u^e of having an Infallible discerning to want
purpose then do these men (who to besure esteem themselves such print against
us, as they do, since then for any thing they know whatever they presume to say
we may be the sound and they the unsound Christians; and that, what they say to
the contrary, would be at best bu^ Co^^^ctural.

8thly Observe. How confidently D. L: commends the Author of (...) Snake which
tho I have proved in an Almanac 1705 and 1706 under the hands of fou r^^^able
person (...) England; (nor Quakers besides wha^ G^o Whitehead. and Jo: V^eth
have proved otherwise abundantly against him for a grievous false Scriber (...)
which D: L: has made no answer yet continues and imposes his Commendations as
he does abundantly in other matters, as if whatever we make appear to the
contrary, thinks he must be believed, though without (...) against us.

9thly. Observe. pa: 5. I did not say as D: L: alleges, that Francis Bugg,
sold his Estate to pay his Debts, but rather that he had sold his Estate to his
Son, part of which he had before obliged himself ^o mak^ his Wife a jointure
of; and that at the very time he promised to g^v^ three hundred pounds with his
Daughter, he was several hundred pounds in debt, more than he wa^ worth: And
that when he was told of his belying us in his books, he (scoffingly) answeied,
his pen would run too quick sometim^; owning and making light of his writing
lies against us, but to this D: L: is silent.

10thly. Observe. Ibid, Geo: Whitehead does not argue in pa: 55. of Light and
Life, that the blood outwardly shed, was not the blood or life of Christ: and
it was the Baptist, not G: W: that said that blood was not in being; neither
did G: W: render him a dead Christ but only told the Baptist, he was such from
his own Argument: And I do not see, that G: W; there defends S: E: but
explains, his meaning; but for himself, he says, he does not make S: E's
Expressions an Article of our Faith; especially as construed by the then
Adversaries and plainly says, that in one sense he owns the blood shed, to be
more than the blood of another Saint, nay, he mentions, how in several respect
it is so, though not as to the matter of it as to the visible; being expressly
according to Scripture, the same we partake of see Hebrews 14. However, as I
showed before, G: W: in his Antidote expressly di^owns S: E's Expressions; but
now behold Candid Reader does it appear by my saying, and truly that G: W: does
there disown the Comparison about the blood of Christ? Admit he had said in his
Light and Life about thirty years before, as D: L: renders him that therefore I
must needs (whether I had as I did not) remembered any such thing or not) be a
Liar, a Jesuitical meaner, a Deceiver of the unwary a Betrayer of the Ignorant;
and what not as he (...), this very matter renders me, b^^^des crying (...)
this is Quaker sincerity, and the like upon such like occasions. For such like
reasons, and after this must uncharitable manner, has he deal^ with me from
time to time which unreasonable treatment I desire patiently to bear from him.
And his ramble in page 6, about Christopher Atkins, the time of his being
disowned, we have only his ^are word; and I never said, he was disowned for
Doctrine, yet the Doctrine, when understood was and is disowned as unsound; but
what is all this to W^ B's saying, The Apostles did not preach a visible Christ
etc: as his-opposere did, for they preach him a visible man with flesh and bone
and: denying him as W: B: there says, to be the word: whereas the Apostle
preached besides his being visibly ascended into heaven, that he was the word
in the heart etc: therefore did not preach him as they did.

11thly. Observe, pa: 6 That, though one of the black charges or the Bomb against
us was as he there most untruly says, for calling the Scripture Beastly ware;
and Idol yet now he has not the books to prove them by, and yet says, he has
proved them all. Note a Liar often shows himself so for want of memory. And I
have answered him several times particularly page 7 of Bomb Searc'd; about his
accusing G: F: and wronging his Opponents books. Of which Answer like himself,
he takes no notice but vaunts that w^ have not offered to disprove him the we
have often told him, among many other things in answer, that we have not those
Opponents books. And he in this very place says that he cannot disprove what G:
F: says of some Priests calling the Letter of the Scripture God etc: because he
has not quoted the book. Now pra^ what difference is there in this case
be^w^x^ books not being q^^o^^d and nor having the books quoted? And as I did
there mention, so I could mention more of G. F's Opposers that di^^^ a^^wered
d^fy the Scripture, calling (...) the Object of Faith and. (...) Great My^tery
pa. ^6. A^^ ha^ we^ ^^ ha^^ e book G: F: here (...) may be some typographica^
^^^its or otherwise (...); yet, I am persuaded we might manifest so much of the
^rook^d and dark excretions of some national Priest's of those (...) their
opp^sing the ^^^^es break^g forth of the G^^^ ^^ga and Truth that would the
more evidently excuse G: F: in^^s Answers to them.

12thly. H^s pa: 8 Observe Seeing according to John's Testimony of Christ that
Christ was a man [M^ck a man] preferred before him and was before him This
could not b^ as (...) was born of a woman; for as such John was before Christ:
And seeing the Scripture no where says tha^ Christ came down from heaven, and
become man but says expr^st, it was the son of man that came down from Heaven
John 3 13. Therefore (...) no fundamental Error in T: Ellwood of others to say
Christ was man before he was (...) a woman; and surely it is as man that he is
our Mediator: And was he not the Churches Mediator before he was born of a
woman? And as God he is not our Mediator, for his Mediation is between God and
u^^^ And I have searched the four pages (...) by him (...) G: F's Great Mystery
and ^ho' there are some extentions for to safely guarded for so fully explained
as co^^d have been wished he keeping close to the intent of a^s opposers
d^nying Christ to be within us yet there is not those words [the Light w^ther]
as he talks if mentioned in any of the same pages: And for a^ his taun^^^g army
answer about Christ without and: had they been but ^ontented to have q^eried
according to the sense of Scripture o wi^^ whether we believed in and expected
to be saved by Christ who is as t^^h^ personal w^e^rance in heaven without us
but as to his Spiritual appearance he is us He might soon have had an answer
directly in the ad^^mitive; (...) that is soun^ and Scriptural* implying only
one and the same Lord Jesus Christ, who, though he be ascended into heaven, yet
also according to his promise, he is and will be with his, to the end of the
world.

In his pa: 9. As to our keeping Christ Commandments; we desire to learn keep
and practice them; bur not so much to boast ^or it, as he Pharisee-like, seems
to do, by his thus accusing us of the contrary who yet, by his continued abuses
to us shows that he is far short of keeping that one plain and great
Commandment of doing to others, as himself would be done by. And as to W:
Penn's asking, what is Christ as to his ^o^y qualifications, as he, in the same
page expresses it) but Meekness Justice and: he does not say thereby, as he
renders him, that Christ is nothing but moral virtues.

As to the need, he talks of; of preaching Christ Crucified though, according to
the Ancients those (though called moral heathen that lived according to the word,
are not to be excluded from all share in Christianity, yet contrary to D: L's
suggestions to wi^^) [ hat then there was no need, that the holy Apostles
should preach Christ Crucified and Salvation by him] there was (...) need of
it. First because Christ the Lord commanded it. ^dly Becuse the accepted time
was then come, wherein the middle will of p^rtition betwixt J^w and Gentile was
to be preached as broken down so as that the Gentiles, who before (as to the
Jewish and Legal Covenant at least) were far off were now made nigh by the
blood of Christ; and that all, through him, might have access by one Spirit unto
the Father: And all were to honor the Son, as they honored the Father, see
Ephesians: ^. John 5 23. Notwithstanding all which, it follows not but that
according to Scripture Cornelius and all others, who feared God, and w^^k'd
righteousness, were accepted of him, even before they had the opportunity of
knowing that Christ was Crucified, see Acts 10.31, 34, 35. but yet it is in
Christ the beloved who was Crucified, and gave himself a ransom for all that
that the acceptance was and is; so there was need of Christ's being Crucified,
for the Lord laid the iniquity of us all upon him, and by whose stripes it was
we are healed; so that his coming was more than a figure. And though D: L:
imposes, yet he name^ no book of ours to the contrary. And G: W: does not call
what I said of Christ's outward appearance and presence etc: nonsense, as he
falsely says; for as he cites not G: W's words fairly, so, if he had, it would
have shown that the nonsense was not said to be so in it self, but from the
Baptist's own way of arguing; and yet upon this though falsely laid upon G: W: I
must it seems* be termed for it a Dissembler, and making it my whole business
to deceive, and what not: because I declared my belief of Christ without etc:

13. In his pa: 10 Observe D: L: speaking of W: P's book, Sandy foundation,
says the Quakers keep it now up in England for fear if the Law and outward
powers but poor than, where are his wits now, (as in page, he tells me of as if
the Quakers were afraid the book which was writ near forty years ago, or
themselves, either should be punished by the Law and outward powers; whereas
the Author, who has been mostly in England from that time to this, and of
public note, both in City, Court and Country was never brought by those
powers to any trial about it. As for the rest of this page, about Christ's
Satisfaction though he has placed the Paragraphs, as if they were successively
so in W: P's book yet there are several, that should have come in botween, left
out; so shall say no more of it here, but to acquaint the reader that it is so.

14. His page 11 Observe. Here he owns he has added the word [Debt] to N: P's
words, but that which is still his great (...) he justifies the ^o^ng of it and
says, it is more plain to (...) capacities; his reason for it is seems is, for
that ^'s s^o^ing else but the debt of our Sins, that W: P: there treats on; as
i^ W: P's treating of nothing else but the debt of our Sins, must needs make
him by those words [his own] ^ean the debt of Christ's own Sins. What is this
but insipid So^^ishness? And W: P: did not there say that Christ did, or did
not pay any thing, but admitting there was such strict payment made as
aforesaid, which Dr: Stilling ^fleet as well as W: P: denied he did, that then
however, it must not have been another but with what was his own, that he had
paid it. And indeed i^ was his own life, that he ransomed us with. Matthew: 20.
28. and which was a Sacrifice Satisfactory to the Father) but not a word of
paying his own debt; but on the contrary in the very same page, W: P: in
express words says, there was nothing due from Christ; therefore for this
great abuse, I say again, D: L: ought in justice to make satisfaction.

And as D: L: himself does not quote Richard Hubberthor^ to call Christ a
Sinner; so, in one sense, God himself is capable of repentance; for he repented
that he had made man etc: Gen: 6 6. He also repented of the evil he had said he
would do unto N^ne^ch and did it not. Jona^ 3 10.

And Observe D: L's wrangling here, about the term [finite] is grounded upon a
mistake about words if his friend G: K: who doubtless knows words as well as
himself can have any credit with him for whereas D: L: reckons, that if Christ
as man, be ^^nite then impotent G: K: owns the first, but terms the last very
unwarrantably, if not blasphemous; so here is D: L's vaunting consequence about
it at an end. But observe, this leads me to take notice, that for all G: K: and
D: L's great noise of being so found in their appearing aginst us, about the
man Christ without us, the watch men upon the walls and the like; yet by their
writings, when compared, I cannot see whether they own that Christ, as man, is
in being, or not; for D: L: in his Trumpet, page 37, concludes that if Christ
^s m^n be fi^ite, then Christ as (...), is come to an End: but G: K in pa: 5^:
o^ Railing Shime^ says Christ as man, is finite, therefore according to G: K
and D: L: compared together Christ as man is come to an End.

Again, in page to of The Rebuker etc: D: L: says, It Is b^j^ond his capacity to
determine whether Christ as m^n, be finite and impotent. So that again, both
being compared, it seems to be beyond his capacity to determine, whether Christ
as man, become to an end, or not. Again, in page 38 of his Trumpet, he says, W:
P: blasphemoussly calls the man Christ the finite and impotent creature. But in
the above page 10 he says he dare not call it blasphemous to say Christ is
finite and impotent. Behold Reader how this Church-Champion contends ^or the
Church-faith. A Monstrous, but just, confusion upon him.

And as for his windy and shameless boast as that he could not bring me to
answer the challenge, of leaving the matter to the judgment of four or six
indifferent men, to try whether W: P: in Sandy Foundation called the man Christ
the finite impotent creature, as he alleged he did and as I did, and, upon
Truth's bottom, still do deny. I say, that he could never bring me to this as
he says, is an untrue, shameless and vain boast; he knows I took him up and
signified the same in a Letter sent him by a person sent on purpose to his
house, as far as Egg-harbour telling him, therein, that I was ready to meet
him within ten days from the date thereof; but which day of the ten or whether
at Philadelphia or Burlington, I wholly left to himself to appoint; but he
answered me in a Letter by the same bearer with most fiivolous, quibbling and
evading excuses, As that he lived not then at Dellawar^, and that he would have
some ground to believe I meant what I writ to him; and next that he would be
secured in person insinuating we designed to kidnap him Now how idle is all
this for ^s he made no such conditions in his challenge, so, had no^ I as far
to send, as he had to come: and had not I as much ground to suspect, that he
meant what he writ, as also that I might be kidnap'd; and therefore would be
secured in person, as he had to ^^spect such things of me. But see a further
answer to this and his other, as idle, Almanac challenge, in D: L: Justly
Rebuked, for abusing W: P: etc: from page 13 to pa: 17. And it is well it is in
print, because notwithstanding what they may now allege, it will speak for it
self without being so subject to misrepresentation, as since by experience we
know verbal discourses, with them, are liable to.

Ob^erve, in his pa. 12. Because D: L: says, I added the word [Christianity] ^o
W: P's words, in pa: 6 of Quakerism a New Nickname etc: I shall therefore cite
the words as they stand in the Errata. In the book it is together thus, The
distinction betwixt moral and Christian the making holy life legal, and faith
in the history of Christ's outward manifestation. Christianity has been a
deadly poison these latter ag^s have been infected with, to the destruction of
the godly living etc: Now I leaving in the word [Christianity] as I found it
save that I placed the word [manifestation] next the word [outward] to make it
better sense and saying it was so corrected in the Errata, has made D: L: make
this noise about it* but whether it be so or not, let the Reader judge; for the
Errata stands thus. pa: 6. line 32 for Outward Christianity, read Outward
manifestotion

Now here we see by the Errata the word [manifestation] i^ placed by W: P: next
the word [outward] ^s I said; and it being W: P's method in the same table of
Errata where he would have a word or words left out, he directed (except where
'twas necessary to put in other words, besides what was in before, in the room
of them) still to blot them out; but W: P: gave no directions to blot out the
word [Christianity] ^ho' had he there would not have needed any other word than
what was in before: therefore it is rational to conclude that as he did not
direct so he would not have the word [Christianity] blotted out; besides, who
is it that knows W: P: that do^s not know him to be a man of a better sense,
than to esteem it deadly poison to believe the History of Christ's outward
manifestation? especially considering in the very same page W: P: owns, and
stands for this to be Christianity, in these express words, (viz.) speaking of
Christ's outward appearance, he says, A firm belief in him that so appeared
lived, died, role and ascended as testified of in the Scriptures of Truth,
[Mark, here say I is the historical knowledge owned] but more especially, as he
breaks in upon the Soul, by his divine discoveries, as the true light
enlightening every man: This I call Christianity, Here we see, W: P: in the
very same page, shows plainly, that he is far from calling it a deadly poison,
to believe the Hi^tory of Christ's outward manifestation: No, it was, as G: W:
said, the making faith in the history, in opposition to his power and work in
the soul, and to godly living, which they would have had to be the Christianity
necessary. And though G: W: and I do not parrot and D: L: like) use just the very
same words yet the sense is the same, however, here it appears by his own
confession, that I do not copy exactly after the London Quakers, but dare
venture further than they have done to my hands, contrary to his most false
assertion before in his last. And now, as I know not that I have any
satisfaction to make on the above account, so I must again call upon him* to
make satisfaction for saying that W: P: called faith in Christ's outward
manifestation, a deadly poison

From his page 13. observe, How does G: F: any more than the Assembly of
Divines, say, God is equal with God as D: L: talks of? Do not they say. That
the Holy Ghost is equal in power and Glory with the Father? And might not D: L:
with the like reason, construe the words of John in the same sense, who says
the Word was with God and the Word was God: And there is (...) the ^am^ reason
^or us to leave out the words [As he is (...)] as (...) of as there is reason
to leave out ^he words [He (...) hath] The one being express Scripture words,
the other (...) contrary to G: F's declared sense in the same page, and in page
5 (...) same book, as before I showed, of which he takes no notice.

Again Observe Is it not strange, these Church people should thus taunt at us
about perfection? as D: L: here does ca^^ing it the Quakers fond Imagination of
a sinless perfection; for ^s the substance of what we hold in that respect is
but according to Scripture, to wit. That all men should so strive, and by the
help of God (whose Grace has appeared to all men attaining to a being w^^e
free from Sin; become Servants of Righteousness, having fruits of holiness that
the end may be everlasting Life. Rom 6. 22. 23. Agreeable to which is that
great conditional ^^^ept to wit. Depar^ from Evil and do good and dwell for
evermore, Psalms 37. 27. and is not this agreeable to what themselves profess
for to be free from Sin, and to depart from Evil, is but to renounce the Devil,
and all his works: Again, to do good, and become Servants of God, is to keep
God's holy will and ^ommandments. All which, they of the Church of England's
profession, not only promise to do but acknowledge they are bound to do and
perform it: And a greater degree of perfection I never understood the Quakers
ever professed to be necessary, in order to eternal life and happiness. But by
their thus taunting a^ his doctrine it seems as if they were building up those
things which formerly they professed they were bound to renounce.

As for Josiah Coals business, it has been largely answered by me several
times which answers he cunningly hides from his reader ^ho he rep^^^ again and
again.

As for t^^ Battle-Door, I sh^^^ in my last, that G: F: was the Author of what
J: Stubbs and B: Furley set his hand to, for they are G: F's words delivered by
himself in English; but his fellow laborers, doubtless being willing people of
other tongues should have the benefit of them put them into several other
languages; yet they being G: F's words, that they might not (like D: L:) assume
to themselves other men's words did still set the Authors name to them: And if
D: L: was from this so prodigiously cr^dulous, as to believe that G: F: had the
Gift of Tongues etc: as he speaks of: yet I never did so believe; for which
reason, I may as well conclude, that the Quakers were not made so to believe,
as that they were. But again, like a man that thinks he has a License to Lie
backward and forward, as he lists, he now tells us, a Jew had Eighty Pound, to
help viz: about the Battle-Door; but in his last he says. Thirty Pound, and his
beloved Snake says Sixty Pound. How like men infatuated are they suffered to
appear; and according to the Switch though they all bear false witness, (...),
yet their witness agree not together.

From his page 14 Observe. As to his taunting and vapouring there about matter
or Governmemt; I think it no more worth my notice than to referr my Reader from
pa: 14 to 21 of Bomb-Search'd, for right information and satisfaction in this
matter. Only, as to the story of his poor Banks, where in the same page he says
I pray God to keep them from having power to bite me, as they did poor Banks,
one of their opposers, whom they caught carrying his goods on horses through
Pensilvania and cast into Philadelphia Prison and took his goods from him, even
his whole estate. Now observe, that this poor Banks was imprisoned at
Philadelphia is true; but that it was for going away with another m^ns wife,
and goods who lived at New York, and who about that same time sent after her is
also true: For ^ saw her voluntarily down on her knees, asking the Governor's
pardon for it; though when they were first taken, it being about twelve or one of
the Clock of the night, she said she was the said Banks his wife but it being
otherwise suspected, and closely said to her, she then said he was her husband
in the sight of God: but being that night kept apart and in the morning
examined by Griffeth Janes at whose Country house they were taken; she then
owned her self to be the said man's wife at York and that the said Banks had
persuaded her to go away with him: But Banks being examined apart from her, he
said she hired him to go with her down to Mary land. As for the goods, which D.
L: calls [his goods] those who had the examination of the matter affirm, that
she owned them to be her Husbands goods, and Banks though asked, would not own
them to be his: And they were mostly expended for her entertainment at the
Ordinary; and that when she came again with her husband, the Account was
settled, and he had what was left, as pr, discharge, under his hand appears.
Now though this is that Banks the Ranter, whose name has long been of such an ill
savor among sober people of all persuasions, yet this is D: L's Banks on whom
the more to deceive) he bestows this commis^rating Epithet, of [POOR] Banks but
which is yet worse and sad to consider, how vainly this D: L: m^kes use of the
sacred name of God in a pretended Prayer about it, upon this his false
insinuating oration against us, in behalf of that old Ranter as above. And it is
no discredit to us, that either Banks or his Comiserator D: L: should be our
Opposer, (as he, very unfairly, without distinguishing how says Banks is so)
for this very thing bespeaks them to be ^oo much according to the Proverb, Like
to Like, and Brethren in Iniquity.

In his page 15 Observe. His turning our friends words to a litteral sense;
(...) also his p^rver^ing their words when they told, and that truly, that the
Powers in Oliver's days should be cut down, I am persuaded must be against his
own conscience. And observe, though G: F: said they should be cut down by the
same power etc: which is that power that pulls down and se^s (...) as he
pleases) yet he did not say it should be by the same means or instruments as
the same Executioner, the same Ax and: as D: L: idly talks of.

From, his pa: 16 Observe again, It does not appear by what D: L: has there
said, thar G: F: could not write the date of the year, for however the date of
one of his Letters may now appear, which may be vitiated lying so long in
Adver^aries hands; yet it plainly appears by the other Letter (which J: Talbot
affirms several that knew his learning owned to be his) that he both could and
did write it; therefore the one could no more show he could not, than the other
showed that he could and did. But it is worth the Reader's notice that they say
of that which is unlearnedly writ, they are both avouch'd to be G: F's by them
that knew his learning. Just as in one Letter, where they render him to write
for Love [lou] and [love] in the other part of the same Letter, and [wiff] for
wife in one Letter, and [wife] in the other; yet all said to be his by them
that knew his Learning. To conclude, whatever he has found in one Letter,
conceining it is not being dated well; yet it follows not, that therefore he
could not do it seeing in the other Letter as themselves have published it is
manifest, he both could and did do it, which was the most I said of it; and so
have no satisfaction to make about it.

From his pa: 16: again Observe. Upon my showing how in his writings he
imitated word for word the Snake and G: K: he talks, as if he told me but I
know not whhre that he can do no better, than follow the example of good men.
Had he only said other men, those that trace him, may possibly be of the same
min^. But how will he do by this? For his good man, the Snake, will not allow
others in such work; but terms F: H: little (if any) less than a ^hief for
(...) the famous Seld^n about tithes though b^ ^ames the said Seldom twice in the
doing of it, see Switch, pa: 480.

Again Observe G: F: does not say in page 7 of Saul's Errand. That what is not
spoken from the mouth of the Lord is Conjuration: but rather that that which is
Conjuration is the raising a living shing out of the dead and the Spirit out of
the Letter etc: is that which is not from the mouth of the Lord.

Again by my mentioning a late instance of an ill practice done by a Clergy man
in Rhoad Island I never said nor thought of any now living there; for though
there was an instance la^e in comparison of D: L's long ago stories; yet the
person was gone from thence some years before I writ: And this I the rather say
(since he thus takes it) to clear any that may be now there, from any suspicion
about it. And I do again say in sincerity, that we have learned otherwise, than
to calu^nate their Society for particular miscarriages of some Clergymen among
them* But as I remember not that I was told, so I never did cast any calumny
(as he speaks of) nor reflection on any Burlington Magistrate; neither was any
one named to me. I only gave a hint of a matter in general, as 'twas reported
to me, so I left it. And I see not how any person can justly say, he is
concerned in it. And one would think D: L: might have been silent about it,
till he had, at least given satisfaction for the great abuse he has very
frothily and undecently put upon the memory of A: Cook of Rhoad Island, and
Mary A: of Long Island both deceased. No, but instead of that, or whatever he
may have said elsewhere in his pa: 15 16. he says my charging it among other
things) as a falsehood upon him it returns upon my own head, and that my
charging it as a falsehood in him is false in me; so that he holds his charge
against them still, and yet makes no attempt to prove, nor in the least ^o
invalidate the proofs I, in my last produced against it. Indeed had we not
learned otherwise, than thus palpably and fa^sly to accuse the Innocent we
might justly have been esteemed as Wranglers and false Accusers, ou^ not as
Christian Contenders, for the holy Faith, once delivered unto the Saints. But
alas, now it is out, for from my complaining against them for charging, and we
say false charging. Innocent persons by name, who, when living, were preachers
among us; and that it was not our way to do so by them, says D: L: but by the
way, let me tell the Quakers, that the Clergy and Quaker Preachers are under
differing circumstances. But how? Why the substance is, The Clergy knowing
themselves (and all men) Sinners, pray for Pardon etc: Which the Quakers do
not, but are too proud, and the like. Now that, that we do not (for here it
hinges) is such a palpable falsehood, that I need say no more for proof but to
appeal to such as frequent our Meetings of worship. G: K: has published in
print rear 30 years ago that our friends frequently do it in our meetings, see
Way Cast up pa: 121 122. And this I have in Satan's Harbinger showed him; yet
like a hardened person, he goes on, with his notorious false charge, taking no
notice of what we justly say in vindication, as well as that we experience
frequently in our public meetings, his charge to be false. It Is true, we have
not the se^ times, or hours to pray in neither do we read the Primitive
Christians had any; but who cannot but see, that men may much as be lifted up
in a proud concert of their performances of praying for pardon twice a week
etc: as the Pharisees for fasting twice a week? And indeed, how parrallell may
this be to those Pharisees, who doubtless thought themselves under different
circumstances from other men, for that they fasted twice a week and the like.
Upon my complaining on them, for immodestly accusing innocent persons, as
ab^ve, he calls it, telling us of our failings; and that there is no other way
to humble us: But I challenge him to show, by one instance, that ever the Lord
Justified any as Instruments to humble men, by raising in a vain and light way,
false accusations against them. The Lord has humbled, and has his own ways to
humble us, as he did his Servants of old though never j^st^fied his and their
Enemies in their false immodest and scoffing attempts to do it. To conclude
this, it seems as if it were from a high conceit they have of themselves (I do
not mean all of that Society) and of their great humility, that they take such
liberty to abuse us; but the Lord who knows our hearts, will one day plead our
cause.

In his page 17 Observe, If D: L: will not own, that woes belong to them that
have made drunk the Nations, we cannot help that; but the Lord by his Servant
John gave such a like lesson concerning them. Revel: 17 and 18 chap: And there
is no comparison, betwixt telling a body of people, as i^ were of their doing
wickedness by consent, and by their public unrighteous decrees, and framing
mischief by Laws. I say, there is no comparison betwixt that, and taunting at a
whole Society, for the failings of particular persons among them (for there was
such in all ages) much more to abuse them.

From his pa. 18 Observe, It justification be in all respects wrought by Christ
in his own person wholly without us, and performed but once, as he there says:
How is it then that according to the Apostle, that Abraham our father was
justified by works? And that a man is justified by works and not by faith only.
And again it is said, we are justified by faith; now the faith of a Christian
has works and must be shown by works see J^mes 2. and it works by love. But
surely, the faith and good works of all Christians, were not performed in
Christ's own person at once, and wholly without us. What signifies your ^^^king
such a boast of your ow^ing the Scripture more than your neighbors, when in
this and in diverse other things, you urge and practice so much that which is
not Scriptural?

Again Observe, I have hitherto been trying D: L: for his abuses to us but am
now come, where he tells us he would have us try our w^ts, to see if we can
reconcile Robert Barclay; but upon viewing the passage he assigns to try us by,
I do confess I presently saw, that were it as hard to reconcile R: B: as it is
to reconcile D: L: to honesty, he had then assigned us a very hard task; for
according to his too much habituated manner, he most vitiousl^ renders R: B: in
page 895 of his Works, and says, He affirms that the historical faith and
knowledge of Christ, is not commonly given to the Quakers or to be expected by
them or any others by the Spirit; but the Scriptures. Now this he has framed
to render R: B: to contradict himself in another place viz: page 43 saying, the
Spirit teaches every true Christian what is needful for him to know etc: But
R: B's Works speaks for it self thus, The Historical knowledge of Christ is not
commonly manifested to us, nor to any others, but by the holy Scriptures, as
the means etc: Here we see, first, those words [by the Spirit] is D: L's base
addition. And 2dly, those words [as the means] is as base an omission; for as
R: B: s^d not, as he renders him so the scope of the Paragraph shows, that he
did not in^end by what he writ, that the historical faith and knowledge of
Christ was commonly given to men without the Spirit though by the Scripture, as
the means; and that is no contradiction; for though ^he Scriptures be the means or
Instrument of which the Lord, by his holy Spirit, makes use to convey us that
knowledge; yet it follows not, that therefore it is without the Spirit as D: L
corruptly renders R: B: to say. Our Lord's promise was that the Spirit should
teach us all things. And it was by the Anointing the Saints, afterward had
within the^, by which they were taught all things. Yet it is clear, the
Scriptures were commonly the means, by which the Revelation of Christ
crucified, was made known* as well as otherwise; for the Apostle speaking of
the Mystery of Christ says it was by the Scripture made known unto all nations
for the obedience of the faith, see John 14. 26. John 2. 27. compared which Rom:
6 26. And this is no contradiction of which their own Doctrine shall be judge;
for do not they themselves say, in their Church Catechism, that the Sacrament
is a [means] whereby they receive the inward and Spiritual Grace which they
also call a new birth now, a new birth is a regeneration; and though they say the
Sacrament is the [means] of this regeneration, yet they do not say that this is
without the Sprit: for they say expressly, at that very time, that they are
regenerate with the Holy Spirit: So that R: B: honestly cited compared with
Scripture and their own doctrine, makes D: L's mighty fabric, being built on
his usual foundation of false citations, to tumble down at once.

D: L: in his pa: 13. seems to threaten us with more jobbs of mending work.
Indeed at this rate, he may help us to work enough; but until he mend his own
evil work and makes satisfaction at least by acknowledgment (though I have not
thought my self oblidged in this to follow him with such particular citations,
as I used to do and as is usual in such cases with Adversaries, yet) he may
expect for the future, to be followed, by me, less particularly than ever.

THE CONCLUSION.
Containg a few general Observations on the whole.

First I desire the Reader to observe, that, as we formerly have, ^o we do
acknowledge, that there may be found expressions among the multitude of our
friends writings (whether by means typographical, shortness in Syntax,
shortness of due explanation mis-transcription, Correction, or otherwise) that
are not well expressed.

Secondly, Observe. It Is questionable whether the Aushor's works of any Society
be ^ree from some expressions that are not warrantably worded, as delivered us
in Print to instance one, (viz.) Calvin saying as in pa: 12 of Bomb Searched I
mentioned) [ Because Christ is not without us says he) but within us] yet from
this we cannot in Charity think that Calvin meant any more than that Christ is
not only without us.

3dly, Observe. That we also in Charity believe, that generally speaking such
Expressions are not an Error of the mind* especially, when compared with the
rest of their works, which in the judgment of judicious and learned men. (not
Quakers) ought of right to be allowed to Authors, as in pa: 13 of the above
book I showed.

4ly, Observe, Our Friends writings for many years were so debar^ed the liberty
of the Press and the Authors often traveling abroad, or in Prison, when their
books were Printing that it may be reasonably supposed the Transcriber
Corrector, or Press might be the occasion of many faults in them: And of such
like abuses D: L: cannot be Ignorant, having so frequently alleged the fault^
of his own books to be typographical, his being absent from the Press and.

5ly, I showed in the above book pa: 28 29 30. out of several out of our
ancient friends works a^ Edward Borough George Whitehead and Robert Barclay
etc: that we do believe the man Christ to be in Heaven to be without us as well
as that he is within us; And that Christ did Rise and Ascend in the sam^ body
in which he suffered; and that it is not annihilated though changed, and more
glorified. As also, that we believe the Resurrection and general day of
Judgment by the man Christ Jesus, against their so often accusing us with the
contrary.

6ly, In pa: 35, 36 and 37. are some reasons why we practice not that which
they call Sacraments.

7ly, From pa: 39 to 52 I showed reasons from Scripturs and from the Ancient
Protestants and Fathers against the necessity of outward Ordination, Personal
Succession restrained and limited Preaching to particular persons, called
Priests or Ministers. A^^ now it tends to limit and quench the Spirit, which
the A^osi^s ^orbad. And in defense of Women's Preaching. And against their
Common Prayer. And against Plays Sports and Pastimes. And Pride in Apparel.
Respecting of Persons etc: with much more, being against the mind ot God (as
declared in Scripture) and famous men. since the reformation, as well as
before; but to done of which D: L: has made any answer.

8ly, Observe, In pa: 43. 44. etc: I not only showed how 'twas contrary to the
Ancient Protestants, but put them also to prove by Scripture, the Unchristian
Practice used by their Ministers(viz) their forcing tithes and other
maintecance, even from those theyesteem no Christians, who never were of them,
nor never go to hear them, who for Conscience sake cannot pay tithes. And
showing how for that reason, they have plundered men's goods, casting hundreds
into Nasty holes and Prisons till they dyed, Beatlug. Knocking and Wounding
with their own hands, Innocent men and women because for Conscience sake they
could not put into their Mouths. And this is still continued in some places:
We had lately an account, of above 4000 L: taken away in Eagland on account of
Tythos and diverse still Prisoners on the same account: Ney, in America our
Friends suffer deeply at this day, because they cannot uphold the said
Antichristian Practice of ^^cing peoples goods from them (which they labor
hard for, maintain their poor famelies with) without doing them any ^ing for
it, except demand it, and then often take six times more (...) they demand,
making no returns. Which cruelty one would think were full enough of it self,
to satisfy any but prejudiced, or such ignorantly devoted persons, that such
are not the true successors of Christ, who as they freely received, so they
were freely to give; and if upon occasion they partook of the carnal things, it
was from them to whom they sowed spiritual things, and that not by force, but
as every man purposed in his heart. And so it is amongst us, and not otherwise;
for though the Ox that treads out the Corn, may take a mouth full as he goes
along; yet it would be accounted most unreasonable that therefore another
should be compelled to let such an Ox eat the corn of him for whom he treads
not: Yet after this manner do these men do by us: So that we say, had we
nothing else, yet this one thing were enough to prove them not true Ministers
of Christ; for according to the Maxim, Whoever is in the Right, the Persecutor
is always in the Wrong.

Observe, We also there declared, that though our friends sometimes opposed or
refused to express our faith in Christ etc: according to the too gross and
unscriptural concerts, some of our Opposers would have imposed upon us: yet the
difference between us and them from the beginning to this day we never
understood to be for that any professed faith in Christ's outward appearance at
Jerusalem, his outward Birth, Miracles, Dying for our Sins, shedding his most
precious Blood for us, Rising for our Justification, Ascending into Heaven,
continuing to be our Advocate, and Intercessor [the man Christ Jesus] His
coming to judge the Quick and the Dead at the last and general day of Judgment,
and Justification by him alone, without any merit, by or from the best of our
own works, but saved by the Mercy of God through the merit of his Dear Son; yet
so that it must be by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost. Titt: 3.5. And that as we never differed with any because they professed
faith in these things. so we our selves, truly believe them to be all (...) and
Christian D^ctrines: but it was for the above, with diverse other unscriptural
Doctrines, Lifeless Innovations, Traditions and teach^^^ of men, sprung up in
the Churches Degeneracy, Slighting and Vilifying the Light of Christ, and his
free Teaching within, as also for the many vain customs, Practices and
Conversations so much tolerated among them, that is the difference betwixt them
and us. see the latter end of the Preface, compared with page 14.

9ly Whereas they so much speak despiseably of the Light of Christ in all men,
as I showed: I also showed by Scripture and Citations out of ancient Fathers,
that they owned this Light, the Spirit's teaching, and ^^lent waiting as well
as we, see page 33, 55, 56. etc:

10ly Observe, From pa: 61 to 78 I enumerated 12 particulars, of D. L's false
charges against us. Citing our Friends words (to prove them such so large and
some of them the whole passages, the more ^lly than before, to make it appear
how he has abused them, acquainting the Reader in the same place, that the
books themselves also in which the Bomb's four false charges, were (as they
still are) to be ^s;^ at the house of Robert Borough in Philadelphia, where
any person might and may soberly see for themselves. But with all the noisy
rattle D. L: and the Bomb, have there made, to incense people, as if we were
undermining the Christian faith, or the like; yet it seems as if it had not
occasioned people, hereaway at least, to be under any such apprehension, for to
this day, not above one of any persuasion, have been there to see, if those
things they charge out of our friends books, be as they Cite them, or not. It
looks also, as if those persons (especially those few resideng in Philadelphia)
who promote their works against us, are more willing to take for granted, that
those their false Citations are true, than they are to try, whether they are
so, or not, seeing they might so easily see for themselves, whether in their
Citations; or in our Answers, here remains the falsehood. Also in Satan's
Harbinger in 1704. In Remarks on D: L: Almanacks 1703, 1704 and 1705. And in
Second part of Bomb Searched 1705 I have detected him of abundance more
particular falsehoods, as well as perversions and abused Citations.

11ly. Therefore again Observe, he seems in his Almanac 1706. at bottom of
April Month, to be angry at our accusing them for liars false accusers; and
says, this is our only fortification: New wheththat that case, it be our only
fortification or not, to be sure, when they so grievously abuse, and publicly
to the world belie as, thereby to ^ed, proach us and the way we profess; it is
but just that the world should ^rue be informed of it, and that we do more than
say, they are Liars and sale ^^re Accuses is evident, in that we have offered
the very books, which prove (...) them so, to be seen as above, a whole year
together, which was more (...) time given, possibly by 358 days for people
deliberately to have satisfied themselves, whether in these men's accusations,
or in our answer (...) there ramained the falsehood, then by any dispute like
meeting, they that could ^^ probably have had: And the books were easy to come
at, the said it, Robert Borrow living openly in the Front Street, and a place
of great r^^^be sort being the very next door to the Coffey house and Post
Office.

12ly. Observfe, again, since in the main, it is made so evidently appear^^ out
of our Ancient and Late Friends books, that we are sound, as to these things
they have so strugled, to render us unsound about, they seem no^ to flag as to
our books, and are trying to make people believe, we have it in our Meanings.
often of late saying, when we declare our Faith in Christ etc: We mean not a
word of what we say. but as that is horrid and presumtuous, uncharity and
falsehood, so it can never answer their End, for menkind must believe, they
cannot be so omniscious, as to know our meanings; especially, seeing it is
contrary to what we constantly express end declare our meanins to be.

Lastly Observe, That notwithstanding, these books and things as above, lie
still at D: L's door unanswered, and almost all untouched by him, i^ order
thereto, yet he continues to Cite the same things, as he pleases, taking no due
notice, of our just defenses; as if all he says were ^^allible, and
Muggleton-like, must be believed, because he says it: o^ which, as we have not
followed him, by citing him here so particulaly as I formerly hinted, I should
not, so whether he write again, or ^t, we how think, we may warrantably lay him
aside, in the main, as often confuted Adversary


