Another Tongue brought in, to Confess the Great SAVIOR of the World.

OR, Some COMMUNICATIONS OF Christianity, Put into a Tongue used among the
Iroquois INDIANS, in America.

And, Put into the Hands of the ENGLISH and the DUTCH Traders:

To accommodate the Great Intention of Communicating the CHRISTIAN RELIGION,
unto the SALVAGES, among whom they may find any thing of this Language to be
Intelligible.

Ezekiel. III 6 People of a Strange Speech, and of an Hard Language, whose words
thou can not understand; Surely had I sent thee unto them, they would have
hearkened unto thee.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green. 1707.

TO THE English and Dutch Traders, Among the Iroquois INDIANS.
THE Popish Missionaries in their Compassing Sea and Land that they may make
Proselytes, have Penetrated So deep Westward in our North- America, as to
Address the Iroquois Indians, with some Instructions of that Christianity*
which has been debased and depraved by their commixed Popery. Certainly, The
zeal of Prot^stants, to Propagate our Holy Religion, well Purified from the
Popish Mixtures, ought to be more Flaming, more Lively, than any thing that we
can see in the Church of Rome, to Enlarge the Empire of Antichrist. The Honor
of our Profession, calls for more Zeal in this matter, Without it* our
Sincerity in our Profession cannot well be justified. The Greatest Service,
that can be done to Mankind, is to introduce Pure Christianity every where;
True Christianity makes men become Noble and Happy Creatures; Christianity
advantaged with the Protestant Reformation, rescue^ the Children of M^n from
the most horrible Slavery; asserts them into the Liberty of the Children of
God. Verily, Did we Love our Glorious CHRIST, or had we any agreeable S^nse of
the vast Obligation, which He has said upon us* how Studious, how Vigorous
would be our E^de^vours* to bring all men to Know Him, and (...) Him, and have
Him Glorified among all Nations of Men! Oh! That a Spirit for the Preparation
of Christianity, were more Operative among those, (...) they are Christians!
The want of it, makes (...) questionable, How far we are, from what (...) not
the Spirit of God very dreadfully abandoned Christendom, there would be seen a
Thousand Times more of it, than there is. Blessed SPIRIT, O^* Return, and
Visit, this Miserable World; and let mavelous things be done by thy
Operations!

Brethren, You have here put into your Hands, the First and Main Points of the
Christian Religion. That famous Gr^tius, wrote his Book, of, The Ve^ity of the
Christian Religion, on purpose to furnish his Countrymen, with matter of
Discourse among the Pagans in the Indies, whither they traveled in their
Trading Voyages. Both Matter and Language too, (as the Prophet Jeremiah did
with his Chaldee) is here put into the Hands of the Traders with the Indian
Pagans, It Is in that very Language, in which the Popish Missionaries among the
Iroquois Indians, have composed (though not Published) a Catechism, full of Gross
Things, which were to be Expected from the Men of their Inten^ions. There may
be a Variety of Dialect in the Language of Iroquois Indians* But it is
possible, this little composure may somewhat facil^tate your Applications to
them, especially to some of them, whither your Prosecution of your Temporal
Interests may carry you. You are now earnestly Solicited, That you, who are
Traders for Bever-Skins, would be as Instrumental as you can to Convey the
Garments of Righte^usness an^ Salvation, among the Naked Salvages; That while
you see^ to Enrich your selves by Trading with the wretched Salvages. You may
(...) to Administer u^^o them in Spiritual things* and* to communicate the
V^searchable Ric^es of CHRIST unto them, T^a^ i^ the Providence of God may cast
you in your (...)* among the Indians, where the Language of the Ir^quo^^ in
this Dial^ct of it, may be of any use, in your communication, you would with
all possible Alacrity, lay hold on all Opportunities, to mention these
Illustrio^s Truths of the Gospel unto them Who can tell, but the Great GOD may
bring some of His Elect in your way! Oh! How Blessed are you, if you may be the
Instruments of bringing any such home unto the Lord! Who can tell, but the
Intimations which You may give unto Some or other of the Salvages, may awaken
them to Repair unto the English, or the Dutch Christians, who may Expound the
way of God more perfectly unto them! Who can tell, but as Frumentius and
AEDesius of old, when they were by accident cast into One of the Kingdoms of
the Inner India, Some of you may be, in Gods time for it, the Instruments of
drawing a whole Nation to Christianity?

But if we miss of every other Good End in this ESSAY, yet this End will be
gained. The precious Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is now Mentioned, and
Honored in a Language* wherein there was never before now, any such Public
Expression of it. Oh! when shall the Day arrive, wherein Every Knee shall bow,
and every Tongue shall confess unto that Glorious LORD.

We conclude with a Memorable Speech of Prosper: in his Book* De Vocatione
Gentium.

A^ some Na^ion^* which have not anciently been owned ^or the Child^en of God,
are since be^ome his Adopted Children, So we dou^t not, but there a^e People in
the Remotest ^arts of the World, who have not seen the Glorious Dawn^^gs of a
Sa^i^ur, and yet shall hereafter in G^ds Good Pleasure and Season, be called to
hear the News, and Enjoy the (...) of Salvation.

A Glorious CHRIST, Exhibited and Glorified, IN A LANGUAGE used, among the
IROQUOIS INDIANS, in America.
I. HOth iserhe?

Igerhe, Alahigonneastag agooas Laooendio si tionnhe naie ehagiatinniont
garonhiage n'egiheie.

Quid Cogitas?

Cogito; Colam Dominum vitae nostrae, qui me inducet in Caelum quando' moriar.

What are your Thoughts?

I Think, I will worship the Lord of our Life, who will then carry me into
Heaven when I die.

Wat syn vwe ged^ghten?

Ick deneke ick will d^n Here des levens dieneu die mine dan naer mine dood ten
Heniel will voer en.

II GAtsa ooahe n'ongooatonnhethon, noktagaia genne, ne tooaieronge K^n?

Garonhiage otiak aooetanne, otiak onhooentsiagon.

Quonam ab^t Anima, quando Egressa est e Corpore? In caelum al^^e abeunt, alt^e
in In^e^num.

Whither does the Soul go, when it leaves the Body?

Some go to Heaven; others go to Hell.

^aar g^^t (...) Zicle wanne^r (...) va^ het ^i^haem is gescheyden?

Sommige g^en ten Hemel en S^mmige gaen ter Hellen.

III. ONka garonhiage Esagoiatenhaooit Laooendio?

Naie Esagoiateooe, Agorihooaston, Jagotontaton hatie sni haooendooten GOD.

Quosnam ducet in Caelum Dominus?

Eos ducet, qui sunt, CREDENTES; nempe qui audiunt Vocen^ Dei.

Whom will the Lord Lead up to Heaven?

He will lead thither, BELIEVERS; even those who hearken to the Voice of GOD.

Welke will den Here ten Hemel Leyden?

Hy will de g^looviegen daer naer toe vocren en die geene dic naer de Stem
Gods Hooren.

IV. GA^^. nihaooendare GOD?

Gahiatons^^age hoooendannentagon.

Vbinam est V^^ Dei?

In Sc^ipturis V^x inhaeret.

Where is the Voice of GOD?

The Voice of GOD, is lodged in the Scriptures.

Waer is de Stem Gods?

De Stem Gods is geloogeer tin de Schriftvre.

V. THo n'ihati GOD ne hoiatatage ne Terso^^*

Asen n'ihati. Skat ne Sagoien, (...) ^^najen, asen hatontha hotkon agooas
(...)*

Quot su^^ in Dei Substantia Persona?

Tres Sunt. Vnus est qui habet ^ilium. Vnus qui habetur in Filium. Ter^ius vero
est Spi^itus Sanctus.

How many Persons are there in the Godhead?

There are Three Persons. One, who is the Father; One, who is the Son; A Third,
who is the Holy Spirit.

Hoc veel* Persoonen syn ^aer in de Godheydt?

Daer syn dry Persoonen Even welcke is de Uaeder. Even welcke is de Soon; en den
der den welke is den Heyliegen Gee^t.

VI. ASen gati n'hatiooendio si tionnhe?

Jaten, Saietat agooas Haooendio.

Suntne igitur Tres Domini Vitae?

Non. Vnus dunt^xat Dominus est

Are there then Three Lord-GODS?

No, by no means. There is but ONE GOD.

Syn daer dan dry Heeren Goden?

Neen.

Daer is maer Eenen God.

VII. HOteooeiennondi GOD negen Garonkia^^, ne onni negen Onhts^^te?

Laonrha hoteooeiennonni.

Laonrha Sagoiatison, Enskat Latsinn, Enskat Onnhetien.

Ne tho agooas Etiongooaiagenon.

An fecit Deus caelum ac Terram?

Is ipse fecit

Is ipse fecit, unum Hominem, alteram Faeminam.

Inde certe Exi^imus omnes.

Did GOD create the Heaven and the Earth?

It is HE that created them.

And He created one Man, and one Woman; From whom all we have proceeded.

Hest God den Hemel en a^rde geschaepen?

Hy heef^se geschaepen.

Hy heest alsoo Even Man en Even (...) gescha^pen, van welcke wy Syn all
afgesprooten,

VIII GAtsa n'ihent^ron GOD?

Agooegon n'ihenteron. Te haiatasiharon agooas garonhiage. Ionhtsiage onni.

Vbinam est Deus?

Vbique est. Implet Caelum et Terram.

Where is GOD?

GOD is every where. He fills Heaven and Earth.

W^er is God?

God is over al: en hy vervult Hemel en Aeede.

IX AT^kooi* Ongooe Lotonon GOD?

En. Ne Honaien. JESUS CHRIST ^^hatias. Hotoo^nt^ton n'iongooarihder^n, si
honario. G^rihondi hotiri^deragon thondatierent^n Ongooe ken* agooegon onni
oo^erihoo^nder^ ch^ n'ongooe si tionhooentsionti^.

An. Deus factus est Hom^?

Ita. Filius nimirum. JESUS CHRISTVS (...) pro Peccatis nostris quando Mortuus
est.

Quoniam Peccarunt Primi homines, (...), qui dein^^ps nascuntur.

Did GOD become a MAN?

He did so. The SON of God did so. His Name is JESUS CHRIST. He Satisfied for
our Sins, by Dying.

For our First Parents Sinned; And all that are born of them, are also Sinners.

Is God mench geworden?

Hy is so. De Soon Gods is (...). Synen naem is Jesus Christus. Hy heest v^l
^aen v^^onse S^nde door Syn doodt om dat onse voor onders en all die naar him
gebooren Syn hebben gesondight.

X. HOnannonstekooe JESUS CHRIST, ason onhtsiage si ireskooe?

Honannonstekooe hotiatatogeton, honatooa tannihakooe hondatserohen ne
sagoreooatakooe, ne gati ooahonni honario. Honaiatannentakton osooengarage te
Gannentsonte.

An amabant JESVM CHRISTVM, cum iret Super Terram?

Amabant illum Sancti; Oderunt vero Peccatores, quos increpabat; ideoque eum
occiderunt.

Affixerunt eum Cruci.

Did men Love JESUS CHRIST, when He walked on the Earth?

Good Men Loved Him. Ill men, (...) of His Rebukes unto them, hated Him* And
therefore they killed Him; and Harmed Him on a cross.

Hebben de menschen Jesus Christus Lie^ (...) hy ^p de Act^^ ^ean^^lde?

Geede menschen hadden him Lie^ Qu^de menschen (on^ dat hy se beris^te) haeten
hem, dae^ (...) h^^ben sy hem gedoodt on op gehangen A^n het cruys.

XI. HOth n'aiaooenon JESUS CHRIST, ne^ Laleronge ken? Gahetken Jotenon ken?

J^^en. Tegni'ooathenoonhooet, onne onsahatonn^e^e. Garonhiage Esaooeton.

Q^^d accidi^ Corpori JESV CHRISTI? Number ^utrefactum est?

Non. Post Duas Noctes resurrexit. Deind^ in c^elum r^diit?

What befell the Body of JESUS CHRIST? Did it see Corruption?

No. After Two Nights He Rose again. And after That He returned into Heaven.

Wat beviel het Lighaem v^n Jesus Christus ^^eft het vardorventhey^ under
worpen geweest?

Neen. Agter twee naghten is hy Uerreesen en dae^ naer ten Hemel gevaeren.

XII. KAtke tentre JESUS CHRIST* garonhinge? Tentre. Te Songooaiateri^anne
n'etsitooatonnhet.

(...) agooegon* Agooegon ^goo^. Esa^^oot^^^ Jesus Christ.

^n ^liquando redibit JESUS CHRISTUS (...)*

Redibit. Judicandi Mortui.

Resurgenius omnes.

Jesus Christus Omnia Omnibus Patefa^i^^.

Will JESUS CHRIST one day Return (...) Heaven? He will Return.

The Dead shall be Judged.

We shall all Rise from the Dead.

Jesus Christ will then discover to all men, all that has been done by them all.

Sal Jesus Christus ter ^emgendagk^ (...) den Hemel coomen?

Hy Sal wedrom comen.

De dooden Sullen geoorde^lt Worden.

Wy Sullen all Uerreysen van de doodt.

Jesus Christus Sal dan te voorschyn brenge^ voor all menschen, al dat sy
gedaen hebben.

XIII. THo n'igarihooage Songooannhaon JESUS CHRIST?

Oieri n'igarihooage.

God Saiatat he^segonnienstag.

Orihooagon Ja^en tarionste^ist.

Ta^en Esaooennoretakooa Godne Laooen^a.

Sasterist God ne Laooennisra.

Esegonnienstag n'esaiena.

Tagen Es^ia^et.

Tagen Esnakooarhag.

Tagen Esennen^ko.

Tagen hoth Es^ienhas.

Tagen hothnahot Esaskanne^hooe.

Qu^t sunt res quas imperavit nobis JESUS CHRISTU^

December Res.

Deum Vnum Co^e^.

Vana res nen est Curanda.

Ne Contemnas Vocem Dei.

Estima Diem Dei.

Amabis Parents.

Ne Occidas. Ne Forniceris. Ne Fureris.

Ne Maledicas. Ne Concupiscas aliquid.

How many Commandments has JESUS CHRIST given unto us?

Ten Commandments.

Thou shall Worship One God.

Thou shall not Practice Vain Superstitions.

Thou shall not Contemn the Voice of God.

Thou shall Esteem the Day of God.

Thou shall Love thy Parents.

Thou shall not Murder.

Thou shall not commit Fornication.

Thou shall not Steal.

Thou shall not Speak Evil of others.

Thou shall not Covet.

^ee ^eel g^boo^en heest Jesus Christus Aen o^s gegeven?

Tit^^.

Het Cers^e: Gebod gy Sult maer ^enen God die^en.

(...): Gy Sult geen afgod^^ye Pra^^iseren.

(...) de^de: Gy Sult het woo^d des h^^ren niet yd^lyck gebru^ken.

Het v^eide: Gy Sult den dagh des H^^ren Uieren.

Het ^ie^de: Gy Sult (...) o^de^s Lief hebben.

Het ^e^de: Gy Sult niet doodt slaen.

Het Sevende: Gy Sult geen on^u^^heyt done.

(...) aghste* Gy Sult niet Steelen.

Het negende: Gy Sult geen valsheyt Spreeken tegens uwe na^^ten.

Het tiende: Gy Sult niet begeeren uwes naesten goets.

XIV. HOth OOahonni ariontrennajen?

Ne ooahonni Tooatsioha.

Laoo^n gati Jesus Christ, sooatrennaien.

Asteson t'ariontrendaien, nok ontaiontkeskooas, onne ooaonrat, onne
ooaontseri, agooegon Jagotekooison, Ka^ke longooannigonraksatha ne otkon, Katke
Jagoribooanderen, onne ooasronhiagen.

Airiaron, JEHOAH, JESUS, Agooegon etisa^eooeien nonni n^iagionnhekon;
Alaskitenr; Tagitenr, tagen Egrihderag, tagennigonrannirat, alagathontats
Snisooendooren.

Quare O^^ndum est?

Ideo quia Pauperes Sumus.

JESUS CHRISTUS autem dixit, Orate. Quotidie O^andum. Quando Surgimus. Quando
itur cubitum. Quando comeditur; et Post etiam. Cum deprav^t Mentem malu^ D^m^n.
Quando Peccatum est. Cum Pa^e^is.

DICENDUM; JEHOVAH, JESU, Omnia fecisti quibus Vivimus. Miserearis mei;
Miserere me, ne Pe^cem; Confirma mentem meam; Audiam vocem tuam.

Why must we PRAY?

Because we are Poor Creatures.

And JESUS CHRIST has directed us, PRAY YE.

We must Pray every Day. When we Rise. When we go to Rest. Before and After
Eating. When the Devil assaults our Minds with his Temptations. When we fall
into Sin. And when we meet with A^fliction.

We must say, O JEHOVAH, O JESUS, Thou have made all things by which we Live.
Have Mercy on me: O Have Mercy on me. Let me not Sin against thee. Strengthen
my Mind, and let me Obey thy Voice.

Waerom moeten wy bidden?

Om dat wy arm Creaturen. Syn en Jesus Christus heest (...) geleert te bidden
en wy moeten d^egelycks bidden als wy opstaen en als wy te bed gaen, en v^or
den Eeten en naer den Eeten: En wanneer onse Sinnen door den Duyvel sche
temtatie ^nstel^ Syn. En waen near wy sondiegen en gecasteyt werden.

Wy moeten segge; O Jehovah, O Jesus gy hebt all dingen gemaekt. Door welcke
wy Leven. Seyt ons genaedigh O Seyt ons genaadigh, en Laet mine niet tegens uw
Sondigen. Sterckt mine gedaghten dat ick uwe gebooden magh onder houwen.

XV. HOth n'Jeierha si Ontatnegos^^abo^e?

Onnega Jonta.

Hoth n^ari^iere, n'artenrhe arongnegose^^g?

Tegarihooage t'a^^rihooandegenhag.

Enskat. Ar^onthontats ^gooas sni haooendooten JESUS CHRIST, arienrhe togenske
Laonrha Laoo sitionnhe, t^g^nske g^ronhiage Es^goiateooe Jagoriheton,
Esagoi^tonti onhtsiagon Jagorihderakskon, gra hi gen honnoooen.

T'egni ooahontha, ariagoterons^g hoth n'iagorihooanderagon, arienhre Jaten
t'aons^gri hooanderache onnagen.

^^id (...) Baptiza^ur?

(...).

Quid (...) ne Baptiz^mu^? (...) res Jung^nda.

Prima; Credendum est (...) JESV CHRISTO. Cogitandum, Ill^ ce te est Dominus
Vitae* (...) in C^lum d^cet (...). Detrudet Peccatores ad (...). Non enim est
M^^dax

Altera. D^^^ndum est de Peccato. Velint, Non amplius Peccabo.

What is there done in BAPTISM?

Water is used.

What must men do, that they may be Baptized?

Two Things are to be joined.

The First. They must Believe in JESUS CHRIST. They must think, most certainly
He is the Lord of Life. Most certainly, He will carry the Faithful to Heaven.
Most certainly, He will cast the Wicked into Hell. He is no Deceiver.

The Second. They must Mourn for their Sins. They must Will and Wish to Live no
Longer in their Sins.

Wat word gebruykt int doopen?

Waeter.

Wat sullen de menschen done datse moogen gedoopt werden twee dingen Syn
nootsaeklyck. Uoor Eerst sy moeten gelooven in Jesus Christus* en Seekerlyck
de^icken dat hy den here des Levens is, hy will Seekerlyck de gelooviegen ten
Hemel doeren. En de ongelooviegen ter Hellen. Want hy is geen bedrieger ten
tweeden: Sy moeten berouw van haer Sonden hebben en willen en wenschen niet
Langer in Sonden te Leven.

FINIS.

