A NARRATIVE Of a New and Unusual AMERICAN Imprisonment Of Two PRESBYTERIAN
MINISTERS: And Prosecution of Mr. Francis Makemie One of them, for Preaching
one SERMON at the City of NEW YORK.

By a Learner of Law and Lover of Liberty.

Printed for the Publisher. 1707.

An Epistle to the READER.
Ingenuous Reader,
YOU have here a Specimen of the Cloggs and Fetters with which the Liberty of
Dissenters are entangled at New York and Jersey Governments beyond any places
in Her Majesty's Dominions; And when the Conditions, and Impositions required,
are as heavy, and uneasy to be bore; and as great a Scruple of Conscience, as
the grounds of their Separation and Dissent, it is next to no Liberty at all.

And what the Consequences of such practices, if persisted in, will prove to
such a Place, where Dissenters are above twenty to one, for one Churchman, and
where men and money are so much wanting, for the defense of New York, both by
Sea and Land, which not many years, (by demands of men and money from the
Neighboring Colonies on the Continent) was represented, as their only Barrier
and Frontier, I leave to thinking men, and considering Politicians to answer;
besides the difficulties and discouragements laid in the way of such as would
Import themselves, and the ready and shortest way to promote Deserters from
those Provinces.

I cannot omit a true, and strange Story, I lately heard of, that during the
Imprisonment of these two Gentlemen, either to find out a Crime, none being
specifyed in the Mittimus, or to aggavate their imaginary fault: An Order was
given to Major Sandford of East-Jersey, to put sundry persons upon Examination,
and their Oaths, to discover what Discourse they had with sundry of their
friends, at the House of Mr. Jasper Crane in New-York-Town in East-Jersey,
where Mr. Samuel Melyen, Mr. Crane and another, gave their Depositions before
Major Sandford, but found nothing to their purpose: Tho the practice is not to
be outdone, yea, scarce paralelled by Spanish Inquisition; for no men are safe
in their most private Conversations, if most intimate Friends can be compelled
upon Oath, to betray one another Secrets. If this is agreeable to English
Constitution and Privileges, I confess, we have been hitherto in the Dark.

Preaching in a Private House was a Crime, and Preaching since, after being
declared Not Guilty by a Legal Trial, in a Public Church, allowed by Law to
the ^rench, is since resented as a greater, by that Unchristian Clamor, made
soon after, by some High-flown Spa^^^ pretended Sons of the Church, who with a
great deal of unbounded fury declared, If such things were allowed, their
Church was ruined: Which is a language of the same nature of those High-Flyers
in England, who were declared by a Vote of the House of Lords, Enemies to the
QUEEN and Government, for suggesting, the Church of England was in danger, from
the Liberty, or Toleration of Dissenters.

Though Preaching a Sermon, and Printing it as the cause of Imprisonment, be
reputed a Libel, to justify opening of Letters, and seizing Books, without
restoration or satisfaction. I hope it will be no crime, for Losers to speak,
in telling the World, what we have suffered on sundry accounts; not only by
Imprisonment, and the exorbi^^nt expensive prosecution; and besides great loss
of time, many diminitive reproaches upon our Reputations, by a Set of men who
could reach by their Short Horns to no higher degree of Persecution: And all
this for Preaching one Sermon, without obtaining a License, which they could
not, in terminis submit to, neither can nor dare in Conscience do to this day.

And even (...) such as have this new molded License, it (...) Crime to Preach
in another place then is expressed in said License* (...) for any to Preach in
their Pulpits: if a People wants a Minister, they must have a License to call
one, whither from New England or Europe, a License to admit Ministers to attend
any Ordination, and limited for number, and tied up from exercising their
Ministry without License, though in a transient manner, which has drove some out
of the Government, and deterred others from coming thereunto; which informs
all, what Liberty of Conscience Dissenters do enjoy.

Mr. Makemie since the Trial, narrowly escaped a second Prosecution, for
Preaching another Sermon: as some say, with a new Charge of being the Author of
the Jersey Paper called, FORGET and FORGIVE; which is so groundless a Charge,
in which his (...) not believe themselves, while the Authors smile at the mist^
(...) men are suffering Imprisonment on account of said Paper, (...) ^ll appear
to have been composed before Mr. Makemie came into these Parts.

This Narrative consists chiefly of these parts for matter. (1.) Their Precepts
for their Apprehending, and Commitment. (2.) Sundry Petitions. (3.) The
Interlocutory Conference, promoted and extorted from Mr. Makemie. (4.) Copies
of Records, attested by Mr. Secretary. (5.) The Pleadings of the Defendant and
Lawyers, with some Intermixed Animadversions, and Glosses upon those as the
Text. If the Publisher is mistaken in his sense of things, he is under the
Correction of all Judicious, Impartial, and Unprejudiced Persons, whom he
readily submits unto.

If any want Information concerning the Sufferings of other Dissenters, both in
their Persons, Estates, and Religious Liberties; I Recomcommend to the Body of
Inhabitants of Jamaica, and New-Town on Long Island, and Bedford in
WestChester; the former afraid to Petition, though one of them has a Minister by
a during-Pleasure License: And the late Petition of Bedford, for Calling a
Minister, is not yet answered, until an Abdicated Scotch Jacobite Parson,
obtruded upon them, that insults intollerably over them, is consulted with. And
how consistent such things are even with the Liberty of Conscience, enjoined
and commanded to be allowed by the Queens Instructions produced in Court, and
to be found in this Narrative, I leave to every Reader to determine.

So I bid you farewell.
A Particular Narrative of the Imprisonment of two Non conformist Ministers;
and Prosecution or Trial of one of them, for Preaching a SERMON in the City of
New York.
THERE is nothing more common in Europe, then Publishing and Printing most
Trials, especially such as afford any thing remarkable, either from the Merit
of the Cause, or Manner of Prosecution. And there being something Singular and
Extraordinary, in sundry respects, in the Cause now before us; we cannot, we
dare not, be silent at this juncture, but bound to let both Europe and America
know, the first Prosecution of this nature, that ever was in America; which we
hope, from the Merit of the Cause, manner of Proceeding, and unsuccessfulness,
shall never be drawn into President, in our quiet and peaceable Wilderness.

And though there was a disappointment, in taking an exact Copy of every thing
offered at the Trial, and so no accurate, or strictly Formal Trial, can be
expected, especially from One who is no Lawyer; but only a brief Narrative and
Genuine History of the several steps of suffering, by the Confinement of
Francis Makemie, and John Hampton, Presbyterian Ministers, for Preaching two
Sermons in the Government of New York, without License being first obtained of
Lord Cornbury, for so doing; the former upon the earnest request of certain
persons in the City of York, Preached a Sermon at the House of William Jackson,
in Pearl-street, on the 20th day of January, 1706, 7. in as public a manner as
possible, with open doors; which Sermon is since Printed; which he was
necessitated to do, seeing Lord Cornbury opposed his Preaching in the Dutch
Church; and the latter Preached a Sermon on the same day in a Public
Meeting House, offered to Record by the Inhabitants of New-Town upon
Long Island.

And Mr. Makemie remained at York City all Monday, and a part of Tuesday the
22d of January, and Traveled that day to New-Town on Long Island, where
according to public appointment on the Lord's Day, he was designed to Preach on
Wednesday following; And was no sooner arrived there, but both were Apprehended
by Thomas Cardale, High Sheriff, and Stephen Luff, Undersheriff of
Queens-County, by a Warrant, Signed by Lord Cornbury, as follows.

WHEREAS I am informed, that one Mackennan, and one Hampton, two Presbyterian
Preachers, who lately came to this City, have taken upon them to Preach in a
Private House, without having obtained My License for so doing, which is
directly contrary to the known Laws of England; and being likewise informed,
that they are gone into Long Island, with intent there to spread their
Pernicious Doctrine and Principles, to the great disturbance of the Church by
Law Established, and of the Government of this Province. You are therefore
hereby Required and Commanded, to take into your Custody the Bodies of the said
Mackennan and Hampton, and them to bring with all convenient speed before me,
at Fort-Anne in New York. And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant:

Given under my Hand, at Fort Anne this 21st day of January, 1706, 7. Cornbury.

To Thomas Cardale Esqr. High Sheriff of Queens-County on Long Island, his
Deputy.
A true Copy

Examined per Thomas Cardale.



AND being late when Apprehended, they were Prisoners upon Parole, at the
Houses of two Neighbors for that night, and next day, instead of carrying them
to Fort- Anne, according to the directions of said Precept, they were carried
by said Sheriffs to Jamaica, seven or eight miles out of t^r direct way to
York, and there detained all that day and night; as if they were to be carried
about in Triumph to be insulted over, as Exemplary Criminals, and put to
further Charge. The 23d day about Noon, they were carried to Fort- Anne in
York; and after sundry hours attendance, appeared before Lord Cornbury in the
Council Chamger, about three or 4 of the Clock, who charged them with taking
upon them to Preach in his Government without his License.

And in regard the Interlocutory Conference upon that Occasion, which continued
for some time, has been misrepresented by sundry hands, and is a seasonable and
suitable preliminary to the ensuing Trial: It is judged expedient to publish as
much thereof, as was very soon committed unto Writing, as follows.

Lord Cornbury. How dare you take upon you to Preach in my Government, without
my License?


Mr. Makemie. We have Liberty from an Act of Parliament, made the First Year of
the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, which gave us Liberty, with which Law
we have complied.


Ld. C. None shall Preach in my Government without my License?


F. M. If the Law for Liberty, my Lord, had directed us to any particular
persons in Authority for License, we would readily have observed the same; but
we cannot find any directions in said Act of Parliament, therefore could not
take notice thereof.


Ld. C. That Law does not extend to the American Plantations, but only to
England.


F. M. My Lord, I humbly conceive, it is not a limited nor local Act, and am
well assured, it extends to other Plantations of the Queens Dominions, which is
evident from Certificates from Courts of Record of Virginia, and Maryland,
certifying we have complied with said Law.

Both Certificates were produced and read by Lord Cornbury, who was pleased to
say, these Certificates extended not to New York.


Ld. C. I know it is local and limited, for I was at making thereof.


F. M. Your Excellency might be at making thereof, but we are well assured,
there is no such limiting cause therein, as is in Local Acts, and desire the
Law may be produced to determine this point.


Ld. C. Turning to Mr. Attorney, Mr. Bekely, who was present, asked him, Is it
not so, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Attorney. Yes, it is Local my Lord, and producing an Argument for it,
further said, that all the Paenal Laws were Local, and limited, and did not
extend to the Plantations, and the Act of Toleration being made to take off the
edge of the Paenal Laws; therefore the Act of Toleration does not extend to any
Plantations?


F. M. I desire the Law may be produced; for I am morally persuaded, there is
no limitation or restriction in the Law to England, Wales, and Berwick on
Tweed; for it extends to sundry Plantations of the Queens Dominions, as
Barbados, Virginia, and Maryland; which was evident from the Certificates
produced, which we could not have obtained, if the Act of Parliament had not
extended to the Plantations.

And Mr. Makemie further said, that he presumed New York was a part of Her
Majesty's Dominions also; and that sundry Ministers on the East End of
Long Island, had complied with said Law, and qualifyed themselves at Court, by
complying with the directions of said Law, and have no License from you^
Lordship.


Ld. C. Yes, New York ^s of Her Majesty's Dominions; but the Act of Toleration
does not extend to the Plantations by its own intrinsic virtue, or any
intention of the Legislators, but only by Her Majesty's Royal Instructions
signified unto me, and that is from Her Prerogative and Clemency. And the
Courts which have qualifyed these men, are in an error, and I shall check them
for it.


F. M. If the Law extends to the Plantations any manner of way, whether by the
Queens Prerogative, Clemency, or otherwise, our Certificates were a
demonstration we had complied therewith.


Ld. C. These Certificates only were for Virginia and Maryland; they did not
extend to New York.


F. M. We presume my Lord, our Certificates do extend as far as the Law
extends; for we are directed by the Act of Parliament, to qualify our selves
in the places where we live, which we have done; and the same Law directs us to
take Certificates of our qualification, which we have accordingly done; and
these Certificates are not to Certify to such as behold us taking our
Qualification, being performed in the face of the Country, at a public Court;
but our Certificates must be to satisfy others abroad in the World, who saw it
not, nor heard any thing of it, otherwise it were needless. And that Law which
obliges us to take a Certificate, must allow said Certificate to have a credit
and reputation in Her Majesty's Dominions, otherwise it is to no purpose.


Ld. C. That Act of Parliament was made against Strowling Preachers, and you
are such, and shall not Preach in my Government.


F. M. There is not one word, my Lord, mentioned in any part of the Law,
against Traveling or Strowling Preachers, as Your Excellency is pleased to
call them, and we are to judge that to be the true end of the Law, which is
specifyed in the Preamble thereof, which is for the satisfaction of Scrupulous
Consciences, and Uniting the Subjects of England, in interest and affection.
And it is well known my Lord, to all, that Quakers, who also have Liberty by
this Law, have few or no fixed Teachers, but chiefly taught by such as Travel;
and it is known to all such are sent forth by the Yearly Meeting at London, and
Travel and Teach over the Plantations, and are not molested.


Ld. C. I have troubled some of them, and will trouble them more.


F. M. We hear my Lord, one of them was Prosecuted at Jamaica, but it was not
for Traveling or Teaching, but for particulars in Teaching, for which he
suffered.


Ld. C. You shall not spread your Pernicious Doctrines here?


F. M. As to our Doctrines, my Lord, we have our Confession of Faith, which is
known to the Christian World, and I challenge all the Clergy of York to show us
any false or pernicious Doctrines therein; Yea, with those exceptions specifyed
in the Law, we are able to make it appear, they are in all Doctrinal Articles
of Faith agreeable to the Established Doctrines of the Church of England.


Ld. C. There is one thing wanting in your Certificates, and that is Signing
the Articles of the Church of England.


F. M. That is the Clerks omission, my Lord, for which we are no way
accountable, by not being full and more particular; but if we had not complied
with the whole Law, in all the parts thereof, we should not have had
Certificates pursuant to said Act of Parliament. And Your Lordship may be
assured, we have done nothing in complying with said Law, but what we are still
ready to perform, if your Lordship require it, and that ten times over: And as
to the Articles of Religion, I hare a Copy in my Pocket, and am ready at all
times to Sign, with those exceptions specifyed in the Law.


Ld. C. You Preached in a Private House, not certifyed according to Act of
Parliament.


F. M. There were endeavors used for my Preaching in a more public place, and
(though without my knowledge) your Lordships permission was demanded for my
Preaching in the Dutch Church; and being denied, we were under a necessity, of
assembling for Public Worship in a Private House, which we did, in as public
a manner as possible, with open doors: And we are directed to certify the same
to the next Quarter Sessions, which cannot be done, until the Quarter Sessions
come in course; for the Law binds no man to impossibilities; and if we do not
certify to the next Quarter Sessions, we shall be cul^ble, but not till then:
For it is evident, my Lord, that this Act of Parliament was made, and passed
the Royal Assent, May 24 th. And it being some time before the Quarter Sessions
came in course, and all Ministers in England continued to Preach, without one
days cess^tion or forbearance; and we hope the practice of England, should be a
president for America.


Ld. C. None shall Preach in my Government, without my License, as the Queen
has signified to me, by Her Royal Instructions.


F. M. Whatever direction the Queens Instructions may be to Your Lordship, they
can be no Rule or Law to us, nor any particular persons who never saw, and
perhaps never shall see them: for Promulgation is the life of the Law.


Ld. C. You must give Bond and Security for your good Behavior, and also Bond
and Security to Preach no more in my Government?


F. M. As to our Behavior, though we have no way broke it, endeavoring always
so to live, as to keep a Conscience void of offense, toward God and Man: Yet
if his Lordship required it, we would give Security for our Behavior; but to
give Bond and Security to Preach no more in Your Excellency's Government, if
invited and desired by any people, we neither can, nor dare do.


Ld. C. Then you must go to Goal?


F. M. We are neither ashamed, nor afraid of what we have done; and we have
complied, and are ready still to comply with the Act of Parliament, which we
hope will protect us at last: And it will be unaccountable to England, to hear,
that Jews, who openly blaspheme the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and disown
the whole Christian Religion; Quakers who disown the Fundamental Doctrines of
the Church of England, and both Sacraments; Lutherans, and all others, are
tolerated in Your Lordships Government: and only we, who have complied, and are
still ready to comply with the Act of Toleration, and are nearest to, and
likest the Church of England of any Dissenters, should be hindered, and that
only in the Government of New York, and the Jersies. This will appear strange
indeed.


Ld C. You must blame the Queen for that?


F. M We do not, neither have we any reason to blame Her Majesty, for She
molests none, neither countenances or encourages any who do; and has given
frequent assurances, and of late in Her Gracious Speech to Her Parliament, That
She would inviolably maintain the Toleration.

While Lord Cornbury was writing Precepts for discharging us from the custody
of Card^e, High Sheriff of Queens County in Long Island, and another for our
Commitment in York; Mr. John Hampton demanded a License of Lord Cornbury, but
he absolutely denied it.

And before finishing of said Mittimus, for their Commitment, Mr. Francis
Makemie moved, that it was highly necessary before their Commitment, the Law
should be produced, to determine that point, whether it is local and limited,
or not: And it is not to be doubted, but Mr. Attorney was soon able to produce
the Law: And he further offered to pay Mr. Attorney for a Copy of that
Paragraph, in which the limiting Clause is, if any. But every thing relating
hereunto was declined and disregarded.


Ld. C. You Sir, Know Law.


F. M. I do not my Lord, pretend to know Law, but I pretend to know this
particular Law, having had sundry disputes thereon. The Mittimus being
finished, they were committed to the Custody of Ebenezer Wilson, High Sheriff
of York City and County, and carried to his Dwelling House, as the place of
their Confinement; and after sundry demands, they had upon the 25th day, the
following Copy of the Precept, for their Commitment.


YOU are hereby Required and Commanded to take into your Custody, the Bodies of
Francis Makemie and John Hampton, and them safely keep till further Orders; and
for so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal, this 23d. day of January, 1706,7. Cornbury.
(Seal)

To Ebenezer Wilson, Esqr. High Sheriff of New York.
A true Copy,

Ebenezer Wilson.



There are sundry things observable in this Warrant of Commitment; which is not
usual in Warrants granted in England. 1. That it is Granted and Signed by the
Supreme Authority, and not by any Sworn Officers, appointed and authorized by
Law, for Commitment of Offenders: And the Supreme Authority of England, have
not put any such power into practice, without a Special Act of Parliament,
impowring them so to do; and that only upon necessity and emergent occasions.
2. Here is no mention of the Queens Name, or Authority, which must be
acknowledged a novelty not easily understood. 3. There is not the least shadow
of a crime or suspicion of a crime alleged, which is but a slender cause of
Commitment. 4. This Mittimus is erroneous in Conclusion, which should be, until
they are delivered by due course of Law, and not until further Order, which is
condemned by Law and Lawyers as insufficient.

And finding themselves Imprisoned, and put under an unlimited Confinement,
they addressed Lord Cornbury, by the following Humble Petition, presented to
his Lordship, by the Hands of Ebenezer Wilson, High Sheriff.

To His Excellency Edward Viscount Cornbury, Captain General, and Governor in
Chief, of the Province of New York, New-Jerseys, and all the Tracts of Land
depending thereon in America, and Admiral of the same. The Humble Petition of
Francis Makemie, and John Hampton.
Most Humbly Shows,
THat whereas Your Excellency has been pleased to Commit us to Prison, by a
Precept, wherein there is no crime alleged; we Your Lordships most humble
Petitioners and Prisoners, most humbly pray, we may be admitted to know our
Crime. And Your Excellency's most humble Petitioners and Prisoners further
pray, as we are Strangers on our Journey to New England, above four hundred
miles from our Habitations, we may be allowed a speedy Trial, according to Law,
which we humbly conceive, to be the undoubted right and privilege of every
English Subject. And Your Excellency's most humble Petitioners, and afflicted
Prisoners, shall, as in duty bound always pray.

Francis Makemie. John Hampton.


To which Petition, after sundry days, they received the following verbal
answer, by the Sheriff who presented the former Petition. 1. Ld. Cornbury did
admire they should Petition to know their Crime, he having so often told them. 2.
If they take the right way, they may have a Trial. And though they signified
their desire, both to the Sheriff and Mr. Attorney, to know what that right way
was; yet could learn nothing; therefore resolved to arm themselves with
patience, until they could obtain a Writ of Habeas Corpus from the Honorable
Roger Mompesson Esqr. Chief Justice, who lived in another Government, and could
Sign no such Writ, until he came into the Government of New York; and thereby
to bring our selves to a Trial, or discharged according to due course of Law.
In the mean time, the Quarter Sessions for the City and County of New York,
coming in course; and being still absolute strangers to the Constitution of
New York; and being ready to manifest their readiness in complying with the Act
of Toleration in all things: They addressed Lord Cornbury by the following
Petition.

To His Excellency, Edward Viscount Cornbury, Captain General and Governor in
Chief, of the Province of New York, New-Jerseys, and all the Tracts of Land
depending thereon in America, and Admiral of the same. The Humble Petition of
Francis Makemie, and John Hampton.
Most Humbly Shows.
THat whereas Your Lordship is pleased not to allow our Certificates from
Courts of Record in Virginia and Maryland, to reach to Your Excellency's
Government; Therefore we being Your Lordships Prisoners, most humbly pray we
may be admitted in the Custody of the Sheriff, to apply our selves to the
Quarter Sessions, that we may there offer our selves to qualification, as the
Law directs, which we are again ready to do; we being resolved to reside in
Your Lordships Government: And we Your Excellency's most humble Petitioners,
and afflicted Prisoners, as in duty bound, shall always pray.

And this being rejected, with severe threatenings against the Messengers, for
presenting a Petition without signing; they resolve to trouble his Excellency
with no more Petitions, and being called the Petition of Francis Makemie, and
John Hampton, and writ by the hand of one of them, and not acquainted with that
practice of Signing all Petitions; it was manifest it came from them, and no
other person. Next we addressed our selves to the Quarter Sessions then Sitting
the 5th day of February, by the following Petition, to the same purpose.

To the Worshipful Justices of the Peace, now Sitting in the Quarter Sessions,
for the City and County of New York. The Humble Petition of Francis Makemie,
and John Hampton.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas your Petitioners, are Protestant Ministers dissenting from the
Church of England, who have Certificates from Courts of Record, of Virginia and
Maryland; certifying, we have taken the Oaths, and performed all such
qualifications, as are required in an Act of Toleration, made in the first year
of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, for liberty of their Majesty's
Protestant and Dissenting Subjects; which Certificates his Excellency Lord
Cornbury is not pleased to allow of, to extend to his Government.

We therefore your Worships humble Petitioners pray, we may be admitted to
appear in the Custody of the Sheriff, at the Bar of your Court, to qualify our
selves again, according to the particular directions of said Act of Parliament,
which in obedience to the Law, we are always ready to do: And your Worships
humble Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall always pray.

Francis Makemie. John Hampton.


This Petition being presented, was viewed and handed about, but never allowed
a reading in open Court; and Mr. Attorney laying hold thereon, was putting it
into his Pocket, asserting it to be a Libel against Ld. Cornbury, and told the
Justices, it was none of their business to administer the Qualifications, or to
this effect.

At the same time, a Certificate in writing was presented by two Inhabitants,
for certifying the Dwelling House of William Jackson, where Mr. Makemie had
Preached, desiring the same to be put upon Record: And though the Court had these
things under consideration for two days, and put the presenters of those Papers
to the trouble of a second appearance, and to bring with them Law, for the
Courts direction, all was rejected; though they had not long before Recorded a
Quaker Meeting House, certifyed by two men, to the same Court, upon the same
Act of Parliament. But for the information of all; whatever offers are made to
any proper Court for qualification, where the Act of Toleration takes place, is
a legal qualification in the eye of the Law, though the Courts reject, and take
no notice thereof.

And at length, some days before March Term, soon after the arrival of the
Chief Justice, Roger Momp^sson Esqr. the Prisoners by their Lawyer, Mr.
Reigniere presented to the Chief Justice, the following Petition, at his
Chamber.

To the Honorable Roger Mompesson Esqr. Chief Justice of this Her Majesty's
Province of New York.
May it please your Honor,
WE the Subscribers being Prisoners detained in the Custody of the Sheriff of
the City of New York, by virtue of a Warrant, whereof a true Copy is hereunto
annexed; Do most humbly request your Honor, to award and grant us Her
Majesty's Writ of Habeas Corpus, to be directed to the said Sheriff, that we
may be thereby brought before your Honor, or some other Judge, in order to our
Enlargement, according to Law. We are your Honors most Humble Servants.

Francis Makemie. John Hampton


And after a due consideration of the Statutes in this case provided, the
following Writ of Habeas Corpus was granted, and the Prisoners were not without
hopes to be discharged without Bail, there being no crime nor suspicion of
crime, seecifyed in our Warrant of Commitment.

ANNE, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff of our City of New York: Greeting.
We Command you, that the Bodies of Francis Makemie and John Hampton, in our
Prison, under your Custody detained, [as it is said] under safe and secure
conduct, together with the day, and cause of their Caption and detention, by
whatsoever names, the same Francis and John, may be reputed in the same, you
have before our trusty and well-beloved Roger Mompesson Esqr. our Chief Justice
of our Supreme Court of Judicature of our Province of New York. at his Chamber,
Situate in Queens-street, in the City of New York, immediately after the
receiving of this Writ, to do, and receive all and singular those things which
our said Chief Justice, of him, shall then and there consider in this behalf;
and have you then and there this Writ. Witness Roger Mompesson Esqr. our Chief
Justice at New York, this eighth day of March, in the sixth Year of our Reign.

Clark,
Octavo die Martij infra Script. Allo. per me, Roger Mompessen.
The Execution of this Writ appears in the Schedule hereunto anexed.

Ebenezer Wilson, Sheriff.


A true Copy.

George Clarke.



This Writ being put into the Sheriffs Hands on Saturday, was not executed till
Monday, in the Afternoon, at which time the Sheriff told them, he had another
Mittimus put into his hands, wherein a supposed crime was specifyed, and only
to be detained, until discharged by due course of Law; and so were obliged to
provide Securities: And as our Confinement was by the former Mittimus, by a new
Mittimus, our Imprisonment was implicitly adjudged and owned to be false
Imprisonment for six weeks and four days; and the Sheriff in the presence of
Dr. John Johnstone, Mr. Regniere, and Mr. William Jackson, refused to Execute
the foresaid Writ, until they had paid him twelve pieces of Eight, for their
Commitment, and as much more for the Return of the Writ of Habeas Corpus;
denying also Receipts for said money when paid.

They were conducted the immediate day, before the Supreme Court, and upon
their new Mittimus, contained in the following Return, were obliged to enter
Recognizance, with two Securities, Doctor John Johnstone, and Mr. William
Jackson, for their appearance next day, at the Supreme Court, and bound not to
depart, without the Courts leave.

The Return is as follows.
I Ebenezer Wilson Esqr. Sheriff of the City and County aforesaid, to Roger
Mompessen Esqr. Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Judicature, of the
Province of New York, at the time and place in the Writ to this Schedule
annexed specifyed, do most humbly certify, that before the coming of that Writ
to me directed; the within named Francis Makemie and John Hampton, were
committed unto the Goal and Prison of our Lady the Queen of the City of
New York, under my Custody, by virtue of a certain Warrant, under the Hand and
Seal of Edward Viscount Cornbury, Captain General, and Governor in Chief of
the Province of New York; bearing date, the three and twentieth day of January
last past; the tenor of which Warrant follows in these words, viz. You are
hereby required and commanded, to take into your Custody, the Bodies of Francis
Makemie and John Hampton, and them safely keep, till further Orders; and for so
doing, this shall be your sufficicient Warrant. Given under my Hand and Seal,
this three and twentieth day of January, 1706, 7. Cornbury. To Ebenezer Wilson
Esqr. High Sheriff of the City and County of New York. And I do further
Certify, that before the coming of said Writ to me directed, that the said
Francis Makemie and John Hampton, were committed afterward by another Warrant,
under the Hand and Seal of his said Excellency, Edward Viscount Cornbury,
Governor aforesaid; bearing date the eighth day of March instant, unto the
Goal and Prison aforesaid, under my Custody; the tenor of which Warrant also
follows in these words, (viz.) New York. ss. You are hereby required and
commanded to take into your Custody, the Bodies of Francis Makemie and John
Hampton, pretended dissenting Protestant Ministers, for Preaching in this
Province, without qualifying themselves according to an Act of Parliament, made
at Westminster, in the first year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord and
Lady, King William, and Queen Mary; and also without my License first obtained;
and them safely to keep, till they shall be discharged, by due course of Law;
and for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under my Hand
and Seal, this eighth day of March, An. Dom. 1706. Cornbury. To Ebenezor Wilson
Esqr. High Sheriff of the City and County of New York. And this is the cause of
the taking and detaining the Bodies of the aforesaid Francis Makemie, and John
Hampton; yet the Bodies of them the said Francis Makemie, and John Hampton,
before the said Roger Momp^ssen, Espr. Chief Justice as aforesaid, at the time
and place in the Writ aforesaid, specifyed, I have ready, as it is in the said
Writ commanded me.

A True Copy.

George Clarke.



It is observable, the second Warrant is still granted, and signed by the
Supreme Authority, and without mentioning the Queens Name o^ Authority: And the
supposed Crime specifyed is double; as 1. Preaching in New York Government,
without complying with the qualifications of an Act of Parliament, made the
first year of King William and Queen Mary: Whereas Ld. Cornbury had read in
January, their Certificates both from Virginia and Maryland, certifying their
qualification according to said Act of Parliament. 2. Preaching without License
being first obtained of Lord Cornbury; whereby it is plain, that complying with
the Law, is not sufficient without a License: And from what goes before, it is
undeniable, they were qualifyed, and had complied with the Law, even in
New York Government, before the date of this last Warrant, and that was by
tendering themselves, not only to his Excellency, but also to the Quarter
Sessions, for qualification; which is all that any Dissenter can do, and all
the Law requires of them to be done: And such as had License, are not yet
qualifyed according to said Act of Parliament. For taking the Oaths only before
Ld. Cornbury, and taking them before a Court, are not the same. But having
related all the antecedents to the Trial, we are now arrived at the Trial or
Prosecution at the Supreme Court in March Term.

Province of New York. Supreme Court, March the first Tuesday, 1706, 7.
Present Roger Mompesson, Esqr. Chief Justice. Robert Millward Esqrs. Justices.
Thomas Wenham. Esqrs. Justices.


The Court being called formally, and the Decquet called over, Francis Makemie,
and John Hampton made their appearance, and answered to their Names, according
to the tenor of their Recognizance.

The Defendants Recognizance ordered to be filed, and the Defendants Aepearance
Entered.

At the Attorney Generals motion, it is ordered, that the Defendants be
continued on their Recognizance, and that they attend the last day of the Term.

The Panel of the Grand Jurors.
William Merit. William Anderson. Robert Lurting. Lawrence Reed. Elias
B^udmot. Nathaniel Mastin Francis Vincent. Lewis Carree. Daniel Cromline.
Richard Sacket. Lancaster Symes. Adrian Hogland. Beverle Lathom. Johannis
Hogland. Benjamin Winroop. Abraham Jeanneau. Charles Wooley. Peter Ryckman.
Paul Drolet. William Provoost. Johannis Burger.
A true Copy. Geo. Clarke.

Mr. Reignere, Attorney for the Defendant, moved, that the Writ of Habeas
Corpus, with all proceedings thereon, at the Chief Justice his Chamber, might
be Entered upon Record.

Mr. Attorney for the Queen, replied, it was not matter of Record being
obtained not in open Court, but at the Chief Justice his Chamber* and returned
to the same place, therefore was not matter of Record; so was put off for that
time.

Wednesday the Second Day of the Term.
The Honorable, Roger Mompesson, Chief Justice, finding the Writ of Habeas
Corpus, and former proceedings thereon, was matter of Record, gave in the
following Memorandum to the Court to be Entered.

Supreme Court. New York. ss.
Memorandum, That at the Supreme Court of this Province, held at the City of
New York, the second Tuesday in March, in the Sixth Year of Her Majesty's
Reign; Roger Mompesson Esqr. Chief Justice of this Province, delivered unto the
said Supreme Court, a certain Record, the tenor whereof follows in these
words.

To the Supreme Court of the Province of New York.
New York. ss.
I Roger Mompesson; Chief Justice of the said Court, do hereby Certify, That
upon the eighth day of March instant; That upon a Petition, Signed by Francis
Makemie, and John Hampton, then delivered unto me: I granted and allowed the
Writ of Habeas Corpus hereunto annexed; which being returned unto me, at my
Chamber, in the said City of New York, by Ebenezer Wilson Esqr. Sheriff of the
said City and County of New York, the tenth day of this instant Month of March,
with the Bodies of the said Francis Makemie, and John Hampton, together with
the Causes of their Commitment hereunto annexed; whereupon I did at the day and
place last mentioned, discharge the said Francis Makemie, and John Hampton,
from their several Imprisonments, taking the several Recognizances hereunto
annexed.

Roger Mompesson.

New York. ss.
MEmorandum, On the 10th day of March, in the Sixth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady ANNE, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Came before me, Roger Mompesson
Esqr. Chief Justice of New York, Francis Makemie of etc. John Johnstone, of the
Province of New Jersey, Gent. and William Jackson, of the City of New York,
Cordwainer, and acknowledged themselves severally to be Indebted to Our
Sovereign Lady the Queen, as follows, viz. the said Francis Makemie, in the Sum
of Forty Pounds, Current Money of this Province; and the said John Johnstone
and William Jackson, in Twenty Pounds like Money each, to be levied on their
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, if failure be made in the Condition
Endorsed.

Roger Mempesson.

THE Condition of the within written Recogniscance is such, That if the said
Francis Makemie do personally appear before Her Majesty's Justices of the
Supreme Court of Judicature, to be held for this Province at the City of
New York, on the morrow of this Day, being Tuesday the Eleventh Day of March
Instant; there to answer all such matters and things as shall be objected
against him, and shall not Depart without leave of the said Court, then the
said Recogniscance to be void.

Vera Copia. George Clarke.

The Grand Jury being called and Sworn the first day of the Term^ and though
there was little besides this matter given to them in Charge, yet after sundry
debates, several Meetings and Adjournments, found the following Presentment
against Francies Makemie; the Queens Attorney, for Reasons best known to
himself, gave nothing to the Grand Jury against John Hampton, who was dropped out
of the Prosecution; though both equally guilty of the same Crime, of Preaching a
Sermon in the Government of New York, and suffered equally by Imprisonment;
from which both were Relieved by the former Writ of Habeas Corpus.

And to such as knew the Grand Jury, when called and sworn, they plainly
appeared to be Chosen on purpose to find the Presentment, for some of them had
never been upon a Grand Jury, others not for sundry years, and sundry of them
Justices of the Peace, who at the Quarter Sessions had so far prejudged them
and their Cause, as they refused to allow their Petition a public reading, or
take the least notice of the Certification of a House offered to Record at the
same time, by two of the Inhabitants of York, and one of them threatened as to
his Trade and Business, as appearing to countenance such a design: Yet with
hard struggling, twelve was influenced, and the two last who made up the number,
were persons of Dissenting Congregations from the Established Church of
England, and their Teachers as liable to be prosecuted, as those Gentlemen, and
as guilty of the same, or like Presentment. One Daniel Cromline, a F^ench
Refugee, dragoon'd out of France for the same Protestant Religion and
Persuasion, and Adrian H^gland, of the Dutch Congregation, whose Minister has
yet no License, being a new made Lieutenant to a Troop: After four of Mr.
Makemie's Hearers, Capt. John Thoobolds, Mr. John Vanborn, Mr. Anthony Young,
and Harris, Coachman to Lord Cornbury, being Subpaena'd, gave Evidence upon
Oath, they heard no unsound Doctrine, nor any thing against the Government; and
one of the Evidences delivered to the Jury, the Act of Assembly of New York,
for Liberty of Conscience to all, except Papists, and showed to them Mr.
Makemie's Certificate from a Court of Record from Virginia, of his compliance
with the Qualifications of the Act of Toleration; they notwithstanding at
length consented to find the Indictmen^; whose Votes were, on Friday in the
Afternoon, taken in a new and unusual method, as they came in one by one from
Dinner.

Friday the First Term.
The Grand Jury find the following Bill, which is ordered to be filed.

Of the T^rm of March, in the Sixth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady
ANNE, over England, etc. Queen.
City of New York.
THe Jurors for our Sovereign Lady the Queen, upon their Oath do Present, That
Francis Makemie, late of the Province of Virginia, Gent pretending himself to
be a Protestant Dissenting Minister and Preacher, and contemning and
endeavoring to subvert the Supremacy, Jurisdiction and Authority of our now
Lady the Queen, in Ecclesiastical affairs, the two and twentieth day of
January, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady ANNE, over
E^gland, etc. Queen, at the City of New York, aforesaid [to wit] at the
Southward of the said City, did privately and unlawfully, take upon him to
Preach and Teach, and did Preach and Teach diverse of Her Majesty's Liege
Subjects, within the said City [to wit] at the Dwelling House of one William
Jackson, situate in the Ward aforesaid, privately and unlawfully, then and
there meet, and assembled together, to above the number of five persons at one
time, under the pretense of Divine Worship, without any leave or License by
him, the said Francis, first had, and obtained, according to Law for the same,
in great derogation of the Royal Authority and Prerogative of our Lady the
Queen, and to the evil Example of all others, in the like case offending
against the Peace of our Lady, the Queen, Her Crown and Dignity. And the Jurors
aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid; do further present, That the said Francis
Makemie afterward [to wit] the aforesaid two and twentieth day of January in
the year aforesaid, at the City and Ward aforesaid, at the aforesaid
Dwelling House of the said William Jackson, did privately and unlawfully
assemble, and gather together diverse of Her Majesty's Subjects unknown, did
then, and there voluntarily, and unlawfully, use other Rites, Ceremonies, Form
and Manner of Divine Worship, then what are contained in a certain Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and of other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, against the Form of the Statute in that
case made and provided, and against the Peace of our said Lady the Queen, Her
Crown and Dignity. And the Jurors aforesaid do further present, that the said
Francis Makemie afterward [to wit] the two and twentieth day of January, in
the fifth Year aforesaid, being then, and now is a person, not qualifyed by Law
to Preach, Teach and Officiate in any Congregation or Assembly for Religious
Worship at the City aforesaid (to wit] at the Southward of the said City, at
the aforesaid Dwelling House, of the said William Jackson, situate in the said
Ward, did take upon him to Preach, Teach and Officiate, and then and there did
Preach, Teach and Officiate, in a Congregation, Assembly, Conventicle and
Meeting not permitted, or allowed by Law, under color or excuse of Religion,
in other manner then according to the Liturgy, and practice of the Church of
England, etc. At which Conventicle, Meeting and Assembly, were five persons or
more Assembled together, against the Form of the Statute, in that case made and
provided against the Peace of our Lady the Queen, Her Crown and Dignity, etc.

A true Copy. George Clark Secr.

Here is a Presentment for Preaching a Sermon at York, highly aggravated into a
Cumulative Crime, and thereby the Grand Jury, led into no small mistake, in
point of time; for it is said to be Preached on the two and twentieth day of
January; whereas it was Preached on the twentieth of January: for these two
Ministers were Lord Cornbury's Prisoners, apprehended on Long Island, on the
two and twentieth day instant, by a Warrant, dated the one and twentieth day:
Which error was cause enough in point of Law, for overthrowing the whole
Presentment, which was so delayed and put off to the last day of the Court,
that a Trial could not be obtained that Court: Therefore Mr. Reignere, the
Defendants Council made a motion, that the Defendants appearance be but upon
Record, and it was ordered the Defendant be continued on his Recognizance,
until the next Term: Mr. Makemie being the only person prosecuted, returns for
Virginia, and returns again before June Term, the third of said Month.

Tuesday, the third day of June, 1707. Province of New York.
Present Roger Mempesson Esqr. Chief Justice. Esqrs. Justices. Robert Milward
Thomas Wenham Esqrs. Justices.



The first day of the Term.

The Defendants Appearance is entered, and he is ordered to be continued on his
Recognizance.

The Defendant ordered to plead to morrow.

Wednesday, June 4th.
The Defendant pleads not Guilty of any Crime, by Preaching a Sermon at York.

The Attorney General for the Queen moves to know, if they would allow a Copy
of the Queens Instructions to the Governor, Signed by his Excellency, to be
brought into Court, in Evidence at the Trial, seeing his Excellency, who had
the Originals, was then in the Jerseys.

The Defendant replied, they could admit of no Copies, seeing there was time
enough to have produced the Original; or Mr. Attorney might have compared the
Copy with the Original, and might have been able to give his Affidavit to the
truth of said Copy; but perceiving if that Copy was not allowed of, the Queens
Attorney would put off the Trial till another time.

Therefore Mr. Attorney General for the Queen, and Mr. William Nicoll for the
Defendant, agrees, that the Copy of such Instructions from Her Majesty to the
Governor, as shall be produced by the Attorney General, and Signed by the
Governor, shall be admitted on Trial, to be the same in Evidence, as if the
Original Instructions were produced. F. M. Defendant moved, that if allowed in
Evidence, he might have a Copy of said Instructions; and further declared, he
could not but wonder, of what Service these Instructions which were no Law,
could do to Mr. Attorney, seeing the Presentment run upon Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, and they expected to have a Trial before a Court, who were Judges
of Law, and not of private Instructions.

Friday, June 6th. 1707.
The Petty Jury called, whose names follow according to the Pannill, and twelve
of them Sworn to try the matter in issue, and the Defendant told the Court, he
was under great disadvantage, being a Stranger, and knew neither names nor
faces; And though he knew he had not liberty in that cause, of peremptory
objections against any, without showing sufficient ground of exception; but he
was informed of one, Mr. Elias Neau, who had in discourse to Mr. Anthony Tongue,
prejudged the Cause, by condemning him for Preaching a Sermon, and justified
Lord Cornbury's proceedings against him; which being proved by the Deposition
of said Young, was approved of by the Judge, as a good objection in Law. The
Defendant further adds, he was amazed to find one who was so lately dragooned
out of France, for his Religion, and delivered out of the Galleys, so soon
prove a Persecuter of the same Religion, for Preaching a Sermon in this City.

The Jurors being Sworn, you may take their Names following.

John Shepherd Foreman Thomas Ives Joseph Wright Thomas Woorden Joseph Robinson
Bartholomew Larouex Andrew Lauron Humphrey Perkins William Horswell Thomas
Carrell. Thomas Baynex. Charles Cromline.
Mr. Attorney produced a Copy of the Queens Instructions, Signed by Lord
Cornbury, and allowed of by both parties in Evidence, as if the Original were
present, and though a Copy was denied again and again to the Defendant, yet by a
Copy of Instructions from King William to a former Governor, the same
Instructions were found, in the same words; and as they were in two Paragraphs
in the produced Copy, so they were found at a great distance from one another
in the former Copy, supposed to be agreeable to the Original, and to be two
distinct and vastly different Instructions; one of them relating to the
Dissenters, the other relating to the Ministers of the Church of England, as
may plainly appear from the Instructions themselves in the following words.

And you are to permit a Liberty of Conscience to all Persons (except Papists)
so they be cont^nted with a quiet and peaceable enjoyment of it, not giving
offense or scandal to the Government.

You are not to permit any Minister coming from England, to Preach in your
Government, without a Certificate, from the Right Reverend, the Bishop of
London: Nor any other Minister, coming from any other part or place, without
first obtaining leave from you, our Governor.

Mr. Attorney Orders four of Mr. Makemies Hearers to be called, Cap. John
Theobolds, Mr. John Vanborn, Mr. William Jackson, and Mr. Anthony Young, who
answered to their Names.

The Defednant perceiving they were summoned and called, to give their Evidence
to the matter of Fact; told the Court, that the Swearing of these four
Gentlemen as Evidences, would but give a needless trouble, and take up the
Courts time; and he would own the matter of fact as to his Preaching, and more
than these Gentlemen could declare upon Oath; for he had done nothing therein,
that he was ashamed or afraid of, ^t would answer and own it, not only before
this Bar, but before the Tribunal of Gods Final Judgment. And so Mr. Attorney
proposed, and Mr. Makemie answered the following Questions, or to the same
purpose.

Mr. Attorney. You own, that you Preached a Sermon, and Baptized a Child at Mr.
William Jacksons.


F. M. Yes, I did.


Mr. Attor. How many Hearers had you?


F. M. I have other work to do, Mr. Attorney, then to number my Auditory, when
I am about to Preach to them.


Mr. Attor. Was there above five hearing you?


F. M. Yes, and five to that.


Mr. Attor. Did you use the Rites and Ceremonies enjoined by, and prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer, by the Church of England?


F. M. No, I never did, nor ever will, until I am better satisfied in my
Conscience.


Mr. Attor. Did you ask leave, or acquaint my Lord Cornbury with your Preaching
at York, when you dined with him at the Fort?


F. M. I did not know of my Preaching at York, when I dined with his
Excellency, no, not for some days after: For when we came to York we had not
the least intention, or design of Preaching there; but stopped at York, purely to
pay our respects to the Governor, which we did; but being afterward called,
and invited to Preach, as I was a Minister of the Gospel, I durst not deny
Preaching, nor I hope ever shall, where it is wanting and desired.


Mr. Attor. Did you acquaint my Lord Cornbury with the place of your Preaching?


F. M. As soon as I determined to Preach, leave was asked, though not by me; for
it was the peoples business, and not mine, to provide a place for me to Preach
in: And I would have been admitted to Preach in the Dutch Church, but they were
afraid of offending Lord Cornbury; And Mr. Anthony Young went to the
Governor, to have his leave, or permission for my Preaching in the Dutch
Church; though all this was done, without so much as my knowledge: But my Lord
opposing and denying it, I was under a necessity of Preaching where I did, in a
private House, though in a public manner with open doors. Mr. Attorney in
pleading, first read over the Indictment which the Grand Jury found, and
endeavored to prove the several parts thereof, by giving a large and full
account of sundry Statutes of K. Henry the 8th, asserting and establishing the
Supremacy of the King over all Ecclesiastical Persons and Affairs, in his
Dominion of England. And from thence asserted the Queens Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and over Ecclesiastic persons; which Supremacy was by
a Delegation lodged in his Excellency our Governor, which he is sworn to
exercise; and this is signified to him by Her Majesty's Instructions, which
were read in Court. Then he proceeded to produce, and read as much as was
necessary, of those Statutes of Qeean Elizabeth, and King Charles the Second,
For Uniformity of Worship according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England; and the Paenal Laws against Conventicles: And enlarging his
pleadings on these points; he turns to the Gentlemen of the Jury, and says, the
matter of fact is plainly confessed by the Defendant, and I have proved it to
be repugnant to the Queens Instructions, and sundry Acts of Parliament of
England; Therefore did not doubt, but the Jury would find for the Queen, and
against the Defendant.


Mr. Ja. Reignere, Attorney for the Defendant, pleads against Mr. Attorney for
the Queen, as follows: The Indictment charges three distinct and separate
facts as Crimes against the Defendant.

1. That he, a pretended Protestant Minister, endeavoring to subvert the
Queens Supremacy, Jurisdiction and Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs; did
privately and unlawfully Preach and Teach, at William Jacksons House, diverse
Subjects, privately and unlawfully, to above five in number, without License
had according to Law, in derogation to the Royal Authority and Prerogative, to
the evil example, and cont. Par.

2. That he did assemble diverse unknown, and unvoluntarily, and unlawfully use
any other Rites and Forms of Worship, then are in the Common Prayer and Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England: Cont. Form. Stat.

3. That being not qualifyed by Law to Preach and Teach in a Congregation or
Meeting not allowed by Law, in other manner then according to the practice of
the Church of England; at which Meeting were five persons, or more assembled,
Cont. Form. Stat.

As to the Indictment, ut supra, that the Defendant did not Preach privately,
nor the persons assemble privately, i. e. with doors locked, barred or bolted;
nay, it appears by the Evidence, and agreed to the contrary by Mr. Attorney
General: that the people met unlawfully, must appear by the violation of some
known Law or Statute, in force here, by which such Meeting and Preaching is
forbidden; that is to say, the Preaching above five.

I take this Colony, as a Dominion of England, to be governed by, and subject
to these three sorts of Laws: 1. The Common Law of England. 2. The express
Statutes mentioning the Plantations, and such other as are for public good (as
the Chief Justice was pleased to say in this Court, in the Case depending
between Smith and Davis). 3. By the Laws of this Colony, and those are to be as
near as may be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of England; and the Judges of
this Court (I dare say) will examine and determine no fact, but according to
the mode and rule of some of those Laws.

That Preaching without License, and assembling above five is a Crime at Common
Law, I never read, and it is not alleged to be against any Statute; it must
be an offense against some Law of this Province, which as yet I never saw, and
desire I may now see it; and if such does not appear, then undoubtedly where
there is no Law, there can be no transgression.

As to what is offered by Mr. Attorney, that the Queen, as Supreme Head of the
Church of England, has power to make Ordinances, and punish for breach
thereof; that this power is delegated to the Governor, who is bound by Oath to
Execute them.

Supposing and admitting all this; yet nothing like an Ordinance appears: for
the Instructions produced by Mr. Attorney cannot have the force of a Law or
Ordinance, especially against persons to whom they were never communicated;
what they may be to those to whom they were given, who alone has the Custody
of them, and conceals them from public view.

As to the two Articles in the Indictment; Cont. Form. Stat.

Now there are diverse Statutes made in England, which enjoin a due observance
of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as the 1st of Eliz. C. 2
d. 2 Eliz. C. 1. Twenty pound a month for not going to Church; 29 Bliz. C. 6.
the same 3 James, C. 4, and 5. But all these were pointed and levelled at
Romish Recusants only, though sometimes misconstrued to extend to others; also 35
Eliz. C. 1. forbidding all Meeting and Conventicles, under penalties of
abjuration and public submission, did the 16 Car. 2d. now expired, and the 22
Car. 2. but all restricted to England, Wales, and Berwick on Tweed; but if they
had not, as they are positive and additional, they shall be confined strictly
to place and words; then the practice of all the Colonies and Plantations, and
the Laws made in some of them, for the Establishment of the Church of England,
but no such Establishment here; but on the contrary, a Law formerly made in
this Province, and in Print, allowing Liberty of Conscience, which I here
insert in the following words.

The last Clause of an Act of Assembly, made in the Government of New York,
declaring the Rights, and Privileges of the Subject.
That no person or persons, which profess faith in God, by Jesus Christ, his
only Son, shall at any time be any way molested, punished, disturbed,
disquieted, or called in question, for any difference in opinion, or matter of
Religious Concernment, who do not under that pretense disturb the civil peace
of the Province, etc. And that all and every such person and persons, may from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, freely have, and fully enjoy, his or
their opinion, persuasion and judgment, in matters of Conscience and Religion,
throughout all this Province; and freely meet at convenient places, within this
Province; and there Worship according to their respective persuasions, without
being hindered or molested, they behaving themselves peaceably, quietly,
modestly and religiously; and not using their Liberty to licentiousness, nor to
the civil injury, or outward disturbance of others. Always provided, that
nothing herein mentioned or contained, shall extend or give liberty to any
persons of the Romish Religion, to exercise their manner of Worship, contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of Their Majesty's Kingdom of England.

And though Mr. Att^ey endeavoring to invalidate this, by denying this Law to be
in force, yet could not prove this Law abolished.

And by one of the Instructions, which Mr. Attorney produced, in tetidem
verbis, is the same, that has been given to former Governors of this Province,
Liberty of Conscience is directed to be allowed.

As to the Third Article in the Indictment, that seems to refer to the first of
William and Mary, of Toleration; but as we say, the Paenal Statutes did not
extend hither, so is there no occasion of Toleration. The Laws and Statutes of
England by their own force, extend equally to all Plantations of England alike;
and if these Paenal Laws did extend to the Plantations, the Crown of England,
would never Tolerate the Governments of Boston, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and
others; who in their Church Discipline are so far from Conforming to the Church
of England, that they have Set up and Established another sort of
Church Discipline universally among them; but notwithstanding this, they are
allowed the liberty they always used in their Church without molestation, and
were so allowed in the very time when these Paenal Laws were in force in
England; but now since by the late Act of Toleration, it was thought by the
wise and experienced Legislators of England, to be for the Public Good, to
repeal these Laws, even there, for which place only they were made, and to
allow Liberty of Conscience; I hope it will never be thought, that those Paenal
Statutes, so repealed, are, or can be for the Public Good here, and as such
extended hither. Wherefore, forasmuch, as neither by the Common Law of England,
nor by any Law of this Province produced, or even alleged by Mr. Attorney,
such Preaching or Meeting, does appear unlawful (but on the contrary, an
express Law of this Province does allow it, as has been shown) and that the
Paenal Laws and Statutes of England against Dissenters, can by no reasonable
construction, be extended hither, I humbly conceive my Client is not guilty of
any offense against Law, and hope the Jury will acquit him accordingly.

Mr. William Nicol, Attorney for the Defendant, pleads in the next place, as
follows.

Mr. Attorney has been entertaining us with some History from the Reign of K.
Henry 8. And it is fit we should entertain him with some History also, more
ancient, and from better Authors, and that is from the Acts of the Apostles;
for we do find, that Teaching, or Preaching, or Speaking in it self, or by the
Common Law, was never found a Crime; for the Apostle Paul Preached a very new
Doctrine to the Athenians, which was an ancient Commonwealth, and was not
Condemned or Imprisoned for it, but they were curious to hear again, Act. 17.
concerning the new Doctrine of the Resurrection; but we find, when the same
Apostle began to insist on any Doctrine which tended to infringe the gain of
the Silver Smiths, who Act. 18. made Shrines for Diana, the Goddess of the
Ephesians, they were enraged, and made an uproar against him, rushing into the
Theater; but it was no Crime, either in Corinth or Athens, where no man was
hurt by the Doctrine it self, neither was obstructed by, nor any offense to the
Civil Government.

And it is plain, it was no offense at Common Law, but was made so by the old
Statutes of 5 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. 2 Hen. 4 Cap. 15.2 Hen. 5. But all these
Statutes being repealed by 1 El. 6. and by Act; of Eliz. it was still no
transgression, but remains as it was, no crime at Common Law.

And the four Statutes against Conventicles in Cb. 2. are all local, and in
express words, limited to England, Wales, and Berwick on Tweed, so have no
relation, to, nor reach to any of the Plantations.

And this is further manifest, from the Constitution of the Plantations, being
as it were settled by National Consent, for those whose thoughts in Religious
Affairs could not square with the Public Establishment in Church Government,
Discipline and Ceremonies, as New England for Independants and Presbyterians,
Rhode Island and New-Jerseys, and we may add New York, for the several sorts of
Dissenters in general; Pensilvania and Maryland, for Quakers and Papists in
particular.

And this being the first that was prosecuted in this nature in the
Plantations, is made the more remarkable, so long after the news of those harsh
Statutes of Cb. 2. have been cut by the Statute of 1. William and Mary.

And it is already evidently proved, that the Acts of Assembly of New York;
allow Liberty of Conscience, with freedom of Public Worship, to all but
Papists.

What was offered on the other side, by Mr. Attorney, as being against the
Queens Prerogative in Ecclesiastical Affairs, was foreign, and not at all to
the purpose; for all the Statutes relating to that matter, being to assert the
Queens Empire, and Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical Persons, as well as
Laymen, in opposition to the Claim and Usurpation of the Sea of Rome, to
exempt the Clergy, or Churchmen, from the Civil and Secular Power.

And as to the Queens Instructions, they are not, neither can have the force of
a Law; besides that, these two Instructions produced in Court, are no way
against us, but rather for us.

Mr. David Jamison, Attorney for the Defendant, appears next to plead in the
following manner.

Mr. Reignere, and Mr. Nicol, Attorneys on the same side, having offered so
many and large Arguments, have left but little room for new matter to be
offered, without enumerating what was offered upon the three heads of the
Indictment.

As to the first, which was Preaching and Teaching without License, against the
Queens Supremacy and Prerogative in Ecclesiastical Affairs. We did not come
here to oppose, or call in question the Queens Prerogative or Supremacy: but
were willing to pay all due respect and deference thereunto; but we cannot see,
that these Instructions from the Queen to my Lord Cornbury, of which Mr.
Attorney has produced a Copy, and which he alleadges to be the Law we have
broken by Preaching, contrary to the Queens Instructions, which are not a Law
to any body else, but to his Lordship, who is directed by them, and is
accountable to the Queen, if he do not observe them. Her Instructions are
private directions to himself, and can be no Law to others: Promulgation is
that which gives the finishing stroke to a Law. Nor do I see how his Lordship
should become guilty of breach of Oath, as Mr. Attorney was pleased to offer,
by not ordering the prosecution of this Gentleman, for Preaching without his
License; although he be Sworn to obey and observe his Instructions, because the
very Instructions produced, give Liberty of Conscience to Protestant
Dissenters, and are in two distinct Paragraphs; the first seems to me wholly to
agree with our Act of Assembly of this Province, is to the same purpose, and
very near the same words; the other Paragraph is negative: You are not to
permit any Minister coming from England, to Preach in your Government, without
a Certificate from the Right Reverend, the Bishop of London; nor any other
Minister coming from any other Part, or Place, without first obtaining leave
from you our Governor. And a Dissenting Minister Preaching here without the
Governors knowledge, could be no breach of his Oath, because it was done
without his knowledge, and consequently without his permission.

To the Second, as to the Statutes of Eliz. and Charles 2. against
Conventicles, they were limited and local Acts or Statutes, and could not any
way reach these Plantations; for here in New York we have no Established
Religion for the whole Province. On the East End of Nassaw, or Long Island,
were, and always have been Independent Ministers, the French had their own way
and Ministers, and the Dutch in like manner; the very Jews and Quakers have the
free Exercise of their Religion; and there is not one Form of Worship
Established for the whole Province. The 16th. as well as 22 of K. Charles 2.
are limited to the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Twe^; and therefore the using of any other Form of Worship in this
Province, then what is contained in the Common Prayer, cannot be a Breach of
those Statutes. Then again the 16 of Chapter 2. for suppressing Conventicles, makes
the third default Banishment, for seven years into the Plantations (
New England and Virginia excepted;) And how can it be supposed, that the
Plantations the places to which the defaulters were to be Banished, can be
understood to be comprehended within the meaning and penalty of that Statute;
that did continue in force, for little more time than four years. The other of
the 22 d. did supply its room, and had much more mild penalties.

As to the third, which is that he Preached without being qualifyed, that is
laid against the Act of Toleration. I did offer, that this Statute likewise was
not, nor is in force in the Plantations generally, especially in this Province,
although there be no locality expressly mentioned therein, and that for these
Reasons. The title and whole design of it is Toleration; now Toleration is an
exception from some restraint; and since the Paenal Laws are not of force here
by consequence, neither is the Act of Toleration of force, here is no
Established Church for the whole Province; from which we should be tolerated.
We have had liberty of Conscience another way, and by an Act of Assembly, which
was made in the beginning of the Reign of K. William and Q. Mary, during the
Government of Col. Fletcher, not yet formally repealed. Then again consider the
Preamble of the Act of Toleration, to the end that all our Protestant Subjects,
may be united in interest and affection; the wisdom of the Nation did at that
time combine, to put an end to all Persecution on the score of Religion. Our
Assembly was much of the same mind, designing to prevent it, and so are all
good men: when we did set about erecting a Church of England Congregation in
this Town, and obtained a Charter for the same, of Governor Fletcher; although
we were desirous to have the National Worship amongst us, yet was it the care
of these Members, who promoted it, to get such Clauses inserted in it, as
should secure the Liberty of the Dutch and French Congregations from our
Successors; and in an Act of Assembly made since, for its encouragement, the
like care and precaution was had; which are still to be seen.

This Province has not been much more than forty years in the possession of the
Crown of England, and is made up chiefly of Foreigners, and Dissenters; and
Persecution would not only tend to the disuniting us all, in interest and
affection, but depopulate and weaken our Strength, and discourage all such
Adventurers for the future. Therefore as this Prosecution is the first of this
nature or sort, ever was in this Province, so I hope it will be the last.

The Defendant prayed, he might have liberty to speak for himself, which was
granted; and he pleaded in his own defense, the following Arguments, which I
publish in his own words.

F. M. I am amazed to find Mr. Attorney so much changed in his opinion; for
when I was before my Lord Cornbury, who told us, the Act of Toleration was
limited and local, and extended not to the Plantations: And Mr. Attorney being
pleased to confirm it, by asserting the same thing, and went a little further,
by producing an Argument to strengthen his opinion, That the Paenal Laws of
England, did not extend to the Plantations, and the Act of Toleration was made
to take off the edge of the Paenal Laws; Therefore the Toleration does not
extend hither; but we find soon after by an Indictment, both the Paenal Laws
and Toleration reaches hither, and all their penalties too.


The Honorable Chief Justice, Roger Mompesson Esqr. interrupted the Defendant,
by saying: Gentlemen, Do not trouble the Court with what discourse passed
between you, before my Lord, or at any other time, but speak to the point.

F. M. May it please your Honor, I hope to make it appear, it is to the point;
and what was Mr. Attorneys argument then, is now mine: For whatever opinion I
was of, while an absolute Stranger to New York, and its Constitution; yet since
I have informed my self thoroughly with the Constitution of this place, I am
entirely of Mr. Attorneys opinion, and hope he will be of the same still.

And as to the Indictment, to return to the particulars thereof; and first, I
am charged with contemning, and endeavoring to Subvert the Supremacy of the
Queen in Ecclesiastical Affairs. As to the Queens Supremacy about
Ecclesiastical persons and things, we allow and be-believe, She has as large a
Supremacy, as in the Word of God is allowed to any Christian Kings and Princes
in the World; and our Confession of Faith, which will compare with any in the
World, and is universally known to the Christian World, is very full in that
matter; a part whereof is judged necessary to be inserted here, for the
information of many.

Chapter 23. Concerning the Civil Magistrate.
1. GOd the Supreme Lord and King of all the World, has Ordained Civil
Magistrates to be under him, over the People, for his own Glory, and the
Public Good; and to this end has armed them with the power of the Sword, for
the defense and encouragement of them that do well, and for the punishment of
evildoers.

3. The Civil Magistrate may not assume to himself the Administration of Word
and Sacraments, or the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; yet he has
Authority, and it is his duty to take order, that Unity and Peace be preserved
in the Church, that the truth of God be kept pure and entire; that all
Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and abuses in Worship
and Discipline, prevented and reformed; and all the Ordinances of God may be
settled; for the better effecting whereof, he has power to call Synods to be
present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is transacted in them, be
according to the Mind of God.

4. It is the duty of People to Pray for Magistrates, to honor their Persons,
to obey their lawful Commands, and to be subject to their Authority, for
Conscience sake: Infidelity or difference in Religion, does not make void the
Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free the people from their due
Obedience to him; from which Ecclesiastical Persons are not exempted: much loss
has the Pope any power or Jurisdiction over them, in their Dominions, or over
any of their people, and least of all to deprive them of their Dominions or
Lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon any pretense whatsoever.

And in all which Mr. Attorney has offered concerning the Queens Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, I cannot learn one argument, or one word, from all the
quoted Statutes, that Preaching a Sermon, is the least contempt, or overthrow
of the Supremacy. And I hope it is not now unknown to any, that the Oath of
Supremacy, has been abolished by a Law, ever since the Revolution, and
consequently the Subject must be delivered from some obligation thereby: and
how far this will be constructed to extend, I leave to the Judges to determine.

And as to my Preaching without License first obtained from Lord Cornbury,
which is asserted to be against Law; I cannot hear from any Law yet produced,
that Ld. Cornbury has any power or directions to grant a License to any
Dissenters, or that any of them are under any obligation, to take License from
his Lordship, before they Preach, or after Mr Attorney pretends no Law, unless
he concludes the Queens Instructions to be a Law, or have the force of a Law:
That they have no force of a Law, has been abundantly proved already; neither
am I any way culpable even from the Queens Instructions, which are produced in
Court; for they consisting of two parts, or rather two distinct Instructions,
not relating at all to the same persons: In the first, his Excellency is
required to permit a Liberty of Conscience to all persons except Papists. And
this is the Liberty is allowed to Dissenters and which we claim, by virtue of
this Instruction: and here is no License mentioned and required; for permission
is a negative act, and implies no more but this; you shall so allow it, as not
to hinder, molest or disquiet them, but rather protect them in it: And Papists
being particularly expressed, it cannot be applied to the Church of England;
therefore Dissenters are intended by this Instruction, and no other; and if
this permission is granted us, according to the express words thereof, we
desire no more. And it cannot be esteemed by any, that imprisoning and
punishing of us at such a rate, for Preaching one Sermon, is a permitting us
Liberty of Conscience. The other distinct Paragraph, or rather, the other
Instruction, which though joined together in this Copy, are at a considerable
distance from one another in the Original; as we really found it so, in a Copy
of Instructions to a former Governor: And as the former concerns Dissenters,
so this is intended for the Clergy of the Church of England; for the words of
the Instruction, as you have it above, are these: You are not to permit any
Minister coming from England, to Preach in your Government, without a
Certificate from the Right Reverend, the Bishop of London, nor any other
Minister coming from any other part or place, without first obtaining leave of
you, our Governor. Here is another Instruction, which should not be produced
or improved against Dissenters; for all mankind, and those of the meanest
capacity must conclude and determine, that this concerns only the Clergy of the
Church of England, who by their Constitution, are under strict obligations to
take License, or Certificate from their Ordinary, and such as come to the
Plantations, acknowledge the Bishop of London as such; and no Dissenter, either
in England, or any where else in the Queens Dominion, ever took, or ever was
under any obligation to take any License from the Queens or Kings of England,
or any other Person or Persons whatsoever; until a method and practice has of
late been erected, and forced into practice at New York: For if our Liberty
either depended on a License or Certificate from the Bishops of England, or the
Governors of America, we should soon be deprived of our Liberty of Conscience,
secured to us by Law, and repeated Resolutions of our present Sovereign, and
Gracious Queen, inviolably to maintain the Toleration which She is pleased to
signify in Her Royal Instructions to all Her Governors abroad; which we are
the more assured of, from the Instructions produced in this Court. So that as
the first clause of this latter Instruction, cannot be applied to any other
Ministers, but of the Church of England; so the latter clause can be understood
of no other but the same sort, or species, as those who came from England with
Certificate from the Bishop of London: And it is well known, there are
Ministers of the Church of England, who may come, and do come not directly from
England, but from some other place, as from sundry Plantations of America; as
Mr. Sharp now Chaplain at Fort-Anne, came not directly from England, but from
Maryland: And I must confess, he being a Minister of the Church of England, and
enjoyes a considerable Benefice thereby, was obliged to comply with the
Constitution of his own Church, and take a License from Ld. Cornbury, if none
could be produced from the Bishop of London. But all this is foreign to us, and
not at all required of any Dissenter in Europe or America.

And if there had been any thing in these Instructions requiring Dissenters to
take any License, or empowering Governors of the Plantations to grant them,
which we do not find; Preaching a Sermon before such License, cannot be judged
a Crime, deserving such a Confinement and Prosecution as we have met with; for
it has been already made appear, that those Instruction cannot have the force
of a Law, to bind the Subject to Obedience, or render him culpable for
Disobedience, seeing Promulgation, which is the Life of the Law, and renders
all persons inexcusable, never as yet have accompanied these Instructions: So
if this be Mr. Attorneys Law we have broke, by not obtaining License before
Preaching, I hope, you Gentlemen of the Jury cannot but find, we are no way
culpable hereby, being neither inconsistent with the Queens Instructions, and
not against any Law.

And as to the last part of the Indictment, concerning the Paenal Laws, or the
sundry Statutes against Conventicles, they never were designed, nor intended by
our English Legislators for America, or any of the Plantations thereof; for
they are limited and local Acts, all of them restricted to England, Wales, and
Berwick upon Tweed, as is manifest from the express words of said Law; neither
have been ever put in execution in any of the Plantations, until now; yea, have
not been executed, even in England, Wales or Berwick upon Tweed, for which they
were Calculated, and made, these twenty years past: And when they were put in
the most strict and rigorous Execution in England, which was about the last of
the Reign of K. Chapter 2. The Dissenters of America lived very quiet, and even in
such Plantations where the Church of England has a full and formal
Establishment. But which is more, even Roman Catholics, who are excluded from
all benefit of the Act of Toleration in England; yet cannot be touched in
America, by these Paenal Laws; for it is matter of fact known to all, and I
appeal to Mr. Reignere if Papists have not liberty, and the exercise of their
Religion, without molestation from Paenal Laws, and even in Maryland, where the
Church of England has a formal establishment by Laws made there: And it is
manifestly known, the Assembly of Maryland made a late Act against Roman
Catholics; and though it was never executed, not being approved of by the Queen,
yet it is a plain demonstration, if the Paenal Laws of England originally and
principally designed against Popish Recusants had extended to the Plantations,
there would have been no need for such an Act of Assembly to be made against
them in Maryland.

It is a further argument the Paenal Laws never did extend to the Plantations,
because it was a penalty in some of them, that persons after sundry and so many
convictions, are to be banished or transported to the American Plantations, as
places removed beyond, and free from the lash of Paenal Laws; for to what
purpose would their banishment be, if after a removal from their Native Land,
they should be lashed, or ruined afresh by the same Paenal Laws.

And if the Penal Laws of England do not extend to these Plantations, where the
Church of England has a legal and formal Establishment, it cannot be imagined,
they can take place where there is no particular Persuasion established by Law;
and consequently all Persuasions there are upon an equal bottom of Liberty, as
I find to be the Case with New York, where there is not one Act of Assembly,
wherein the name or manner of Worship as it is in the Church of England is so
much as expressed: And where there is no legal Establishment or any penalties
or restrictions on the Liberty of any Dissenters, there is no room for, or need
of any Toleration; for where no penalty, what must we be tolerated from; but
pure nullities, or nothings, which seems inconsistent with the thing it self:
Therefore in New York Government all Persuasions there are upon an equal level,
and bottom of liberty; and this confirmed to all Dissenters, except Papists,
and allowed by an Act of Assembly, already read in open Court. And if Jews, who
openly blaspheme the Lord Jesus, Quakers and Lutherans, and all other or most
persuasions are allowed even in this Government; it is matter of wonder, and I
can know no reason, why we only should not be allowed of, but put to
molestation as we now are, by my present prosecution: Is it because we are
Protestants? Is it because we are likest the Established Church of England of
any Dissenters? Is it because we are the most considerable Body of Protestants
in the Queens Dominions? Is it because we have now since the Union, a National
Establishment in Great Britain, as nighly related and annexed unto the Crown of
England, as the Church of England themselves? Sure such Proceedings, when
known, will and must be a prodigy to England.


Mr. Attorney replied, it was impossible for any man to answer all which was
offered, there was so much delivered, and by so many.

The Defendant told Mr. Attorney, he verily believed it was impossible for Mr.
Attorney to answer what was said, and that it was a great truth Mr. Attorney
asserted.

Mr. Attorney proceeds to answer, and says: These Gentlemen on the other side
assert all the Paenal Laws of England are local and limited to England, Wales,
and Berwick upon Tweed; but I shall produce one that is not so, but extends to
all the Queens Dominions; and that is the Act of Uniformity, made the first of
Elizabeth, which is demonstrated from the very words of said Law, or other
place within this Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, and
other the QUEENS Dominions: And flies to the Instructions again, and endeavors
to assert and vindicate the Supremacy, and says, the Kings and Queens of
England, Enjoin and Command their Governors to grant Licenses; and it has
always been customary, and an universal practice to take Licenses from
Governors: And those Ministers who come from other places, must be the same
that my Ld. is to allow Liberty of Conscience unto.

The Defendant begged leave to answer the Attorney as to his last Argument, as
to the first of Elizabeth, which is the Act of Uniformity; we acknowledge it
was extensive to the Queens Dominions in general, and not limited to England,
and Wales only; yet I hope to make it appear, this Act does no way affect the
Plantations, and far less affect Dissenters; therefore is altogether foreign to
our present purpose. For 1. That Act of Parliament was made in the first year
of the Reign of Elizabeth, and consequently before any Plantation had a being,
or was thought of, and so could have no relation to them at all, they being
pure non-entities at that time. 2. All over the Act, and in sundry places
thereof, it is directed to Ministers, Parsons or Vicars in Cathedrals,
Parish-Churches, Private Chapels, or Oratories; and not a word in the whole
Act of Dissenters or Conventicles. For 3. At that time, when this Act was made,
there were not strictly and properly speaking, any number of Dissenters in
England, who held Separate Meetings from the Public and Established Worship;
for though there were those in the Church of England, who always from the
beginning of the Reformation scrupled the use of all the Common Prayer, and
omitted some Ceremonies, which was, and is to this day, the grounds of the
Separation; and it was to oblige such to an Uniformity in Public Worship. And
as soon as the Act was made, and put in Execution, with all its penalties, many
were discouraged, others Cast out of the Church, for Nonconformity; and this
really made the Separation, and all the mischiefs of the Separation are
originally owing to this Act; though as soon as the Separation was made, they
could not touch Dissenters by the penalties of this Act, therefore were under a
necessity of making new Acts of Parliament in the following Reigns, for
punishing Separated Dissenters; all which were limited and local in express
words; and never designed to pursue Persecuted Persons to an American
Wilderness. 4. I am able to make it appear, if this Act of Uniformity were
strictly put in Execution, the most of the Clergy of the Church of England,
would fall under its lashes and penalties; for none of them are to use any
other Rite, Ceremony, or open Prayer, but what is mentioned and set forth, in
the said Book of Common Prayer. And it is well known, the most valuable men in
that Church use another Public Prayer, then is in Common Prayer, and all such
persons are so far Dissenters, and being in Communion with the Church of
England, are only liable to be Prosecuted upon this Statute.

And as to the Queens Instructions, which Mr. Attorney insists so much upon, it
was, and is obvious to every man, they were two distinct Instructions; and though
we have them placed so near in this Copy, they have no affinity one to another;
and it is not fair for Mr. Attorney to take the latter clause of one
Instruction, and join it to another, which was before; this is a Curtailing the
Queens Instructions: whereas those who composed them, knew better how to join
them together, then Mr. Attorney does.

And whereas Mr. Attorney affirms, that giving and taking License was very
common and universal; I am well assured there never was, neither is to this day
any such practice in any Plantation of America; and there were but few persons,
as yet in York Government that had Licenses; for besides the two Dutch
Ministers, who differ upon Long Island, and it is said Licenses are the cause
of their difference; there is but one English Nonconformist Minister, in all
the Government, who has taken a License, and it is as certain, Mr. Dubois, and
sundry others of the Dutch Churches has no License, neither will submit to any
such as are granted.

Mr. Attorney perceiving how matters then stood, moves that the Jury should
bring in a special Verdict, and the Judges inclined thereunto; for says Mr.
Attorney, the matter of fact is plainly confessed by the Defendant, as you have
heard, and you are to bring it in specially, for you are not Judges of Law.

F. M. May it please your Honors, I am a Stranger, who live four hundred miles
from this place, and it is known to the whole Country, what intolerable
trouble I have been put to already, and we cannot consent to a special Verdict,
for that is only to increase my trou^, multiply my Charge, and give me further
delay: And it is a known truth in Law, that Strangers are to be favored always
with expedition in Justice, and does no way approve of delays; and if this
should be allowed of, no man's innocence is able to protect him; for if I am
cleared, I should suffer more in Charges at last, then if I were really guilty
of the breach of many Paenal Laws of England: And as to the Juries judging of
Law, and confessing the fact, I cannot see one point of the Law to be judged;
for that the Paenal are local and limited, that is owned on all hands, and
Paenal Laws are strictly to be taken and interpreted, and not allowed to the
ruin of the Subject, to extend, or be ^terpreted beyond the plain and strict
sense of the words. It is also ^e, we have confessed Preaching a Sermon at the
House of Mr. William Jackson, with all its true circumstances; but we have not
owned this to be a crime, or repugnant to any Law, or inconsistent with any of
the Queens Instructions yet produced to us; neither has Mr. Att^y made any
thing of this yet appear; for all those ancient Statures ^H. the 8 th tend only
to throw off, the Authority, Supremacy and Jurisdiction of the Popes, and See
of Rome, and invest the Kings and Queens of England with that usurped Authority
of the Popes, and to bring Ecclesiastical persons, under the Civil Jurisdiction
of England, who in times of Popery were made only accountable to the Sea of
Rome, and that Jurisdiction; therefore does not touch, neither is any way
applicable to this Case.


Mr. Attorney, These Gentlemen acknowledge, and say, the Ministers of the
Church of England are to take Licenses, and obliged so to do; and if so, the
Dissenters should also, otherwise they must expect more favor and liberty then
the Ministers of the Church of England.


F. M. I must confess, the Case is very different; for it is the opinion and
constitution of the Church of England, that notwithstanding their Ordination,
they are not to Preach or Officiate as Ministers, until they procure, or have a
License from their Bishop, or Ordinary, which no Dissenting Minister is
concerned with; and they voluntarily and freely bring themselves under an Oath
of Canonical Obedience, to obey their Ordinary; and if he require them to take
Licenses, or any thing else they must, they are sworn to submit thereunto. But
finally, There is a great deal of reason, why Ministers of the Church of
England should submit to License, but we are not; because it is only bare
liberty which Dissenters have; but they have not only Liberty, but a
considerable Maintenance also; without which, I never knew any of them value
Liberty only; and Dissenters having liberty only without any Maintenance from
the Government, are not at all under obligations, neither is it required of
them to take Licenses of any.


After a long debate and fair pleadings, The Honorable Roger Mempesson, Chief
Justice, applies himself to the Jury, to this effect: Gentlemen, You have heard
a great deal on both sides, and Mr. Attorney says the fact is confessed by the
Defendant, and I would have you bring it in specially, for there are some
points I am not now prepared to answer; How far Instructions may go, in having
the force of a Law, especially when not published, or made known: And there is
one objection made by Mr. Makemie, and that is the Oath of Supremacy of England
is abolished; and how far it will go in this matter, I confess I am not
prepared to answer: If you will take upon you to judge of Law, (...) in the
fact specially: This is the first Instance I can learn, has been of a Trial ^
Prosecution of this nature in America.

The Jury desired the Act of Assembly of New York might be delivered to them;
and the Defendant desired the Jury might have the Queens Instructions also,
which Mr. Attorney opposed and denied.

There is a Constable Sworn to attend the Jury, who withdraws, and in a very
short time returned again.

The Jury is called, and finds the Defendant Not Guilty.

The Court begun to enquire Reasons for the Jury's Verdict, but the Chief
Justice told the Jury, they might give Reasons if they would, and they might
choose whether they would or not give any Reasons for their Verdict. The
Foreman told the Court, the Defendant had not transgressed any Law: Another
person of the Jury told the Court, they believed in their Consciences, they had
done the Defendant Justice, and so the Verdict was confirmed.

Mr. Reign^, Attorney for the Defendant, moved, that the Defendant might be
discharged; which was by the Chief Justice referred till to morrow morning.

Saturday, June 7 th.
Ordered that the Defendant be discharged, paying Fees, and that his
Recognizance be likewise discharged.

A True Copy. Geo. Clark.

The Defendant told the Court, it was an hard case, that an innocent person,
and one found so upon Trial, and by Law, and suffering so much already, and not
only innocently, but for doing of good, should pay so severe Fees at last.

At length the Defendant was willing to pay all just and legal Fees to the
Court, and Officers thereof, who acted indifferently in their several Offices,
as to this matter, but it was unreasonable, he should pay his Prosecutors,
whatsoever they were pleased to demand; this was nothing less, then hiring our
Enemies to ruin us; but it being the practice, as they affirmed, no Arguments
would be received.

The Defendant further told the Court, if he must pay Fees, as he was a
Stranger, prayed he might not be left to the Arbitrary Demands of Officers; but
that the Bill of Cost might be produced, and examined in open Court, and taxed
by the Judges. But the Chief Justice decl^ning it, as a thing he did not
concern himself with: It was referred to Robert Millward Esqr. one of the
Assistant Judges, who was to tax the Bill, after notice given to the Defendant
or his Attorney, of the time and place to make their objections: But the Bill
was taxed by said Judge^ without any such notice given; and instead of
moderating any Articles, added two new ones. And their full account was paid,
and a Copy of said Account denied the Defendant, and a Receipt upon payment of
Money refused, though paid in presence of two Witnesses.

A POSTSCRIPT^
AS there are Preliminaries to the Trial Published, to obviate those
misrepresentations which have been industriously improved, both at New York,
and elsewhere, to vindicate this new and unusual Prosecution; so it is judged
as necessary, to add by way of Postscript or (...), for the Information of
America, Copies of these following particulars. 1. The Act of Assembly of
New York, for Settling a Ministry, and ^ising a Maintenance for them, only in
some particular places of that Government. 2. A Copy of that Act of Parliament
of England, for Punishing Governors of Plantations in England, for Crimes
committed by them in the Plantations. 3. A Copy of such Licenses as are granted
by Lord Cornbury, to some Ministers. 4. An Account of the Exorbitant Charge of
the Confinement and Prosecution, for Preaching two Sermons in New York
Government. 5. A Copy of Mr. Makemies Certificate from a Court of Virginia. To
which I shall add some illustrating Animadversions, and so conclude this
Narrative.

1. An Act passed in a General Assembly, made Sept. 12, 1693.

An Act for Settling a Ministry, and raising a Maintenance for them in the
City of New York County of Richmond, Westchester, and Queens-County.
WHereas Profaneness and Licentiousness have of late Overspread this Province,
for want of a Settled Ministry throughout the same: To the end the same may be
removed, and the Ordinances of God daily Administered. Be it Enacted by the
Governor, and Council, and Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and
by the Authority of the same, That in each of the respective Cities and
Counties hereafter mentioned and expres^ed; there shall be called, inducted and
established, a good sufficient Protestant Minister, to officiate and have care
of Souls, within one year ^t after the Publication hereof: That is to say, in
the City of New York one, in the County of Richmond one, in the County of
Westchester (...), in Queens-County two, one at Jamaica, and the adjacent Towns
and ^ms: The other to have the (...) of Hempstead, and the next adjacent Towns
and (...)

And for the ^tive Encouragement, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid. That there shall be annually, and once every year, Collected and
Paid for the Maintenance of each of their respective Ministers, the respective
Sums hereafter mentioned: That is to say, for the City and County of New York,
One hundred Pounds; for the two Precincts of Westchester, one hundred Pounds,
to each fifty, to be paid in Country Produce at Money Price; for the County of
Richmond, Forty Pounds in Country Produce at Money Price; And for the two
Precincts of Queens-County, one hundred and twenty Pounds, to each Sixty in
Country Produce at Money Price. And for the more orderly raising the respective
Maintainances for the Ministers aforesaid; Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the respective Justices of every City and County
aforesaid, or any two of them, shall every year issue out their Warrants to the
Constable, to Summon the Freeholders of every City, County and Precinct
aforesaid together on the second Tuesday in January, for the choosing of ten
Vestry Men, and two Churchwardens; and the said Justices and Vestry Men, or
major part of them are hereby empowered within ten days after the said day, or
any day after as to them shall seem convenient, to lay a reasonable Tax on the
said respective Cities, Counties, Parish, or Precinct, for the Maintenance of
the Minister and Poor of the respective places; and if they shall neglect to
issue their Warrants, so as the Election be not made that day, they shall
respectively forfeit Five Pounds, current Money of this Province; and in case
the said Freeholders duly Summoned as aforesaid, shall not appear, or
appearing, do not choose the said ten Vestry Men and two Churchwardens, that
then in their default the said Justices shall within ten days after the second
Tuesday, or in any day after as shall seem to them convenient, lay the said
reasonable Tax on the said respective Places, for the respective Maintainances
aforesaid; and if the said Justices and Vestry Men shall neglect their duty
herein, they shall respectively forfeit Five Pounds, Current Money aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such of the
Justices and Vestry Men that shall not be present at the time appointed to make
the said Tax, and thereof be Convicted by a Certificate under the hands of such
as do appear, and have no sufficient excuse for the same shall respectively
forfeit Five Pounds current Money aforesaid; and a Roll of the Tax so made,
shall be delivered unto the hands of the respective Constables of the said
Cities, Counties, Parishes, Precinct, with a Warrant Signed by any two Justices
of the Peace, impowering him or them to Levy the said Tax, and upon refusal, to
distrain and sell by public Outcry, and pay the same into the hands of the
Churchwardens, retaining to himself Twelve pence per Pound for Levying
thereof; and if any person shall refuse to pay that he is so assessed, and the
said Constable do strain for the same, all his Charges shall be paid him, with
such further allowance for his pains, as the said Justices, or any of them
shall judge reasonable. Or if the said Justice or Justices shall neglect to
issue the said Warrant, he or they respectively shall forfeit Five Pounds,
Current Money aforesaid.

And if the said Constable, or any of them fail of their duty herein, they
shall respectively forfeit Five Pound, Current Money aforesaid, and the
Churchwardens so Chosen, shall undertake the said Office, and receive and keep
a good account of the Money or Goods levied by virtue of this Act; and the same
issue by Order from the said Justices and Vestry Men of the respective Cities,
Counties, Precincts and Parishes aforesaid, for the purposes and intents
aforesaid, and not otherwise. And the Churchwardens shall, as often as
thereunto required, yield an Account unto the Justices and Vestry Men, of all
their Receipts and Disbursements; and in case the Churchwardens, or any of
them, shall neglect their Duty herein, they shall respectively forfeit Five
Pounds, Current Money aforesaid, for every refusal.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Church
Wardens in their respective Precincts aforesaid, shall by Warrant as aforesaid,
pay unto the respective Ministers, the Maintenance aforesaid, by four equal and
Quarterly Payments, under the Penalty of Five Pound, Current Money aforesaid,
for each neglect, refusal or default; the one half of all such forfeitures
shall be disposed of to the use of the Poor in each respective Precinct, where
the same does arise; and the other half to him or them that shall prosecute the
same.

Always Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all and every the respective Ministers that shall be Settled in the respective
Cities, Counties and Precincts above said, shall be Called to Offi^e in their
respective Precincts aforesaid by the respective Vestry Men (...)
Churchwardens aforesaid: And always Provided, that all former Agreements made
with Ministers throughout this Province, shall continue and remain in their
full force and virtue: Any thing contained herein (...) the contrary hereof in
any wife notwithstanding.

An Act to Punish Governors of Plantations in this Kingdom, for Crimes by them
committed in the Plantations.
WHereas a due Punishment is not provided for several Crimes and Offenses
committed out of this His Majesty's Realm of England; whereof diverse
Governors, Lieutenant-Governours, Deputy-Governours or Commanders in Chief of
Plantations and Colonies within His Majesty's Dominions beyond the Seas, Have
taken Advantage, and have not been deterred from Oppressing His Majesty's
Subjects within their respective Governments and Command, nor from committing
several other great Crimes and Offenses; not Deeming themselves Punishable for
the same here, nor accountable for such their Crimes and Offenses, to any
Persons within their respective Governments and Commands. For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, That if any Governor,
Lieutenant-Governour, Deputy-Governours or Commanders, shall after the first
day of August, One Thousand Seven Hundred, be guilty of Oppressing any of His
Majesty's Subjects beyond the Seas, within their respective Governments or
Commands; or shall be guilty of any other Crime or Offense, contrary to the
Laws of this Realm, or in force within their respective Governments or
Commands; such Oppressions, Crimes and Offense shall be Enquired of, Heard and
Determined in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench here in England; or before
such Commissioners, and in such County of this Realm, as shall be assigned by
His Majesty's Commission, and by good and lawful men of the same County; and
that such Punishment shall be inflicted on such Offender as are usually
inflicted for Offenses of like Nature committed here in England.

A Copy of a Ministers License granted by Lord Cornbury. By His Excellency
Edward Viscount Cornbury, Captain General, etc.
To (...) Greeting.
I Do hereby License and Tolerate you, to be Minister of the (...) Congrega^^on
at (...) in (...) County, in the Province of New York: And (...) have and
exercise the free Liberty and Use of your Religion, pursuant to Her M^jesty's
Pleasure, therein signified to me, in Her Royal Instructions; for and d^ring so
long time, as to me shall seem meet. And all Ministers and others, (...) hereby
required to take notice hereof.

Given under my Hand and Seal, (...) Fort-Anne, in New York, this (...) day of
(...) in the (...) Year of Her Majesty's Reign. Annoque Dom. (...) Cornbury.

A Copy of a Certificate from the Court of Accomack County in Virginia, read by
Lord Cornbury, before Commitment of Francis Makemie, for Preaching a Sermon at
York.
Accomack-County ff.
THese may Certify to all, to whom these Presents may concern, that Mr.
Francis Makemie, a Dissenter and Preacher, in the aforesaid County of Accomack,
has at a Court held in the aforesaid County, October the 5th. 1699. performed
and answered, by taking the Oaths, etc. Enjoined in a certain Act of
Parliament, made the 24th day of May, Anno Dom. 1689. In the First Year of the
Reign of King William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act for Exempting Their
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church of England, from the
penalties of sundry Laws. And by his application to the Court by Petition
obtained Order in October Court last, that his own House at Accomack-Town, and
his Dwelleng-House at Pocamock, should be Registered and Recorded to be the
first places of his constant and ordinary P^^^^^ing:

Which is Attested this 10th day of October, Anno Dom. 1699. Per me John
Washbourn, Cler. Car. Com. Accomack.

An account of the Charges of the Imprisonment of Francis Makemie, and John
Hampton; and Prosecution of the former, for Preaching a Sermon at New York City.
Item. l. s. d. TO Tho. Cardale, Sheriff of Queens County, on L^ng-Island, for
apprehending and bringing us before Ld. Cornbury, at Fort-Anne. 04 01 00 To
Charges at Jamaica, whether we were carried out of the way. 00 12 00 To
Expenses at White Hall Tavern, while attending Lord Cornbury's leisure, besides
what ^undry Friends spent 00 02 03 (...) Ebenezar W^lson High Sheriff for
Commitment to his House. 04 01 00 To Extraordinary Expenses, during the time of
our Imprisonment. 06 00 00 To Mr. Ja. Reignere for a retaining Fee. 01 13 09 To
a Fee at another time. 03 06 00 To Ebe. Wilson, Sheriff of York for
Accommodation. 13 05 06 To Ditto for Return, and Habeas Corpus. 04 01 00 To the
Chief Justice when we gave Recognizance. 01 16 00 To Ditto after the first
Term. 00 18 00 To Mr. William Nichel for pleading. 02 12 00 To Ditto still due,
but now ordered him. 01 10 00 To my Charges in returning with my man from
Virginia both by Land and Water, to attend the Trial at New York. 12 06 06 To
the Sheriff for a Copy of the Pannil 00 05 06 To Mr. Attorney for the Queen
though Cleared. 12 12 06 To Mr Secretary for Fees. 05 12 06 To the High Sheriff
for Fees after Trial. 01 10 00 To the Judge. 01 00 00 To Judge Willward for
taxing the Bill of Cost I think 00 12 00 To the Crier and Undersheriff. 00 10
00 To M^ Reignere for his pains in Writing and Pleading. 05 00 00 Sum 81 04 09

IN this Po^ipt, there is first, The only Establishing Act of New-Yor^ which t^
^ergy of the Church of England has laid hold upon ^ thereby would dec^e the
World, in imposing upon, not only the A^rican, but Europaean World, that they
are Established in New York Government, as in England; but also influence that
Noble Corporation or Society for Propogating the Gospel, or the Patrons of most
of them, to break the Fifth Commandment, in Stubbs his Scheme: And though the
foregoing Trial has opened the eyes, and undeceived most, if not all at
New York, in this matter; for which they may thank a Prison. So this is to
enlighten, not only those abroad in the World, but also influence and direct
the Assemblys of New York for the future; in not giving a handle to any, to
pervert their Laws, contrary to the intention of the Legislators, for
confirming by subsequent Acts, in their unjust possessions; all which they may
perceive from the following particu^ 1. This Law is no general for the whole
Government, but for four Counties of a Colony where there are nine Counties; so
that the largest share is yet without the benefits of this Act. 2. It was made
upon the motion and application of sundry Dissenters, on Long Island, yet
alive, who expected another benefit by it, then they have been since treated
with. 3. It was made by an Assembly generally Dissenters, and are so to this
day; and let such as are alive declare their design in this Law. 4. There is
not any mention of so much as the name of the Church of England, or the mode or
manner of the Church of England Worship, Government or Ceremonies in all the
Law, without which, I cannot imagine they can have any Establishment. 5. Every
sufficient Protestant Minister, duly called according to directions of said
Law, has a right hereunto, and none else, and that Dissenters for whom this Law
was originally designed, are deemed and called Ministers, and men in Holy
Orders, is plain from the express words of the Act of Toleration. 6. None have
a right unto, or should have any benefit by this Act, but he that is called and
chosen by twelve men, chosen by the free Votes of the people of the County
which Mr. Urqhart of Jamaica, never had by any Vote of the majority; therefore
has as great a ^ight to the Salary there, as he has to the Meeting House, with
the House and Land he lives upon, of which the Proprietors have been Ousted
with violence, without all legal Process or Ejectment; and being of 1500 l.
value. It is matter of satifaction this practice is singular, and not yet made
a President of, though New-Town is threatened by the same Parson. 7. It is
observable, at the time this Law was made, there was not a Church of England
Clergyman ^n in all that Country, and for some time after. 8. As no person had
^right by this Law, but such legally called, and chosen so consequent^ (...)
was no crime for the Vestry to refuse levying or ^ng money to (...) is had no
right. 9. By English Law, and Practice, (...) Vestry men (...) to be ^ed as
culpable, until legally convi^ of the crime, or ^atter of fact. 10. By the last
clause of this Law, all former Agreements made between Ministers and People,
were confirmed and ratify^, and all such were then, and are to this day, Dutch,
French, and Bri^ Dissenters. So much concerning New York Act of Assembly.

As to (...) English Act of Parliament, I shall say nothing, but leave that
(...) the Queens-Bench, and the Learned Judges there, when the crimeless
^ittimus, and till further order comes to be tried by them.

The next Copy is a New York License, not so common and general (...)
Dissenters, as Mr. Attorney asserted at the Trial; for if they were (...)
called in, they would make but a small number, and any may have ^em for half
the money they cost; and with some not so easily swal^ed down, as Conformity,
for which we dissent: And for these Rea^ns. 1. If we are not Ministers before,
this License can never make (...) so. 2. No such Instructions from the Queen
was produced at the Trial, as laid Dissenters under any obligations of taking
Licenses. 3. ^y this License they are only tolerated to exercise their Religion
in one Congregation, and allows not a liberty to Preach to any People (...) the
whole Government, who shall desire it, which no Minister in his right wit for
the future, will submit to 4. It is a most precarious liberty, which is
granted, not, Quamdiu been se gesserit, but during pleasure; which is
inconsistent with that Commission and Authority; which Ministers of the Gospel,
called of God, derive from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Head and King of his
Militant Churches: Therefore it is from a principle of Conscience, and not from
any contempt of Government (...) disrespect to the persons of any in Authority,
that they cannot, they dare not submit to such a License, so inconsistent with
the toleration, and that liberty of Conscience allowed in Britain, and
practiced in all the Queens Dominions, besides New York, and commanded to be
allowed by the Queens Instructions.

The next thing to be taken notice of in this Postscript, is a Copy of Mr.
Makemies Certificate from a Court of Record in the Dominion of Virginia; which
was produced to, and read by Ld. Cornbury, before Con^ment, and shown to the
Grand Jury, before the Presentment was found: And though Mr. Attorney told the
said Jury, while four of the Hearers were examining upon Oath concerning the
Sermon, this Certificate was writ under a Hedge, which no doubt influenced them
to have no regard thereunto: Yet if the Act of Toleration, and consequently
this Certificate had come in play at the Trial, he was armed with an
Exemplification from the Government, signed by the Praesident, and the Seal of
the Colony annexed, to prove the truth and validity of this Certificate, and
vindicate it from Forgery.

The last thing is an account of the Expenses, of not only a person who is
innocent, but for doing good, as was determined by the Trial; and in complying
with the most solemn obligations of duty, both to God, and the Souls of men. To
which, besides loss of time, and absence from his Family and Concerns, he might
have justly charged Twelve Pounds more Money, by being necessiated to make his
Escape, both by Land and Water to New England, from Office with new Precepts,
whereby a whole Sabbath was profaned, in seeking to apprehend him; for which
some must be accountable.

But it is plain and undeniable, that the Prosecution of the most innocent
person in the world at New York is more expensive, then if Mr. Makemie had been
guilty of all the Paenal Laws mustered up, in the Indictment against one
Sermon, if prosecuted in England, even while P^nal Laws were in force, and
Executed there.

And a fair and legal decision, cannot put an end to a Controversy where the
same fact is made criminal, and a new Process violently designed, and
vigorously aimed at, by such, as nothing but the interpos^ on of the Authority
of England will put a stop to.

And what legal Authority Mr. Attorney, and a perpetual Sheriff have for their
demanded Fees, I leave to the Regulated. Table of Fees (...) New York to
determine; not to be paralelled by any Colony in H^ Majesty's Dominions.

In regard the all Opportunities have been denied to the abovesaid Mr. Makemie
for his own Vindication, 'twas thought proper here to Subjoin a Copy of his
Letter to the Lord Cornbury, of which (...) regard was had, nor answer given.
Boston, July 28 th. 1707. May it please Your Lordship,
I Most humbly beg leave to Represent to Your Excellency my just astonishment
at the Information received from sundry hands since my arrival in these
Colonies, and after so long and so expensive a Confinement, so deliberate and
fair a Trial, before Judges of Your Lordships appointment, and by a Jury Chosen
by your own Sheriff, on purpose to try that matter: I have been legally
cleared, and found guilty of no Crime for Preaching a Sermon at New York,
though my innocence protected me not from unspeakable and intolerable Expense.

I am informed, may it please your Excellency, there are Orders and Directions
given to sundry Officers in the Jerseys, for apprehending me, and (...) design
of giving me fresh trouble at New York.

If I were assured of the true cause of Your Lordships repeated Resentments
against me, I doubt not but my Innocence, would not only effectually justify
me, but remove those impressions imposed on Your Lordship by some persons about
you.

And as to my Preaching, being found at the Trial, against no Law, ^or any ways
inconsistent with Her Majesty's Instructions produced there; and considering
the solemn Obligations I am under, both to God, and the Souls of men, to
embrace all opportunities for exercising ^ho^ Ministerial Gifts vouchsafed from
Heaven; to whom I do appeal, I have no other end, besides the Glory of God, and
the Eternal Good o^ Previous Souls: I must assure my self Your Lordship insists
not on the n^w ^s a Crime, especially in New York Government, where (...)
Pro^ts are upon an equal level of Liberty, and no legal Establishment for any
particular Persuasion.

I (...) I am Charged with the Jersey Paper, Called, Forge^ and For^; though the
proving a Negative in my just Vindication be an hard Task, and not an usual
undertaking; yet doubt not but the thing it self, the matter it contains being
foreign to me, and no way concerned ^e: the time of its publication, being so
soon spread abroad after my arrival; I am well assured, none dare legally
accuse me, while the Authors smile at Your Lordships mistake and imposition,
whose Informers deserve to be stigmatized with the severest marks of Your
Lordships Displeasure; and the Authors will find a time to confront my sworn
Accusers of Perjury; and besides that, I never saw it till about the last of
February: We have suffered greatly in our Reputations, and particularly by
being branded with the Character of Jesuits; though my universal known Reputation
in Europe and America, makes me easy under such inviduous imputations: I have
been represented to Your Lordship as being factious in the Government, both of
Virginia and Maryland: (...) have peaceably lived in Virginia, and I brought
from Maryland a Certificate of my past Reputation, signed by some of the best
Quality on the most Contiguous County, ready to be produced at the Trial, i^
there had been occasion for it: A Copy of which I presume to Enclose for Your
Lordships perusal and satisfaction.

I beg leave to represent to Your Lordship my just concern at the sundry
Precepts for apprehending me, both in York and Jerseys, as one of the greatest
Criminals; whereby I am prevented in performing my Ministerial Duties to many
in Your Lordships Government of m^ own Persuasion, who desire it. I shall
patiently expect Your Lordship^ Commands and Directions, in giving me an
opportunity for Vindicating of my self in what is charged against me, and being
always ready to comply with any Qualification enjoined and required by Law.

I beg leave of Your Lordship to Subscribe my self Your Excellency's Most
Humble and most Obedient Servant. Francis Makemie

FINIS.

