To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Barron of Hurly. Captain General and
Governor in Chief of the Provinces of New Jersey, New York, and Territories
depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same. THE ANSWER OF Peter
Sonmans, To an Address presented to your Excellency, by the House of
Representatives, dated March 18. 1708.
May it Please your Excellency.
BEfore I proceed to say any thing, in Answer to the said Address, I must
humbly beg leave to return my hearty thanks, for the right your Excellency does
in permitting me to justify my self from the many false Accusations contained
therein; which I cheerfully undertake, in consideration of my own Innocence,
and your Excellencys justice in showing so great a readiness to hear both
partys, which though most necessary for the discovery of the truth, the Mannagers
and Contrivers of that Address, did not intend should be allowed me, as plainly
appears by the Prayer thereof.

This, My Lord, must seem a very extraordinary Proceeding, that an Assembly,
which ought to take all imaginable care of preserving the Liberties and
Properties of her Majestys Subjects, and Supporting the Courts of Judicature,
should be induced to declare me guilty of Illegally using the power I am
clothed with, to the great hurt of several of her Majesty's Subjects, and if
tolerated, will be of evil Example, and render their Liberties and Properties
precarious; and at the disposal of every Magistrate who will make his Will, and
not the Law, the rule of his Actions, while they themselves transgress the
fundamental Rules of Justice, and of Liberty and Property, in condemning me
unheard, and praying your Lordship to do the same.

How ill grounded and untrue their charge is, your Excellency will easily
discover, and whether the Promoters of this Address unwarrantably use the trust
reposed in them to the evil example of the Province, whether they render the
Liberties and Properties of the Subjects precarious, when they condemn without
Proof, when they set themselves up as a Supreme Court to hear and determine all
such things as the Law in its ordinary course has provided for, and take
Cognizance of several matters that are already before some of the Courts, and
must there be tried, though they have not so much as the Power of administering an
Oath to any one they examine? Or I, that have, to the utmost of my ability,
endeavored to keep up the Authoriy of the Courts, and never judged, much less
condemned any before Examination and a full hearing, thereby endeavoring to
preserve the Liberties and Properties of her Majestys Subjects from being
precarious, and have always set Justice, and the Laws, (as far as I knew them,
being no Lawyer) before me as a Rule to govern my actions, and not my Will, as
is asserted.

The Address tells your Excellency, That having examined into the truth of
several Complaints made against me, do find etc. thereby intimating that
several Complaints have been made: when by their own Votes and Report, not any
Complaint, and but one Petition from persons summoned to serve upon a grand
Inquest for the Counties of Middlesex and Summerset, at a Court of Sessions
held at Amboy the 8th of March last, appears to have been presented to them; by
the prayer of which Petition, the Petitioners only desired the said Counties in
General, and themselves in particular, might be relieved from some pretended
unpresidented Proceedings, and unjust Fines, (as the said Petition did style
them) imposed upon them by that Court, which Fact, if they had been as true, as
indeed they are not, only related to what happened at that Court, without so
much as mentioning any other Complaint. This Petition being referred to a
Committee, that Committee, as I am advised, could, nor ought not to have
cognizance of any other matter, or thing, than what was referred to them, (
viz.) the subject matter thereof: But the Committee taking upon themselves to
go beyond the subject Matter and Prayer of that Petition, into affairs of quite
another nature, which were neither referred nor mentioned to them, is wholly
unpresidented and unwarrantable.

But to demonstrate the unaccountable Proceedings of the Committee, perfectly
to your Lordship; your Excellency will please to remark, That Mr. Willocks, the
chief of the said Petitioners, because I desired him to take the Oaths
appointed by several Acts of Parlaiment, in the room of the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, etc. before I would admit him to serve on the said Grand
Inquest, which he refused, was permitted to arrogate to himself the liberty of
being chief Mannager and Examiner at the said Committee.

The Address further intimates to your Excellency, That they are sorry, that I,
who have the honor of being of the Queens Council, and do not want sufficient
Abilities for her Service, should by my imprudent Conduct, lay them under a
necessity of so public a Complaint against me. I am as little obliged to the
promoters of the Address for that honor, as for their Complement, because the
first was by some of their Members, or their Friends, opposed as much and as
long as it could, and the last only used to aggravate the Crimes they would
charge me with. The necessity they lay under of so public a complaint, an
impartial Judge will find difficulty to discern, because supposing all they say
true, (the contrary of which I have no doubt the whole Province believes) they
are things of that nature that the established Courts ought, and only can Judge
of them, where accused, as well as the Accuser must be legally heard, and the
Evidences on both sides duly weighed and considered, so that imprudent Conduct,
not to give it a worse term, may more truly be turned upon the Mannagers of the
said Address than me.

They would persuade your Excellency in the next place: That they cannot be so
much wanting to the Country they represent, as to be silent in a Cause that so
justly requires their Consideration. The said Addressors, My Lord, might have
cleared this point, with mentioning but one Complaint, or other instance made
to them by the Country, the neglect of which could give the least ground for
supposition that they are wanting to the Country they represent, or required
their consideration, so particularly, that without it no remedy could be had.
But not one complaint being made against me, save that one Petition, before
mentioned, the Country and I have more reason to be heartily sorry, that some
Members among the Representatives have so far indulged their own private
Resentments, and betrayed the trust reposed in them, to engage a whole Assembly
in revenging a particular Picque, the more since my lawful Endeavors to
recover those just Rights and Dues, which they have torn from me, only occasion
that Picque; such Proceedings, I am fully convinced, your Excellency will never
countenance, but on the contrary, that your Lordship will discourage by such
proper methods as are consonant to your Lordships great Wisdom and Justice, all
those, who, under color of preserving the Queens Honor, and performing their
Duty to their Country, endeavor to use the Power allowed them, only to make
both a Party to and assisting in the Injurys they have done.

Being sensible that my Answer to the Address will oblige me to trespass too
much upon your Lordships time, I will pass over many just Remarks, which might
be made upon it, and confine my self, as much as is possible, to what is
immediately conducing to my justification. Wherefore, I only deny, and so pass
over the groundless Accusation, that those Arbitrary measures (as the said
Address is pleased to style them) with which the late Administration under the
Lord Cornbury so much abounded, were very much owing to my Counsel, I being one
of the persons on whose advice his Lordship very much relied; because the said
Address it self, styles it only Belief and Conjecture. What Arbitrary measures
my Lord Cornbury used, are to me utterly unknown, and if any such were, how
little they can affect me, I leave to your Excellencys consideration, since I
had not, until last August, the honor of sitting in her Majestys Council, nor
indeed much of his Lordships, Conversation, besides, wholly incapable of
advising a Nobleman of his many extrordinary Qualifications and great Sagacity.

The first thing the Address particularly accuses me with, is, That procured
the arresting of Mr. John Barclay on Whitsunday last, coming out of Church from
the Sacrament, which said Address affirms, is a manifest breach of the Peace,
and contrary to the Laws in that case made and provided. Here the Mannagers of
the Address prevailed upon the Representatives to assume to themselves an
absolute uncontrollable Power of determining what is a breach of the Law. But
allowing that it was a breach of the Peace, it is not a Crime of so high a
nature, but any inferior Court, nay, a single Justice of the Peace by a law of
this Province, might examine into, and punish it, without troubling your
Lordship, which is evident not only from every days practice, but even from the
Proceedings which have succeeded that supposed Crime, some of the said
Committee having already persuaded the said Barclay to arrest Dr. Arents (who
took him) for his alleged mistake, and found an Indictment against him, for
his presumed breach of the Law. But I have no doubt of seeing that Fact
justified, because I am sure its common in England, where I never heard such a
case questioned; which is thus:)

The said Barclay refusing to answer a Bill filed in Chancery against him,
after the time he had prayed, and was allowed him, elapsed, stood all the
Contempts of the said Court for above a year, mostly sheltering himself your
Exellencys Government of New York, at length a Commission of Rebellion was
sealed against him, directed among others, to the said Dr. Arents, which I
delivered to him on the Saturday. He asked me, if he might execute it on the
Sunday, if he should chance to see him? I told him, he might, being no common
Process, but a Commission under the broad Seal of the Province to answer the
Queen as a Rebel; accordingly Arents took him, after he was come out of the
Church. If I erred in my Opinion in a point of Law, which is the utmost can be
made of this Article, being no Lawyer, I cannot suppose your Excellency will
take that to be so great a crime, as to deserve such public Censure. I do not
believe any Gentleman, though a Barrister, was ever before so treated, if he
mistook in a point of Law, which is not yet determined I did.

But indeeed, one would think the close of this Article penned by a Papist or
Non-Juror, such large Privilege is given to the Altar, which if allowed, tends
to protect Murderers, Robbers or any Felones from being taken, if they Presume
but to come to the Lords Table.

The Second Article says, I took from one John Brown his Horse, without
assigning him any reason for it, and detains him to this day. Surely your
Excellency will not judge this a matter of that moment or consequence to lay
the Assembly under a necessity of so public a Complaint, and that they should
be wanting to the Country they represent, if they should be silent in a cause
that so justly requires their consideration, etc. but on the contrary, that so
trivial and mean a thing, is fitter for a Justice of Peace, or at most, that
Court where Brown has been advised to sue me, than your Excellencys
Consideration. But it serves to increase the number of Articles for them, and
to convince your Lordship, what pains the promoters of the Address have been
forced to take, how low and much beneath the Dignity of an Assembly, they are
obleg'd stoop, to find seeming Accusations: To which I shall not trouble your
Excellency with any further Reply, save that its untrue in all its parts, That
I never took the Horse, detained, or have, or have had him in my Custody, but
lay the Proof upon them, before that Court where they have commenced their
Action against me. This I could easily manifest to your Excellency, but judge
in too inconsiderable for your Lordships notice; besides, it might be
prejudicial to me, in my necessary defense in its proper place.

Nevertheless, I cannot omit giving your Excellency another evident
Demonstration of the Unreasonableness of the Address, in misrepresenting this
matter on bare suggestion, either of some of the said Committee, or else their
chief Mannager, Mr. Willoks, for the which Misrepresentation there is as little
foundation, even in the Report of the Committee it self, or what Brown said at
the Committee, as the committee had warrant to meddle with the whole business,
which was not referred to them.

The Address says, Sometime after the poor Man (Brown) had commenced an Action
against me to recover, if possible, his Beast unjustly detained from him, one
Reeves complained against one Mellin a Tailor, etc. insinuating, and so timing
the matter, as if I had treated Brown severely on the account of his carrying
away Melin, to revenge the suit which he, the said Brown had commenced against
me. Whereas the Reverse is true; for the matter of Mellin was long before Brown
arrested me. Melins affair happening in May, and Browns Writ bears test in May
Court, but was not sealed until July, nor had I any notice of, or was arrested
upon it until September following; from whence its evident, that Browns action
against me for the Horse, might be the effect of Browns resentment for being
committed, but could never be any reason for my committing him, as is
insinuated.

Which brings me to the matter it self about Mellin. Your Excellency will here
see the temper of some of the Leading Members of the Assembly, whose Rancor
carries them so far beyond their Reason, that they state the facts different
from, nay, repugnant, not only to the Report of the said Committee, but also
prevert what was said by the persons they examined, of which I shall give your
Excellency four particular Instances.

First, The said Address says, That one Revees complained against one Mellin a
Tailor, for detaining a Coat of Reeves which I was pleased to call Felony, and
was going to commit Mellin for Felony. The Report is, That I issued my Warrant
to the Constable to bring Mellin before me, upon John Revees his complaining of
Felony against said Millen.

2ndly, The Address goes on, Though Mellin proved, and Reeves afterward confessed;
Mellin only detained the Coat he had made, till Reeves should pay him for the
making of it. This being joined to the foregoing, it is to be taken, that this
Proof of Mellin, and confession of Reeves, were at the Examination. But the
Report, and what was said, is quite otherwise ( viz.) That I committed the said
Brown into the Sheriffs Custody, where he remained until Bailed out, although
Reeves afterward declared, that the said Mellin had not stole the Coat, before
pretended, but detained it for his pay. From whence its evident that this
declaration of Reeves, if any such was, happened after Reeves was bailed out,
and not at the Examination before me; and its plain, by the Report, from what
A. Hudy said, and the Address it self confesses, that it was some time before
Brown was bailed; neither is there one word in all the Report, that Mellin
proved that he detained the Coat for want of payment for making it; all which
much alters the state of the case; for when the matter was under examination
before me, I could take no notice of discourse that happened many days after.

3dly The Address tells your Excellency, That Mellin finding there was no
contending with absolute Power, found a way to escape from me, and was set over
to Statten-Island by the aforesaid Brown, who was altogether ignorant of what
had happened. The Report is, At the desire of Mellin, John Brown carried him to
Statten-Island, and Brown told Committee, that he knew Mellin was in trouble.
So that not one word of Absolute Power, nor any thing that appears like it, can
be gathered either from the Report, or what was declared to the Committee.

4thly, The Address sets forth, Upon which Sonmans, to gratify his Resentment,
contrary to Law, commits said Brown to Goal, and when the Sheriff had admitted
him to Bail, he used many Threats to him for his so doing, ordering him to take
him back again, telling him he would throw up his Commission and go to York,
and desire my Lord to send Soldiers to Rule them; Which Threat, and Fear of
being governed by Martial Law, induced the Sheriff to take him into Custody
again, and keep him in Prison till my Lord Cornbury was pleased to allow he
might be admitted to Bail. The Report is only thus, But the next day he
committed John Brown, which after some time, he, viz. the Sheriff, admitted to
be bailed out; at which Sonmans was very angry, and said, he would go to York
to my Lord, and throw up his Commission, and desire my Lord to send Soldiers
to Rule them.

Your Excellency sees that here is no mention of any Threats, nor any Command
of mine to take him into Custody again, much less does the Sheriff say one
word, That the Threats, or fear of being governed by Martial Law, induced him
to take the Man again in Custody, or that he could not be bailed until my Lord
Cornbury was pleased to allow it, who, I believe, was never applied to about
it: This is all an Addition of the Contrivers of the Address.

The next Sentence in the Address, is, This Proceeding, as it was most unlawful
and unjust, so it tended not only to render her Majesty's Subjects entirely
depending on my Lord Cornbury, or those he thought fit to honor with
Magistracy, but to create in the Minds of People an aversion to her Majesty's
just and mild Government, when by a humor, a Gentleman of the Council could
Dragoon them at pleasure.

Here, My Lord, The Mannagers of the Address prevail upon the Representatives,
to take upon themselves, again, an absolute Power of asserting that Proceedings
are most Unlawful and Unjust, when, in truth, they know not what the
Proceedings are; for a learned Judge tells us, Examination without an Oath, is
but loose Discourse. So, upon loose discourse, and that without hearing what
the other side has to object to that loose discourse, the Promoters of the
Address impose upon the Representatives, to judge of the Lawful or
Unlawfulness, and Justice or Injustice of the Actions of the Officers of the
Government. Whether this be asserting and protecting the Liberties and
Properties of the Subject, or rendering them precarious, your Excellency will
easily judge?

How any thing, even the Address, much less the Report says, can have the
tendency by the Address mentioned, I confess, I understand not, nor how thereby
Her Majesty's Subjects are entirely made depending on my Lord Cornbury, or
those he thought fit to honor with Magistracy. If Brown was uneasy under his
Commitment, why did he not move for a Habeas Corpus, as the Law directs, and so
obtain his liberty, which my Lord Cornbury, nor any other Magistrate, neither
could or would have disobeyed. What they mean by a Gentleman of the Council
could Dragoon them at pleasure, I protest I under stand not. The Addressers
certainly designed not that Reflection upon me, because they and their Chief
Mannager, Mr. Willoks, very well know that I had not the honor of sitting at
that Board until some Months after; besides, not any Soldiers under that
denomination, were ever here, that I know of; Nor indeed can I see the least
pretense for that extravagant Expression, taking the fact in as bad a sense as
the Mannagers of the Address, themselves, would gladly have it understood,
since the most it amounts to, even then is that I said, I would desire such a
thing, but that I ever did desire it, appears not.

But that your Excellency may be fully informed, l will presume to relate the
fact truly, purged from the Glosses put upon it. Reeves having taken Mellin
with his Wife, as Inmates into part of his House, complained to me, that he
missed sundry things, particularly some Rum, Wool, working Tools, and lastly a
Coat, Mellins had made for him, which Reeves had worn several times. That he
the said Reeves being gone to work, Mellin had feloniously taken this Coat, and
carried it to another house, where he and his Wife had retired, without giving
him any the least notice. Wherefore finding Millins had taken the Coat, he
believes he might also have taken some of the other things; therefore prayed a
Warrant against him, (which I granted.) When both appeared before me, Reeves
took his Oath to his Complaint, and produced some Witnesses, which affected
Mellin as to the Wool: Mellin for his defense alleged, that he had made the
Coat, confessed the taking it out of the House when Reeves was abroad, and
carrying it away. I asked, if since he had made the Coat, he had not delivered
it to Reeves, and whether Reeves had not many times worn it? If he had demanded
payment of Reeves, and given him notice, that if he was not paid for the making
he would take it in pawn? Mellin confessed he delivered it to Reeves, and that
Reeves had worn it, but could not prove he had either demanded payment for
making, or given him notice, that he would secure the Coat if he was not paid.
As to the Wool, and other things, he only answered, he knew nothing of them*
without making any reply to what the Evidences said relating to the Wool. I
then told him, I must commit him. Whilst I was writing the Mittimus, I gave the
Constable charge of him, who let him escape, although I called to him expressly,
that I should require him at his hands. Presently after, I was informed, upon
Oath, That John Brown had carried said Mellin over a Cannoe to Statten-Island,
though Brown was told the whole matter. Whereupon I sent a Warrant for Brown;
being come before me, I asked him some Questions about this affair, but he
refused to make any direct Answer; whereupon I told him, he must find Sureties
to appear, and answer at the next Sessions; which he absolutely refused; and
putting his Arms on his side, turned about short, and bid some of the Company
get him horse, he would ride to Goal in state. I then committed him.

The next day, being told, That the Sheriff had taken upon himself to bail
Brown, though committed as an accessory to Felony; I went to Woodbridge to
inform the Sheriff of his Error, and warn him of the Inconveniences he might
suffer thereby. At the entrance into the Town, I met Brown, with the Constable
and another returning to Amboy. I enquired the reason thereof? The Constable
told me, The Sheriff had accepted of Bail I answered, That the Sheriff could
not do that; and commanded the Constable to bring Brown back before me; which,
though often repeated, the Constable utterly refused to do. I went into the
Town; ask't the Sheriff, by what Authority he bailed a Prisoner so committed?
He told me, There were three Men bound in One Thousand Pound a piece to deliver
Brown to him again, whenever he should be demanded. I advised him to demand him
presently; related to him what had happened with the Constable, adding, That I
would complain to my Lord of this Contempt, which if he would not direct to be
prosecuted, I would lay down my Commission, for that it was to no purpose to
keep it, if I could not be obeyed; and if People could not be ruled by the
Laws, or the Civil Magistrate, my Lord must send down Soldiers to compel them.
The Sheriff, sensible of his Error, sent for Brown again, and kept him until he
thought fit to apply to the Secretary to be bailed, who immediately bailed him,
without any direction or allowance of my Lord Cornbury, who, I believe, was
never spoke to about the Bailment, as is insinuated by the Address. I indeed
complained to his Lordship of the Disobedience of the Constable, whom my Lord
directed to be bound over, and the Grand Jury have found the Indictment against
him. Mellin was afterward taken up, but soon bailed* and the Attorney General
preferred an Indictment to the Grand Jury against him last November Court, the
Names of four Witnesses being upon the back of the said Indictment, who were
also Sworn; but the said grand Jury, of which Mr. Royce (the Chairman of this
Committee) was Foreman) were pleased never to Return the said Indictment into
the Court, nor so much as sent for one of the Witnesses. Your Lordship will now
judge whether my procedure is Unlawful and Unjust: I humbly conceive, if a
Justice of Peace is not protected in the Execution of his Office, but is
suffered to be Affronted, his Commands disobeyed, and those he thinks fit to
Commit, carried away out of the Government, that excellent Constitution, which
has provided so useful an Officer, will soon be lost.

But here I must again take Notice to your Excellency, That supposing every
thing in this Article alleged, was true, its not of that nature to lay the
Representatives under a Necessity of so public a Complaint, Or that they
should be wanting to the Country they represent, if they were silent, much less
that it so justly requires their Consideration; forasmuch as I am advised, That
the matter no way concerns them, because the utmost the whole Charge can amount
to, is, That I wrongfully committed Mellin and Brown, which if I did, they had
their Remedy, in the ordinary course of the Law, before the established Courts,
without presuming upon your Lordships time, who cannot, if they are wronged,
adjudge them any Satisfaction, but must at last leave the matter to be
determined by the Law.

The Third Accusation is in a Case depending between the Queen and Mr John
Harrison, upon an Information exhibited by the Attorney General, he the said
Sonmans endeavored to persuade the Sheriff to pack a Jury, as the Address
untruly relates. The Report, and what the Sheriff said at the Committee, being
quite otherwise. I know not what the Address means. The Sheriff said (according
to the Report of the Commit) That it was upon a Trial of John Harrison, at a
Supreme Court at Burlington, in a Cause depending between the said Sonmans and
Harrison. So here the Causes differ. And in truth, I cannot make any Answer to
it, since I know nothing of the Matter. I had no Causes depending between
Harrison and my Self, that could come on, or were ready for Trial at that Court
at Burlington: If it was a Cause of the Queens, I had no business with it, nor
was acquainted with any steps taken, in order to bring it to Trial, much less
to pack a Jury; wherefore I absolutely deny the Charge, nor know any thing of
the Fact, Cause or Time. I confess, I have many times advised the Sheriff to be
careful to get good Juries, and not to impannel any he thought Partial, or
inclining to any Party; nor am sensible that I have therein committed any
fault; though, with submission, I think the said Representatives would have done
well, and had reason enough to have enquired into the Reason how such strange
both Grand and Petty Juries have been impannelled of late, who have all along
gone directly contrary to the Charge given them by the Court, and the fullest
Evidence that could be; and whether some others have not pack't Juries to their
own purpose, which has occasioned some Presentiments and Verdicts to go
accordingly.

The Fourth Article is represented to your Excellency as a great Instance of my
Injustice and Partiality, but will, I doubt not, appear as much to my
Advantage, as now it seems the contrary, when it is truly related. The Fact, My
Lord, is thus: Michael van Vechten (who, of the two mentioned in this Article,
is more my Friend and Acquaintance than Alexander Walker) arrested Walker for
130 l. in the Court of Common Pleas, in which Court there is a standing Rule,
That all Writs shall be signed by the Party himself, or his Attorney. The Writ
was not signed by said Van Vechten, but by Mr. Gorden, who was not at that time
allowed to practice as an Attorney. Mr. Gorden appeared for the Plantiff, Van
Vechten; the Attorney General for the Defendent, Walker. The Cause being
called, Mr. Attorney General for the Defendant, moved, that the Writ might
abate, because it bore Test in the Vacation, and was not signed by van Vechten
or his Attorney, as the Rule required. Being sensible that Mr. Gorden watched
for an opportunity of Complaint against me, although he was not allowed to plead,
I suffered him to say all he could for his Clyent, only told him, He ought not;
but however, gave way to his Pleading. After a long Debate I gave Judgment,
That the Writ should abate, because it bore Test in the Vacation; which is
certainly a good Reason for Abatement. The Defendant thereupon made out his
Bill of Costs, which, as the Ordinance allows, I taxed, though I cannot remember
the Sum; but be it what it will, I dare maintain my Taxation, by the Ordinance
then in force. As to what the Address says, Where a Writ of the Plantiffs
abates, no Costs ought to be paid: All former Practice in this Province
Confutes such an Assertion. And that the unfairness of the Address may more
plainly appear, I must add, That by the Oath of the Judge of said Court, I
ought not to give Counsel or Advice to either Party; yet the Address accuses me
for not doing that, when it tells your Excellency in the same Article, That
another Writ signed in the same manner as that was, met with no Objection from
me, but was allowed of. There was indeed another Cause called, between Jacob
Arents Plantiff, and Robert Mellin Defendant, both who appeared in Person; The
Plantiff moved for a Rule to oblige the Defendant to plead to his Declaration,
but the Defendant made no exception to the Writ, which I never saw, nor indeed
was it my business to look after it. From whence its evident, That except I had
seen the Writ, and, contrary to my Oath, been of Council for the Defendant, I
could not make any Exception to it.

But that the Partiality of the Address, and particularly of Mr. Gorden, who
only spoke to this matter before the Committee, may appear to your Excellency
as clear as the Sun at Noon, I must beg your Excellency will be pleased to
observe, That at at the very last Court of Pleas held at Amboy, the 11th of
March, Mr. Gorden pleaded in Abatement for the Defendant to this very Writ they
accuse me of passing without being signed by the Party, for that it was not
signed by the Party, according to the Rule of the Court; but before the Court
gave Judgment, agreed to put in an issuable Plea. I told Mr. Gorden, if they
had not agreed, I must have given Judgment for the Defendant, because the
Reason pleaded for Abatement, was good.

Before I pass from this Article, I must beg leave to represent to your
Excellency, That what ever the matter of Facts, here charged, are, they are not
such as belong to the Representatives, nor obliges them to such extraordinary
Proceedings, since if I have erred, the party injured could and may yet have
his Remedy at the established Courts, and not by such unpresidented Methods.

The Fifth Article Complains of my refusing to bind Alexander Walker to the
Peace, on pretense, That I was immediately going out of Town on your Lordships
business, though I staid in Town part of the next day; which Accusation I utterly
deny; no regular Complaint being ever made to me. I confess, that on Sunday,
about three of the Clock in the afternoon, as I was sitting at Dinner, and then
just going out of Town, Mr. Gorden told me a story to the purpose in the
Address set forth; to which I answered, that I was to go out of Town as soon as
I should rise from the Table, that I should be back at night, and go away next
morning early, therefore advised him to apply to some other Justice of the
Peace, which he promised to do. But I must also inform your Excellency, that
nothing of what Mr. Gorden said appeard to me, Himself confessed it, all
Hearsay; he was neither the Party hurt, or threatened to be hurt, had not seen
any body hurt, or heard any threatened, nor showed me any Authority or request
from the grieved Party, if any there was, for what he did, much less made or
offered to make Oath, as the Law requires, that any thing he said was true, or
that any body was in any danger or fear; and all Examinations, without Oath,
are but loose discourse, upon which no Justice can answer the binding any one
over. And I have much reason to believe, the matter of fact was otherwise than
Mr. Gorden reported, for though I returned at night, and went not out of Town
until Ten the next morning, I heard nothing of Mr. Gorden, or the Presons he
pretended to appear for.

The Sixth Article relates to my own private particular Affairs: that matter is
already brought before the Supreme Court, where it must have its determination,
wherefore shall not trouble your Excellency with any other answer, then, that I
deny the fact. Though I cannot omit observing to your Excellency that this cannot
be any instance of my rendering the Liberties and Properties of her Majesty's
Subjects precarious, nor a Crime of that nature, as lays the said
Representatives under a necessity of so public a Complaint. Which if the said
Representatives should neglect, they should be wanting to the Country they
represent, since the meanest Court in the Province has power to take notice,
and punish any such crime, when its proved before them. The whole matter is of
so mean and inconsiderable a nature, that the Mannagers of the said Address
ought to blush when they trouble your Lordship with such triffles; its a hard
case when an Assembly are forced to strain the trust reposed in them, to so
great a degree, only to gratify the private revenge of a few of their Members.

The Seventh Article is of a piece with the former, to which I shall therefore
only answer, That I utterly deny the facts, for which some of the Members of
the said Representatives presented me; that I have much reason to believe the
Grand Jury themselves did not believe what they brought in; but were imposed
upon and over born by some, who never minded the Oath they had taken, and that
those Indictments are False, Scandalous and Malicious, invented for a handle to
fling dirt, which plainly appears in their being so laid and contrived, that
the main accusations can never come regularly to be tried, the sham Indictment
being found by an Inquest not of the place where the fact is alleged to be
committed.

I may boldly affirm to your Excellency, that I am not conscious of any guilt,
which can make me fear any honest Grand Jury, that will be bound by the Oath
they take, ( viz.) that they shall not present any body for hatred or malice,
or excuse any for fear, favor or Affection) nor have ever after an
unpresidented manner hindered the Grand Inquest from doing their Duty at the
last, or any other Court.

What I did at the last Court of Sessions at Amboy, the 8th of March, your
Excellency has been pleased to approve of, viz. Not to admit any to serve upon
the Grand Inquest, who refused to take the Oaths to the Queen, as by Law
required. This, My Lord, is what the Mannagers of the Address are pleased to
call Hindering a Grand Inquest from doing their Duty, after an unpresidented
manner; Though I may more truly say, That the said Inquest being led by Mr.
Willocks, who publicly declared, he would not take the Oaths, and was pleased
to term it, Taking the Lords Name in vain, did, after an unpresidented manner,
withdraw from, and not attend the said Court, as they ought to have done. The
Reason of which, and why the Sheriff did not summons another Grand Jury, as he
was commanded, I presume the said Representatives, or at least some of them,
know best, there being but too much Reason to believe, that whole matter was so
ordered by some Members of the Representatives, who being conscious of the
Riots and Breaches of the Peace they had lately been guilty of, were justly
apprehensive of their Crimes, and would not escape due Prosecution. How careful
some of the Representatives have been of tolerating evil Examples, How Anxious
to preserve the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects from being precarious;
Whether they have been wanting to the Country they represent; Whether they have
been silent in a Cause that might justly require their Consideration; and
lastly, Whether they protect those that publicly stand up in Defiance against
many Acts of Parliament? I shall leave to your Excellencys just Considerations,
when your Excellency shall please to reflect, that all this Accusation is only
because I would oblige a Grand Jury-man to take the Oaths, which, it seems, is
so great a Crime, in the Eyes of many of the Representatives, that it lays them
under a Necessity of so public a Complaint against me.

To the Eighth and last Article, I say, and confess, That in four Criminal
Causes depending before, and tried this last Court of Sessions at Amboy, I did
not admit a Quaker to serve on the Jury, which I have no doubt but your
Excellency will be pleased to approve of, for the following Reasons,

First, Because I never heard, by any Instruction of her Majesty, the Quakers
were admitted to be upon Jurys. I have heard, and do believe, that an
Instruction to the purpose following, may have been given, viz.

Whereas we are informed, that diverse of our good Subjects inhabiting those
Parts, do make a Religious Scruple of Swearing; and by reason of their refusing
to take an Oath in Courts of Justice, and other Places, are or may be liable to
many Inconveniences, Our Will and Pleasure is, that in order to their ease, in
what they conceive to be matter of Conscience, so far as may be consistent with
good order and Government, you take care, that an Act be passed in the General
Assembly of our said Province, to the like effect as that past here in the
Seventh and Eighth year of his late Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act that the
Solemn Affirmation or Declaration of the People called Quakers shall be
accepted instead of an Oath, in the usual form; and that the Law be transmitted
to Us, and Our Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, etc.

But, with submission, I humbly conceive this so far from allowing them to
serve upon any Jury, that it does not so much as direct that they shall have
the benefit of the Act there mentioned; but on the contrary, from the very
words, it plainly appears, that her Majesty gave no direction against that Law,
nor allowed, much less directed that they should have the ease by that Law
given them, but that they are, or may still be liable to the many
Inconveniences in this Province, to which they were exposed in England before
that Act was made; for, if otherwise, what Reason can be assigned for these
words in the Instruction, Our Will and Pleasure is, that in order to their Ease,
etc. you take care that an Act be passed, etc. Likewise, these foregoing, And
by reason of their refusing to take an Oath in Courts of Justice, and other
Places, are or may be liable to many Inconveniences.

Secondly, Because even by that Instruction, whereby Her Majesty has been
graciously pleased to admit the Quakers to bear and share in several Offices in
this Government, nothing is contained, as I am advised, that can be construed to
extend to permitting them to serve on Juries; which will plainly appear to your
Excellency from the Instruction it self, which I have heard, and do believe,
may be in these words, viz.

And whereas we have been farther Informed, that in the first settlement of the
Government of our said Province, it may so happen, that the number of
Inhabitants fitly qualified to serve in our Council, and in the General
Assembly, and in other places of Trust or Profit there, will be but small, It
is therefore our Will and Pleasure, that such of the said People, called
Quakers, as shall be found capable of any of those Places or employments, and
accordingly be elected or appointed to serve therein, may upon their taking and
signing the Declaration of their Allegiance to us, in the form used by the same
People here in England, together with a Solemn Declaration for the true
discharge of their respective Trusts, be admitted by you into any of the said
Places or Employments.

From which words in the Preamble, We have been informed, that in the first
Settlement of the Government, it is plain that that Instruction took its rise
only from Information: Against the truth of which, I shall not trouble your
Excellency with any arguments here, though the contrary, I am assured of from
many good hands. But, my Lord, here is not one word of being admitted to serve
on Juries, in the whole Instruction; it seems to be restrained to the Council,
General Assembly and other Places of Trust or Profit, under which denomination
that of a Jury-Man, as I humbly conceive, cannot well be accounted.

Besides, your Excellency will please to Remark, That the Preamble gives the
Reason of this Instruction, viz. That in the first Settlement it may so happen,
that the Number of Inhabitants fitly qualified to serve, etc. will be but
small. It is therefore plainly intimating, That if there were a sufficient
Number to serve, that Instruction would not have been given. Now, My Lord, in
this Cause complained of, a sufficient Number to serve were impannelled; so
that, at best, an Officer may err in admitting a Quaker, but cannot (with
submission) if he does not.

3rdly, Because the last Clause, but one, of the Act of the 7 and 8 of William
the 3d, mentioned by her Majesty's Instructions, and recommended to be past
here, in order to the case of the Quakers, in express words forbids it; which,
for the more certainty, I shall presume to trouble your Excellency with, and
are these: Provided, and be it Enacted, That no Quaker or reputed Quaker,
shall, by virtue of this Act, be qualified or permitted to give Evidence in any
Criminal Causes, or serve on any JVRY, or bear any Office or Place of Profit in
the Government, any thing this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

The Conclusion of the said Address is so very extraordinary, that I would not
any way alter it, but shall repeat the words, Were there no more to be said
against him than his being indicted for Perjury and Adultry, we humbly conceive
would justify what we are to desire of your Lordship, a Person of that
Character being a scandal to her Majesty's Council; and we believe your
Excellency will think it a Reflection on the public Administration to continue
him in that Station; We therefore pray, that your Excellency would remove him
from your Presence, her Majesty's Council, and from all Places of Trust and
Profit in this Province. So That the said Representatives in very plain Terms
desire your Excellency, first, To Condemn me unheard, or before any thing is
proved against me, upon their bare Affirmation, as a Scandal to her Majesty's
Council, and that it will be a Reflection on the Public Administration to
continue me in that Station. Therefore, 2dly, with the same justice, they pray
your Excellency to proceed to Execution, viz. To Remove me from your
Excellency's Presence. Her Majestys Council, and from all Places of Trust and
Profit in this Province. I hope your Excellency will please to Pardon me, if I
say, This Desire and Prayer of the said Representatives is directly contrary to
the Liberties and Properties of the Subject, to the express words of the Great
Charter of England, The Petition of Right, the many other subsequent good Laws,
that in all Reigns have been Enacted for the benefit of the Queens Subjects,
and only to be equalled under a French or Turkish Government; therefore the
most Unjust and Unreasonable that evere were made.

For, were nothing to be said against the Form and Substance of the said
Indictment, as much there is; were they found (as a Grand Inquest ought to be)
by impartial unprejudiced Men, the contrary of which is evident, the chief Men
being known to be my professed Enemies, because I have many Demands on them in
Civil Causes, had they been brought into the Court in the usual manner, which
they were not, but in a Method altogether strange, or had they been without any
manner of other Objection, yet even then, your Excellency knows, they are only
a bare Affirmation, to which the Party never had any Opportunity of being
heard, much less making any Defense. For which reason the Law directs, That the
Party shall be summoned, not to be judged, much less condemned, but heard, that
Time and Opportunity may be given him to make his Defense and invalidate the
Evidence, which may have been Wrongfully or Maliciously given against him. But
this bare Accusation shall, by the Desire of the Addressers, who ought to be
the most careful Protectors of the Liberties of the Province, as far as the Law
directs, nay, to make new Laws to help the Defects of the former, if Occasion
requires it, be deemed so full a Conviction and Proof, that Judgment and
Execution shall follow upon it.

By this Rule, My Lord, any Gentleman who has the honor of serving the Queen,
or any other Officer of the Government, shall be Turned out, Ruined in his
Reputation (which ought to be dearer to him than his Life) and treated as a
high Criminal, Convicted without being heard, or any Proof against him, whilst
his only Crime is, that a few leading Men, though his known Enemies, have
Interest enough with a Sheriff to be returned on a Grand Inquest.

But, My Lord, the matter of this Address is yet more extravagant; for all
Examinations of the Grand Inquest are upon Oath, but much of what I am charged
with, in the said Address, is only upon a bare Relation given, without the Life
of an Oath, or any thing else to oblige the Relator to speak the Truth,
managed by one, who publicly refuses to give any assurance of his Allegiance
to the Queen, or Fidelity to the established Government. And for several other
Charges, they do not by the Report of the Committee, or any other Proceedings
of the Assembly, appear to have been so much as told the said Representatives,
but must be things framed by the Mannagers of the Address.

Your Excellency will be pleased to Remember, what a learned and just Judge has
left as a standing Rule, viz. That all Questions and Trials, where Witnesses
are examined, the Examination is upon Oath by the Law, by all our Books,
Statutes, and every days Practice; Examination without an Oath is but loose
Discourse. Yet the Promoters of the said Address, prevail upon the
Representatives, to take upon themselves a much greater Power than the House of
Commons it self ever claimed, viz. not only of Examining, but Condemning, and
praying Execution. Whereas the House of Commons, even in Impeachments for
High Treason, High Crimes and Misdemeanors, never pray any farther, but that
the Person Impeached may be put to answer for all and every of the Premises,
and that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials and Judgments may be upon every
of them, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. The same Judge says, in another
place, Magna Charta, The Petition of Right, and other good Laws of the Land,
ordain, That Men's Trials should be by the established Laws, and not otherwise;
That they are the very words of the Petition of Right.

In pursuance of which, Lords, upon Impeachments of the House of Commons, are
tried before the House of Lords, and if the said House of Commons find reason
to accuse a Commoner, they proceed not to condemning, and addressing that he
may be removed from all his Places of Trust and Profit, but that direction may
be given, that he be prosecuted, in order to his acquitting and discharging
himself of the Crimes laid to his charge, if he can, or else of being legally
convicted; which Prosecution must be by the established Laws, which Laws the
Act of the twelf and thirteenth of William the 3d, for the further Limitation
of the Crown and better securing the the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects,
says* are the Birth Right of the People of England. I shall not need to trouble
your Excellency here with a relation of what happened on the occasion of the
Impeachments of the House of Commons, against my Lord Oxford, my Lord Summers,
my Lord Portland, and my Lord Hallifax, and that the House of Lords resolved
so, and did Address his late Majesty, that his Majesty would be pleased not to
pass any Censure upon their Lordships, until after their Lordships should be
tried upon the said Impeachments, and Judgment be given according to the usage
of Parliament and the Laws of the Land, because your Excellency being a Member
of that Noble House, and present at most of those Proceedings, must be better
acquainted with them, than I can, and will not fail of making due Reflections
thereon.

But contrary to all this, the said Address prays your Excellency, as I said
before, to Condemn me, nay, go on to Execution, without any such Examination,
before any Trial by the established Laws, without any legal Evidence, before
being heard, and all in a summary way, without any Judicial Proceedings
whatsoever.

How far the Advisers of the Address, by this Conclusion, and indeed the whole
Address justly entitules them to the several Crimes of Illegally using the
Power they are clothed with, to the great hurt of her Majesty's Subjects,
giving an Evil Example, and rendering Liberties and Properties precarious, and
at the disposal of every Assembly, that shall make Envy and Spleen, and not the
good of their Country, the Rule of their Actions; whether they, by their
unpresidented ways, lay not themselves under the Necessity of public Censure?
Whether they are not wanting to the Country they represent, when they thus
endeavor to make it a Party to the Injuries they do, and neglect Matters that
justly concern the whole Province's Wellfair? Whether they break not through
all Laws, abuse their Majesty's Subjects, though in considerable Offices? Whether
they deserve not Public Reproof, that thus use the Places they sit in, so
contrary to the end for which they are sent? Whether this does not tend to
render her Majesty's Subjects entirely Depending on the Caprice of a Party in
an Assembly, and Create in the Minds of People an Aversion to her Majesty's
just and mild Government, when some leading Men in an Assembly can Displace any
of the Council at their Pleasure, without being allowed to speak for himself,
or having the Accusation proved against him? Whether they encourage not Grand
Inquests to Neglect doing their Duty, and discourage Magistrates from tendering
the Oaths to the Queen and Government, prescribed by sundry Acts of
Parliament? And, lastly* Whether they do not Defeat her Majesty's good
Intentions to her Quaker Subjects, and render her Government uneasy to the
People of that Persuasion, when they neglect passing an Act as the Queen
directs, and endeavor to persuade them, That they may act contrary to Law? I
say, how far the Advisers to this Address ingross to themselves these several
Crimes, with which they unjustly endeavor to load me, I shall submit to your
Excellencys judgment, and that of all judicious Men.

And although I might now close my Answer, with justly turning their Conclusions
upon the Mannagers of this Address, by retorting, That were there no more to be
said against them, than their Attribtrary, Unjust and Illegal Conclusions; I
humbly conceive it would justify what I could desire of your Excellency,
Persons of that Principle, and who hold those Tenets, being unfit to represent
a Province, it might be believed, your Excellency would think it dangerous for
the public Safety to continue them in their Stations, and I should pray, that
your Excellency would remove them from your presence, their places in the
Assembly, and from all Places of Trust and Profit in this Province. I say, though
I might justly finish with this, yet I will not presume so far, or any way to
direct or prescribe to your Excellency, much less follow an example, which, I
think deserves to be avoided; neither shall I trouble your Excellency with any
further Remarks on the unpresidented, unwarrantable, unjust and unreasonable
Request of the said Address, nor take upon me to recount the Numberless
Pernicious Inconveniences, that must necessarily flow from such proceedings,
since they are too obvious to escape the meanest, much less your Excellencys
Observation.

But for that the matters and things in the said Address contained, are either
no Crimes, or false in fact, or miserably misrepresented, and if any Faults be
committed, though I must insist upon it, that not any appears to your Excellency,
by the said Address, they are such as are and must be regularly tried before
the Established Courts, according to the known Laws of her Majestys Kingdoms,
and the Custom of said Courts, and cannot be examined or tried any other way;
and for preventing the many ill and unwarrantable consequences that must needs
attend such uncommon and illegal ways of scandalizing all Officers, but
especially those that have the honor of being of her Majestys Council, to whom
some Civility and Respect is or ought to be done, I humbly pray, that the said
Address may make no impression upon your Excellency, but be utterly
disregarded, and that your Excellency will be pleased, so effectually to
discountenance such new and unpresidented Methods of villifying Officers of the
Government, particularly those whom her Majesty has thought fit to honor with
a Place, in her Majestys Council, that I may in some sort be justified thereby,
and receive all the satisfaction the nature of such an Address will bear, and
to your Excellency in your Wisdom and Justice shall seem meet; which is humbly
submitted to your Excellency's Judgment.

Peter Sonmans
Amboy April 14th, 1709.
To the Honorable Rich. Ingoldesby Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of the Provinces of New Jersey, New York and Territories depending thereon in
America etc.
May it please your Honor,
THe foregoing Answer being prepared and written long before the death of his
late Excellency, the Lord Lovelace, I have presumed to deliver it to your
Honor, in the same style and manner as it was first intended, without any
alteration, assuring my self that your Honors Judgment will easily discern the
grounds of so unwarrantable and unpresidented a Proceeding, and your Justice
give me such ample satisfaction as the nature of the thing will bear. All which
is most humbly submitted to your Honors Judgment, by

Your HONORS Most Obedient humble Servant, Peter Sonmans.
Amboy, June 11 1709.
An Appendix.
To the Honorable House of Representatives of her Majesty's Province of
New Jersey, now met and assembled in General Assembly at Perth-Amboy.
The Petition of us under-Subscribers, summoned to serve upon the Grand Inquest
at her Majestys Court of Sessions, held for the County of Middlesex in the said
Province, the Eight Day of this Instant March.
Humbly shows,
THat in obedience to our Duty, and to manifest our readiness to serve her
Majesty and our Country, we did all appear at the opening of the said Court,
and answer each of us to our respective Names, as we were called, and did
tender our selves to take the accustomed Oaths, which have always been given to
grand Jurys; but before we were permitted to take the said Oaths, Peter
Sonmans, Esquire President of the said Court, would know (as he said) whether we
had taken some other Oaths, which he desired Jeremiah Bass, Esquire Secretary of
said Province to bring, but Mr. Bass refusing, he the said Mr. Sonmans
adjourned the Court till three of the clock in the afternoon.

We your Petitioners did continue our attendance, in expectation of the Courts
sitting till after sun set, and within night, when we were under a necessity of
repairing to our respective Homes, where not only the wants of our Families
obliged us, but that also the Town being so crowded we could obtain no Lodging.
After the said Mr. Sonmans knew that your Petitioners were dispersed, he called
the Court by candle light, and, as we are informed, has fined each of your
Petitioners in the sum of Thirteen Shillings and four pence. Your Petitioners
do further beg leave to inform this honorable House, That as we are credibly
informed, the said Mr. Sonmans stands indicted at the last Supreme Court of
this Province for the Crimes of Perjury and Adultery, from whence we have
reason to conjecture, that he being conscious of his own Guilt, and being in
terror of more Indictments, he took the methods abovesaid to frustrate the
Grand Inquest proceeding, as in Justice they ought.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, this honorable house will take the
Premises into consideration, and to take such Methods as in your wisdom shall
think fit, for Relief of this County in General, and your Petitioners in
particular, from such unpresidented Procedures and unjust Fines; and as in duty
bound your petitioners shall ever pray.

Miles Foster Sammuel Dolte John Ormston Matthew More Isaac Smalley Joseph
Fitzrandolph Peter Bargoun Jerimiah Reader George Willocks John Pike junier
John Molleson David Denham John Heard John Ilslee Jonathan IIslee Thomas
Blumfield A True Copy, J. Pinhorn.


The Report of the Committee upon to said Petition, viz. Die Mercurij A. M. 16
March. 1708.
THe Foreman of the grand Jury, on behalf of himself and the rest made it
appear to this Committee, that the said Jurors gave their attendance, according
as specified in said Petition, and that the said Peter Sonmans, Esquire stands
indicted as is declared in said Petition; as also, diverse other things are
alleged against him to this Committee, viz. Jacob Arents declared that the
said Peter Somans employed or advised him to arrest John Barclay on the Sabbath
day, which he did accordingly.

John Brown declared That the said Sonmans had taken away his Horse without
showing him any reason for it, and that he had commenced an Action against him
for said Horse.

Willan Frost, Constable, says, Peter Sonmans orderd him to bring Robert
Mellin before him upon John Reeves complaining of felony against said Millen
which afterward, at the desire of said Mellin, John Brown carried him over to
Statten Island, at which Sonmans was displeased and Committed the said Brown
into the Sheriffs Custody, where he remained until Bailed out, although Reeves
afterward declared, that the said, Mellin, had not stole the Coat, before
pretended, but detained it for his pay.

Adam Hudey, Sheriff, says, That Sonmans told him, That complaint was made to
him, against Mellin, on which complaint he would commit: him into his Custody,
but the next day he committed John Brown, which after some time he admitted to
be bailed out, at which said Sonmans was very Angry, and said he would go to
York to my Lord, and throw up his Commission, and desire my Lord to send
Soldiers to rule them. And further says, That upon Trial of John Harrison at
Supreme Court at Burlington, in a cause depending between said Sonmans and
Harrison, Sonmans told him, that he had need to summons a good Jury, and that
John Harrison being Captain, there was none on their side Boundbrook fit to
serve, but he could advise him of a Jury of good men, all in his way, which he
accordingly gave him a List of ten or eleven men, which were all Dutch men.

Thomas Gordon says, Michiel Van Veighty desired him to take out a Writ
against Alexander Walker, and sign it in his name, which he did; but afterward
it was disallowed by Sonmans, because it was not Michiel Van Veightys hand
writting, although Michael Van Veighty owned it to be his order in open Court, yet
it was thrown out; notwithstanding said Sonmans signed a bill of Costs of three
Pounds seventeen Shillings and ten pence; and after allowed another Action in
the like case.

Application being made to Mr. Sonmans by Thomas Gorden, on behalf of a poor
sickly boy called John Loveridge, that one Alexander Walker went-on the Sabbath
day with an Ax to him, and threatened to wash his hands in the boys blood, Mr.
Sonmans acknowledged it was a notorious violation of the Peace, but said he had
not time, and refused to meddle in it.

John Brown declares, that Mr. Sonmans has turned out Quakers from serving upon
Jurys, upon account of their Persuasion.

A True Copy,

J. Pinhorn.

To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Baron of Hurly, Captain General and
Governor in chief of the Provinces New Jersey, New York and Territories
depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
The Humble Petition of Peter Sonmans.
Shows,
THat diverse of the Freeholders of this County being duly summoned to attend,
the Court of General Sessions held at Amboy on the eight Instant, to serve upon
the grand Inquest, for this and the County of Sommerset, did appear at said
Court, and answered to their Names as they were called.

That George Willocks being impannelled as Foreman of the said Inquest, coming
to be sworn, was asked by your Petitioner. Whether he had taken the Oaths to
the Queen appointed by sundry Acts of Parliament? to which Mr. Willocks gave no
direct answer, but objected against the Authority of the said Court of Sessions
to administer said Oath.

That the said Court of Sessions being very well assured of their Authority to
administer said Oaths, and informed, that said Willocks had never taken them,
ordered their Clerk to get the Rolls, in which said Oaths were contained, in
order to tender them to said Willocks; but said Willocks then positively
declared, if the Rolls were there, he would not take them, for that he would
not take the name of the Lord in vain; and that he having attended and answered
to his Name, should or did not think him. If obliged to attend said Court any
longer, or words to that effect.

The Clerk not having said Rolls, the said Court of Sessions prayed the
Secretary to lend them the Rolls he had, but the Secretary making some
objections thereto, the said Court adjourned to three a Clock in the afternoon,
in order to procure the old Rolls belonging to this County, or new ones.

That the said old Roll not being to be found, your Petitioner immediately
employed the Doorkeeper of the Council to prepare new ones, which,
notwithstanding the utmost diligence, could not be in a readiness until about
six in the evening.

That immediately after the said Rolls were transcribed the said Court opened
again, and the said persons summoned, to attend, as aforesaid, were again
called upon, but not one attending or answering to their Names, the said Court
resolved not to proceed (as indeed they ought to have done) to fine said
Defaulters, because they would not be deemed too serve, but adjourned until the
next day at nine a Clock in the morning.

That the said Court opened again, according to their adjournment, and called
over the Panel, but only one answered said Call, although diverse were about the
Court: whereupon said Court seeing their Authority opposed in a very-high
degree, proceeded to fine the said Defaulters according to Law.

That notwithstanding the great lenity of said-Court, the said George Willocks
with fifteen others of the said Defaulters, have presented a very Scurrelous,
Malicious and Scandalous Petition against your Petitioner, to the House of
Representatives, a Copy of which is hereunto annexed: the allegations of which
are not only false in fact, but likewise very opprobrious and injurious to your
Petitioner, who could not in duty act otherwise then he has done.

That your Petitioner not being conscious of any guilt, is not afraid of any
Indictments, except such as mere Malice or Envy, without any ground or poof,
where partys are Judges, can suggest, of which nature those are in the Petition
mentioned, and writ by the own hands of said Willocks though not of that Inquest:
That such Proceedings and Affronts are wholly unpresidented, highly
dishonouring Her Majestys Government, tending to the great encouragment of
Non-Jurors, subverting the very being and Authority of Courts, and
discouragement of the Judges and Justices of the respective Courts from doing
their duty. Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays,

That your Excellency and the Honorable Council will be pleased to put an
effectual stop to such seditious Practices, and order such suitable
satisfaction to your Petitioner, and qive such further directions as your
Excellency in your great Wisdom shall judge proper and necessary.

And your petitioner shall ever Pray.

JAcob Arents of Amboy, Practiser of Physic, Aged about 36 years, being sworn
upon the holy Evangelist of Almighty God, makes Oath, that That on or about
the 15th day of March last, he this deponent was twice summoned to attend a
Committee of the House of Representatives by one Cutler, who, this Deponent was
informed, and believes, was Doorkeeper to the said House, and told this
Deponent, That he was commanded by the Committee to fetch him. Whereupon this
Deponent attended the Committee, and was there examined by George Willocks (who
this deponent is informed, and verily believes, was not one of the
Representatives, but a Petitioner to the Committee) touching the taking of John
Barclay, whom this Deponent says, he took on or about the 23d day of May,
1708. by virtue of a Commission of Rebellion issued out of the Court of
Chancery, and delivered to him by Peter Sonmans Esquire under the Seal of the
Province, in which this deponent was named the first Commissioner.

And this deponent further says, That some time in the said Month of May, he
this deponent heard one John Reeves make a complaint to Mr. Sonmans, That one
Mellin, a Tailor (to whom and his Wife) Reeves had let part of his house, had
left his house when he was gone out, and taken with them a Coat which the
Tailor had made for Reeves, and he had worn several times; That he mist several
other things out of his house, to wit, some Rum, wool and working Tools, which
he supected Mellin and his Wife might have taken, whereupon prayed Mr. Sonmans
to grant him a Warrant to bring Mellin before him, which Mr. Sonmans having
granted, Mellin was brought before him, who examined him upon Reeves Complaint.
That Millin confessed the taking of the Coat when Reeves was from home, and that
Reeves had several times worn it. That some witnesses, particularly one
Elizabeth Sharp gave some evidence relating to Wool, which Reeves said he
missed and was brought to spin, or work up some other way, by Mellins Wife, to
one Mary Arents; but that Mellin said he knew nothing of that matter. That Mr.
Sonmans told Mellin he must commit him, but while Mr. Sonmans was writing the
mittimus, Mellin was going away, which being told Mr. Sonmans, he called to the
Constable that he should take care of Mellin, being committed to his charge, or
words to that effect. But that the Constable nevertheless suffered Mellin to
escape, and that one John Brown carried him to Statten-Island, whereupon Mr.
Sonmans issued out a Warrant to bring Brown before him, but that Brown would
make little answer to several Questions put to him about his conveying Mellin
away. That Mr. Sonmans told Brown he must find surety to appear, and answer it
the next Quarter Sessions, which Brown refused, and putting his Arms on his
side, asked some of the company for a Horse, and said, he would ride to Goal in
state.

That the next day this Deponent rid with Mr. Sonmans to Woodbridge, that at
the entrance into the Town, they were met by the Constable and John Brown, upon
which Mr. Sonmans commanded the Constable several times to bring Brown back
into the Town, before him, but that the Constable did not do it. That this
deponent with Mr. Sonmans, went to the Sheriff, whom Sonmans asked, how he came
to Bail Brown? That the Sheriff said, he had three Men bound in one Thousand
Pound, a piece for Browns appearance when he should demand him. Upon which Mr.
Sonmans advised the Sheriff to send for him again immediately, for that he
could not answer what he had done, and related to him how disobedient the
Counstable had been, of which Mr. Sonmans sa id, he would complain to my Lord,
and pray that he might be prosecuted for it. That this Deponent afterward
heard that Brown remained in the Sheriffs Custody until he was bailed out.

And this deponent further says, That on or about the 9th of January last this
deponant was at dinner with Mr. Sonmans about three of the Clock in the
afternoon, being to go with Mr. Sonmans to visit a sick person as soon as they
should rise from the Table, that just before Dinner was over, Mr. Gorden came
and told Mr. Sonmans, that he had heard that Alexander Walker had beat his
Wife, and threatened or attempted to kill his Wifes Son, one John ^overidge,
praying that Walker might be bound to the Peace. Mr. Sonmans told him, he was
sorry to hear it, but that he was just going out of Town, should be back at
night, therefore desired Mr. Gorden to apply to some other Justice, if the
matter required haste. That Mr Sonmans and this Deponent went out of Town
immediately after, returned in the evening, and that Mr. Sonmans, went out of
Town again next morning about ten; but that Mr. Gorden nor any other made any
application upon that Subject after the first to Mr. Sonmans, that this
Deponent ever heard of, though he was with Mr, Sonmans all the while. And further
this Deponent says not.

Jurat 7 Die Junij, 1708. J. Arents.
Coram me, Richard Townly.

JOhn Bishop, Clerk of the Peace for the County of Middlesex and Sommerset,
aged about Sixty years, being Sworn upon the Holy evangelist of Almighty God,
makes Oath, That the Freeholders summoned to serve upon the Grand Inquest at
the Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held for the said County at
Amboy on the eighth of March last, did all answer to their names as they were
called. That George Willocks being impannneled as Foreman, before he took the
Oath appointed for that end, was asked by Peter Sonmans, Esquire President of the
Sessions, Whether he had taken the Oaths to the Queen appointed by sundry Acts
of Parliament, in the room of the Oath of Allegance and Supremacy? To which Mr.
Willocks made little answer, but objected against the Authority of the Court to
Administer said Oaths. That the Court Ordered this Deponent to get the
Parchment Rolls in which the Oaths were contained, in order to tender them to
him. That M. Willocks declared his doubt whether he would take the said Oaths,
if the Rolls were there; and said, That having attended and answered to his
name, he should not, or did not think himself obliged to attend the Court any
longer, or words to that effect. That this Deponent not having the Rolls, the
Secretary was desired to lend his, but the Secretary making some objections to
that, the Court adjourned to three of the Clock in the afternoon, to procure
the Rolls aforesaid; but that notwithstanding the utmost diligence, they could
not be got really until about siix of the Clock in the evening. That
immediately after the Rolls were transcribed, the Court opened again, but not
one answered to their names of all those that were impanneled upon the grand
Inquest. That the Court did not proceed to fine the defaulters, but immediately
adjourned to nine the next morning. At which time the Court being again opened,
the Panel was again called over, and but one answered to his name, though
several lived in Town (and as this Deponant has been credibly informed, and
verily believes) were about the Court the night before, and that morning
looking in at the window, whereupon the Court fined each of the defaulters
thirteen shillings and four pence. That a new Precept was immediately given to
the Sheriff to summons another grand Inquest, and that some hours after the
Sheriff returned the Precept, that he could not find men enough to impannel.
That no other Oaths but those before mentioned were offered to the said
Willocks.

And this Deponant further says, That on or about the 25th day of May last,
the above mentioned Oaths were regularly tended to Mr. Willocks by Mr. Sonmans
and John Drake, two of Her Majestys Justices of the Peace for the said
Countries, at Amboy aforesaid in the County of Middlesex, but that he refused to
take them, objecting against the Authority of two Justices to Administer the
same, although he well know that Mr. Sonmans was of the Quoram, which this
Deponant also recorded among the Minits of the said Court.

And this Deponant further says, That in a suit depending in the Court of
Pleas before Mr. Sonmans between Michiel Van Veighten Plantiff, and Alexander
Walker, Defendant, the Attorney General moved for the Defendant, that the Writ
might abate, because it bore Test in the vacation, which exception was allowed
by Mr. Sonmans, and the Writ ordered to abate. And further this deponant says
not.

Jurat 7 Die Junij, 1709. John Bishop, Cl.
Coram me, Danial Cox.

JOhn Pinhorn, Esquire one of the Clerks in the Court of Chancery of the Province
of New Jersey, and Clerk of the House of Representatives, aged about 27 years,
being Sworn upon the holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath, That
sometime in the Month of May, in the sixth year of the Reign of her present
Majesty, Annoque Domini, 1707. This Deponent as Clerk, in the Court aforesaid,
filed a bill against John Barclay at the suit of Pater Sonmans, Esquire That the
time usually allowed by the said Court to answer being elapsed, he this
Deponent made out an attachment against the said Barclay for his Contempt, but
before he was taken upon that Writ, the said Barclay on or about the 7th day of
November, in the same year by his Counsel moved the said Court for a months
time to answer the said Bill, as this Deponant is informed by the Register of
said Court, which being granted, and that time also spent, this Deponant made
out another Attachment against said Barclay, and so run throw the whole course
of the Court. The said Barclay not answering the Bill aforesaid, the Deponant
made out and sealed a Writ or Commission of Rebellion against him, on or about
the sixteenth of May, in the Seventh year of her present Majestys Reign Annoque
Domini, 1708. directed to Jacob Arents and others, by virtue of which Arent's
took him, and brought him into the said Court on or about the third day of
June, in the same year, by which Court he was committed in Salva and Arcta
Custodia, and remained so imprisoned until the said Court on or about the twelf
day of March last, commanded this Deponant to make out a Commission to be
sealed and was sealed, directed to John Wells and another, to bring Barclay
into Court, by virtue of which Commission, Wells took him out of his
Confinement: and brought him into the said Court, which he again moved by
Petition on or about the 18th of March last, for further time to answer, which
was granted. And that the said Barclay has been in perfect liberty and freedom
ever since, although he has not to this day cleared his Contempt, nor has this
Deponent had any notice that the said Barclay has fyled his answer to the said
Bill.

And this Deponent further says, That George Willocks is not one of the
Representatives of this Province, but on or about the tenth day of March last,
Petitioned the said House, with fifteen others, that were sommoned to serve on
the grand Inquest at the Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held
for the Countys of Middlesex and Sommerset at Amboy the 8th of March last,
which Petition was read in the House of Representatives of the said Province,
and committed to a Committee, from which Mr. Royse made a Report to the said
House; upon which an Address, was agreed by the said House to be made to my
Lord Lovelace, late Governor; But that diverse of the Representatives were
utterly against the said Address, and all the Proceedings relating thereunto,
saying, it was only Malice and private Resentment of the said Willocks and some
of the leading Members of the said House, and that not any part of it appeared
or was Proved. And further this Deponant says not.

Jurat 10 Junij, 1709. J. Pinhorn,
Corem me, Richard Townley,

ADam Hude, High Sheriff of the Countys of Middlesex and Summerset, aged about
47 years, makes Oath, being Sworn upon the holy Evangelists of Almighty God,
That he this Deponent had a Writ delivered to him to arrest Peter Sonmans, Esquire
at the Suit of John Brown, in the Supreme Court, which Writ was not delivered
to him until some time in November last, long after Brown was bailed out of his
Custody upon the business of carrying over Robert Mellin to Statten-Island.
That he arrested Mr. Sonmans soon after he received the Writ. That he heard,
and verily believes the cause of Action was about a Horse which Brown alleged
Mr Sonmans had taken from him.

And this Deponent further says, That John Royce and Capt. John Harrison, who
are now two of the Representatives, together with Judadiah Higgins, were upon
the Grand Inquest at the Supreme Court last November. And that in the Month of
March last, this Deponent was summoned to attend a Committee of the House of
Representatives, which he attended, but should not have gone, if he had not
been summoned. That he was there examined at the request of Geo. Willocks about
a Commitment of Rob. Mellon, John Brown, and several other things. That John
Royce was Foreman of the Grand Inquest at the Court before mentioned. And
further this Deponent says not.

Jurat 8 Die Junij, 1709. Adam Hude.
Coram me, William Pinhorn.

To all to whom these Presents shall come, or may concern, Greeting.
ON Search of the Docquet of Causes depending in the Supreme Court of her
Majestys Province of New Jersey, I find a Writ was issued out that bore Test in
May Term, 1708. of one John Brown against Peter Sonmans, but was not sealed in
the Office till September 1708. and returned in November, 1708. and that some
considerable time before the sealing of the said Writ I and Mr. John White,
had, on the first application made to us, admitted the said John Brown to bail,
and certified the Recognizance into the Supreme Court. And that the said Brown
was committed by the said Peter Sonmans for assisting one Mellin, who was
accused of Felony, to make his escape.

I do also further Certify, That I bayled the said Brown, without ever
acquainting his Excellency the Lord Cornbury with the same, nor know I of any
application made to him on this matter.

I do also Certify, That Peter Sonmans was admitted and took his place as one
of her Majestys Council for the Province of New Jersey, the 8th of August,
1708. at Burlington.

I do also Certify, That John Royce was Foreman of that Grand Jury that found
the two Indictments of Perjury and Adultery against the said Peter Sonmans in
November, 1708. and that the said Jury consisted of Persons whose Habitations
were some in the County of Middlesex, and others in the County of Sommerset.
That Royce had formerly been Deputy Secretary to Jer. Bass, Esquire but had been
some time before turned out by him. That the said Peter Sonmans had at the same
time several considerable Causes depending in the same Court against Capt. John
Harrison, Judadiah Higgins and the said Royce, who were all on the said Grand
Jury.

That the Indictment for Perjury against the said Peter Sonmans, Esquire was
grounded on an Affidavit made by the said Sonmans before Coll. Daniel Cox, one
of the Judges of the said Court at Burlington, in the County of Burlington, of
several Sums of Money by the said Sonmans expended, and which he desired
allowance of, as Costs in the Cause.

That the said Sonmans had not any Venire's sealed in the Office, for any
Causes to, be tried at Burlington, by a Middlesex Jury, nor any Cause tried
that Term, (that the Cause Dom Regina verse John Harrison came to Trial at the
Supreme Court held at Burlington for the Province of New Jersey, the 4th, 5th,
6th, 7th and 8th of May, 1708. (excepting a Cause against Mr. Forster, which he
recovered that Term.

In Testimony whereof I Jeremiah Bass, Esquire Secretary of her Majesty's Province
of New Jersey, and Prothonetary of the said Supreme Court, have hereunto set my
Hand, this 9th Day of June, 1709. Jer. Bass, Secry.

FINIS.
LEt the Answer of Peter Sonmans, Esquire to the Address of the General Assembly of
New Jersey, to his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, late Governor of this
Province, with the Report, Petitions, Certificates and Affidavits, etc. be
Printed. And for your so doing this shall be your Warrent.

Given under my Hand this 14th Day of June, 1709. Richard Ingoldesby.

Printed By William Bradford, at the Sign of the Bible in New York, 1709.


