A DISSERTATION Concerning the Future Conversion OF THE Jewish Nation.

Answering the Objections of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Baxter, Dr.
Lightfoot, and others.

With an Enquiry into the first Resurrection.

By INCREASE MATHER, President of Harvard-Colledge, at Cambridge, in
New England.

Hear the Word of the Lord, O ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off,
and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him,

Jer. 31.10. LONDON: Printed by R. Tookey for Nath. Hillier, at the Prince's
Arms in Leaden-hall-street. MDCCIX.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN HARTOPP, Knight. and Baronet.
I Do not remember that when I was happy in a frequent Conversation with You,
during my Four Years Abode in London, that ever we discoursed concerning the
Subjects in the following Dissertation treated on. Nor do I know what Your
Judgment, or particular Sentiments, as to these Contemplations, may be.
Nevertheless, I know that God has adorned You with singular Learning, and that
You are well able to pass a Judgment on Controversies of this Nature: And I am
willing that what I have written should come under Your Censure. Nor have I any
other way than by this Dedication, to manifest that no Distance of Place can
remove out of my Heart the grateful Sense which I have of the many Favors I
received from You whilst with You.

I earnestly pray that the Blessings of Heaven may descend upon Your Person,
and upon Your Virtuous Consort, whom the Lord has made to be a Pattern of
Humility and real Piety, and upon the many hopeful Branches of Your Family, who
are the Children of many Prayers, and the Posterity of Ancestors eminent for
Religion: Most of them cannot but have some Remembrance of their Excellent and
Honorable Grandfather, than whom I have scarce known a more Heavenly Soul upon
Earth.

Whether I shall see You again in this World is uncertain; however the
Providence of our Lord Jesus Christ shall order that Matter, I hope (as Dr.
Usher said of Mr. Mede) we shall meet in Resurrectione prima. I remain

Boston, N. E. Nov. 29. 1695. Right Worshipful SIR, Yours ever to serve,
INCREASE MATHER

The Doctrine of the JEWS CONVERSION vindicated.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of the Jews Conversion no New or Singular Opinion. Who
have opposed it. Mr. Baxter's great Worth acknowledged. Why to be answered. His
Arguments against a National Conversion of the Jews summarily rehearsed.
THAT a General Conversion of the Israelitish Nation, is according to the
Scriptures to be expected in the latter Ages of the World, is nothing but what
Christians in all Ages have believed. So the Ancients (Fathers as they are
called) who lived toward the Primitive Times. So the Schoolmen in the dark
Days of Popery. So the chief Reformers in this and the last Century, all which
I have elsewhere made to appear, and therefore shall not again mention the
Names of those great Authors, whether ancient or modern, which have declared
their Judgment, and given their Testimony to what we assert as a glorious
Truth. Some few of late have opposed the commonly received Doctrine, as a
Scriptureless Notion. Iacobus Batalerius a Dutch Minister has published a
small Tract, entitled Dissertatio de Israelitarum Conversione a Paulo ad
Romanos undecimo capite pr^dicta. In which he endeavors to prove that whilst
the Apostles were yet living, not only some Part of, but that All Israel was
converted and saved, at least wise before the Apostle John died; supposing that
the One Hundred Forty Four Thousand Sealed ones of all the Tribes of Israel,
spoken of Revel. 7. are not meant (as doubtless they are) of believing
Gentiles, who are Surrogate Israel, but of the Natural Israel* and that the
Restitution of all Things predicted, Acts 3.21. was fulfilled by the first
Coming of Christ, with many other Things like these mentioned. His Book was
Printed Anno 1669. Hague. Also Mr. James Calvert has written a Treatis^ with
this Title, Colluctationes Theologica cum tribus Ingentibus dubiis. viz. De
Reditu december tribuum, de Conversione Iudaeorum, Mensuris Sacris Ezekielis:
Whose Schem^ we shall anon consider. With these Authors does the Reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter concur in his Sentiments about the Jews.

As for Mr. Baxter, I am far from joining with them who damn him as an
Heretic, as bad as Pelagius. Although he had not in every Point (as B^col^er
says of another) Caput regulatum Calvini; nevertheless he was a Man of
excellent Natural Parts, of great Reading and Learning, and of eminent Piety;
and one that did great Service for the Church of God; an happy Instrument of
converting many Souls, and is now undoubtedly among the Blessed. Maccovius said
of our Ames, whose Judgment differed from his in some Matters of Controversy,
Sit Anima men cum pientissima Anima Amesij; so say I, Sit Anima mea cum Anima
Baxteri.

This notwithstanding, it is better to maintain the Truth with the Generality
of the Orthodon than to ^rr with Origin: Mr. Baxter was subject to Mistakes.
Bernardus non videt omnia. His Aphorism^ about Justification (...) very (...)
to the most judicious Divines both in England and New England.

His Christian Directory has some Superstitious Things in it, which his
Antagonist (Mr. Danver^) has noted, and thereby exposed him to those Men who
have no Kindness for his Memory. In many o^ his Writings these are Ar^inianish
Notions, which I wish had never been there. He honored himself in his
imitating Austin, in writing a Book of ^^tractati^ns: I wish he had done more
that Way. Were he now living, it would not trouble him to see any of his
Mistakes corrected. Not long (...) his Death, in private Discourse, he did
seriously profess his Desires to (...)* that if I observed any dangerous Error
in any of his Writings* in Case the Lord should continue my Life after his, I
would refute that Error. This argued both a Sincere Love to Truth, and Humility
to be in his Holy Soul.

As to what he has written against a future Conversion of the Jews, inasmuch as
he has been pleased to honor me with the Dedication of that Book, wherein he
treats of this Subject, entreating a Confutation of what is erroneous therein,
I may the more freely do it; and I shall conscienciously for^ear such
Reflections as Polemical Writings are usually attended with; espec^^lly
considering not only the Worth of the venerable Person against whom I def^nd
what I believe is Truth, but that he is gone to his Everlasting Rest.

I shall not spend Time in reciting all Mr. Baxter's Words, and in that Way
follow him (...), that would be tedious.

The Sum of what Mr. Baxter says, is this, What has been foretold in the
Scriptures, whether of the Old or New Testament, concerning the Conversion of
the Jews, (...) already fulfilled, in as much as many of them were converted in
the Days of the Apostles, after which Millions of Infidel Jews were destroyed
by the Roman Emperors, by Means whereof the greatest Part of that Nation left
alive in the World, were Christians. And in the Days of Constantine the Great,
inasmuch as that Emperor became a Christian, Multitudes of the Pagans became
Christians, and probably Multitudes of the Jews, and since that in all Ages
many Jews have been baptized. This is the Sum and Substance of what Mr. Baxter
does object in his Book of the Kingdom of Christ, Printed in the Year 1691.
Since which Time I have had no Leisure to perpend his Arguments, but now have
gained a few spare Hours from other Employments. Deus nobis h^c oti^ focit.

CHAP. II. There was not any National Conversion of the Jews in the Apostles
Days; nor will there be until the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in. What is
meant thereby. The Body of the Israelitish Nation, comprehending the Ten
Tribes, not destroyed by the Romans. No extraordinary Conversion of the Jews in
the Reign of Constantine. Of Jews converted in several Ages. Few Jews have ever
embraced the Protestant, which is the only true Christian Religion.
LET us now impartially consider what there i^ of Weight in that which the
Reverend Person ^^^tioned, has objected.

1. To affirm that (...) was in the Apostles Days a National Conversion of the
Jews is clearly against the Scripture. It is contrary to what the (...)
foretold would come to pass. The Spirit in them showed that Israel (...) not be
ga^hered, that that Nation would not esteem, but a^^or and (...) the (...) and
that they should therefore be themselves rejected and discovenanted, Isa. 49.5,
7. and 53.3. Zech. 11.8, 9, 10. It is very tru^ that many Thousands of Jews did
believe, and that in the City of Jerusalem. So did the other Apostles say to
Paul, Acts 21.20. and Myriads besides in other Places: Nevertheless all these
were but a small Number compared with the Body of that wondrously multiplied
Nation. It is very strange that any should call that the Time of the Jews
Conversion which was the Time of their Rejection. Hence the Apostle speaks of
(...), their diminishing* Romans 11.12. because the believing Jews were but a
very small dimi^utive Number, compared with those that obstinately refused the
Gospel; and he shows not only that Judicial Blindness was upon them, but that
they would continue under that Blindness, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, Ver. 25. The Fullness of the Gentiles is not come in to this very Day;
therefore the Salvation of Israel, which the Apostle speaks of to the Romans,
is not yet accomplished. Mr. Baxter's Notion (p. 58.) that when the Empire of
the World fell into Christian Hands, that then the Fullness of the Gentiles came
in, wants a solid Foundation: It might with as much Reason be supposed, that
when Crowned Heads did, since the Antichristian Apostasy, embrace the Gospel,
and defend the Reformation, that then the Fullness of the Gentiles come in, Rev.
14.14, 15. The Argument alleged to confirm his Interpretation is not cogent,
viz. That it must either be so, or else the Meaning of it must be that when all
the Gentiles are converted that shall ever be converted, then is the Fullness of
the Gentiles come in. That great Man Dr. Prideaux (whose Learned and Orthodox
Writings have been very useful to the Church of God) has given a better
Interpretation of the Text, than either of those mentioned by our Reverend
Author; scil. That when the Roman Idolatries and Mohammedan Blasphemies are
removed, the Fullness of the Gentiles will come in, and the Way be made clear
for Israel's Salvation. Vid. Prideaux Orat. de Voc. Iudaeorum. p. 122.

In some Places of Scripture, by the Gentiles, the Romans, or the Roman
Monarchy is meant, Acts 4.27. and 21.11. Then by the Fullness of the Gentiles
may be meant the full Time of the Continuance of that Monarchy, which will
remain until the Sixth Vi^l be poured out, and then is the Jews Conversion to
be expected, Rev. 16.12. Some have thought that the Parchments which Paul
desired Timothy to bring to him, were some Notes of our Lord's Sermons which
(...) had, and Paul from him. Be that Conjecture as it is, it cannot be denied
but that some of Paul's Expressions are like unto what is in Luke's Gospel, and
why may not this under our Consideration, allude unto those Words of Christ,
mentioned Luke 21.24. Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the
Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. i. e. until the Times be fulfilled when the
Fourth Monarchy shall come to its total Ruin. See a like Phrase, Ier. 27.7.
When the Four Monarchies of the Gentiles are finished, especially when the last
Period of the Fourth Kingdom prophesied of, viz. When the Time, Times and half
a Time is expired, then ends the Time of the Gentiles and the Jews Misery. See
Mr. Ios. M^d^'s Works, Fol. 263, 873, 910, 920. This Time is not accomplished,
but that it is very near its Period has been by many late Writings evinced, and
in particular by my Learned and very dear Friend, Mr. Samuel Le^, in his Book
D^ ^^cidio Antichristi. He once showed me in Manuscript a Second Part of his
elaborate Meditations de Antichrist^; I wish the World might see them: Whether
they were with him when he was taken Prisoner and carried into France (where he
died) I know not, I cannot hear of them in New England.

2. To say the Body of the Israelitish Nation was destroyed by the Romans,
therefore the Prediction that all Israel shall be saved has been fulfilled, is
odd kind of arguing. And although the conquering Sword of the Roman Emperors,
Vespatian, Tr^jan, Adrian, etc. has cut off Millions of Jews, it is a great
Mistake to say that the Body, or major Part of that Nation has been destroyed.
There is an old Prophecy, and most certainly a true one, that Dan and Joseph,
shall look for Salvation, by Christ* Genesis 49.18, 26. And many other Scriptures
there are (as I have elsewhere noted) which foretell a Conversion of the Ten
Tribes. Now let Mr. Baxter's Supposition be granted, (which is Datum non
concessum) that the Body of the Two Tribes is extinct, unless it can be proved
that the Ten Tribes have embraced the Gospel, the Promise made to them remains
still to be accomplished, Hos. 1.11. (...) Lightfoot has observed, that
throughout the whole 11th Chapter to the Romans, there is not the Name of Jew,
but of Israel, mentioned, to show that the Ten Tribes are as much concerned in
the Salvation there spoken of as the Two Tribes. It is objected, that those
Tribes are no where in the World. I will not insist on Mr. Fletcher's Arguments
to prove they are among the Tartars; though this was also the Opinion of
Genebrand, Boterus, and of Morney, de verit. relig. Christianae, C. 26. p. 423.
and others. If I should say that R. Benjamin in his Itinerary relates that he
saw Multitudes of them who at that Time retained the Distinction of their
Tribes, Mr. Baxter tells me he is a Jew, and not to be credited, nor in Truth
is he in some of his Relations, as Lemperaeur has made to appear. But Josephus
(a more credible Jew) says, that in his Time the Ten Tribes were known to be
beyond Euphrates in almost infinite Numbers, Antiqu. L. 11. C. 5. And Ierom in
his Comment on Hos. 1. and Joel 3. says, that in his Days they were known to be
in Media, where the Scripture informs us that they were transported and planted
by the Assyrians, 2 Kings 17.6. and no doubt but that great Multitudes of that
Nation are there at this Day. Vid. Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. L. 3. C. 14. When the
Seventh Trumpet shall sound (and we are now come toward the End of the Sixth
Trumpet) and the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, these shall all become Christians, Ier. 31.1. Ezekiel. 20.40.
Zech. 14.9. Revel. 11.15.

3. There have been no such great Conversions amongst the Jews, as is
pretended; but it is rather a true Assertion which Dr. Willet in his Book de
generali and novissima Iudaeorum vocatione, p. 22, etc. has confirmed, sc.
paucissimi ex Iudaeis ulla atate conversi. It is only a Conjecture, that
because Multitudes of Pagans did in the Days of Constantine the Great turn
Christians, that therefore the Jews did so too. Search the Histories of those
Times, and nothing will be found therein concerning any memorable Conversion of
the Jews under the Reign of that Emperor. The Scripture had foretold, that that
Nation (as to the Generality of them) would continue Infidels; and therefore so
it has been, and so it will be, until God's appointed Time to have it otherwise
shall come.

That there were Christianized Jews in Constantine's Time, for whom he caused
Churches to be built, to encourage them in their Prof^^sion of Christianity,
the Writers of Ecclesiastical History have informed us; but not of any General
Conversion amongst them. The greatest and most remarkable Conversion of the
Jews was that which some say was effected amongst them in Arabia (where it is
certain that they were very numerous) by a glorious Appearance of Christ (like
that to Paul, Acts 9.) to them, upon which it is said many Thousands of them
believed, and upon their receiving Baptism were recovered from that Blindness
which the Glory of the Apparition had affected them with. Mr. Baxter judges
that Relation to be fabulous; nor do I put it into my Creed, though I know
Learned and Judicious Writers, Protestants as well as Papists, have mentioned
it without reflecting on the Story as fictitious. When Basilius was Emperor in
Constantinople, he did by great Rewards tempt a Multitude of Jews to become
Christians; who accepted of his Offer, and out of Love to Lucre would become
Christians. See Magdeburg centur. 9. cap. 2. and Zonoras Tom. 3. But Men whose
Conversions are hired, are not worthy the Name of Christians: The like is to be
said of such as are persecuted into Christianity, which has been the Fate of
many miserable Jews in Spain. It is reported that many Samaritan Jews were
compelled to embrace Christianity in the Days of Justinian. V. Usser. de
Cainane. p. 192. Grotius in Levit. 17.4. The holy Apostles did never practice
nor teach such Ways of Conversion. As for the Jews converted to the Popish
Religion, their Conversion was more to Antichrist than to Christ; they were
perverted to the old Idolatry of their Fathers in Babylon: Though they did not
worship Baal and Ashteroth, they worshipped St. Peter and the Virgin Mary,
which is no less Idolatry than the former. Should any pretend that (...) Israel
has been saved, by being persuaded to pray to Gods that cannot save them? That
in these latter Ages of the World some eminent Jews have been made famous
Christians is very true. Paulus Riccius, in the Court of the Emperor
Maximilian, of a Jew became a Christian. Eli^^ Levita turned Christian, and
brought Thirty Jews more with him to be Baptized, Ann. circiter 1517. R.
Samuel, Antonius Margarit, Ernestus Ferdinandus, Paulus Weidnerus, Christian^^
Gerson were famous converted Jews, and have written Books against Judaism.
Hieronymus de sancta fide, about the Year 1412. turned Christian: He wrote a
Book unto his Countrymen the Jews, wherewith Five Thousand of them were
converted, as is in the Bibliotheca Patrum related. Lud Carretus (a Jewish
Physician) became a Christian in the Year 1553. His Conversion was in Part
effected by strange Visions in his Sleep. He gives an Account of them in an
Epistle to his Sons, which he calls Visa divina. This Epistle Buxtorf has
published in his Synagoga Iudaica. The Fifty Third Chapter of Isaiah is wont to
be called Tortura Rabbinorum. Manasseh-Ben-Israel said of it, Iste locus magnum
scandalum dedit. The Divine to whom he spoke it, replied well, Recte quia (...)
Christus est lapis scandali. Hulsius says that some Jews told him that their
Masters could easily extricate themselves from all the other Prophets, if
Isaiah would hold his Peace. Andradius relates that he knew several Jews in
Africa, who by reading that Chapter became Christians. They told him the Words
which chiefly convinced them were those in Ver. 4. (...) which we translate
smitten [of] God, and afflicted, but the Jews said there should be no [of] in
the Translation, but that they ought to be read thus, a smitten God, and
humbled, and that the whole Chapter was to be understood of God made Man, that
he might bear and satisfy for our Sins. Mr. Baxter did not mistake when he
affirmed that some converted Jews proved eminent Divines. Nichol^^ de Lyra was
such an one in his Time, Anno 1310. of whom Luther was wont to say wittily,
N^si Lyra lyrasset, totus mundus delirasset. John Isaac a German Jew became a
Professor in Col^gn, Anno 1558. He says of himself that he was converted by
reading that Chapter in Isaiah but now mentioned, and that he had read it above
a Thousand Times over: And that disputing with Five Jews at once at Frankford,
he stopped their Mouths with that Chapter, that they could not answer a Word.
Paulus Burgensis was a famous converted Jew; he died, Anno 1435. wrote
Additions to Lyra's Notes on the Bible, and Two Volumes called Scrutinium
Scripturarum. He was Chancellor of Spain; had a Son that succeeded in his
Bishopric. Vid. Hofmauni Lexic. Univers. p. 112. But above all, there was
Emanuel Tremellius, who was not only a Christian, but a Protestant-Iew, he was
a Professor at Heidelberg. His assisting Iunius in translating the Bible; his
Commentary on Hosea, and his Learned Notes on the Bible, have made him famous
to Posterity, His dying Words which were, Vivat Christus and pereat Barabas,
Let Christ live and let Barabas die, shows him to be a sincere Convert. How
(...) such Converts have been known amongst those of the Jewish Race since the
Apostles Days! Protestants, who are the true Professors of the Gospel, have not
had many Jews amongst them. Apparent r^^i (...) in gurgi^^ v^sto. And at this
Day, -- Vix sunt totidem quot
Thebarum portae, vel Divitis ostia Nili.


There are Two at London, viz. John Alexander and Theodore John, who is lately
joined to the German Lutheran Congregation within that City. I have not heard
of many Jews in the present Age who have become so much as nominal, much less
real Christians; and I believe there will not be many until the Day comes when
all Israel shall be saved, which ( without taking God's Name in vain) I pray
God to hasten. We see then that notwithstanding the weightiest of Mr. Baxter's
Reason^ offered against it, the old Doctrine concerning a future Conversion of
the Jewish Nation remains a Truth. As for what he has suggested (in p. 65.)
concerning the Conflagration, the Thousand Years, Gog and Magog, they will in
the Close of our Discourse come under Consideration. His Objections, p. 66.
That Considering the present Unpreparedness and great Wickedness of the Jews,
their scattered Condition, and that we must imagine Miracles if we believe such
a Conversion of that People as has generally been supposed. I answer, Why may
we not believe that God will do wonderful Things in the last Ages of the World?
His last Works are wont to be the most glorious. Have not Marvels (if not
Miracles) been done in our Days? It is confessed, that the Calling of the Jews,
whenever it shall come to pass, will be an astonishing Work of God, it will be
(...), which has caused many with Chrysos^^^ to call it (...). But why should
it seem incredible, that God should do it? He is able to graft them in again,
and has said that he will do it. Nothing less than Omnipotency can, and that
both can and will make the (...) Bones live.

CHAP. III. The R^^sons of Mr. Baxter's being so mistaken in his Exposition of
Prophesies. Mr. Fox's Interpretation of the Forty Two Months. Mr. James Calvert
considered. Grotius and Dr. Hammond not the best Interpreters. The Pope is
[the] Antichrist.
NOtwithstanding the rare Accomplishments wherewith Mr. Baxter was adorned, it
is not to be marvelled, if in a Subject of this Nature, he did not so clearly
discern the Truth as perhaps some others, his Inferiors, ^ave done. Nec omnia
poss^^us o^^es. His Talent did not lie in the Interpretation of Prophesies: ^or
was be happy in his Choice of Authors who have hand^^d this Argument. I
remember at my first Acquaintance with him, (which was in the Year 1688.) he
told me that a Provocation of Dr. H. M^r^'s who had reflected on him for his
Ignorance, or Unacquaintedness in Apocalyptical Mysteries put him upon the
Study of the Revelation, and that he had read Two and Thirty Authors who had
written on that Part of the Scripture; I prayed him to tell me whom of all the
Thirty Two he did chiefly value; he told me (...) was Mr. Fox (the famous
Martyrologist) and he was wonderfully taken with (...) Exposition of the Forty
Two Apocalyptical Months, supposing Mr. Fox had the ^iscovery by Divine
Instinct. It is indeed surprising to read Mr. Fox's Relation of that Matter; he
makes a solemn Protestation in his (...) in Apocalyp. p. 216. and Acts and
Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 1^9. That (...) ^e was (...) on a Lord's Day concerning
the Persecutions of the Churches and the Forty Two Months which he once thought
made but Three Years and a half, there seemed something to say to him, (yet he
heard no Voice, only a vehement Impression on his Mind, which was attended with
a strange Majesty) Number as Daniel does his Seventy Weeks. Hereupon he
concluded, that since one of Daniel's Weeks was Seven Years, by the Forty Two
Months must be meant Seven Times Forty Two, that is Two Hundred and Ninety Four
Years; and finding that the Primitive Persecutions continued so long, he
concluded that to be the true Interpretation of the Forty Two Months. Suppose
this strange Impression on Mr. Fox's Mind were (as I am apt to believe it was)
from a good Angel, his Way of numbering was very strange. Daniel's Seventy
Weeks made Four Hundred and Ninety Years: Had Mr. Fox followed Daniel's Rule in
numbering, he would have found that Forty Two Months was in the Prophetical
Style, Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years, and that therefore they related not unto
Rome Pagan, but Rome Papal. Now Mr. Baxter's following that excellent Man in
this Mistake, caused him to think that Babylon in the Apocalypse was to be
expounded of Rome Heathen, and not Apostate and Antichristian, which is a
Fundamental Error in Apocalyptical Interpretations. I remember likewise, that
Mr. Baxter did to me (as he does in his Printed Book) very much commend Mr. I.
Calvert's Book before mentioned. I confess, that as I saw the Title of it in
the Catalogue when first published, hoping that some Light might be given to
the Mysteries treated on, I sent Three Thousand Miles to obtain it: When it
came to my Hand, casting my Eye on the Frontispiece, and seeing Imprim^^^r Sam.
Parker, I was afraid I should find my self disappointed in what I expected, and
so it happened.

This Author calls that Truth which the greatest Worthies in this Age have
believed, a Thing incredible, a golden Mountain, the Vision of one asleep, etc.
He pretends that Ezekiel's Distribution of the Tribes is not Mystical, but
Historical, and that Exekiel's City was that Jerusalem which the Romans
destroyed, and that whereas the Name whereby that City shall be called is, The
Lord is there, that was fulfilled (he says Page 184, 221.) in that Zorobabel
who was a Type of Christ, and afterward Christ himself was personally present
in that Jerusalem. He thinks the Second Temple did answer that described by
Ezekiel. Most certainly when the Jews read such Things written by Christians,
they laugh them to Scorn, and are hardened in their Infidelity. Ezekiel's
Temple shall never be profaned, Ezekiel. 47.7, 8. But the Second Temple was
profaned by Antiochus, Pompey, Titus, etc. Another pretty Conceit he has (p.
62, 63.) concerning the New Jerusalem, viz. That after the Old Jerusalem was
destroyed, the City was built again in the Days of Adrian the Emperor, and then
inhabited by Christians, but there was no Temple in it, so was Rev. 21, 22.
fulfilled. This is somewhat like Eusebius's Interpretation, who because
Constantine turned the Heathen Temples which he found in Jerusalem, into
Christian, supposes that to be the New-Ierusalem. I mention not these Things
to confute them, for the very Recitation is Confutation sufficient; yet out of
this Author has Mr. Baxter taken (in a Manner all) his Objections against a
future Conversion of the Jewish Nation. But whence had Mr. Calvert his Notions?
Not out of his own Head; for he says in his Preface, Ducibus Grotio and
Hammondo in hunc Trancitem de vulgari Via d^stexi. I shall not wonder to see a
Man going out of the common Path, nor yet d^flecting into very great Errors,
who will follow such Guides as (...) and Dr. Hammond. As for Grotius, I look on
my self as concerned to warn young Scholars to beware of him, lest they suck
down Poison when they think they have found Honey. He has (as Dr. Owen in his
Answer to Biddle has made to appear) by perverse Expositions and
Interpretations in his Annotations on the Bible, corrupted many Texts of
Scripture. It is an amazing Thing that a Man who had written a Book with such
Clearness and Strength of Argument as Grotius's Book De Satisfactione Christi,
is managed with should against all that Light turn S^cinian; and that he was at
last a Papist, who can doubt, since he defends Transubstantiation, and that the
Council of Trent in the Point of Justification is Orthodox? It is Pity such a
Man should have (which he boasts or) many Followers in England. But it may be,
there are some that like him the better for his advising the King of Sweedland
not to tolerate Calvinists within his Dominions. They that would see more of
Grotius's Principles, may read Mr. Baxter's Treatise of the Grotian Religion
discovered. His fanciful and absurd Interpretations concerning Antichrist are
solidly and unanswerably refuted by (...) in his Strigil. and by Maresius, who
shows how Grotius does on all Occasions Pelagianize. Vid. Mares. de
Antichristo, p. 134. Yet this Grotius before his Apostasy could see a future
Conversion of the Jews; for in his excellent Book De veritate Religionis
Christianae, he does acknowledge it, and pray for it. That Dr. Hammond has
borrowed most of his Notions from Grotius (especially his Apocalyptical ones)
whoever compares them will quickly discern. They have both of them laid the
Pope under an Obligation of Gratitude for endeavoring to persuade the World
that he is not Antichrist: If the Pope will not thank them for it, Campanella
the Jesuit does; for he supposes that the whole Protestant Cause is yielded,
if this Point is once gained, (V. de Monarch. Hisp. c. 27.) They jump with the
Papists in making Antichrist to be one particular Man, Simon Magus, or
Caligula. That Notion has been abundantly refuted by many of our Divines, and
very solidly too by one, all whose Notions are not solid, I mean Mr. Brightman,
who has a large Discourse and well handled, proving that Antichrist cannot be
as Bellarmine and the Popish Doctors believe, one particular Man only. Vid.
Brightman in Apocalyp. cap. 17. p. 492, etc. Learned Whitaker (the Glory of the
University of Cambridge in his Day) has with such Strength of Argument
demonstrated, that the Popes successively are the Antichrist, besides what has
been done by Dr. Abbot, Dr. Downham and many others, and of late by Turretine,
who has handled that Subject with great Accuracy and Elaborateness, so as that
no unbyas'd Reader can any more be in doubt concerning it. Nor does it look
well that when the old Waldenses, Wicliff, Huss, and their Followers, and all
Protestants from the Time of Luther, have Preached down Popery as
Antichristianism, some have set their Wits on work to find another Antichrist.

CHAP. IV. Dr. Lightfoot's Objections considered. The unparalleled Wickedness
of the Jews, and their long Continuance therein, not unpardonable.
Antichristian Nations may be converted. Judaism not the same with
Antichristianism. Romans 11.26. vindicated. Authors that have written of the Jews
Conversion. Dr. Lightfoot's Positions considered. Conjectures about the Time
and Manner of the Jews being brought to own Christ. Rome to be first destroyed.
BEsides the Authors mentioned, there is a very judicious Writer, viz. Dr. John
Lightfoot, the late Learned Master of Katharine-Hall in Cambridge, by whom the
common Opinion of a future Calling of the Jews, is questioned* Although I must
crave Leave in some Things wherein we may differ, salva (...) and charitate, to
dissent from the Notions of that excellent Man, I freely confess that his Books
have given great Light to (...) and difficult Scriptures: I make Account that I
possess a Treasure in having them. And I wish that all the Students in our
Academy, who design the Ministry, were furnished with all his Works, which are
published in Two Volumes in Folio. Nor does be so much deny as doubt of a
General Conversion of the Jewish Nation. In his second Vol. p. 1123. he says,
The Jews have forfeited their Privilege: The Gentiles refused the invisible
Creator; but these rejected their God visible, and that for a Murderer. This
makes me not believe the Call of the Jews, because they sinned beyond the
Gentiles: They have sinned against such Light as shall never appear to Eyes
again. Thus the Doctor.

I remember I have heard of one in Cambridge, that being in great Trouble of
Mind because of the Greatness of the Sin which had been committed; a Doctor
there saying Adam was guilty of the greatest Sin that ever Man was guilty of,
and yet his Sin was pardoned, and he is now in Heaven: That poor guilty
Creature replied with an Air that was very surprising, That Is more than all the
Doctors in Cambridge can prove. So I say, although some Learned Men have proposed
it as a Problem* An Induratio Iudaorum (...) secum tra^at peccatum in spiritum
sanctum? I will be bold to say, that the Affirmative is more than all the
Doctors in Cambridge can prove. And if the Jews are not guilty of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding the Heinousness of their Guilt in
crucifying the Son of God, and preferring a Murderer to him, who knows but that
Infinite Grace may convert and save them? Especially considering that some
Thousands of those very Individual Persons, who did with wicked Hands crucify
the Prince of Life, were nevertheless (such is the exceeding Riches of the
Grace of God) brought to true Repentance, and their Sins forgiven, Acts 2.37.
To say that because that Nation is under the Guilt of such an unparalleled
Crime as that of crucifying their Savior, therefore there is no Probability of
their Conversion, does not agree with Zech. 12.10. They shall look on him whom
they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him. This Learned and Worthy Doctor
in his first Volume, p. 375. expresses himself with great Modesty: His Words
are, Though I am unwilling to recede from that charitable Opinion of most
Christians, that there shall once be a Calling of them home, yet see I not how
the Supposal of the universal Call of the whole Nation, as of one Man, can be
digested without some Alloy and Mitigation. And again, p. 377. That they shall
be generally called, and that not 'till the Antichrist of Rome is fallen, and
the Fullness of the Gentiles come in, as some Circumstantiate, the Thing needs
clearer Evidence than has yet been produced. As for that Notion of a Universal
Conversion of the Jews to a Man, I confess the School Doctors have asserted it.
So Aquinas, Cajetan, Dominicus a Soto. But our Authors generally affirm only a
National, and not a Universal Conversion. So judicious Mr. Strong, in his
excellent Sermon on Romans 11.26. But this Reverend Author, besides what has been
mentioned concerning the Jews having rejected Christ and the Offers of the
Gospel, produces chiefly Two Objections. One is, That the Jews are a Brood of
Antichrist. But (says he) The End of Antichrist will not be Conversion, but
Perdition. The Argument must stand thus; If the Body of the Jewish Nation be
Antichristian, then the Body of that Nation shall not be converted: But so it
is; therefore, etc. Both the Consequents of the Proposition, and the
Assumption, are to be denied. For though it is certain that the (...), he that is
by Way of Eminence called the Antichrist is a Son of Perdition; there (...)
been (as the Doctor acknowledges) Antichristian Nations that the Body o^ them
are converted. Is not our English Nation of Popish become Protestant? Nor has
the Doctor proved his Assertion, that the first Generation of Jews is
ordinarily called Antichrist. In a large Sense all false Christ's are
Antichrists. And the (...), after they had refused the true Messiah, were
plagued with many false ones; for which Cause it is said, there are many
Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. The Ancients looked upon every Heretic as an
Antichrist. It is a known Saying of Hilarious, Quisque Christum qualis ab
Apostolis predicatus est, negat, Antichristus est. But Antichrist, the Son of
Perdition, is spoken of as one not in Being in the Apostles Days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,
6. Antichrist is one that pretends to be Christ's Friend, but is really his
Enemy. Therefore Antichristianism is styled The Mystery of Iniqui^y. Were
Antichrist a professed Enemy to Christ, (as the unbelieving Jews are) his
Iniquity would not be called a Mystery. Therefore I do not see why that Name
should be fixed on them more than on other Infidels. Mr. Mede (who is an
Interpreter of the Apocalypse, (...)) thinks that the Antichristian Apostasy
consists wholly in the Church's Ethnicizing, and not in its Iudaizing: I take
it to be in both. But as for the grand Sin of Antichrist, viz. Idolatry, we
know the Jews have dreaded that Sin ever since the Babylonian Captivity. So
that to say there is no Hope of their Conversion, because they are of the Brood
of Antichrist, seems not to be an Argument of Weight enough to cause us to
recede from that which has been the received Opinion of most Christians, as the
Doctor acknowledges this of the Jews future Conversion to have been.

He does moreover object that the Drift of the Apostle in that eminent Place,
Romans 11. is not to show that the Jews shall be all hereafter called, only to
prove that they were not wholly cast off. But it is clear that the Design of
the Apostle is to convince those Gentiles of their Error who insulted over the
Blind and rejected Jewish Nation. He therefore tells them that not only some of
the then Jews did belong to Election, but that the Obduration which the Body of
that Nation was punished with, was only, (...), for a Time, until the Fullness
of the Gentiles should come in, and that then all Israel should be saved, v.
26. To say that he intends the Elect, or Spiritual Israel, is against the Drift
of his whole Discourse, who throughout the 9 th, 10 th, and 11 th Chapters,
speaks of Israel according to the Flesh. Besides, he says he would acquaint
them with a Mystery which before they we^^ ignorant of, v. 25. It was no
Mystery to them that all the Elect should be saved: But though the Prophets had
declared it, they were as ignorant of a future Conversion of the Jews, as the
believing Jews were of the Conversion of the Gentiles, which seemed a very
strange Doctrine to them: Although it was revealed unto, and foretold by the
Prophets, they did not of a long Time understand it. Now if the Apostle speaks
of the Natural Israel, nothing can be imagined more clear and express for a
National Conversion of the Jews than those his Words are. For the Salvation of
all Israel connot intend a few, or any thing less than a National Conversion.
All Israel in due Time to be converted, is put in Opposition to a Remnant, and
to the diminutive Number that were saved in the Apostles Days. This Salvation
of all Israel is called their Fullness, and their being received again, v. 12,
15. The future Conversion of the Jews will equalize that of the Gentiles. Now
the Conversion of the Gentiles has been National: Hence it is said the World,
i. e. Gentile Nations, have been reconciled; their future Conversion will be
like their present Rejection: Now that is not of a few particular Persons, but
of the Body of the Nation. But my present Design being rather to show the
Invalidity of what is objected against the received Opinion, than by positive
Arguments to confirm it, I shall not further insist here. There are Elaborate
Discourses on this Subject never yet answered, so far as I have seen. Vo^ti^^
(...) Disputation de generali Conversion^ Iudaeorum. Also what has been
published by Divines of our own Nation, Willet, Prideaux, Gouge, or Finch,
Fuller, (not to mention others) are not easy by solid Reason to be refuted. My
own Thoughts (such as they be) are to be seen in a large Discourse on Romans
11.26. Printed at London in the Year 1669. from which, as to the Substance of
what is there asserted, I do not to this Day see any just Cause to recede.

Since that I have met with some others who have written on this Subject. There
is an Anonymous Author has published a Book with this Title, Tractatus de Regno
Ecclesiae glorios^. In which there are Eight-Chapters of the future Vocation of
the Jews. I have somewhere read that Brenius was the Author of that Treatise.
Iacobus Alting (Son of the famous Henry Alting) has emitted a large Tract on
Romans 11. in which he does strenuously endeavor to prove a future Vocation of
the Jews. It seems by his Preface that Bishop Reynolds had seen and did approve
of what he writes. And I perceive by Mr. Iurieu, (p. 395.) that Whitsius, one
of the learned Professors at Utrecht, has lately written on this Subject, and
that he does not only acknowledge a future Conversion of the Jews, but that
they shall return to their own Land again, and rebuild Jerusalem; which is a
Thing doubted of by many who are clear for their Conversion; but that Book I
have not yet seen. It confirms me in my old Opinion very much, when I see a
Person qualified with Dr. Lightfoot's great Sagacity and Depth of Judgment, as
well as Piety, (for these things are conspicuous in him) has no more to say
against it. Besides, Vol. 1. p. 732. in order to the Confutation of
Millenaries, he has several Positions which he lays down as Articles, c. g.
That the Bo^k of Daniel speaks nothing of the State of the Jews beyond the
Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. That the Revelation intends not the Times in
Daniel, but begins where Daniel left. That the Fourth Monarchy in Daniel is not
Rome. That the Blasphemous Horn in Dan. 7.8, 25. is not Antichrist, but
Antiochus, etc. Now if we must either admit of those Positions, (the contrary
whereunto has by many been evinced from Scripture Light, to me as clear as
Mathematical Demonstration) or else receive the common Opinion of the Jews
Conversion, and be Millenaries, for my Part I must sooner believe both than
believe any one of the mentioned Articles, which the Learned Doctor is so
positive in.

And I must confess that the Argument which Beza, Fayns, and others, (and of
late Mr. Iuri^u) have insisted on, has of a long Time been of weighty
Consideration with me, scil. The Miracle by which God does preserve the Jewish
Nation, distinguished from all other. It cannot be supposed that God would for
Two Thousand Years preserve this People, scattered amongst other Nations, yet
without mixing it self with them, if they were not preserved for some great
Work. As if (says Dr. Fuller) they had learned from their River Jordan running
through the Galilaean Sea, and not mingling therewith, to pass through an Ocean of
other Nations, and yet remain an unmixed People by themselves. A comfortable
Presumption, (says he, speaking after his witty and usual manner) that these
Materials are thus carefully kept entire by themselves, because intended by
Divine Providence for some Beautiful Building to be made of them hereafter.

These Things considered I shall not change my Judgment, as to the Question in
Controversy, until I meet with more convincing Arguments than what have been
objected by Mr. Baxter, Dr. Lightfoot, or any other which I have seen. No Man
ought (without very good Reason) to reject an Opinion tha^ the whole Church of
God, and a great Part of the World besides, has received in all Ages for Truth.
Dr. Owen, in his judicious Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews (Vol. 1.
p. 249.) has asserted that the Generality of the Nation of the Jews all the
World over ^^all be effectually called, with which Mercy they shall also (...)
Deliverance from their Captivity, a Restoration to their own Land, with a
flourishing and happy Condition therein. He there says, the Thing it self is
acknowledged, as far as I can understand, by all the World, that have any
Acquaintance with these Things. Christians generally do assert it, look for it,
pray for it, and have done so in all Ages, from the Days of the Apostles.
Mahometans are not without some Thoughts of what shall befall the Jews before
the End of the World. The Jews are in Expectation that the Messiah will come to
them. We are in Expectation that they will come to him. And it may be this
Difference may ere long be reconciled by his Appearance unto them, so calling
them unto Faith and Obedience. Thus far Dr. Owen.

As for the manner of their Conversion, I still incline (with Mr. Mede, Dr.
Twisse, Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Strong, and others) to think that it will be effected
as Paul's was, by a miraculous Appearance of Christ to some of them, and be
carried on by the Preaching of the Gospel, with a most glorious down pouring of
the Holy Spirit therewith. My Reasons I have expressed in my Diatriba de signo
filii hominis and secundo Messiae adventis; which was Printed at Amsterdam,
Anno 1682. As to the Time of their Conversion, I have not much to say: The
Turks keep them from possessing the Land of their Fathers. The Anonymous Author
of the Book entitled Clavis Apocalyptica ad incudem revocata, (which Book I
understand was written by one Mr. Cussion, Minister at Denvir in Norfol^)
supposes the Apocalyptical Beast and the Turk will expire together, and that
both will be in the Year 1701. and that the Jews will then have a complete and
final Salvation.

That the Turkish Empire is near some fatal Catastrophe, not only the present
Posture of Affairs there, but what is written in the Apocalypse gives us Ground
to believe. The Turks were prepared and raised up to be a killing Scourge to
the Apostate Christian World, for the Space of an Hour, a Day, a Month, and a
Year, Rev. 9.15. which makes 396 Years. It is generally agreed that the Turkish
Empire, in the present Ottomanical Family, began in the Year 1300. ^etavius
makes it to be Two Years sooner, but then it must cease being a Woe before the
Year 1696 is expired. That Is the Time Mr. Brightman long ago fixed on. ^^sted
(in Trifol. Prophetic. p. 164.) says, that sine dubio finem habebit Tyrannis
Turcica Anno Christi 1694. Ra^^ius was many Years since persuaded, that after
the Year 1694. the Church would see Hal^yon Days. That Year is just now
expired. We in America hear nothing of the Turks D^wnfall.

The Vision is for an appointed Time, but at the End it shall speak and not
lie. There are also who think that the Twelve Hundred and Sixty Days will End
with the Year 96. So Mr. Beverly in his late Books. I remember that once in
Discourse with that worthy Man Three Years since, he told me that he did no
more doubt but that in the Year 97. there would be an happy Turn of Affairs,
than he did question whether to morrow would come after to day. Nor is his
Fundamental Notion of the last Half Time, beginning in the Year 1517. to (...)
despised. If that hold good, the Twelve Hundred and Sixty Days will (...)
fallibly end in the Year 97. Perhaps some would rather begin the semi-ti^^ from
the Year 1530. when the Protestant Name began; then the 1260 Days expire Anno
1710. Mr. Baxter tells Mr. Beverly if he should live to see himself
disappointed in his Ninety Seven, he does not know how he will be able to bear
it: But if he should, he is not the first worthy Man that has been mistaken in
Computations. Others concur with him as to the Time, though not as to the Ground^
he goes upon. A late Writer thinks that because the last (...) Horns appeared,
Anno 455. that therefore the 1260 Days end Anno (...) because these Years may
be reckoned by Thirty Days to a Month, (...) ^he whole Account to be Seventeen
Years and an Half less, and ^^at brings us to 1697. Others have a Notion that
it was an ancient Tradi^^on that Christianity would last 365. Years. Austin
says that some in those Days gave out that the Apostle Peter had so taught. Now
we must reckon the ^hristian World to begin at the Destruction of the Jewish
World, when the Tem^le was burnt in the Year 72. to which add 365, and it makes
4^7. the Year when Mr. Beverly begins the Antichristian World, and so ends it
with 1697. Napier in his Discovery of the Revelations, Prop. 14. thinks that
the Day of Judgment will begin Anno 1697, or at furthest in 1699. There was
found in the Study of Iustus Lapsius a Prophecy, which predicts both the
Expiration of the Turkish Empire, and the utter Desolation of Rome in the Year
School. which is Four Years hence: The Words of the Prophet (or however of the
Poet) are these.

Nonagesimus Octavus mirabilis Annus
Ingruet, is secum gaudia laeta feret.
Corruet hoc anno Turcarum invisa prop^go
Roma, tuum in libris fabula nom^n erit.
A Prophecy not unlike this was published by ^^gio Montanus above Two Hundred
Years ago, which I have quoted in my Discourse of Com^ts, Chap. 10. p. 138.

All these are but the Conjectures of Men, nor may we lay Weight on (...)
Nevertheless, since the Time that almost all Judicious Writers on the (...)
have fixed on for the finishing the Beast's Reign is well nigh expired, we
(...) rationally suppose that great Changes in the World are not far off.

As for the Year of the Jews Conversion, I cannot perceive that it is any where
described in the Scriptures. The Jews themselves do not expect their
Deliverance until Rome be first destroyed, and then they say it will be out of
Hand. R. Kimchi is positive in his Assertions, that whatever the Prophets have
said concerning the Destruction of Edom in the last Days, (...) they have
spoken it of Rome. No Man that has any Acquaintance with the Writings of the
Jewish Rabbis can be ignorant that when Edom is mentioned in the Scriptures,
they still apply it to Rome, supposing that Vengeance must come on that City
before the Redemption of Israel. There is undoubtedly a Vial to be poured out
on the Seat of the Beast, before the Jews return. The Beast has his Seat (which
he will needs have it called (...) Apostolica) in Italy. I am persuaded that
the Time is at Hand when some strange Providence will cause the Pope's more
peculiar Territories to be full of Darkness. After that Darkness the Light of
Truth concerning the Mystery we are discoursing of, will appear with such
Clearness as will leave no Room for Doubt or Disputation. In the mean Time, it
is a little surprising to see that the most learned Men amongst the Papists are
not without Conviction that a Fatal Day will overtake Rome, when the World will
draw near to its End; They confess (and that makes it the more strange to see
Protestants deny it) that by Babylon in the Apocalypse, Rome not Pagan, but
Christian is intended; which they say will at last degenerate, and after that
become subject unto an Eternal Desolation; yea, that it will be burnt and never
rebuilt. Thus Tirinus, Ribera, Suarez, and several others among the Jesuits
themselves. And there are old Predictions of Rome's Ruin. That of one of the
Sybils is famously known. (...). The Christian Cicero, (as he is commonly
styled) Lactantius, who flourished in the Year 290. says in plain Terms,
Rom^^em (...) de (...) de divino praemio. L. 6, 7. Cap. 15. And again, Cap. 25.
At ver^ c^m caput illud orbis c^ci^^ri^ and (...) esse ceperit, quod Sibyll^
fore aiunt, quis dubi^^t (...) jam finem (...) humanis, orbique Terrarum.

CHAP. V. Concerning the First Resurrection. Such Things are affirmed in
Scripture as do necessarily imply Two Resurrections. Many are already risen.
Several Reasons mentioned inducing us to believe that the Resurrection of
Saints and Sinners will not be Simultaneous. Confirmed by Scripture.
NOT only a future Conversion of the Jews, but another more disputable Point,
and that does meet with a more (...) Opposition, Reverend Mr. Baxter has
observed in some Books of mine long since published, viz. That the Resurrection
of the Righteous shall precede the Resurrection of the wicked. He does desire
me to give some Proof of that Assertion, since many Scriptures seem to assert a
common Judgment, and consequently a common Resurrection both of the just and
unjust at the same Time of Christ's Coming. I cannot see that that Objection of
their being mentioned in the same Scriptures, without an express Distinction
that the one shall precede the other, is an Argument sufficient to prove that
they must of Necessity begin together. Certain it is that both shall be in the
(...) Day of the Lord; both shall fall within the Compass of the great Day of
Judgment. But then there is a Morning and an Evening of that Day. The (...)
will be attended with a First, the Evening with a Second Resurrection. (...)
^oming of the Messiah is in many Scriptures in the Old Testament spoken of
(...) Day, without any express Distinction of his First and Second Coming* Isa.
2.11. Z^ch. 12.3, 4, 6, 8. The Jews therefore do not own Two Comings (...)
Christ. They say Shil^h shall come, but where is it said he shall come twice?
We reply, that such Things are spoken concerning the Messiah as do necessarily
imply a First and Second Coming. The Prophets speak of his coming to suffer and
die for the Sins of his People, and of his coming to judge the Earth. Daniel
says that Messiah should be cut off, and yet that the Son of Man should come in
the Clouds of Heaven, and (...) on a Throne, judging the World; which implies
Two Comings of Christ. The Jews, to evade this, have feigned Two Messiahs, one
the Son of Joseph, that should suffer, and the other the Son of David, who must
reign without suffering. But the ^cripture speaks expressly of Two
Resurrections, as we shall see: Besides, in very many Scriptures that is said
which does imply no less. When the Prophets and Saints shall rise from the
dead, all the Kingdoms of the World will become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, Rev. 11. ^^* 18. After this Resurrection is begun, All People,
Nations and Languages shall serve him, All Dominions shall obey him, Dan.
7.14.27. There is lately published a Book entitled A new System of the
Apocalypse: It is a judicious Treatise; the Author not mentioned; but I
understand it was Mr. Phillipot a persecuted French Minister. He observes that
the Scriptures but now quoted cannot be fulfilled after the Universal
Resurrection, because then there will be no Dominions for the Saints to reign
over: This then infers there will be a Resurrection of the Saints before the
wicked shall rise to their final Judgment; and that there is not a Simultan^ity
in the Resurrection of all the dead, is past all doubt, since many of the dead
are risen already. There were Multitudes of Saints who rose immediately after
the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 27.52, 53. Probably those
raised Saints did wait upon our Lord Christ, and ascend with him to Heaven:
Whence it was a celebrated Saying amongst Christians in the Primitive Times,
That Christ descended alone, but ascended with a Multitude. Cyril, Chrysostom,
and others of the Ancients were of Opinion that all the Saints that died before
our Savior's Time did then rise. See Mr. Mede's Works, Fol. 750. It is
therefore certain that they have a wrong Idaea of the Resurrection in their
Minds, who think that all Mankind shall rise at the same Hour.

That the just shall rise before the unjust, the subsequent Reasons have
induced me to believe.

Reas. 1. If after the Resurrection of the Saints, the wicked shall be
destroyed by that Fire in which the Lord shall be revealed from Heaven, and
after that restored to Life at the ultimate Judgment; It must needs be
acknowledged that the Resurrection of the just will precede that of the unjust;
but all this is true. The Living Saints at Christ's coming shall be caught up
into the Air, that so they may escape that Deluge of Fire, which will be the
Perdition of ungodly Men, Luke 17.34. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. 2 Pet. 3.7. But before
this Rapture of the living, the dead Saints shall be raised. Therefore the
Apostle says, They that remain unto the Coming of the Lord shall not prevent
them which are asleep. i. e. ^hey, as to their Bodies, shall not be with Christ
before the Bodies of Saints asleep in the Grave shall be with him; but the dead
in Christ shall rise first, and (...), after that the living Saints will be
caught up to meet the Lord coming in the Air, ^ Thessalonians. 4.15, 16. Chrysostom on
that Place observes that the just shall be the first Risers, not only in
Dignity, but in Time. As when the Flood came, there was a Difference made
between Noah's Family and the rest of Mankind: Thus when the World shall perish
by Fire, no Saint shall be hurt by that Fire, but Sinners shall. We must not be
wise above what is written, and therefore we may not determine how long the
Conflagration will last. Noah's Flood continued for many Days and Months, he
was a whole Year in the Ark. The Weapons of Ezekiel's Gog are Seven Years in
burning, Ezekiel. 39.9. No Doubt but that the Conflagration of the Great Day will
last a long Time. Many will perish as soon as the Fire begins; but the wicked
shall not be raised until the Conflagration be over: Nor (as we shall endeavor
to prove) of a long Time after that. When as the Saints shall rise when the
Heavens and the Earth, which now are, shall begin to be on Fire. This
demonstrates that there will not be a Simultaneity in the Resurrection of the
just and unjust.

Reas. 2. The Jews did and do believe from the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
not only that there shall be a Resurrection both of the just and unjust, but
that the just shall rise first. It is uncertain who was the Author of the
Apocryphal Book of Wisdom, only that he was a Jew, and one that probably wrote
whilst they were yet a Church, and the Holy Spirit not wholly departed from
them. There are many excellent Documents contained in that Book. Grotius says
truly concerning it, Venerandam habet antiquitatem apud Christiano^ semper in
pretio est habitus. Now some judicious Writers conceive that he has Respect to
the First Resurrection in Chap. 3. Ver. 6, 7. where he says of the righteous,
that in the Time of their Visitation (so is the Resurrection styled) they shall
shine, they shall judge the Nations, and have Dominion over the People, and
their Lord shall reign for ever. The Jews believe that when Messiah comes,
their Forefathers shall rise out of their Graves and reign with him. Some of
their Rabbis speak of a particular, and of a general Resurrection. So
Eben-Ezra on Dan. 12.2. And not only he, but this has been the Opinion of many
of them. The Author of Sepher Abkat affirms, That many Doctors say, that when
Messiah comes, (...) none shall live again but the just. Vid. Grelleti prodrom.
in Apocalyp. p. 216. Kimchi and other Hebrew Doctors expound Psalm. 1.5. Where
it is said, the ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the
Congregation of the Righteous, as excluding Sinners from partaking in the
glorious Resurrection of the great Day of Judgment. There is a Place in Isaiah
which both Jewish and Christian Expositors have interpreted of a particular
Resurrection of the just before the universal Resurrection, viz. Isa. 26.19.
The Prophet says that the dead Saints shall rise at the same Time with his dead
Body, but in Verse 14. he says of the wicked, they shall not live, they are
deceased, they shall not rise: Here seems to be a Distinction and Opposition of
the Resurrection of the Saints to that of the wicked, declaring that when the
one shall be, the other shall not be. The not rightly understanding these
Scriptures has caused some of the Jewish Rabbis to run into the Heresy of
denying an universal Resurrection. Because the Scripture does intimate that
some shall rise from the dead when others shall not, they have fondly supposed
that none but Israelites shall have a Resurrection from the dead. It is a
celebrious Saying amongst them, That there are four Things which Israelites are
priviledg'd with above all the Nations of the Earth, viz. Prophecy, the Law,
the Holy Land, and the Resurrection. Vid. Buxtorf. Synagog. Iudaic. Cap. 3.
Edit. Bas^^. 1661.

There are judicious Interpreters who suppose that the Angel speaks of a
First Resurrection in Dan. 12.2. where it is said that many of them who sleep
in the Dust of the Earth shall awake: Since it is not said All, but Many that
sleep awake, when as at the Day of Judgment, not only many, but All will rise.
Mr. Brightman and Mr. Huit, in their Commentaries on Daniel, are of Opinion
that it is only a Mystical Resurrection of the Jewish Nation which is there
spoken of; with whom I perceive my worthy Friend Mr. Samuel Clark in his Notes
on that Place does concur. But the Reason alleged has no Cogency in it: For
(as Glass^us observes) Many is in the Scripture taken, (...), for All, Isa.
52.15. Romans 5.15, 19. and 12.8. We may not unnecessarily recede from a Literal
Interpretation. And inasmuch as the Jewish Church did build her Faith of the
Resurrection on this Text in Daniel in a special Manner, (as may be seen in
Manasseh-Ben-Israel in his Book De Resurrectione) I think we should not exclude
the Literal Sense of the Words.

Now taking it for granted that the Resurrection here spoken of, is that which
shall be at the Judgment of the Great Day, this Text seems to be a very
pregnant and clear Proof that the just shall rise unto everlasting Life a long
Time before the wicked shall rise unto Shame and everlasting Contempt: For the
Angel does plainly intimate, both that this Resurrection shall be when the
Time, Times and half Time is fully expired; and when the King of the North,
having planted the Tabernacles of his Palace between the Seas in the glorious
holy Mountain, shall come to his End. But this King of the North will come to
his End long before the ultimate Resurrection, as in the Sequel of our
Discourse will be made to appear: Therefore some shall awake out of the Dust of
the Earth unto Everlasting Life long before that. I omit here Mr. Burroughs's
Argument (on Hos. 1. p. 133.) that standing up in this Resurrction is promised
to Daniel as a special Favor to him as an eminent Saint, and that therefore
the Place cannot be meant of the General Resurrection which shall be at the
ultimate Judgment. What is that End of Days in which Daniel must stand up, that
is, rise from the dead? Does it not mean that after the Time, Times and half a
Time (when John also says that the Mystery of God will be finished) are
expired, this first Resurrection will begin.

Reas. 3. There are Scriptures in the New Testament which intimate that the
Resurrection of the just will precede the universal Resurrection.

W^ shall begin with that Scripture, Mat. 24.31. He shall send his Angels with
a great Sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the
four Winds, from one End of Heaven to the other.

It seems by this, that at the Coming of our Lord the Elect shall rise and be
gathered together unto him before the Resurrection of the Non-Elect. Mr. Strong
(in his Thirty Sermons p. 279.) thinks that this Text is not to be understood
of the General Resurrection, because when the last Trumpet sounds, not Elect
only, but Reprobates are brought to judgment, when as this Trumpet in Matthew
gathers only the Elect from the Four Winds; therefore (says he) it seems that
none shall bear this (...) but the Elect, and it shall sound to them as such.

And hence some ha^^ ^nterpreted this Trumpet as intending the Publication of
the Gospel for the Conversion of the Elect, supposing that the Coming of the
Son of Man in the Clouds of Heaven with great Power and Glory, spoken of in the
preceding Verse, has respect only to his Providential Coming unto the
Destruction of Jerusalem. Thus Grotius, and his Admirer Dr. Hammond. But it is
a dangerous Exposition that shall make such clear Proofs of our Lord's Second
Personal Coming to be nothing but Metapho^^ and Allegories. That Phrase of
Christ^ coming in the Clouds of Heaven is peculiar unto his Coming to begin the
great Day of Judgment, Dan. 7.13. with Acts 1.11. His providential Coming to
destroy Jerusalem was at the Beginning of the great Tribulation of the Jewish
Nation; When as this Coming in the Clouds of Heaven is expressly said to (...)
after that Tribulation is ended, Ver. 29. That which Matthew expresses by
saying after the Tribulation of those Days, Luke expounds by saying Jerusalem
shall be trodden down, until the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. This then
is one Scripture which seems to indigitate a Resurrection of the righteous as
precedaneous to that of the wicked. Another Scripture which seems to speak no
less, is that Luke 14.14, 15. where we read of Blessedness, and Recompenses,
and the Kingdom of God at the Resurrection of the just. The ultimate
Resurrection will be a Resurrection of the unjust: It is called a Resurrection
of Damnation, John 5.29. The Righteous shall rise and reign long before that.
The Expression seems clearly to import that there is a Resurrection peculiar to
the Righteous, therefore called the Resurrection of the just. And in Luke
20.35. It is said, They are the Children of God, being the Children of the
Resurrection. Laurentius in his Problem, De Regno Millenario, p. 25 argues
thus, The universal Resurrection is not proper to the Children of God; but the
Resurrection spoken of in Luke 20. is proper to the Children of God; for the
Children of that Resurrection are said to be the Children of God; therefore it
is not the Universal Resurrection which in that Place is spoken of. Another
Scripture which some have produced, as confirming a Distinction of Time in the
Resurrection, is that 1 Cor. 15.22, 23, 24. In Christ shall all be made alive,
but every Man in his own Order, Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that
are Christ's at his Coming, after that the End. It is true that all shall rise
(...), at the Coming of Christ: But a large Space of Time is contained under
that Expression of the Lord's Coming. His first Coming comprehends more than
Sixteen Hundred Years. We are sure that under the Dispensation which will begin
at his Second Coming there will be a Thousand Years, but how much more we know
not.

The Apostle asserts an Order in the Resurrection, which implies that some
shall have a Preference therein as to the Time of their Resurrection: They that
are united to Christ shall rise when his next Personal Appearance begins: But
it is not said, that the End when the Kingdom shall be delivered to the Father,
and all the dead shall rise, will be then, or as soon as they who are in Christ
shall rise, but that it will be afterward. Our English Translation does very
much obscure the true Meaning of that Scripture; The Adverb (...) in Ver. 24.
should not be translated then, but afterward, as it is Englished in Ver. 23.
It is there and frequently put for that which comes a considerable Time after,
Mark 4.28. We proceed therefore unto another Scripture, which seems to intimate
that the righteous shall rise in the Morning, but the wicked in the Evening of
the great Day of Judgment, it is that Rev. 2.26, 28, Where the Lord says to the
Overcomer, I will give him Power over the Nations, and I will give him the
Morning Star. Some Expositors have wearied themselves in vain by seeking to
accomodate this Promise to a State of the Church before the Resurrection; when
as it is certain that every one of the glorious Things promised to the
Overcomer, in Christ's Epistles to the Churches in Asia, will be fully
accomplished at, and not before the Day of Judgment. Now admitting the Doctrine
of the first Resurrection, it is easy to see how the Saints reign on Earth and
have Power over the Nations; but if the Resurrection be simul and semel of just
and unjust, all at the same Moment, it is not easy to demonstrate how Nations
and Kingdoms shall be ruled by them.

Christian Victors shall in the Morning of the Resurrection, as soon as the
great Day shall dawn, be with Christ, and partake with him in his Kingdom. Thus
is the Morning Star given to them.

CHAP. VI. That the Scripture speaks of the first Resurrection in express
Terms. That famous Text, Revel. 20. considered and vindicated. That the
Resurrection there spoken of is a Corporal Resurrection, proved by Six
Arguments. That the Primitive Christians believed the Chiliad, and the First
Resurrection, in the Literal Sense. Concerning the Sibyls. Testimonies out of
them are of no Validity.
THE Scriptures in the former Chapter in (...) in, (...) implicitly, and by
just Consequence prove that the Resurrection of the just shall precede that of
the unjust. But there is one Place which does expressly, and in Terms assert ^he
First Resurrection. Let that therefore be a Fourth Reason. Notwithstanding it
^as been done abundantly by others, we shall a little consider and vindicate
that eminent Text, Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. The Words are, I saw Thrones, and they sat
upon them, and Judgment was given to them, and (there must be repeated as in
our English Translation is expressed [I saw]) the Souls of them that were
beheaded for the Witness of Jesus Christ and the Word of God, and (there must
again (...) be repeated, notwithstanding the Translators have omitted it. [I
saw them]) which had not Worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had
received his mark upon their foreheads, nor in their hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand Years; but the rest of the dead lived not again
'till the thousand Years were finished. This is the first Resurrection, Blessed
and Holy is he who has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death
shall have no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand Years. From which words says Dr. Thomas Burnet (in
his Theory -- B. 4. p. 152.) If you please we will raise this Doctrine, That
those that have suffered for the sake of Christ and a good Conscience, shall be
raised from the dead a thousand Years before the General Resurrection, and
reign with Christ in an happy State. His Doctrine I believe is an Holy Truth,
only I cannot understand why this Millenial Reign should be restrained to the
Martyrs, since it is promised not only to them that were beheaded for the Word
of God, but to them that have not worshipped the Beast, nor received his mark.
Which comprehends not only the Jews yet to be converted, but many Protestants
and Saints who never had ^he Honor (though they would have rejoiced in it) to
die for Christ, or for ^earing Witness to his Truth. If it can be proved that
it is a Corporal Re^urrection which is here intended, it puts an end to the
present Controversy. ^^^^edius in his Diatribe de Mill Annis p. 129. says
that Piscator not long before his Death, wrote a small Treatise of the future
Happiness of the Church on Earth, out of which Manuscript he ingeniously
confesses he had taken many Things in that his Diatribe. Both Piscator and
Alsted, and of our own Nation, Mr. Mede and Dr. Goodwin, long since, besides
many learned Men more lately, have produced such Arguments to prove that what
is spoken in the 20th Chapter of Revelation must be understood (...),
Historically, and in the Letter, as cannot easily be answered. Let the
following Arguments be duly weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

1. It is a known, received Maxim among Divines, that in the Interpretation of
Scripture we may not depart from the Literal Sense, if it will stand with the
Analogy of Faith. For Men to make Allegories where there are none, is to
obtrude their own Imaginations instead of Scripture. Now says Mr. Mede (Fol.
943.) The 20 th of Apocalypse, of all the Narrations in that Book, seems to be
the most plain and simple, most free of Allegory, and of the Involution of
Prophetical Figures. How can a Man then take a Passage of so plain, and
ordinarily expressed Words as those about the First Resurrection are, in any
other Sense than the usual and Literal.

2. It is evident by the Law of Opposites. The First and Second Resurrection
must needs be of the same Kind, otherwise the Discourse would be Illogical,
which may not be supposed. Piscator speaks like a Logician as well as a Divine
when he says, In omni Legitim^ distributione membra inter s^ opponuntur sub
eodem genere. In every Rational Distribution the opposite Parts are of the same
Kind. Here is a Distribution or Distinction of dead Men living again, some at
the Beginning of the Thousand Years, the rest not until the Thousand Years were
finished. But those that live again after the Thousand Years, live as to their
Bodies. That the Second Resurrection is not Metaphorical but real, and to be
taken in a Literal Sense is clear and indisputable. For then the dead, small
and great, shall stand before God and be judged according to what is written in
the Books, and the Sea gave up the dead which were in it, Ver. 12.13. This is
the Second Resurrection which comes after the Thousand Years; and it is
certainly a Resurrection of the Body. And thus does Mr. Mede argue, It would
(says he) be a most harsh and violent Interpretation to say that [Dead] and
consequently [living again from the dead] should not, ^trobique, be taken in
the same Meaning. For such a Speech in ordinary Construction implies, that as
some of the dead lived again in the Beginning of the Thousand Years, in that
Sense the rest of the dead should live again at the End of the Thousand Years,
and e contra, in what Manner the rest of the dead should live again at the End
of the Thousand Years, in that Manner those that were beheaded for Jesus, lived
again in the Beginning of the Thousand Years; which living again of those some,
is called the First Resurrection.

3. Piscator has another Argument which is to this Purpose, They who after they
live again shall be and reign with Christ, do rise in Respect of their Bodies.
Now this is affirmed of the Subjects of the First Resurrection; They lived and
reigned with Christ, and they were Priests of God and of Christ, and reigned
with him a Thousand Years. Piscator indeed supposes it to be a reigning with
Christ in Heaven after the Resurrection: But the Saints in Heaven shall not
reign for a Thousand Years, but on Earth they shall, it must therefore be meant
of a Reign not in Heaven, but on Earth.

4. As is the Death of those Reigning Saints, such will be their Resurrection:
But their Death was of their Bodies: For it is said they were beheaded, which
implies a Natural Death. The Romans did usually, and the Jews often put Men to
Death (as John Baptist was) by cutting off their Heads with a Sword. Although it
is said Souls that were beheaded, that does not in the least imply that the
Death spoken of was a Spiritual Death peculiar to the Soul; for how can an
immortal Soul be beheaded? But frequently in Scripture the Soul is put for the
Person, Genesis 46.26. Ezekiel. 44.25. nay for the Body; As when it is said, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell. i. e. my Body in the Grave, Psalm. 16.10. The
martyred sacrificed Bodies of the Saints, are said to be Souls slain, which cry
for Vengeance, Rev. 6.9. Dr. Goodwin observes well, their Resurrection to Life
must be taken in the same Sense and Proportion to the Life they lost. Inasmuch
then as the Natural Lives of the (...) were taken away, their Living implies a
Resurrection of their Bodies, for their Souls to be reunited with and live in.
The Argument stands thus, A Resurrection of the dead in Body is a Corporal
Resurrection; but the First Resurrection is a Resurrection of the dead in Body;
for it is a Resurrection of them that were beheaded.

5. The First Resurrection spoken of in the Apocalypse is either a Spiritual,
or a Political, or Corporal Resurrection: But neither of the former. It has
commonly been interpreted as meant of a Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul, in
Respect of Regeneration; as if it were the same with what Paul speaks, Ephesians.
2.5. You has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. But if this
were intended, how is it said, that they lived and reigned a thousand Years? Do
all that are made Partakers of Regeneration live a Thousand Years? And how is
it said that the rest of the dead lived not again until the Thousand Years were
finished? There never was a Thousand Years in which there was no Conversion, or
Spiritual Resurrection of Souls. Besides, a Death in Sin is not called the
first Death, and consequently Conversion from a State of Sin is not properly
called [the] first (supposing it be [a] first) Resurrection. The Spiritual
Resurrection began presently after Adam's Fall, and shall continue to the End
of the World; when as that which John speaks of is proper to the Thousand
Years, and not to begin before Antichrist's Reign is ended. Yet again, how can
it be said of Men that were beheaded, that they were converted after their
beheading? Such Absurdities has this (though a vulgar) Exposition in it. This
Notion is therefore rejected by most that have studied the Apocalypse: But
there are many learned and judicious Authors who take the First Resurrection in
a Political Sense, as if it were of the same Nature with the Resurrection of
the Witnesses spoken of in the 11th of Revelation, and did intend only thus
much, that when Antichrist is destroyed, the Church shall be delivered from the
Death of Affliction, and continue in a glorious State for a Thousand Years
before the ultimate Judgment, during all which Time Men shall be ruled by the
Laws of Christ, and only Saints shall have Power in their Hands. All this I
freely acknowledge to be true and according to the Scriptures: But with all due
Respect to these Expositors, I conceive that does not comprehend the full
Meaning of the Text before us. For this Interpretation does imply that the
Saints of the First Resurrection suffered a Political Death only, like that of
the Two Witnesses. Were that so, a Political Resurrection would be intended by
their living again. But (as has been shown) their Death was more than
Political, and therefore so must their Resurrection unto Life be. Again, this
Interpretation implies that the beheaded Saints lived again in their Successors
only, and not in their own Persons. When as in Strictness of Speech, a
Resurrection is of the same individual Person rather than of a Successor. And
certainly as they suffered in their own Persons, so they themselves in their
own Persons, and not others for them, shall rise and reign, 2 Timothy 2.12. When
Christ says to Overcomers, that they shall eat of the Tree of Life, have a new
Name, have Power over the Nations, etc. we may not suppose that he intends they
shall have this Glory in their Successors: No more may we think they who have
been beheaded for his Sake shall have a Kingdom given them for a Thousand Years
in their Successors, but not in their own Persons.

Yet further, it is said concerning the Saints of the First Resurrection, that
they are blessed and holy, and that the Second Death shall have no Power over
them. How does this agree to them that are the Subjects of only a Political
Resurrection? Will there be a Time when in the Church on Earth there shall be
no Reprobate, nor any unregenerate Person for a Thousand Years together? So
indeed it will be at the Day of Judgment: But before that Blessed Day it will
not be, Mat. 13.30. Nor does this Political Sense well agree with that
Expression of the rest of the dead not living again until the Thousand Years
were finished. Shall all the dead have a Political Resurrection at the End of
the Thousand Years? They must have a Resurrection of the same Kind with that
which some had at the Beginning of the Thousand Years. I have yet one Thing
more to object here. This Political Resurrection does imply that the Lord's
People shall enjoy great Prosperity, yea, and Dominion in this present World,
and that for many Ages, when as the Scripture tells them of Persecutions and of
an evil World, and that the Sufferings of the Church shall last throughout this
present Time; yea, until the Day comes when the Creature shall be delivered
from the Bondage of Corruption, and we shall have the Redemption of our Body,
Romans 8.18, -- 24. There is a Kingdom promised, but the Enjoyment of it not to
be expected in this present, but in the World to come. In the Resurrection
World we shall reign on Earth, but it must be made a New Earth, which it will
not be before the Conflagration: The Fire of the Judgment Day will purify and
renovate the World. The Scripture is express, that the last Days of this
present World will be perilous Times, 2 Timothy 3.1. It is not said some of the
last Days will be so: Nor may we distinguish where the Scripture does not. But
how then can we believe that the last Thousand Years of this World will be
Times without any Peril? The New Heaven and the New Earth which God has
promised, i. e. the New World which shall begin with the Resurrection, will be
another kind of World than what this which we see is, and has been ever since
the Fall of Adam. In that World they shall have Rest and Refreshing, Luke
20.35. Acts 3.19, 21. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. In the mean Time they must bear the Cross,
conflict with Enemies, and suffer Persecution, Mat. 16.24. Ioh. 18.36. 2 Timothy
3.12. It remains then that the First Resurrection is Literal and Corporal.

6. Primitive and Orthodox Christianity was of this Mind. Indeed since
Antichristianism has had the Ascendant, as many other glorious Truths, so the
Doctrine of the First Resurrection and the Thousand Years Reign has been
condemned for Heresy. Baronius calls it Heresy, but A Lapide is more modest.
He says the Millenary Opinion is an Error, but he dared not to call it
Heresy, because it was never condemned by any Council. Some Lutherans have
been as severe in their Censures as Baronius. There was a late Lutheran
Minister, viz. Georgius Laurentius, who wrote a Book which he calls Problema
Theologicum de Regno Sanctorum in Terris Millenario. His Arguments are proposed
with great Modesty* Nevertheless a Lutheran Consistory condemned his Book as
Heretical, and the Author was excommunicated. It is an odd Passage which the
Editor of that Treatise has in his Preface to it, viz. That when Laurentius
fell sick, he desired to speak with the Vicar who had excommunicated him, told
him that he should die with that Sickness, and that the Vicar should quickly
follow him. Within a few Days the Vicar was taken ill and died, but in great
Horror often over cried out, Laurentius has written the Truth, Laurentius has
written the Truth; and so departed this Life. Let Papists and Lutherans think
what they please of it, I am certain that if this Opinion be Heretical, the
Fathers and Martyrs in the Primitive Times were Heretics. Jerome was one of
the first that did set himself fiercely against it; and yet in one Place he
says, that although he did not approve of the Chiliastical Opinion, he dared not
condemn it, because (says he) many Ecclesiastical Doctors and Martyrs have so
taught. This has been so often spoke to, and by so many, that it would be Loss
of Time to insist or enlarge upon it. Dr. Burnet has laid down this Conclusion,
That the Millennial Kingdom of Christ was the General Doctrine of the Primitive
Church, from the Times of the Apostles to the Nicene Council inclusively. He
observes truly that in the First and Second Century this Doctrine was not
contested, or opposed by any excepting Heretics, who denied the Resurrection
wholly. I cannot omit the mentioning of what Justin Martyr speaks, whose Words
are so express and full as that nothing can be more. He tells Trypho the Jew,
that not only himself but (...) whosoever amongst Christians were thoroughly
Orthodox did believe the Resurrection, and the Thousand Years in Jerusalem, as
the Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel had foretold: For (says he) Isaiah speaking of
the Time of these Thousand Years says, there shall be a New Heaven and a New
Earth, etc. He adds, One of ours whose Name was John, one of the Twelve
Apostles of Christ, in the Revelation exhibited to him, has foretold that they
who believe on our Christ shall continue a Thousand Years in Jerusalem, and
after that shall be the universal Resurrection and Judgment. Vid. Dial. p. (
mihi) 307, 308. Now that Justin Martyr, a Learned and Holy Man who lived within
Thirty Years of the Apostle John, should affirm that all Orthodox Christians
did then believe a particular Resurrection at the Beginning of the Thousand
Years, and that the New Jerusalem would continue for a Thousand Years, and
after that a Catholic Resurrection of all together, (as his Words are) is a
Demonstration that this Doctrine was received from the Apostles themselves. It
is incredible that Justin Martyr would affirm that all Orthodox Christians were
of this Belief, if it were not so indeed; and it is not to be thought that
Christians living so near the Apostles, could not some, but all of them be of
this Persuasion, if the Notion of the Chiliad and of the First Resurrection, in
the Sense expressed and contended for were not Scripture Truth, and some Part
of the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Irenaeus was contemporary with
Justin, and also a Martyr for Christ; he does expressly assert a first Corporal
Resurrection to begin with the Millennium. He spends an whole Chapter in
proving that the Scriptures by him alleged will not admit of Allegorical
Interpretations; and that they do not speak of a Super-Caelestial Happiness.
Cont. Heret. Lib. 3. Cap. 35. He affirms that the Presbyteri who knew the
Apostle John declared that they received this Doctrine from him, and that John
was thus taught by the Lord himself, Cap. 33. In some Editions of Irenaeus, the
Five last Chapters of his Fifth Book* are left out. Fenardentius ingeniously
confesses that he believes the Reason was because therein Irenaeus discovers
himself to be a Chiliast. What Irenaeus says, if well considered, amounts to
little less than a Demonstration that the Doctrine of the Chiliad and of the
First Corporal Resurrection is not an Error, but an Apostolical Tradition and
Truth. Would Irenaeus say that he received it from those Elders who had it from
the Apostles themselves, if it were not so? In one Place he mentions Papias as
having thus taught, who was one of John's Scholars, instructed by him. Eusebius
confesses that Papias was an holy Man, only to blast his Opinion, he said he
had (...), but a weak Judgment. It ill becomes such an Arianish Author as
Eusebius was, to reflect on a venerable Father for Weakness of Judgment, who
had so little of Solidity and Orthodoxy of Judgment himself. But Irenaeus
speaks in the Plural Number, Presbyteri (p. mihi 497.) quemadmodum [Presbyteri]
meminerunt qui Iohannem Dis^ipul^m Domini i^d erunt. As (says he) the Elders
who have seen John the Disciple of the Lord have declared that they learned
from him. Doubtless Irenaeus intends Polycarp as well as Papias; for in his
Epistle to Florinus, he mentions Polycarp by Name as one of those Elders that
were taught by the Apostles. And he says, that when he was a young Man, he
heard Polycarp affirm that he was frequently with John and others of the
Apostles: Now if Irenaeus had his Chiliastical Opinion from such Elders as
Polycarp and Papias, declaring that they had it from John, and from other of
the Apostles, doubtless it is no Error, but an holy Scripture Truth. I omit all
Citation of Testimonies out of the Sibyls. As for those Sibylline Oracles which
were sacred with the Romans of old, they are lost, being consumed when the
Capitol was burnt. The Eight Books of Pseudo-Sibylline Oracles which are in the
Hands of many (notwithstanding what Isaac Vossius has said to the contrary)
were composed and imposed upon the World by the Fraud and Forgery of Christians
pretending to be Inspired Gentiles. Therefore Celsus in Origin scornfully
calls the Christians Sibyllista's, complaining that they themselves were the
Authors of those Oracles which they attributed to the old Sibyls. Is it
probable that the Gentiles should have a more distinct Knowledge of the
Trinity, of the Incarnation and Sufferings of Christ, and of the particular
Miracles wrought by him than ever the Children of Israel, or the Prophets, or
the Apostles themselves had, before they saw the Things accomplished? Nor could
the Author of those Books be (...), divinely inspired. For there are some
Things therein very futile, as that of Adam's being the first that did descend
into Eden, etc. and some Things that are false, concerning God's being the
Author of Evil, of Purgatory; and not to mention other Particulars, Erythraea's
feigning her self to be Noah's Nymph is an egregious Lie. Could Noah's Daughter
not only speak Greek, but write Greek Verses? It seems the true Author was a
Gnostick: For the Sibyl pretends to know how many Stars there are in Heaven;
how many Men there are, or shall ever be on Earth, which is more than any Angel
in Heaven knows: This is perfect Gnosticism. The Author lived in the Primitive
Times: For the most ancient Fathers, Justin Martyr and Athenagoras mention the
Sibyls. But as to the Subject which we have in Hand, we may gather from these
pretended Oracles that Christians who believed the Day of Judgment and the
Resurrection, did also believe the Chiliad, and the Glory of the New Jerusalem;
for of all these do these Prophetesses speak many Things. Vid. Plurae apud
Hornbeck. de conv. Indor. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Dupin (the Regius Professor in Paris)
in his lately published Ecclesiastical History, calls the Millenary Notion the
Dotage of Antiquity, Vol. 1. p. 47. He confesses that Justin, Athenagoras,
Irenaeus, Clement, Tertullian, and many other ancient Writers, yea, the
Primitive Christians, for the most Part, were of that Opinion. He concludes
that the Author of the Sibylline Verses was a Christian, who lived in the
Primitive Times, because he asserts the Chiliad. Du Pin Vol. 1. P. 21.

CHAP. VII. Other Reasons proving a particular before the Universal
Resurrection. The Day of Judgment begins with the Millennial Kingdom. Daniel's
Day of Judgment and John's Thousand Years the same. The Thousand Years not
past, but future. The Day of Judgment will be here in less than a Thousand
Years. The Lord Jesus Christ will appear in Person at the Final Destruction of
Antichrist, when the Marriage of the Lamb shall be consummated, and New
Jerusalem come down from Heaven. Which Things will be a Thousand Years before
the ultimate Resurrection and Judgment.
WE have in the preceding Chapter endeavored by clear Testimony of Scripture
to evince that the dead in Christ shall rise a long Time before the universal
Resurrection: We go on to confirm our Assertion by some further Arguments
grounded on Scripture Revelation.

Reas. 5. If the Day of Judgment does begin with the Apocalyptical Chiliad,
then the Resurrection of the Just will be a Thousand Years before the universal
Resurrection. This Proposition none will deny. I assume, But the Day of
Judgment will begin with the Apocalyptical Chiliad. If this be well proved, we
gain all that we contend for. There are Two Arguments for it, which for my own
Par^^ cannot answer, and therefore must believe the First Resurrection to be
Corporal, until I see a clear and solid Answer to them.

Argum. 1. Because Daniel's Day of Judgment, with the universal Kingdom, and
John's Thousand Years are the same. I shall not spend Time to prove that the
7th Chapter of Daniel speaks of Christ's Personal Coming to Judgment. It is
wonderful that any Men of Learning should deny it, and affirm that what is
spoken in that Chapter is already accomplished. But was the Beast given to the
burning Flame at Christ's first Personal Coming? Was the Man of Sin destroyed
Four Hundred Years before he was born? Was the Dominion under the whole Heaven
given to the Saints of the most High at Christ's First Coming, who told his
Disciples that they must expect Sufferings, and not Dominion in this World: Nor
in the Interpretation of others to be admitted, which supposes that Daniel
speaks only of a Vertual Coming of Christ, by the Power and Presence of his
Spirit. Such Expositions are dangerous, inasmuch as they have a Tendency to
weaken the Faith of Men concerning a Fundamental Article in Religion. There is
not a more pregnant and illustrious Place in all the Old Testament to prove
Christ's Personal Coming to Judgment, than that in the 7th of Daniel, when he
shall come with a fiery Stream issuing before him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand Angels waiting on him; i. e. when he shall be revealed from Heaven in
flaming Fire with his mighty Angels, he will come to Judgment. Now this is that
Coming of Christ to receive an universal Kingdom which Daniel speaks of. But
John's Thousand Years is the same with this as appears; 1. In that they begin
at the same Time, s^il. at the Final Destruction of Antichrist. When the Beast
is destroyed, and his Body given to the burning Flame, does Daniel's Day of
Judgment and universal Kingdom begin, Chap. 7. Ver. 10, 11, 26, 27. When the
Beast is cast alive into the Lake of Fire, then does John's Thousand Years
begin, Rev. 19.20. and 20.4. If Daniel's Day of Judgment and John's Thousand
Years both begin with the total Ruin of Antichrist, as we see they do, then
they are the same. 2. They have both the very same Description given to them,
as we shall see if we compare them. Daniel says, I beheld 'till the Thrones
were pitched down. Our English Translation, which is until the Thrones mere
cast down, is not according to the Chaldee Original. The Meaning is, that
Thrones or Seats were placed for the Judges to sit upon. The Hebrew Doctors
say, that one of these Thrones is for the King Messiah to sit upon. There is
mention made of more Thrones than one, because the Saints shall have the Honor
to sit with Christ as Assesso^^ in judging the World. Doubtless our Savior had
Respect to this Text in Daniel, when he said to the Apostles in Matthew. 19.28.
When the Son of Man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, ye shall also sit
upon Twelve Thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. Now whereas Daniel
says, I beheld 'till the Thrones were pitched down, and the Judgment (i. e.
they that were to be Judges) sat: John says, I saw Thrones, and they sat upon
them. Daniel says, Ver. 22. And Judgment (i. e. Power of judging) was given to
the Saints of the most High: John says, And Judgment was given to them. Daniel
says, And the Saints possessed the Kingdom; that is to say, with the Son of
Man who came in the Clouds of Heaven: John says, And they lived and reigned
with Christ a Thousand Years. Who that well considers this can do otherwise
than think that Daniel's Vision of the great Judgment and universal Kingdom of
Christ with his Saints, and John's Vision of the Saints reigning with Christ a
Thousand Years, are one and the same Thing. See Mr. Mede's first Letter to Dr.
Medus. Fol. 932.

Argum. 2. If the Thousand Years are not past, but future, and if the Day of
Judgment will be here within less than th^se Thousand Years, then undoubtedly
the Day of Judgment does begin with the Apocalyptical Chiliad: But both these
are true.

Many Learned Men have thought that the Thousand Years began either at the
Birth or Death of our Savior, or at the Destruction of Jerusalem, or when
Constantine the first Christian Emperor was enthroned. This last Opinion is
followed by many that have wrote on the Apocalypse: But the Reign or Prosperity
of Christians under Constantine continued not a Thousand, nor for more than
Twenty or Thirty Years before unhappy Changes attended them. From the Beginning
to the End of the Millennium Satan is bound, which hitherto he has never been.
If the Devil's Hands have been bound for a Thousand Years, how then has he been
able to strike the Church with such cruel Persecutions? And as much since
Constantine's Time as before. Some say this Ligation of Satan does not imply
his being kept from persecuting the Church, only from being able to deceive the
Nations. But he has deceived the Nations within these Thousand Years last past
as much as ever since the World began. Has he not deceived the Nations by his
Prophet Mahomet? And has he not deceived the Nations by Antichrist? It is
strange that any Man should imagine that Satan has not deceived the Nations
since Antichrist came, when the Apostle says his coming is after the working of
Satan, with lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. And if the Nations have not been deceived since Constantine,
how is it said of the Beast, that he deceives them that dwell on the Earth,
Revel. 13.14. It is said that after the thousand Years are finished Satan must
be loosed a little Season: But according to the mentioned Interpretations, the
Thousand Years were expired Four Hundred Years ago, which is more than a little
Season, compared with a Thousand Years. But why then is not Gog and Magog
destroyed by Fire from Heaven, nor the ultimate Judgment here? which without
doubt it will be within less than Four Hundred Years after the Millennium.

If the Millennial Reign began a Thousand Years ago, then Christ's Reign on
Earth and Antichrist's would be at the very same time, which cannot be. Non
been convenient nec in una sede morantur. There are others who think the
Thousand Years are now current. Cotterius supposes that they began in the Year
1517. Mr. Durham (a worthy Man) makes the Millennium to commence ab anno 1560.
He imagines that the Twelve Hundred and Sixty Days were expired, and that the
seventh Trumpet has been sounding ever since that. He thinks that this Notion
of his will (as he Phraseth it) help to stay the Gadding Expectation of
stupendous things to come. The First Resurrection is with him the same with
Conversion and Regeneration. He would not have us believe that Christ will ever
be on the Earth again, no not at the Day of Judgment. I am apt to think that
Job and he had differing Sentiments as to that particular (see him on Revel.
20. p. 715, 727.) But since the Time he fixes upon, the Witnesses have been in
Sackcloth, and slain also. What Massacres have there been since that? Would Mr.
Durham deny that the Lord's faithful Witness^s in England and Scotland too have
suffered a Civil Death since 1560? Yea sin^e 1660? And very lately in Hungary,
in Piedmont, in France, and in all Popish Dominions the Witnesses have been
slain. If then the Martyrs have Lived and reigned ever since 1560, they have
reigned in Sackcloath and lived in their Graves. And if the Thousand Years
began above an Hundred Years ago, how comes it to pass that Antichrist is yet
living and reigning? The Devil still reigns by his Vicar at Rome; how then has
he been bound for these 130 Years last past? It is therefore a vai^ thing for
us to imagine that the Millennial Reign is begun. Besides, this Interpretation
does concern only the Protestant Churches in the Happiness of the Thousand
Years, when as the Converted Jews, and all the Churches on Earth, shall then be
in a glorious Estate. Let us therefore go on with the second part of the
Argument before us, viz. That the Day of Judgment will be here in less than a
Thousand Years. Most of those whom we dispute against do believe that the
coming of our Lord to Judge the Earth cannot be far off. This is therefore an
Argument ad Hominem no^ to be answered. It has been a commonly received
Opinion, and much is to be said for it, that as the World was Six days in
making, so the Duration if it shall be Six ^^^usand Years. Thus amongst the
Jews do there Masters teach. Thus also Irenaeus Cyprian, nay and Austin himself
who was no Chiliast, and others of the Ancients, and very many of our Modern
Divines. Now the World will quickly be Six Thousand Years Old. According to the
Chronology of the Samaritan Pentateuch, in the Year of Christ 1736. the World
will be just Six Thousand. In that Year also (as Mr. Mede observes) the Twelve
Hundred and Sixty ^ays of the Beast's Reign will expire, reckoning from the
Deposition of Augustu^^^, the last Roman Emperor. Moreover, Antichrist will not
be totally destroyed before Christ's coming to Judgment. It is plain from
Daniel that the Beast, as (...) by the wicked Horn, must continue until the Day
that the World shall be on (...)* And that Horn shall make War with the Saints
until the Ancient of Days comes, ^an. 7.11, 21, 22. And Paul says concerning
the Man of Sin, that the Lord ^aith destroy him with the Brightness of his
coming, 2 These. 2.8. which Expositor^ generally and truly interpret as meant of
his Personal coming to Judgment. And it is clear from Psalm. 1. that the Apostle
there intends no other coming. (...) ver. 3. Antichrist shall not only be cast
into the Lake of Fire, but cast (...) to it, because he is destroyed with the
Fire in which Christ will be revealed from Heaven at the great Day of his
Second Appearance. Is not Antichrist Comprehended under that God of whom
Ezekiel has Prophesied, that the Lord shall rain upon him great Hailstones,
Fire and Brimstone, Ezekiel. 38.22. viz. at the Battle of Armageddon, When the
Lord with his Mighty Ones shall come down and ^it to Judge the Nations, Revel.
16.16. with Joel 3.12, 13, 14. When the Time of Antichrist's Reign is ended,
who must reign next? Most certainly Christ and his Saints. Tythonius (who
Flourished Anno Dom. 380.) in his Homilies on the Apocalypse (which are falsely
ascribed to Austin) has these Words in Apoc. 20.4. Retulit Spiritum cum haec
scriberit, regnaturam Ecclesiam mill Annis in hoc seculo usque ad finem mundi.
V. August. Operum Tom. 9. Hom. 16. Now the Time, (...) and half a Time allotted
to Antichrist are well nigh expired. They that begin his Reign latest confess
that he was to be seen in the Year Six Hundred and Six. The Truth is, he was
then a Man above an Hundred Years Old. But suppose him to be ^ewly born then,
he cannot live longer than the Year 1866. Therefore the coming of Christ to
Judgment will be here in much less than a Thousand Years. And then in as much
as the Apocalyptical Chiliad is not past but future, it follows undeniably that
the Millennial Reign falls within the compass of the Day of Judgment, and
consequently that there shall be a Resurrection of the Just, antecedaneous to
the Universal Resurrection. But thus for the Fifth Reason. I shall add but one
more.

Reason. 6. The Lord Jesus will no sooner come in Person from Heaven into this
Visible World, but there (...) be a Resurrection of the Just. For this the
Scriptures are clear, nor is there any Controversy about it. 1 Cor. 15.21. 1
These. 3.13. (...) our Lord will appear the Second ^ime unto Salvation, long
before the Resurrection of the Wicked. It was showed but now, that Antichrist
will not be finally and totally destroyed before the Coming of the Lord. But
Antichrist will be totally destroyed a Thousand Years before the Universal
Resurrection, We read of the Beast and False Prophet being cast alive into the
Lake of Fire, before any thing is spoken of the Millennial Reign; and at the
End of the Thousand Ye^r^, when Gog and Magog, and the Devil that deceived
them, are cast into the Lake of Fire, they find the Beast and False Prophet
there, Revel. 20.10. So that they had been dead and in Hell during all the
Thousand Years. I confess this was one of the first Arguments which did above
Twenty Years since induce me to believe a particular Resurrection at the
beginning of the Thousand Years; I could never answer it, I saw clearly by what
is spoken by Daniel and Paul, as well as by John, in the Revelation, that at
the Final Destruction of Antichrist there will be a Personal Coming of Christ,
and that the World will then be on a light Fire. And I saw that after this
Perdition of the Man of Sin, there shall be a Glorious Reign of the Saints on
Earth.

If after the Total and Final Ruin of Antichrist, the Church of God shall have
a Glorious time on Earth, before the Universal Judgment of all Mankind: And of
the Final ruin of Antichrist is not to be expected before the coming of Christ
in the Clouds of Heaven, all that we argue for must needs be granted; Both the
Premises does the Scripture clearly assert.

Yet further to prove that Christ's next Personal Coming will be a long time
before the Wicked shall rise, I argue thus.

When the Marriage of the Lamb is consummated, Christ appears in Person* Mat.
25.6. but this will be a long time before the Universal Resurrection: For it is
as soon as New Jerusalem comes down from Heaven, Revel. 21.9, 10. When as
New-Ierusalem descends from Heaven a long time before the General Judgment:
Which is manifest in that there are Nations Healed after that, and in that
there are Saved Nations which walk in the Light thereof, and Kings that bring
their Glory to it. All which must needs be before, and not after the Ultimate
Judgment: Nor will there then be any building of Houses or Planting of
Vineyards in any part of the Earth; which things the Apostle Peter says are to
be expected in the New-Earth which God will Create, and of which all the
Prophets have spoken, 2 Pet. 3.13. compared with Isai. 65.21. Irenaeus, (p.
502.) says that without Controversy these things will he fulfilled at the
Resurrection of the Just, when they shall Reign on the Earth. Mr. Brightman
perceiving that the New Jerusalem intends a State of the Church on Earth, and
not in Heaven only, that so he might decline a Literal Sense of the first
Resurrection, makes the Second Resurrection to be Mystical. And whereas it is
said, the Dead, small and great, stood before God, and the Books were opened,
he supposes the meaning to be, that all the Jews that belong to Election,
would then he Converted. And Whereas it is said again, the Sea gave up the Dead
which was in it, he says, the Sea notes Corrupt Doctrines, and that therefore
the Words imply, that the Jews who live in Spain and Italy, and in other Popish
Countries shall be called. But if Men allow themselves this Liberty of
Allegorizing, we may at last Allegorize Religion into nothing but Fancy, and
say that the Resurrection is past already. How much safer is it to keep to the
Letter of Scripture, when for us so to do is consistent with the Analogy of
Faith?

CHAP. VIII. Objections answered. That the Judgment described in Daniel and
Matthew, alludes to the Synedrium. That Jews as well as Chistians have believed
not only a Day of Judgment, but that it should continue a Thousand Years. That
there will be two Con^lagrations. The first beginning with the Thousand Years
not Universal. Gog and Magog will arise out of some of the Nations that shall
escape the Conflagration. Conjectures about the Americans. Dr. Twiss his
Opinion of Mr. Mede. That notwithstanding the Glorious Presence of Christ in
the New-Jerusalem, it is not impossible for Gog and Magog to make an
Insurrection against the Camp of the Saints. The Conclusion.
THE Design of the former part of this Dissertation is to handle the
Controversy under Debate ((...)) only in a defensive Way, and I have therefore
but touched, and not enlarged on the Arguments that prove a future Conversion
of the Israelitish Nation. In this last part, which concerns the first
Resurrection, to begin with the Millennium, I once purposed to consider the
Question ((...)) and only by positive Reasons to confirm what I believe is
Truth. But I perceive it will be needful to endeavor the Removal of some
Objections which detain many sober Minds from the embracing of such a Paradox
as that which we have been laboring to evince.

I. It has been objected that Matthew. 25. speaks of the Righteous and the Wicked
being Judged together; the one being set on the Right hand and the other on the
Left hand of Christ the Judge. To which I answer,

That it is evident that the Sentence of Absolution will be passed on the
Righteous before the Sentence of Condemnation on the Wicked. When it is said,
he shall set the Sheep on the Right hand, but the Goats on the Left, the
meaning is, that the Sheep shall be acquitted, but (...) Goats condemned. Both
the 25 th Chapter of Matthew and the 7 th of Daniel ^^^ude to the Synedrium, or
great Sessions of the Judges in Israel. That Supreme Court of Judicature in
which Cases of Life and Death were tried (which Court was always held at
Jerusalem, thence was it said, that it cannot be that a Prophet perish out of
Jerusalem, Luke 13.33.) the Jews call Beth din haggadol, the great House of
Judgment. This Court was first erected by Moses, according to Divi^^ Direction.
It did consist of Seventy Elders besides the Nasi. i. e. the Prince or
President of the Court. The most Aged or Venerable of the Judges was
Vice President, he was called Ab-beth-din, the Father of the House of Judgment.
This helps to understand that Expression of the Ancient of Days in the 7th of
Daniel. These Judges sat semicircle wise: The Nasi, or President, in the
midst of them, the Father of the Consistory, or Vice President, next to him on
his Right Hand. This gives Light to the Expression of sitting on the right Hand
of Power, Mark 14.62. There were Two Scribes belonging to this House of the
great Judgment; the one of which sat on the Right Hand, he took the Votes for
Absolution; the other on the Left Hand, who took the Votes for Condemnation.
Unto this (I say) the 25th of Matthew and the 7th of Daniel have Respect. Now
why may we not believe, that at the great Assize, when all Mankind shall be
brought before the Judge, the Righteous shall have the Sentence of Absolution
passed on them in the Morning of that great and long Day; but the Wicked
receive their Sentence of Condemnation in the after Part, or Evening of the
Day? And why may not the Mill Anni caelestis imperii, (as Lactantius's
Expression is,) why may not the Thousand Years Reign be the setting of the
righteous at the Right Hand of him who is the Ancient of Days, the chief Judge
to whom it belongs to pronounce the Sentence, and who will sentence to the
Second Death all whose Names are not written in the Book of Life after the
universal Resurrection? These, when they shall be brought out of their Graves
shall find the Judge and his Saints with him sitting upon Thrones of Glory.
They that would see more of the Synedrium, unto which the Scriptures mentioned
have (as I said) a Reference, may consult Godwin, Seldom, Cunaeus, and Hoffman
in his Lexicon universal. Also my learned Friend (whom for Honor's Sake I
mention) D. Leusden, Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of
Utrecht, has written De Synedriis Iudaeorum in plilo^. Hebraea mixed.
Dissertation 46.

2. It is by some objected that there is no mention of a Thousand Years any
where in all the Scripture, except in one Place, when as, if so momentous ^
Truth as that contended for, were intended thereby, it would be oftener spoken
of than once. But far be it from us to reject a Scripture Truth because it is
but (...), once in express Terms mentioned. There are many weighty Truths of
which this is to be affirmed. The Messiah his being to be born of a Virgin, and
at Bethlehem, and that he was to come within so many Years, these Things were
but once mentioned by the Prophets. That particular Resurrection which was at
the Time of our Lord's Resurrection, is spoken of by only one of the
Evangelists. Many Historical Passages in Luke's Gospel are no where else
mentioned, but that is Ground sufficient for our Faith to build upon. But as
for the Thousand Years, they are mentioned no less than Six Times (sometime
with, and sometime without an Article in the Greek Original) in one Chapter. I
cannot think that the Holy Spirit by the Apostle John would so inculcate, and
insist upon it, if there were not a greater and a more glorious Mystery
contained therein than the vulgar Interpretation does allow of. Moreover, it
seems to me that another Apostle mentions the Thousand Years, as concurring
with the Day of Judgment: For Peter calls the Day of Judgment, the Day of God,
and the Day of the Lord. He also says, that one Day is with the Lord as a
Thousand Years, and (...) Thousand Years as one Day, 2 Pet. 3.8, 9, 10, 12. The
ancient Jews did believe the Day of Judgment would continue a Thousand Years.
It is a celebrated Saying among them when they speak of the Day of Judgment,
that one Day of the Holy Blessed God, is a Thousand Years. Peter seems to say
the same. Hence it was that some old Antimillinaries would not own the Second
Epistle of Peter to be Canonical S^ripture; because they thought the Writer of
that Epistle was a Chiliast, as Mr. Mede has observed Folio 756. The Jews
cannot endure to read the New Testament; nevertheless, some of them are
affected with the Book of Revelation, for therein they find Mystical Numbers,
such as 666, and 42 Months, Three Days and a half, etc. which they are
delighted with, and they are taken with John's Description of the New
Jerusalem, and the Allusions which are throughout the whole Book to Things
which they are acquainted with is pleasing to them: And in particular, a
Thousand Years glorious Reign with the Messiah, and that after the Resurrection
of the Righteous, and before the Resurrection of the Wicked, is a Mystery which
the Hebrew Doctors have not been altogether unacquainted with; having (no
doubt) received that Notion, as well as that of the Day of Judgment, by
Tradition from their Fathers, who had them from the Prophets. For when these
Things shall come to pass, in the Days of the Seventh Apocalyptical Trumpet,
they are the Mystery of God which he has declared to his Servants the Prophets.
It may give Light into the Subject before us to cite some Testimonies out of
Jewish Authors; and let Men call what we plead for a Jewish Opinion, if they
please. Maimonides, who is accounted one of the wisest and soberest Writers
amongst the Jews since their last fatal Dispersion in Tract. Saned. cap. 10.
says that Their wise Men are of the Belief that the Kingdom of the Messiah
shall continue for a thousand Years. In Talmud Babylon. Cap. Helek. Aruck is
brought in as speaking their Sense of these Matters, viz. That the Righteous
ones whom God shall raise from the dead, shall no more (...) to the Dust, but
those Thousand Years, in which the Holy Blessed God shall renew the World, he
will give them Wings of an Eagle. This he speaks as a Thing known and
undeniable. And R. E^^^zer says, The Days of the Messiah are a Thousand Years.
They say, that when the Righteous are restored to Life, and when Gog is
destroyed (by that Gog, the Turk who is the Eastern Antichrist, must be meant)
then will be the (...) the glorious World to come. See* Dr. Lightfoot. Vol. 1.
p. 354. In few Words, there are of their Rabbis who say, the glorious Reign of
Messiah and of the House of David will begin when the World is Six Thousand
Years old, which Reign some of them reckon as belonging to this World, but
others call it the World to come. That this Reign will continue until the
Seventh Thousand Year from the Creation, when will be the universal
Resurrection and last Judgment. They that would see more Rabbinical Notions may
find them in Grellot's Prodromus in Apoc cap. 20. I shall only add here, that
it is no Heresy to believe that some Circumstances relating to the Day of
Judgment were not revealed so fully before as since the Ascension of our Lord,
who has taken the Book out of the Right Hand of him that sits on the Throne,
and has made these Things known to John, the last of the Apostles, so far as is
needful, for the Edification and Consolation of his Church.

3. Another Objection is that at the Day of Judgment the Conflagration will
destroy all the wicked on the Earth, and then how shall there be Enemies, viz.
Gog and Magog to make an Attempt on the Camp of the Saints after the Thousand
Years are expired? To this some have answered, that we may suppose that the
Living Saints who shall be all changed at the Lord's Coming, will not be put
into a State in respect of Immortality, equal with the Angels, as the Saints of
the First Resurrection shall be; but the Change they shall undergo will make
them like Adam in Paradise; that they shall eat and drink and the like, as Adam
should if he had not sinned; that these shall be instructed and ruled by the
Saints of the New Jerusalem, who shall then be Priests and Kings. Thus Irenaeus
Lib. 5. Cap. 35. and Lactantius Lib. 7. C. 24. The Hebrew Doctors are of
Opinion, that in the Days of the Messiah Men shall live as long as the
Patriarchs did before the Flood. They suppose the Meaning of that Text Isa.
65.20. The Child shall die an Hundred Years old, to be, that one who is but an
Hundred Years old will be counted a Child, because of the great Longevity of
Men in those Days. But the Scripture seems to intimate that the Saints found
alive at the Lord's Coming shall in a Moment be made incorruptible, like those
raised from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.50, 51, 52. Wherefore there is another Answer
which seems to some (though for my own Part I am not so fully satisfied in that
Notion of the Saints being made incorruptible at the Beginning of the Thousand
Years) a clearer Solution of what has been objected. It is this; the Scripture
gives us to understand that there will be Two Conflagrations, as well as Two
Resurrections, the first at the Beginning, and the last at the End of the
Thousand Years. As for the first Conflagration, not only the Living Saints, but
whole Nations besides shall escape that Destruction, out of which Nations will
Gog and Magog arise. Lactantius says, that when the Thousand Years begin, though
Antichrist shall be destroyed, yet that the Nations shall not be wholly
extinguished, but Quadam relinquentur ut triumphantur a justis, etc. Some will
remain for the Righteous to reign over. And the Scripture speaks expressly of
the Nations of them which are saved, Rev. 21.24. that is to say, who are saved
from that Fire, which the Beast and False Prophet are cast alive into; who are
saved from that Burning which shall be when the Beast is slain, and his Body
given to the burning Flame. A great Interpreter conceives that the Words have
Respect to the 66th of Isaiah, where the Prophet speaks of the Time when the
Lord will plead with all (...) Fire, and the slain of the Lord shall be many:
Yet then will be the Day in which all Flesh shall come to worship before the
Lord, and they shall go forth, i. e. go forth out of their Graves, and look
upon the C^^casses of them whose Wor^ (...) neither shall their Fire be
quenched, Ver. 23, 24. This is the Case of those that are cast alive into the
Lake of Fire. Nevertheless it is said, that at this Time some shall escape,
Ver. 19. I will send those that escape of them: In the Septuagint it is (...),
i. e. the saved ones of them; or it may be that Text in the Revelation alludes
to Isaiah 45.20. They that are escaped (or as the Seventy have it) that are
s^^ed of the Nations; meaning those that should survive the destroying
Judgments which should come on Idolaters. The Prophet there speaks of a
universal Conversion of the Nations, which nevertheless the Apostle Paul shows
will be fulfilled after that the Day of Judgment shall begin, Romans 14.11. No
Man supposes that there will be any Conversion at the ultimate Judgment. He
that is unjust then shall be unjust still: But after the Conflagration (which
begins with the Judgment on Antichrist) there will be a most glorious
Conversion of all the Nations on the Earth, which shall escape that Deluge of
Fire. And this well agrees with Daniel's Intimation, that after some shall
awake out of the Dust of the Earth unto everlasting Life (...) shall be turned
to Righteousness, Dan. 12.2, 3. When God's appointed Time is come for the
Burning of the World, the Fire will doubtless begin in one Part of the Earth
first, as it was when the World was drowned; and the Scripture does clearly
intimate that Italy will be the Place, for there the Beast has his Seat. Dr.
Cressener (a late judicious Writer) inclines to think that after the burning of
the Body of the Beast, there will remain a considerable Part of the Earth
entire and inhabited; that the Christian Church shall not only continue, but
increase, after the particular Conflagration of the Roman Territories; because
it is said, the rest of the Beasts had their Lives prolonged for a season, Dan
7.12. So that it should seem, that the Babylonian, Persian and Grecian Kingdoms
represented by the Three First Beasts, were not destroyed by Fire, as the Roman
Territories represented by the Fourth Beast, are described to be; but that
Greece and Asia shall continue inhabited after the Burning of the Western Part
of the Roman Empire. He also supposes that when that Part of the Earth shall
continue in Flames, this partial Conflagration will be a Means of keeping
Christians in a more strict Obedience, yea and of converting the Heathen
Nations in all Parts of the World. Thus does that learned and worthy Person
conjecture. His Argument would be demonstrative, if it were certain that the
Prolongati^^ of Life for a Season and Time, which is mentioned in Daniel
concerning the rest of the Beasts, were to be understood of a Life granted to
them after the Fourth Beast (or Kingdom on Earth) is slain and given to the
Burning. Mr. Mede chooses to read the Word in the singular Number, the Remainder
of the Beast, and then the Sense is, that not the Body only, or People of the
Beast's Dominions were destroyed, but the Ten Horns and the wicked Horn (which
are the Remainder of the Beast) had their Dominion taken away; yet the
Prolongation of Life was given to them for a Season and Time, viz. until the
Time when the Son of Man shall come in the Clouds of Heaven. But if we construe
the Words plurally, and by the rest of the Beasts understand the Three First
Monarchies, the Meaning may be, that they lost their Dominion after they had
successively for a Time ruled the World: But then the Fourth Beast differed
from them in this, that he was destroyed by Fire from Heaven, which they were
not: So that this Text in Daniel does not necessitate us to believe that the
Conflagration will be so particular, or that only the Western Part of the Roman
Empire shall fall under it.

Others are of Opinion that the one half of the Earth will be consumed by the
First Conflagration, which begins with the Thousand Years, viz. That Hemisphere
which is spoken of in the Scripture. As for the New World, which is now well
known and called by the Name of America (though there is more Reason to call it
by the Name of Columbina, as Mr. Nich. Fuller well observes in Missel. p. 172.)
in Honor to the first European Discoverer; it was not known in the Days in
which the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures lived. Those Parts of the Earth which
do not include America are in Scripture Dialect all the World, Luke 2.1. Acts
11.28. Col. 1.23. The late Opinion of Torniellus and P^gius that the Apostles
preached the Gospel in America is a groundless. Imagination, and it is solidly
refuted by ^asuagius in Exercitat. Historic. critic. p. 524, etc. It is certain
that the American Hemisphere was unknown to the Ancients a long Time after the
Apostles Days: Nay, the Notion of Antipodes was as incred^ble to them as the
Earth's Motion is to some in these Days. I remember one of them derides that
Opinion; he says, they are idle Men who think there are Inhabitants in the
opposite Part of the Earth, for then (says he) they must walk with their Feet
superior to their Heads, and Trees would grow downwards, and the T^^es would
grow downwards, and the Rain fall upwards. And Austin calls it a Fable, and
says, it is nulla ratione credendum, that it is in no wise to be believed that
there are Men on the other Side of the Earth, walking with their Feet against
ours. It is famously known that Pope Zechary, Anno 748. excommunicated a poor
Presbyter, whose Name was Virgilius, for maintaining that there were Antipodes;
that is, for saying there are Men in America. So then for many Ages after the
Penmen of the Holy Scriptues were dead, America was an unknown World. And
whether there were then any Inhabitants in that Hemisphere is uncertain. But
Asia, Africa and Europe were the Stage on which the Four Monarchies acted their
Parts. All those Parts of the Earth are spoken of in that one Scripture, Isa.
66.19. Mr. Mede conjectures not only that the American Hemisphere will escape
the Conflagration, but the People there will not be concerned in the
Blessedness of the renovated World, during the Thousand Years, and that Gog and
Magog will come from thence; that the Devil will suggest to them, Your World is
a miserable World compared with that on the other Side of the E^rth: You die
and never rise again, but they on the other Hemisphere live again after they die,
and ^re an happy People: Do you invade their Land, and you shall be like them,
you shall be like the Gods, like the Immortal Ones that are there. He says the
Americans may well be expressed by the Name of Magog, if Fuller's Conjecture be
true, scil. That they are originally Scythians. The East-Indians (especially
the Scythians in China) and the West-Indians do exactly resemble each other, as
if they were of the same Original. And if the Scythians are spread abroad into
both Indies, Noah's Prophecy concerning the Enlargement of Japhet's Tents is
wondrously fulfilled. It is not easy to demonstrate who were the Aborigines in
the American World, which made Peter Cotton the Jesuit (as Thuanus from his own
Hand Writing reports of him) to go to Conjuring that so he might find it out.
Grotius his Conceit that the Americans were originally Norwegians, is
sufficiently confuted by Hornius in his Elaborate Discourse De origin Gentium
Americanarum. Lerius, Comtaeus and Bochart have given probable Arguments to
prove that some of the first Americans were Phaenicians of the Posterity of
Cham. This is also confirmed by Hornbeck, de Conversions Indorum, and by
Hornius, who makes it no less probable that others of them are Scythians, who
are indisputably the Posterity of Magog. Nor is it necessary that the
Apo^^liptical Gog and Magog should be the Natural Progeny of them mentioned in
the Scripture: It is enough if they be like them in respect of Enmity and
Hostility to the Church of God: However, Mr. Mede's Conjecture is ingenious,
and may probably prove true. Dr. Twiss was much taken with Mr. ^ede's Notions,
he says in one of his Letters to him, I profess you have strange Conceits, I
mean for the Worthiness of them, they possess me with Admiration. And in
another, Your Letters, your Conjectures, your Meditations are the greatest
Jewels my Study contains. He says that when he communicated some of them to Mr.
White (once a famous Minister in Dorchester) and to Mr. Thatcher of Sarisbury,
they were ravished with them. In another of his Letters he has these Words, I
protest unto you, if I should lie in Prison all the Days of my Life, next to
the Consolations of God's Spirit, your Writings would most refresh me. That
judicious Doctor does particularly applaud Mr. Mede's Conjecture about Gog and
Magog. It is more like Truth than that of Dr. Homes, who supposes a new
Covenant of Works; and more rational than the extravagant Fancy of a late
learned Writer, who concluding (...) the Conflagration at the Beginning of the
Thousand Years will be general, (destroying the whole Earth and all living
Creatures therein) thinks that the New Earth will of it self produce, not only
other Animals, but Men. There are many who have asserted an Equivocal
Generation of Serpents and Vermin, (though that be denied by the best
Philosophers) but an equivocal Generation not only of perfect Animals, but of
Men with rational Souls is a Notion never heard of in the World before. And yet
it may be not less Heretical than that of a Pythagorean Metempsychosis, or
Revolution of Souls, asserted by the same Author. And not altogether so
irreligious as his profane Attempt discovered in another Book; where he
endeavors to make the World to believe that the History of Adam's Fall
described by Moses is a mere Allegory, or Fable; for which his daring Impiety,
a late judicious and worthy Writer, Dr. John Edwards has with just Indignation
rebuked him. But I pass from this.

4. It is objected, If New-Jerusalem do consist of raised Immortal Saints, How
shall they that are in a State of Mortality be able without Fear to converse
with such Glorious Persons, and how shall Gog and Magog adventure to besiege
them? The Devil and his Angels might as well adventure to Besiege Heaven. Is it
credible that during the Time of Judgment, there can be Heart in any Creature
to attempt such an Undertaking against Christ and his Saints, as this of Magog
is? As for the first part of the Objection, it is answered without any
difficulty. How was Abraham and Lot able to converse with the Angels who came
to instruct them? How were three of the Disciples able to converse with Moses
and Elias when Christ was transfigured in the Holy Mount, in which there was a
Glimpse and Representation of this Glorious Kingdom, and of the Communion which
shall then be between Saints Mortal and Immortal: As for the latter Part of the
Objection, the Answer which Dr. Twiss gives is this, True, if Gog and Magog
knew the Condition of New-Jerusalem so well as the Devil and his Angels know
the Condition of Heaven. The Devil will deceive them, as he did our first
Parents, and make them believe that they may without Danger follow his
Suggestions. But if we suppose them to be acquainted with the Glory of the
New-Ierusalem, which is only the Metropolis of the New World, the Camp of the
Saints, upon whom the Attach does immediately fall, are in a less Glorious
Estate. It will doubtless be a great Hardiness in Gog and Magog to engage in so
desperate an Attempt: But how often have Sinners, when left to themselves, not
acted like rational Creatures? Some have thought that the Apostate Angels did
first Sin in Heaven; I am not of that Opinion, for Heaven is a Place that was
never defiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. But for certain those Angels were once in Heaven,
that was their first and proper Habitation. They saw the Infinite Power of God;
they were by, and looked on when He made this Earth, and shouted for Joy, Job
38.7. And after that, they saw him Create the Sun and Moon, and all the Stars
in Heaven. They could not but know that the Eternal Power was able to destroy
them in a Moment; yet these mutable Beings left to themselves, begin a War
against Heaven. Is it then impossible that Gog and Magog should do the like,
when the Devil is in them?

Mr. William Alleine in his Discourse of the New-Heavens and New-Earth, p. 123.
reasons well, that the Power of Sin is so great as that it will make Men hazard
their Lives to fulfill their Lusts. The Officers who apprehended the Lord Jesus
Christ, notwithstanding He did at that very Time discover his Divine Power
before their Eyes, were so hardened as to go on with their Design, John 18.6.
Luke 22.51. What Miracles did Pharaoh and the Egyptians see? Nevertheless they
would venture to follow the Children of Israel into the Red Sea, although they
knew that the drying up the Sea was a Miraculous Thing, done by the Lord for
the Salvation of his People. No doubt but the Amalekites did hear of this, and
that Pharaoh and all his Host were drowned in that Sea, yet they would venture
to come and fight against the Camp of the Saints, though they knew God was among
them. Balaam knew that God was with them, and that there was great rejoicing
amongst the Children of Israel, because they had Him as King in the midst of
them, Numb. 23.21. He knew that Israel should Eat up the Nations, his Enemies.
For all this he did them all the Mischief in his Power, and gave Devilish
Advice to Balak tending to the ruin of That People. Is it then impossible that
Magog should, by the Instigation of Satan, attempt a War against the Saints of
God, though he should hear that Christ is amongst them and Reigning over them,
and that the Name of that Glorious Church is, The Lord is there? The Children
of Israel whilst in the Wilderness, Lived by Continual Miracles; the Pillar of
Cloud by Day, and of Fire by Night, was a standing Miraculous Demonstration of
the Presence of God. The Manna was Angel's Food; They saw by Ocular
Demonstration, in respect of the Effects thereof, that Immortal Invisible
Agents were amongst them every Day. The Hebrew Doctors say (as Buxtorf in his
Dissertation of the Manna has shown) that the greatest Miracle that ever was
wrought for their Father was that of the Manna wherewith they were sustained.
And how often did the Lord visibly appear to them? Deuteronomy. 31.15. Yet how did the
Hypocrites in that Church rise up in Rebellion against God, notwithstanding
these Miracles? Why then should it be thought impossible that God and Magog
should compass about the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City, with an ill
Design, (which yet shall signify no more than the Men of Sodon their besetting
Lot's House when the Angels were in it) supposing Risen and Immortal Men to be
in the midst of them.

As for that Opinion of Christ's Personal Presence and Residence in the midst
of the New-Jerusalem, during the Thousand Years, I do not assert it. I believe
He will appear when the thousand Years begin: Yet I know not, but in that World
to come, He may be seen ascending and descending at his Pleasure, all the
Angels of Heaven waiting on Him. This great thing, this glorious Sight shall
Nathanael, and all such Israelites as he was, be blessed with, Ioh. 1.50.51.
The Saints on Earth may have a glorious Vision of Christ in Heaven at the Right
Hand of God, when Heaven shall be opened, and they shall have the same Sight
that Stephen had Acts 7.55.56. We may not reject a Truth, which as to the
Substance of it is revealed, because we are in the Dark as to many
Circumstances attending it. The Patriarchs and Prophets had the first coming of
Christ discovered to them. They knew that the Eternal Son of God should be
Incarnate, and that he should die for the Salvation of Men; Nevertheless, many
Circumstances attending that coming of the Lord, they did not discern with that
Clearness as is in (...) Gospel revealed. The Prophets themselves searched into
the meaning of th^se (...) they were ins^^^ed to declare, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. The
like to this is (...) be (...) of our Knowledge respecting the Invisible World.
We know that the (...) of departed Saints are in Bliss; we know that they are
praising and (...) God; but unquestionably those Holy Souls have Employments
which we know not of; nor shall we as long as we abide in Flesh, 2 (...). 12.4.
The (...) to be said with reference to the Day of Judgment, and the
Resurrection-World. Mr. Baxter, in his Book concerning the Kingdom of Christ,
(p. 71, 72.) (...) these Words. Concerning the New-Earth, we must content our
selve: with what God has revealed, and not search into unrevealed things. It is
(...) that i^ will be a Restitution of all things; that in it shall dwell
Righteousness, that it will be a Par^dise state; that Christ shall reign over
it, that (...) Glorified saints shall lose any of the^^ part in Heaven by it:
It will be a state of Communion; Angels and Men will (...) familiar Converse,
Christ shall be joyfully known amongst the^^ as their (...) King. Neither
Christ nor the Saints will lay by their Humane Nature, or Body, but their
Bodies will be so far refined as shall be suitable to the Condition of the New
refined World. All this Mr. Baxter says is certain: I fully concur with him*
(...) in what he mentions as certain of Gog and Magog, I cannot go along with
him, nor in some Particulars which he speaks of as uncertain; but with his
Fourth Particular I consent. His words are these, It is uncertain whether there
shall be any stated, visible Presence of Christ here, or that only he shall
appear as in Heaven, as the Sun does by it is Light; or only sometimes be seen
as he was after his Resurrection. His concluding Words are; If by Faith in
Christ God dwell in us by Love, and we in Him, and we have in us that Kingdom
of Grace, we shall have our part in the future Kingdom, though we understand not
many Difficulties about it. A (...) Conclusion.

The Objection about the Insurrection of Gog and Magog is of all the most
difficult to be solved: I pretermit the odd Notion of a late French Author,
viz. Pier Poiret, in his Book which bears the Title of Le Aeconomi^ Divine,
T^m. ^. Chap. 15. p. 469. who supposes that by Gog and Magog, the Devil and
(...) Souls are intended, which he thinks will be all let loose out of Hell at
the (...) of the Thousand Years, to make a Furious, though a fruitless Attempt
(...) Glorified Saints of the New-Ierusalem. This Fancy of his is new and
singular, and I suppose will not be received by many. It is certain that the
Universal Resurrection will be after the Magogical War; nor is it credible that
that War will be undertaken by none but unbodied Spirits.

Thus have I with as much Brevity and Perspecuity as I could, declared my
Sentiments with my Reasons: Nor do I maintain any thing but what the primitive
Doctors and Martyrs did Believe and Teach, as also very (...) Eminent Divines
(both Con-formists and Non-conformists) in this Last (...) wherein the Truth
relating to these Mysteri^^ has b^^n more abundan^^^ en^^^ed into.

I know many Worthy Men are of a differing Opinion. A late Learned Author has
well observed, that not only the discovery of Truth, but to believe it (...)
found out by others, is the Gift of God. All Good Men will be of the (...)
Judgment in Tempori^u^ Regni ((...) often (...) the Thousand Years) When they
meet in the Glorious Kingdom of Christ. Then (and not, till then) we shall all
come into the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God; Which
day, which Kingdom, let it come quickly, and it will come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge ^. Line 32. read Bucholtzer. P. 5. l. ult. read Barabbas. P. 6. l. 4.
read Nantes. P. 7. l. 50. read tramitem. P. 9. l. 50. read Consequence. P. 11.
l. 18. read Witsius. P. 26. l. 12. their. P. 28. l. 16. read (...). P. 34. l.
36. read Gog and Magog.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Nath. Hiller, at the Prince's Arms in
Leaden-Hall-street, over against St. Mary-A^e, London.
SEven Select Sermons upon some common, but woeful Distempers wherein Men
gratify the grand Enemy of their Salvation; and upon the Remedies of those
Distempers; by the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather, by a singular Providence of God
preserved from the Hands of the French, whereinto they were fallen, and now
published by an English Gentleman who providentially light upon them.

A Learned and Accurate Discourse, concerning the Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that
Guilt, and Prayer for that Pardon. Written some Years since by the Reverend Mr.
Thomas Gilbert, Minister of the Gospel, lately deceased at Oxford.

A Sinner's Justification: Or, the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord our
Righteousness: Delivered in several Sermons by Obadiah Grew, D. D. late
Minister of the Gospel in Coventry. The Second Edition.

A New Edition of the Figures or Types of the Old Testament, by which Christ
and the Heavenly Things of the Gospel were Preached and Shadowed to the People
of God of Old, explained and improved in sundry Sermons. By Mr. Samuel Mather,
sometime Pastor of a Church in Dublin. To which is added (more than was in the
former Edition) a large Table, and a Scheme of the whole Work.

This last Book to be had also at Mr. Joseph Hillier's of Boston in
New England. Price bound 7 s. In Quires 6 s.


