AN ALARM SOUNDED To PREPARE The Inhabitants of the World To Meet the LORD IN
THE Way of his Judgments.

By Bath. Bowers.

Dan. xii. V. 1, 10. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince,
which stands for the Children of thy People, and there shall be a time of
Trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time;
and at that time thy People shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the Book.

Many shall be purified and made White, and tried, but the Wicked shall do
wickedly; and none of the Wicked shall understand, but the Wise shall
understand.

Friendly Reader;
THere are two things which I shall offer by way of Preface. First, Concerning
my meeting with Repulses in my proceeding to Print. 2 dly, As to the smallness
of what I shall print.

As to the first, viz. my being repulsed at the beginning of my proceeding, I
must confess it made a very profound and ungrateful Impression upon me, and
made me weep before the Lord, and lament after this manner, Oh, that God would
take away my Life from me! Oh, that I might have my Request, even to dye! And
being full freight with Reasonings, it made me argue after this manner, O Lord!
if indeed thou be the Author of this my Concern, and thy Power is strong above
every power of the Enemy, Why am I thus disappointed, rejected and contemned?
But after a time my Spirit was brought under the Moderation of the Cool of the
Day, and then I saw, that God, for Reasons known to himself, does suffer the
Blasphemies, Revilings and bitter Reproachings of the basest of Men, and by
that we are taught not to exalt our selves above our Lord and Master. And
further, the matter was cleared up to me, from those Scriptures, 1 Kings 20.35.
it is said, A certain Man of the Sons of the Prophets, said unto his Neighbor,
in the Word of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee; and the Man refused to smite
him, etc. And in Judges 20.18. it is further said, And the men of Israel arose,
and went up to the House of God, and asked Counsel of God, and said, Which of
us shall go up first to the Battle? [Pray observe] And the Lord said, Judah
shall go up first. And I don't find that we have any reason to suspect but all
this proceeding was from the Lord, nevertheless, the ensuing Relation informs
us, that they were twice worsted before their Enemies. And I think this may be
sufficient to silence all the Reasonings of men in that kind, as it did mine.

2 dly, As to the Compendiousness of what I shall publish in print, I have this
to say, viz. That it is best known to my self how long I labored under a
reluctance, and how very unwilling I was to appear in print at all; for it was,
indeed, a secret terror to me to think of making a contemptible appearance in
the world, being apprehensive nothing would render me more so, than if my
Offering was small, though in the opening of the Seals of the Mysteries of the
Kingdom; I was taught, that it was the little Oil that filled all the empty
Vessels, the little Seed whose product out-flowrisht all Seeds, and the little
Leven that levened all the whole Lump, and the little Stone that became the
great Mountain, and filled all the whole Earth And I think its very worthy of
observation, that at the opening of the seventh Seal, there was silence in
heaven. But notwithstanding all this, I knew full well, that to make but a
small or little appearance in any respect whatsoever was nautious, hateful and
very ungrateful in the eye of the world. And further, I considered, that at
this time the world is full of Preaching and Praying, Writing and Printing, and
it would seem but a very insignificant thing for me to step in among the Crowd
with that which would look like adding another Drop to the great Ocean, etc. I
should have been willing to have gone forth in the way which I would have
chose, but the way which, I saw, I was like to be concerned in, did not please
me at all, because I found, that to deliver any thing contrary to the vulgar
received Opinions, was rather the Object of Scorn and Ridicule, than the
subject of sober Consideration. All these things, and many more considered, has
made me very backward and remiss in bringing any of my Works to view; but as
Overturns, Overturns, Overturns are to happen, till he comes to reign whose
Right it is; so my potent Enemy [ Ambition] whilst I fled before it, was a
firey Serpent, with a deadly sting, but having been often forced to turn upon
it, the formidable Monster is become tame, that I can take it by the Tail; and
blessed be the God of Victories, now I can hear my Reputation called in
question, without being stung to the heart. Some Peoples Manuscripts uses to
receive additions by lying by, but from mine I have diminished pretty much of
what I first intended to publish, having for a long time been willing to
decline it; so I don't care how little it is, if three words would have
answered the Obligation I am under, I think I can truly say, I should have been
glad. So I shall be brief and compendious in giving in my Relation, as
follows,

WHy it pleased the Almighty to bend his Bow and set me as a Mark for his
Arrow, not only from my Youth, but even from my very Infancy up, I know not but
even so it has been; for to the best of my remembrance I was but about six or
seven years of Age when first I had strange and numerous Apprehensions of a
future state, and a fear to dye, and after to be cast into Hell, would make
such strong Impressions of Horror upon my Spirit, which caused me to weep and
tremble, and often to wish I had never been born. And the weight and inward
sense and feeling of those things keeps me in great awe before the Lord. Well,
I arrived to the age of about fourteen years, and then Pride, the chief evil I
was naturally inclined to, became a very potent Enemy against me; and though I
was but young I found I was in an evil case, by the strong propensity and
inclination to the Influences of evil, not that I was sensible of the Deformity
of evil in it self, no* but because I was smitten, pincht and restrained in my
Libertine progress, for I really believed that Pride and Luxury, and abundance
of outward Riches to uphold it, was the chiefest good; and on the other hand,
to be limited to Obedience, Humility and taking up the Cross, was an
intolerable Confinement, but under this, considered, I was afraid going to Hell
was worse, so I continued in this Condition some years, being extremely
addicted to decking up my self, going abroad and keeping of wild Company; but
this state was rendered very uncomfortable to me, because I was still followed
with a secret terror what the evil would be. Sometimes I should wish and hope
there was no God, and sometimes pray, that if there was, he would by any means
bring me nearer to himself. Thus it was with me till I entered into the 19th
year of my Age. And then at the latter end of the Summer I was visited with a
violent Fever, which brought very extreme pain upon me, and made me mighty
impatient and restless, but did not bring me much under the apprehensions of
Death; but I thought, if I should have the small Pox, which was then in the
Country, I should surely dye; for I had all the Summer, at times, been under
the terror of it, and had blooded and taken Physic, and practiced several
things as Remedies against it, though at that time I thought I was pretty secure*
being at a considerable distance from where it was; nevertheless, that which I
greatly feared, was to be brought upon me, for in the midst of my Illness,
which I thought was already more than I could bear, it accidentally happened
that my Brother came home sick, and in a short time his sickness appeared to be
the Small Pox, which when I understood, it struck me into such extreme terror
that I could scarce keep within the bounds of Moderation; for now I thought
there was no Remedy, I being too weak to be removed from home; so I had no help
to escape, but by keeping from my Brothers Chamber, which I carfully did; but
contrary to my expectation, and to my great grief, in a few days my Brother
dyed, and in about a week after my self was seized in a very violent manner,
and soon was brought under the dismalest aspect that ever I was sensible of
before. I thought now was the time that I had from my Infancy feared: now I
must dye, and to Hell I must go, as the reward of my Pride; that was the chief
thing presented before me; and in this condition I made many Protestations and
Promises to my self, if God would graciously grant me a Reprieve, and give me a
little longer time, which I thought I had no reason to expect; but as my
Terrors within, so my Distemper without continually increased, though I had been
urgent for the assistance of the Doctor, and the application of what might be
proper for my Relief, but it was all to no purpose; for in a short time my
Distemper was so violent that I expected no other but in a few hours or minutes
to be choked, being in extreme thirst, and every thing I took forcing its
passage through my Nose. And in this Distress I earnestly desired some small
Beer to be given me, promising to my self, that if I could swallow that, it
should be a sign to me that God had not forsaken me. And when I came to try the
experiment, this found passage down very comfortably, which was an exceeding
joy to me, insomuch that it forced my feeble Body upon my knees, to give thanks
to him who I did not know but might have mercy on my Soul, which I supposed to
be in a very dangerous Condition at that time; but this spark was soon blown
out by the returns of my fear, terror and anguish of Spirit, which remained
strong upon me for many days, having blindness without and darkness within*
every night I expected to dye; and in my slumbers thought I was actually in
Hell; but his Judgments he mixed with Mercy, and lifted me out of the horrible
Pit, and gave respit for a time.

And after some time, when I was pretty well recovered of my Distemper, only I
remained weak, as I was one morning lying in my Bed, ruminating in my mind, and
hoping the bitterness of Death was past, on a fuddain, before I was aware, I
found my self overcome with a divine Sweetness, which all my life before I had
been a stranger to, this made me say, in the words of David, O Lord, if ever I
forget thee, let me be forgotten by thee; and if I prefer thee not above my
chiefest joy, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my Mouth. But my pleasant
Theme soon folded up, and the divine Ray withdrew, leaving this word with me,
to wit, Obedience is better than Sacrifice; and also, a strong Injunction upon
me to leave off my little Fineries, and vain Complements, and to take up the
much despised saying Thee and Thou to a single Person. This again brought a
strange Impression of horror over me, and raised a great unwillingness, and
strong Reasonings offered themselves, and a foolish shame got the dominion over
me, which altogether brought me even within a hairs breadth of rebelling; but I
awakened not long before upon good ground; I submitted, though it was not without
Tears. But soon after I found it was to double advantage; for whereas before I
took delight in nothing but reading Romances, decking up and receiving and
giving Visits, (not that by my saying of this I am about to represent my self
as a Gentlewoman by Birth, which had nothing else to do; No, for my Mother
found me other employment beside, though it was often sore against my will; but
now I was under a total alteration; for having been kept from visiting by
reason of my illness, about half a year, my propensity to that exercise was
pretty much abated, though I suppose it would soon have renewed its strength; but
I was ashamed to see or to be seen of my former Acquaintance and Companions,
because I durst do no other than appear in a way that was very contemptible in
my own eyes, and I suppose no less in the eyes of others; but it was not long
before this Cross lost its sting, and I became not only easy* but pleased with
my great Change of affairs; and I began to take delight in Gardening, and
applied my self, with pleasure, to the Contemplation of Matters Philosophical
and Divine. But this was not the end of my progress in trouble, as by the
sequel you will find. For soon after the old Accuser and Troubler was let loose
against me, and represented before me, That now I had submitted to this Light
within, I must be obedient and perform all the preposterous Actions, but above
other things, the fear of going Naked was sharp upon me; this was like a Sword
to my Nature, which from my Childhood had been bashful, to an extreme; but I
soon got over this Terror; but it continued with me to be mighty full of Though
and Considerations, passing and re-passing in a perpetual Motion, sometimes one
fear would be uppermost, and sometimes another; but at length it was fixed upon
me to believe, I was still short in the faith of Christ crucified, and my work
not yet finished; the whole systim of Religion was become a very intricate
knotty thing to me, and if I might, I should have been very willing to have let
it all alone, but I was entered in the list, and could by no means free my
self; and since it was so that I could not get out, I thought it was best for
me to be industrious to get Instruction; but I found that Men nor Books could
not do it, and to apply my self to God I was afraid, remembering the smart of
that teaching I had received; and also I wondered in my self that I received no
fresh supplies from that anointing which I thought was desirable above all
things, but this I could not obtain, neither could I be satisfied. And then I
considered I had heard great talk of great matters in Pennsilvania, and being
willing to try that experiment, I prepared my self, and came over, but when I
came, though I was diligent in seeking, and seldom mist any opportunity of going
to Meeting, yet in nothing could I find the sweetness which was comparable to
that which first tinctured my Soul. This was my Condition all that time, which,
I think, was about three years after I first received the Seal of the Covenant
of God. And thus was my Troubles, which I kept reserved to my self, not being
willing any Body should know how it was with me; and also, I think it was then
about, that the fear of Preaching fiercely invaded me. This Passage is not to
be omitted, for it was a very considerable exercise to me, the which followed
me several years, with very ungrateful Retors, That the first Revelation I had
was to turn Quaker, and I could expect no other but the next would be to turn
Preacher, and that I should rebel, and there would be an end of my progress,
and so I must to Hell at last. With this I was so harrast and tormented, that
it became as great a terror to me then, as the fear of Death had been to me
before. I supposed my Preaching could be of no other Service than for a Cross
to my self; and if I must suffer, I strongly desired it might be by any other
means which might be private to my self; and moreover, I found, that my former
enemy ( Pride) had invaded me again, though not in the same manner as before, yet
it was no less troublesome; for though it had pleased God graciously to bring me
so far, that it was not hard for me to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly
before the Lord my God, but I was exalted in Pride above my fellow Creatures,
and could by no means behold Persons or Things that were in any respect poor or
mean, without an eye of Contempt; this very thing brought me under profound
disquietings of Spirit, insomuch that it often made me kneel down, and weep,
with this Lamentation in my self, That I was afraid Pride would one day be my
Destruction. And being thus continually assaulted, pursued and molested, it
totally weaned me from all outward things, so as I could say in truth, Lord, I
have none in Heaven but thee, nor none in Earth but thee; and I hoped to be
forgiven that which I could not help. And being very weary of my very
troublesome Life, it made me as earnest to dye as before I had been to live. And
often I importunately besought the Lord to take away my Life from me, arguing
what good I could do. I much wondered what strange place, I knew not what nor
where, I should enter into, when I did dye; however, I was willing to try the
experiment, but no such good tidings was allotted for me; but at times I
received secret Whispers, That I must come to further Sufferings, to have the
root or original of sin wrought out, to be made perfect. And I remember I could
not but wonder what I could suffer by, more than I did; for I thought they were
very considerable already. But, Oh! Woe is me, what have I suffered since that
time! No Tongue can tell, nor none that on earth does dwell.

Thus far is my Relation of what I suffered under the first Covenant, as a
Servant in the House, it being about the space of five years. Now I shall
proceed in recounting the Passages of my Travails or Pilgrimage after I
received the Seal of Adoption or Heirship to the Promises of God, which are Yea
and Amen forever, to all who believe and obey his Commands. I kept no outward
Journal, but as near as I can reach it in Memory, it was in the year 1694. in
the beginning of Winter when I was mightily hurried hither and thither by an
increase of my former Discomposures of Mind, but one day it happened that I had
an unusual quietness, stillness and easiness rested on my Spirit, which made me
hope, my condition would be rendered better than it had been. But the day
following, which was the 23th of the 11th Month, in the Morning waking, I was
seized in a very wonderful manner with an extreme Weeping, and, as I hinted
before, that I had fixed upon me a sense, that I was short in the Knowledge of
Christ crucified, and in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; so now it was set
in upon me, with a mighty Force, like a Fountain opened, and these words were
stamped or engraven, as with an Iron Pen, or as with the point of a Diamond,
viz. I know nothing, I understand nothing; surely I am more brutish than any
Man, Prove. 30.2. Distraction and Misery are in my ways, and the way of Peace I
know not. With this Lesson I arose, and with this Lesson I went to bed. I soon
grew mighty Melancholy, and hated Company, excessive Weeping being my greatest
ease and comfort; and also, I was much inclined to sleep. Thus I mostly spent
the time, till the first First Day in the First Month, which was between six
and seven weeks; which Day I have cause to remember above the rest of Days; for
in the Morning I was seized with an unaccountable Restlesness, which made me
impatiently wish for the Day to begin; but the approach of Night proved no
better to me; for in the evening a chill horror came over me, and I was cast
into a profound Abyss of Torment, which by the teaching and experience I have
had since, I can suppose to be no other than the Pit of Hell; and under this
extremity I threw my self down upon the Bed, my Complaint being taken away,
where I lay till about Midnight in that Condition, which I shall never forget,
and then I arose, and kneeling down, fell instantly into exubrancy of Grief,
weeping in the most passionate manner that ever I was sensible of before in all
my life, and there I lamented my self a while, and then went to Bed, where I
lay till Morning, still under the same impressions of horror; and all the
comfort I had was in the hopes, That a few days would put an end to my wretched
Life; and I suppose it was about seven or 8 in the Morning, when I thought I
felt my self seized with the temporal or bodily Death; this made some
alteration upon me, which I can no way express But then was the time, under
this sharp hour of Temptation, That once again the Lord discovered his Grace,
And openly showed to me his face.
And ever I was aware my Soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab, and joy
and peace, light and gladness shone round about me, and God engraved, as with
the point of his Scepter, That I had been faithful in a few things, and should
be made Ruler over many things. And at that time he showed me, That the
chiefest good consisted in love, and displayed his Banner of it in a very
wonderful manner, and promised me an establishment in Perfection of all the
degrees of it, that is, To love the Lord my God with all my Soul and Strength,
and my Friend as my self, with a reciprochal or mutual affection. This was the
prize which was set before me, for above fourteen years past, as the Reward of
Overcoming. And at that time it was fixed upon me with such an indissoluable
tie, which since has made me perceive it with force and vigor, even to this
very day; and often it comes upon me with a Power which I can by no means with
stand, to pray with earnest Supplications and Tears, That God would raise me up
a Seed, that we might behold his glorious Majesty, contemplate his wonderful
Works, and the operations of his hands, and enjoy his Mansions or Habitations,
which he has prepared in the West and the South; I say, that we may be
partakers together, and Inheriters forever of these his peculiar favors and
blessings, is the profound and inherent desire of my Soul.

But to return from this my short digression, I shall proceed on in my Relation
of the further Dealings of God with my Soul. It was at that time also that he
revealed to me, That I should -- but have a Race set before me, which if I
endurd or held out to the end, then I might expect great matters, or glorious
things to ensue; and in this Vision of the Almighty I had fullness of joy, and
concluded that God did not intend now to destroy me, which all along before I
was afraid of. So now by this change of my Condition, I was made able to rise
and go about, it being the second Day of the Week, and that day and the next I
remained under a sweet sense of what I had seen and felt; but the third Day a
great impatience came upon me, in a tumultuous manner, for a speedy performance
of those things promised, and I came under a temptation to fast till all the
work was accomplished; but for this I received a gentle Reproof, and the word
was to me, That God would do for me, but not in my time, nor by my Covenant.
And then I arose and took some Sustenance for my Body, being weak with fasting
from about the middle of the 3d Month, as near as I can remember. And then for
a short time I was mounted again above the Waves and Billows, and was exalted
very high, with the impression of the whole of Balaam's Policy, but more
especially where it is said, And his King shall be higher than Agag; and his
Kingdom shall be exalted very high. These things brought me to an exceeding
high Mountain, where I saw all the world no more than an Ant-hill, and all
People but as Grasshoppers. Here the Lord spoke very Friendly to me, as a Father
or a Husband, and taught me and instructed, because he intended to lead me in a
way which I little mistrusted at that time, though experience has taught me it
was wearisom, tedious and rugged. Now it was that I thought I might lay all my
Complaints before the Lord, and have my Petitions granted, the Spirit of Prayer
being strong upon me. And these three things I earnestly entreated for, 1 st,
That he would lay no more upon me than I should be able to bear. 2 dly, That he
would give me a sign or confirmation that I should never be made to preach. 3
dly, That he would forgive me what my Misery might extort from me. But I
received no sign according to my desire; but the word was to me, In the day of
my Power my People shall be a willing People; and, as I remember, from that day
forward, I was freed from the secret terror of it, which had been like to a
knawing Worm to me for several years, etc. In this Mountain I was delighted,
and thought it was good to be here, and fain would have pitched my Tabernacle at
that time, and gone no more forth, but God designed other things for me; I
think it was about the middle of the fifth Month, on a first Day of the Week,
I was under an extraordinary Disturbance and Commotion in my Mind again, and
that Scripture was presented in deep Characters before me, where it is said, A
Woman when she is in travail has pain, because her hour is come, etc. and
indeed it was sooner fulfilled upon me than I expected; for in the afternoon,
after I had been exercised most part of the Day in Supplications, Tears and
strong Cries before the God of Heaven, I was taken in such a manner as I can
give no very intelligible account of, but the feeling sense of it was such,
that I was forced to embrace the assistance of being held, a pain seizing my
Teeth, which served me as an excuse, but in less than an hour I had respit, and
at night was pretty quiet; but the next day I was afraid to be alone, and then
my hopes were strong, and I encouraged in my self, that I should be delivered,
and see no more sorrow, but, Oh! Woe was me, this was the beginning of such
sorrow as I had never suffered before; for after this I was cast out into utter
Darkness, and sealed down under such Darkness as might be felt. Before this I
had been pretty much inclined to sleep, but now it was otherways with me; for
my sleep, in great part, forsook me, and I had no rest night nor day, and the
Spirit of Prayer and Supplication was taken from me, and not being able to
sleep it made me practice rising a nights; and also, I had a strong propencity
to lying on the ground, and this strong Coard of Affliction was bound about me
for about two Months, and then my Chain was a little loosed again;
nevertheless I was debarred from that which I had been willing to part with all
for the purchase of. And now my Condition was to be compared to Cain's, for I
was a Vagabond, had no pleasure, delight or inheritance in the earth, and was
driven out from the presence of God, which was a punishment greater than I was
willing to bear. Nevertheless, for all my Discontent and Complaining, it was my
place of wandering little odds of eight long years before I had a glympse of
that Glory that folded its self for me.

The 3d Chapter of Jeremiah's Lamentations, to the 14th verse. and the 23d
Chapter of Job to the end, these with many other places of Scripture (which for
brevity's sake I omit) were to me as a Parchment Roll, or as the Philactaries
of the Jews, which are said to be things they always wore upon their Breasts,
with the ten Commandments at large; but mine were engraven with Lamentations,
Mournings and Woes.

And at the beginning of this time of my walking to and fro, afflicted,
destitute and forsaken, it was, that I made a Vow. To eat no Flesh, nor to
drink Wine till the Lord appeared to me again. But all this was more
supportable to be bore than some other things which I suffered in this Land of
Deserts and of Pits, Jer. 2.6. The desire to be delivered, and have a
readmission into the Fathers Bosom was fixed upon me, even as my outward
breathing, but to obtain I had no power nor no might; but much more in the
spring of the year my desires and supplications generally were increased, like
an overflowing stream. And thus it was dictated to me to pray, O Lord God!
Remember, I beseech thee, what I have suffered at thy hand! O Lord, what
hinders now, but that I may be delivered, after so long a time of hard Bondage!
O Lord! grant now that I may come in Remembrance, now when thou art visiting
every thing by the Return of the Spring, even every Shrub, and every little
Twig, and every Spire of Grass, and all things partake of thy circulating
Virtue, and I only above all other things am rendered Miserable! In the Day the
Drought consumes me, and Frost by Night, Genesis 31.40. And these my Prayers were
always attended with great floods of Tears, but all in vain; for I had but a
deaf ear turned to all my Intreatys. Sometimes hope would flatter me up, and
build me a great Pyramid, and set me at the top, on highest story of an
expectation that Heavens Gate would be open to me in a Moment. But I was no
sooner arrived to the highest pitch of my paramount Desires, but I should be
cast down to the lowest Hell, where I was instantly met by a great part of the
Infernal Pack: The first started out upon me in a vaunting ridiculous manner,
calling me Whimsical Fool, and told me, That I fed my self with Chymarae's and
Phansies, and that it was but in vain to seek, for there was no God to be
found. But my Reason and Experience prepared me an Answer, in this manner, viz.
That though God had dealt by me contrary to my expectation, and I had been
mistaken in some things, yet I was sure I was not deceived in what I had tasted
of the infusion of the Spirit of Love and Life. But he told me, This was
nothing but a Chance, which happened to me, and that I should never see it
again. Which made me to say, Oh! thou beloved Chance! that I may forever dwell
under thy circling Virtue!

And after this, a second stands up, in a more demure manner than the former,
and he gravely tells me, That if there was a God, he was become unjust and evil
to me, and that I should never be able to endure to the end of my Race; which
for ought I knew might be a hundred or a thousand years, and therefore I had
better destroy my self by drowning or poison, which I might act so privately
that no body should know it.

But to this I framed an Answer, as follows, viz. That though I was under the
discouragement of not knowing how long my Captivity would be continued me, yet
on the other hand, I had the advantage of not knowing how soon it would be that
I should receive the Seal of Redemption. And to the proposal of destroying my
self, I was very willing, and should have been glad to have complied with it,
but I was afraid, because I believed that God intended to make me endure to the
end of my Race, whether I would or no; for I found, by woeful experience, that I
was very weak, and he was very strong; and I thought he was able to stop the
operation of Poison, or to draw me out of the Water; and for my Rebellion I was
afraid that he would reward me with the unsupportable punishment of of
lengthening out the seres of my Troubles; and in this I knew he would be even
with me to the full. This was the thing which kept me from tempering in that
kind.

But when I had partly silenced the Clamours of these two, up steps a Third,
with power and force, and a longer continuance than the former, and this made
me fret, and rage, and storm, and wish abundance of impertinent Wishes, beside
that of wishing I had never been born, or that my Mothers Womb had been my
Grave, and made me curse my self the day that I was born, and every thing I
could think on, but God, and that I durst not, etc. And also, he told me, I did
well to be angry, even to Death, because God loved to afflict me. And indeed
when it was in the cool of the day of Battle, no arguments could have prevailed
with me to believe the contrary of this, for my Conscience bare me witness,
that I had been willing to part with all things which by Nature's Charter I
might claim a title to; and also was willing to suffer the greatest extremity,
and could have endured it without murmuring, had it been short; but this long
continuance, and often repeated breaking me with breach upon breach, Job 16.19.
and multiplying my Wounds without a cause, Job. 9.17. O this, without a cause,
filled me with Confusion and horror; and these Infernal Rages were suffered to
prey upon me till I was brought into such a Condition that I can no way, nor by
no means express, but it caused me to lie on the ground and lament, and weep
till my eyes were sore and swelled, and then I should fall into slumbers, which
were rendered short and broken, by the impression of that horror which still
gnawed upon me, the which made me start and wake, and then again renew my
Complaint, and make me say, O Lord! is my strength the strength the strength of
Stones, or is my flesh of (...), that I am made to endure all this? Job 12.6.
But the strength and force of these bitter storms seldom held me above three
days, and sometimes not so long before they abated, but almost a continual
Melancholy rested upon me, and great Pensiveness: and often with a secret
Regret I was caused to ruminate on the happiness of Servants and Negroes, who I
saw and heard no singing about, and considered how far their state was better
than mine, for after their moderate labor, they could take their food
pleasantly, and their sleep quietly; but my Tears were mingled with my Drink,
and my Sighings came before I eat: I was scared with Dreams and terrified by
Visions, and wearisom Nights were appointed for me. I wore out the Day, wishing
for the Night, and in the Night was weary of my Bed. Thus sometimes better, and
sometimes worse, I wore away the time for many years. Mean while People would
often be telling me how happily I lived, and might come and go when I would,
and have and do what I pleased* but at the same time I thought, and not without
a bitter cause, That, alas! if they knew all, they would have a less Opinion of
my Happiness! I kept my self private and reserved, though I was often brought
as within a hands breadth of going Raving about the Streets; for I really
believed it would be a great ease to me, if I might but have had the liberty to
have Raved and Ranted publicly; but I had the bounds of Decency always marked
before me, which upon my peril I durst not pass.

The chief Reasons that I thus almost wholly concealed my Condition, was, 1 st,
That I expected to be healed by no other hand than that that wounded me. 2 dly,
I remembered the ill Success that befell poor Job in the like case, which was, to
be reflected on, That God did but correct him for his Wickedness. 3 dly, I
considered that there can be no true simpathy without an affecting sense; and I
knew that Cries and Complaints make but a very ungrateful Sound in the ears of
those that dwell in ease and pleasure. So upon these Considerations, I thought
it was best to keep mine to my self. And, as I was hinting before, that it was
about eight years, that the Light and Glory which I saw in the Mount, was
totally eclipsed from my sight; but by the assistance of Faith and Hope, the
dear Companions of all my Tribulations, who never left me, if they could be
heard for the Cries and Clamours which often beset me; I say, by the assistance
of these, and often sitting down by the Rivers of Babylon, (for I had nothing
but a bare remembrance of the beauty of Sion) I made hard shift to stagger
along, till about the middle of the 7th Month, in the year 1703. as near as I
can remember, on a first Day of the Week I was in a retired frame of mind,
after ( I believe) I had gone up seventy and seven Thousand times, and more, to
see if I could perceive the least appearance of that which my Soul panted
after. I felt that which made me say, But, O Lord, what am I, that thou
should show thy self gracious unto me! And now I thought surely the
bitterness of Death is past. But, Ah! Woe was me, that I had been ten Thousand
times pinacled up in vain hopes; for soon after this, strong Travail came upon
me again, and I found my self as bad as ever. O Lord God of Heaven, thou only
knows how this Tormented me! I remember, that I thought that if one three Days
of what I then suffered, was administered to the World, surely it would reform
at once, etc.

'Twas three days I fasted, and was instant in the deepest descent of the
Spirit of Prayer and Supplication. And thus I presented my humble Petitions,
and said, O Lord, I beseech thee, let this time be the time of Love, for I can
never be brought lower than I am now. O Lord, hear me, and believe me! And
after I got over this dreadful fit, I entered into a Condition, as it were,
between joy and anguish; sometimes in one part of the day I should be in sharp
pain, which caused me to weep and lament, as with my hands on my Loins, and,
may-be, the same day I should be in perfect ease and quiet. And when I was in
one of these states, the other would seem very remote from me; and to this day
it remains with me to be after this manner* And the ruminating on what I have
suffered, and the fear of what I may have yet to suffer, and the consideration,
that for all my weary Travails, I have but overcome in part, and am but
delivered in part. These, with other things, often bring strong Travail upon me
still, and makes me weep, and lament, and pray, and wish, that God would take
away my Life from me But nevertheless* my Condition is rendered far better than
it has been; for these Fits are shorter and seldomer than they have formerly
been. But as to my grand and very troublesome Enemy, viz. [^ride] I think I can
give in my evidence of the total overthrow of it; for it has pleased God to
bring me from the Principle of it, to such a ^evil in all the Branches of it,
that I love and delight in the Company of the Poor more than the Rich: and a
little House pleases me better than a great one* and mean or cheap Clothes
better than rich or costly, and small gain better than great; for if I had
(...) so much I am limited to use no more than I do, and so it can do me no
good. And moreover, I can behold the most contemptible part of Mankind, as bone
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; and often great Compassion is raised, in
consideration of the fallen state of Man; and strong desires have been begotten
in me, for a Reformation, Re-uniting and Re-establishing in the Throne of his
Favor and Grace, etc.

Who can know Heaven's blessed Continent,
Till they, with me,
Be made to set,
That it is in Love's sweet Cement*
Or who can tell the Depth of Hell,
Whilst they, as I,
Be made to cry,
Where Raging (...) dwell.
So, thus far having briefly hinted concerning some of the most material
Passages in my long and tedious Travail in my spiritual Warfair; and if any
part or parts, or the whole of it may be of Service to any, it answers the end
of her who can in truth subscribe her self

Their very humble Friend or Servant either, Bath. Bowers.
Philadelphia, July 17. 1709.
Rev. xxii. v. 17. The Spirit says, Come,
And the Bride says, Come,
And let all that hear, Come,
And take of the Water of Life freely.
But, Lord, if they will not Come
Without sin, to Salvation, do thou Come,
And Compel them to Come,
That we may altogether Come,
And forever sing Hallelujah to Thee,
In the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th Degree.
Amen, says my Soul.

It Is possible some may carnally reason, That it is not consistent with the
goodness of God to afflict People, but for their sins. But if they will search
the Scripture, they may find it otherwise: I remember David in one place cries
our, Oh! Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesheck, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar!

THE END.

