GOD in the Camp: OR, The Only Way for a People to Engage the Presence of GOD
with their ARMIES.

Delivered in a Sermon Preached before His EXCELLENCY and GENERAL ASSEMBLY, at
a Lecture in Boston, March 6 th. 1706, 7.

By John Williams, Pastor of the Church in Deerfield.

Rev. XIX 14. And the Armies which were in heaven, followed Him upon white
horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

Holiness and Faith is the best Armor folks can put on. Durham, Expos.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green. Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop near
the Old-Meeting-House. 1707.

GOD in the Camp: OR, The Only Way for a People to Engage the Presence of GOD
with their ARMIES.
Deuteronomy XXIII.9. When THE HOST goes forth against thine Enemies, then
keep thee from every WICKED THING.


IN these Words, (1.) Something is supposed, Namely an HOST of the People of
God going forth to War against their Enemies. As a consequent of Man's Apostasy
and defection from God, there are Wars, and rumors of Wars: From the enmity
that is between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, the People
of God are often, not only under a necessity to raise Forces for their own
defense; but also to go forth in Battle array against their Enemies. That which
is supposed in the Text, is, That the People of God in a righteous Cause, and
from a Call of God, are going forth in an Offensive War, against Gods, and
their Enemies.

(2.) The bounden Duty of God's People: When the HOST goes forth to War; then
keep thee from every wicked thing: Words denoting the highest care, and
endeavor to approve themselves an Holy People to the Lord: [ Then] in a
peculiar and special manner; not to be understood, as though at other times,
they might make bold with any Sin; but that in their preparations for War,
their special and peculiar concernment, and care should be to Engage a Holy God
on their side, and with their Forces, which cannot be done whilst they take a
liberty to indulge themselves in Sin. [ Thee] comprehensive of Soldiers,
Marching out; and the Body of the People, tarrying by the Stuff; neither
Soldiers nor People might be careless of his duty.

Keep thee from every wicked thing] i. e. A Watchful care to avoid all manner
of Sin: beware that you don't bring your selves under the guilt of any Sin. Not
only a Watching against Some Sins, but All. A care to keep themselves in their
desires and actions from every Sin. True Holiness requires not only avoiding
some of the grossest Sins, or many Sins, but every Sin. So that the duty is a
careful Watching against all God-Provoking Evils.

DOCTRINE.
That People, that would have the Gracious Presence of GOD with their Armies,
must carefully Watch against all God-Provoking Evils.



When a People send forth their Soldiers on any Expedition, they are concerned
to have Men of Courage and Activity employed, and these to be well accoutred,
and every way prepared for Service. They wish them good Success, yea
undoubtedly make many Prayers for their Safety and Success; all these things
are very desirable, and commendable: but to the Soldiers prospering and
succeeding abroad, its needful that they themselves, and such as stay at home,
take heed that they don't provoke the Lord of Hosts and God of Armies to absent
Himself from the Camp, or turn an Enemy to their Forces.

In the Prosecution of this Truth consider these particulars.

I. That the Gracious Presence of God with the Armies of His People, is a great
Mercy, and absolutely needful for their Prosperity. Its only through God that
they can do Valiantly: Therefore that of the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 60.9, 10, 11,
12. Who will bring me into the strong City? Who will lead me into Edom? Wilt
not thou O God, which had cast us off? and thou O God, which did not go out
with our Armies? Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
Enemies. Zech. 12.5. And the Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The
inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the LORD of hosts their God.
If an Army want this, what ever preparations are made of choicest Soldiers,
and those Equipt after the best sort, they shall either return with shameful
disappointment, as to any annoyance to their adversaries, or fall as a prey to
the rage and fury of their Enemies; yea the most valiant will easily be swept
away: Without this it shall be said, as Jer. 46.15. Why are thy valiant men
swept away; they stood not, because the Lord did drive them. Consider here,

1. Wisdom and Counsel for War are from the Lord. Among the Praise worthy
Characters of Soldiers the holy Scriptures make mention of this as none of the
least, that they are Expert, and Skilful in War, 1 Chronicles. 12.33, 35, 36. Of
Zebulun such as went forth to Battle, expert in war with all instruments of
war, fifty thousand which could keep rank, etc. You read in the Scriptures of
Counsel and Strength for War, Isa. 36.5. I say, (say thou) (but they are but
vain words) I have counsel and strength for war* Wisdom and Counsel are very
needful in all War: There are many Warlike Stratagems and devices that require
counsel, and sound judgment; when, where, and how to attaque an Enemy, are
weighty considerations that require Wisdom and Counsel for War: Preparations
for our own defense and safety; Marchings, Encampings, Entrenching, Figures of
Battle; Ordering and placing the Soldiery to advantage; Scaling of Walls, do
all require Military Wisdom. But Counsel and Wisdom in all is from God: The
holy Psalmist acknowledges all his skill to be given to him from God: He says,
God taught him, Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my
hands to War, and my fingers to Fight.

2. Strength and Courage are from the Lord. It Is God that girdeth them with
Strength. Courage is the gift of God. Though some Persons are naturally of a
more robust and courageous Spirit, and temper, than many others; yet it must be
acknowledged, that it is God, which makes them to differ; Yea Men of Courage,
are not at all times equally courageous: Experience shows us also, that Persons
of a timorous constitution, have at times acted with the highest courage, and
bravest resolution: From whence it is evident that valor is given, or taken away
as pleases God. Strength and courage are very desirable qualifications for
Soldiers, to their enduring and going through the Fatigues of a War, and their
disputing with the Enemy in the gate, or their encountering the Adversary in the
High places of the Field. They must be valiant, that would successfully fight
the Battles of the Lord. Therefore that Commendation, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. And of the
Gadites these separated themselves unto David unto the hold of the Wilderness,
men of might, and men of War, fit for the battle, that could handle shield and
buckler, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and were as swift as the
roes upon the mountains. Strength and Courage as well as Wisdom and Counsel are
from the Lord: It Is God that takes away courage from the Adversary, and makes
them dismayed: 'Twas He that sent faitness of heart among the Canaanites of
old, Josh. 2.9, 10, 11. And she said to the men, I know that the Lord has
given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you. For we have heard how the Lord
dried up the water of the Red Sea for you, when you came out of Egypt, and what
you did unto the two kings of the Amorites that were on the other side Jordan,
etc. And as soon as we heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did
there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the Lord your
God, He is God in Heaven Above, and in earth beneath. It Is God that threatens as
a punishment of a Peoples Sins to take away courage, Lev. 26.36, 37. I will
send a faitness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies, and the sound
of a shaking leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee, as fleeing from a
sword: and they shall fall when none pursues. And they shall fall one upon
another, as it were before a sword, when none pursues: and ye shall have no
power to stand before your enemies. Amos 2.14, 15. It Is God, that gives Spirit
and Courage, Zech. 10.5. And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down
their Enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle, and they shall fight,
because the Lord is with them. -- It is God that has said, Jer. 51.30, 31, 32.
The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight: they have remained in their
holds: their might has failed, they became as women: they have burnt their
dwelling places: her bars are broken. One post shall run to meet another, and
one messenger to meet another; to show the king of Babylon that his city is
taken at one end, And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have
burnt with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

3. The Success of the battle is from the Lord. It Is He that crowns with the
Victory: He gives Success to which party He will; yea it is alone with Him to
save by many or by few; yea many times the fewest and weakest have the Victory:
Raw and unexperienced Soldiers, carry the Field, when old experienced and well
disciplined Soldiers flee away. Its therefore said, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. Be not
afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great Multitude for the battle is not
yours, but Gods. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set your selves,
stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and
Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed: to morrow go out against them, for the
Lord will be with you. God can make the Stars in their courses to fight against
his Peoples Enemies. That good reforming King Hezekiah speaks comfortably to
his Soldiery, when proud insulting enemies were invading, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. Be
strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor
for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us, then with
him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us,
and to fight our battles. See also, Neh.4.20. Josh. 23.9, 10. For the Lord has
driven out from before you great Nations and strong; but as for you, no man
has been able to stand before you unto this day. One man of you shall chase a
thousand: for the Lord your God, he it is that fights for you, as he has
promised you. Psalm. 33.16, 17. There is no king saved by the multitude of an
host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. An horse is a vain thing
for safety: neither shall be deliver any by his great strength. Though the horse
be prepared for the day of battle, safety is of the Lord: Its therefore said,
Eccl. 9.11. Nor the battle to the strong. If valiant, stout-hearted enemies
come against Gods People, they cant prevail, when Gods gracious presence is
with them: Psalm. 76.3, 4, 5, 6. There brake he the arrows of the bow, the
shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah* Thou art more glorious and
excellent then the mountains of prey. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have
slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found their hands. At thy
rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot, and the horse are cast into a dead
sleep.

II. P. That People who have the Gracious Presence of God with their Armies,
must carefully watch against all God-Provoking Evils.

The Reasons are,

1. Because God is a Holy God, and cannot with any approbation behold iniquity,
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity. From the Holiness of God we may argue his Righteousness in frowning
upon the Armies of a Sinful People, and refusing to go forth with them: from
the Holiness of God we may argue, that it is inconsistent with the Honor of
God, to give uninterrupted Success to the Armies of a degenerate Covenant
People. When a People wont approve themselves a holy People, God says, That the
staff in the hand of their Enemies, is His indignation, Isa. 10.3, 4, 5, 6. And
what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall
come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your
glory? Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall
under the slain: for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and
against the people of my wrath will I give him a chance to take the spoil, and
to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. The
Unholiness of a People leaves them naked, and takes away their defense; which
made Joshua and Caleb to say, Numb. 14.9. Only rebel not ye against the Lord,
neither fear ye the people of the Land, for they are bread for us: their
defense is departed from them, -- Its therefore said that Aaron had made the
People naked, when he complied with their motion in making them a calf, Exodus
32.25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked, (for Aaron had made them
naked unto their shame amongst their enemies.) It Is God that is the defense of
his People: It Is he that appoints Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, and always
seasonably defends; as Birds flying he defends, but it is where He is the glory
in the midst of them, Zech. 9.15. and 12.8. Isa. 4.5. And the Lord will create
upon every dwelling place of mount Zion and upon her assemblies a cloud, and a
smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the
glory shall be a defense. When God would encourage his People, in the days of
Joshua, to expect his fighting for them and with them, He bids them be holy and
obedient, Joshua 1.7, 8, 9. Only be thou strong, and very courageous, that thou
may observe to do according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded
thee: turn not from it to the right hand, or to the left: that thou may
prosper whithersoever thou go, etc.

2 Reas. Because they are the Sins of Gods Covenant People, that bring upon
them the heavy distressing Calamites of War. Judge. 2 14, 15. And the anger of
the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of
spoilers, that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies
round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as
the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them: and they were greatly
distressed. Judge. 5 8. They chose new gods; then was war in the gates. How then
can Gods People hope to speed, and get free from Judgments, that take no heed
to Reform and put away the procuring Causes of War? See Josh. 7.11, 12, 13.
Israel has sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I
commanded them: for they have even taken of the cursed thing, and have also
stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even amongst their own stuff.
Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but
turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither
will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from amongst you.
Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify your selves against to morrow: for
thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee, O Israel: thou can not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away
the accursed thing from among you. See again, Josh. 24.19* 20. -- Ye cannot
serve the Lord: for he is an holy God: he is a jealous God, he will not forgive
your transgressions, nor your sins. If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange
gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he has
done you good.

3. Reas. Because God gives them no ground of encouragement to expect His
Gracious, Succeeding, Prospering Presence, without taking heed to put away what
is an Offense to Him. As is enough evident from the forementioned Scriptures,
and multitudes of other places of Scripture. God gives his People sufficient
encouragement in a way of holy Obedience and thorough Reformation, to expect
his gracious Presence with them in all respects; but on no other account: As
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments; If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; Then will I
visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes.

USE I. To convince that People of their Sin and Folly, who boast of the
Numbers, and Courage of their Soldiers sent forth on Service, but don't take
care to put away, or keep themselves from Sin. The Sins of a People at home do
oftimes more against the Soldiery abroad, than the Sword of the Adversary:
Isai. 3.25, 26. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war. And
her gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall sit upon the
ground. Its sure, nothing more animates, emboldens and encourages Adversaries,
then the Sins of them they fight against: Jer. 50.7. All that found them, have
devoured them, and their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have
sinned against the Lord, the Habitation of Justice, even the Lord, the Hope of
their Fathers. The Sins of a People in Covenant with God do strengthen the
hopes of them that make War against them: Isa. 36.10. And am I now come up
without the Lord against this land to destroy it? The Lord said unto me, Go up
against this land, and destroy it. When a People walk holily, God is an Enemy
to their Enemies: Jer. 2.3. Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the
first fruits of his increase: all that devour him, shall offend, evil shall
come upon them, says the Lord. The folly of a Covenant People in this regard
is very great, because they know what God says in this Word of avenging the
quarrel of his Covenant, and bringing Enemies against them, and giving them
Success; yea they know from the way of Gods former Providence toward His own
Professing People; how ineffectual a degenerate Peoples Forces have been to
resist the anger of God; how He diminished the Armies of backsliding Israel of
old, and poured contempt upon them. Their folly is very great because the most
essential means of safety and success are neglected, and Gods counsel rejected.
Again, God does not give them encouragement to rely on Him for success in a way
of Apostasy, but rejects their confidences. We can never find Armies
courageous, and numerous enough to resist God: Nor can we make Forts so high,
and thick, but God can easily throw them down, and make them ineffectual and
unserviceable: their Sin and Folly therefore is witnessed against, that
repaired their Forts, but disregarded God, Isa. 22.8. etc. And thou did look
in that day to the armor of the house of the forest. II.V. But ye have not
looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it
long aloe. See also 15. and 20.

USE. II. This should put us upon enquiring, Whether the fault of the
unsuccesfulness of our Soldiery, be not in those of us that stay by the stuff.
Are we, have we been keeping our selves from every Wicked thing? We have reason
to take notice of the frowns of God upon us, and be humbled under them, in that
God does not go forth with our Armies; or do any great matter by them against
our Adversaries: a great deal expended in raising Armies, Wearisome and
toylsome Marches by the Soldiery, and very little effected: for God does not
go forth with our Forces: How often has our Soldiery been unsuccessful, and
Armies returned without any considerable annoyance of our Enemies: how often
has God in this way put our Military Troops to shame? Surely such
disappointments should put us upon enquiries, Why God thus frowns? What means
the heat of his displeasure? God expects to hear all saying, What have I done?
There are many complaints on this account. Sometimes, some are ready to murmur
against Rulers, (an evil that Israel of old were guilty of when under frowns,
they would be complaining and murmuring against their Rulers, and an evil too
too prevailing among Gods People in every age) as though the fault was in them,
and they the blameable causes of their disasters. Some complain against the
Commanders of the Forces employed, and sent forth, as though they wanted courage,
and were faint hearted, or were not Persons of any conduct. Sirs, let me tell
you, the fault is very often in them that tarry by the Stuff, they are all the
while taking a course to provoke the Lord of Hosts, and God of Armies to be an
Enemy to their Soldiers: Far from being affected for the Soldiers abroad, as
Uriah was, 2 Samuel 11.11. Sirs, let me ask you who are censuring others for
their cowardice, and imputing the want of Success in our War, to those that are
employed in sending Forces abroad, or to those that are sent forth, Whither you
hant reason to be turning some complaints against your selves, viz. in taking
courses to make God angry with the Land? Who? where is the man of you all? that
can stand before our God, who is a consuming fire to the workers of iniquity,
when he clothes himself with vengeance, and comes forth in Battle array to
punish and humble a Sinful, backsliding People: If God arms Flies, Frogs etc.
to come in battle array upon Pharaoh, and the Egyyptians, they cant withstand.
If Enemies be in themselves despicable, yet if sent by God and commissioned by
him to punish a sinful People, they shall be made very formidable. Verily Sirs,
when God so often seems in his Providence to fight against our Armies, it
gives us reason in good earnest to inquire whether God be not saying, Neither
will I be with you any more, except you put away the accursed thing.

USE. III. Of Reproof.

1. To reprove Soldiers, and such as go forth to War, that take no heed to
keep themselves from every wicked thing. Its great folly and wickedness in you
to remain Un-reformed, and to be going on still in your iniquities. One would
think that Frontiers and Soldiers should be engaged with all seriousness, and
thorowness to be holy, and thoroughly to amend their ways and their doings, they
are so often as it were in the jaws of Death, and at the mouth of the Grave:
and yet how often cause to fear, whether borders be not borders of Wickedness,
and continuing to provoke God to say, as Mal. 1.4. -- And they shall call them
the border of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has indignation
for ever. Surely the desolations in so many of our borders should at least
occasion all our borders to be solemnly thinking upon that Scripture, Jer.
15.13, 14. Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without
price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. And I will make thee
to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou know not: for a fire is
kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon you. If in all our borders we
approve our selves holy to the Lord, and keep our selves from every wicked
thing, doubtless God will say as Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. I have heard the
reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have
reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border. Therefore
as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as
Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and
salt pits, and a perpetual desolation, the residue of my people shall spoil
them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them. This shall they have for
their pride, because they have reproached, and magnified themselves against the
people of the Lord of hosts. The Lord will be terrible unto them: Surely the
frequent disappointments of Soldiers give occasion to ask whether the Holy
God, the Lord of hosts, and God of Armies, don't see what is displeasing to the
Pure eyes of his glory among them. Surely Soldiers are very much to blame, if
by their own Sins, they turn back the weapons of their own Warfare, and prove
traitors to themselves. Is there not ground to fear whether the Sins of
Soldiers, not only before but in their Service do not provoke God at least to
say, That He wont honor them to do any great Service for Him, or His People.
The unsatiable Tiplings of Soldiers at Ordinaries, their delighful Debauching
of themselves with Strong Drink, when ever they can come at it, to ingratiate
themselves with one another; are not the way to ingratiate themselves with God;
if they by wickedness debase themselves, they take a course either to return
with shame under such humbling considerations that God was not with them, and
that they have not performed any heroical Actions; or to fall down among the
slain in the day of Gods anger. Soldiers must not be Enemies to God
themselves, by their Sins, if they would be thought to do God Service in
fighting against his Enemies. Our Armies should be HOLY to the Lord: Its
through God alone you can do valiantly: what a madness then to Sin away the
gracious presence of God from you? and to provoke him to say, I will not be
with you.

2. To reprove all such who tarry at home, (when the Host goes forth to War)
and take no care to keep themselves from every wicked thing. How very faulty
and blame worthy are all those that indulge themselves in God-provoking Evils
to a making the Land guilty before God? Its Sin at any time, but this gives a
farther accent to the Sin of a People, and is a real aggravation of their
Sinfulness, that they refuse to amend their ways and their doings, when their
Armies are in the Field.

1. You act as though you had no Bowels of Charity to your Friends, Relations and
Neighbors, and are doing of them the greatest injury. You cry out against the
Enemy for Murdering so many. Sirs, your ways and your doings procure these
things: I may say, our Apostasies from God and Holiness, kill our Friends, and
open the Grave for many of our acquaintance. You cant express your charity and
love to your Neighbors and Friends who jeopard their Lives in the high places
of the Field, whilst by your Sins you are separating between them and their
God. The Sins of a Covenant People do more against their Armies and Frontiers,
and slay more of their Friends than their Enemies can do.

2. You are hereby an occasion of a great deal of dishonor to the Holy God,
and the holy Religion you profess. By your means the Adversaries reproach the
true Religion as though God disowned it, because he frowns upon the Armies of
them that profess it; the Enemies reproach and defy the Armies of the Living
God. Our Armies would be a terror to our Adversaries, and would have been very
Victorious, were it not for our Apostasy. You blame them that do defy our
Armies; but much blame belongs to you that occasion their being reproached. You
are dreadfully in love with your Lusts, or you would not be thus gratifying of
them, to the prejudice of Religion, to the endangering the Land, to the
reproach of the Armies of the God of Israel. Your hearts are removed far from
God, who cannot at such a day and under such circumstances, be prevailed with
to be a holy people to the Lord: may we not say you are the Troublers of Gods
Israel*

3. You are dreadfully stupid under, and unaffected with the Wrath of God that
burns so against us this day. Isa. 42.24, 25. God has brought such desolations
that have made the Ears of them that hear of them to tingle: yea to give an
occasion to say as to some of our own Plantations, Go to my house at Shiloah,
and see what I have done; and yet how many so unawakened under so many Sins and
Judgments past, that they are at present running upon the thick bosses of Gods
buckler, who are Sinning to the procuring guilt to their own Souls, and the
Land, without fear.

4. You are very Presumptuous whilst you look for great Success to your Forces
in such a way of unreformedness. Your Prayers, so long as such idols are set up
in your hearts, are not like to be prevailing, are like to be as unserviceable
to your Hosts abroad, as they to you; yea you may expect that God will answer
by Terrible Things, and yet in Righteousness, when you wont hearken to the
voice of God to amend your ways and your doings: Ezekiel 14 8. etc. Many Prayers,
Days of Prayer and Fasting, without Reformation, are not likely to be
acceptable Prayers to God: They are not such Fasts as he has chosen.

Last USE. Of Exhortation, to Exhort you to labor to be a Holy People* and to
be keeping from every Wicked thing. All those that stay at home may do a great
deal to further, or hinder the Success of our Armies. Your Prayers of Faith,
your holy Examples, your painful Endeavors to promote Holiness, and effect a
Reformation of Provoking Evils, may do a great deal of Service.

1. God stands as it may be said with his Drawn Sword in his hand to awaken you
to a necessary Reformation. He don't only threaten* but gives you to hear what
Armies He has in a readiness, either to drive you to your Duty, or punish you
for your refusals of Obedience. God has already mixed many a bitter cup for us
to drink, to put us upon considering, and says to this day, That his anger is
not turned away but his hand is stretched out still: You cannot resist God and
Prosper. When the Trumpet is blown and such Alarming providence, to warn, how*
sad if by our security and bold impenitency we provoke God to sheathe his Sword
in our bowels, and cause the slain of the Lord to be many.

2. If you go on in your Unreformedness, you will be an occasion of our Hosts
going out to meet the Enemy with the guilt of a backsliding People upon them.
No Army your Forces can meet with can be so formidable, as the Guilt of a
People Apostatizing from God, and holy Obedience. The Sword of our Soldiery
would not return empty, our Hosts would perform praise worthy Actions, our
Warriors would do valiantly if our iniquities don't dishearten and disappoint
them. Oh! make have, to get Guilt removed, endeavor that the controversy
between God and the Land may be removed, that our Peace may be made with God;
and then he will be as the Lord of our Hosts.

3. Your being holy and keeping from Sin, will be every way beneficial to your
selves. God will do you no harm if you repent and turn to him; He will crown
your Forces with Success* as birds flying he will defend your Plantations: It
will be beneficial to you as to your Worldly Interests; a great deal of your
Substance that is spent on your Lusts, will be preserved; and those heavy
Charges under which you groan, will be prevented. Such breaches, and
bereavements in Relations, Towns, Families and Neighbourhoods, causing such
distressing, amazing Sorrows and Griefs, will be prevented; such strifes and
unhappy Contentions that take away our comfort, and are so ominous, will be a^
at end; terrors and accusation of your own Consciences, informed from the word
of God, prevented, and your Souls will be filled with Gods love and grace in
every respect for Soul and Body; it will be a Gain and Benefit to you to be
Holy.

4 You will by Unreformedness augment the fierce anger of God* and bring a
farther decay upon Religion. If instead of reforming Sins warned of, and
witnessed against; we grow angry with them that warn us, and wont be reformed;
we shall procure great guilt to our selves: Ier. 26 18, 19. If we cant bear to
have our Sins Witnessed against to put us upon reforming and amending, we must
yet prepare to bear the indignation of the Lord, and must feel the effects of
Gods Wrath. Is the iniquity of P^^r too little from which we are not purged to
this day? hant we guilt enough to make us miserable enough? Is not Religion
dying and languishing? are not the things that remain, ready to dye?

Let us then labor to get a right knowledge what the God-provoking Evils are
that are among us, and carefully set our selves against them. Are they not
Contempt of Christ, Gospel Grace, and Gospel institutions, making way for the
manifest works of the Flesh, in Wantonness, Drunkenness, Idleness and Pride?
Are there not unhappy Contentions, Murmurings, reproachful Censuring of one
another, and Covetousness, with a Luke-warmness of Soul in our Profession?

Let every one carefully in their place set themselves to Reform, and amend:
Those that are in Civil Authority should not hold the Sword in vain. All that
God has commissioned to Preach in his Name, should in Life and Doctrine
endeavor a Reformation, and improve their interest and power for the
Suppressing of Sin. All heads of Families should engage in a speedy and through
care that we may be a People Saved from our Degeneracy, and become a holy
People to the Lord; and then God will say with respect to our Forces, as Josh.
5.13, 14. And Joshua went unto him and said unto him, Art thou for us or for
our Adversaries? And he said nay but as a Captain of the Host of the Lord am I
now come.

FINIS.

