THE Inexcusableness OF Neglecting THE Worship of GOD, UNDER A Pretense of
being in an Unconverted Condition.

Showed in a SERMON Preached at Northampton, The 17th. December. 1707. being the
time of the Sitting of the Inferior Court.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

Imprimatur, J. DUDLEY.

Boston in N. E. Printed by B. Green. Sold by Samuel Phillips, at the Brick
Shop. 1708.

The Preface.
THOSE that have been Eminent Reformers in the Church of God, have seldom or
never been so happy, as to Effect a perfect Reformation. Asa reformed many
things, But the high places were not taken away, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. And though it
is said of Jehoshaphat. that he took away the high places out of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. Yet, Chap. 20. v. 33 it is noted, that in the latter end of his
Reign, That the high places were not taken away: the meaning is, that he did
take them away in part, yet did not perfectly effect it. Corruption is wont to
creep upon the Church by degrees, and Reformation is not effected at once.
Sometimes when those things that are more gross are taken away, some lesser
Corruptions are retained: and sometimes when men go from one extreme, they
don't stop where they should, but trespass on the other hand. This comes to
pass, partly through the dim-sighredness of men: when many Corruptions are
grown up in the Church, it must be a work of Time to make a discovery of them;
those that discern some, are not suspicious of others; when the Church is much
corrupted, it is a time of darkness, and Errors do not lie open to Observation.
Partly it comes to pass through the perverseness, and stubborness of People, who
are backward to turn out of those ways that they have been naturalized unto:
that is given as the reason why the High places were not taken away, because
the People had not prepared their heart to the Lord God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22.

There have been three remarkable Instances in these later Ages of the
imperfect accomplishment of the work of Reformation.

Lucher was an instrument in the hand of God to open a door of deliverance from
Popery: and he did with abundance of Evidence, make a discovery of a Multitude
of Abominations in the Church of Rome, yet was so unhappy as to fall into that
corrupt Opinion of Consubstantiation.

The glorious Reformers of our Nation in the days of K. Edward the sixth, went
beyond Luther in the work of Reformation, and yet even that glorious
Reformation was very imperfect, and wanting in many things to be mended by the
Church in Succeeding Ages: And those holy men who first planted this Land,
carried on the work of Reformation to an higher pitch, yet failed in several
things; especially in two points, viz. in not accepting Non-scandalous Persons
into their Communion; and in not acknowledging a Public Government in the
Church.

And such is the misery of the Church of God that the mistakes of those worthy
men, who have led in the work of Reformation, do prove an invincible temptation
to many men. As the Renown of those Reformers is a bulwark against those Errors
that were Exploded by them, so we find our selves embarrassed by their mistakes
from proceeding in the work of Reformation: As if it were criminal not to
mistake with them.

It may possibly be a fault and an aggravation of a fault, to depart from the
ways of our Fathers; but it may also be a virtue, and an eminent act of
Obedience to depart from them in some things. Men are wont to make a great
noise, that we are bringing in of Innovations, and depart from the Old Way: But
it is beyond me to find out wherein the iniquity does lie. We may see cause to
alter some practices of our Fathers, without despising of them, without priding
our selves in our own Wisdom, without Apostasy, without abusing the advantages
that God has given us, without a spirit of compliance with corrupt men, without
inclinations to Superstition, without making disturbance in the Church of God:
And there is no reason that it should be turned as a reproach upon us.

Surely it is commendable for us to Examine the practices of our Fathers; we
have no sufficient reason to take practices upon trust from them: let them have
as high a character as belongs to them, yet we may not look upon their
principles as Oracles. Nathan himself missed it in his conjecture about
building the house of God: He that believes principles, because they affirm
them, makes Idols of them: and it would be no humility, but baseness of spirit,
for us to judge our selves incapable, to Examine the principles that have been
handed down to us: If we be any ways fit to open the Mysteries of the Gospel,
we are capable to judge of these matters: And it would ill become us so to
indulge our selves in ease, as to neglect the Examination of received
principles. If the practices of our Fathers in any particulars were mistakes,
it is fit they should be rejected, if they be not, they will bear Examination:
If we be forbidden to Examine their practices, that will cut off all hopes of
Reformation.

The design of the following Discourse, is to Examine One practice of these
Churches, which is thought to be a failing. It was not composed on a design to
be made thus Public: but the importunity of some Gentlemen who heard it, has
prevailed for the Printing of it.

All that I request of the Reader is, That he do not act like those who told
the Prophet: Jer. 44. 16. A for the word which thou have Spoken to us in the
Name (...) and we will not hearken to thee.

The Inexcusableness OF NEGLECTING THE Worship of GOD, under a pretense of
being in an Unconverted Condition.
Exodus XII. 47, 48. All the Congregation of Israel shall keep it. And when a
stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the Lord, let
all his Males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it: and he
shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof.
IN this Chapter we have the Institution of the Passover, and the several Laws
and Ordinances, that were to be attended in the celebration of it. Two of which
are set down in these Verses: First, v. 47. All the Congregation of Israel
shall keep it. This must be understood with its exceptions. Those that were
Unclean, were not to keep it until they were cleansed: Numb. 9. 13. The man
that is clean and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover,
even the same soul shall be cut off from his People. Another exception was of
the Females: Women were not bound to go to the place which God should choose,
where the Passover was to be kept: Exodus 23. 17. Three times in the year shall
all thy Males appear before the Lord God. Yet when they were present they were
bound to keep it. Exodus 12. 4. If the household be too little for the Lamb, let
him and his neighbor next unto his house, take it according to the number of
the souls. Most probably also, they that were cut off from their People by a
sentence of Excommunication, were not to keep it. Secondly, v. 48. The stranger
is allowed to keep it upon two conditions. (1) That he did desire it. Sometimes
strangers that dwelt among them, became proselites and did desire to keep this
Ordinance as they were not to be compelled, so they were not to be rejected, if
they desired it in an orderly way. (2) That all his Males were circumcised.
Circumcision was a token of God's Covenant, when they were circumcised, they
were incorporated, and became as those, who were born in the Land, and enjoyed
equal privileges with natural Israelites.

The Doctrine to be spoken to, is, That Sanctifying Grace is not necessary unto
the Lawful attending of any duty of Worship.

The whole Congregation whether sincerely Godly or not, were to keep the
Passover: Sanctifying Grace is an inestimable blessing, far beyond all the
common gifts of the Spirit; it is the very Life of the Soul, it fus it to serve
God and to enjoy communion with him; and Sanctifying Grace is necessary to
Salvation: without holiness no man can see the face of God: Yea, Sanctifying
Grace is necessary to the acceptable attendance of every duty of Worship; if
men were not holy their offerings were not acceptable, nor their Sacrifices
sweet to God: but Sanctifying Grace is not necessary to the lawful attending of
any duty of Worship: if men be not holy, yet it is lawful for them to attend
any duty of Worship: No duty of Worship is forbidden to men, because they are
destitute of Sanctifying Grace. From the beginning of the World to this day,
Men were never forbidden any duty of Worship, for want of Sanctifying Grace.
Sanctifying Grace is necessary unto the right discharge of moral duties, as
well as instituted: but it is not necessary unto the lawful attending of Moral
duties, or the lawful attending of Instituted duties; and as men may not excuse
themselves from moral duties from the want of Grace, so they may not excuse
themselves from any duty of Worship.

I shall clear up the Truth of this Doctrine by an Induction of particulars.

I. Sanctifying Grace is not necessary unto the attending of those duties of
Worship which are required in all Ages. There are some duties of Worship that
are not peculiar either to the State of the Church in the time of the Old
Testament, or of the New, but common to both: and they may be attended by such
as are Godly, and such as are not. Men in a natural condition may lawfully
attend them; Men's being in a natural condition is no sufficient pretense for
neglecting of them. As,

1. Prayer: Such men's Prayers are an abomination unto God. Prove. 28. 9. He that
turns away his Ear from hearing the law, even his Prayer shall be
abomination; but yet they are to be performed. It is the duty of all men to
Pray to God, Luke 18. 1. He spoke a parable to them to this end that men ought
always to pray: The Pharisees were blamed by Christ for Praying in the Streets,
that they might have glory from men, and for making long Prayers for a
pretense; but they are not blamed for Praying. Ungodly men are much blamed in
Scripture for not Praying: Psalm. 14. 4. They call not upon God. Isai. 43 22.
Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob. So men are blamed for leaving off
Praying: Job 27. 10. Will he always call upon God: And chap. 36. v. 13. They
cry not when he binds them. All forts of men are directed to cry to God in
their necessities: Sinners are put upon it to cry to God: Isai. 55. 6. Seek ye
the Lord while be may be found, cast ye upon him while he is near. Such as are
Ungodly are stirred up to Pray to God for forgiveness: Act. 3. 22. Pray God if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven. It was the manner of the
People of Israel good and bad to Pray: Luke 1. 10. The whole multitude of the
People were Praying without at the time of incense.

2. Hearing of the Word. Men must assemble themselves on the Sabbath to hear
the Word. Lev. 23. 3. The seventh day is a Sabbath of rest an boly convocation.
Ungodly men must do it in order to their Conversion: The Word of God is the
Means of Conversion: Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of
truth. The word of God teaches men to turn to God: it holds forth Conviction,
Warning, Encouragement and Direction. Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe on
him, of whom they have not heard. The word of God is the means of Regeneration:
Psalm. 19. 7. The law of the Lord is perfect Converting the Soul. Therefore
Ministers must Preach the Word to all sorts of men, good and bad, Christ
Preached to the Multitude, Mat. 5. 1, 2. So did John the Baptist, so the
Apostles: And it is spoken of as a very bad thing for men to withdraw
themselves from the assemblies of the People of God: Heb. 10. 25. Yea it is
lawful to Preach the word of God to the Heathen: there was a temporary command
to the Disciples, that they should not go into the way of the Gentiles, Mat.
10. 5. But afterward they were commanded, to teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19.
And go into all the world and Preach the Gospel to every Creature; and if it be
lawful to Preach to them, it is lawful for them to hear it.

3. Preaching of the Word: It is upon all accounts most desirable, that
Preachers should be Godly men, and Caeteris Paribus, they that are Converted
themselves are most likely to be instruments of the Conversion of Sinners, and
the Edification of Saints. Yet it is lawful for men in a natural condition to
Preach the Word Christ Jesus sent out Judas to Preach the Gospel as well as the
other Disciples: Mat. 10. 7. It was the work of the Priests and Levites to
Preach to the People of Israel: Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They shall teach Jacob thy law,
and Israel thy judgments. But we have no reason to think that they were all
Godly. God gave extraordinary gifts in the Primitive times to some that were
not Godly, to fit them for Preachers, 1 Cor. 13. 11. If I speak with the tongue
of Men and Angels, and have not charity, etc. Christ directed the People to
attend on the Preaching of the Scribes and Pharisees. The Scribes and
Pharisees, set in Moses seat; whatsoever therefore they bid you observe, that
observe and do. And Paul rejoiced in some men's Preaching of Christ, though they
did it with a bad spirit, Phil. 1. 18.

II. Sanctifying Grace was not necessary unto those duties of Worship, that
were peculiar to the times of the Old Teshament. There were severals acts of
worship that were Instituted of Old, but have been abolished long since; when
they were Divine institutions, they were to be attended, not only by Godly, but
also by Natural men.

As,

1. Circumcision: Circumcision was an holy Ordinance, a token of the Covenant
between God and his People: but multitudes of People were according to the
Ordinance of God to be Circumcised in the flesh, that were not circumcised in
heart. God never blamed the People of Israel for Circumcising persons that were
not Regenerate. Abraham was appointed to Circumcise all the Males in his
Family: Genesis 17. 12, 13. Ishmael was Circumcised, but yet a carnal person: Genesis
17. 25. When the Israelites bought Servants from among the Heathen, they were
bound to Circumcise them. All the Israelitish Male Children were in their
several Generations to be Circumcised, yet there were but few of them that
proved Godly. God ordered that the Congregation of Israel should be Circumcised
at Gilgal: Josh. 5. 2. At that time the Lord said unto Jushua, make thee sharp
knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time: yet
multitudes of them were carnal men.

2. The Passover: This was a memorial of the Angels passing over the houses of
the Israelites, when the first born of the Egyptians were slain, Exodus 12. 27.
which was a Type of our Redemption by Christ; therefore Christ is called our
Passover: 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us. And it was
lawful for men to partake of the Passover who were not Regenerated, for it was
Gods appointment that the whole Congregation should keep it: Exodus 12. 47. At
the time of the first Institution there were very few Godly among them, for
they are called an evil Generation. And so at many other times; yet God
threatens those that under any pretense did neglect to celebrate the Passover,
if they were clean and not in a Journey, Numb. 9. 13. And Hezekiah sent to
invite the People of Ephraim and Manasseb, and other Tribes to celebrate the
Passover, though they had lived in Idolatry for some Ages, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. And
Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and
Manasseb, that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep
the Passover to the Lord God of Israel. And Jesus Christ himself partook of the
Passover along with Judas: Luke 22. 13, 14. They made ready the Passover, and
when the hour was come, he sat down and the twelve Apostles with him.

3. Offering of Sacrifice: Many times the whole Congregation of Israel offered
Sacrifices to the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20, 21. Though multitudes of them were in
a natural condition. Any one of the People of Israel had his liberty as he saw
occasion to bring his Sacrifice to the Lord, Lev. 1. 2. Yea not only the People
of Israel, but the Strangets among them, had a liberty to bring their
Sacrifices, Lev. 22. 18, 19. Wheever he be of the house of Israel, or of the
Strangers in Israel that will offer his oblation for all his Vows, and for all
his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the Lord, for a burnt
offering: Ye shall offer it at your own will, a male without blemish. And in
many cafes the People of Israel were bound to bring their offerings. So the
Sin Offerings for Sins of Ignorance, Lev. 4. The trespass offerings for Sins
wittingly committed, Lev. 6. 10. So when they were cleansed from the Leprosy;
and in many other cases: they indeed did it in a very provoking way because
they lived in wickedness, Jer. 6. 20. He tells them, their offerings were not
acceptable, nor their Sacrifices sweet to him. But it was lawful for them,
whether Regenerate or Unregenerate to bring their Sacrifices.

4. Officiating in the work of the Priesthood. The Priests besides teaching of
the People, were bound to many other Services: as the offering of their
Sacrifices at the brazen Altar; the setting the show bread in order; the
lighting of the Lamps; the offering of Incense; the judging in cases of
Leprosy; and in all Ecclesiastical cases. But if they were not Regenerate yet
it was lawful for them to officiate: If they had any blemish they might not,
Lev. 21. 17. But the want of Regenerating Grace did not make it unlawful for
them to officiate. The Priesthood went by lineal descent from Aaron, it
belonged to them by Generation, not by Regeneration: and it is unreasonable to
think that all the Posterity of Aaron were Regenerate. Hophni and Phineas were
not, 1 Samuel 2. 12. The Sons of Eli were Sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord.
And the chief Priests were principal Enemies to Jesus Christ.

III. Sanctifying Grace is not necessary unto the attending such duties of
Worship, as are peculiar to the times of the New Testament. There be a few
duties of Worship that are peculiar to these times of the New Testament, but
there is no peculiar qualifications requisite in those that do attend them: they
agree with the Worship in the time of the Old Testament, so that they are to be
attended by the Members of the Visible Church.

As,

1. Baptism. In Adult persons, it is needful that there be a profession of
Faith and Repentance, morally sincere, in order to their being Baptized. Mat.
3. 6. They were baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their Sins: So the
Eunuch before his Baptism, made confession of Christ: Act. 8. 37. I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. But Baptism may be administered to those
who are not Regenerate: It is not to be imagined that all that were Baptized by
John were Regenerate, or judged by him to be so; If Regeneration had been
necessary unto Baptism, Christ would not have committed that Work to his
Disciples, who were then exceeding raw, Job. 4. 1, 2. The Pharisees heard that
Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John, though Jesus himself baptized
not but his Disciples So there were multitudes Baptized by Philip in Samaria;
and Simon Magus among the rest, Act. 8. 12, 13. And it is the appointment of
God that the Children of his visible People, should be Baprised, who are
generally at that time in a natural condition. If Unregenerate Persons might
not be Baptized, the Pharisees would not have been blamed for neglecting
Baptism: they would have been excused, as not prepared for it: but they are
condemned for not being Baptized, Luke 7. 30. The Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the counsel of God against themselves, not being Baptized of him.

2. The Lords Supper: No Scandalous person may be admitted to Baptism, neither
may any Scandalous person be admitted to the Lords. Supper; but those that are
not Scandalous may partake of it, though they are not Regenerate. Such persons as
might lawfully come to the Passover, may also if they have Knowledge to discern
the Lords-body, lawfully come to the Lord's Supper, for they are alike figures;
the Passover was a type of Christ to dye; the Lord's Supper is a representation
of Christ who has dyed: It is lawful for Unregenerate men to celebrate the
Memory of the death of Christ, which is a great encouragement and comfort unto
them; and so they do in this Ordinance: It is lawful for Unregenerate men to
give a Solemn Testimony to the virtue of the death of Christ, and show it
forth; and so they do in this Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Ye show forth the Lords
Death till be come. That which God teaches us in this Ordinance, is very
needful for Unregenerate men to learn; namely the insufficiency of all other
things besides the death of Christ for Salvation, and the alsufficiency of
Christ for Salvation: that which we profess in this Ordinance is very fit for
Unregerate men to profess; namely the need of Christ, and saving virtue of his
blood: as it may be of great advantage to natural men to hear Gods Promise in
the Covenant of Grace. So to see God setting his Seal to the Covenant of Grace.
If it be lawful for all the Adult Members of the Church to partake of the
Lord's Supper, then it is lawful for some Unregenerate men to do it: but it is
lawful for all the Adult Members of the Church to do it: this was the practice
in the primitive Church, 1 Cor. 10. 17. We are all partakers of that one bread:
If it be lawful for the Church to require Unregenerate persons to come to the
Lords Supper, then it is lawful for them to come; but it is lawful for the
Church to require all its Adult Members to keep the Covenant with God: If it be
lawful for an Ungenerate man to be in Covenant with God, it is lawful for them
to come to the Lords Supper, for if it be lawful for them to be in Covenant, it
is lawful for them to keep Covenant: If Sanctification were a necessary
qualification to partaking in the Lords Supper, than it would be a very Sinful.
thing for any unsanctifyed person to come, though he hoped he was Godly, though he
was consident of his Godliness. When Christ Instituted this Ordinance, He
commanded his Disciples to attend it, Luke 22. 19. Therefore it is an Ordinance
to be attended by the whole Church, by all the Disciples of Christ, that have
Knowledge. If Sanctification were a necessary qualification, in order to
partaking, then the Church should let no others come, and then God would have
given them a certain Rule in attending of which, they might keep all others
away. Men had need have good arguments to make the World believe, that coming
to the Lords Table is a privilege equally confined with Justification,
Adoption and eternal Glory; and that none may venture to the Lords Table, but
those that shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Officiating in the work of the Gospel Ministry: If a man do know himself to
be Unregenerate, yet it is lawful for him to administer Baptism and the Lords
Supper. The blessing of this Ordinance does not depend upon the Piety of him
that does administer it. Christ knew Judas to be Unregenerate, yet he let him
as well as the rest of the Disciples to administer Baptism: Joh. 4. 2. Josus
baptized not but his Disciples. If men be destitute of Regenerating Grace, yet
they may administer Gods Ordinances in such a manner as may be for the glory of
God, and the Edification of his People. It is most desirable upon all accounts
that they who Officiate in the work of the Ministry, be holy and gracious men:
but men that are destitute of Grace are not prohibited in the word of God to
administer the Ordinances of God, if such may Preach surely they may administer
Sacraments. Paul speaks of Preaching as a greater work than administering.
Baptism, 1 Cor. 1. 17. And we may argue that it is greater than administering
the Lords Supper.

The Reasons of the Doctrine we,

1. There is no certain, knowledge who have Sanctifying Grace. If we should be
limited by God, so that we might admit none to Church fellowship, but such as
have Sanctifying Grace, we should be under extreme difficulties and great
scruples of Conscience; for if we make the most exact search, we should often
be very much mistaken, and in danger to accept of some that were not sincere,
and to reject some that were sincere. There is no certain rule given in the
Scripture to the guides of the Church, whereby they can distinguish Saints from
Hypocrites; neither do many Persons know what to make of themselves: Some that
are Godly have many fears whether their hearts be right in the sight of God:
which is employed in that Precept, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your
Calling and your Election sure. And many Hypocrites have a great considence
that they are Saints, Joh. 9. 40. Are we blind also? It is not to be imagined
that God would give a Rule to his People that is impracticable: If that were
the Rule that only Godly men, were to be admitted to communion in the Church,
there is not knowledge enough upon Earth in order to the practice of it: the
Church through their ignorance must wholly forbear acting: for their knowledge
of other men's Piety is but a supposition, 1 Pet. 5. 12. By Silvanus, a faithful
brother as I suppose. And particular Persons, would never be able to attend
that Rule for want of the knowledge of themselves; some would exclude
themselves, and others would obtrude themselves contrary to it, so that the
Rule would come to nothing. Gods Rules are such that no man has any just cause
to object against them: but if this were the Rule that Godly men only might
enjoy Ordinances; the Church might object, that it is Gods prerogative to know
the hearts of men, and we are utterly incapable to attend that Rule.

2. It is needful that others should attend duties of Worship, that the Worship
of God may be carried on. In the flourishing times of the Church, that will
hold, Mat. 20. 16. Many are called and few are chosen: but there be degenerate
times, when Religion runs very low among the People of God; and at such a time,
there is a great scarcity of Godly men, Psalm. 12. 1. The Godly man cease, the
faithful fail from among the Children of men. Isai. 53. 1. Who has believed
our Repors, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed. It may be there may be
but two or three sometimes in a Parish: in some Countries especially Godly men
are very thin sown: and if the rest must be excluded from any part of the
Worship of God, how can it be carried on, how can they show forth the Lords
Death till he come? Yea if none but holy men must Officiate in the Church; they
would be necessitated many times to be destitute of Ministers: in some Countries
especially it would be a difficult thing to find men qualifyed with Sanctifying
Grace. Sometimes there is a great scarcity of Godly Magistrates: Jer. 5. 1. Run
to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know and seek in
the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
Judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. So many times there is
a great scarcity of Godly Ministers: Mat. 23. 3. Do not after their works, for
they say and do not.

3. This is very useful that men may obtain Sanctifying Grace. If men have it
not now yet it will be a wonderful Mercy if they can obtain it before they dye:
and the attending duties of Worship is very serviceable to that end. Thereby
they are in the way to be gained, Psalm. 29. 9. In his Temple does every one
speak of his glory. It is a blessed thing to be waiting upon God, Prove. 8. 34.
Blessed is the man that bears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors. The giving of Converting Grace is not Timitted to any one
Ordinance. Prayer is very serviceable that way, Prove. 2. 3. If thou cryest
after knowledge and liftest up thy voice for understanding. So the Hearing of
the Word is very serviceable. The entrance of God's Word gives light. So the
Sacraments are very useful for Conversion: God teaches us in Baptism that we
are naturally polluted, and that we need to be cleansed by the blood of Christ.
God in the Lords Supper in vites us to come to Christ, makes an affecting
representation of his Sufferings for our Sins, testifies the Sufficiency of
Christ: confirms the truth of the Covenant of Grace, teaches us that the
Promise of Salvation to those that believe in Christ is certain; all Sacraments
are Seals of the Covenant, as circumcision was: Romans 4. 11.

4. The attending of these duties are part of the External Covenant: The
Covenant People of God are bound to attend Covenant duties. If any part of the
External Covenant be neglected, the Covenant is broken. The Covenant that God
makes with his Visible People ought to be attended, the Visible People of God
have a natural power to attend those duties, and they have a legal power to
attend them: they may attend them lawfully: There is no part of the external
Covenant, but it may be kept by the Visible Church, therefore they have power
to qualify themselves sufficiently, in order to the attending of them: but if
Sanctifying Grace were necessary in order to the lawful attending of them, than
it would be out of their power.

The USE of this Doctrine is of Warning; That you be not afraid to attend
duties of Worship, because destitute of Sanctifying Grace. Men that are
destitute of Sanctifying Grace can perform no duty in an acceptable manner: but
yet you must not give way to a spirit of fear, so as to neglect your duty. Men
must be afraid to neglect it and not afraid to attend it: You must make haste
to get Sanctifying Grace, but you must not deny God any part of his Worship,
till that is done. It is a poor thing for men to be scared into Religion, but
it is sad indeed for men to be scared out of Religion, and to neglect Gods
Worship out of fear of God.

There be two things that make men neglect the Lord's Supper.

1. Some despise it, they don't find any need of it; their design is the World
and their pleasures; and they don't regard the Lord's Supper. There is a
profane Spirit prevailing in the Land; and many men neglect the Lord's Supper
from the same reason, that they neglect Secret Prayer: viz. Because they do
despise holy things, they don't regard communion with God, nor help and
advantages to Eternal Life: they are far from that Spirit that David had, Who
said, One thing have I desired, and that I will seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

2. Some are afraid of it. They are desirous to do any thing that they can for
the promotion of their Salvation; but they are afraid to attend that Ordinance.
It is with them as it was with David, 2 Samuel 6. 9. And David was afraid of the
Lord that day, and said, how shad the Ark of the Lord come to we. They have
drunk in an opinion, that none but Converted, Persons should come to that
Ordinance, and so they neglect in: they have been misinformed about it, and so
dare not come: But they should not be afraid to attend that Ordinance.

Consider 1. Those who discourage Persons from coming to it, because
Unconverted, do in their zeal make others to cease from fearing the Lord. As
the Reubenites and Gaditer did argue in some what alike case, Josh. 22. 23, 24.
The neglecting outward Worship is the way to neglect inward Worship. Staying
from Ordinances is not the way to fit men for Ordinances: the neglecting of the
Sacrament is the way to make the Country grow profane. Gods Ordinances are the
means to advance Religion. If they neglect Prayer, it would hinder them from
fearing the Lord; if they neglect Hearing the Word; if they neglect Baptism; so
likewise if they neglect the Lords Supper: it will prove no advantage to
Religion to neglect any of God's Ordinances; the solemn attending of Gods
Ordinances lead men into a sense of the need of Christ, and benefit of Christ.
The limitting of the Lords Supper to a small number, has a tendency to nourish
carnal considence in them that are admitted, and to nourish profaneness in
them that are excluded.

2. There can be no sufficient reason assigned, why those who are destitute of
Sanctifying Grace, should be debarred from the Lords Supper. The holiness of
the Ordinance can be no reason: for circumcision and the Passover were holy
Ordinances, yet many Unregenerate Persons did partake of them. Baptism is an
holy Ordinance, yet it may be administered to Unregenerate men: the
signification of the Lords Supper can be no reason, it signifies Christ as
Suffering for our Sins; the Bread is the sign of his Body, and the Wine the
sign of his Blood. So the Water in Baptism, is a sign of the Blood of Christ,
yet may be applied to Unregenerate Persons. The sign of Christ crucified is of
great use to put them in mind of Christ's Sufferings for us: Its being a Seal
of the Covenant is no reason, it is of great use to them to see God Sealing his
Covenant. As it is of use for God to declare his Covenant, so to see God
Sealing his Covenant: the Testimony that is given to Christ in this Ordinance
can be no reason, it is very fit that they as well as others should show forth
his Death.

3. Many that judge that Persons should be Converted before they come to the
Sacrament, do run into a great fault, viz. they persuade Persons that they are
Converted before they are: they are zealous against men's coming to the
Lord's Supper in an Unconverted condition, yet advise and encourage such persons
to come under a notion that they are Converted; if persons do but carry civilly
and religiously, they think they are Converted, and urge them to join to the
Church; hereby abundance of wrong is done; men are greatly hardened in a natural
Estate: and they are laid under great Temptation to flatter themselves, as if
the bitterness of death were past: this is a means to prevent many men's
Conversion; if men are made to believe that they are Godly before they be, that
is like to prove a mighty impediment unto their Conversion, they don't lie open
to the threatenings of the Word, they think others spoken to, and they pity
them; but they are not sensible of their own danger: Joh. 9. 41. Because you
say, you see, therefore your sin remains.

4. If none that are destitute of Sanctifying Grace may come, than two sorts of
Persons that do come should stay away. First, such persons as are in a natural
condition, yet have got a confidence that they are Converted: there are many
such. Prove. 30. 12. There is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet
are not cleansed from their filthiness: But there is no way to keep them from
it, the Church cannot keep them from it, because they are visible Saints: and
their own Consciences will not forbid them, because they are confident that
they are Converted. And Secondly, there is another sort that should forbear,
viz. Such Godly men as do not know that they are Converted. If a man be Godly,
yet how can he with a good Conscience come to an Ordinance, peculiar to Godly
men, when he don't know himself to be Godly: if only Saints are allowed to
come, he must know himself to be a Saint, before he can know that he is allowed
of God to come. As if a man has power to Sell nothing but what is his own, then
he must know a thing to be his own before be can sell it with a good
Conscience. Or if a Church have power to consure only Scandalous persons, then
they must know a man to be Scandalous before they can with a good Conscience
censure him. So in this case, if the Sacrament be only for Godly men, they don't
know that they have any right to it, until they know that they are Godly.

5. It is from the misunderstanding of one Scripture principally, that these
are afraid to come to the LordsSupper: viz. 1 Cor. 11. There are two
expressions in that Chapter that they are terrifyed with, One that He that
eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord:
that is of profaning the Ordinance. And they are said to eat and drink
damnation or judgment to themselves: but this unworthy eating is doing of it in
a rude manner, as v. 21. For in eating every one takes before others his own
Supper, and one is hungry and another is drunken. And he explains himself, v.
29. Not discerning the Lords body; that is, not discorning that bread from
common bread. Another expression is, Let a man examine himself and so let him
eat, v. 28. But it is not said, Let him examine himself whether he should eat
or forbear, but let him Examine himself, and so let him eat. The meaning is,
that he must come solemnly to that Ordinance, Examining what need he has of it.

6. The Church is bound to receive men if they be externally qualifyed, whether
they be Godly or no. If men make a profession and are not Scandalous in their
Conversation, the Church cannot refuse them. The Apostle still received those
that made a profession of the Gospel, Act. 2. 41. and 6. 7. Those that are
Saints by calling are to be accepted of the Church, whether they be Converted
or not. The matter of the Church are visible Saints: if the Church were only to
receive those that are Converted, God would have given them a certain rule, in
attending of which Unconverted Persons should be excluded, but there is no such
Rule given: Neither is there any external sign, that does certainly distinguish
Converted men from Unconverted; the Church is not concerned to see that they be
all real Saints, their work is to see they be visible Saints, if they reject
such they are to blame.

7. It cannot be an unlawful thing for men to keep the External Covenant. As
the visible People of God have a natural power, so they have a lawful power to
keep the External Covenant. if they keep the External Covenant they are
accepted as a righteous People, Deuteronomy. 6. 25. It shall be our righteousness if
we observe to do all these Commandments: If they neglect to do any part of the
Covenant, they lay themselves open to the judgments of God. God brings War to
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant; and this is one part of Gods Covenant, Genesis
17. 10. Circumcision is called the Covenant. So this is one branch of the
Covenant. It is required in the second Command, That we worship God in that way
which he has appointed: and this is the appointment of God, that his whole
visible Church do celebrate the Memorial of the Death of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We being many do all partake of that one bread. And indeed it is the duty of
the Church to require all its Adult orderly Members to come to the
Lord's Supper, and it would be very strange that it should be the duty of the
Church to require them to come, and censure them for not coming, and yet be
their duty to stay away because Unconverted.

8. It is exceeding strange that it should be the Institution of God, that only
Converted Persons should come to the Lord's Supper, and yet no more care taken
that that Institution should be attended. If it were Gods will that no
Unconverted Persons should come, it is much that he does not charge his Church
to use their utmost endeavors to discover Secret Hypocrites, and to keep them
out of the Church, and that he don't command them to pluck up all the Tares
that they can discover among the Wheat; as was proposed, Mat. 13. 28. And is it
not much that he does not charge Unconverted men, not to meddle with those holy
things? and tell them that they must content themselves with Praying and
Fasting, and Hearing and being Baptized, but proceed no further: but we find no
such injunctions in the Scripture.

9. We have no cause to wonder to find some Divines of our own Nation, and some
of other Nations to deny that the Supper is a Converting Ordinance. I find
Wendiline, a great Divine in his disputations against the Lutherans
acknowledging again and again, that the Sacraments may instrumentally begin
Faith in Adult Persons; and in another place, saying, That the Sacraments of
confirmation; he means the Passover, and the Lord's Supper may organically begin
Faith. Yet there be a great many Divines that do deny this. But this is not to
be wondered at, seeing they hold, That Elect Infants that have faederal
holiness, have at the same time the internal grace of Regeneration. Thus
Voetius Statu. Elect. Unte. Conv. And he says, That Dr. Burges does prove by
many Divines, that Elect Infants have an initial and seminal Regeneration upon
their Baptism; if it were so, no doubt but their actual Conversion would be in
early days, before they come to that Age, when persons are wont to be admitted
to the Lords Supper.

10. No Christian Country does neglect this Ordinance no we do in this Land. In
our own Nation at home, so in Scotland, Holland, Denmark, Sweedland, and among
the Protestants in Germany and France, they do generally Celebrate the Memorial
of Christ's Death. This Country is singular in neglecting of it. About Forty
years past, there were a Multitude in the Country, Unbaptized: but that neglect
was taken into Examination, and now there is an alteration in that particular.
But to this day there be Four to One that do neglect the Lord's Supper; as if it
did not belong to them to magnify God upon the account of the Work of
Redemption. We are a People that pretend high in Religion, but indeed we fall
short of other People in the very Form of it, and don't come up in our practice
in this particular to many other Churches.

11. The general neglect of this Ordinance is a visible denying of the Gospel.
Christ has threatened to deny them before his Father, that do deny him before
men, Mat. 10. 33. And the neglect of this Institution is a visible denial of
Christ. Our business at the Lords Supper is to Celebrate the Memorial of
Christ's Death, and to give our Testimony to the Gospel: 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he
come. They therefore that do neglect to do this, do withold their Testimony.
They act as if they did not believe the Doctrine to be true. What construction
can be put upon it, but that they are unconcerned to give their Testimony to
Christ, and question the truth of the Gospel; it is an open reproaching of
Christ, and a visible contempt of the Gospel? This neglect has a great
tendency, to strengthen and confirm others in their Infidelity; for they act as
if they did not believe it. And many Children when they are reproved for their
Infidelity, have that excuse for themselves, That their Fathers and Mothers do
not believe the Gospel.

12. The neglect of this Ordinance is one great cause of Gods Judgments. We are
under sorrowful dispensations, and have reason to conclude this neglect to be
one especial cause of them. There be indeed abundance of Moral Evils in the
Land, that do provoke God to anger: but generally when God brought Judgments on
Israel, it was mainly for corruptions in Worship. As we may not introduce
Ceremonies of men's Invention, so we must not neglect Ordinances that are of
Divine Institution. Neglects of Worship bring destroying Judgments: Exodus 5. 3.
Let us Sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us with Pestilence, or
with Sword. Let men have what pretenses they will, yet those pretenses will not
excuse them in the neglect of Gods Ordinances. God don't allow men to be scared
out of his Worship. But I do judge that the generality that do neglect it, do
it out of a careless and profane Spirit, and then it is no wonder, if it
brings down the Wrath of God.

It is Objected by some against this Doctrine, That if the Lord's Supper be a
Converting Ordinance, then not only such as are Civil and Religious may be
admitted to it, but profane and vicious Persons for they likewise need
Conversion, and it is pity but they should have all helps to Conversion?

A. 1. That Baptism is a Converting Ordinance, but yet is not to be administered
to Adult Persons that are profane: For Baptism is only a Converting Ordinance
to the Members of the Church, who are Unconverted. The Hearing of the Word only
is the appointed means for the Conversion of others.

2. The Lords Supper is an Ordinance for the strengthening and exercising of
Grace: yet it does not follow that it is to be administered to Godly men, who
are guilty of Scandal, the need that they have to have their Grace strengthened,
is no argument that the Lord's Supper should in that case he administered to them.

3. Though the Lord Supper is a Converting Ordinance, yet it is not to be
administered to any profane and vicious men: For it is a Converting Ordinance
only to those that it is appointed to be administered unto; viz Members of the
Church walking orderly. When Church Members carry Scandalous, there are other
Ordinances appointed for their Conversion, in case they be Unconverted.

It is also Objected, That these who were Unclean were not to partake of the
Passover, Numb. 9 7 which seems to hold forth to us. That those that are
spiritually Unclean in the days of the Gospel, may not partake of the
Lord's Supper?

A 1. If those that were spiritually Unclean might come to the Passover, no
reason can be assigned why they may not also come to the Lords Supper: For the
Passover was an holy Ordinance as well as the Lords Supper; and the Passover
ought to be attended in an holy manner, as well as the Supper.

2. The Ordinances of the Old Testament were not Types of the Ordinances of the
New Testament. If the reason why the Unclean might not come to the Passover was
to signify that those who were Unregenerate might not come to the Lord's Supper:
of what Edification would that Institution be to the Jews. They did not
understand any such meaning, and if they had, it would have done them no good.
But the Ordinances of the Old Testament did signify Evangelical Doctrines,
which were of great use to the Jews, so this appointment, that Unclean Persons
might not come to the Passover did signify, that those who were spiritually
Unclean, should not have communion with God in the highest Heaven, but be
Excluded out of the Kingdom of GOD.

FINIS.

