THE Falseness OF THE Hopes of Many Professors, Showed in a SERMON Preached in
Boston, the 8 th. of July, 1708. Being the Lecture Day.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by Bartholomew Green. Sold by Samuel Phillips at the
Brick Shop, 1708.

THE Falseness of the Hopes Of Many PROFESSORS.
MATTHEW. VII. 26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand.


CHRIST JESUS in this Sermon upon the Mount, having given many Divine Rules and
Counsels, does here in the close of that Discourse, give an account of two
sorts of Hearers that were present: The first sort he commends, He compares
them to a wise man that built his house upon a Rock, v. 24, 25. The second ^ort
he condemns, v. 26, 27. In this verse he ^peaks of a second sort of Hearers:
Where (1.) We have their Character, they do them not. They do not practice what
they hear; they give attention to the Word, but do not live accordingly; they
listen to Temptation, and do not what they are Commanded; they forbear not what
they are forbidden: They please their Curiosity by hearing; they give
themselves a diversion from their Labors, they fill their Heads with
Knowledge, they get Estimation, but they do not put what they hear in practice;
there be few but do some things, but these don't yield Universal Obedience to
Christ. (2.) The censure that he passes upon them, he resembles them to a
Foolish man that builds his house upon the Sand. They act imprudently for
themselves, they are like a man that builds his house upon a moveable
foundation, which will not stand when the Torrent comes, and the Winds blow: So
these men build their hopes for Heaven, upon ^ foundation that will fail them.

The DOCTRINE is, That many Profess^r^ build their Hopes of Salvation (...)
F^undation.

H^pes of ^alvation a^^ comfortable, they are a great (...) Aff^iction* and
under the ap^^ehens^^ns of ap^roaching Death, but the will (...) is T^^t many
men's hopes have a rotten ^^^^dation. Men's hopes of Salvation are of two ^^rt
(...) ^ome are firmly built upon a Rock, others are built upon grounds that
will utterly fail them. Hopes of Salvation are no evidence that men are in a
good condition; men had need examine the foundation of their Hope. It would be
well for some Professors, if their hopes were converted into fears: They merely
cheat themselves by nourishing such hopes. Some Professors are much put to it
to get and keep an Hope for Salvation, and when they have got it, it is good
for nothing: Many Professors are careless and presumptuous, and take up with
such hopes as will utterly deceive them: Job 8.13, 14. The Hypocrites hope
shall perish, whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spiders
web. Job. 27.8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when
God shall take away his Soul? Rev. 3.17. Thou say thou art rich and
increased in goods and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched and miserable, and poor and blind and naked.

Here I shall answer two Enquiries.

Quest. 1. When do men build there hopes upon a good foundation: upon a
foundation that will not fail in a time of trial?

Before I answer this Question, I shall premise a distinction.

You must distinguish between the foundation of Faith and of Hope: Faith and
Hope are two distinct Graces: Faith is an Accepting of the offer of Salvation
by Christ: but Hope is the Expectation of Salvation: and accordingly yo^ must
distinguish the foundation of Faith from the foundation of Hope* the foundation
(...) Faith ^s Ch^i^^ J^s^s. 1 Cor. ^.11. Other f^^^dation can ^o man l^y, the
(...) which (...) jesus Christ. Ac^. 4.1^ (...) ^here Salvation (...) any
other, for (...) o^^^r Name (...) ^ven given am^nt m^n (...) we must (...) The
righteousne^^ o^ Jesus Christ freely off^re by a faithful God, is the
foundation of faith* We rely on the Grace of G^d, as the mo^^^^ cause of
Salvation, and on the Righteousness o^ Christ, as the purchasing cause of it.
Christ ^ laid in Zion for a foundation, Isa 28.1^.

An^w. There are two foundations of hope

1. A knowledge t^^t are ^ave accepted ^he offer of the G^spel There (...)
abundance (...) Pr^^^se^, m^^e (...) the Scripture (...) ^elievin^ Job ^^.3^.
H^ to (...) to (...) nev^r (...) and (...) never th^rst (...) H^^ (...) 5.24.
H^ ^^at (...) th^^ (...) and (...) I f^ (...) the (...) wanting (...) be eve^
(...), and if (...) in ^ut (...) they (...) b^liev^ (...) Christ, the (...)
very (...) to expect (...) several mistakes about men's believing in Christ:
some men take that for believing, which is not believing. Some men take
encouragement from their own Righteousness to trust in Christ, and they call
that Faith: but men may know that they do believe. Faith in Christ is a thing
that may clearly be discerned and understood; faith is sometimes very visible:
and when it is seen, men may assuredly gather, that God will bestow eternal
Life upon them: they have no reason to be afraid though they have a great many
Infirmities: but they may conclude upon the Pardon of their Sins, and
everlasting Life. Faith is like the Sword of Saul, and Bow of Jonathan, it
never fails of bringing men to Salvation: 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your
Faith even the Salvation of your Souls: Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you
with all joy and peace in believing.

2. A knowledge that we have the other Qualifications that Salvation is
promised unto. There be several Qualifications, which though they be not
properly the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, yet they are things that do
accompany Salvation. So Love to God: Jam. 1.12. God has promised the Crown of
Life to them that love him. So mortifying the deeds of the flesh: Romans 8.13. If
ye by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. So walking in
the Law of God: Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in
the law of the Lord. Having a respect to all Gods Commandments: Psalm. 119.6.
Being righteous: Mat. 13.43. Then shall the righteous shine like the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. The knowledge of God: Joh. 17.3. This is eternal life
to know thee, the only true God. There may be difficulty in making application
of these signs; there be images and false resemblances of all Grace: and this
makes some men mistake, and think they have Grace when they have none: but when
they do discover any of these signs in themselves, they may certainly conclude
that they shall be Saved. If men see any Grace in themselves, they may
certainly lot upon Salvation; they shall not need to be at a loss about their
condition: this decides the controversy about their Eternal Estate: 1 John
3.14. We know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren.

Quest. 2. When do men build their hopes upon a false foundation, and flatter
themselves with vain hopes, when their Estate is naught?

Answ. 1. When they misapply good Rules to themselves. The Rules are good, but
the application of them is false. As,

(1.) When they think that they accept of the offers of the Gospel, but do not.
Many men are pretenders to faith, that have none: Jam. 2.14. What does it
profit my Brethren, if a man say, he has faith? Isai. 48.2. They make mention
of the holy City, and stay themselves on the Lord God of Israel. The mistake
arises two ways, one is they don't understand the Nature of Faith; some have a
persuasion, that the Gospel is true, and they call that faith: some are
convinced that Justification is not by Works, but by Faith, and they call that
faith: some men hope that Christ will have pity upon them and save them, and
they call that faith: some men desire to be found in the Righteousness of
Christ, and they call that faith: some men have a confidence that God will Save
them, and they call that faith. The mistake of some others does arise from
Ignorance of the Working of their own hearts. They have a right notion of the
nature of faith, but they do not discern their own hearts: they think, they
come to Christ upon the mere encouragement of his Righteousness; but indeed
they take only part of their encouragement from thence; the first ground of
their encouragement is their own Sorrow, their desires, their love to the
People of God: yet they take in the Plea of the Righteousness of Christ. This
makes the Apostle speak as he does: Romans 11.6. If it be of Grace, it is no more
of works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of works, it is no
more Grace, otherwise work is no more work.

(2.) When they think they have the other Qualifications, that the Promises are
made to, but have them not. Many men are deceived about Gold, and about Jewels;
and so they are about Grace* Men may judge that the^ have love to Christ, when
they only have some pangs of Affe^tion unto Him. Like that man that said* (...)
where-ev^^ (...) think they love God only because the^ (...) about matters of
Religi^n, as the (...) had. Romans 1^.2. S^ (...) t^i^k, they know God because
they have g^^ m^^e literal Knowledge than other men, (...) because they have
only some common Illuminati^n; as carnal men may have* Heb. ^ Th^^ (...) b^
enlightened and ta^te of the powers ^f the W^rld to come. Men may think that
their Sin^ are mortifyed, because they are restrained, and they do^^^ indulge
themselves in any Immorality, they have escaped the Pollutions of the World. So
men in (...) think that they love Godly M^n, because they have an honorable
respect for them, (...) pity them when they a^^ Persecut^^, (...) kind to them.
They think they walk (...) law ^f the Lord, bec^^se they are (...) is every
frequent t^ing for m^n to (...) t^^mselve^, when the (...) be only (...) they
(...) upon themselv^^ (...) and Gracious Re^sons, without (...) Ex^mination,
and (...) no^^ish (...) expect^^^on of Eternal Life and Hop^ t^ere is (...)
their (...)

(...) themselves o^ (...) Men make many (...) of Trial, which will not bear
Examination.

As,

1. They judge well of themselves, because they enjoy Gospel Privileges. Some
men imagine, because of their Privileges, that God loves them, He has caused
their lot to fall in a Place of Gospel light; they are no Papists, they belong
to an Orthodox Church; they have been devoted from their Childhood unto God:
they sit under Good Teaching, and sit at the Table of the Lord: they belong to
the Militant Church, and hope to be translated to the Church Triumphant: this
is but a Sandy Foundation. John warns men against this confidence, Matt. 3.9.
Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. There is a
great deal of chaff on the floor of the Gospel Church: there be bad fish as
well as good, caught by the Net of the Gospel. The means of Grace are a savor
of Death unto Death to some: the Gospel is hid from many that hear it; many are
called and few are chosen; some are blinded and hardened by means: Luke 13.26,
27. Many will say have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have
taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tel^ you, I know you not whence you
are. A^^os 9.7. Are ^ou not as the Children of the Ethiopians unto me, O
Children of Israel?

2. Because they are Conscientious. If they ^now any thing to be a duty, they
are careful to attend it, if they know any thing to be a Sin, they are careful
to avoid it; and so they think, they are obedient and walk in the law of the
Lord: they don't walk after the flesh, but have a respect to all Gods
Commandments; but these men put a cheat upon themselves, and lay a snare for
their own Souls. Paul was Conscientious when he was a Pharisee: Phil. 3.6.
Touching the righteousness which is in the Law, was blameless. The common work
of the Spirit of God will make men Conscientious: Fears of Hell, and hopes of
Heaven, will make men studiously to avoid Sin, and to attend Duty. Generally
men's Consciences are very tender a considerable time before they come to
Christ; such as are Godly may remember, that they were Conscientious before
they were Godly, or had any Spiritual acquaintance with Christ. There is a
gracious Conscientiousness, and a legal Conscientiousness: Some that are
Conscientious for a time, do afterward loose that tenderness of Conscience,
and indulge themselves in ways of iniquity. They escape the Pollutions of the
World through the knowledge of Christ, and are again entangled therein, 2 Pet.
2.20.

3. Because they are well Esteemed of. They are generally reckoned Saints: they
understand what others say of them; and men desire their Prayers; and Godly men
love their Company, and take a delight to converse with them: but this is a
very poor argument: for the judgment of men about other men's Piety, is but a
Supposition: 1 Pet. 5.11. By Silvanus a faithful brother, as I suppose. No man
can look into the heart of another, and see the workings of a gracious Spirit.
Men cannot see the Principles of Grace in themselves, and they can neither see
the Principles nor the actings of Grace in others. Godly men are often mistaken
in others; the Disciples did not discern Judas: and though David did discern
Doeg, yet for a great while he did not discern Ahitophel. In corrupt times, men
are wont to be under great mistakes; one Hypocrite commends another: the Jews
had a mighty Opinion of the Scribes and Pharisees.

4. Because God answers some of their Prayers. They can tell several
particulars, which they have Prayed for, and God has granted; and they think
that that word has therein been made good, That the eyes of the Lord are upon
the Righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. But you must distinguish
between the granting of the thing Prayed for, and the accepting of the Prayer:
Men's Prayers may be accepted, when they are not granted; and they may be
granted when they are not accepted: the thing might be done out of common
bounty. God heard the Voice of Ishmael, Genesis 21.17. God hears the Ravens that
cry, Psalm. 147.9. It may be the thing was done out of respect to the Prayer of
some other Person, who Prayed for you in general, or possibly for that
particular Mercy. God many times hears the cries of afflicted Persons, whether
they be Godly or Ungodly: Exodus 22.22, 23. Ye shall not afflict any Widow, or
Fatherless Child, if thou afflict them in any wife, and they cry at all unto
me, I will surely hear their Cry.

5. Because they have some inward Encouragements. They have had some
comfortable word come to them with a great deal of Power. Some encouraging
Scripture has been set home upon their hearts, and they take that to be the
Witness of the Spirit; but this may be where there is no Grace: Men may have
tastes of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, yet
utterly fall away, Heb. 6.4, 5. They may receive the word with joy, yet have no
root, Matt. 13.20. Godly men have sometimes great terrors, God shakes
threatenings over them; and carnal men may have great encouragements: Sometimes
God terrifies Ungodly men, and sometimes he incourages them, to make them more
diligent in seeking him, and quicken them to Pursue after Peace with God, and
they strain their Encouragements too far.

USE. I. Hence see that many Professors will not do well at last. Such as are
building upon the Sand will fall: Mat. 7.27. Abundance of Christians will
perish, and abundance of Protestants will perish. There be ^ut a (...) at walk
i^ ^he (...), Mat^ (...) Many seek, and ^ot (...), Luke 13.^ (...) a (...)
called, and (...) Mat. 2 (...) N^^e will stand b^ those that are built (...)
R^ck* The day ^ Judg^^ (...) a trying (...); Ch^^st will not the wh^le Churches
together to Heaven. If i^ (...) be as the Sand of the Se^, (...) ^mnant (...)
shall be Saved. Christ Jesus will make a S^^^^ation between the precious (...)
the vile: He (...) me w^^^ his (...) in hi^ ^^nd, Mat. 3.12. Christ Jesus has a
(...) Kingdom here, but He (...) ^f his Kingd^m all things that st^nd, (...)
them (...). Mat. 1 ^ 1. When the (...) are g^ther^^ (...) the bad (...) ^^e
^h^p from the (...) Mat (...).

Some that have had great confidence will (...). No (...) that has (...) will
mis^ (...) ^ut many men that have had great Confi^ (...) will (...). Some
carn^l People a^ (...) ^^ey to ^^y, as the (...), Are we blind (...) They have
drunk in (...) high (...) ^^^mselves, upon slighty grounds: (...) the not
(...), ^^^^^sed i^ ^^^^^est not t^ (...) and m^^^^^ble, (...), and h^ (...).
They s^y (...) that, J^ (...). P^^v. (...); let them be striven with in
Private, they will hold their own; they live under searching Preaching that
startles many a Saint, yet they hold their integrity, they can answer any thing
that is objected against them, they lot upon going to Heaven, as much as they
do upon going to bed at Night; but when they come to be searched by Christ, and
to be weighed in the Balance, they will be found wanting, and their hopes will
crack and break, and utterly fail them: Job 27.8. Where is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God shall take away his Soul?

2. Some that have made a great blaze with their Profession. Some carnal men
have by their gifts of Prayer and Preaching, made a great blaze: there has been
a show of more than ordinary Grace, they have seemed to be like green
Olive Trees in the house of God. Some have been men of mighty zeal against this
or that moral evil; they have had a fervor of Spirit against vicious
Practices: Some have been mighty sticklers in Religious controversies, mightily
engaged for that which they called Purity, and the cause of God: but many such
men will fail at last: Men that have Prophesyed it Christ's Name, and in his
Name have cast out Devils, will be rejected by Christ, Mat. 7.22, 23* Foolish
Virgins that had shining Lamps will be excluded. The Pharisees made a mighty
blaze, as if they were the most Eminent men in the World. They were very
Scrupulous, they would not eat with unwash'd hands, they took abundance of
pains to make Proselytes, they abounded in Prayers and Fastings; yet they
missed of Salvation, Mat. 23.33.

3. Some that have the good Opinion of other men. Many men are generally
accounted Saints, they live in honor, and dye in honor, they have an Innocent
and Religious carriage, and thereby a good Reputation; but many of these men
have only had a common work of the Spirit, and they will perish at last. Saints
when they come to Heaven, will miss many that they thought to see there: Wicked
men when they come to Hell, will find many there, that lived in good
Reputation; when they dye, ^hen give a good Character of them, and they say ^ow
there is an end of all their troubles, and they have a reward of their
Obedience; there is no great cause of Mourning on their account, for ^hey are
well on it: Men say, Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord; but alas, the
men are gone the other way, they never come within ^housands of Miles of
Heaven: their condition was like the condition of that Young man, Mat. ^9.20.
Multitudes that are Sainted on earth, are Damned in Hell.

4. Some that have been Helps to the Souls of others. It is an Honor and a
Mercy to be Serviceable to the Souls of others, to be a means of the Conversion
of Sinners, and of the Edification of Saints: but some have been so that have
missed of Salvation themselves. Men that are Instruments to awaken others, may
be secure themselves; Men that are Instruments to Convert others, may be
Unconverted themselves. The efficacy of the Word of God does not wholly depend
upon the Piety of him that dispenses it: Men may Preach Profitably to others,
yet be cast-aways themselves: Men may call others to Meeting, yet not go
themselves: So men may call others to Heaven, yet not go thither themselves.
Men that are in a carnal condition, may be Instruments to edify others. The
Crows brought flesh and bread to Elijah. Many that have been helps to the Souls
of others, may loose their own Souls: Men may have gifts for the Edification of
others, yet not have Grace for the Salvation of their own Souls. Mat. 7.22, 23.
Many shall say in that day, have we not Prophesied in thy Name? --

USE. II. Of Examination.
Whether you have built upon a sandy Foundation, o^ not? There be a great many
of you, that have hopes that you are in a State of Salvation, and are
nourishing some expectations of Eternal Life and it would be very strange if
none of you should build your hopes upon a solid foundation, and it would be
more strange if none of you should build your hopes upon a sandy foundation:
Such Persons are generally mingled in Assemblies. The Wheat and the Chaff are
mixed together: So the Tares and the Wheat. Do not say that it is not likely
that your hopes are built upon the ^and; but if there be any ground of
Suspicion, it is worth the while to Examine your Selves Some that have made a
Profession for many years, have found that the^^ foundation was not good; and
have been con^^nced, that they have for many years deceived themselves, it may
be so with some of you: if y^u Examine your Selves, you may make the (...)
discovery; self-flattery is a common disease. P^ ^0 1^ The^^ (...) a Generation
that are pure in t^^ (...) eyes* yet are nor cleansed from their filthin^^^
(...) I^ you Examine your Selves, you may d^^cover the falsenes of your hopes.
Be pers^^ded then to take pains* You must be Exam^^^d thoroughly therefore
Examine your

In order to your Examining of your selves, I shall propose two questions to
you.

Question I.
Have you any thing Substantial indeed to plead for your selves? Have you any
thing to plead that is indeed Evidential, that puts the goodness of your hopes
beyond controversy? I take it for granted that you have several things to plead
for your selves, you have arguments enough, if they be but good; the Question
is, Whether any of them be of weight? A man that goes to Law, had need see to
his tackling* A man that is to have a trial before the Tribunal of Christ, had
need to see that he has that which will bear Examination. Are your pleas such
as are common to Hypocrites? There are some pleas, which if they be true, are
very strong. That is a good plea, that God has made Spiritual discoveries of
his Glory, and the Glory of Christ to their Souls: That is a good plea, that
they have had the visible actings of Grace, Faith and Love and Repentance; if
men have been able to say with Peter, Lord, thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee. That is a good plea, that God has by his Spirit
manifested his love unto them. But men are ready to lay weight upon
insufficient pleas, they take notice of several probabilities, but many false
hearted men (...) make the same pleas; they say they are (...) for their Sins,
they desire to walk in ways (...) Obedience, they are not tainted with
Im^^^^^lities, they seek God daily, they read good ^^^ks, etc. But the inquiry
is, Whether you (...) any thing that is peculiar to Saints? Twenty
probabilities, will not prove you to be ^n heir of Salvation: Twenty
probabilities may make the thing more probable, but they will not make a
Certainty: You cannot draw a certain conclusion, unless you have something
^ubstantial to prove it.

Here Consider two things.
1. Th^^ may stand by you, when you are well, (...) w^^l not stand by you, when
you are dying. Many men when they are in health are taken (...) about Worldly
business, and carnal injoy^ents, and have very little sense of Eternal things,
and then they can make a shift to quiet themselves with some probabilities of
Eternal ^ife: When Death is looked upon a remote ^^ing, small encouragement
will support their (...), but when they come to dye, they are (...) times
sensible that it is a dreadful thing (...) ^arry, if they should be mistaken,
they ^ould be unspeakably miserable, and they don't ^ow how to content
themselves with uncer^^^ hopes; if a man should tell them, that there is a
probability of their Salvation, they think with themselves, But what if it
should be otherwise? how can I bear the blackness of darkness, and the never
dying worm, and unquenchable fire? Now they are more accurate in searching
themselves, they cannot satisfy themselves with small appearances, and slender
grounds of comfort; and sometimes they plainly discern that their hopes were
delusions, that they have miserably cheated themselves, that their Religion has
been nothing else but Formality. I have heard a dying Professor bitterly bewail
the want of Sincerity. Then men will consider more thoroughly after what manner
they have lived. When the Bridegroom was coming, the foolish Virgins complain,
That their Lamps were gone out, Mat. 25.8. Thus they are terrifyed: Job 27.20.
Terrors take hold upon him as waters.

2. That way stand by you, when you are dying, that will not stand by you when you
are dead. Men when they are dying, may be under delusion, especially if they
have Religious affections* they are sorry for their Sins, and intend if God
spares them, to live more carefully than they have done, and they gather hopes
from thence: they make a kind of Faith, and that keeps them from despair:
Sometimes dying men flatter themselves, and make a great matter of frivolous
signs; men's eyes are not always open when they are dying: the Devil cheats them
then, and sooths them up with vain hopes of Salvation. Psalm. 73.4. There are no
bands in their death. But when they are dead they shall see things as they are,
God determines things right. If carnal men go out of the World with great
hopes, their hopes will vanish in a Moment; when they are dead, their hopes
will be as the giving up of the ghost. Job 27.8. Where is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though be has gained, when God shall take away his Soul?

Question. II.
Is there nothing Substantial against you? You take notice of many things that
make you afraid, as that you are ready to be carried away with Temptation, to
do such things again as you have confessed before God. You are ready to excuse
your selves from duty, you have an unsavory Spirit; you are apt to seek your
self, with a neglect of Gods glory; you are very formal in Duties of Religion;
you feel a great deal of Pride and Discontent, and Worldliness, and Unbelief
working in your own hearts: but you recover your selves, and say that such
things are consistent with a principle of Grace: and you hear others of the
People of God complaining of these things, and good men are often in a bad
frame. Paul found a law in his Members warring against the law of his mind.
Abraham was scared into a denial of his Wife: Sarah denied that she laughed:
Hezekiah's heart was lifted up, and he rendered not according to the benefit
received: Jonah was froward, and Barnabas was carried away with dissimulation;
and by such considerations they strengthen their hopes: but look more narrowly
into things; Is there nothing Substantial against you? Do you not allow your
self in the neglect of some duty? Do you not live in a way of disobedience to
some of Gods Commands? Does not a Self-seeking Spirit rule you? Do you Mourn
for Sin as the greatest evil? Are you not under the dominion of some Lust? Are
you not an utter stranger to the Glory of God, and Jesus Christ? Do you not
live upon your own Righteousness? Is there nothing that is inconsistent with
Grace? if there be any thing Evidential against you, your hopes are vain.

Here consider two things.
1. You may deceive men, but not GOD. Men that have not a spark of Grace in
their hearts may carry it so, that men may take them for very holy men: They
talk Religiously, abstain from vicious courses, have an orderly and religious
Conversation, and so they may pass currently among men for Godly men; and live
Twenty or Thirty years in good Reputation: Men do not discern what their ends
be, what their Spirit is, nor those Secret practices that they are guilty of.
Men may have blemishes on their bodies, and others know nothing of them: Men
may be very poor and others not know it: So men may be Spiritually blind and
dead, and others be ignorant of it: but there is no hiding of the thing from
God; the hearts of men are under his eye; God has a Window into every man's
heart: Men may cheat other men; but they cannot cheat God. Men don't know the
thoughts of Gods heart any further than he reveals them, but God knows their
hearts; neither the Spirituality of the Soul, nor the darkness of the Night;
nor the false shows that men make, can be a cover to hide the heart from God:
all thoughts, desires, purposes and ends are open unto God: God sees not as
man sees: Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart and try the reins, to render
to every man according to his works* though the heart is very deceitful, yet it
is not so deceitful as to deceive GOD.

2. You may deceive your selves, but not GOD. Many Persons have deceived
themselves: Men often take that for Silver that is not Silver, and that for
Grace which is not: the difference is narrow between true Faith and common
Faith, between saving Love and common affection, between Godly sorrow and legal
sorrow, between Godly zeal and common zeal. Sometimes men do not search
accurately, sometimes their common affections work so high, that they carry a
mighty resemblance of Grace; and men are naturally inclined to have a
favorable Opinion of themselves, and pronounce a Sentence of justification on
themselves, without sufficient grounds: Men are acquitted in the Court of
Conscience, without sufficient cause: but they cannot deceive God, He sees
through all shows and pretenses, and can distinguish between the substance and
the shadow* God is better acquainted with men, than men are with themselves:
Psalm. 139.2. Thou understandest my thought afar off.

USE III. Of Warning.
That you don't build your hopes upon a sandy foundation. He is a foolish man
that builds his house upon the Sand, Mat. 7.26. Men are careful that they may
not expose themselves to great hazards, but he that builds upon the Sand, is in
extreme danger: Hopes built on the Sand are flattering and deceitful hopes, all
the advantage of them is, that the men go the more quietly unto Hell. It is
well worth the while to build upon a Rock; but men will loose their labor that
build upon the Sand. If the design of men be Salvation, these hopes will be an
hindrance to them, it is better a great deal to be without hopes, than to have
hopes built upon the Sand. If men build upon the Sand, the building will fall:
And at the time, when you should principally have the benefit of your Religion,
your hopes will fall about your ears: therefore be Careful.

I shall apply this Warning particularly.
1. To Ignorant Professors. When Ignorant Persons have a case depending in the
Law, it is an easy thing for a crafty Fellow to make them believe that their
case is good: So Satan has great advantage on Ignorant Professors; blind men
may easily be led into the ditch. Some men be Ignorant which be certain signs,
and which be uncertain; they are likely to depend upon those that are
uncertain. Some men cannot tell wherein the Nature of true Faith does lie,
neither are they able to distinguish common from Saving Grace; such are in
great danger to be imposed on; Ignorant men are in the next preparation to be
deceived: The darkness of the mind exposes them; it is easy to deceive the
simple, Romans 16.18. Men that do not know Silver, may easily be cheated about
it. Men that are ignorant of the Law, are not fit to be Judges. Ignorance makes
men bold to continue in dangerous ways. It is strange that knowing Persons
should continue in dangerous ways, 1 Cor. 6.9. but it is not strange to see
Ignorant People continue in such ways.

2. To such as have not had a distinct work of Conversion. Some men have had a
very accurate and distinct work of Conversion, they have been plainly led along
from step to step, and have been clearly brought home to CHRIST: but there be
some others with whom the case is otherwise, they pretend to be Saints, but
they give a miserable account of their Conversion: Some of them may be
Converted, but many of them are not: ordinarily if men be Converted they know
more about it: for Conscience is a great observer of men's behavior, and such
men are in great hazard to build upon the Sand: It is possible for them to
attain to a certainty: Joh. 9.25. One thing I know, that whereas I was blind,
now I see. But many such Persons do deceive themselves, their arguments for a
Converted condition are far short of a demonstration.

3. To such Professors as are carried on in a still w^y. Some Professors are
mightily hurried with Temptation: They have mighty fears and terrors, and Satan
is casting in his fiery darts; these are under more advantage to look to
themselves, and many times such have great Consolations: But there be some
others, that go on in a still quiet way, they have no great Sorrow, nor any
great Joys, go on in a way of Profession one year after another, and they have
little Temptation and little Comfort, they have scarce any dark hours, they
have little to say against themselves, and very little to say for themselves;
it will be a wonder if many of these men do not miscarry, if they be Godly it
is much they have no more Temptation; if they be Godly it is much they have no
more comfort; it is well if their quietness do not arise from stupidity: they
had need diligently to Examine themselves. When the strong man armed keeps the
house, many times all is quiet, Luke 11.21.

4. To Old Professors. There be some Young Christians that are very much
exercised with fears, whether their Sins be Pardoned, or not. That is the
occasion of those words, 1 John 2.12. I have written to you Children, because
your Si^s are forgiven for his Names sake. But there be some Old Professors
that have had an hope a great while: and it is so confirmed by custom and
length of time, that they think much to Examine their hopes, they say, they
have been in the Church Twenty or Thirty years, and they think they are too old
now to begin, and to lay a foundation of Religion. They do not know certainly
what their Religion is, but they must run the venture of it they have looked
upon their hopes to be pretty good these many years, and they cannot tell how
to be brought to it now, to call all in question again; they are for running
the venture of it, right or wrong; there is more hopes of some vicious men than
of these: Mat. 21.31. Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of God
before you.

FINIS.

