The Redeemed Captive, Returning to ZION. A Faithful HISTORY OF Remarkable
Occurrences, IN THE Captivity AND THE Deliverance OF Mr. John Williams;
Minister of the Gospel, in DEERFIELD, Who, in the Desolation which befell that
Plantation, by an Incursion of the French and Indians, was by Them carried
away, with his Family, and his Neighborhood, unto CANADA.

Whereto there is annexed a SERMON Preached by him, upon his RETURN, at the
Lecture in Boston, December. 5. 1706. On those Words, Luke 8. 39. Return to thine
own House, and show how great Things God has done unto thee.

Boston in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop
1707.

Imprimatur, J. Dudley.

The DEDICATION. To His EXCELLENCY, JOSEPH DUDLEY, Esqr. Captain General and
GOVERNOR in Chief, in and over Her Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay
in New England, etc.
SIR,
IT was a Satirical Answer, and deeply reproachful to Mankind, which the
Philosopher gave to that Question, What soonest grows old? Replied, Thanks. The
reproach of it would not be so sensible, were there not sensible Demonstrations
of the Truth of it, in those that wear the Character of the Ingenuous. Such as
are at first Surprised at, and seem to have no common relish of Divine
Goodness; yet too soon lose the Impression: They Sang God's Praise, but soon
forgot His Works. That it should be thus with respect to our Ben^factors on
Earth, is contrary to the Ingenuity of Humane Nature: But that our grateful
Resentments of the Signal Favors of Heaven, should soon be worn off by Time,
is to the last degree Criminal and Unpardonable.

It would be unaccountable Stupidity in me, not to maintain the most Lively and
Awful Sense of Divine Rebukes, which the Holy GOD has seen meet in Spotless
Sovereignty to dispense to me, my Family and People, in delivering us into the
hands of those that Hated us: who Led us into a strange Land; My Soul has These
still in Remembrance, and is Humbled in me: However GOD has given us plentiful
occasion to Sing of Mercy as well as Judgment. The wonders of Divine Mercy,
which we have seen in the Land of our Captivity, and Deliverance therefrom,
cannot be forgotten without incurring the guilt of the blackest Ingratitude.

To preserve the Memory of These, it has been thought advisable to Publish a
Short Account of some of Those Signal Appearances of Divine Power and Goodness
for us; hoping it may Serve to excite the Praise, Faith and Hope of all that
Love GOD; And may pecultarly Serve to Cherish a Grateful Spirit, and to render
the Impressions of GOD' S Mighty Works indelible on my Heart, and on Those that
with me, have seen the Wonders of the Lord, and Tasted of His Salvation: That
we may not fall under that heavy Charge made against Israel of old, Psalm. 78.
11, 42. They forgot His works, and the wonders He showed them: They remembered
not His Hand, nor the Day that He delivered them from the Enemy.

And I cannot SIR, but think it most agreeable to my Duty to GOD our Supreme
Redeemer, to mention your EXCELLENCY'S Name with Honor; Since Heaven has
Honored you as the prime Instrument in returning our Captivity. Sure I am, The
Laws of Justice and Gratitude (which are the Laws of God) do challenge from us
the most Public acknowledgments of your uncommon Sympathy with us, your
Children, in our bonds, Expressed in all Endearing methods of Parental Care and
Tenderness. All your People are cherisht under your Wings, happy in your
Government; and are obliged to Bless GOD for you: And among your People, those
that are immediately exposed to the Outrages of the Enemy, have peculiarly felt
Refreshment from the benign Influences of your Wise and Tender Conduct; and are
under the most Sensible engagements to acknowledge your EXCELLENCY, under GOD,
as the breath of their Nostrils.

Your Uncommon Sagacity and Prudence, in contriving to loose the Bonds of your
Captived Children; your unwearied Vigor, and Application, in pursuing them, to
work our Deliverance, can never be enough Praised. It is most Notorious that
nothing was thought too Difficult by you to Effect this Design; in that you
readily sent your own Son, Mr. William Dudley, to undergo the hazards and
hardships of a Tedious Voyage, that this affair might be Transacted with
Success; which must not be forgotten, as an Expression of your great Solicitude
and Zeal to recover us from the Tyranny and Oppression of our Captivity.

I doubt not but that the GOD, whom herein you have Served, will remember, and
gloriously Reward you; And may Heaven long preserve you at our Helm, a Blessing
so necessary for the Tranquillity of this Province, in this Dark and Tempestuous
Season; May the best of Blessings from the Father of Lights, be showred down
upon your Person, Family and Government; which shall be the Prayer of,

Your EXCELLENCY'S Most Humble, Obedient, and Dutiful Servant, John Williams.
(...) (...)
THE Redeemed Captive, Returning TO ZION.
THE History I am going to Write, proves, That Days of Fasting and Prayer
without REFORMATION, will not avail, to Turn away the Anger of God from a
Professing People; and yet Witnesses, How very advantageous, gracious
Supplications are, to prepare particular Christians, Patiently to suffer the
Will of God, in very trying Public Calamities. For some of us moved with fear,
set apart, a day of Prayer, to ask of God, either to spare, and save us from
the hands of our Enemies, or to prepare us to Sanctify, and Honor Him in what
way soever, He should come sorth, toward us. The Places of Scripture from
whence we were entertained, were Genesis 32. 10, 11. I am not worthy of the least
of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou ^ast showed unto thy
servant (...) Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my Brother, from the
hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the Mother
with the Children. [In the forenoon.] And Genesis 32. 26. And he said, Let me go,
for the day breaks: and he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me. [In the afternoon.] From which we were called upon to spread the causes of
fear, relating to our own Selves, or Families before God; as also, how it
becomes us with an undeniable importunity to be following God, with earnest
Prayers for His blessing, in every condition. And it is very Observable; how
GOD ordered our Prayers, in a peculiar manner to be going up to Him; to prepare
us with a right Christian Spirit, to undergo, and endure Suffering Trials.

Not long after, the Holy, and Righteous God, brought us under great Trials, as
to our Persons and Families, which put us under a necessity, of spreading
before Him in a Wilderness, the distressing dangers and calamities of our
Relations; Yea, that called on us notwithstanding seeming present frowns, to
resolve by His Grace not to be sent away without a blessing. Jacob in wrestling
has the hollow of his Thigh put out of joint; and it is said to him, Let me go:
yet he is rather animated, to an Heroical Christian resolution to continue
earnest, for the blessing, than discouraged from asking.

ON the Twenty-ninth of February 1703, 4. Not long before break of day, the
Enemy came in like a Flood upon us; our Watch being unfaithful* an evil whose
awful effects, in a surprizal of our Fort, should bespeak all Watchmen to
avoid, as they would not bring the charge of blood upon themselves. They came
to my House in the beginning of the Onset, and by their violent endeavors to
break open Doors, and Windows, with Axes, and Hatchets, Awakened me out of
Sleep; on which I leapt out of bed, and running toward the door, perceived the
Enemy making their entrance into the House: I called to awaken two Soldiers;
in the Chamber; and returned toward my bedside, for my Arms: the Enemy
immediately brake into the Room, I judge to the number of Twenty, with Painted
Faces, and hideous Acclamations. I reached up my hands to the Bed-tester, for
my Pistol, uttering a short Petition to God, For Everlasting Mercies for me and
mine, on the account of the Merits of our Glorified Redeemer; Expecting a
present passage through the Valley of the shadow of Death: Saying in my self,
as Isaiah 38. 10, 11. I said, in the cutting off my days, I shall go to the
gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I shall
not see the Lord, even the Lord, in the land of the Living: I shall behold man
no more with the inhabitants of the World. Taking down my Pistol, I Cockt it,
and put it to the breast of the first Indian who came up; but my Pistol missing
fire, I was seized by Three Indians, who disarmed me, and bound me Naked, as I
was in, my Shirt, and so I stood for near the space of an hour: binding me,
they told me they would carry me to Quebeck. My Pistol missing fire, was an
occasion of my Life's being preserved: Since which I have also found it
profitable to be crossed in my own Will. The judgment of God did not long
slumber* against one of the Three which took me, who was a Captain, for by
Sunrising he received a Mortal Shot* from my next Neighbors house; who
opposed so great a number of French and Indians as Three hundred, and yet were
no more than Seven men in an Ungarison'd house.

I cannot relate the distressing care I had for my dear Wife, who had lien-in
but a few Weeks before, and for my poor Children, Family, and Christian
Neighbors. The Enemy fell to riffling the house, and entered in great numbers
into every room of the house. I begged of God, to Remember Mercy in the midst of
Judgment: that He would so far restain their Wrath, as to prevent their
Murdering of us: that we might have Grace to Glorify His Name, whether in Life
or Death; and as I wa^ able committed our State to God. The Enemies who entered
the House were all of them Indians and Marqua's, insulted over me a while,
holding up Hatchets over my head, threatening to burn all I had; but yet God
beyond expectation made us in a great measure to be Pityed: for though some were
so cruel and barbarous as to take, and carry to the door, Two of my Children
and Murder them, as also a Negro Woman; yet they gave me liberty to put on my
Clothes, keeping me bound with a Cord on one arm, till I put on my Cloths to
the other; and then changing my Cord, they let me dress my self, and then
Pinioned me again. Gave liberty to my dear Wife to dress herself, and our
Children. About Sun an hour high, we were all carried out of the house, for a
March, and saw many of the Houses of my Neighbors in Flames, perceiving the
whole Fort, one house excepted, to be taken. Who can tell, what Sorrows pierced
our Souls, when we saw our selves carried away from Gods Sanctuary, to go into
a strange Land, exposed to so many Trials? the journey being at least Three
hundred Miles we were to Travel; the Snow up to the Knees, and we never inured
to such hardships and fatigues* the place we were to be carried to, a Popish
Country. Upon my parting from the Town they fired my House and Barn. We were
carried over the River, to the foot of the Mountain, about a Mile from my
House, where we found, a great number of our Christian Neighbors, Men, Women
and Children, to the number of an hundred, Nineteen of which were afterward
Murdered by the Way, and Two starved to Death, near Cowass, in a time of great
Scarcity or Famine, the Salvages underwent there. When we came to the foot of
our Mountain, they took away our Shoes, and gave us, in the room of them
Indian-Shoes, to prepare us for our Travel. Whilst we were there the English
beat out a Company, that remained in the Town, and pursued them to the River,
Killing and Wounding many of them; but the body of the Army, being Alarmed,
they repulsed those few English that pursued them.

I am not able to give you an account of the number of the Enemy Slain, but I
observed after this fight, no great insulting Mirth, as I expected; and saw
many Wounded Persons, and for several days together they buried of their party,
and one of chief Note among the Macqua's. The Governor of Canada, told me, his
Army had that Success with the loss but of Eleven men, Three Frenchmen, One of
which was the Lieutenant of the Army, Five Macqua's, and Three Indians: but
after my Arrival at Quebeck, I spoke with an English man, who was taken the
last War, and Married there, and of their Religion; who told me, they lost
above Forty, and that many were Wounded: I replied the Governor of Canada
said, they lost but Eleven men: He answered, it is true, That there were but
Eleven killed outright at the taking of the Fort, but that many others were
Wounded, among whom was the Ensign of the French; but said he, they had a fight
in the Meadow, and that in both Engagements, they lost more than Forty. Some of
the Soldiers, both French and Indians then present told me so (said he)
adding, That the French always endeavor, to conceal the number of their Slain.

After this, we went up the Mountain, and saw the smoke of the Fires in the
Town, and beheld the awful desolations of our Town: And before we marched any
farther, they killed a Sucking Child of the English. There were slain by the
Enemy of the Inhabitants of our Town to the number of Thirty-eight, besides
Nine of the Neighboring Towns* We Traveled not far the first day; God made the
Heathen, so to Pity our Children, that though they had several Wounded Persons,
of their own to carry, upon their Shoulders, for Thirty Miles, before they came
to the River, yet they carried our Children, incapable of Traveling, upon
their Shoulders, and in their Arms. When we came to our Lodging place, the
first Night, they dugg away the ^now, and made some Wigwams, cut down some of
the small branches of Spruce-trees to lie down on, and gave the Prisoners
somewhat to eat; but we had but little Appetite. I was Pinioned, and bound
^own that Night, and so I was every Night whilst I was with the Army. Some of
the Enemy who brought drink with them, from the Town, fell to Drinking, and in
their Drunken fit, they killed my Negro man, the only dead Person, I either saw
at the Town, or in the Way. In the Night an English Man made his escape: in the
Morning I was called for, and ordered by the General to tell the English, That
if any more made their escape, they would burn the rest of the Prisoners. He
that took me was unwilling to let me speak with any of the Prisoners, as we
Marched; but on the Morning of the Second day, he being appointed to guard the
Rear, I was put into the hands of my other Master, Who permitted me to speak to
my Wife, when I overtook her, and to Walk with her to help her in her Journey.
On the Way we discoursed of the happiness of them who had a right to an House
not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens; and God for a Father, and Friend;
as also, That it was our reasonable Duty, quietly to submit, to the Will of
God, and to say, The Will of the Lord be done. My Wife told me her strength of
body began to fail, and that I must expect to part with her; Saying, She hoped
God would preserve my Life, and the Life of some, if not of all of our
Children, with us; and commended to me, under God, the care of them She never
spoke any discontented Word as to what had befal'n us, but with suitable
expressions justified God, in what had befal'n us. We soon made an halt, in
which time my chief Surviving Master came up, upon which I was put upon
Marching with the foremost, and so made to take my last farewell of my dear
Wife, the desire of my Eyes, and companion in many Mercies and Afflictions.
Upon our Separation from each other, we asked for each other, Grace sufficient,
for what God should call us to: After our being parted from one another, she
spent the few remaining Minutes of her stay, in Reading the Holy Scriptures;
which she was wont Personally every day to delight her Soul in Reading,
Praying, Meditating of, and over, by her self, in her Closet, over and above
what she heard out of them in our Family Worship. I was made to Wade over a
small River, and so were all the English, the Water above Knee-deep, the Stream
very Swift; and after that, to Travel up a small Mountain, my Strength was
almost spent, before I came to the top of it: No sooner had I overcome the
difficulty of that ascent, but I was permitted to sit down, and be unburthened
of my Pack; I sat pitying those who were behind, and entreated my Master, to
let me go down, and help up my Wife, but he refused, and would not le^ me stir
from him. I asked each of the Prisoner (as they passed by (...)) after her, and
heard that i^ passing through the abovesaid River, she fell down and was
plunged over Head and Ears in the Water after which she traveled not far, ^or
at the Foot (...) this Mountain, the cruel and blood thirsty Salvage who took
her, slew her with his Hatchet, at one stroke; the tidings of which were very
awful: and yet such was the hard-heartedness of the Adversary, that my Tears
were reckoned to me as a reproach. My loss, and the loss of my Children was
great, our hearts were so filled with Sorrow, that nothing but the comfortable
hopes of her being taken away in Mercy, to her self, from the evils we were to
see, feel and suffer under; (and joined to the Assembly of the Spirits of just
men made perfect, to rest in Peace, and joy unspeakable, and full of glory; and
the good pleasure of God thus to exercise us,) could have kept us from sinking
under, at that time. That Scripture, Job 1. 21. -- Naked came I out of my
Mothers womb, and Naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord: Was brought to my Mind, and
from it, That an Afflicting God was to be Glorified; with some other places of
Scripture, to persuade to a Patient bearing my Afflictions.

We were again called upon to March, with a far heavier Burden on my Spirits,
than on my Back, I begged of God, to Overruled in His Providence, that the
Corpse of One so dear to me, and of one whose Spirit, He had taken to dwell
with Him in Glory, might meet with a Christian burial, and not be left for
Meat, to the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth: A Mercy that God
graciously vouchsafed to grant. For God put it into the hearts of my
Neighbors, to come out as far as she lay, to take up her Corpse, recarry it to
the Town, and decently to bury it, soon after. In our March they killed another
Sucking Infant of one of my Neighbors; and before Night, a Girl of about
Eleven years of Age. I was made to Mourn, at the Consideration of my Flocks
being so far a Flock of Slaughter, many being Slain in the Town, and so many
Murdered in so few Miles from the Town; and from fears what we must yet expect,
from such who delightfully imbrued their hands in the blood of so many of His
People. When we came to our lodging Place, an Indian Captain from the Eastward
spoke to my Master about killing of me, and taking off my Scalp. I lift up my
heart to God, to implore His Grace, and Mercy in such a time of need; and
afterward I told my Master, if he intended to kill me, I desired he would let
me know of it, assuring him that my Death after a promise of Quarter would
bring the guilt of blood upon him. He told me he would not kill me: We laid
down and Slept for God Sustained and kept us. In the Morning we were all called
before the chief Sachems of the Macqua's, and Indians, that a more equal
distribution might be made of the Prisoners, among them: at my going from the
Wigwam, my best Clothing was taken away from me. As I came nigh the Place
appointed, some of the Captives met me, and told me, they thought the Enemies
were going to burn some of us, for they had peeled off the bark from several
Trees, and acted very strangely. To whom I replied, They could act nothing
against us, but as they were permitted of God, and I was persuaded, He would
prevent such Severities. When we came to the Wigwam appointed, several of the
Captives were taken from their former Masters, and put into the hands of
others: but I was sent again to my two Masters, who brought me from my House.

In our fourth days March the Enemy killed another of my Neighbors, who being
nigh the time of Travail, was wearied with her Journey. When we came to the
great River, the Enemy took Slayes to draw their Wounded, several of our
Children, and their Packs; and Marched a great pace. I Traveled many hours in
Water up to the ankles: near Night I was very Lame, having before my Travel
wronged my anckle-bone and sinews: I thought, so did others, that I should not
be able to hold out to Travel far. I lift up my Heart to God (my only refuge)
to remove my Lameness, and carry me through with my Children and Neighbors, if
He judged it best; however I desired God would be with me in my great Change,
if He called me by such a Death to Glorify Him: and that He would take care of
my Children, and Neighbors, and bless them; and within a little space of time,
I was well of my Lameness, to the joy of my Children, and Neighbors, that saw
so great an alteration in my Traveling.

On the Saturday, the Journey was long and tedious; we traveled with such
speed, that four Women were tired, and then Slain by them who led them Captive.

On the Sabbath Day we rested, and I was permitted to Pray and Preach to the
Captives. The place of Scripture spoken from, was Lam. 1. 18. The Lord ^s
righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment: ^ear, I pray you, all
people, and behold my Sorrow: my virgins and (...) men are gone into captivity.
The Enemy who said to us, Sing us one of Zions Songs; were ready some of them,
to upbraid us, because our Singing was not so loud as theirs. When the Macqua's
and Indians were chief in power, we had this revival in our bondage; to join
together in the Worship of God, and encourage one another to a Patient bearing
the Indignation of the Lord, till he should plead our cause. When we arrived to
New France we were forbiden Praying one with another, or joining together in
the Service of God.

The next day, soon after we Marched, we had an Alarm; on which many of the
English were bound: I was then near the Front, and my Masters not with me; so I
was not bound. This Alarm was occasioned by some Indians shooting at Geese that
flew over them, that put them into a considerable consternation, and fright:
but after they came to understand they were not pursued by the English, they
boasted, That the English would not come out after them, as they had boasted
before, we began our Journey in the Morning. They killed this day Two Women,
who were so faint they could not Travel.

The next day in the Morning, before we Traveled, one Mary Brooks, a pious
Young Woman, came to the Wigwam where I was, and told me She desired to bless
God, who had inclined the heart of her Master, to let her come to take her
farewell to me. Said she, by my falls on the Ice yesterday I wronged my self,
causing an Abortion this Night, so that I am not able to Travel far; I know
they will kill me to day: but (says she) God has (Praised be His Name) by His
Spirit with His Word, strengthened me to my last encounter with Death: and
mentioned to me some places of Scripture so seasonably sent in for her support.
And (says she) I am not afraid of Death, I can through the Grace of God,
cheerfully submit to the Will of God. Pray for me (said she) at parting, That
God would take me to Himself. Accordingly she was killed that day. I mention it
to the end, I may stir up all in their Young Days, to improve the Death of
CHRIST by Faith, to a giving them an holy boldness in the day of Death.

The next day we were made to Scatter one from another into smaller Companies;
and one of my Children carried away with Indians, belonging to the Eastern
parts. At Night my Master came to me, with my Pistol in his hand, and put it to
my breast, and said, Now I will kill you, for (said he) at your House you would
have killed me with it if you could. But by the Grace of God, I was not much
daunted, and whatever his intention might be; God prevented my Death.

The next day, I was again permitted to Pray with that Company of Captives with
me, and we allowed to Sing a Psalm together. After which, I was taken from all
the Company of the English, excepting two Children of my Neighbors, one of
which a Girl of four years of Age, was killed by her Maqua Master, the next
Morning, the Snow being so deep, when we left the River, that he could not
carry the Child and his Pack too.

When the Sabbath came, one Indian staid with me, and a little Boy Nine years
old, whilst the rest went a hunting. And when I was here, I thought with my
self, that God had now separated me from the Congregation of His People, who
were now in His Sanctuary where He Commands the B^^ssing, even Life for ever:
And made to bewail my Unfruitfulness under, and Unthankfulness for such a
Mercy. When my Spirit was almost overwhelmed within me at the consideration of
what had passed over me, and what was to be expected; I was ready almost to
Sink in my Spirit. But God spoke those Words with a greater efficacy then man
could speak them, for my strengthening and support: Psalm. 118. 17. I shall not
dye, but live: and declare the works of the Lord. Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou
cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God:
for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
Nehem. 1. 8, 9. Remember I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
Servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the
Nations: But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though
there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I
gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen,
to set my Name there. Those Three places of Scripture, one after another by the
Grace of God, strengthened my Hopes, that God would so far restrain the Wrath
of the Adversary, that the greatest number of us left alive, should be carried
through so tedious a Journey. That though my Children had no Father to take care
of them, that Word quieted me to a patient waiting to see the end the Lord
would make, (...) 19. 11. Leave thy fatherless Children, I will preserve them
al^ve, and let thy Widows trust in me. Accordingly God carried them Wonderfully
through great Difficulties and Dangers. My youngest Daughter, Aged Seven years,
was carried all the Journey, and looked after with a great deal of Tenderness.
My youngest Son, Aged Four years, was Wonderfully preserved from Death; for
though they that carried him, or draw'd him on Sleyes, were tired with their
Journeys, yet their Salvage cruel Tempers, were so overruled by God, that they
did not kill him, but in their pity, ^he was spared, and others would take care
of him; so that four times on the Journey he was spared, and others would take
care of him, till at last he arrived at Mont-Royal, where a French Gentlewoman
pitying the Child, redeemed it out of the hands of the Heathen. My Son Samuel,
and my Eldest Daughter were pityed, so as to be drawn on Sleyes, when unable to
Travel. And though they suffered very much through Scarcity of Food, and tedious
Journeys, they were carried through to Mont-Royal. And my Son Stephen about
Eleven years of Age, Wonderfully preserved from Death, in the Famine whereof
three English Persons dyed, and after Eight Months brought into Shamblee.

My Master returned on the Evening of the Sabbath, and told me, he had killed
five Mo^se. The next day we removed to the place where he killed them. We
tarryed there three days, till we had roasted and dried the Meat. My Master made
me a pair of Snow-shoes, for (said he) You cannot possibly Travel without; the
Snow being knee-deep. We parted from thence heavy laden; I Traveled with a
burden on my back, with Snow-shoes Twenty-five Miles the first day of wearing
them; and again the next day till afternoon; and then we came to the French
River. My Master at this place took away my pack, and draw'd the whole load on
the Ice: but my bones seemed to be misplaced, and I unable to Travel with any
speed. My feet were very sore, and each Night I wrung Blood out of my
Stockings, when I pulled them off. My Shins also were very sore, being cut with
Crusty Snow, in the time of my Traveling without Snow-shoes. But finding some
dry Oak-leaves, by the River banks, I put them to my Shins, and in once
applying of them, they were healed. And here my Master was very kind to me,
would always give me the best he had to Eat; and by the goodness of God, I
never wanted a Meals Meat, during my Captivity; though some of my Children and
Neighbors, were greatly Wounded, (as I may say) with the Arrows of Famine, and
Pinching want; having for many days nothing but Roots to live upon, and not
much of them neither. My Master gave me a piece of a BIBLE; never disturbed me
in Reading the Scriptures, or in Praying to God. Many of my Neighbors also,
found that Mercy in their Journey, to have Bibles, Psalm-books, Catechisms, and
Good Books, put into their hands, with liberty to use them; and yet after their
Arrival at Canada, all possible endeavors were used, to deprive them of them.
Some of them say, their Bibles were demanded by the French Priests, and never
re-delivered to them, to their great grief and sorrow.

My March on the French River was very sore, for fearing a Thaw, we Traveled a
very great pace; my Feet were so bruised, and my joints so distorted by my
Traveling in Snow-shoes, that I thought it unpossible to hold out. One Morning
a little before break of day, my Master came and awakened me out of my Sleep,
Saying, Arise, Pray to God, and Eat your Breakfast, for we must go a great way
to day. After Prayer, I arose from my knees, but my feet were so Tender, Swollen,
Bruised, and full of Pain, that I could scarce stand upon them, without holding
on the Wigwam. And when the Indians said, You must run to day; I answered, I
could not run: My Master pointing out to his Hatchet, said to me, Then I must
dash out your Brains, and take off your Scalp. I said I suppose then you will
do so, for I am not able to Travel with speed. He sent me away alone, on the
Ice. About Sun half an hour high, he overtook me, for I had gone very slowly,
not thinking it possible to Travel Five Miles. When he came up he called me to
Run; I told him I could go no faster; he passed by without saying one Word
more: So that sometimes I scarce saw any thing of him for an hour together. I
Traveled from about break of day, till dark, never so much as set down at noon
to Eat Warm Victuals; Eating frozen Meat, which I had in my Coat Pocket, as I
Traveled. We went that day Two of their days Journey, as they came down. I
judge we went Forty or Forty five Miles that day. God Wonderfully supported me,
and so far renewed my Strength, that in the afternoon I was Stronger to Travel
than in the forenoon. My Strength was restored and renewed to admiration. We
should never distrust the care and compassion of God, who can give Strength to
them who have no might, and power to them who are ready to faint.

When we entered on the Lake the Ice, was very rough, and uneven, which was very
grievous to my feet, that could scarce endure to be set down on the Smooth Ice,
on the River; I lift up my cry to God in Ejaculatory requests, That He would
take notice of my State, and some way or other relieve me. I had not Marched
above half a Mile, before there fell a Moist Snow, about an inch and half deep,
that made it very soft for my feet, to pass over the Lake, to the place where
my Masters Family was. Wonderful favors in the midst of trying Afflictions! We
went a days Journey from the Lake, to a small Company of Indians, who were a
hunting; they were after their manner kind to me, and gave me the best they
had, which was Moose-flesh, Ground-nuts and Cramberrys, but no Bread: For Three
Weeks together I eat no Bread. After our stay there, and undergoing
difficulties in Cutting of Wood, and suffering from Louziness, having Louzy old
Clothes of Soldiers, put upon me, when they stripped me of mine, to Sell to the
French Soldiers in the Army.

We again began a March for Shamblee, we stayed at a branch of the Lake, and
feasted Two or Three days on Geese we killed there. After another days Travel,
we came to a River where the Ice was thawed, we made a Cannoe of Elm-bark, in
one day; and arrived on a Saturday near noon at Shamblee, a small Village,
where is a Garrison, and Fort of French Soldiers. This Village is about Fifteen
Miles from Mont-Royal. The French were very kind to me: A Gentleman of the
Place, took me into his House, and to his Table; and lodged me at Night on a
good Feather-bed. The Inhabitants, and Officers were very obliging to me, the
little time I stayed with them, and promised to Write a Letter to the Governor
in Chief, to inform him of my passing down the River. Here I saw a Girl taken
from our Town, and a young Man, who informed me, that the greatest part of the
Captives were come in, and that Two of my Children were at Mont-Royal; that
many of the Captives had been in, Three Weeks before my arrival: Mercy in the
midst of Judgment! As we passed along the River toward Sorel, we went into an
House where was an English Woman of our Town, who had been left among the
French in order to her Conveyance to the Indian Fort. The French were very kind
to her, and to my self, and gave us the best Provision they had; and she
Embarkqued with us to go down to St. Francois Fort. When we came down to the
first Inhabited House at Sorel, a French Woman came to the River side, and
desired us to go into her House, and when we were entered, She compassioned our
State, and told us, She had in the last War been a Captive among the Indians,
and therefore was not a little sensible of our difficulties. She gave the
Indians something to eat in the Chimny corner, and spread a cloth on the Table
for us with Napkins; Which gave such offense to the Indians, that they hasted
away, and would not call in at the Fort. But where* ever we entered into Houses,
the French were very Courteous. When we came to St. Francois River, we found
some difficulty by reason of the Ice; and entering into a Frenchmans House, he
gave us a loaf of Bread, and some Fish to carry away with us; but we passed
down the River till Night, and there Seven of us Supped on the Fish* called
Bull-be^d or Pout, and did not eat it up, the Fish was so very large.

The next Morning we met with such a great quantity of Ice, that we were forced
to leave our Cannoe, and Travel on Land. We went to a French Officers house,
who took us into a private Room, out of the sight of the Indians, and treated
us very Courteously. That Night we arrived at the Fort called St. Francois;
Where we found several poor Children who had been taken from the Eastward, the
Summer before, a sight very Affecting, they being in habit very much like
Indians, and in Manners very much Symbolizing with them. At this Fort lived two
Jesuits one of which was made Superior of the Jesuits at Quebeck. One of these
Jesuits met me at the Fort Gate, and asked me to go into the Church, and Give
God Thanks for preserving my Life, I told him I would do that in some other
Place. When the Bell rang for Evening Prayers, he that took me, Bid me go; but
I refused: The Jesuit came to our Wigwam, and Prayed a short Prayer; and
invited me to Sup with them; and justified the Indians in what they did against
us: Rehearsing some things done by Major Walden, above Thirty years ago; and
how justly God retaliated them in the last War, and inveighed against us for
beginning this War with the Indians. And said, We had before the last Winter,
and in the Winter been very Barbarous, and Cruel in burning and killing
Indians. I told them, That the Indians in a very Persidious manner, had
committed Murders on many of our Inhabitants, after the Signing Articles of
Peace: and as to what they spoke of Cruelties, they were undoubtedly
Falsehoods, for I well knew, the English were not approvers of any inhumanity,
or barbarity toward Enemies. They said, An English man had killed one of St
Casteen's Relations, which occasioned this War: for, say they, The Nations in a
general Counsel, had concluded not to engage in the War, on any side, till they
themselves were first molested, and then all of them as one, would engage
against them that began a War with them; and that upon the killing of Casteens
Kindsman, a Post was dispatched to Canada, to advertise the Maqua's, and
Indians, that the English had begun a War. On which they gathered up their
Forces, and that the French joined with them, to come down on the Eastern
Parts; and that when they (...) near New England, several of the Eastern
Indians, told them of the Peace made with the English, and the satisfaction
given them from the English for that Murder. But the Macqua's told them, it was
now too late; for they were sent (...) and were now come, and would f^ll on
them, if without their consent they made a Peace with the English. Said also,
That a Letter was show^^ them sent from the Governor of Port Royal, which he
said, was taken in an English Ship, being a Letter from the Queen of England,
to our Governor, Writing how She approved his designs, to Ensnare and
deceitfully to seiz^ on the Indians; so that being enraged from that Letter,
and being forced as it were, they began the present War. I told them the Letter
was a Lie forged by the French.

The next Morning the Bell Rang for Mass: My Master bid me go to Church: I
refused: he threatened me, and went away in a rage. At Noon the Jesuits sent for
me, to dine with them; for I eat at their Table all the time I was at the Fort.
And after Dinner, they told me, the Indians would not allow of any of their
Captives staying in their Wigwams, whilst they were at Church; and were
resolved by force and violence to bring us all to Church, if we would not go
without. I told them it was highly unreasonable so to impose upon those who
were of a contrary Religion; and to force us to be present at such Service, as
we Abhorred, was nothing becoming Christianity. They replied, They were
Salvages, and would not hearken to reason, but would have their Wills: Said
also, If they were in New England themselves, they would go into their Churches
to see their Ways of Worship. I answered, th^^ case was far different, for
there was nothing (themselves being judges) as to matter or manner of Worship,
but what was according to the Word of God, i^ our Churches; and therefore it
could not be an of fence to any man's Conscience. But among them there were
Idolatrous Superstitions in Worship: they said, Come and see, and offer us
Conviction, of what is Superstitious in Worship. To which I answered, That I
was not to do Evil that Good might come on it; and that forcing in matters of
Religion was hateful. They answered, The Indians were resolved to have it so,
and they could not pacify them without my coming; and they would engage they
should offer no force or violence to cause any compliance with their Ceremonies.

The next Mass, my Master bid me go to Church: I objected; he arose and
forcibly pulled me out by Head and Shoulders out of the Wigwam to the Church,
that was nigh the doo^^ So I went in and sat down behind the door, and there
saw a great confusion, instead of any Gospel Order. For one of the Jesuits was
at the Altar, saying Mass in a Tongue Unknown to the Salvages, and the other,
between the Altar and the door, saying and singing Prayers among the Indians at
the same time; and many others were at the same time saying over their Pater
Nosters, and Ave Mary, by tale from their Chapelit, or Beads on a String. At
our going out we smiled at their Devotion so managed; which was offensive to
them: for they said, We made a Derision of their Worship. When I was here, a
certain Salvagess dyed; one of the Jesuits told me, She was a very holy Woman,
who had not committed One Sin in Twelve years. After a day or two the Jesuits
asked me, What I thought of their Way, now I saw it? I told them, I thought
Christ said of it, as Mark. 7. 7, 8, 9. Howbeit, in vain do they Worship me,
teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men. For laying aside the
Commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots, and
cups: and many other such like things ye do. And he said unto them, Full we^^e
reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep (...) own tradition. They told
me, They were not the Commandments of men, but Apostolical Traditions, of equal
authority with the Holy Scriptures. And that after my Death, I would bewail my
not Praying to the Virgin Mary; and that I should find the want of her
Intercession for me, with her Son; judging me to Hell for asserting, the
Scriptures to be a perfect rule of Faith: and said, I abounded in my own sense,
entertaining explications contrary to the sense of the Pope, regularly sitting
with a general Council, explaining Scripture, and making Articles of Faith. I
told them, It was my Comfort that Christ was to be my Judge, and not they at
the Great Day: And as for their censuring and judging of me, I was not moved
with it. One day a certain Salvages^ taken Prisoner in Philips War, who had
lived at Mr. Buckleys at Wethersfield, called Ruth, who could speak English
very well; who had been often at my House, but was now proselyted to the Romish
Faith, came into the Wigwam, and with her an English Maid, who was taken the
last War, who was dressed up in Indian Apparel, could not speak one word of
English, who said she could neither tell her own name, or the name of the place
from whence she was taken. These two talked in the Indian Diale^^ with my
Master a long time; after which my Master bad me ^ress my self; I told him I
would not he commanded me several times, and I as often refused. Ruth said, Mr.
Williams you know the Scripture, and therefore act against your own light for
you know the Scripture says, Servants obey your Masters; he is your Master,
and you his Servant. I told her she was ignorant, and knew not the meaning of
the Scripture, telling her, I was not to disobey the Great God to obey any
Master, and that I was ready to suffer for God if called thereto: On which she
talked to my Master, I suppose she interpreted what I said. My Master took hold
of my hand to force me to Cross my self, but I strugled with him, and would not
suffer him to guide my hand, upon this he pulled off a Crucifix from his own
neck, and bad me Kiss it; but I refused once and again; he told me be would
dash out my brains with his Hatchet if I refused. I told him I should sooner
choose death then to Sin against God; then he ran and caught up his Hatchet, and
acted as though he would have dashed out my Brains; seeing I was not moved, he
threw down his Hatchet, saying, he would first bite off all my nails if I still
refused; I gave him my hand and told him, I was ready to suffer, he set his
teeth in my thumb nails and gave a gripe with his teeth, and then said, no good
Minister, no love God, as bad as the Devil; and so left off. I have reason to
bless God who strengthened me to withstand; by this he was so discouraged as
never more to meddle with me about my Religion. I asked leave of the Jesuits to
Pray with those English of our Town that were with me, but they absolutely
refused to give us any permission to pray one with another, and did what they
could to prevent our having any discourse together.

After a few days the Governor de ^audrel, Governor in Chief, sent down two
men with Letters to the Jesuits, desiring them to order my being sent up to him
to Mont-Royal, upon which one of the Jesuits went with my two Masters, and took
me along with them, as also two more of Deerfield, a man and his Daughter about
Seven years of Age. When we came to the Lake, the Wind was tempestuous and
contrary to us, so that they were afraid to go over; they Landed and kindled a
fire, and said they would wait a while to see whether the Wind would fall or
change. I went a side from the Company among the Trees, and spread our case
with the temptations of it before God, and pleaded that He would order the
season so, that we might not go back again, but be furthered on our Voyage,
that I might have opportunity to see my Children and Neighbors, and converse
with them, and know their state. When I returned, the Wind was more boisterous,
and then a second time, and the Wind was more fierce; I reflected upon my self
for my unquietness, and the want of a resigned will to the Will of God. And a
third time went and bewailed before God my anxious cares, and the tumultuous
workings of my own heart, begged a Will fully resigned to the Will of God, and
thought that by the Grace of God I was brought to say Amen, to whatever God
should determine, Upon my return to the Company, the Wind was yet high; the
Jesuit and my Master said, come we will go back again to the Fort, for there is
no likelihood of proceeding in our Voyage, for very frequently such a Wind
continues three days, sometimes fix; after it continued so many hours, I said
to them, the Will of the Lord be done; and the Cannoe was put again into the
River, and we embarked. No sooner had my Master put me into the Cannoe, and
put off from the Shore, but the Wind fell, and coming into the middle of the
River, they said, We may go over the Lake well enough: and so we did. I
promised, if God gave me Opportunity I would stir up others to Glorify God in a
continued persevering, committing their straights of heart to Him; He is a
Prayer bearing God, and the Stormy Winds obey Him. After we passed over the
Lake, the French where ever we came were very compassionate to us.

When I came to Mont-Royal, which was Eight Weeks after my Captivity; the
Governor de' Vaudrel redeemed me out of the hands of the Indians, gave me good
Clothing, took me to his Table, gave me the use of a very good Chamber; and was
in all respects relating to my outward man, courteous and charitable to
admiration. At my first entering into his House, he sent for my two Children,
who were in the City, that I might see them; and promised to do what he could
to get all my Children and Neighbors out of the hands of the Salvages. My
change of Diet after the difficulties of my Journey's, caused an alteration in
my Body: I was Physick'd, Blooded, and very tenderly taken care of in my
Sickness The Governor redeemed my Eldest Daughter out of the hands of the
Indians; and she was carefully tended in the H^spital, until she was well of
her Lameness; and by the Governor provided for with respect, during her stay
in the Country. My youngest Child was redeemed by a Gentlewoman in the City a
the Indians passed by. After the Indians had been at their Port and discoursed
with the Priests, they came back and offered to the Gentlewoman a man for the
Child alle^ging that the Child could not be profitable to her, but the man
would, for he was a Weaver, and his service would much advance the design she
had of making cloth: but God overruled so far that this Temptation to the
Woman prevailed not for an exchange; for had the Child gone to the Indian Fort,
in an ordinary way it had abode there still, as the rest of the Children
carried thither do. The Governor gave orders to certain Officers to get the
rest of my Children out of the hands of the Indians, and as many of my
Neighbors as they could. After Six Weeks a Merchant of the City obtained my
Eldest Son, that was taken to live with him: he took a great deal of pains to
persuade the Salvages to part with him. An Indian came to the City (Sagamore
George of Pennacook) from Cowas^, and brought word of my Son Stephen's being
near Cowass, and some Money was put into his hand for his Redemption, and a
promise of full satisfaction if he brought him; but the Indian proved
unfaithful, and I never saw my Child till a year after. The Governor ordered a
Priest to go along with me to see my youngest Daughter among the Macqua's, and
endeavor her (...) with him; he was very courteous to me, and from his Parish
which was near the Macqua* Fort, he wrote a Letter to the Jesuit to desire
(...) to send my Child to see me, and to speak with them that took her, to come
along with it. But the Jesuit wrote back a Letter, That I should not be
permitted to speak with, or see my Child, if I came that my labor would be
lost; and that the Macqua's would as soon part with their hearts, as my Child.
At my return to the City, I with an heavy heart carried the Jesuits Letter to
the Governor, who, when he read it, was very angry, and endeavored to comfort
me, assuring me, I should see it, and speak with it; and he would to his utmost
endeavor its ransom: Accordingly he sent to the Jesuits who were in the City,
and bid them improve their interest for the obtaining the Child. After some
days, he went with me in his own Person to the Fort. When we came thither, he
discoursed with the Jesuits: after which my Child was brought into the Chamber
where I was. I was told I might speak with her, but should be permitted to
speak to no other English Person there. My Child was about Seven years old; I
discoursed with her near an hour; she could Read very well, and had not
forgotten her Catechism; and was very desirous to be redeemed out of the hands
of the Macqua's, and bemoaned her State among them, telling me how they
profaned God's Sabbath's: and said, She thought that a few days before they
had been mocking the Devil, and that one of the Jesuits stood and looked on
them. I told her, she must Pray to God for His Grace every day; She said, She
did as she was able, and God heipt her: but says she, They force me to say some
Prayers in Latin, but I don't understand one word of them, I hope it wont do me
any harm. I told her, she must be careful she did not forget her Catechism, and
the Scriptures, she had learnt by heart. She told the Captives after I was
gone, as some of them have since informed me, almost every thing I spoke to
her; and said, She was much afraid she should forget her Catechism, having none
to instruct her. I saw her once a few days after in the City, but had not many
Minutes of time with her, but what time I had, I improved to give her the best
advice I could. The Governor labored much for her redemption, at last he had
a promise of it, in case he would procure for them an Indian Girl in her stead.
Accordingly he sent up the River some hundreds of Leagues for one, but it was
refused, when offered by the Governor: he offered them an hundred pieces of
Eight for her Redemption, but it was refused. His Lady went over to have begged
her from them, but all in vain; its there still; and has forgotten to speak
English. Oh! that all who peruse this History would join in their servent
requests to God, with whom all things are possible, that this poor Child, and
so many others of our Children who have been cast upon God from the Womb, and
are now Outcast ready to perish, might be gathered from their dispersions, and
receive Sanctifying Grace from God! When I had discoursed with the Child, and
was coming out of the Fort, one of the Jesuits went out of the Chamber with me,
and some Soldiers, to convey me to the Cannoe. I saw some of my poor
Neighbors, who stood with longing expectations to see me, and speak with me,
and had leave from their Salvage Masters so to do. I was by the Jesuit himself
thrust along by force, and permitted only to tell them some of their Relations
(they asked after) were well in the City, and that with a very audible voice;
being not permitted to come near to them. After my return to the City I was
very Melancholy, for I could not be permitted so much as to Pray with the
English, who dwelt in the same house. And the English who came to see me, were
most of them put back by the Guard at the door, and not suffered to come and
speak with me. Sometimes the Guard was so strict that I could scarce go aside
on necessary occasions without a repulse; and whenever I went out into the City
(a favor the Governor himself never refused when I ask it of him) there were
spies to watch me, and to observe whether I spoke to the English. Upon which I
told some of the English, they must be careful to call to mind and improve
former Instructions, and endeavor to stand at a further distance for a while,
hoping that after a short time I should have more liberty of conversing with
them. But some spies sent out, found on a Sabbath Day more then Three (the
number we by their order published were not to exceed together) of us in
Company, who informed the Priest; the next day one of the Priests told me, I
had a greater number of the English with me, and that I had spoken something
reflecting on their Religion. I spoke to the Governor that no forcible means
might be used with any of the Captives respecting their Religion; he told me,
He allowed no such thing. I am persuaded that the Governor if he might act as
himself, would not have suffered such things to be done as have been done, and
that he never did know of several things acted against the English.

At my first coming to Mont-Royal, the Governor told me, I should be sent home
as soon as Captain Battiss was returned and not before; and that I was taken in
order to his Redemption. The Governor sought by all means to divert me from my
Melancholy Sorrows, and always showed a willingness for seeing my Children.
And one day I told him of my design of walking into the City; he pleasantly
answered, Go with all my Heart. His Eldest Son went with me as far as the door
and saw the Guard stop me, he went in and informed his Father, who came to the
door and asked, Why they affronted the Gentleman going out? They said, It was
their Order: But with an angry countenance he said, His Orders were that I
should not be stopped. But within a little time I had my orders to go down to
Quebeck. Another thing showing that many things are done without the Governors
consent, though his Name be used to justify them, ( viz.) I asked the Priest,
after I had been at Mont-Royal two days, leave to go and see my youngest Child;
he said, When ever you would see it tell me, and I will bring it to you; for,
says he, The Governor is not willing you should go thither. And yet not many
days after when we were at Dinner, the Governors Lady (seeing me sad) spoke to
an Officer at Table, who could speak Latin, to tell me, That after Dinner I
should go along with them and see my two Children. And accordingly after Dinner
I was carried to see them; and when I came to the house I found three or four
English Captives, who lived there, and I had leave to discourse with them. And
not long after the Governors Lady asked me, to go along with her to the (...)
to (...) one of my Neighbors Sick there.

One day one of the Jesuits came to the Governor, and told the Company there,
That he (...) saw such Persons as were taken from Deerfield. Said he, The
Macqua's will not suffer any of their Prisoners to abide in their Wigwams
whilst they themselves are at M^ss, but carry them with them to the Church, and
they cant be prevailed with to fall down on their knees to Pray there, but no
sooner are they returned to their Wigwams, out they fall down on their knees to
Prayer. He said, They could do nothing with the grown Persons there; and they
hundred the Childrens complying. Where-upon, the Jusuits counseled the Macqua's
to Sell all the grown Person^ from the Fort; a stratagem to seduce poor
Children. Oh Lord! Turn the Counsels of these Ahitcphels into foolishness, and
make the Counsels of the Heathen of none effect!

Here I observed, they were wonderfully lifted up with Pride, after the return
of Captain Montin^g from Northampton with News of Success: they boasted of
their Success against New England. And they sent out an Army as they said of
Seven hundred men, if I mistake not, Two hundred of which were French, in
company of which Army went several Jesuits; and said, They would l^y des^^e all
the places on Connecticut River. The Superior of the Priests told me, Their
General was a very Prudent and Brave Commander of undaunted Courage, and he
doubted not but they should have great Success. This Army went away in such a
boasting, triumphant manner, that I had great hopes God would discover and
disappoint their designs: our Prayers were not wanting for the Blasting such a
Bloody design. The Superior of the Priests said to me, Don't flatter your
selves in hopes of a short Captivity; for, said he, There are two young Princes
contending for the Kingdom of Spain; and a Third, that care was to be taken for
his Establishment, on the English Throne. And boasted what they would do to
Europe; and that we must expect not only Europe, but in New England the
Establishment of Popery. I said, Glory not, God can make great changes in a
little time, and revive His own Interest, and yet Save His poor afflicted
People. Said he, The time for Miracles is past; and in the time of the last
War, the King of France was as it were against all the World, and yet did very
great things, but now the Kingdom of Spain is for him, and the Duke of Bavaria,
and the Duke of Savey, etc. and spoke on a lofty manner of great things to be
done by them: and having the World as I may say in subjection to them.

I was sent down to Quebeck in Company of Governor de Ramsey, Governor of
Mont-Royal, and the Superior of the Jesuits, and ordered to live with one of
the Council; from whom I received many favors for Seven Weeks. He told me, It
was the Priests doings to send me down before the Governor came down; and that
if I went much to see the English, or they came much to visit me, I should yet
certainly be sent away where I should have no converse with the English. After
my coming down to Quebeck, I was invited to Dine with the Jesuits, and to my
face they were civil enough. But after a few days a young Gentleman came to my
Chamber, and told me, that one of the Jesuits (after we had done Dinner) made a
few Disticks of Verses and gave them to his Scholars to Translate into French:
he showed them to me. The import of them was, That the King of France his
Grandson had sent out his Huntsmen, and that they had taken a Wolf, who was
shut up, and now he hopes the Sheep would be in safety. I knew at the reading
of them what he aimed at, but held my Peace, as though I had been ignorant of the
Jesuits intention. Observing this reproaching Spirit, I said in my Heart, If
God will bless, let men curse if they please; and I looked to God in CHRIST the
Great Shepherd to keep his scattered Sheep among so many Romish Revenous
Wolves, and to remember the reproaches where with his Holy Name, Ordinances,
and Servants were daily reproached. And upon an observation of the time of
these Verses being composed, I find that near the same time the Bishop of
Canada with Twenty Ecclesiastics were taken by the English, as they were
coming from France, and carried into England as Prisoners of War.

One Sabbath day Morning I observed many Signs of approaching Rain, a great
moisture on the Stones of the Hearth and Chimny-jams. I was that day invited to
Dine with the Jesuits; and when I went up to Dinner, it began to Rain a small
dri^ling Rain: The Superior told me, They had been Praying for Rain that
Morning: And l^, (says he) It begins to Rain. I told him, I could tell him of
many instances of Gods hearing our Prayers for Rain. However in the afternoon
there was a general Procession of all orders, Priests, Jesuits and Friars, and
the Citizens in great Pomp, carrying (as they said) as an holy relic, one of
the bones of St. Paul. The next day I was invited to the Priests Seminary to
Dinner; Oh, said they, we went in Procession Yesterday for Rain, and see what a
Plentiful Rain followed. I answered, we had been answered when Praying for
Rain, when no such Signs of Rain, and the beginnings of Rain preceeded, as now
with them, before they appointed or began their Procession, etc. However, they
upbraided me, That God did not approve of our Religion, in that He disregarded
our Prayers, and accepted theirs. For (said they) We hear you had days of
Fasting and Prayer before the Fleet came to Quebeck; God would not regard your
Prayers, but heard ows, and almost in a miraculous way preserved us when
assaulted, and refused to hear your Fast-day-Prayers for your Preservation, but
heard ours for your Desolation, and our Success. They boasted also of their
King, and his greatness, and spoke of him as though there could be no Settlement
of the World, but as he pleased; reviling us as in a low and languishing case,
having no King, but being under the Government of a Queen: And spoke as though
the Duke of Bavaria would in a short time be Emperor. From this day forward
God gave them to hear sorrowful Tidings from Europe: That a War was commenced
against the Duke of Savoy, and so their Enemies increased. Their Bishop taken,
and Two Millions of Wealth with him. News every year more distressing and
impoverishing of them; and the Duke of Bavaria so far from being Emperor, that
he is dispossessed of his Dukedom; and France so far from being strengthened by
Spain that the Kingdom of Spain like to be an occasion of the Weakening and
Impoverishing their own Kingdom: they themselves so reporting. And their great
Army going against New England turned back ashamed; and they discouraged and
disheartened, and every year very exercising fears and cares, as to the
Salvages who live up the River. Before the return of that Army, they told me,
We were led up and down and Sold by the Heathen, as Sheep for the Slanghter,
and they could not devise what they should do with us, we should be so many
Prisoners, when the Army returned. The Jesuit told me, It was a great Mercy
that so many of our Children were brought to them, and that now especially
since they were not like speedily to be returned, there was hope of their being
brought over to the Romish Faith. They would take the English Children born
among them, and against the consent of their Parents Baptize them. One Jesuit
came to me and asked, whether all the English at Lo^et, (a place not far from
Quebeck where the Salvages lived) were Baptized? I told him they were. He said
if they be not, let me know of it, that I may Baptize them, for fear they
should dye and be damned, if they dyed without Baptism. Says he, When the
Salvages went against you, I charged them to Baptize all Children before they
killed them: such was my desire of your E^rnal Salvation though you were our
Enemies. There was a Gentleman called Monsier de Beauville, a Captain, the
Brother of the Lord Intendant, who was a good friend to me, and very courteous
to all the Captives; he ^ent me an English Bible, and when he went to France
gave it me.

All means were used to seduce poor Souls.

I was invited one day to Dine with one of (...) Note, as I was going, met with
the Superior of the Jesuits coming out of the House, and he came in after
dinner; and presently it was propounded to me, if I would stay among them and
be of their Religion, I should have a great and honorable Pension from the
King every year. The Superior of the Jesuits turned to me, and said, Sir, you
have manifested much grief and sorrow for your separation from so many of your
Neighbors and Children; if you will now comply with this offer and proposal,
you may have all your Children with you; and here will be enough for an
honorable maintenance for you and them. I answered, Sir, If I thought your
Religion to be true, I would embrace it freely without any such offer, but so
long as I believe it to be what it is, the offer of the whole World is of no
more value to me than a Blackberry; and manifested such an abhorrence of this
proposal, that I speedily went to take my leave and be gone. Oh! Sir (said he)
set down, why in such a hurry, you are alone in your Chamber, divert your self
a little longer, and fell to other discourse, and within half an hour says
again: Sir, I have one thing earnestly to request of you, I pray pleasure me! I
said, let your Lordship speak; (said he,) I pray come down to the Palace to
morrow morning, and honor me with your Company in my Coach to the great
Church, it being then a Saints day. I answered ask me any thing wherein I can
serve you with a good Conscience, and I am ready to gratify you, but I must
yet ask your excuse here; and immediately went away from him. Returning unto my
Chamber, I gave God thanks for his upholding o^ me, and also made an enquiry
with my self, whether I had by any action given encouragement for such a
temptation. Not many days after, and a few days before Governor de' Vaudrel
coming down, I was sent away Fifteen Miles down the River, that I might not
have opportunity of converse with the English. I was courteously treated by the
French, and the Priest of that Parish; they told me he was one of the most
Learned men in the Country; he was a very ingenious man, zealous in their way,
but yet very familiar. I had many disputes with the Priests who came thither,
and when I used their own Authors to confute some of their Positions; my Books
borrowed of them were taken away from me, for they said, I made an ill use of
them. They having many of them boasted of their Unity in Doctrine and
Profession, were loath I should show them from their own best approved Authors,
as many different Opinions, as they could charge against us. Here again, a
Gentleman in the presence of the Old* Bishop and a Priest, offered me his
House, and whole Living, with assurance of Honor, Wealth and Employment, if I
would embrace their ways. I told them, I had an indignation of Soul against
such offers on such terms, as parting with what was more valuable than all the
World; alleging, What is a man profited if he gain the whole World, and lose
his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? I was
sometimes told, I might have all my Children if I would comply, and must never
expect to have them on any other terms; I told them, my Children were dearer to
me than all the world, but I would not deny Christ and his Truths for the
having of them with me; I would still put my trust in God who could perform all
things for me.

I am persuaded that the Priest of that Parish where I kept, abhorred their
sending down the Heathen to commit Outrages against the English, saying, it was
more like committing Murders, than managing a War. In my Confinement in this
Parish, I had my undisturbed opportunities to be humbly imploring Grace for our
selves, for Soul and Body, for His protecting presence with New England, and
His disappointing the bloody designs of Enemies; that God would be a little
Sanctuary to us in a Land of Captivity, and that our Friends in New England,
might have Grace to make a more thankful and fruitful improvement of means of
Grace than we had done; who by our neglects find our selves out of Gods
Sanctuary.

On the Twenty-first of October, 1704. I received some Letters from
New England, with an account that many of our Neighbors escaped out of the
desolations in the Fort, and that my Dear Wife was recarried and decently
Buried. And that my Eldest Son who was absent in our desolation, was sent to
College and provided for; which occasioned Thanksgiving to God in the midst of
Afflictions, and caused Prayers even in Canada, to be going daily up to Heaven
for a Blessing upon Benefactors, showing such kindness to the desolate and
afflicted. The consideration of such crafty designs to ensnare young ones, and
to turn them from the Simplicity of the Gospel, to Romis^ superstition, was
very exercising; sometimes they would tell me my Children, sometimes my
Neighbors were turned to be of their Religion. Some made it their work to
allure poor Souls by flatteries and great promises, some threatened, some
offered abusive carriages to such as refused to go to Church and be present at
Mass; for some they industriously contrived to get them Married among them. A
Priest drew up a Compendium of the Romish Catholic Faith, and pretended to
prove it by the Scriptures, telling the English, that all they required was
contained in the Scriptures, which they acknowledged to be the Rule of Faith
and Manners; but it was by Scriptures horribly perverted and abused. I could
never come to the sight of it, (though I often earnestly entreated a Copy of it)
until I was a Shipboard for our Voyage for New England; but hearing of it, I
endeavored to possess the English with their danger of being cheated with such
a pretense. I understood they would tell the English that I was turned, that
they might gain them to change their Religion; these their endeavors to seduce
to Popery were very exercising to me* And in my Solitariness I drew up these
following Sorrowful, Mournful, Considerations, though unused to, and unskilful in
Poetry, yet in a plain style for the use of some of the Captives, who would
sometimes make their secret Visits to me, which at the desire of some of them,
are here made public.

Some Contemplations of the Poor, and desolate State of the Church at Deerfield.
THE Sorrows of my heart, enlarged are,
Whilst I, my present State, with past compare*
I frequently, unto Gods House did go,
With Christian Friends, his Praises forth to show.
But now, I Solitary sit, both sigh and cry,
Whilst my Flocks Misery, think on do I.
Many, both Old and Young, were slain outright,
Some in a bitter Season, take their ^light.
Some burnt to Death, and others stifled were,
The Enemy, no Sex, or Age would spare.
The tender Chidren, with their Parents sad,
Are carried forth as Captives, some unclad.
Some Murdered in the Way, unburyed left,
And some through Famine, were of Life bereft.
After a tedious Journey, some are Sold,
Some kept in Heathen hands, all from Christ fold;
By Popish rage, and Heathenish cruelty,
Are banished. Yea some compelled to be;
Present at Mass. Young Children parted are,
From Parents, and such as instructors were.
Crafty designs are used by Papists all,
In ignorance of Truth, them to inthrall,
Some threatened are, unless they will comply,
In heathens hands, again be made to lie.
To some, large Promises are made, if they,
Will Truths renounce, and choose their Popish way.
Oh Lord! mine eyes on Thee, shall waiting be,
Till Thou again turn our Captivity.
Their Romish Plots, Thou can confound; and Save,
This little Flock, this Mercy I do crave,
Save us, from all our Sins, and yet again,
Deliver us from them who Truth disdain.
Lord! for thy Mercy sake, thy Cov^nant mind;
And in thy House, again rest let us find.
So we thy Praises forth will show, and speak,
Of all thy Wondrous Works, yea we will seek,
The advancement of thy great and glorious Name,
Thy Rich, and Sovereign Grace, we will proclaim.
THE Hearts of some were ready to be discouraged and sink, saying, They were
out of sight, and so out of mind. I endeavored to persuade them, we were not
forgotten, that undoubtedly many Prayers were continually going up to Heaven
for us. Not long after came Capt. Livingston, and Mr. Sheldon, with Letters
from His Excellency our GOVERNOR, to the Governor of Canada, about the
Exchange of Prisoners; which gave a revival to many, and raised expectations of
a return. These visits from New England to Canada so often, greatly
strengthened many who were ready to faint; and gave some check to the designs
of the Papists to gain Proselytes. But Gods time of deliverance was not yet
come, as to some particular Persons, their Temptations and Trials were
increased; and some abused because they refused a compliance with their
Superstitions. A young Woman of our Town met with a new Trial. For on a day, a
French man came into the room where she was, and showed her his Beads, and
boasted of them, putting them near to her; She knocked them out of his hands on
the floor; for which she was beaten, and threatened with Death, and for some
days imprisoned. I pleaded with God His overruling this first Essay for the
deliverance of some, as a pledge of the rest being delivered in due time. I
improved Capt. de Beauville who had always been very friendly, to interceed
with the Governor for the return of my Eldest Daughter; and for his purchasing
my Son Stephen, from the Indians at St. Francois Fort; and for liberty to go up
and see my Children and Neighbors at Mont-Royal. Divine Providence appeared to
a moderating my Affliction, in that Five English Persons of our Town were
permitted to return with Capt. Livingston, among whom went my Eldest Daughter.
And my Son Stephen was redeemed and sent to live with me: he was almost quite
Naked, and very Poor; he had suffered much among the Indians. One of the
Jesuits took upon him, to come to the Wigwam and Whip him, on some complaint
that the Squaws had made, that he did not Work enough for them. As to my
Petition for going up to Mont-Royal to see my Children, and Neighbors, it was
denied; as my former desire of coming up to the City before Capt. Livingstons
coming was. God granted me favor as to Two of my Petitions, but yet brought me
by His Grace to be willing, that He should glorify. Himself in disposing of me
and mine as He pleased and knew to be most for His glory: And almost always
before any remarkable favor, I was brought to lie down at the foot of God, and
made to be willing that God should govern the World, so as might be most for
His own Honor, and brought to resign all to His holy Sovereignty. A frame of
Spirit when wrought in me by the Grace of God, giving the greatest content and
satisfaction; and very often a forerunner of the Mercy asked of God, or a
plain demonstration, that the not obtaining my request was best for me. I had
no small refreshing, in having one of my Children with me for four Months* And
the English were many of them strengthened with hopes, that the treaty betwixt
the Governments would issue in opening a do^r of escape for all.

In August, Mr. Dudley and Capt. Vetch arrived, and great encouragements were
given as to an Exchange of all in the Spring of the year: and some few again
were sent home; among whom I obtained leave to send my Son S^^phex. Upon Mr.
Dudley's and Capt. Vetch's Petitioning, I was again permitted to go up to
Quebeck; but disputing with a Mendicant ^^yar, who said, He was an Englishman
sent from France, to endeavor the Conversion of the English at Quebeck; Who
arrived at Canada whilst our Gentlemen were there: I was by the Priests means
ordered again to return to Chat^^uvich^, and no other reason given, but because
I^ discoursed with that Priest, and their fear I should prevent his success
amongst the Captives. But God showed His dislike of such a Persecuting Spirit:
for the very next day which was September 20 O. S. October 1st N. S. the
Seminary, a very famous building, was most of it burnt down; occasioned by a
Joyners letting a Coal of fire drop down among the Shavings. The Chapel in the
Priests Garden, and the Great Cross were burnt down; the Library of the Priests
burnt up: This Seminary and another Library had been burnt but about Three
years before. The day after my being sent away by the Priests means from
Quebeck at first, there was a Thunder-Storm, and the Lightning struck the
Seminary in the very place where the fire now began.

A little before Mr. Dudley's arrival, came a Soldier into my Landlords house
Bure-foot, and Bareleg'd, going on a Pilgrimage to Saint Anne. For said he, My
Captain who dyed some years ago appeared to me, and told me, he was in
Purgatory; and told me I must go a Pilgrimage to Saint Anne, doing Penance, and
get a Mass said for him, and then he should be delivered. And many believed
him, and were much affected with it; came and told ^^e of it, to gain my Credit
of their devised Purgatory: the Soldier told me, The Priests had counseled
him to undertake this Pilgrimage. And I am apt to think, ordered his calling in
at my Lord-lords, that I might see and speak with him. I laughed at the conceit,
that a Soldier must be pitch^ upon to be sent on this errand; but they were
much displeased, and lamented my obstinacy, in that I would not be reclaimed
from a denial of Purgatory, by such a Miraculous Providence.

As I was able, I spread the case before God, beseeching of him to disappoint
them of their expectations, to Proselyte any of the Captives by this Stratagem;
and by the goodness of God it was not very Serviceable: for the Soldiers
Conversation was such, that several among the French themselves judged it to be
a Forgery. And tho the Captain spoken of was the Governors Lady's Brother, I
never more heard any concernment or care to get him out of Purgatory.

One of the Parish where I lived, told me, That on the Twenty-second of July,
17^5. He was at Quebeck, at the Mendicant Friars Church, on one of their Feast
Days, in honor of a great Saint of their Order, and that at Five a Clock Mass
in the Morning, near Two hundred Persons present. A great Gray Catt brake or
pushed aside some Gla^s, and entered into the Church, and passed along it near
the Altar, and put out Five or Six Candles, that were burning; and that no one
could tell which way the Catt went out: and he thought it was the Devil.

When I was in the City in September, I saw two English Maids who had lived
with the Indians a long time. They told me, that an Indian had dyed at the
place where they were; and that when sundry of his Relations were together in
order to his burial, the Dead arose, and informed them, That at his Death he
went to Hell, and there he saw all the Indians that had been Dead since their
embracing the Pepish Religion; and warned them to leave it off, or they would
be Damned too, and lay down Dead again. They said, the Indians were frightened,
and very Melancholy; but the Jesuit to whom they told this told them, It was
only a delusion of the Devil to draw them away from the true Religion; Adding,
That he knew for certain that all those Indians who had been Dead spoken of by
that Indian, were in Heaven, only one Squaw was gone to Hell who dyed without
Boptism. These Maids said also, That many of the Indians much Lamented their
making a War against the English, at the instigation of the French.

The Priests, after Mr. Dudley's going from Canada, was ready to think their
time was short, for gaining English Proselytes, and doubled their diligence and
wiles, to gain over Persons to their Persuasion. I improved all opportunities I
could, to Write to the English, that in that Way I might be Serviceable to
them. But many or most of my Letters treating about Religion were intercepted,
and burnt. I had a Letter sent down to me by order of the Governor, that I had
a liberty of Writing to my Children and Friends, which should be continued;
provided I Wrote about indifferent things, and said nothing in them about the
points in controversy between them and us: And if I were so hardy as to Write
Letters otherwise, they should endeavor to prevent their being delivered.
Accordingly, I found many of them were burnt. But sometimes notice would be
given to the English, that there were Letters written, but that they were
burnt; so that their Writing was somewhat useful though never perused by the
English, because they judged those Letters condemned Popery. Many of our
Letters Written from New England, were never delivered, because of some
expressions about Religion in them. And as I said before, after Mr. Dudley's
departure from Quebeck, endeavors were very vigorous to seduce. Some were
flattered with large Promises, others were threatened, and beaten, because they
would not turn. And when two English Women, who had always opposed their
Religion were sick in the Hospital: they kept with them Night and Day, till
they dyed; and their friends kept from coming to visit them: after their death
they gave out, that they dyed in the Romish Faith, and were received into their
Communion. Before their Death Masses were said for them; and they buried in the
Churchyard with all their Ceremonies. And after this, Letters sent into all
parts to inform the English, that these two Women turned to their Religion,
before their Death, and that it concerned them to follow their Example, for
they could not be more obstinate than these Women were in their Health, against
the Romish Faith, and yet on a Death bed embraced it. They told the English who
lived near, That our Religion was a dangerous Religion to dye in. But I shall
hereafter relate the just grounds we have to think these things were falsehoods.

I was informed, there was an English Girl bid to take and wear the Cross, and
Cross her self: She refused; they threatened her, and showed her the Cross, At
length, She had her choice, either to Cross her self, and take the Cross, or be
Whipped, she chose to be Whipped* and they took up her Clothes, and made as though
they would correct her; but seeing her choosing indeed to suffer rather than
comply, they desisted and tied the Cross about her Neck. Some were taken and
shut up among their Religious, and all sorts of mean* used to gain them.

I received a Letter from one of my Neighbors, wherein he thus bewails. I
obtained leave of my Master, to go to the Macqua-Fort to see my Children, that
I had not seen for a long time: I carried a Letter from my Master; to show that
I had leave to come. When I came to the Fort, I heard one of my Children was in
the Woods. I went to see a Boy I had there, who lived with one of the Jesuits;
I had just asked him of his Welfare; he said his Master would come presently; he
durst not stay to speak with me now, being in such awe of his Master. On which
I withdrew, and when his Master came in, I went and asked leave of him to speak
with my Child, and showed him my Letter. But he absolutely refused to let me
see or speak with him; and said, I had brought no Letter from the Governor,
and would not permit me to stay in the Fort, though I had Traveled on foot near
Fifty Miles for no other errand than to see and speak with my Children.

The same Person with another English man last Spring, obtained leave of the
Governor General, to go to the same Fort on the same errand, and carried
Letters from the Governor to the Jesuits, that he might be permitted to speak
with his Children. The Letter was delivered to the Jesuits; who told him, his
Son was not at home, but gone a Hunting. Whenas he was hid from them, as he
heard afterward, so the poor man lost his labor a second time. These men say,
that when they returned to Mont-Royal, one Laland, who was appointed as a spy,
always to observe the motions of the English, told them, that one of the
Jesuits had come in before them, and had told the Governor that the Lad was
gone out a Hunting. And that the English man who accompanied this poor man,
went out into the Woods in hopes of finding the Lad; and saw him, but the Lad
run away, and that he followed him and called after him, but he would not stop;
but holding but a Gun threatened to shoot him down, if he followed him, and so
he was discouraged, and turned back. And says Laland, You will never leave
going to see your Children and Neighbors, till some of you are killed. But the
men told him, it was an absolute lie, let who would report it; for they had
neither seen the Lad, nor did they go into the Woods to search after him. They
judge this was told to the Governor, to prevent any English for the future
going to see their Children and Neighbors. Some of ours say, they have been
little better than absolutely promised, to have their Children who are among
the Salvages, in case they themselves would embrace Popery. And that the
Priests had said, They had rather the Children should be among the Indians, as
they did, than be brought out by the French, and so be in a readiness to return
for New England.

A Maid of our Town was put into a Religious house among the Nuns, for more
than two years, and all sort of means, by flatteries, threatenings, and abusive
carriages used to bring her to turn. They offered her Money, which when
refused, especially the latter part of the time, they threatened her very much;
sent for her before them, commanded her to Cross her self. She refused, they
hit her a box on the Ear; bid her again, still she refused. The ordered a rod
with Six branches full of knots to be brought; and when she refused, they
struke her on the hands, with their renewing their Commands; and she stood to
her refusals, till her hands were filled with Whales, with the blows. But one
said, Beat her no more, we will give her to the Indians, if she wont turn. They
pinched her Arms till they were black and blue; and made her go into their
Church, and because she would not Cross her self, struke her several blows with
their hands on her face. A Squaw was brought in and said, She was sent to fetch
her to the Indians: but she refused; the (...) went away and said, She would
bring her Husband with her to Morrow, and (...) should be carried away by
force. She told me, She remembered what I told her one day, after the Nuns had
threatened to give her away to the Indians; that they only said so to affright
her, that they never would give her away. The Nuns told her, She should not be
permitted any more to speak to the English; and that they would afflict her
without giving her any rest, if she refused: but God preserved her from
falling. This poor Girl had many Prayers going up to Heaven for her daily, and
by name, because her Trials were more known to some of the English, than the
Trials of others, who lived more remote from them.

Here might be an History by it self, of the Trials and Sufferings of many of
our Children, and Young ones, who have been abused, and after Separation from
grown Persons, made to do as they would have them.

I shall here give an account of what was done to one of my Children, a Boy
between Fifteen and Sixteen years of Age, Two hundred Miles distant from me,
which occasioned grief and sorrow, that I want Words to utter; and yet kept
under such awe, that he never d^rst Write any thing to me, for fear of being
discovered in Writing about Religion. They threatened to put him to the Indians
again, (...) he would not turn; telling him, He was never bought out of their
hands, but only sojourned with them, but if (...) would turn, he should never
be put into their hands any more. The Priests would spend whole day^s in urging
of him. He was sent to School to learn to Read and Write French; the
Schoolmaster sometimes flattered him with Promises, if he would Cross himself,
then threatened him if he would not. But when he saw flattering Promises of
rewards, and threatenings were ineffectual, he struke him with a stick he had in
his hand; and when he saw that would not do, he made him get down on his Knees
about an hour, and then came and bid him make the sign of the Cross, and that
without any delay; he still refused. Then he gave him a couple of Strokes, with
a Whip he had in his hand; which Whip had three Branches and about twelve great
knotsty'd in it. And again bid him make the Sign of the Cross; and if it was
any Sin, he would bear it himself: and said also, You are afraid you shall be
changed if you do it: but (said he) You will be the same, your Fingers wont be
changed. And after he had made him shed many Tears, under his abuses and
threatenings, he told him, He would have it done: And so through Cowardice and
Fear of the Whip, he made the Sign. And did so for several days together with
much ado, he was brought to Cross himself. And then the Master told him, He
would have it done without his Particular bidding him. And when he came to say
his Lesson and Crossed not himself, the Master said, Have you forgot what I bid
you do. No Sir, said he, Then the Schoolmaster said, Down on your Knees; and
so kept him for an hour and half, till School was done: and so did for about a
Week. When he saw this would (...) do, (...) took the Whip, What wont you do it
(said he) I will make you: and so again, frighted him to a compliance. After
this, Commanded him to go to the Church: when he refused, he told him, he would
make him. And one Morning sent four of the biggest Boys of the School, to draw
him by force to Mass. These, with other severities and witty stratagems were
used; and I utterly ignorant of any attempt made upon him, to bring him to
change his Religon. His fear was such, that he never durst Write any of these
things, least his Letters should fall into their hands, and he should again be
delivered to the Indians. Hearing of an opportunity of Writing to him by one of
the Parish where I was, going up to Mont-Royal, I Wrote a Letter to him, and
had by him a Letter from my Son; which I shall here insert.

Honored Father,
I Have received your Letter bearing date January 11 th. 1705, 6. for which I
give you many thanks, with my Duty, and my Brothers. I am sorry you have not
received all the Letters I have Writ to you; as I have not received all yours.
According to your good Counsel, I do almost every day read something of the
Bible, and so strengthen my faith. As to the Captives newly brought, Lancaster,
is the Place of two of them, and Marlborough that of the third; the Governor
of Mont-Royal has them all three. There is other News that will seem more
strange to you. That two English Women, who in their Life time were dreadfully
set against the Catholic Religion, did on their deathbed embrace it. The one
Abigail Turbet, the other of them Esther Jones, both of them known to you.
Abigail Turbet sent for Mr. Meriel the Sabbath before she dyed. Said (many a
time upon several following days) That she committed her Soul into his hands,
and was ready to do whatever he pleased. She desired him to go to the Chapel
St. Anne, and there to say a Holy Mess for her, that she might have her Sins
Pardoned, and the Will of the Lord accomplished upon her. Her Cousin Mrs.
Badston, now Stilson, asked her. Whether she should be willing to do as she
said; She answered, yes. And upon the Tuesday she was taken into the Catholic
Church, in the presence of John Laland, and Madam Grizalem, an English Women,
and Mrs. Stilson, also with many French People besides. She was anointed with
Oil on the same day; according to her Will then, upon the Wednesday an Image of
Christ Crucified, was brought to her, she caused it to be set up over against
her at the Curtains of her bed, and look^d continually upon the same; and also
a little Crucifix brought unto her, she took it, and kissed it, and laid it
upon her Stomach. She did also make the sign of the Cross upon her self, when
she took any Meat or Drink. She promised to God that if she should recover, she
would go to the Mass every day: She having on her hand a Crucifix, saying, Oh
my Lord that I should have known thee so late! She did also make a Prayer to
the Virgin Mary, the two last days of the Week. She could utter no Word, but by
kissing the Crucifix endeavoring the Crossing her self, she gave an evidence
of her faith; she dyed Saturday the 24 th. of November, at three a Clock in the
afternoon. The next day, the Priest did commend that Woman's Soul to the Prayers
of the Congregation in the Mass, in the afternoon she was honorably buried in
the Churchyard next to the Church, close to the body of the Justice Pese Wife;
all the People being present at her Funeral. The same day in the Evening, Mr.
Meriel with an English Woman, went to Esther Jones; she did at first disdain,
but a little after she confessed, there were Seven Sacraments, Christ's Body
present, the Sacrament of the Mass, the Inequality of Power among the Pastors
of the Church; and being returned to wait by her all Night long, he read and
expounded to her some part of the Catholic Confession of Faith to her
satisfaction. About Midnight he asked her, Whether she might not confess her
Sins; I doubt not but I may, said she: And two hours after, she made unto him a
fervent confession of all the Sins of her whole Life. When he said, He was to
offer Christ to his Father for her; She liked it very well. The Superior of
the Nuns being come in to see her, she now desired that she might receive
Christ's Body before she dyed. She did also show Mrs. Stilson, a great mind to
receive the Sacrament of Extream^ Unction, and said, That if ever she should
recover and get home, she would have reproached the Ministers, for their
neglecting that Sacrament so plainly commanded by St. James. In the afternoon,
after she had begged pardon for her wavering, and the Catholic Confession of
Faith was read aloud to her, in the hearing of Mr. Craston, Mrs. Stilson, and
another English Woman, and she owned the same; about Seven a Clock the same day
she said to Mr. Dubison, Shall not they give me the holy Communion! But her
Tongue was then so thick that she could hardly swallow any thing. She was then
anointed with Holy Oil: but before, she said to Mr. Meriel, Why have you not
yet, Sir, forgiven my Sins? In the Night following, that Priest, and Mr.
Dubison were continually by her; and sometimes Praying to God in her name, and
Praying to the Virgin Mary, and oother Saints. She said also, I believe all: I
am very glad Christ was offered to his Father for me. Six or Seven hours before
she dyed, a Crucifix was showed to her by Mr. Dubison, she took it and laid it
upon her heart, and kissed it; and then the Nuns hanging it with a pair of
Beads upon her Neck. A little before she dyed, Mr. Dubison asked her to Pray for
him in Heaven; she promised him: so she gave up the Ghost, at Ten of the Clock
the 27 th. of November, whilst the high Mass was saying; she was soon commended
to the Prayers. On the fourth day of the Week following was buried; after the
Mass had been said for her: she was laid by Abigail Turbet.

Jan. 23 d. 1705, 6.

I Have her transcribed the Letter in the very words of it without the least
alteration: the same for substance was sent to several other Captives. When I
had this Letter, I presently knew it to be of Mr. Meriels composing; but the
Messenger who brought the Letter, brought word that my Son had embraced their
Religion. Afterward when some blamed him for letting me know of it, because
(they said) they feared my Sorrow would shorten my days. He told me, he thought
with himself that if he was in my case, he should be willing to know the worst,
and therefore told me as he would have desired to have known if in my place. I
thanked him, acknowledging it a favor to let me know of it: But the News was
ready to Over-whelm me with Grief and Sorrow. I made my complaint to GOD, and
Mourned before Him; Sorrow and Anguish took hold upon me. I asked of God to
direct me what to do, and how to Write, and find out an opportunity of
conveying a Letter to him; and committed this difficulty to his Providence. I
now found a greater opposition to a Patient, Quiet, Humble, Resignation to the
Will of God than I should otherwise have known, if not so tried. Here I thought
of my Afflictions and Trials; my Wife and Two Children killed, and many of my
Neighbors; and my self, so many of my Children and Friends in a Popish
Captivity, separated from our Children, not capable to come to them to instruct
them in the Way they ought to go; and cunning crafty Enemies, using all their
subtilty to insinuate into Young ones, such Principles as would be pernicious.
I thought with my self how happy many others were, in that they had their
Children with them, under all advantages to bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord. Whilst we were separated one from another, and our
Children in great Peril of Embracing damnable doctrines. Oh! that all Parents
who Read this History would Bless God for the advantages they have of Educating
their Children; and faithfully improve it! I Mourned when I thought with my
self that I had one Child with the Macqua's, a second turned to Popery, and a
little Child of Six years of Age, in danger from a Child to be instructed in
Popery; and knew full well that all endeavors would be used to prevent my
seeing or speaking with them. But in the midst of all these God gave me a
secret hope, that He would magnify His Power and free Grace, and disappoint all
their crafty designs. When I looked on the right hand and on the left, all
refuge failed, and none showed any care for my Soul. But God brought that Word
to uphold me; Who is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we can ask or
think. As also that, Is any thing too hard for God? I Prayed to God to direct
me; and Wrote very short the first time, and in general terms, fearing least if
I should Write about things in controversy, my Letters would not come to him. I
therefore addressed him with the following Letter.

Son Samuel.
YOurs of January 23 d. I received, and with it had the Tidings that you had
made an abjuration of the Protestant Faith, for the Romish: News that I heard
with the most distressing, afflicting, sorrowful Spirit that ever I heard any
News. Oh! I pity you, I mourn over you day and night! Oh I pity your
weakness, that through the craftiness of man you are turned from the Simplicity
of the Gospel (...) persuade my self you have done it through ignorance Oh! why
have you neglected to ask a Fathers Advice in an affair of so great importance
as the change of Religion! God knows that the Catechism in which I Instructed
you, is according to the Word of God; and so will be found in the Day of
Judgment. Oh! consider and bethink your self what you have done! And whether
you ask me or not, my poor Child I cannot but Pray for you, that you may be
recovered out of the Snare you are taken in. Read the Bible, Pray in Secret;
make CHRIST'S Righteousness your only Plea before GOD, for Justification:
Beware of all Immorality, and of Profaning God's Sabbaths. Let a Fathers
Advice be asked for the future, in all things of weight and moment. What is a
man profited if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a
man give in exchange for his Soul? I desire to be humbled under the Mighty hand
of God thus afflicting of me. I would not do as you have done for Ten thousand
Worlds. My heart aches within me, but I will yet wait upon the Lord; to Him will
I commit your case day and night: He can perform all things for me and mine;
and can yet again recover you from your fall. He is a God forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin: to the Lord our God belong forgivenesses though we have
rebelled. I charge you not to be instrumental to ensnare your poor Brother
Warham, or any other, and so add Sin to Sin. Accept of my Love, and don't
forsake a Fathers advice, who above all things desires that your Soul may be
Saved in the day of the Lord.


WHat I mournfully Wrote, I followed with my poor Cries to God in Heaven to
make effectual, to cause in him a consideration of what he had done. God saw
what a Proud heart I had, and what need I had to be so answered out of the
Whirlwind, that I might be humbled before Him. Not having any answer to my
Letter for some Weeks. I Wrote the following Letter, as I was enabled of God,
and sent to him by a faithful hand; which by the blessing of God was made
effectual for his good, and the good of others, who had fallen to Popery; and
for the establishing and strengthening of others to resist the Essays of the
Adversary to Truth. God brought good out of this evil, and made what was
designed to promote their interest, an occasion of shame to them.

Son Samuel,
I Have waited till now for an answer from you, hoping to hear from you, why
you made an Abjuration of the Protestant Faith, for the Romish. But since you
continue to neglect to Write to me about it, as you neglected to take any
advice or counsel from a Father, when you did it. I cannot forbear Writing
again, and making some reflections on the Letter you Wrote me last, about the
two Women. It seems to me from those words of Abigail Turbet's in your Letter*
or rather of Mr. Meriels, which you transcribed for him. [ Abigail Turbet sent
for Mr. Meriel, she committed her Soul into his hand, and was ready to do
whatsoever he pleased.] I say, it seems rational to believe, that she had not
the use of her reason; its an expression to be abhorred by all who have any
true sense of Religion. Was Mr. Meriel a God, a Christ? could he bear to hear
such Words and not reject them; replying don't commit your Soul into my hands,
but see that you commit your Soul into the Hands of GOD through Christ Jesus, and
do whatever God Commands you in His Holy Word. As for me, I am a creature, and
cannot Save your Soul, but will tell you of Acts 4. 12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other; for there is no other Name under Heaven given among
men, whereby we must be Saved^ Had he been a faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST
he would have said, it is an honor due to CHRIST alone. The holy Apostle says,
Now unto him that is able to keep you, and present you faultless before the
presence of his Glory, with exceeding joy, to the only wise GOD our Savior be
glory, and majesty, dominion and power both now and ever, Amen Jude 24, 25.
v^^ses. As to what you Write about Praying to the Virgin Mary, and other
Saints, I make this reply, Had Mr. Meriel done his duty, he should have said to
them, as 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
JESUS CHRIST the Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our sins. The
Scriptures say, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man
CHRIST JESUS. Yea, CHRIST said, Go and Preach, He that Believes and ^s
Baptized, shall be Saved. The Apostle in Gal. 1. 8. Says, But though wear an
Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, then that we have Preached
to (...) let him be accursed. They never Preached, Prayed to the Virgin Mary,
or other Saints. As you would be Saved hear what the Apostle says, Heb. 4. 13.
etc. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his fight; but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is entered into the Heaven,
JESUS the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession: for we have not an High
Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin; let us therefore come
holdly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace to
help in time of need. Which words do hold forth, how that CHRIST JESUS is in
every respect qualifyed to be a Mediator and Intercessor and I am sure they
cannot be applied to any mere creature, to make them capable of our Religious
trust. When Roman Catholics have said all they can, they are not able to
prove, that the Saints in Heaven have a knowledge of what Pray (...) are
directed to them. Some say they know them one way, others say they have the
knowledge of them in another way: and that which they have fixed up* on as most
probable to them, is, That they know of them from their beholding the face of
God; Seeing God they known these Prayers: But this is a great mistake. Though the
Saints see and know God in a Glorious manner, yet they have not an insinite
knowledge; and it does no ways follow that because they see God, they know all
Prayers that are directed to them upon the Earth. And God has no where in His
Word told us, that the Saints have such a knowledge. Besides, were it a thing
possible for them to have a knowledge of what Prayers are directed to them, it
does not follow that they are to be Prayed to, or have religious honor
conferred upon them. The Romanists can neither give one Scripture Precept of
Example for Praying to them; but God has provided a Mediator, who knows all our
Petitions, and is Faithful and Merciful enough, and we have both Scripture
Precept and Example, to look to Him as our Mediator and Advocate with the
Father. Further it cannot be proved that its consistent with the Saints being
creatures, as well as with their happiness, to have a knowledge of Prayers from
all parts of the World at the same time, from many Millions together about
things so vastly differing one from another: and then to present those
Supplications for all that look to them, its not Humility but Will Worship.
Col. 2. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility,
worshipping of Angels, verse 23. Which things indeed have a show of Wisdom and
Will Worship, and humility. For what humility can it be, to distrust the Way
that God has provided and encouraged us to come to Him in, and impose upon God
a Way of our own devising? Was not God angry with Jeroboam, for imposing upon
him after such a fort? 1 King. 12. 33. So he offered upon the Altar which he
had made in Bethel, the fifth day of the eighth Month, which he devised of his
own heart. Therefore CHRIST says, Mark 7. 7. Howheit, in vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men: Before the coming of
Christ, and His entering into Heaven as an Intercessor. Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he
is able to Save them to the uttermost that come to God by him, seeing (...)
lives in make intercession for them. I say before Christ's entering into Heaven
as an Intercessor, not one word of any Prayer to Saints, what reason can be
given that now there is of so many Saints to make Intecession, when CHRIST as a
Priest is entered into Heaven to make Intercession for us? The answer that the
Romanists give is a very fable and falsehood: Namely that there were no Saints
in Heaven, till after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, but were
reserved in a place called Lim^us Patrum, and so had not the beatisical Vision.
See Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with God and was not for God took him. If he was
not taken into Heaven, what can be the sense of those Words, for God took him?
Again, 2 King. 2. 1. When the Lord would take up Elija^ into Heaven by a
Whirlwind, verse 11. There appeared a Chariot of fire and Horses of Fire, and
parte^ (...) both asunder, and Elijab went up by a (...) wind into Heaven. Must
the truth of the Scripture be called in question to uphold their Notions?
Besides, it is not consistent with reason to suppose, that E^och and Elias
instead of having a peculiar privilege ^ouchsafed to them, for their eminency
in holiness, should be less happy for so long a time then the rest of the
Saints deceased, who are glorified in Heaven; which must be, if they are yet
kept and must be till the day of Judgment out of Heaven, and the beatifical
Vision, in an earthly Paradise, according to some of the Romanists, or in some
other place they know not where: according to others. Religious Worship is not
to be given to the creature, Mat. 49. (...). And says, All these things will I
give thee, if thou will f^ll down and worship me. Then says Jesus to him, Get
thee hence Sa^^^, for it is written thou shall whorship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. That phrase, and Him only shall thou serve, excludes
all creatures. Rev. 22. 8, 9. I fell down to worship before the feet of the
Angel, which showed me these things; then says he to me, see thou do it not,
for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them
which keep the sayings of this book, worship God. Which plainly shows, that God
only is to be Worshipped with a religious Worship. None can think, that Saint
John intended to give the highest Divine Worship to the Angel, who says, Don't
fall down and worship me; its Gods due, Worship God. So Act. 10. 25, 26. As
Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him and fell down at his feet and worshipped
him, but Peter took him up, saying stand up, I my self also am a man. See also
Lev. 19 10. The Words of the Second Commandment (which the Romanists either
leave out, or add to the first Commandment saying, Thou shall have no other
gods before me, adding etc.) I say the Words of the second Commandment are,
Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
waters under the earth; thou shall not how down thy self to them, nor serve
them, for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God, etc. These words being inserted
in the Letter, that came from your Brother Eleazar in New England the last
Summer, was the cause of the Letters being sent down from Mont-Royal, and not
given to you; when so near you: as I suppose there being no other clause of the
Letter that could be objected against, and the reason why found at Quebeck,
when I sent it to you a second time enclosed in a Letter Written by my self.
The Brazen Serpent made by Divine appointment as a Type of CHRIST, when abused
to Superstition, was by reforming Hezekiah broken in pieces. As to what the
Romanists plead about the Lawfulness of Image and Saint Worship, from those
likenesses of things made in Solomon's Temple, its nothing to the purpose. We
don't say it is not lawful to make or have a Picture, but those carved Images
were not in the Temple to be adored, bowed down to, or worshipped. There is no
manner of consequence, that because there were Images made in Solomon's Temple
that were not adored and worshipped, that therefore its now lawful to make and
fall down before Images, and Pray to them, and so Worship them. Religious
Worshipping of Saints cannot be defended from, but is forbidden in the
Scriptures; and for fear of loosing their Disciples, the Romanists keep away
from them the Bible, and oblige them to believe as they say they must believe.
As though there was no use to be made of our reason about our Souls; and yet the
Bereans were counted noble, for Searching the Scriptures, to see whether the
things Preached by Saint Paul were so or no. They dare not allow you liberty to
speak with your Father, or others, for fear their Errors should be discovered
to you. Again, you Write, that Esther Jones confessed, that there was an
inequality of Power among the Pastors of the Church. An argument to convince
the World, that because the Priests in fallacious ways, caused a Woman
distempered with a very high Fever, if not distracted, to say, she confessed
there was an inequality of Power among the Pastors of the Church, therefore all
the World are obliged to believe that there is a Pope. An argument to be sent
from Dan to Beersheba every where, where any English Captives are, to gain
their belief of a Pope. Can any rational man think, that CHRIST in the
Sixteenth Chapter of Matthew, gave Saint Peter such a Power as the Papists speak
of; or that the Disciples so understood CHRIST? when immediately there arose a
dispute among them, who should be the Greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? Math.
18. 1. A^ the same time came the Disciples of Jesus, saying, who is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? The rock spoken of in the Sixteenth of
Matthew, not the Person of Peter, but the confession made by him, and the same
Power is given to all the Disciples, if you compare one Scripture with another;
not one word in any place of Scripture of such a Vicarship power as of a Pope,
nor any solid foundation of proof that Peter had a greater Authority, than the
rest of the Apostles. 1 Cor. 4. 6. That you might learn in us, not to think of
men above that which is written. Yea, the Apostle condemns them. 1 Con 1. 12.
for their contentions, One saying, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of
Caephas; no more of Peter's being a foundation than any of the rest. For we are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, JESUS CHRIST himself
being the chief corner stone. Not one word in any of Peter's Epistles; showing
that he had greater power than the other Apostles. Nay if the Scriptures give
any preference, it is to Saint Paul rather than Saint Peter. 1 Co^. 3. 10.
According to the grace of God which is given to me, as a wise Master Builder I
have laid the foundation. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4. For I verily as absent in body, but
present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him
that has so done this deed. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
1 Cor. 7. 1. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote to me; application made
not to Saint Peter, but Paul, for the decision of a Controversy or Scruple. 1
Cor. 11. 2. Now I praise you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and
keep the ordinance as I delivered them to you. Either those spoken of, Acts 15.
or in his Ministry and Epistles, 2 Cor. 2. 10. For your sake forgave I it, in
the person of Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 28. That which comes upon me daily, the care
of all the Churches. 2 Cor. 12. 11,12. For in nothing am I behind the very
chiefest of the Apostles, though I be nothing. Truly the signs of an Apostle
were wrought among you in all patience, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds;
and in other places. Again if you consult, Acts 15. where you have an account
of the first Synod or Council, you will find that the counsel or sentence of
the Apostle James is followed, ver. 19. Wherefore my sentence is, etc. not a
word that St. Peter was chief. Again, you find Peter himself sent forth by the
other Apostles, Acts 8. 14. The Apostles sent unto them Peter and John. When
the Church of the Jews found fault with Peter, for going in to the Gentiles
when he went to Cornelins, he does not say, why do you question me, or call me
to an account, I am Christ's Vicar on Earth. When Paul reproved Peter, Gal. 2.
he does not defend himself, by mentioning an infallibility in himself as
Christ's Vicar, or reprove Paul for his boldness.

The Roman Catholic Church cannot be a true Church of Christ, in that it makes
Laws directly contrary to the Laws and Commands of Christ. As for example, in
withholding the Wine or the Cup from the Laiety, in the Lord's Supper; whenas
Christ commands the same to drink who were to eat. Their evasion that the Blood
is in the Body, and so they partake of both in eating, is a great fallacy built
on a false foundation of Transubstantion. For when men eat, they cannot be said
to drink, which Christ commands, for Christ commands that we take the Cup and
drink, which is not done in eating; besides the Priests themselves will not be so
put off. The words ( this is my Body) do only intend, this does signify of
represent my Body, which will appear if you compare Scripture with Scripture,
for after the Consecration the Holy Ghost calls it Bread, and the fruit of the
Vine. Exodus 12. 11. It is the Lords Passe^ver; that is, it represents it. In
all the Evangelists, you read of killing and eating the Passover, a few lines
or verses before these words, This is my Body, which plainly show, that our
Savior in the same way of figurative expression speaks of the Gospel
Sacrament. If these words were taken as the Romanists expound them, he must eat
his own Body himself, whole and entire in his own hands; and after that each
one of the Disciples eat him entire, and yet he set at the Table whole,
untouched at the same time; contradictions impossible to be defended by any
rational arguments. Yea, his whole Body, must be now in Heaven and in a
thousand other places, and in the mouth of every Communicant at the same time,
and that both as a broken and unbroken Sacrifice, and be subject to
putrefaction. CHRIST is said to be a Door, a true Vine, a Way, a Rock; What
work shall we make if we expound these in a literal manner, as the Romanists
do, when they say, this is my Body, is meant of the real Body of Christ in the
Eucharist? It Is said, 1 Cor. 10. 4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink;
for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was
Christ. Was Christ literally a Rock, think you? Yea, it is absurd to believe,
that a Priest uttering a few words over a Wafer not above an inch square, can
make it a God, or the Body of Christ entire as it was offered on the Cross. A
blasphemy to pretend to a power of making God at their pleasure; and then eat
him, and give him to others to be eaten, or shut him up in their Altars: that
they can utter the same words, and make a God or not make a God, according to
their intention, and that the people are obliged to believe that it is God, and
so adore it, when they never hear any word of consecration, nor know the
Priests intention. As to what you write about the Holy Mass: I reply, it is
wholly an Humane Invention; not a word of such a Sacrifice in the whole Bible,
its being a Sacrifice propitiatory daily to be offered, is contrary to the Holy
Scriptures. Heb. 7. 27. Who needs not daily, as those Highpriests, to offer
up sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for the peoples* for this he did
once, when he offered up himself. And yet the Romanists say, there is nee^ that
he be offered up as a Sacrifier to God every day. Heb. 9. 12. By his own blood
he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for
us. 25, 26, 27, 28. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
High Priest enters into the holy place, every year with the blood of others:
For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world. But now
once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put away (...) by the
sacrifice of himself. As it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
the Judgment* So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. Heb. 10. 10.
By which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the Body of Jesus
Christ once for all. ver. 12. But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins, for ever sat down on the Right Hand of God. ver. 14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. By which
Scriptures you may see, that the Mass is not of Divine Appointment, but an
humane Invention. Their evasion of a bloody and an unbloody Sacrifice, is a
flam, the holy Scriptures speak not one word, of Christ being offered as a
Sacrifice Propitiatory, after such a sort as they call an unbloody Sacrifice.
All the Ceremonies of the Mass are humane inventions, that God never Commanded.
As (...) what in the Letter about Praying for the Women after their Death, is
very ridiculous. For As the tr^^^ falls so it lies; as Death leaves judgment
will find: (...) change after Death from an afflicted to an happy place and
state. Purgatory is a phansy for the enriching the Clergy, and impoverishing
the Laiety. The Notion of it a fatal Snare to many Souls, who sin with hopes of
easy getting Priestly absolutions at Death, and buying off Torments with their
Money. The Soul at Death goes immediately to Judgment, and so to Heaven or
Hell. No authentic Place of Scripture, mentions so much as one Word of any
such place or state. Mr. Meriel told me, if I found one error in our Religion,
it was enough to cause me to disown our whole Religion: by his argument you may
see, what reason you have to avoid that Religion that is so full of Errors.
Bethink your self and consult the Scriptures, if you can get them (I mean the
Bible:) Can you think their Religion is right, when they are afraid to let you
have an English Bible? Or to speak with your Father, or other of your Christian
Neighbors, for fear they should give you such Convictions of truth that they
cannot remove? Can that Religion be true, that cannot bear an Examination from
the Scriptures, that are a Perfect Rule in matters of Faith? Or that must be
upheld by Ignorance, especially Ignorance of the holy Scriptures? These things
have I written as in my heart I believe. I long for your recovery, and will not
cease to Pray for it. I am now a man of a Sorrowful Spirit, and look upon your
fall as the most aggravating circumstance of my afflictions, and am persuaded
that no pains will be wanting, to prevent me from seeing or speaking with you;
but I kn^w that Gods Grace is all-sufficient; sufficient. He is able to do
exceeding abundantly above what I can ask or think. Don't give way to
discouragement as to a return to New England; read over what I have written,
and keep it with you if you can; you have no friend on earth that wishes your
Eternal Salvation more heartily than your Father. I long to see and speak with
you, but I never forget you; my love to you, and to your Brother and Sister,
and to all our Fellow Prisoners. Let me hear from you as often as you can. I
hope God will appear for us before it be long. There are a great many other
things in the Letter, that deserve to be refuted, but I shall be too tedious in
remarking of them all at once. Yet would not pass over that passage in the
Letter, that Esther Jones confessed, that there were Seven Sacraments. To which
I answer, That some of the most Learned of the Romish Religion, confessed
(without the distracting pains of a violent Fever) and left it upon record in
Print, that it cannot be convincingly made out from the Scripture, that there
are Seven Sacraments, and that their most incontestable proof is from
tradition, and by their traditions they might have found Seventeen as well as
Seven: considering that four Popes successively, spent their lives in purging
and correcting old Authors. But no man can out of the Holy Scriptures, prove
any more than two Sacraments of Divine Institution, under the New Testament,
namely, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. If you make the Scriptures a perfect rule
of faith as you ought to do, you cannot believe as the Romish Church believes.
Oh! see that you Sanctify the Lord Himself in your heart, and make Him your
fear and your dread. Fear not them that can kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do; but rather fear him that has power to destroy Soul
and Body in Hell fire. The Lord have Mercy upon you, and show you Mercy for the
Worthiness and Righteousness sake of Jesus Christ, our Great and Glorious
Redeemer and Advocate, who makes Intercession for Transgressors. My Prayers
are daily to God for you, for your Brother and Sister, yea for all my Children,
and fellow Prisoners. I am your Afflicted and Sorrowful Father,

John Williams.
Chateauriche, March 22. 1706.

GOD who is gloriously Free and Rich in His Grace to vile Sinners, was pleased
to bless poor and weak means for the recovery of my Child so taken, and gave me
to see, that He did not Say to the House of Jacob, Seek you me in vain. Oh!
that every Reader would in every difficulty make Him their Refuge; He is an
hopeful stay. To alleviate my Sorrow, I received the following Letter in answer
to mine.

Mont-Royal, May 12. 1706. Honored Father,
I Received your Letter which you sent by -- which good Letter I thank you for;
and for the good Counsel which you gave me: I desire to be thankful for it, and
hope it will be for the good of my Soul. I may say as in the Psalms; The
sorrows of Death compassed me, and the pains of Hell gat hold on me: I found
trouble and sorrow, then called I upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord I beseech
thee deliver my Soul! Gracious is the Lord and Righteous, yea our God is
merciful. As for what you ask me about my making an Abjuration of the
Protestant Faith for the Romish, I durst not Write so plain to you as I would,
but hope to see and discourse with you. I am sorry for the Sin I have committed
in changing of Religion, for which I am greatly to blame. You may know that Mr.
Meriel the Schoolmaster, and others, were continually at me about it; at last
I gave over to it: for which I am very sorry. As for that Letter you had from
me, it was a Letter I transcribed for Mr. Meriel: And for what he says about
Abigail Turbet, and Esther Jones, no body heard them but he, as I understand. I
desire your Prayers to God for me, to deliver me from my Sins. Oh remember me
in your Prayers! I am your Dutiful Son, ready to take your Counsel.

Samuel Williams.


THis Priest Mr. Meriel, has brought many Letters to him and bid him Write them
over and send them, and so he has done for many others. By this as also by Mrs.
Stilsons, saying, She does not think that either of these Women did change
their Religion before their Death; she affirms also, that oftentimes during
their Sickness, whilst they had the use of their reason, they protested against
the Romish Religion and Faith. Its evident that these Women never dyed Papists,
but that it was a wily Stratagem of the Priests to advance their Religion; for
Letters were sent immediately, after their death, to use this as a persuasive
argument to gain others. But God in His Providence gave in farther Conviction
of their fallaciousness in this matter.

For the last Summer, one Biggilow of Marlborough, a Captive at Mont-Royal, was
very Sick in the Hospital, and in the judgment of all with a Sickness to Death.
Then the Priests and others gave out, that he was turned to be of their
Religion, and taken into their communion: But contrary to their expectation he
was brought back from the gates of Death, and would comply with none of their
rites: saying, that whilst he had the use of his reason, he never spoke any
thing in favor of their Religion. And that he never disowned the Protestant
Faith, nor would he now. So that they were silenced and put to shame. There is
no reason to think that these two Women were any more Papists than he; but they
are Dead and cannot speak. One of the Witnesses spoken of in the forementioned
Letter, told me, she knew of no such thing, and said Mr. Meriel told her, that
he never heard a more fervent and affectionate Prayer, than one which Esther
Jones made a little before her Death. I am verily persuaded, that he calls that
Prayer to God so full of affection and confession, the confession made by her
of the Sins of her whole Life. These two Women always in their health, and so
in their Sickness, opposed all Popish Principles, as all that knew them can
testify, so long as they could be permitted to go and speak with them. One of
these Women was taken from the Eastward, and the other, namely Esther Jones
from Northampton.

In the beginning of March 1706. Mr. Sheldon came again to Canada, with Letters
from His Excellency our GOVERNOR, at which time I was a few days at Quebeck.
And when I was there, One Night about Ten a Clock, there was an Earthquake,
that made a report like a Cannon, and made the Houses to tremble: It was heard
and felt many Leagues, all along the Island of St. Laurence, and other places.
When Mr. Sheldon came the second time, the Adversaries did what they could to
retard the time of our return, to gain time to seduce our Young Ones to Popery.
Such were sent away who were judged ungainable, and most of the Younger sort
still kept. Some still flattered with Promises of reward; and great Essays to
get others Married among them. One debauched, and then in Twenty-four Hours of
time Published, taken into their Communion and Married; but the poor Soul has
had time since to lament her Sin and Folly, with a bitter cry; and asks your
Prayers, that God of His Sovereign Grace would yet bring out of the horrible
Pit, she has thrown her self into. Her Name was Rachael St^rer of Wells.

In * April, one Zebediah Williams of our Town dyed: he was a very hopeful and
pious young man, who carried himself so in his Captivity, as to edify several
of the English; and recover one fallen to Popery, taken the last War; though some
were enraged against him on these accounts; yet even the French where he
Sojourned, and with whom he Conversed, would say he was a good man: One that
was very Prayerful to God, and Studious and Painful in reading the holy
Scriptures. A man of a good understanding, a desirable Conversation: in the
beginning of his last Sickness he made me a Visit (before he ^^ent to the
Hospital at Quebeck) to my great satisfaction, and our mutual consolation and
comfort in our Captivity. As he had several times before, living not above two
Miles from me over the River, at the Island of St. Laurence, about Six Weeks or
Two Months. After his Death, the French told me, Zebediah was gone to Hell and
Damned: For, said they, He has appeared since his Death (to one Joseph Egerly,
an English man, who was taken the last War) in flaming fire, telling him, he
was Damned for refusing to embrace the Romish Religion, when such pains were
used to bring him to the true Faith, and for being instrumental to draw him
away from the Romish Communion, forsaking the Mass; and was therefore now come
to advertise him of his danger. I told them, I Judged it to be a Popish Lie:
Saying, I bless God our Religion needs no lies to uphold, maintain, and
establish it, a^ theirs did. But they affirmed it to be true, telling me, how
God approved of their Religion, and Witnessed miraculously against ours. But I
still told them, I was persuaded his Soul was in Heaven, and that these reports
were only devised fables to seduce Souls. For several Weeks they affirmed it,
telling me, that all who came over the River from the Island affirmed it to be
a truth. I begged of God to blast this Hellish Design of theirs, so that in the
issue it might be to render their Religion more abominable, and that they might
not gain one Soul by such a stratagem. After some weeks had passed in such
assertions, there came one into my Landlords House, affirming it to be a truth
reported of Zebediah, saying, Joseph Egerly had been over the River, and told
one of our Neighbors this Story. After a few hours I saw that Neighbor, and
asked him whether he had seen Egerly lately; he said yes, What News told he to
you? None said he. Then I told him what was affirmed as a truth; he answered,
Egerly said nothing like this to him, and he was persuaded he would have told
him, if there had been any truth in it. About a week after this, came one John
Boult from the Island of St. Laurence, a Lad taken from Newfoundland, a very
serious sober Lad of about Seventeen years of Age; he had often before came
over with Zebediah to visit me. At his coming in, he much lamented the loss of
Zebediah, and told me, that for several weeks they had told him the same Story,
affirming it to be a truth, and that Egerly was so awakened by it, as to go
again to Mass every day, urging him; since God in such a miraculous way offered
such conviction of the truth of their Religion, and the falsehood and danger of
ours, to come over to their Religion, or else his damnation would be dreadfully
aggravated. He (said he) could have no rest for them day and night; but (said
he) I told them their Religion was contrary to the Word of God, and therefore I
would not embrace it; and that I did not believe what they said. And says he,
to me, one day I was sitting in the house, and Egerly came in, and I spoke to
him before the whole Family (in the French Tongue, for he could not speak much
English) and asked him of this Story, he answered, it is a great falsehood,
saying, he never appeared to me, nor have I ever reported any such thing to any
body; and that he had never been at the M^ss since Zebediah' s death. At the
hearing of which they were silenced and put to shame; we blessed God together,
for discovering their wickedness, and disappointing them in what they aimed at,
and prayed to God to deliver us and all the Captives from delusions, and
recover them who had fallen, and so parted. After which I took my Pen and wrote
a Letter to one Mr. Samuel Hill, an English Captive, taken from Wells, who
lived at Quebeck, and his Brother Ebenez^r Hill to make a discovery of this
lying Plot, to warn them of their danger, and assure them of the falsehood of
this report; but the Letter fell into the hands of the Priests, and was never
delivered. This Egerly came home with us, so that they gained nothing but shame
by this stratagem: God often disappoints the crafty devices of wicked men.

In the latter end of Summer, they told me they had News from New England by
one who had been a Captive at Boston, who said that the Ministers at Boston had
told the French Captives, that the Protestant Religion was the only true
Religion; and that as a confirmation of it, they would raise a dead person to
life before their eyes for their conviction; and that having persuaded one to
feign himself dead, they came and prayed over him, and then commanded him in
the Name of Christ (whose Religion they kept pure) to arise, they called and
commanded, but he never arose; so that instead of raising the Dead, they killed
the Living; which the bereaved Relations discovered. I told them, it was an old
Lie and Calumny against Luther and Calvin new vamped, and that they only change
the persons and place: but they affirmed it to be a truth; I told them I
wondered they were so fond of a faith propagated, and then maintained by lying
words.

We were always out of hopes of being returned before Winter, the season
proving so cold in the latter end of September, and were praying to God to
prepare our hearts, with all holy submission to his Holy Will, to Glorify his
Holy Name in a way of passive Obedience in the Winter. For my own part, I was
informed by several who came from the City, that the Lord Intendant said, if
More returned and brought word that Battis was in Prison, he would put me into
Prison, and lay me in Irons. They would not permit me to go into the City,
saying, I always did harm when I came to the City, and if at any time I was at
the City, they would persuade the Governor to send me back again.

In the beginning of last June, the Superior of the Priests came to the Parish
where I was, and told me, he saw I wanted my Friend Captain de Beauville, and
that I was ragged. But says he, your obstinacy against our Religion discourages
from providing better Clothes; I told him it was better going in a ragged Coat,
than with a ragged Conscience.

In the beginning of last June, went out an Army of Five Hundred Maqua's and
Indians, with an intention to have fallen on some English Towns down
Connecticut River, but lighting on a S^alac^ok Indian, who ran away in the
night, they were discouraged; saying, he would alarm the whole Country: about
Fifty as some say, or Eighty as others, returned: Thus God restrained their
Wrath.

When they were promising themselves another Winter, to draw away the English
to Popery, came News of an English Briganteen a coming, and that the Honorable
Capt. Samuel Appleton Esqr. was coming Ambassador, to fetch off the Captives,
and Capt. John Bonner with him. I cannot tell you how, the Clergy and others
labored to stop many of the Prisoners, to some Liberty, to some Money, and
yearly Pensions were offered, if they would stay. Some they urged to tarry at
least till the Spring of the year, telling them it was so late in the year,
they would be lost by Shipwreck if they went now; some younger ones they told,
if they went home they would be Damned and burn in Hell for ever, to affright
them; day and night they were urging of them to stay. And I was threatened to be
sent aboard, without a permission to come ashore again, if I should again
discourse with any of the English who were turned to their Religion; at
Mont-Royal especially all crafty endeavors were used to stay the English. They
told my Child, if he would stay, he should have an honorable Pension from the
King every year, and that his Master, who was an old man, and the richest in
Canada, would give him a great deal; telling him if he returned he would be
poor, for (said they) your Father is poor, has lost all his Estate; it was all
burnt. But he would not be prevailed with to stay; and others were also in like
manner urged to stay, but God graciously brake the snare and brought them out.
They endeavored in the Fall of the year, to have prevailed with my Son to have
gone to France, when they saw he would not come to their Communion any more.
One Woman belonging to the Eastern parts, who had by their persuasions, Married
an English Captive taken the last War, came away with her Husband, which made
them say, they were sorry they ever persuaded her to turn to their Religion,
and then to Marry. For instead of advancing their Cause by it, they had
weakened it, for now they had not only lost her, but another they thought they
had made sure of. Another Woman belonging to the Eastward, who had been
flattered to their Religion, to whom a Bible was denied, till she promised to
embrace their Religion, and then had the promise of it for a little time,
opening her Bible whilst in the Church and present, at Mass, she read the
fourth Chapter of Deuteronomy, and received such conviction whilst reading,
that before her first communion she fell off from them, and could never be
prevailed with any more to be of their Religion.

We have reason to bless God, who has wrought deliverance for so many, and yet
to pray to God for a door of escape, to be opened for the great number yet
behind, not much short of an Hundred, many of which are Children, and of these
not a few among the Salvages, and having lost the English Tongue, will be lost
and turn Salvages in a little time, unless something extraordinary prevent.

The Vessel that came for us, in its Voyage to Canada struck on a Bar of Sands,
and there lay in very great hazard for four Tides, and yet they saw reason to
bless God for striking there; for had they got over that Bar, they should at
midnight in a Storm of Snow have run upon a terrible ledge of Rocks.

We came away from Quebeck, October Twenty five, and by contrary Winds and a
great Storm, we were retarded, and then driven back nigh the City, and had a
great deliverance from Shipwreck, the Vessel striking twice on a Rock in that
Storm. But through God's goodness we all arrived in safety at Boston, November
Twenty one, the number of Captives Fifty seven, two of which were my Children.
I have yet a Daughter of Ten years of Age, and many Neighbors, whose Case
bespeaks your compassion, and prayers to God to gather them, being Outcasts
ready to perish.

At our arrival at Boston, we found the Kindnesses of the Lord in a wonderful
manner, in God's opening the hearts of many, to bless God with us and for us,
wonderfully to give for our supplies in our needy state. We are under
obligations to praise God, for disposing the hearts of so many to so great
Charity, and under great bonds to pray for a blessing on the Heads, Hearts and
Families of them, who so liberally and plentifully gave for our relief. It Is
certain, that the Charity of the whole Country of Canada, though moved with the
doctrine of merit, does not come up to the Charity of Boston alone, where
notions of merit are rejected; but acts of Charity performed out of a right
Christian Spirit, from a Spirit of thankfulness to God, out of Obedience to
Gods Command, and unfeigned Love and Charity to them that are of the same
Family and Household of Faith. The Lord grant, that all who devise such liberal
things, may find the accomplishment of the promises made by God, in their own
persons and theirs after them, from Generation to Generation.

I Shall Annex a short account, of the troubles beginning to arise at Canada.
On May Sixteen, arrived a Cannoe at Quebeck, that brought Letters from Mesyppa,
written the May preceding, giving an account that the Plague was there, and
that One hundred and Fifty French in a very little time had dyed of it; and
that the Salvages called the Lezilouways were very turbulent, and had with
their Arrows wounded a Jesuit in Five places, and killed a Frenchman that
waited on him. In July News came, that the Nations up the River were engaged in
a War one against the other, and that the French living so among them, and
Trading with them, were in great danger, that the Mitchel-macquina's had made
War with the M^^^mies, and had killed a Mendicant F^yar, and three other
Frenchmen, and eleven Salvages at a place called the Straits, where they are
settling a Garrison and Place for Traffic; the Mitchel-macquina's had taken
sixteen Frenchmen Prisoners, and burnt their Trading Houses. These tidings
made the French very full of perplexing troubles; but the Jesuits are
endeavoring to pacify them, but the troubles when we came away, were rather
increasing then lessening; for the last Letters from the French Prisoners at
Mitchel-macquina report, that the Salvages had sent out two Companies, one of
an Hundred and Fifty, another of an Hundred and Sixty, against the Salvages at
the Straits, and they feared, they would engage as well against the French as
the Indians.

The END.
Reports of Divine Kindness: OR, Remarkable Mercies Should be Faithfully
Published, For the Praise of GOD the Giver. Set forth in a SERMON Preached at
Boston Lecture, December. 5. 1706.

By John Williams, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Deerfield; Soon after his
Return from a doleful Captivity.

Psalm. 107. 13, 14, 15, 32. He saved them out of their distresses. He brought
them out of darkness, and the shadow of death: and brake their bands in sunder.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful works
to the Children of men. -- Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the
People, and Praise him in the Assembly of the Elders. Psalm. 34. 3. O magnify
the Lord with me, and let (...) exalt his Name together. Boston: Printed for S.
Phillips, at the Brick Shop. 1707.

Signal favors to be Published, for the Praise of God the Giver.
Luke VIII. 39. Return to thine own House, and show how great things God has
done unto thee. --
THE Infinitely Wise disposer of all things, who aims at His own Glory, in the
Governing of Rational Creatures, does sometimes bring Persons into the depths
of distress, and then magnify his Power and Grace in raising them up out of
their afflictions: and in many respects by such things, He has a design of
advancing His own Honor and Glory in the World. We find in the context, a
Person in a very doleful distressed condition: he seems to be forsaken of God,
and made a Possession and dwelling Place of Evil Spirits, deprived of all
humane comforts and delights, made to possess Sorrow and Pain to such a degree,
as to be a common Subject, or Theme of discourse for all men to relate doleful
things about. And afterward, God in very remarkable and wonderful works of
Power and Mercy not only gives release from his sorrowful Possession, but he is
S^^ting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his (...) mind. Now this was
done for the declarative and manifestative Glory and Honor of God. For when
this man for whom such great things had been done, Petitions Christ that he may
abide with Him, to hear from Him, and Pay his respects to him; he receives
commandment, to be glorifying the Power and Mercy of God, in declaring to
others what great things God had done for him.

1. A Subject of great Mercy; or a person spoken of for whom God had done great
things, bestowed eminent Mercies.

2. A particular and special command from Christ, to be glorifying God in
relating to others, what Mercies he had been the Subject of.

3. His obedience to the great command of Christ: he went and published the
great things done for him by Christ; so that from the command of Christ, and
his obedience to it, for which he is commended, you may observe this Doctrinal
Conclusion.

DOCT. It well becomes those who have had eminent Mercies, to be showing to
others what Great things GOD has done for them. The holy Scriptures in many
places confirm this Truth. See Exodus 12. 25, 26, 27. And it shall come to pas^,
when ye be came to the land, which the Lord will give you, according as he has
promised, that ye shall keep this service. And it shall come to pass, when your
Children shall say unto you, What mean you by this service? That ye shall say,
It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over the Houses of the
Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our
houses. Exodus 13. 8, 10. And thou shall show thy son in that day, saying, This
is done because of that which the Lord did unto me, when I came forth out of
Egypt. Thou shall therefore keep this Ordinance in his season from year to
year. Psalm. 78. ^, 4. Which we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told
us; we will not hide them from their Children, showing to the Generation to
come the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength, and his wonderful works that he
has done. In the prosecution and handling of this Truth, Consider,

1. They who have had Mercies, have had them from God. God is the bestower and
giver of all our good things: All our Mercies come to us by a Divine
Providence, and ordering; not by casualty and accident, neither are they of our
own procuring and purchasing, or others, so as to exclude the providential
disposing of God. It Is God who returns the Captivity of Zion, Psalm. 126. begin.
When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream:
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. Then said
they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them. The Lord has
done great things for us; whereof we are glad: turn again our Captivity O Lord.
The very Heathen, acknowledge the good things bestowed upon, and done for the
Church, to be from God; and Gods own People acknowledge Him for the Mercies
granted, and humbly supplicate Mercies from Him for the future. It Is God who
gathers the outcasts of Israel: it is He who takes away the Captives of the
Mighty, the Prey of the terrible: Who contends with them that contend with us,
and saves our Children. It Is God who disperseth and gathers again: Therefore
the Psalmist, Psalm. 103. begin. Calls upon his Soul to bless the Lord, and not
to forget all his benefits; and says, it is God who forgiveth all thy
iniquities, who heal^th all thy discases: Who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies,
and(...) Sometimes, God in a more immediate and extraordinary way and manner,
confers blessings and mercies, sometimes in a more ordinary and mediate way;
but his Providence is to be acknowledged in all: not one single Mercy comes to
us, without a commission from that God by whom our very Hairs are numbered.

2. It well becomes those who have had eminent Mercies, to be showing to others
what great things God has done for them. Therefore you find the holy Psalmist
calling upon others, to give a listening ear, whilst he makes a Narration of the
Salvations he had from God, Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all you that fear God,
and I will declare what he has done for my Soul.

1 st. Reason. Because God aimed at the advancement of His Own Honor and
Glory, in the giving and dealing out of these Mercies. God makes and disposes
all things for His own Honor and Glory. All Works of Providence, are some way
or other to advance the Honor and Glory of God in the World. The glory of His
Power, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice and Holiness, are some way or other advanced in a
declarative and manifestative way and manner. Now it well becomes us, to fall
in with the design of God, and in an active manner to be giving Him Glory. That
God designs to have Glory given to Him, is evident from, Psalm. 50. 15. And
(...) upon m^ in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Exodus 7.5. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I
stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the Children of Israel from
among them. God has a design to magnify His Power, Mercy and Covenant
Faithfulness, in the eyes of the World.

2 d. Reas. Because God has given us direct precepts, and positive Commands, in
this Way to be Glorifying of Him. God is our Lord and Lawgiver, and He
requires that among other ways of showing forth His Praises, we do it by
rehearsing His Praise worthy Acts, to the Children of Men. So that in Obedience
to God, and answering that High and Noble end we were made for; its requisite
that in this way we glorify God. Its enough, that the great God who has taken
us into Covenant Relation to Himself, has enjoined us, to show forth His
Praises in rehearsing to others the Salvations, and Favors we have been the
Subjects of. The forementioned Scriptures, with many others that might be
enumerated, sufficiently demonstrate, that God calls for our thankful
acknowledgments in this Way; and upon the account of this being so agreeable to
the revealed and preceptive Will of God, the Psalmist expresses himself, as in
Psalm. 145.4, 5, 6. One Generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall
declare thy mighty acts. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy Majesty;
and of thy wondrous works. And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible
acts: and I will declare thy greatness. They shall abundantly utter the memory
of thy great goodness: and shall sing of thy Righteousness. Verse 10, 11, 12.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; and thy Saints shall bless thee. They
shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom; and talk of thy power. To make known
to the sons of men his mighty acts (...) and the glorious majesty of his
kingdom.

3 d. Reas. Because hereby they will stir up others to bless God with them, and
for them. A truly gracious Soul finds by experience, that he can do but a
little in Glorifying God, finds how far he falls short of the rule of duty, in
so reasonable a Service as Glorifying God. And being enlarged in desires that
the glory due to God might be given Him, does call upon others to joy^ with him
in this Heavenly Service of Praising God; and therefore tells them what great
things God has done. Psalm. 34. 2, 3, 4, 6. My soul shall make her boast in the
Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad. O magnify the Lord with me,
and let us exalt his Name together. I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and
delivered me from all my fears. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him;
and saved him out of all his troubles. When (...) told his Father in law
Jethro, the great things (...) had done for Israel, he Glorifies God on their
behalf, Exodus 18. 8. etc. And Moses told his Father in (...) all that the Lord
had done unto Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians for Isreal's sake, and all the
travel that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them. And
Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel: whom he
had delivered ou^ of the hand of the Egyptians. And Jethro said, Blessed (...)
the Lord, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of
the hand of Praraoh, who has delivered the people from under the hand of the
Egyptians. Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods (...) for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them. By this means thanks will
be given to God by many: as many have been Praying to God for them, so many
will be praising and blessing God with them and for them.

4 th. Reas. Because hereby they will oftentimes be advised and counseled, how
to improve such Mercies to the Glory of God. We are conscious to our selves of
so much blindness, ignorance, and darkness, that we cannot but own it a great
thing to be in a way for the best counsel, what to do with our Mercies, and
what and how to return to God for them. Now the publishing the great things
done by God for us, put others in a capacity to be advising and telling of us,
what temptations we may expect to meet with, and what will be needful on our
part to avoid temptations, and how to overcome; they will be counselling us,
how to be in a way, of rendering to the Lord according to the benefits done unto
us: what Duties God looks for the performance of, and directions how to do
duty. In a word, we may be counseled how to order our whole Conversation, so as
God may have Glory, and our good purposes of honoring and glorifying God with
our Mercies, established. Pr^^. 20. 18. Every purpose is established by
counsel. When Moses had told Jethro what great things God (...) done for
Israel, he says, Exodus 18, 19. Heathen (...) unto my voice, I will give thee
counsel, and (...) with thee, etc.

5 th. Reas. Because hereby they will be instrumental to put others upon
trusting God, making Him their hope and refuge in an Evil Day. Others will be
excited, to a seeking refuge under the shadow of his Wings, Psalm. 44. beg. We
have heard with our ears; O God, our fathers have told us, what work then did
in their days, in the times of old. How thou did drive out the Heathen, etc.
And then it is said, Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances for Jacob.
Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy Name will we tread them
under that rise up against us. For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my
sword save me. In God we boast all the d^y l^^g. Others that have heard, will
say, such and such an one was thus exercised, and God appeared for them, and
put songs of praise to the Lord into their mouths, we will commit our Case to
God too; we will both hope and quietly wait for Gods Salvation too. Your
telling others, how you have found God a Prayer-hearing God, will encourage
them, Prayer-wise to be committing their distressed and difficult cases to Him.
What an honor to be instrumental to any Souls comfort, and Gods honor;
agreeable to this is that, Psalm. 78. 5, 6, 7. Which he commanded our fathers^
that they should make them known to their Children. That the Generation to come
might know them, even the Children which should be born: who should arise and
declare them to their children: That they might set their hope (...) God, and
not forget the works of God: but (...) his Commandments.

6 th. Reas. Because the Works of God toward them, have been very wonderful.
The Psalmist often speaks of the Works of God as mavelous; they are wonderful
if we consider, how God Timed the Mercy; when their feet well nigh slipped, when
they could see no way of escape; as with the Children of Israel at the Red Sea.
How very wonderful and mavelous was the work of God, in putting by the wicked
purpose of H^man against Mordeca^ and the Jews? If we consider how God kept
from falling, by making them pass a right judgment on their ways and His ways,
as Psalm. 73. Yea appearing to save them, when with Jonah they were saying. They
were cast out of Gods sight. All refuge seemed to fail, none showing any care
for their soul; even then God made good his word on which he had caused them to
hope, as Psalm. 142. per totum. The Works of God are mavelous, if we consider
the way and manner of ushering in the mercy, the instrument^ that were made use
of, and how He disappointed the counsels of the Crafty.

7 th. Reas. Because it is a good evidence, that they regarded and took notice
of the Works of God in Mercy, and would not forget His wonderful works toward
them. For hereby, they put others under advantages to put them in mind, what
favors they have received from God.

USE. I. Of INSTRUCTION.
And,

First, It informs us, that its very acceptable to God, for Christians to
entertain the report of the experiences of others, to excise their own (...)
glorify God. For i^ God make it a duty in the (...) receiver to report, it
lays the hearer under an obligation, to set such remarks upon the passages of
Divine Providence to others, as may be useful to engage their hearts to Glorify
God, for the favors and blessings He has bestowed upon others. And therefore
in obedience to Gods Command, that you may be under advantages to Glorify God;
I will now make a report, of some of the great things God has done for those,
you have been putting up so many Prayers to God for. God has eminently been
fulfilling that Word, Psalm. 106. 46. He made them also to be pitied, of all
those that carried them Captives.

God has made such whose Characters have been; that they were such whose
tender Mercies were Cruelties; such from whom, one act of pity and compassion
could scarce be expected, even such who have delighted in cruelty; to pity and
compassionate such who were led into Captivity by them. Made them bear on their
Arms, and carry on their Shoulders our Little Ones, unable to Travel. Feed
their Prisoners with the best of their Provision: Yea, sometimes pinch
themselves, as to their daily food, rather than their Captives. To pity them
under Sickness, and afford all proper means for the restoration of their
Health, or recovery from Lameness. Made Heathens bowels earn toward poor
Infants exposs'd to Death, so as to Work out their deliverance from fatal
strokes, by burdening of themselves. Oh! let us adore the riches of the Grace
of God, who in wrath rememb^rs Mercy, and does not stir up all His wrath; and
from hence be encouraged, when under convictions of Gods being angry with us,
yet look to Him for Mercy.

God has upheld many poor Souls under all manner of disadvantages, as to a
getting of Knowledge, and kept them from falling, though crafty Adversaries
were under all advantages, and painful endeavors to seduce them. Being without
Bibles, Ministers, or Christian Friends to confer with, daily harrased with
Temptations, and Tempters: Some threatened, some flattered, some shut up and
confined in Monasteryes, where no means were unessayed to gain them to change
their Religion.

God has strengthened to go through tedious Journeys, and renewed strength,
when they were even fainting in their Spirits* thinking it not possible to
Travel Five Miles, and yet enabled to Travel at least Forty in a day.
Remarkably ordering seasons, so as to be for their comfort in their Travels;
causing a Moist Snow to fall on the Lake, only to such a height as to make it
easy to their Swollen and Wounded feet: Changing the Winds for their advantages,
in petty Voyages in their ticklish Cannoes.

They have found God a little Sanctuary to them, in the Land of Strangers; even
there have found the Consolations of God through Christ not to be small; so
that some of the most joyful and refreshing favors from Heaven, have been
given in to their Souls, when under all sorts of outward afflictions.

They have found God a God hearing Prayers, when they have gone to Him with
their most difficult cases, preserving them from falling; recovering theirs
from falls; to a making void the counsels of Adversaries, disappointing of them
in the things they dealt most Proudly in. God has brought His to a resignation
to His Will, and then appeared dealing out Mercies, as the very case did
require.

God has Sanctified to some, their former Sabbath solemn attendances on Duties
of Piety, Private as well as Public; and a Religious Education to be an
unanswerable Objection, against such who were zealous for the Traditions of
Men, to a visible Profaning Gods Sabbaths. They durst not embrace that
Religion whose Principles as well as Practices, were so contrary to the
Precepts of Gods holy Word. Oh! how should Ministers, and Parents be encouraged
from hence to use their utmost care, that Gods Sabbaths may be duly Sanctified
by all under their charge; and that they would be exemplary before others, in a
due observance of Holy Time.

God has made the falls of some to Popery, a means for the recovery of others;
and making those things, by which the adversary thought to increase their
numbers and proselytes, to be occasional of recovering such who from their
youth had been educated in the Popish way; having been taken Captives when
young. Don't be discouraged and say, your Friends and Relations have (being
Captivated when young) for a long time lived in Popery, and therefore no hopes
of recovery; for God can make dry bones, very dry to live, and can in ways
unthought of by you, both recover them after they have fallen, and return them
again. The Adversaries have sometimes, pretended miracles for the confirmation
of their Religion, that they might seduce to Popery; in fallacious ways caused
reports that some Captives dyed Papists; that one appeared in Flames of Fire to
bear a testimony against the Protestant Religion; but God has in his wise
Providence, made known their falsehoods and lies.

They have sought to persuade some, by Sums of Money to change their Religion,
offering honor and advancement to them at the same time; but God has enabled
to resist and hate such allurements.

The reading the fourth Chapter of Deuteronomy, a means of recovering one from
Popery.

God has made some with an heroical, yea with a right Christian Courage to
welcome Death. Oh let every one get such a preparedness for DEATH, that a
sudden DEATH may not be a terror!

God has made some by the want of Sanctuary Mercies, to set an higher value
upon the Ordinances of JESUS CHRIST. Oh learn to prize, and improve them, lest
God teach you by the briars and thorns of the Wilderness, the worth of them,
and weep when you set down at the Rivers of Babylon.

God has strengthened some to stand, when they have not only been threatened
with all cruelties if they refused, but when the Hatchet has been lift up, with
a threatening of speedy death in case of refusal. Oh let every one trust in God,
who is a seasonable help and a present refuge!

INSTRUCTION, II.
How they are to blame, that do not regard and take notice of the Works of God,
nor treasure up the remembrance of them in their minds. How soon are mercies
like to be forgotten; the Psalmist says, Forget not all his Benefits. It was
the great sin of the Isr^elites of old, that they soon forgot Gods wondrous
works. The Holy God gave order, that his People should Erect Stones of
remembrance, that his Wonderful Works of Mercy to his People might not be
forgotten; yea, commanded Parents to tell their Children, from Generation to
Generation, what great things he had done for them. How are they then to blame
that say, They bless God for their Mercies, and don't rehearse the Praise*
worthy Works of Divine Providence to others.

USE II.
To direct such, who have received great and eminent Mercies from God, in this
way of making known to others the wonders of mercy to them, to be praising God.
It Is one way very proper and agreeable to the revealed Will of God: You must
watch against all vain Ostentation.

USE III. Of EXHORTATION.
To all who have in a more peculiar way and manner, been casting off the
effects and fruits of Divine Bounty and Goodness, to be declaring what great
things God has done for them.

Therefore,

1. Beware of all manner of Pride. Sometimes men cannot declare the Great Works
of God done for them, without making known their own weakness, and therefore
are silent, and hold their peace, they had rather God should lose his Glory,
then they any of their credit or esteem. But the holy Psalmist says, His feet
had well nigh slipped; yea, that in his haste he had said, all men are liars; and
that one day he should surely perish: takes shame to himself, that he might
magnify the preventing and delivering grace and goodness of God. Sometimes men's
Pride makes them so admire their own parts and contrivances, as to overlook the
Works of Divine Providence; they sacrifice to their own net, and burn incense
to their own drag; and say they had so much Learning and Knowledge, that they
could easily answer arguments to seduce them to Popery; and so don't see and
acknowledge the goodness of God, in preserving and keeping of them.

2. Beware of a stupid, senseless, slothful Spirit. The works of God are sought
out of them that have pleasure in them. Some will not be at the pains to recollect
the passages of Divine Providence; will not commit them to writing, or to their
memories, and therefore soon forget them; they never wisely observe the
heightning circumstances of their Mercies.

Consider, 3. How Heavenly an Employ and Service it is, to be Glorifying and
Praising God. It will be one part of the work of Heaven, to be telling of the
wonderful Works of God toward us. Begin such an Heavenly Employ on Earth.
Hereby you will also interest your selves in the Prayers of others; to have
many Prayers going daily to God for you, how great a favor is it! Others
hearing what Mercies you have had, will bear you upon their hearts when at a
Throne of Grace, that you may suitably improve such mercies.

The Glorifying God, is the greatest and chiefest concern of gracious Souls;
and the Glorifying of God here, is the way to be Glorified by, and with God for
ever. The not Glorifying God is very displeasing to Him, and a way to deprive
our selves of the sweet and comfort of our Mercies. God accounts forgetting of
Mercies, a forgetting Himself.

FINIS.

