THE DOCTRINE OF Singular Obedience, As the Duty and Property of the True
Christian: Opened and Applied.

In a SERMON, Preached By I. Mather, D. D.

I These. V. 6. Let not us Sleep as do others. II Pet. III. 11. What manner of
Persons ought you to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? BOSTON in
NEW ENGLAND, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, at the North End of the Town,
1707.

TO THE Reader.
FAITH and OBEDIENCE are the Two Pillars on which Religion stands. If either of
them is wanting, that man's Religion is Vain. And yet the greatest part of those
who pretend to Christianity, fail in one of these. It is Natural for Adams
Children to seek for life by works and doings of their own, without a CHRIST.
They would find the Life of their Hand. The Jews sought for Salvation in a
Legal way, without depending on the Righteousness of Christ alone for
Justification unto Life: But they attained it not. Wherefore? Because they
sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. Millions of men
called Christians, have split upon the same Rock. The Obedience of CHRIST
alone, has been or could be Meritorious. Papists (and such Popery is Natural)
teach that their Good Works are Meritorious of Heaven itself. A Learned man
among them was not afraid to say, That if God would give him Heaven Gratis, he
would not accept of it so; but would first do something to deserve it. On the
other hand; There are many who think to be Saved by a Faith which is not
attended with Holiness or New Obedience. Such Antinomians there were in the
Apostles Days: To Confute whom, James wrote his Epistle; in which he says,
What does it profit a man to say, He has Faith, and have not Works? Can Faith
Save him? As the Body without the Spirit is Dead, so Faith without Works is
Dead also. In all Ages there have been multitudes of Professing Christians, who
have in their Practice been no better than Infidels. And there seems to be more
such in this than in former Generations. It is the sad apprehension of several
late Authors, that the world was not more Degenerate before the Universal
Deluge, than it is at this Day, One observes, That if we look through the
world, of an Hundred Christians, Ninety Nine are either Heretical, or of
Vicious Lives. I dare not think, (as a Late and Learned Writer believes) that
of a Million of men down from Adam to our Days, scarce so much as O as has
been Saved. Our late Political (...), will not allow that there have been above
One and Twenty Thousand Millions of men in the world, since the Creation. But
certain it is, that more than Twenty One Thousands yea, many Hundreds of
Thousands are the Heirs of Salvation: For the Scripture speaks of them, as a
Great (...), which no man can Number. Rev. 79. Nevertheless, Compared with
those that Perish, they are but few. Yea, and in some Particular Churches,
there are but few (...): Although 'they may all have a Name to Live, Christ
see-eth that their Works are not perfect. Rev. 3 1, 2. Which awful thought
should make all Professors of Religion, all Church Members in special, careful
to prove their real Christianity, by the Sincerity of their Obedience to the
Commandments of Christ. To Excite thereunto, is the design of the Plain
Discourse (...) herewith; in which the Reader may not expect my thing Cutious,
or Elaborate; or set forth with Excellency of Speech. The Apostle says of
himself, that his Preaching was not with the Enticing words of man's wisdom.
Such a Pattern I desire to imitate. Plain Food is the wholesomest.

If the Reader would know the Reason why these Meditatious are Published by the
Press, it has been thus brought to pass: Certain Pious persons who Live in a
Neighboring Town, happening to be present when this Sermon was Preached, were
very importunate for a Copy of it, which having obtained from one that took it
in Shorthand, I have Pernsed and Corrected what was brought to me by the
Printer, and permitted him thus to Publish it. I shall not long trouble the
world: But if! may leave any thing on the Earth, which shall be Profitable to
any of the Elect of God, when I shall my self be no more seen or heard, let the
Grace of God be Magnified, who has seen meet to improve one,

Who is Less than the Least of Saints.

INCREASE MATHER
Boston, August 23. 1707.
Singular Obedience The Property of a True Christian,
Mat. V. xlvii. -- What do ye more than Others? --


THIS with the two following Chapters, contains the Substance of a most
Heavenly Sermon, which our Lord Jesus Christ Preached to His Disciples. The
beginning of the Chapter, informs us in what place it was that Christ Preached.
It was at a Mount: His Doctrine came from Heaven, the Mountain of Holiness: And
a Mount was a proper place to declare it in. In the latter part of this
Chapter, He gives an Exposition of the Moral Law; He that gave the Law on Mount
Sinai, Expounds that Law on another Mount; and Vindicates it from those Corrupt
Glosses which the Pharisees had put upon it. The Law says, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor; the Pharisees made an Addition to it, viz. That they might hate
their Enemies: and that because the Law required Love to a Neighbor; therefore
one not a Neighbor might be not loved, but be hated. Christ instructed His
Disciples better. He taught them a Doctrine contrary to that of the Pharisees;
namely, That they should love their Enemies: And this He Confirms by Two
Arguments.

1. From the Consideration of that Common Love and Bounty which the Most High
does manifest toward all men. So that in loving their Enemies, they would
resemble the Blessed and Holy God, who shows kindness to the greatest Enemies
that He has on the Earth. He makes His Sun to shine on the Evil, and sends Rain
on the Just, and on the Unjust. Which instructs men that they should show
kindness to their Personal Enemies.

2. Another Argument by which the Lord Confirms His Doctrine, is, That if they
who were His Disciples should love their Friends only, they would do no more
than the worst men in the world did. They would not outdo the Publicans. The
Publicans were the Collectors of the Tribute due to the Emperor: The Chief
Commissioners were Persons of Quality; they were Roman Knights; but they had
inferior Officers under them that would Oppress the People, and would Exact
more than was by the Law appointed; and were therefore hated of all men. It was
a Celebrated saying among the Jews, That no Publican shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Now (says Christ) if you Salute your Brethren; that is
express Love to them only, you do no more than the Publicans; you do no more
than those men you count the worst in the world: If you do no more than what
the Pharisees instruct you in, you will be very defective in your Obedience.
What do you mine? i. e. more than others: Ti Peristhon quid Proestantius: What
Extraordinary thing do ye do? Wherein do you Excel? You that are Christ's
Disciples, ought to do more than Publicans and Pharisees too: And if you will
approve your selves as you ought to do, you will outdo them.

The DOCTRINE to be insisted on from the words is, That it is the Duty and
Property of the true Disciples of Christ, to Outdo all other men in their
Obedience to the Commandments of God.

There are Two Particulars before us to be Enquired into.

1. In what Respects it is the Duty and Property of Christians to Outdo all
other men.

2. The Reasonableness of it.

QUEST. 1. In what Respects is it the Duty and Property of the true Disciples
of Jesus Christ, to Outdo other men?

ANSW. 1. In Respect of the Universality of their Obedience to the Commandments
of God. This is that that God does Require and Expect from those that are His
Servants: Deuteronomy. 10. 12. What does the Lord require of thee, but that thou
should walk in all His ways? And as it is their Duty, so it is their
Property. David could say, I Esteem all thy Precepts. And it is said of him,
that he was a man after Gods own Heart, to fulfill all His Will. The like
spoken concerning Zechariah and Elizabeth; Luke 1. 6. They walked blameless in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord. And indeed this is the
difference between the Sincere Servants of Christ, and those who are not so. An
Hypocrite may comply with some, nay with many things that God does require: As
it is said of Herod, that he did many things. And Jehu was a notable instance,
who did some things and great things too, according to the Command of God; and
yet he was not sincere in his Obedience, because there was one thing he would
not do: God Commanded him to Execute judgment upon the House of Ahab, he did it
readily; God commanded him to Destroy the Worship of Baal, he did that too; but
then he knew was the Command of God that the Claves Dan and Bethel, those Idols
should be removed, but that did not comport with is carnal Interest, therefore
he would not do it, which discovered the falseness (...) his Heart: Jehu took
no heed to walk in the Law of God with all his heart. How did that appear? He
did not turn from the Sins of Jereboam, 2 King. (...). 31. But the real
Disciples of Christ is (...) doing all that God requires. And the truth is,
there is no man in the world that does duly observe all the Commandments of
God, but only the true Believer on Jesus Christ. Wherefore He has said, You are
my Friends, if you do whatsoever I Command you, Joh. 15. 14.

II. It is the Duty and the Property of the true Disciple of Christ, to Outdo
other men in respect of the Constancy of their Obedience. The Lord said of
Solomon, that he should be Established in his Kingdom, if he would be Constant
in keeping of the Commandments, 1 Chronicles. 28 7. This is One Reason why the
Covenant is called, The Everlasting Covenant. They have broken the Everlasting
Covenant: For that Gods Covenant People are under Obligations unto Perpetual
Obedience; and they that are Sincere in their Covenant with God, will practice
accordingly. They have joined themselves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant,
never to be forgotten. Hence David said, Psalm 119. 112. I have inclined my
Heart to perform thy Statutes always, even to the End. There are Professors who
are very inconstant in their Profession: They change their Religion just as the
Times change. So it was with the Jews; Hos. 6. 4. Thy Goodness is as the
Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew it goes away. The People generally would
be of that Religion that was uppermost: they would be of the State Religion,
let it be what it would. When there was a Good King, such an one as Hezekiah,
they would be of the true Religion. When Manasseh came to be in the Throne,
then they turned back to their Idolatry. When Godly Josiah was King, then they
would be of the Reformed Religion; but they turned to the Lord feignedly and
treacherously, not with their whole heart: As was evident in that when Josiah
was Dead, and his Ungodly Sons Reigned in his stead, the Body of the Nation
soon revolted to their old Superstitions. Thus was their Goodness like the
Morning Cloud and as the Early Dew; soon gone. And when men take up their
Profession of Religion for Carnal Ends, and meet with Disappointments, it is
very probable they will turn away from the Holy Commandment. The Apostle
complains of Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10. He has forsaken me, having loved this present
world. Ecclesiastical writers tell us, That that Demas, of a Minister of Christ
became a Priest of Jupiter! There was more Money to be get by being a Priest of
Jupiter, than by being a Preacher of the Gospel. If men begin their Profession
in Hypocrisy, it is likely they will end in Apostasy: As it was with many of
the pretended Disciples of Christ; Joh. 6. 66. Many of His Disciples went back,
and walked no more with Him. But it was not so with His true Disciples.
Therefore when Christ said to them, Will you go away also? Peter if the Name of
all of them said, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal
Life: q. d. We can never-mend our selves let us go where we will. As for His
true Disciples, nothing can move them from their steadfastness, no Temptation
can turn them out of the way of Obedience: or if they do turn aside, they will
soon return again; Psalm. 44. 17, -- All this is come upon us, nevertheless we
have not dealt-falsely in thy Covenant: Our heart is not turned back, neither
have our steps declined from thy way; although thou have broken us sore in the
place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of Death. Thus then the true
Disciple of Christ is constant in his Obedience; he is the same man at all
Times, in all Places, in all Companies, Fixed and Constant: wherever you find
him, he is a God-fearing man.

III. It is the Duty and the Property of the true Disciple of Christ, to Outdo
others in respect of Passive Obedience. In respect of a Profound Submission and
Resignation to the Will of God, in whatever afflictive Dispensations of His
Holy Providence may attend them. This Christ has taught His Disciples, not by
Precept only, but by His Holy Example, Heb. 5. 18. He learned Obedience by the
things that he suffered. When the greatest Agony that ever man endured was
coming upon Him, He said, Not my Will, but thy Will be done. This is the
highest Obedience: For a man to Submit to the Will of God in Affliction, is a
greater Obedience than to do what God Requires in a way of Active Obedience. We
have notable Examples of this, not only in the New, but in the Old Testament
Believers. Thus Abraham when God had given him a Son in a Miraculous way, for
him now to part with that Son at the Command of God, was certainly a great
trial as of his Faith so of his Obedience. Nevertheless he readily complied,
rising Early to perform what was Commanded him, Genesis 22. 3 Eli when Tidings was
brought to him of dismal doleful Desolations coming on his Family, said, It is
the Lord, let Him do what seems Him Good. And David under great Afflictions
said, 2 Samuel 15. 26. If the Lord say He has no delight in me, behold here I
am, Let Him do to me (...) seems good to Him. And the holy Prophets are
recommended to us for our imitation herein; Jam. 5. 10. Take the Prophets who
have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering Afflictions,
and of Patience. They were Patient under all the Afflictions that God did see
meet to Exercise them with. It is the Property of a true Disciple of Christ, to
make a comparative Choice of Affliction, that is of affliction rather than Sin;
any thing rather than sin; Mat. 16. 24. If a man will be my Disciple, let him
take up his Cross. If the case is so circumstanced, that he must either Sin or
take up the Cross; then if he is a true Disciple of Christ, he will with his
own hands take up the Cross. Thus did Moses, Heb. 11. 25. He chose rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of Sin for
a season: That now was Singular Obedience, to choose to be on the suffering
side. Moses was Heir apparent to the Crown of Egypt, being the Adopted Son of
Pharaohs only Daughter; but he chooses to part with all the Honors and Riches
of a Kingdom, and to suffer Afflictions with a poor People of God in a
Wilderness. It is then the Property of a true Disciple of Christ, to be willing
to suffer for His Name; yea, to rejoice in it: As its said of the Apostles,
they Rejoiced that they there counted worthy to suffer Shame for His Name, Act
5. 41. The Martyrs loved not their Lives unto the Death. One burned to Death by
Papists, for making a Profession of the Protestant Religion; Alas (said he)
have I but one Life to loose for Christ? If I had as many as Hairs on my Head,
I should be glad to part with them all for Christ. And the Primitive Christians
were rather too forward, than too backward in this matter. When none accused
them, they would some of them come before the Judges and accuse themselves of
being Christians, that so they might Dye for the Dear Name of Jesus Christ.

IV. It is the Duty of true Christians to Outdo others in respect of the
manner of their performing Religious Duties. True Christianity, Godliness in
the Power of it, consists very much in the manner of performing Religious
Duties. As now; In hearing the Word, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you bear. Many
hearers of the Word, never take heed how they hear; if they come and hear, they
think that is enough: But says Christ, Take heed how you hear; take heed you do
not hear after a careless manner; take heed you do not hear in a drowsey and a
sleepy manner but that you hear so as to profit, by what you hear. It is the
Character of a true Servant of the Lord to do so; Mic. 2. 7. Do not my words do
good to them that walk uprightly? They that are upright in heart, will hear
after such a manner as good shall come to them by what they hear. Thus also as
to Prayer: There are many Professors of Religion will Pray constantly; they
will attend Public Prayer, they will Pray in their Family every day; and it
may be in their Closets too, and yet all this mere Formality; Mat. 15. 8. They
draw near to me with their Mouths, and honor me with their Lips, but their
Hearts are far from me. There are many that often Pray, but what is their
Praying more than a Carcass of Religion, without any Life or Soul in it? When
as the true Servants of God his Heart is in Duty, Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole
Heart have I sought thee. The Sincere Christian seeks the Lord with his Soul,
and with his Spirit within him. His Prayer is not a mere formal dead thing; No,
he serves the Lord fervently. It is said of Epaphras, Col. 4. 12. He Labors
Fervently in Prayers for you. So again as to the Sanctification of the Sabbath:
There is an External Sabbath, that men who are not the true Disciples of the
Lord will conform unto. The Jews were mighty Sabbatarians, as to an External
observation; they would not do any Servile work on the Sabbath Day, they would
dye first: But as to the Internal Sabbath they were strangers to it. But the
true Disciple of Christ is for an Internal, as well as an External Sabbath: His
care is, that his Heart be in a Sabbath frame when the Lords Day comes; that he
may be in the Spirit; that he may have Communion with God therein. When the
Sabbath comes he is glad of it, his Heart rejoices; when the Sabbath is ended
it is a trouble to him. He calls the Sabbath a Delight, and does Honor the
Lord in it, not speaking his own words, Isa. 58. 13.

V. It is the Duty and Property of the true Disciples of Christ, to Outdo
others in respect of their Charity toward their Personal Enemies. They will
love their Enemies; they dare not take a Personal Revenge on a particular
Enemy. You see David would not, when he could easily have avenged himself, and
those about him did importune him to it; but because of the fear of God he did
it not. The Disciples of Christ should, and if they be true Disciples they will
do so; they will show love to the greatest Enemies they have in the world: they
will show their Love in Praying for them. This has Christ taught us, not only
by Precept, but by His own Holy Example. As for the Jews that Crucified Him, He
Prayed that God would forgive them; Luke 23. 34. Father Forgive them, etc.
Stephen a true Disciple of Christ, when his Adversaries were stoning him to
Death, he Prayed, Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge. Yea, the true
Disciple of Christ will not only Pray for his Enemies; but if he have an
opportunity he will do them Good, as well as wish them Good: he will not
requite Evil for Evil, but Evil with Good; Romans 12. 20. If thine Enemy hunger,
seed him; if he is thirsty, give him drink. And indeed in this Precept of
forgiving the greatest injuries, our Christian Religion does Excel all other
Religions. The Jews thought they might Revenge themselves, that they might hate
their Enemies; and they counted all that were not Jews to be their Enemies.
Some of the Jewish Rabbis say of all Gentiles, as the Papists do of
Protestants, That it is no more Sin to Kill one of them than to Kill a Dog. And
the Philosophers among the Gentiles, although they taught Excellent Morality in
many particulars; in this the greatest Moralists of them fell short in their
Doctrine, and much more in their Practice. They taught, that if a man had
sustained a little Injury he may do well to forgive it; but if a great One,
they say he should not forgive it, but be revenged for it. Christ teaches His
Disciples better than so. The Emperor Julian, justly Sir-named the Apostate,
was a man of great Morality; with respect to this particular, he discovered
that he had a Graceless Soul. He would Scoff at many Holy Sayings of Christ in
this Sermon Preached at the Mount, and would particularly Deride at a man's
forgiving his Personal Enemies. Well but the true Disciples of Christ will do
it, though others cannot. Christians, would you not be glad to know whether you
are true Disciples or no? This is one of the greatest signs of it that can be
mentioned. If a Christian thinks with himself, God has forgiven me greater
Injuries than ever I received from any man, therefore they that have been
injurious to me, I will heartily forgive them! This is one of the greatest
signs of a true Believer that can be.

VI. It is the Duty and Property of the true Disciples of Christ, to Outdo
other men in respect of their hatred of, and opposition unto Sin. Ye that love
the Lord hate Evil. If men love the Lord, they will hate the Evil of Sin more
than any Evil whatsoever. They will not allow themselves in such sins, as other
men do indulge themselves in. They are careful and watchful not only against
sinful Deeds, but also not to sin in Words. The man that rules not his tongue,
his Religion is vain. He only seems to be Religious. David says, I will take
heed to my ways, that I Sin not with my Tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. Nay, the true
Disciple of Christ is careful not to Sin so much as in his Thoughts: He hates
vain Thoughts, much more vile ones. I hate vain Thoughts: but thy Law do I
love, Psalm. 119. 113. In a word; The true Disciple of Christ will refrain from
every thing that he knows or thinks is a Sin against God; Psalm. 119. 101. I
have refrained my Feet from every Evil way. The true Disciple of Christ will
not refrain from Greater Grosser Evils only, but from Lesser also; such as the
world it may be, makes no Conscience of. There are some men that would be
counted Christians, who will not Swear bloody Oaths, but will Swear such as
they call Petty Oaths; they will Swear by their Faith and Treth. But Christ
says to His Disciples, Swear not at all. Again; There are some that would be
counted true Christians, they will not Blaspheme the Name of the Holy God, but
they will take His Name in vain: At every turn they will say, Lord Bless me!
And without any Reverence of that Fearful Name, they will say, O Lord! O God!
Christ does not allow His Disciples to do so. And there are those that will use
weighty Asseverations about trifling matters; they will say, Wom it is so: I
Swear it is so. Our Holy Lord Jesus Christ allows not His Disciples in such
needless Asseverations. He says, Let your Communication be Yea and Nay, what
is more is from Evil. Moreover, The true Servants of God will not only abstain
from Sin themselves; but will bear a due Testimony against the Sins of the
world about them. They will have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness; but reprove them rather: yea, though they Expose themselves to the
hatred of the would for it. Christ said unto some of His Natural Relations who
were Ungodly men; The world cannot hate you, but me it hates; because I
testify that the works thereof are Evil, Joh. 7. 7. So will the Faithful
Servants of Christ Testify against the Sins of the Times; although it should
Expose them to the rage of a Malignant world, and cost them their Lives. John
Baptist did so; and the holy Prophets did so. Therefore Stephen said to the
Jews, Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers Persecuted, and Slain them?
Act. 7. 52. The Jews themselves own it: They tell us, That the Prophet Isaiah
was sawn asunder for his Faithfulness in reproving the Sins of King Manasseh,
who was his near Kinsman: And that the Prophet Micah had his Brains knocked out
by wicked men: That the Prophet Jeremiah was Murdered in Egypt; and Ezekiel in
Babylon, because they witnessed against the Sins of a wicked World. This is
Singular Obedience.

VII. It is the Duty and Property of the true Disciples of Christ, to Outdo
others in Heavenly-mindedness, and in weanedness from this world. This does
Christ require of His Disciples, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Lay not up Treasures on Earth;
but lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven: Let your Hearts be there; let
your Treasure be there. This is proper to real Christians. It is said of the
holy Patriarchs, Heb. 11. 13. They desired a better Country; that is an
Heavenly one. Ay, their hearts was there; their hearts were not glued to this
Earth. David could say he had a weaned Soul, Psalm. 131. 2. His heart was taken
off from the Riches and Honors of this world. And this is true of the Sincere
Disciples of Christ, more than of other men: Other men their Portion is in this
world; therefore their hearts are set more upon Earth than upon Heaven. There
is not an Unbeliever in this world, but if the Lord should say to him, Take thy
choice, either come to me in Heaven; or live on the Earth in all Temporal
Felicity; he would choose to live here for ever. But it is otherwise with the
true Disciple of Christ; he longs for Heaven. The chief reason of his
willingness to abide here, is that he may do service for Christ. For me (said
the Apostle) to live is CHRIST. If Christ should say to the Believer, Wilx thou
come to me, or remain on the Earth? he would say, Nay, Lord, let me be where
thou art. He has by Faith seen that there is a better World than this: A World
in which there is no Sin; and he cannot but love such a world; a world where
Christ is to be seen in all His Glory, and he cannot but long to be there. There
are his Thoughts, there is his Heart, there are the desires of his Soul. I
desire to be with Christ, which is far better than to be in this world, Phil.
1. 23.

Thus we see that it is both the Duty and the Property of the Disciples of
Christ to do more than others. We proceed to Enquire into the Reasonableness of
it. I shall mention but Two Reasons briefly.

Reason 1. God has done and will do greater things for Believers on Christ,
than for any other men in the world. Therefore they have infinite reason to
study how they may do more for Him. There is not a true Believer in the world,
but God has done glorious things for him. The Lord has given him that which is
more Valuable than all Earthly Riches: He has given Grace to him: And the least
dram of true saving Grace, is more worth than all the Silver and Gold and
Jewels that this world does afford. Grace is more precious than Rubies, and all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared with it, Prove. 3. 15. As
for the true Believer, God has Pardoned all his Sins, which were many. Suppose
a man were deeply in Debt, if the Creditor should frankly forgive him all his
Debts, would he not think that he could never do enough for one that has been
so kind to him? And can we ever do enough for God, who has freely remitted our
Infinite Debts, which it was impossible for us Ever to satisfy for? And yet the
Law Condemned us to Prison until the utmost Farthing was paid. And if we are
Believers on Christ, God has Adopted us to be His Children; 2 Cor. 6. 18. You
shall be my Sons and Daughters, faith the Lord Almighty. He will then give them
a Glorious Inheritance, nothing less than a Kingdom. It may be, they are Poor
Contemptible People, that make no figure in the world; yet they are Heirs of a
Kingdom, Better and Greater than all the Kingdoms of the Earth, put them all
together. Jam. 2. 5. Has not God chosen the Poor of this world, Rich in Faith,
and Heirs of the Kingdom which He has promised to them that love Him?

Reason 2. True Believers on Christ are able to do more in a way of Obedience,
than others can. That Principle of Grace which is wrought in their Souls, is a
mighty thing. It is Might in the Inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16. Thences are they able
to resist Temptation, so as others cannot. How did Godly Joseph resist great
Temptations? How can I do this wickedness, and Sin against God? said he. If he
had not had Grace in his Soul, such a Temptation would have overcome him.
Nehemiah withstood such Temptations as few in the world would or could have
done. It was because there was a principle of the Fear of God in his Heart;
Neh. 5. 15. So did not I, because of the Fear of God. The Holy Spirit dwells in
the hearts of Believers. He will not fail to assist them, if they do not Grieve
Him: He will Enable them to mortify Sin so as others cannot; Romans 8. 13. If you
through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the Body, you shall live. The Holy
Spirit will assist them in Duty, ver. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
Infirmities. He helps Believers to use such Arguments with God in Prayer, as
will be sure to prevail: He Enables them to Pray with such Faith, and with such
brokenness of Heart, and meltings of Soul, as others are not acquainted with.

We proceed to the APPLICATION of the Doctrine, thus far Cleared.

The First USE may be for INSTRUCTION, in several Particulars.

Instruct. I. We may here see, that among Christians, there are but few true
Christians to be found. Among Nominal Christians, but few Real Christians: For
there are but few that Outdo others in their Obedience to the Commandments of
God. They call themselves Christians, they are Christians in Profession, but in
Practice like the rest of the world. Salvian complained of it in his time: He
says, that Prater Pau^^ssimos, excepting a very few indeed; the generality of
the Christian world was Sentina V^tiorum, a Sink of Vice and Sin. And is the
world better now than it was in his time, above a Thousand Years ago? Look over
the Earth, and see if there be many Real Christians among those that bear the
Christian Name. In the Eastern Nations there are Millions who are called
Christians, but they are miserable Christians. In Africa, that great Continent,
Three times as big as Europe, there are indeed now but very few that have the
Christian Name, compared to what once there was. That Part of the world once
full of Christians, is now overwhelmed with Mahomitans: Yet about Egypt there
are many Thousands of Christians, but miserable ones. And if we look on the
Greek Churches, what lamentable Christians are they? Let us cast our Eyes upon
Europe, there we may see more Papists (who are Pagan-Christians) than
Protestants. They boast of the great multitudes of Christians they have made in
America; they say as many as all the Latin Church: They pretend to Fourteen
Millions, but they are most woeful Christians. Then consider the Protestant
Nations; How is it among them? As for the Generality of those that go under
that Name, are there not such as destroy their Christian Profession, by a
wicked Conversation? As to their Morals, they are not much better, than the
Papists. It is so too generally. Blessed be God, who has put it into the Hearts
of some Great Personages, as well as others, to promote Reformation of Manners.
The Churches of the Reformation need Reformation. Among Protestants,
Drunkenness, Profane Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Unrighteousness, Vile
Debaucheries, Coveteousness are common Evils: Besides very many who maintain
Fundamental Errors in Religion; as do Antinomians, Socinians, Quakers, and such
like, whose Heresies are Damnable. Alas! For men to take up a Profession of
Christianity is Easy; there is no difficulty in that, when it is the General
Profession of the Country, but to Practice, to live like Christians, that is
Difficult: Therefore but few do so. So true is that word of Christ, Mat. 7. 14.
Strait is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way, that leads to Life, and Few there be
that find it.

Instruct. II. Hence then, there is an Holy Singularity that does become the
Servants of Christ. There is indeed a Singularity which is not to be commended:
When men will not comply with the Laudable Civil Customs of their Neighbors;
when they will not conform to the Good Manners of the Christian world. You know
there is a sort of men, that will not stir their Hats, nor how their Bodies out of
Civil Respect to their Neighbors; no not to any be they never so much their
Superiors. Are they like Abraham, who Bowed himself to the Children of Heth?
Are they like Jacob, who when his Brother Esau was become a Great Man he called
him Lord, and Bowed himself to the Ground seven times before him? Are they like
the Evangelist Luke, who when he dedicated his History to Theophilus, whom he
thought to be a Noble man of Antioch, calls him, Most Excellent? Are they like
Paul, who when he defended himself before the Governor, called him, Most Noble
(...)? But then there is an Holy Singularity, that is well-becoming the
Faithful Servants of God: When men in matters of Religion do not do as the
world does, nor do any thing at all, but what they have in the infallible Word
of God a warrant for it; Romans 12 2. Be not Conformed to this world; that is in
matters of Religion. The Lord Jesus Christ would have His Disciples to be
Non-conformists to the Corrupt Manners of the world. They may not live by such
Rules as others do. It was wicked Humans Complaint and Accusation against the
Lords People, that they had Laws diverse from all People, and that they did not
keep the Kings Laws, Est. 3. 8. In matters of Religion, the Laws of God and not
of the Emperor was their Rule. Thus then an Holy Singularity becomes the
Servants of Christ: They must differ from a great part, yea, the greatest part
of the world. They must be of more girt Conversations, Ephesians 5 10 Walk
Circumspectly. Acribos, Precisely Endeavoring to come up to the height of the
Rule. They must do as but few do; Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few Names. They may
not walk after the Course of the world. They must Swim against the Stream, and
not be like Dead things, which go which way soever the Stream carries them.
When the whole World was become an Arian, there was one Athanasius against the
whole World. But if a man acquits himself thus like a Christian, he will be
counted a Fool. The world will say, He is more Precise than Wise. Austin says
it was so in his time. Some Christians of an ill Life (he says) when they saw
an Holy Christian, they would in a deriding manner say to him, You are a John
Baptist, are you not? You are for Heaven, no question of it! But let them mock
on. Christians ought to be Precisians. They ought to be men of more Conscience,
and should have more of the Fear of God in them, than others have. Noah was a
Singular man in his time. The Lord said to him, Thee have I seen Righteous
before me in this Generation, Genesis 7. 1. He did not do as the most of men in
that Generation, in which he lived were wont to do. And Lot was a Singular man;
there were not Ten more such men to be sound in Five Cities together as Lot
was, so Singular was he in his Obedience. The Prophet Elisah was a Singular
man. He says, I have been Zealous for thy Name, and am left alone. God indeed
told him of Seven Thousand known to the Lord, who had not bowed to Baal. What a
small number was that? Seven Thousand in a Populous Nation? Seven Thousand, to
so many Hundreds of Thousand; that could loose in one Battle Five Hundred
Thousand. Well then, the Servants of God must be Singular in their Obedience;
yea, so as that the World shall wonder at them. It was said to Joshua the High
Priest, Thou and thy Fellows are men wondered at. That they should venture to
Build the Temple at such a time, their Faith and their Courage made them
wondered at; that they should set upon Building the Temple, when all the Powers
of the world were set against them; they were on that account men of an Holy
Singularity. Zec. 3. 8.

Instruct. III. It is a sad thing, when men that call themselves Christians, do
not Outdo others in that which is Good; but it may be others Outdo them. It
has been so, that some Insidels have Outdone many that call themselves
Christians, in some Moral Duties. The Emperor Severus though a Pagan, was
mightily taken with diverse of Christ's Precepts in this Sermon at the Mount.
Especially that, Do to others, as you would have others do to you. How many
Christians are there that little regard that Holy Precept? What shall I say,
that there have been those among Mohammedan Infidels, that have Outdone most
Christians in some Duties of Morality. A Late Writer speaks of one in
Constantinople, that another coming to his Shop to Cheapen a Commodity; I can
(said he) accommodate you with it, but my next Neighbor has it also; I have
had a great deal of Custom to Day, my Neighbor has had none; therefore I wish
you would go to him, that so my Neighbor may gain something as well as my
self! This shames many Christians. Yea, and those Infidels are Constant in
Prayers to God, though not in the Name of Christ; nevertheless they Pray to that
God who made the world, commonly Five times every Day: And they look upon it as
the greatest Disgrace that can be mentioned, for to say, such a man lives
without Prayer. When two Turkish Infidels fell out, bitterly contending with
one another; One of them that he might be sure to Disgrace his Adversary to
purpose; said he, That man there, has not Prayed to God so much as Once this
Day! And for that he was looked upon as an horrid Wretch. But are there not
Professed Christians in the world, that do not Pray to God so much as once in a
Day? It may be there are some in this Assembly, that have not Prayed to God
this Day: The Lord be merciful to them. Infidels will rise up in Judgment
against them, and Condemn them in the Last Day. But especially, it is a sad
thing when those that pretend to an higher Form and greater Seize than
others in Religion, yet don't Outdo them in an holy walking before the Lord.
It is so when Church Members don't Outdo others in Holiness, and in Obedience
to the Commandments of God. To those that make an higher pretense to Religion
than others, what says the Prophet? Hos. 4. 15. Though thou Israel play the
Haylot; let not Judah Offend. So the Lord says, If Professors at Large will
indulge themselves in these and those Evils, let not Church Members do so. If
other men indulge themselves in Drinking to Excess, do not you who are
Church Members do so. If other men will Overreach, and be Oppressive in their
Dealings with their Neighbors, you that are Church Members may not do so. It
is a sad thing, when the world shall have occasion to say, Those Church Members
are like us; they squander away their Time in Public Houses as much as we do:
They speak as Vainly and as Unprofitably as we when met together. And there is
one Duty which many who are not Church Members attend, but yet many who are so
live in a sinful Neglect of it: I mean that of attendance upon the Lecture in
this great Town: Many that are not Church Members, come to Hear and that
constantly; but the greatest part of Church Members seldom or never come,
although they have no reasonable Excuse for their Neglect. It may be the thoughts
of it will be terrible on a Deathbed. An Eminent Minister in London, informed
me of one, a great Professor of Religion, a Member of a Congregational Church
who came to a Tragical End, but not long before his Death he declared to that
Divine, That it lay heavy upon his Spirit, when he remembered how seldom he went
to hear a LectureSermon, though there was Excellent Preaching in the City, and
near the House where he lived, yet he cared not to stir out of Doors to Hear
the Word of God. Oh! Think of it; and let not others who do not pretend to
Religion so much as you do, Outdo you in any thing that is Good.

USE II.
Let Believers be Exhorted to approve themselves Singular in their Obedience to
the Commandments of God. And therefore to be often thinking what they may do
for God, and to promote His Interest and Glory. Let us be often asking our own
Souls David's Question; Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render to the Lord? Has God
done Singular things for me, what shall I do for Him? And let us set Christ's
Example before our Eyes: Looking to Jesus; follow Him; Let us walk as He
walked. Our Lord Jesus Christ was always doing the things that pleased God; So
should Christians Endeavor to do. Our Lord Jesus Christ went about doing Good:
When He came into this and that Company, He would drop some word or other
whereby they might be Edified: So should it be with us. And if we Live as
Christ Lived; if we are Conformed to Him, what then? Then we may think of His
Coming with ExceedJoy; Then we may think of Death with Exceeding Joy: Then we
may think of the Terrible Day of Judgment with Exceeding Joy: Then we may think
of the Terrible Day of Judgment with Exceeding Joy. I Conclude with that
Scripture, 1 John 4. 17. We may have boldness in the Day of Judgment, because
as He is, so are we in this World. Amen!

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THESE Two Small Books lately Published, are to be Sold by Timothy Green, at
the North End of Boston; viz.

1. The Greatest Concern in the World. A short and Plain Essay to answer that
Mostconcerning and All-concerning Enquiry, What must I do to be Saved? From
Act. 16. 30.

2. A Very Needful Caution. A Brief Essay to discover the Sin that Slayes its
Ten Thousands; and Represent the Character and Condition of the Coveteous. With
some Antidotes against the infection of Coveteousness and Earthly-mindedness
From Luke 12. 15. Take heed and beware of Coveteousness.

As also there is now a Printing, and may shortly to be Sold by Timothy Green,
a Book Entitled, The Vain youth Summoned to appear at Christ's Bar. Or an
Essay to block up the Sinful ways of Young People, by most Solemn
Considerations relating to that Judgment unto which they are hastening. From.
Eccl. 11. 9. The Second Edition Enlarged.


