The Body of Death Anatomized.

A Brief ESSAY Concerning the Sorrows and the Desires OF THE Regenerate, Upon
their Sense of INDWELLING SIN; Delivered at the Lecture in Boston. 12. d. 7 m.
1706.

By Nehemiah Walter, Pastor of the Church in Roxbury.

Antiquo Peccato, nihil ad Praedicandum notius, nihil ad Intelligendum
Secretius.

August. Nil de eo Legitur, quin amplius de eo Legi de^ideratur.

Elisim, Piorum Clyp. Boston N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips,
1707.

The Body of DEATH Anatomized,
ROMANS VII. 24. O wretched Man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of
this Death?


THESE Words are the doleful outcry of one of the most holy Men that ever
lived: It is no less a Person than the Apostle Paul, that Great and Excellent
Servant of Christ, who is here bitterly bemoaning himself. In this his
Self-lamentation Observe.

1. The Matter of his Lamentation, or that which he complains of, Namely, The
Body of Death in him: that is the Gravamen, the burden of his holy Soul. By the
Body of Death is meant Inherent Corruption, which he sometimes calls Sin,
Indwelling Sin, a Law of Sin. -- It Is called a Body, partly, because it
overspreads the whole Body of Man. Original Sin eats into the Body, and
diffuses it self through every Member thereof, and employs them as instruments to
act by. Partly, because it consists of many Members or Parts. A Body is made up
of many Members united one to another. Thus Original Sin has a great many
Members and Branches: it is a Mass of Corruption, a Collection of Lusts. The
Members of this Body of Sin are far more numerous than the Members of our
Humane Bodies: for there are many Lusts that have Possession of, and act by,
each single Member of the Body. There is but One Tongue in the Body, yet the
Sins of the Tongue are numberless.

It Is called a Body of Death, Partly, because it makes men Dead unto and in
Spiritual Duties. As for Natural men it makes them altogether Dead unto
Spiritural Duties; either they perform them not at all, or they discharge them
in a manner wholly Dead and Lifeless. As for the Regenerate, Indwelling Sin
causes in them a great deal of Averseness to and Deadness in Religious Duties;
they do not discharge Duties with that Life, Vigor and Activity which they
ought to do; and this is from the deadning Influence of Indwelling Sin.

Again, It is called a Body of Death, because it tends to and issues in Death.
Original Sin is a Deadly Principle. As for the Godly, it brings Temporal Death
upon them: Because they have Sin in them, they have the Seed of Death in them.
As for the Unregenerate, this Indwelling Sin does bring upon them Eternal
Death: It ceases not till it has accomplished their Everlasting Destruction.
It Is this Body of Death whereof the Apostle complains, which is the first thing
Observable.

2. His complaint concerning it, O Wretched Man that I am: He cries out and
complains of himself as Wretched on the account of this Body of Death.
Wretched, does not signify Cursed or Unhappy, but Weary and Tired: like a man
that had fought till spent, and ready to sink, unless some One come in to his
help and support.

3. His earnest Desire of Deliverance from it, Who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death? This is not the Voice of one Doubting of Deliverance, or at
a loss where to go for Deliverance; for he was sure of Deliverance in due time,
and knew from whom his Deliverance would come; as the next Verse shows, I thank
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. It is therefore the Voice of one that longs
for, that breathes and pants after Deliverance.

DOCT. Indwelling Sin is one matter of a Godly Man's Lamentation, and what he
much longs to be Delivered from.
This Doctrine may be spoken to under three Propositions.

PROP. I. Every Godly Man has Sin dwelling in him. All men have a corrupt
Nature handed down to them from our first Parents. They are Conceived in Sin
and brought forth in Iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. This Sin of man's Nature is not
perfectly removed in the Work of Regeneration and Sanctification: The best of
Men have the Remainders of Corruption in them as long as they continue in this
World. The Apostle Paul, was, it may be, inferior to no mere man as to holiness
of Heart and Life, and yet he does in our Text and Context confess that he had
Sin dwelling and stirring in him. It is Self-Delusion to think or say, That we
have no Sin, 1 John 1.8. There is no Sinless Person on this side Heaven: and
therefore the Mortification of Sin, is a work wherein Saints are to be engaged,
all the days of their Lives.

PROP. II. This Indwelling Sin is One matter of a Godly Man's Lamentation. The
renewed Soul of the Apostle does in the Text Sigh and Groan over the remainders
of Sin in him* Herein he is a Pattern of all true Believers; every holy man is
like him in this point.

Two things may here be Enquired into.

Q. 1. How do the Godly Lament Indwelling Sin?

A. 1. Principally. The Body of Death is the Chief Matter of their Lamentation.
There is nothing which a Godly Man does more bitterly bewail than this Plague
of his own Heart.

1. He Laments this more than any Outward Affliction. Corruption within causes
more heaviness and sorrow in his Spirit, than all Troubles Without. This we may
see Verifyed in the Apostle Paul: He was a man exercised with as various and
great Calamities as most men. Scarce any, if any, did suffer more than he did
in his time: he himself gives us a Summary account of his many and grievous
sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Now though he was a Man of such
Sufferings, yet we do not find that he complained under them: he never cried
out of his sharp Afflictions bemoaning himself on the account of them. No,
instead of lamenting them he Rejoiced and Gloried in them; they were (...)
matter of his Triumph, not of his Sorrow. ^ now, when he gives us an account of
the Body of Death and Sin in him, he cries out, O wretched man that I am! The
Body of Death is a Saint's greatest Burden: He groans more under the weight of
that, than of any burden of Affliction. Hence it is that he is willing that God
should lay any Afflictions upon him which may mortify his Corruptions: He is
content God should use the sharpest Remedies that may kill his Lusts. Let God
take away the Health and Strength of his Body, let God do any thing with him,
If it may slay Sin, he is satisfied.

2. He Laments this more than any Actual Sin. Acts of Sin are to be bewailed,
but the Principle of Sin much more; And a Godly Man is in bitterness of Spirit
for his Actual Iniquities, but more for Original Sin. He grieves that he has
committed any Sin, but he grieves more that there is such a corrupt heart in
him which carries him to such Sins. Indwelling Sin is much worse than any
Actual Sin. The Lusts of the heart are greater Evils than the Sins of the Life,
as shall presently be proved. There is therefore more cause to bewail Sin in
us, than Sin acted by us. Accordingly a Godly Man, is by his Actual Sins led up
to the Consideration of Original Sin, and he Principally Mourns over that. When
David had been guilty of Murder and Adultery, he bitterly bewailed those horrid
Sins; but his Penitent Eye did especially look to, and weep over that Vile
Heart from whence they proceeded, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity,
and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Behold! Says he. He points his finger to,
and takes special notice of, his Natural Corruption: and it is as if he should
have said, Ah Lord! What a Cursed and Sinful Nature have I that is prone to
such Monstrous Abominations? The vileness of his Heart was that which mostly
abased him. Thus the Apostle in the context makes a Penitent mention of the
many Actings of Sin whereof he was guilty, but at length his most bitter
complaints are made against the body of Death, O wretched man that I am: who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? The strength of his Sorrow is
spent on this: He stops not till he comes to the Fountain head, and there he
lies down and weeps.

2. The Godly do Lament Indwelling Sin Continually. This Body of Death lies
down with them, rises up with them, and accompanies them all the day long, and
so is an occasion of their constant Lamentation. It Is as a Loathsome Corpse
chained to them, which is the perpetual burden and abhorrence of their Souls.
Every day they find it inclining and prompting them to Sin, deadning and
indisposing them to duty, and so is a daily grief of Heart to them: by reason
of this, they go Mourning to their Graves.

So much for the first Enquiry.

Quest. 2. Why do the Godly make Indwelling Sin the Matter of their Lamentation?

Answ. They have abundant Reason so to do.

For,

1. Indwelling Sin directly opposes the whole Law of God. It is contrary not
only to Some of Gods Commands, but to Every One of them. It is an Universal
contrariety to the holy Law of God: It consists in an Aversation to Every thing
that God requires, and an Inclination to Every thing that God forbids. There is
an absence of All Good, and a fullness of All Evil in Original Sin. There are as
many Lusts in Indwelling Sin, as there are Laws in the Word of God: To every
Law there is an opposite Lust. Does God require Faith? Opposite to this is the
Lust of Unbelief. Does He require Humility? Opposite to this is the Lust of
Pride. Does he require Hope in His Mercy, mutual Forgiveness, Patience under
Trials, etc? Opposite to these are the Lusts of Despair, Revenge, Impatience,
etc. So that Original Sin is as extensive as the holy Law of God: It is then
directly contrary to the whole Law of God in every part of it. In this respect
it is far worse than any Actual Sin: for Actual Sins are directly contrary to
some particular Commands only. But Indwelling Sin is an Entire Body of Lusts,
which is contrary to the Entire Body of Divine Laws. There is no Law, which
Original Sin, does not in one branch or other, stand in a direct Opposition
unto. It is therefore called a Law of Sin, partly, because it lies in a
parallel Opposition to the Divine Law.

Indwelling Sin is then a just Matter of Lamentation. O how worthy is that Sin
to be bewailed which is so Exceeding broad? If we are deeply to be humbled for
every Act of Sin which transgresses the Law of God in some single point, how
much more for that Sin which transgresses the Law of God in all points? The
more Laws are broken by a Sin, the more (...) should be Lamented.

2. Indwelling Sin is a principle of Cursed Enmity against God. The Mind as far
as it is Carnal or Corrupt, is not only an Enemy to God, but also Enmity
against God, Romans 8.7. Nothing worse than this can be said of it. Hereby is
pointed out to us that extreme Antipathy against God which there is in Original
Sin. An Enemy may be reconciled to God, but Enmity can never be reconciled to
Him: It is totally and implacably opposite to the blessed God. Indwelling Sin
sets it self against GOD to Astonishment: The dreadful Malignity of it against
GOD we may see in that power which it has over many Ungodly men; it makes them
to be Haters of God, Fighters against God, Denyers of God: This Sin within,
would, if it could, pull GOD from His Throne; yea, deprive GOD of His very
Being: The Saints and Servants of God have that within them which would do all
this. And they do oftentimes experience in some degree, the workings of this
horrid Enmity against God in themselves: There are most Wicked, Blasphemous,
Atheistical thoughts which do sometimes arise in their Hearts. They find
Indwelling Sin many times prompting them to offer unto God the most vile
Affronts imaginable. Do they not sometimes question whether there be a GOD?
whether the Scriptures be true? whether there be a divine Providence, and
whether there be Future Rewards or Punishments? Thus does Indwelling Sin act in
opposition to the Being, Word and Providence of God: And is not such a vile
Principle to be abhorred?

3. Indwelling Sin is the Root of all Actual Sins. All the Sins of our Lives
proceed from the Sin of our Nature. The Corruption of the Heart, is the rise
and spring of all Sinful Thoughts, Words and Deeds, Mat. 15.18, 19. Out of the
Heart, as corrupt, proceed Evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc. It Is Lust
within that conceives and brings forth Sin, Jam. 1.14, 15. For this cause all
Sinful Deeds are called the Deeds of the Flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Neither God,
nor the Devil, nor the World, are the Authors of our Sins; but our own Corrupt
Hearts: these are the next and immediate causes of every iniquity committed by
us. This Indwelling Sin is then the radical Sin, the Root of Bitterness upon
which all Sin grows; It Is the Sin of Sins, the Mother and Nurse of all Sins,
seminally containing in it every sort and kind of Sins; it is therefore more
evil than all Actual Sins; for there is more of Evil in the Cause, than in the
Effect; more Poison in the Fountain, than in all its Streams; It is but Some
degree of the Venom and Malignity of Original Sin that is diffused into all
Actual Sins. Surely, such a principle as this, which is productive of all
manner of Evils, is to be greatly lamented.

4. Indwelling Sin is more set upon Sin because God forbids it. Such is the mad
fury and rage of Lust, as it makes the Command and Prohibition of God, the very
Reason why it urges to Evil, and disswades from Good. The more God forbids a
thing the more eager it is after it, and therefore will do it because God
forbids it. The more God requires a thing the more backward it is to it, and
Therefore will not do it Because God requires it: It takes occasion from the
Commandment to work all manner of Iniquity, and thereby discovers it self to be
Out of measure Sinful, Romans 7.11, 13. Were not a thing Forbidden it could be
content to let it alone, and were not a thing Commanded it could be content to
do it. Lust is Irritated and exasperated by the Law of God: It delights to
cross God in His Will; Its Working thus in a spiteful opposition to the Command
of God, is daily to be seen in the Lives of men. When God would have had the
Israelites go into Canaan, then they were for returning into Egypt; and when
God would not have them go into Canaan, then they were set upon going in, Numb.
14.4, 40. etc. Indwelling Sin is a principle of contradiction to the Law of
God; it is set upon Sin for Sin's sake: And is not such a Malicious Principle
as this a just matter of Lamentation? Should it not make our Souls bleed to
find that there is such an heart in us; so full of malignity against the
Authority of the Supreme Lord?

5. Indwelling Sin does always Solicit to Sin, It is a principle that is
ever stirring and working toward Sin: it is Never Idle, but Always Active, and
its Perpetual Tendency is to Sin. Sometimes it prompts to Sins of Omission,
endeavoring to draw us off from that duty which God requires of us; and if it
cannot prevail to a neglect of duty, it labors to make us Careless, Slighty
and Formal in the discharge of it: and if it cannot work us up to this frame,
it endeavors to Obstruct and Distract us in the duty as much as it can, Romans
7.21. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. He
experimentally found the stirrings of Corruption in the very time of his
discharging Duties, that he could not do them as well as he would. At other
times it prompts us to Sins of Commission, endeavoring to draw us to the doing
of that which is evil. And if it cannot prevail upon us Outwardly to act it,
then it seeks to bring us to Inward Pleasing Thoughts of it. Thus it is
evermore following us with Secret Solicitations to Sin, Jam. 1.14. Sin within,
is a more restless and constant tempter, than Satan without: And should it not
afflict us to find and feel such an Unwearied Solicitour to Sin in our very
bosoms? How can we choose but cry out and complain of it?

6. Indwelling Sin is an Enemy to Grace. Corruption is a principle directly
contrary to Grace. It is every way opposite unto it, in its original,
operations and tendency. Indwelling Sin wages a Continual War with Inherent
Grace, Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17. It strives to hinder the actings of Grace; it
endeavors to weaken and ruin the principle of Grace. If the good Spirit of
God excites any Good Motions in the Soul, Indwelling Sin labors to kill them
in their Birth, as Pharaoh the Male Seed of Israel. Sin and Grace, like Esau
and Jacob, struggle and contend in the same Womb. And should we not loathe that
Enemy of all Righteousness that is in us? That principle which seeks to destroy
the Divine Nature that we partake of?

7. Indwelling Sin is that which does the Saints most Hurt. It is an enemy to
their Good, it Wars against their Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. Nor is there any thing
which does so much hurt unto them as that Sin which is in them. The Devil and
the World never do them any harm but by the improvement of this vile Principle
in them: all our mischiefs are from our Lusts; therefore they are called
Hurtful Lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9. It Is Sin within that Wounds our Consciences, breaks
our Peace, darkens our Evidences, robs us of our Comfort, defiles and brings
guilt upon our Souls. Indwelling Sin is our Greatest Troubler, the Scorce of
all our Calamities. Were it not for our Lusts, we might be easy in all
Conditions. Well may a Believer cry out and complain of such an hurtful
principle.

PROP. III. As a Godly Man greatly bewailes, so he much longs to be delivered
from Indwelling Sin. He is so wearied with it, as that his very Soul desires to
be delivered from it. Now there are three things respecting Indwelling Sin
which he longs to be delivered from.

1. He desires to be Delivered from the Prevailing Power of Indwelling Sin. It
is most certain that a true Believer is Delivered from the Reigning Power of
Indwelling Sin: It does not Lord it over him, so that he should willingly,
readily and cheerfully obey it, as he did in his State of Unregeneracy. A
Convert ceases to be a Servant of Sin, and is freed from its absolute rule,
Romans 6.17, 18. And Sin Within shall never more have a plenary Dominion over
them, Verse 14. Nevertheless Sin within is capable of Prevailing over
Believers, and oftentimes does actually Prevail: It carries them away to great
and Scandalous Sins, as the Scriptures do testify in many instances. Now the
truly Godly do earnestly desire that they may be Saved from Sins prevalency.
And hence they are much in Prayer to God for preservation from the Power of
Lust, Psalm. 19.13. and 119.133. And hence it is that they exercise themselves
in endeavors to Keep under the Body of Sin, 1 Cor. 9.27. A Godly Man is one
that has heartily renounced Subjection to the Law of Sin, and desires that it
may never more overpower him.

2. He desires to be Delivered from the Terrifying Power of Indwelling Sin.
This Sin is many times a principle of Terror to the truly Godly: It so darkens
their Minds, so deadens their Hearts and Affections, so stirs and works in
them, as that it fills them with perplexing doubts and fears. It many times
lays them unto dismal apprehensions about themselves: they are made to Fear
whether God be their reconciled Father and Friend, whether they have any
interest in Christ and His Grace, whether they have any title to or
well-grounded Hopes of Heaven. They are ready to account themselves Hypocrites,
and to Despair of Salvation through the horrid workings of Inherent Corruption.
Now that which Delivers them from these Terrors, is the sense and assurance of
Gods Love; and therefore they do earnestly desire that the Lord would lift up
the light of his Countenance upon them, Give to them the Joy of his Salvation,
and make them to hear the Voice of Gladness, Psalm. 51.8, 12. They cry to God
for those fresh gales of the Spirit, which may scatter those Fogs and Mists,
which Indwelling Sin has covered their Souls withal.

3. He desires to be Delivered from the very Being of Indwelling Sin. Nothing
short of Complete Deliverance will content a Godly man. The Body of Death is
such an Annoyance to an holy man, as that he would fain be perfectly and
eternally rid of it.

Now it is only in Glorification that a Believer comes to be fully set at
liberty from this troublesome inmate: In this Life it will be and abide in us,
but when we leave this World and go to Glory, then we shall be altogether
Sinless; Sin shall no more have a Being in us; for this cause a Godly man
desires and pants after Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. Their being Buraned with
Indwelling Sin, makes them Groan for that future State, wherein they shall have
all the remainders of Indwelling Sin quite done away. One great thing which
makes Heaven desirable to a Saint, is, That Perfect Innocence of Nature which
he shall there be restored to: Heaven is not so much desired by an holy Man,
because he shall there be freed from All Sufferings, as because he shall be
freed from All Sin.

APPLICATION.
USE. I.
We may hence see what Glorious Power is put forth in the Conversion of a
Sinner. The Doctrine before us gives a clear demonstration of the Almighty
Grace of God exerted in the Work of Regeneration. When a Man is truly
Converted, he bitterly bewailes Indwelling Sin, he cries out of it as an
intolerable burden, and Groans in Spirit for a full deliverance from it. How
wonderful is the Change wrought in such an Heart! Man naturally Loves his Lusts
with a Boundless Love; they are the very delight of his Soul, the Elements in
which he loves to move; they are dearer to him than GOD Himself: he Idolizes
them and puts them in the Place of GOD, Phil. 3.19. Yea, he exalts them Above
GOD in his affections, 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God:
The very Life and all of a Sinner is bound up in his Lusts; he is never more at
ease, nor in the enjoyment of greater Satisfaction, than when he is fulfilling
the desires of the flesh. But now, when he is Converted, his Love to Lust, like
Amnons to Tamar, is turned into the greatest Hatred: He says to his beloved
Lusts, Arise, be gone; and he calls upon God to put them out from him and to
bolt the door of his Heart after them. O Strange Alteration! How comes it about
that all on a sudden the Inclination, bent, frame and whole posture of the Soul
is thus turned another way? Surely, it is God that does this; an Almighty Hand
must needs effect it. None has such power over the Heart, but that God in whose
hands the Hearts of all Men are, and who turns them which way soever it
pleases him. It Is the Almighty GOD that dissolves the Close Union, which there
is between the Soul and Sin.

USE. II.
We hence learn that those are Not Godly Persons who do not make Indwelling Sin
the matter of their Lamentation. There is the highest reason to bewail it, and
all that are truly Godly do greatly bewail it; Such therefore as bewail it not,
are not Godly. The not Mourning over Indwelling Sin, is a sure sign of an
Unregenerate man; he is a perfect Stranger to Grace, who is a Stranger to Grief
and Sorrow for inherent Corruption. And if so, then several Persons may from
hence be convinced of their being in a State of Unregeneracy.

As,

1. Those who Bless themselves in the Goodness of their Natures. Though the Word
of God declares that the Heart of Fallen man, is Deceitful above all things and
Desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. Yet there are some who will not believe or own
any such thing concerning themselves: for ought they can discern their Hearts
are as Good as they need be; they find them to be well-inclined, well-disposed,
well-meaning; they do not perceive that there are swarms of Lusts and Vile
Affections in them: they wonder to hear Persons crying out of the vileness of
their hearts; they see no cause of such complaints concerning themselves. As
for such Persons as these, there is no Spiritual Light in them, their eyes are
closed to this day, and through the Darkness that is upon their Minds, they see
not those monstrous Corruptions that are in them, Rev. 3.17, 18. It Is possible
such Persons may lead Lives that are Civil, Orderly and Blameless as to men, [
Phil. 3.6.] yet all this while they are far from being in Sanctified Estate. No
man was ever Converted, who was not Convinced of the Sinfulness and
Wretchedness of his Nature. He never was Holy, that has not seen himself to be
Exceeding Vile. He never was in a State of Salvation, that has not been
sensible of his being in a Lost and Sinful State by Nature.

2. Those who make the Sin of their Nature an Excuse for their Actual Sins.
Though there be nothing that can Excuse Sin, yet Sinners seek to Find Excuses:
And one thing which they are ready to use as an Excuse, is the Inclination of
Nature to Sin: It Is Natural, say they, to Sin. All men's hearts are Inclined to
Evil. Nature will have its course. Such as these never did unfeignedly Mourn
for the Corruption of their Nature* if they had, they would see this to be an
Aggravation of their Sin, and in no sort an Extenuation of it. They would see
Adultery, Theft, Revenge, etc. to be so much the worse, because they proceed
from an Adulterers, Thievish, Revengful heart. Were Indwelling Sin the matter
of their Lamentation, they would not plead it for the Justifying themselves in
acts of Iniquity.

3. Those who Cherish and Indulge any Lust. If there be any Particular
Corruption whereof Persons are tender, and wherein they do inwardly and
customarily delight, such Persons are not afflicted in Soul for the Pollution
of their Hearts. Though Persons Restrain their Lusts and suffer them not to break
out, yet if they allow them to act and work in their Souls, they are Lovers of
their Lusts, and not Mourners for them. Thus if Persons allow themselves in a
course of Unclean, Covetous, Revengful Thoughts, they do not bewail Indwelling
Sin: Were it Really Lamented, men would engage in the Universal Mortification
of it. They would not Cherish any Member of that vile Body of Sin, but would
labor to keep under and subdue the whole Body.

USE. III. Of Exhortation.
Let all be Exhorted not to rest till Indwelling Sin become the Matter of their
Sorrowful Lamentation. Be not satisfied till you find your selves Persons of a
Sorrowful Spirit on the account of Sin in you. If your Hearts are to this day
Unaffected with the Corruption of your Natures, resolve no longer to abide in
such a frame. To strengthen you in such resolutions, I shall here lay before
you the absolute necessity of Sorrowing on the account of the Body of Sin that
is in you.

1. If you have not a Sorrowful sense of Corruption you will not earnestly
Desire Grace. There will be ho hungrings and thirstings after Holiness, where
there is not a sensible perception of Defilement: how should a man long to be
Sanctified that is unaffected with his Filthiness? It Is sense of Sin which
works desires of Grace. The reason why Nicodemus could not understand the
doctrine of Regeneration, was because he did not understand the doctrine of
Original Sin: he did not see that that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh: he
did not see that he was born of Parents whose Natures were Corrupt, and from
whom he had derived a Sinful Corrupt Nature; and hence he did not see a
necessity of having his Nature Renewed by the Spirit of Grace, and consequently
did not desire nor seek after Regenerating Grace. A man will never labor to
get out of a State of Nature, who does not see and bewail the Sinfulness of
that Estate. If therefore it be necessary that you should be Regenerated, it is
necessary that you be touched with a feeling of Corruption. And what is more
necessary than Regenerating Grace? Our Lord does most expressly and solemnly
declare, that Without this a man can never enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh.
3.3, 5. None shall partake in Glory hereafter, that do not partake in Grace
here. Except a man pass from Spiritual Death to Spiritual Life, he cannot pass
from Earth to Heaven at the last.

2. If you have not a Sorrowful sense of Corruption, you will not see the
absolute need you stand in of Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ will never be
Precious until the Heart become Loathsome to itself. Those only that see
themselves in a Lost Estate will seek for a Savior: Such as think themselves
Whole, will not go to the Physician. None will go to Christ but such as are
Weary and heavy Laden with the burden of Indwelling Sin. The Soul will never
cry out to Christ for a Cure, till it be pained with the Disease that is upon
it. Christ then cannot be a Savior to us unless we are deeply sensible of our
Sinfulness: And what will become of us if we have not an Interest in that
Savior? We Perish Eternally if our Souls be not committed into His Saving
Hands.

3. If you have not a Sorrowful sense of your Corruptions, you will never be
Willing to part with them. No Sinner will desire to Putt off the Old man with
his Lusts, until it be a thing grievous and hateful to him. Unlamented Lusts
will be Retained Lusts. Men must Groan under this Spiritual burden, before they
will strive to Cast it off: The heart never thinks of Parting with its Lusts
until they Become Bitter to it: It is therefore impossible for Men to be
Separated from their Lusts till they Sorrow for them. And if Lusts be not
parted with, what will the End be? We are told what the Event will be, Matthew.
^.19, 30. We shall be cast into Hell. Either we must part with our Lusts, or
part with God, Christ and Heaven, and perish Eternally in the place of Devils.
These things do then show the necessity of Sorrowing for Indwelling Sin.

If it be now asked, What must we do to attain such a Sorrow? Attend these
Directions.

Direction, I.
Labor for a clear and full Conviction of the Exceeding Sinfulness of
Indwelling Sin. It is indeed Exceeding Sinful, Romans 7.13. Sinful above
Hyperbole, as the Original suggests: And if you are once thoroughly Convinced
hereof, you will soon bemoan your selves on the account of it; and until your
have such a Sight of it, you will never duly Lament it. Now in order hereto
two things must be done.

1. Compare your Natures with the Holy Law of God. The Law is a Glass wherein
you may see the true Face of Sin upon your Souls. We are to remember that our
Natures ought to be conformed to the Law of God in every point: We should be as
Holy and Sinless as that Law requires. Our Hearts ought exactly to answer that
Strict Rule: Now compare your selves therewith, and you will see your
Sinfulness. -- You ought according to the Law of God to be Always inclined to
Good, and Never inclined to Evil: to Hate Sin without the Least Love to it: to
Believe in God without the least Distrust: to be Humble without the least
Pride: to be Meek without the least Passion: to be Sober and Temperate without
the least Excess: to be Pure and Chaste without the least Unclean Motion: to
Love your Neighbor without bearing him the Least ill Will: to discharge all
Duties without the Least Defect. Such a One you ought to be according to the
Holy Commandment of God: but Consider whether you are so. Oh! how far do you
come short of being such a One? Will you not, if you take this course, soon cry
out, Unclean! Unclean! Behold, I am Vile!

2. Beg of God to give you a Spiritual Discovery of the Sinfulness of
Indwelling Sin. By comparing your selves with the Law of God, you may attain to
such rational Convictions of your Sinfulness, as may force from you a
Confession of your Vileness; but you will never so see your defilement as to
loathe your selves for it, unless God Open you Eyes: It Is He must let light
into our Souls to see aright, the hideous monstrousness of those Lusts, that
lodge in the Secrets of our Hearts. Beg therefore of God to show you that which
you see not. Go to Jesus Christ for Eyes Salve to anoint you, that you may see
your selves Wretched, and Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked, Rev. 3.17,
^8.

Direction, II.
Pray to God for a Spirit of Mourning. It Is God only who can give a Soft,
Tender Heart, which shall be suitably sensible of its own Hardness, Ezekiel.
36.26. I will take away the Stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give unto
you an Heart of Flesh. Pray then earnestly unto the Lord to pour out upon you
the Spirit of Grace, that you may see and bewail your Spiritual Pollution. Give
God no rest till He has made you a Loathing in your own eyes, and Opened a
Fountain of Tears in you for your Sin.

USE. IV. Of Consolation.
To such as Lament Indwelling Sin, and Travail with Desires of Deliverance from
it. Some there are whose Sighings and Groanings on this account are Not bid
from God: He Hears them bemoaning themselves, as Ephraim did, for the obstinacy
of their Hearts: He sees them using all holy Endeavors to Subdue Sin, and
exceeding Thankful for any degrees of Deliverance from it, and longing for
further Deliverance therefrom. Unto such as these, Two Words of Comfort may be
spoken.

1. Your Burdened Souls shall never more be brought under Subjection to
Indwelling Sin. Sin will strive to regain its Ancient Dominion over you, and to
reduce you to former Subjection, but this shall never be effected. Ail its
Attempts this way shall prove Unsuccessful. You may sometimes in an Hour of
Temptation fear, that Corruption will recover its mastery over you; but be not
afraid: Keep up a Fear of Watchfulness, but don't give way to a Fear of
Dispondency: The Almighty and most Faithful God has given His Word for it, That
Sin shall not have Dominion over you, Romans 6.14. Though it may pursue you, as
Pharaoh did Israel, yet it shall never carry you back into Bondage. The Lord
that has Begun to Deliver, will Go on to Deliver; He will most assuredly keep
you By His Mighty Power through Faith unto Salvation.

2. Your Wearied Souls shall shortly be At Rest from Indwelling Sin. It will
not be long before your desires of Deliverance shall be fully Satisfied. That
which you Long for shall be granted unto you, and that very Quickly. Heaven,
though it be Afar off as to local distance, yet it is Near in point of Time. A few
days more and you go to that Place, where Nothing that Defiles Enters in.
Hold out a little longer in Striving against Sin, and you shall never more have
any Conflict or Combat with it. Your Warfare shall speedily be Accomplished,
and then shall you experimentally Know that which your fain would Know, but
never yet Did Know, Namely, What it is to Serve GOD without Sin, and that to
all ETERNITY.

FINIS

