The Temple Opening. A Particular CHURCH Considered as a TEMPLE OF THE LORD. In
a SERMON Preached on a a Day, when such a CHURCH was Gathered, and a PASTOR to
it Ordained.

Now Published by that Church, as a continual Monitor of their Duty, and for
the more Extensive Benefit of others, who would be Confirmed in the Right ways
of the Lord.

Ezekiel. xli i. He brought me to the TEMPLE. Adhuc habet Ecclesia quo Crescat;
donec illud impleatur, Dominabitur a Mari usque ad Mare. Aug. Sup. Matthew.
Boston: Printed by B. Green, for S. Phillips 1709

THE TEMPLE Opening.
10 d. 7 m. 1707. At Braintry.
Ephesians II.22. In whom you also are Built together --


THE Greatest, the Noblest Work, that ever is done among the Children of Men,
is this Day to be done in this Assembly. The very Angels of Heaven, fly to the
Windows of Heaven, that they may be the Glad Spectators of Such a WORK done
among the Children of Men upon Earth. It is, To Erect a TEMPLE of God. And
what? An American Wilderness be the Place, where the Glorious LORD shall See
Temples Erected for Him! O Sovereign GRACE! O Wonderful GRACE! It is even so,
Lord, because it Pleases thee!

Indeed, the Whole CHURCH of GOD, collectively taken, is a TEMPLE, which our
Magnificent Solomon is Building for Him. The Building is not yet Finished. The
Period which answers to the Seventh Year, wherein the Temple of Solomon was
finished, is not yet arrived. When it is arrived, the Acclamations [and
Solomon's too among the rest!] will be such as no Age ever yet heard: they will
be Astonishments, beyond all that were ever yet seen in the World. In the mean
time, we are told; All the Building fitly framed together, grows unto an Holy
Temple in the Lord. The Temple is Growing, in the Conversion of Sinners unto
GOD; and the Addition to the Church daily of those that shall be Saved. When a
Sinner is Converted, a New Stone is brought and laid in the Building of the
Temple. The Temple grows bigger and higher, as often as any Sinner is
Converted. God fetches in Matter for His Church, from all Corners of the World.
He will go on doing so, till all the Elect are Effectually Called. The
Top-stone of the Church will not be laid, until the Last of the Elect be called
home to God, that ever shall be so. What a Shout will be given upon that
Stroke, It is Finished! It is Finished! Until this be done, this is the Reason
why we are so earnest with our Hearers, to Repent of Sin, and Return to God,
and Believe on Christ, and Lay Hold on Eternal Life. The Ministers of the
Gospel are Workmen about the Temple. Their only Work in the World should be, to
build the Temple of GOD. For this we are in continual Agony. Oh* That this
Consideration might prevail with our Hearers, to become Seriously Religious.
Children; At the Moment that you do indeed Resolve to become Seriously
Religious, the Temple of GOD, receives a desirable Growth by your Accession
unto it. You will contribute unto the Growth of the Temple, in the Day that you
turn unto God. Oh! Happy Souls, that are Stones in the Temple of the Lord! Oh!
Glorious Happiness, to be a Part of such a Temple! GOD will own you for His, in
the Day when He makes up His Jewels.

But there is another Observation, unto which we are now to be invited. As the
Universal Church is the Temple of GOD, So Every Particular Church is to be a
Temple.

There were Three Things of High Account, among the Ancient People of GOD; The
City of Jerusalem; The Family of David; And, the Temple of the LORD. In the
CHURCH of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, there is a bright Constellation of all those
Glories meeting together. That CHURCH, which is the Body of them, that Love the
Lord, and Hate Evil, and hope for Blessedness in the Heavenly World. Our
Apostle assures us, That this Church, is, The City of God; and* The Family of
God; and, The Temple of God. And, Oh! who would not give himself up unto the
Conduct of a Glorious CHRIST, that he may be brought into a Church of so great
a Character!

Now, the Apostle having said, That the Universal Church is the Temple of God,
presently says to the Church of Ephesus; You also are builded together. The
Particular Church of Ephesus; the Congregational Church, was also a Temple.

I may then, without any Obstruction in the way, pass on to this Doctrine and
Admonition of the Lord.

Every Particular CHURCH of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, is to be together Built in
the Glorious LORD, as a TEMPLE of GOD. A Particular Church, is, A Society of
Christians* combining for the Worship of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the ways
that He has Instituted. Or, as our Catechized Children can tell us; It Is a
Congregation of Saints joined together in the Bond of the Covenant, to Worship
the Lord, and Edify One another, in all His Holy Ordinances. I make no Scruple,
to call it, A Congregational Church. For it is unquestionable, That a
Congregational Church is an Instituted Church. If a Church of another Form,
should pretend unto Institution, still it is the Congregational Church, that has
the First claim, and a Plain claim it has, unto it. The Churches mentioned in
the New Testament, were every One of them, evidently Congregational. And the
most Judicious, Laborious and Impartial Searches into Christian Antiquity, do
declare, That they cannot find any other Churches, in the First Ages of
Christianity, but what were Congregational. This Truth will most certainly
gain, as Ignorance, and Prejudice, and Passion, in the Treating of such
matters, does abate in the World. Concerning such a Particular Church, we are
now to receive diverse Propositions.

1. Unto what may a CHURCH of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, be likened? Unto what, so
well as unto an House, unto which our Lord JESUS CHRIST Himself has likened it.
You shall find this comparison asserted; 1. Tim. 3.15. The House of God, which
is the Church of the Living God. In many Articles (...) the Comparison be
carried on; we will with Delight and Profit, Reflect upon several of them.

Has not an House, a Builder? A Church has One. And it is the Lord Himself, that
is the Builder of it. We read, Heb. 3.4. Every House is built by Some Man; but
he that built all things (here) is God.

Has not an House, an Owner? A Church has One. And it is the Lord JESUS CHRIST
Himself that is the Owner of it. We read, Heb 3 6 Christ is a Son over His own
House, whose House we are.

Is there not Skill required unto the Building of an House? An Architect should
be an Artist. It is no little Skill, that is requisite unto the producing of a
Church, the Ordering of it, and the Managing of it. It calls for the greatest
Skill in the World. We read, 1 Cor. 3.10* A Wise Master Builder, must be
concerned.

Does an House consist of Good and Choice Materials? A Church must not consist
of what is Rotten; But of Saints, that are Styled Cedars; and, Comparable to
find Gold. Nothing but what is Good and Choice, is to be Admitted here; Except
we would make a Vile Cottage of it. We read, Ephesians. 1.1. They must be, Saints,
and Faithful in Christ Jesus.

Must the Materials of an House be well Prepared, that they may be laid into
it? They that are laid in the Church, must be fetched out of the Rude Heap of
Mankind* and formed and hewed and Squared and Shaped for a Place among them
that are Sanctified. A Work of Effectual Calling, and Regeneration, and
Sanctification, is to pass upon them, to prepare them for it. We read, 1. Pet.
2.5. As lively Stones, (not such Lifeless Things, as the Temple of old, was
composed of,) ye are built up, a Spiritual House; an Holy Priesthood.
[Probably Peter now had in his Eye the words, which our Savior had formerly
Spoken unto him, Matthew. 16 18.]

Must the Materials of an House, be well Joined unto One another? It will never
be an House, if they be not so. The Form of it, arises from the Conjunction of
the Materials. In the Church there is a Conjunction of those, of whom it is
made up. Their Conjunction is by a Covenant of God. In some sort or other, they
do Resolve and Engage together to Serve the Lord. We read; Psalm. 122 3. It is
compact together.

What is the End of an House? It Is to Dwell in; It Is a Dewlling Place. A Church
is the Lords Dewlling Place. It Is an Habitation of God. We read, Rev 2 1* He
walks there.

Finally; In an House there are various Vessels and Vtinsels And in a Church
there are so too. We read, 2 Timothy 2 20. In a great House, there are not only
Vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood* and of Earth; and some to
Honor, some to Dishonor. Godly and Sincere Persons in a Church, these are
Vessels of Honor* Golden Vessels* or, The Plate of the House. Wicked Persons,
and the men of this World, are Vessels of Earth. Such as Dishonor God by Sin
are Vessels of Dishonor God Save us from coming under such a Denomination*

But, if a Church be an House* I Suppose it will put us in mind. That Church
Work is Building-Work. I do not wonder then, that Church-Work does go on with
Difficulty; Or, that it goes on with Deliberation; Or, that it is Expensive to
carry it on. To Build such an House, must needs be an Hard Work, a Slow Work,
and a Costly One.

II. But what kind of an House, is a Church of the Lord JESUS CHRIST? It is an
House that may be called, A Temple. Do but say, Who Is House it is, and you
presently determine it, A Temple. It is an House of GOD. Hence we read; 2 Cor.
6 16. Ye are the Temple of the Living GOD.

In affirming a Church to be a TEMPLE, there are Two very Important Things
affirmed concerning a Church.

First* It is to be Remembered, That a Church, is like a Temple, Dedicated and
Consecrated unto the Special Service of GOD. What is a Temple? It Is an House
Dedicated unto the Worship of GOD. What is a CHURCH? It Is a Company of Men, who
have Dedicated themselves unto the Worship of GOD. GOD and the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, is Worshipped in the Church. The very Design upon which a Church is
Erected, is, That the Lord might be Worshipped there. A CHURCH is, as we read,
1 Cor. 1 2. To call upon the Name of JESUS CHRIST* our Lord. The Lord JESUS
CHRIST affords unto men in His Church, peculiar Opportunities of Communion with
Himself. A Church is gathered upon this Intention; That Men may therein Enjoy a
Special Communion with GOD, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST. The Language, the
Pretense, the very Motto of a Church* is that; 1 John 1.3. Truly our Fellowship
is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ. In a Church, the Children of
Men present their Offerings unto GOD; and in a Church, GOD Visits the Children
of Men, with Communications of Light and Life and Grace unto them. A Temple is
made for this Purpose; That there may be upon Earth, in the Devotions of Men,
Some Conformity to what is doing in Heaven; And that here may be a fit
Receptacle, to take in Such Communications from Heaven, as God will favor Men
upon Earth withal. This, This is the very purpose of a Church, It Is made, that
Heaven and Earth may therein come sweetly together; It Is made, that God and Man
may therein Converse with one another.

Secondly. It is to be Remembered, That a Church is to take its measures, in
many Things, from the Temple, which the Lord had of old, in the Land of Israel.
There was a Tabernacle, which Moses built for the Special Service of GOD,
according to a Pattern which God had shown him, of what is Existing, and
Managed, in the Heavenly World There was a Second Edition of the Tabernacle in
an Illustrious Temple, built by Solomon, for the Special Service of GOD,
according to the Further Directions, which the Visions of God, had given unto
his Father David; who had a clearer view than Moses had, of particularly, the
Throne of Glory, in the Third Heaven, or that Apartment of the Heavenly World,
which was answered, by, The Holy of Holies, in the Temple. The Dying Servant of
God, left that charge; 1 Chronicles. 22.19. Now set your Heart and your Soul, to
Seek the Lord your God; Arise therefore, and Build ye the Sanctuary of the
Lord. This Temple of GOD, is now laid in Ashes. GOD has fulfilled unto the
Jews, His Threatening; Your House shall be Left unto you Desolate. The Jews are
making that bitter complaint; Our Holy and our Beauteous House, where our
Fathers Praised thee, is burnt up with Fire. But the Temple was built on a Spot
of Land, bought of a Gentile! GOD has many a Temple now in the Land of the
Gentiles. Every CHURCH of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, is now to be a Temple of GOD.
It is remarkable, That all the Furniture of the Temple, Seen by John, in the
Heavenly World, is introduced, as Living. The very Lamps, are Spirits; The very
Horns of the Altar have a Voice; The Throne it self Speaks. A Church is more
like the Temple in the Heavenly World, than any Inanimate Composition that has
been called a Temple. It Is Living, every part of it. But that it may have the
more of a Temple in it, what was in the Temple of old, must be Imitated and
Spiritualized in the Church of the LORD. A Church is to consider, what was to
be Seen, and what was to be Done, in the Temple; and to take its Measures
accordingly. I foresee* That I must anon Resume this Admonition.

But if a Church be a Temple, Methinks All that are in the Church are hence
Admonished. Holiness becomes this House for ever!

It becomes them, to take up this Resolution. Well; I am in an Holy Place: I am
where the Holy God is present, with Singular Discoveries of Himself. Oh! Let me
be very Holy. In such an Holy Place, Let me do nothing Offensive unto the Lord,
who is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Holy Ones, and to be had in
Reverence of all them that are about Him.

III. But what Regard should the Parts of a Church have to one another? They
should ly well Together, that they may be a Temple of GOD. A Church of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST must have this property, Built together. It cannot pretend unto
the Consistency of a TEMPLE, if it be not so.

First. By a Church Covenant, the several Parts of a Church are to be Brought
and Laid well Together. While men ly Scattered one from another, and are not
come Voluntarily together, and are not come into a Voluntary Relation unto each
other, they cannot be a Church of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. And how can they do
this, but by a Mutual Confaederation? The Formation of a Church, is by a
Church Covenant, wherein men bind themselves to Walk together, according to the
Order of the Gospel. It Is a Sacred Corporation. Every Corporation is made so by
a Covenant. It must be by a Covenant, that men are Incorporated into an
Evangelical Church State before the Lord. Though the Hazard of having the Word
misconstrued among Malignant Enemies, might make the Apostles forbear using the
Word, Covenant, yet we find the Thing in the Apostolical Writings. We read;
Act. 5.13. about, Joining to the Church. The Original Word, carries this in it;
A Cleaving together; which implies, Their Mutual Promises to Keep together: A
Joining in that Covenant or Agreement, in which that Church Associated for the
Worship of the Lord. The Word is the same that is used for the
Marriage-Covenant. A Church is a Spouse of Christ; It is by a Covenant that
they approach unto Him. Brethren, This is the Day of your Espousal unto the
Lord. Where men do not Implicitly at least, Agree and Engage, together, to
Worship the Lord JESUS CHRIST according to His Laws, it is almost on all hands
Agreed, they neither are, nor can be, A Church. All Reasonable men, will grant
as much as this comes to. An Implicit Covenant is necessary to the very Being
of a Church. And indeed, the Essence of a Church is preserved, where there is
but an Implicit Agreement of a Company of Believers, declared by their constant
Practice, in coming Together for the Public Worship of God, and Subjection to
His Ordinances. But then, an Explicit Covenant is Expedient, is Profitable, is
Desirable; Yea, It Is a Duty. Our GOD must be Served with Our Best. We must not
Put off the Lord with a Defective Thing, when we have a Better. And we are
certain, That an Explicit Covenant is better than an Implicit. The Officers of
the Church, are chosen by the Church, and come in with the Consent of the
Church. As there must be a Covenant between the Church and its Officers; thus
there must be a Covenant in the Church, to Qualify, to Distinguish, to Enable
them, that they may Choose their Officers. Accordingly, Ecclesiastical and
Unquestionable History Reports to us, A Covenant, which the Primitive
Christians had among them. Tertullian thus describes a Church, Corpus Sumus, de
Spei Faedere, as Incorporated with a Covenant. Pliny relates, That Some
Renegado Christians being Examined by him, Confessed, They had a Covenant among
them. Justin Martyr Speaks of Three Things, then demanded of all that were
Admitted into the Church; A New Birth; A Sound Faith; and, A Promise to walk in
Obedience to the Gospel. Zepper tells us, of many Reformed Churches in these
Later Ages Reviving this Discipline of the Primitive; That they who were
Admitted unto the Lord's Supper in them, Solemnly Entered into a Covenant, That
by the Grace of God they would Order their Lives according to His Word, and
Submit unto the Discipline of His Church. Parker says; Admittitur, non Sine
Solenni Pactione, cum Deo, et cum Ecclesia.

By the Church Covenant, is meant, The Covenant of Grace applied unto those
Duties of the Covenant, which a Church of the Lord is to Observe, that the
Order of the Gospel may be maintained in it. There are Particular Duties, which
the Members (the Pastors and Brethren) of Particular Churches, owe to one
another. They that will not Seriously, and Solemnly Acknowledge their
Obligations to the Duties, are but poorly Qualified to be Acknowledged as
Members of the Churches. Now the Church Covenant in our Churches, is nothing
else, but that Acknowledgment.

Some Disaffected and Unacquainted Persons, may decry the Covenant by which our
Churches are formed, as a Singularity. But even in this Day of Deviation from
the Primitive Discipline, the Lord ever now and then raises up, some Testimony
for it. I will at this time only Recite the Words, of Mr. Ostervaldt, a late
Outlandish Writer on, The causes of the present corruption of Christians.

The Order which I mean, is this, First, That when Persons desire to be
Admitted unto the Sacrament, they should be Instructed for Some Weeks before,
and that the same time, they should be informed of the Sacredness and
Importance of the Action, and of the Promise they are to make, that so they may
prepare for it betimes. In the next place, that they should be Examined, and
that they should Publicly render an Account of their Faith. This Examination,
being over, that they should be required, to Renew and Confirm in a Public and
Solemn manner, their Baptismal Vow, to Renounce the Devil and his Works, the
World and the Pomp of it, the Flesh and its Lusts; and to Promise, that they
will Live and Die in the Christian Faith. And then, that they should be
Admitted, to the Communion, by Benediction and Prayers.

[He Proceeds.] The Order I propose, will be thought a Novelty, by none but
such as do not know what was anciently Practiced, and who call Innovations,
every thing which does not agree with the Custom of their Country, or their
Church. Besides, this Establishment being altogether Suitable unto the Nature
of the Christian Religion, it ought not to be Rejected. I Offer this with the
greater Confidence, because an Order like this, has been Settled of late, in
some Churches, and is there observed with Extraordinary Success. [Thus my
Author.]

Briefly, The Covenant for the Duties of the Church State, is the Cement of a
Church. The Stones of a Temple are to be well Cemented and United unto one
another, by an Holy Covenant.

Secondly. The Several Parts of the Church must Keep well together, in
attending to the Duties of the Church Covenant, which are now Expected from
them. A Temple must Hold well together, in the Discharge of the Duties, whereto
the Church Covenant has obliged them that are in it. The Temple falls to
Pieces, when the Church Members may have it said of them; Psalm. 78 37. They are
not Steadfast in His Covenant.

Church Members, You have given your selves unto the Church whereto you do
belong; Engaging, That in the Fellowship thereof you will attend upon the
Ordinances of the Glorious Gospel, while your Opportunities to be thereby
Edified in your most Holy Faith shall be continued. There is much that you have
now to Do Together, in waiting on the Lord, that So you may be Built Together
as a Temple of the Lord

There are Duties, which the ELDERS of the Church, are to do toward the
Brethren. Oh! That our Glorious LORD would help us to Study and Practice our
Duties! Oh! That we may Spend our Time, in Praying for our Flocks, in Treating
with our Flocks, in a continual Travail for their Salvation! Oh! That we might
Watch for the Souls of our People, as they that must give an Account; and be
Prudent and Faithful Stewards of the Heavenly Mysteries unto them! Will you,
Brethren, Ask for us those Mercies of God?

I readily acknowledge, Very many, very awful are the Duties of the Elders. But
will my doing so, obtain for me the Liberty now to say, That the Duties between
the Elders and the People are Mutual? If the People would allow this
Concession, they might be convinced presently of several Miscarriages, which We
can hardly take the Liberty to mention; Only by considering, Should the Elders
neglect the Church, as much as the Brethren of the Church often cast off the
Elders, doubtless, there would be loud complaints concerning it.

But between the Elders and the Brethren, Methinks, I see the DEACONS, in a
Seat of Eminency, demanding, -- And what shall we do? Sirs, You must be Men of
Gravity, of a Grave and Solid, and Comely Behavior. You must be Sincere men,
Temperate men, Bountiful men; and Hold the Mystery of Faith in a pure
Conscience. You must with much application Study the Temporal Interest, both of
the Elders and of the Brethren. You must see as far as you can, that none
Suffer by want. You must use all Discretion as well as Fidelity, for Augmenting
as well as Dispensing, the Churches Treasury. You must have one Virtue more,
which is perhaps too little considered; that is, Much Boldness in the Faith.
The meaning is, That you must Speak Plainly, Freely, Boldly, on the behalf of
Christ, and His Church, to Such as you find Strait-handed People, not
contributing according to their Ability. You must not be Ashamed nor Afraid,
but with much Boldness tell your Neighbors, when they are Defective in doing
their Part, for the Support of Christianity.

I will now go on to say; There are Duties which the BRETHREN of the Church,
owe both to the Elders, and to one another. When Things Ly well together in the
Temple, the Brethren become well disposed both toward the Elders, and toward
the Brethren. We will describe their Disposition. Oh! That while we are
uttering the Description, the Spirit of Grace may so fall upon You, Our
Brethren, as to bring you into it!

The Disposition of the Brethren toward the Elders, is thus to be Expressed.

I would highly Esteem the Men, to whose Conduct I am committed by the Order of
GOD, while they shall by their Seriousness and Holiness, and Usefulness,
deserve my Esteem.

I would observe and follow their Example, in all those Good Things, wherein
the Grace of Christ has made them Exemplary.

I would make my daily and fervent Prayers to GOD for them, that He would pour
out His Blessings on them, and make them rich Blessings to His People.

I would conscientiously Endeavor to Support them, and Liberally Communicate
in all Good Things, unto them, that while I am Spiritually Enriched by them,
they may not Sink in Temporal Poverty.

I would Comfort them in their Adversities, Defend them from their Adversaries,
Vindicate their Innocence from unjust Reproaches.

I would in an Orderly, Suitable, and Obedient manner Attend upon them, when I
am called upon.

The Disposition of the Brethren toward One another is thus to be Expressed.

I would carry the Flock before the Lord* in my constant Supplications, and
constantly Pray for the Peace of the Society.

I would Study and pursue the welfare of the Society, on all accounts, as I may
have Opportunity; and Studiously Maintain its Purity, its Unity, and all the
Privileges which the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased for it.

I would Stand by the Society, when ever any Storms of Affliction may arise
upon it; and not abandon it, because it is Afflicted and tossed with Tempest.

I would faithfully Give, and Thankfully Take, Admonitions, as in the Society,
there may be Occasion.

I would help to carry on all the Affayrs of the Kingdom of God, in the Society
according to my Ability; In Supplying or Discharging of Offices; in Upholding
of Discipline; Or, what ever must be done, that Religion may be honorably
carried on.

I would Mark and Shun those that cause Divisions in the Society, and much be
afraid of being my self the cause of Divisions.

I would have a Brotherly Sympathy with the whole Society, as being my self
also in the Body, and Sympathize with every particular Member that may be in
any particular Sorrow.

Oh! what a Lovely Temple Built together should we see in this Place, if here
might be a Church thus disposed!

IV. But a Temple Built thus together, what must it be Built upon? It must be
Built upon our Lord JESUS CHRIST. In Him a Church is to be Built together.

Excellent Things are implied in this.

First. In Him! -- Every Churchmember should be In Him; Every Churchmember
should have an Union with the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Who are they, that are fit for
for Church Fellowship? we read, Ephesians. 1.1. The Saints, and Faithful in Christ
Jesus. Before we come to be in a Church, we should be in the Lord Jesus Christ.
They that are not in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and that are not New Creatures, and
that are not Holy Ones Partakers of the Heavenly Calling; are not Sound Members
of the Church. Our First work must be to make sure of this, That we be in the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, by Accepting of Him, as He is Offered unto us. Then we may
come to be in the church, and welcome. And the Grand care of every One, that is
in the Church, it should run upon this; Am I in the Lord Jesus Christ, or no?
It is not being in the Church, that will deliver a man from the Wrath of God.
No; It Is being in the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Our main care must be that; Phil. 3 9.
Oh! That I may be found in Him!

Secondly. In Him! -- It Is a Respect unto Him, that must hold us together.
Church Members must be United in Respect unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST. This, This
must be the Uniting Principle among us. All Church Members must hold together
in making the Lord JESUS CHRIST their Foundation. It Is no Temple of GOD, which
is not United upon that Foundation. We read, Col. 2.19. Holding the Head, is
necessary. A Church falls, if the Members thereof, do not concur, in their
Apprehensions of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; in their Inclinations to the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. The Uniting Principle of a Church must be This; All the Members of it,
must believe, That JESUS is CHRIST, and that CHRIST is GOD; and, That the
Things Reveled and Reported in the Gospel, are Faithful Sayings. And all the
Members of it, must Prize CHRIST, as the Pearl of Great Price, and Love CHRIST,
as the Altogether Lovely One, and Serve CHRIST as their only Lord, and prefer a
Portion in CHRIST above any Worldly Portion. This is One of the admirable
Instances of our GODS Gathering together all things in CHRIST. The Members of
the Church are Gathered together; and it is their Belief of CHRIST, and their
Homage to CHRIST, by which they are Gathered and United.

Thirdly. In Him! -- It Is on the account of Him, that we are to take up a
Kindness for one another. All Church Members must be Kind unto One another,
because of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. There is, 2 Pet. 1.7. A Brotherly-Kindness,
that must Sweeten the whole carriage of Church Members toward One another. Now
this Brotherly-Kindness, wherein we are to Love as Brethren, what must it be
Built upon? It must be Built upon the Command of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Because
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, has given us this Command, Love One another, Therefore
we should forbear Injuring or Provoking one another; Therefore we should Please
each other to Edification; Therefore we should be Serviceable to each other,
and be ready to do each other all the Good that ever we can. Again; It must be
Built upon the Image of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. We may See something of the
Image of the Lord JESUS CHRIST in One another; Therefore, and so far, we should
have a Value for One another; Therefore we should bear One another Burdens,
and make as light as we can of the Infirmities wherewith any render themselves
Burdensome unto us; Therefore we should close with one another, and come
together cheerfully and heartily.

Thus we shall render our selves, A Temple of God, built up together in our
Lord Jesus Christ.

APPLICATION.
We are this Day concerned with a People, which we now see growing into such a
TEMPLE. The most agreeable thing that we can do, is to let this dear People of
the Lord, Hear what we do on their behalf make our Wishes to the Lord. O CHURCH
of the Living GOD: We will now utter our Wishes for you. And they shall be all
Summed up, in this comprehensive One; The LORD make you a TEMPLE for Himself;
God grant, That you may be a Temple Built up together in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Oh! That all that Look upon this Church, might have cause to Cry out with Joy;
A TEMPLE, A Temple of the Lord Jesus Christ! A Glorious Temple of God! An House
of GOD, and a Gate of Heaven!

I must have my WISHES, more particularly yet, and more pathetically adapted
for you. I will fly away to the Temple of Solomon, where we were a few Minutes
ago. There I will take a few Turns. I will fetch my WISHES from Some things,
whereof I shall take notice there.

I take notice; The Temple was built upon Mount Morijah. I Wish, That you, O
Church of the LORD, may be built upon the Rock of Ages. The Truths which
concern a Glorious CHRIST, that Rock of Ages, are faithfully Set before you in,
The Confession of Faith, received among you. May you be well Founded on those
Truths, and may a Blast from GOD, befall all Attempts ever to remove you from
them.

But, I also Wish, you may never have any but Men, that for their
Peaceableness, may Merit the Name of Solomon, to be your Builders.

I take notice; The Temple was built of Stones well Squared, of Trees well
Hewed. I Wish, That the SPIRIT of GOD, by His Renewing Operations upon your
Minds, may make you all to be Such.

When you are Such, then Call to your Minds, the Condition of the Vnregenerates
left behind you, in the same Quarry, and the same Desert, from whence you were
taken. And Pity them, Oh! Pity them!

I take notice; The Temple had a very Beautiful Aspect. I Wish, That the Beauty
of your Conversations may be such as to commend Religion; Such as to set off
your Profession.

May your Charity, the most obvious and visible part of your Behavior, be like
the Beautiful Porch of the Temple. But the Porch, and the Holy of Holies, were
of the same Dimensions. I Wish, your Charity and your Holiness, may be Parallel
in their Dimensions.

But, Oh! That there were more Compassion shown to them, that are lying in the
Porch! Our Children are lying in the Porch: There they ly, Begging Alms.

I take notice; There was an Outer Court in the Temple, and an Inner Court. I
Wish, That you may be, not merely Worshippers in the Outer Court; not content
with outward Shows and Signs of the Fear of God: But that you may also be
Worshippers in the Inner Court; Acquainted with Inward, Sincere, Hearty, and
Experimental Piety.

I take notice, of a Table with Loaves upon it, in the Temple. I Wish, That you
may have CHRIST, as the Bread of Life, and more than Half a loaf of it, every
Sabbath set before you.

I take notice of Lavers in the Temple. I Wish, That you may all be Washed in
the Lavers of the Word, and the Grace, and the Blood of your Glorious LORD. Oh!
For clean Hands, and Pure Hearts, in this Holy Place!

But shall I show you the way to arrive at Excellent Holiness! We read of, A
Sea of Glass mingled with Fire. The Great Laver in the Temple, was called, A
Sea; A Sea, of Glass, that is, of Brass. It was Mingled with Fire. It stood not
far from the Altar. The Fire on the Altar caused a bright Reflection in the
Water; The Water looked as if mingled with Fire. Verily, The Thoughts of a
crucified JESUS, may be much mingled, in all your Endeavors after Holiness;
you will find in them the most Purifying Virtue that can be imagined.

I take notice of Altars in the Temple. I Wish, That you may act a Lively Faith
on a Glorious CHRIST, as making Satisfaction for us, at the Brazen Altar, as
making Intercession for us, at the Golden Altar. Yea, may you present your
selves as also Sacrifices unto GOD. May your Devotions be continually the
Sacrifices wherewith God shall be well-pleased. May your Prayers and your Alms,
go up as a Memorial before the Lord!

There were Pillars in the Temple. I Wish, Your Elders may be such. God help
them, the God of Patience, and of (what will follow!) Comfort, help them to
Bear a great deal!

I take notice, of Golden Candlesticks in the Temple. I Wish, That you may be
well Illuminated, as the Lesser Lamps, the Sons of Light, were from the
Principal One I Wish, Others may receive Illumination from you. But, Oh! Let
the Golden Snuffers be well used in your Impartial Discipline.

If any Unclean and Profane Persons, go to Press into the Temple; I Wish, They
may be kept out. I Wish, this House of God, may never be a Den of Thieves; or,
as Chrysostom calls a Church full of Scandalous Members, A Stable for Camels
and Asses.

And will you Try, O Church of the most High! Try to get a Look into the Holy
of Holies. Oh! Look into Heaven, as much as you can, as far as you can, as often
as you can. The Vail is Rent, at the Death of your Glorious LORD. Now they that
Stand in the Holy Place, may look into the Holy of Holies. Oh! Be a People of
an Heavenly Temper; Seek the Things that are Above; and, Have your Conversation
in Heaven. Be much in such Meditations as these; My Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST,
the High Priest, is gone into the Holy of Holies; There He Sits down at the
Right Hand of GOD. By virtue of His Blood I shall enter into that Heaven after
Him. There, There is the Ark of GOD; There is the Mercy Seat; the CHRIST, in
those Exhibitions, for the sake whereof God is Merciful to me. There to be, is
by far the best of all.

Methinks, I am loath to leave the Temple! But something of a more particular
Importance, than all of this, must be Spoken unto the People, who are this Day
becoming a a Temple for the LORD.

Brethren; It Is a very Great Glory, which is this Day put upon you, by this
Glorious ONE. But, as you must beware, of being Haughty, because you now Stand
in the Lords Holy Mountain, so your Standing there, should make you very
Cautious, very Watchful, that your whole Behavour may Adorn the Doctrine of God
your Savior. You have the Eyes of the most Holy LORD upon you; Eyes that
strike and pierce like Lightning; Pure Eyes, that will not look upon Iniquity.
The People of God, and all your Neighbors, have their Eyes upon you. Oh! how
much ought this to be your Prayer; Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a
plain Path, because of my Observers! It is greatly to be Desired, greatly to be
Advised, That you Endeavor greatly to approve your selves the Children of God,
without Rebuke, in the midst of those, who may be ready enough to censure you.
That you may keep close to the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and the Right
ways of the Lord, wherein these Churches have hitherto flourished: That you may
be much in Supplications to the LORD, and often Set apart Whole Days for
Extraordinary Supplications, that the Work of God may be happily carried on
among you. In a Word, That you may all be true Citizens of Zion!

And, Oh! That your Minister, may be a Man Diligent in his Business, because he
Stands before the King of Kings: A Man that shall make it his whole Business,
to Know Christ, and Preach Christ, and Serve Christ, and Win Souls unto Him,
and feed you with Christ, which is the Food of Angels: A Man that shall
maintain an Holy, Humble, Trembling, and Prayerful Walk with God, and render it
your Safety to Follow Him, as a Follower of the Lord: A Man that wherever he
comes, will be always at Work for GOD, and for YOU; Do Good continually; Be
always full of Contrivances to Do Good; Never be Well, but when Employed in
some Good Work, and Study to be a Workman that need not be ashamed.

May this CHURCH of the Lord, be such a TEMPLE, and so accommodated; Then shall
we say, It Is Good to be here.

I will not break off, till I have Illustrated that Saying, with quoting Two
passages.

One Passage must be from our Incomparable Goodwin, who having described, the
Grand Intention of a Congregational Church, coming together, To Worship the
Lord, and Edify One another in all His Holy Ordinances; adds, It Is an
Honorable Assembly, wherein CHRIST is the Head! And they meet, not for the
Good of the Common wealth directly; though that be honorable, yet it is nothing
to the Salvation of Souls, and the Edifying of One another in the Fear of God.
How therefore should all matters be carried? There should nothing appear but
the Presence of Christ; the Love of Christ, and the Power of His Grace: And
then, they are the most honorable Meetings in the World!

Another Passage must be, from our celebrated Shepard; who in a Manuscript,
which I have in my hands, relates the Gathering of the Church at Cambridge,
quickly after his coming into New England, and the condition of his own
Virtuous Consort at that time very near her Death, of a Consumption. The
Relation has these words in it. It pleased the Lord to join us into
Church Fellowship. After the Day was ended, we came to her Chamber, She being
unable to come unto us. And because we feared, her End was not far off, we did
solemnly ask her, If she was desirous to be a Member with us. Which she
Expressing* and so Entering into Covenant with us, we thereupon all took her by
the hand, and received her as become One with us* having had full Trial and
Experience of her Faith and Life before. At this Time, and by this means, the
Lord did not only show us the worth of this Ordinance, but gave us a Seal of
His Accepting of us, and of His Presence with us that Day. For the Lord hereby
filled her Heart, with such unspeakable Joy and Assurance of Gods Love, that
She said to us, She had now Enough; and we were afraid, her Feeble Body, would
have at that time fallen, under the weight of her Joy. Thus She told me; Though
in my Judgment* I saw that the Lord had Loved me, yet in my Affection I feared,
that there might be some flaw in my Heart, Some Sin in my Soul, which might
Separate between me and my God, at the Last, which I neither Saw, nor Others
could discern: But now, by this Ordinance, the Lord has Satisfied and driven
away my Fears. I look on my Entrance into the Church of Christ here, as a
Resemblance and Forerunner, of my Entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven among
the Saints there. And though I know, that Hypocrites are, and may be received
into the Bosom of the Church, yet I am willing the Lord should try me, and mend
me, and by this Means, He has Sealed it unto me, that I am not One of them.
And thus, a Fortnight almost before her Death, unto her Departure, in the midst
of most bitter Afflictions and anguishes, her Peace continued.

I return to the Temple. May this Church, be such a Temple; Then, as there were
Cherubims on the Walls of the Temple, the very Angels of GOD, will take
Pleasure, to Behold you, to Befriend you.

Yea, Then, The Glorious LORD Himself, will afford a most gracious Presence of
His unto You. And, Lord, If thou will be here, we shall not Dye; nor shall the
Souls of our Children Dye!

The Name of this Church will be, Jehovah Shammah, THE LORD IS THERE.

A Copy of the COVENANT, WITH which the CHURCH was Gathered.
Inserted, as a Perpetual MONITOR of the Flock, to be Steadfast in the Covenant.
And, In Perpetuam rei Memoriam.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, apprehending our selves Called of GOD
to Join together in Church Communion: (acknowledging our Unworthiness of Such a
Privilege, and our Inability to keep Covenant with GOD, or to perform any
Spiritual Duty, unless Christ shall enable us there-unto:) In Humble Dependence
on Free Grace for Divine Assistance and Acceptance; We Do in the Name of CHRIST
JESUS our LORD, freely Covenant and Bind our Selves Solemnly, in the Presence
of GOD Himself; His Holy Angels, and all His Servants here present, To Serve
the GOD whose Name Alone is JEHOVAH, FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, the Only True
and Living GOD, Cleaving to Him as our Chief Good; and unto our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, as our only Savior, Prophet, Priest, and King of our Souls, in a Way
of Gospel Obedience: Avouching the LORD to be our GOD, and the GOD of our
Children, whom we Give unto Him; counting it as an High Favor, that the LORD
will accept of us and our Children with us to be His People. We do also Give
our Selves One unto Another in the LORD, Covenanting to Walk together as a
Church of CHRIST in all the Ways of His Worship, according to the Holy Rules of
His Word; Promising in Brotherly Love faithfully to Watch over one another
Souls, and to Submit our Selves to the Discipline and Power of CHRIST in His
Church; and duly to attend the Seals and Censures, or what ever Ordinances
CHRIST has Commanded to be Observed by His People, so far as the LORD by His
Word and Spirit has or shall Reveal unto us, to be our Duty: Beseeching the
LORD to Own us for His People, and to Delight to Dwell in the midst of us.

And that we may Keep our Covenants with GOD, We Desire to Deny our Selves, and
to Depend wholly on the Free Mercy of GOD, and upon the Merits of JESUS CHRIST;
and wherein we shall fail, to Wait on Him for Pardon through His Name,
Beseeching the LORD to Own us as a CHURCH OF CHRIST, and to Delight to Abide in
the midst of us.

FINIS.

