The NECESSITY OF A Speedy and Thorough Reformation, As it was Discoursed In a
SERMON, Preached before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL,
and Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England: On
May 25. 1709.

Which was the Day for ELECTION Of Her Majesty's COUNCIL for that Province.

By GRINDAL RAWSON; A.M. and Pastor of a Church of Christ in Mendon.

Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine* heart from Wickedness, that thou may^^ be
saved: How long shall thy vain ^^ought^ (...) with^^^ thee? Amos 5 4. For thus
says the Lord to the House of Israel Seek ye me, and ye shall live. Hos. 14.
9. Who is Wise and he shall understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are Right, and the just shall walk in them but
the Transgressors shall fall therein. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Benj.
Eliot, Sold at his Shop at the Head of King Street. 1709.

PUblished at the Desire of the House of Representatives.

John Clark, Speaker.
Boston, May 26th. 1709.
A SERMON Preached at the ELECTION, May 25. 1709.
Jeremiah XIII. 16. Give Glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness,
and before your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.
JEREMIAH was One of those Many Prophets, whom God because he had Compassion on
his People and Dewlling Place, sent to his People Israel grown very Corrupt and
Degenerate, to discover their sinful Miscarriages to them, and to urge the
Reformation of them, as a means of preventing those fearful Desolations which
would otherwise overtake them (...) Chron. 36^^^. As his Name, Jeremiah
signifies, The Exaltation of the Lord, So he takes frequent occasion,
throughout his Sermons to them, to lay before them an Heart-affecting discovery
of the Glorious dispensations of God's Covenant Grace, Mercy, Truth and
Faithfulness toward them; and to represent to them their abominable
transgressions, base, and more than brutish regardlessness of the merciful
conduct of God's Providence toward them their slighting, despising, and
trampling under foot the repeated Act^ of his favor and kindness, persisting,
not withstanding all Warnings, Admonitions and Judgments, spent in vain upon
them, in an immorigerous disobedient rebellious and incorrigible frame,
proceeding still from worse to worse, hating to be Reformed and refusing to
turn unto God, from whom they had so deeply revolted; upon the account whereof,
in Obedience to hi^ Lord and Masters Command, he is enforced to Menace them
with, and to denounce against them the final and fatal Doom, God had determined
upon them; The destruction of their Temple, and City, the dissolution of their
Ecclesiastical, and Civil Polity, the whole issuing in a Miserable and Shameful
Captivity, for Seventy years together, the deserved fruit of their
incorrigible, and incurable impieties.

The last thing mentioned is the great business the Prophat insists on in this
Thirteenth Chapter. The whole Sum of his Excellent Sermon herein contained, may
be reduced unto three heads.

I. He threa^^ns Judah and Jerusalem with a fearful destruction and doom, which
would put an end to those Probatory Methods, God had for a long season been
using with them; from the 1 st. to the 15 th. v.

II. He earnestly advises, and importunes them, by a speedy Repentance and
Reformation; the only thing ^^at would Effect it, to prevent and divert the
hideous S^^^m, of Wrath impending and hanging over their heads, and ^eady to
break forth upon them; from v. 15. to 22.

III. He stands up in the Vindication of the Spotless, and untainted
Righteousness of God, Assuring them, they had no reason in the World to dispute
the case with God, or to look upon it an unreasonable or unjust thing, for him
to threaten them with such a Judgment, as would put a period to the time of
their trial and probation, during the whole of which, all Methods of Grace and
Favor, all lesser, and lighter Strokes of divine Judgments, had proved
ineffectual to win them over to a Sense of Duty, and to (...) them from their
Sinful and Abominable Courses, to which alone, not to a want of Grace, Mercy,
Truth, or Faithfulness in God, not only all former heats of God's anger they
had f^lt, or were still under the Effects, and Tokens of, but also this present
threatened destruction were to be reputed as wholly owing: from v. 22. ^d (...).

The Destruction the Prophet in God's Name ^heatens this People with, he is
commanded to Exhibit to them by two Types or Emblem^.

The first Type is that of A Li^^^n Girdle, which he is Commanded to get, and
put upon his Loins; and some time after to hide in the Hole of a Rock, by the
River Eu^^rates; Many days after this, he is Commanded to go to Eu^^^rates to
take the Girdle thence. The Prophet performs the Enjoined Service, whether
really, only Visionally ^s not determined; but whether the one way or the
other^ it comes to one; the Girdle he finds Marred and Sp^yled and good for
nothing: this we have from the 1. to the ^. v-Jeremiah receives from God
himself the Explication of the Type, with a Commission to declare both the
Type, and its Explication to the People* they must be instructed that God's
design by this Type or Emblem, was to le^^ the (...) know, that God had put a
Special Honor and Respect upon them; the like he had not done to any Nation;
he had taken them into Covenant with himself; they were made a People hear to
God, no wonder then if he Expect Honor and Service from them. They were a
People whom God had formed for Himself, and therefore ought to have been for a
Name, Praise and Glory to him; but they failed his just Expectation, answered
not his design. He is therefore resolved to pluck them from his L^ins, and
suffer them to consume and ^ot, and become as that Marred Girdle which was
rendered wholly Useless and Unserviceable: from v. 8. ^d 12. v.

The second Type is that of Bottles filled with Wine. This the Prophet is
ordered to propound to them, v. 12. Their Sensual Lusts had no small hand in
pulling down Ruin and Destruction upon them. They were a People who loved
^^ag^ons of Wine, H^^. 3. (...). Those were the best Prophets, in their Esteem,
who would Prophecy to them of Wine, and Strong Drink, Mica^ 2. 11. Our Prophet
is therefore commanded to tell them, that God had prepared Bottles for them;
Bottles* every-of which, too, should be filled with Wine. What News could be
more pleasing to the Drunkard than this? But alas, the Wine would not be
grateful to their Palate; It would be wine of Astonishment and Confusion; all
Ranks, Orders and Degrees among them, from him that S^t on the Throne, to the
meanest Inhabitant in the Kingdom, must drink of it, and feel the fatal and
ruining, and intoxicating consequences of it. The destroying Judgments of
Heaven to be Executed upon them by the Caldeans, that hasty, and bitter Nation;
this was the Wine, They themselves the Bottles to be filled with it; Bottles
that must be broken, and dashed in pieces* by the hands of divine and righteous
Vengeance v. 12, 13, 14.

The destruction of this People, we see, is resolved upon, and, in Gods Name,
peremptorily denounced; but because in all such threatenings there is a
Condition to be understood. i. e. Unless Sinners do Repent, and Turn from the
Evil of their ways, Jer. 18 7, 8. Therefore the Prophet, in the Words of our
Text, Subjoyns a Serious and Pathetical Exhortation to stir them up, and
quicken them to Confession of, Humiliation for, and to a Speedy Reformation of
all the God provoking Evils, in the midst of them, as the only means to divert
the fatal Ruin which would otherwise overwhelm them.

Give Glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your
feet stumble on the dark Mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it
into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

In the Words; which I shall not stand upon a Critical Analysis of, Two things
may be briefly Observed.

I. An Exhortation. Give Glory to the Lord, and c. By their giving Glory to the
Lord, the Prophet intends their free and full Confession, and Sincere bewailing
all their Sins, and all the fearful Aggravations attending them, their
Repenting of and Turning from all their Iniquities. A bare Confession of Sin,
without hearty Sorrow, Repentance, and utmost endeavor to Return and Forsake
it, will stand the Sinner in little stead, and will not turn to his advantage:
Prove. 28. 13. He that Covers his Sins shall not prospe^, but whose
confesses, and forsakes them, shall have Mercy.

II. The Illustration of the Exhortation. Diverse things claim to be considered
here; As*

I. The Person Exhorting; The Prophet Jeremiah. God's Prophets and Ministers
must denounce the Judgments of Heaven, against Heaven daring and offending
Sinners. They must cry aloud, and not spare, lift up their Voices like
Trumpets, and show the Lords People their transgressions, and the House of
Jacob their Sins, Isa. 58. 1. A neglect herein, would argue them of
Unfaithfulness to God, and of falseness to their own Souls; and would bring
upon them the guilt of the Blood of the Souls of others, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8. But
yet it becomes them to manage this Service, in the most Affectionate and
Winning way and manner imaginable. They should endeavor to make Sinners
sensible, that although they must out of Faithfulness to God, and their precious
Souls, denounce the Judgments of God against them, yet they are far from
desiring the woeful day. It would be the greatest Joy, Pleasure, and
Satisfaction to them in the World, might they be made Instrumental to promote
their Repentance and Reformation, whereby the anger of God might be appeased,
and the final Execution of threatened Judgments diverted.

II. The Persons concerned in the Exhortation. All Ranks, Orders and Degrees of
Men among them. Their Kings, Priests, Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, v. 13. All had been guilty of Provoking God to displeasure, and
therefore it was requisite they should All joy^ in that necessary duty of
Confessing* Bewailing, Repenting, and Reforming of their Sins, whereby Gods
anger might be Averted, and their final doom Prevented.

III. The Arguments by which the Exhortation is pressed upon them.

I. God was still their God. They might look upon, acknowledge, and plead with
God, as a God yet theirs by Covenant. Give Glory to the Lord your God. O
astonishing and amazing Consideration! O the inconcievable Depths of Covenant
Mercy! will God own a Covenant Relation to such a fearful degenerate People? A
People whose deeds had over-passed the deeds of the wicked, Jer 5. 28. A People
who had forsaken the fountain of Living Waters, Jer. 2. 13. A Sottish and
Foolish People, who were only wise to do Evil, but to do good had no
understanding, Jer. 4. ^2. A People that were become Brass and Iron, grievous
Revolters and Backsliders, Jer. 6. 28. A People slidden back by a perpetual
backsliding, that held fast deceit, and refused to return, Jer. 8, 5. O the
surprising Charms of such an heart affecting and melting Consideration! And
this, doubtless our Prophet had in his Eye. His mentioning of this
Consideration, was with design to insinuate the Obligation deriving from it.
God is as yet your God, and would you have him to continue such; You must then
Repent of your Sins, Reform your Evil Ways, humble your selves under his high
and mighty Hand* Live and Walk in all manner of Obedience to his Holy and
Righteous commands; In which way alone you may Expect to have the blessings of
the Everlasting Covenant continued and secured to you, and the present Storm of
impending wrath diverted from you.

II. Though the Sentence was pronounced, yet the Execution was respited. Before
^e cause darkness and before your feet stumble on the dark Mountains. q. d.
Dark dispensations you are threatened with. A dark and black day is hastening
on you; it is coming, it is coming apace, but through the wonderful and
astonishing Patience of God it is not yet come; Nothing can prevent its coming
but your Repentance, and Reformation. Set about this work therefore with all
imaginable speed, for although it be not yet too late, you know not how soon it
may. This argument is the same with that the Prophet Zephaniah used with his
People: Zeph, 2. 1, 2. Gather your selves together, gather your selves
together, O Nation not desired. Before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the Chaff, before the f^erce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lords Anger come upon you. And this day he tells them, as our
Prophet here, would be a day of Darkness and Gloominess, a day of Clouds and
thick darkness, Zeph. 1. 15.

III. It would be a Vain thing for them to hope, this duty neglected, that they
should ever emerge out of their present Evil Circumstances, or escape the
present threatened Storm of Wrath coming upon them. Their false Prophets,
indeed, flattered them to presume and lot upon this, and they were but too
ready to hug and embrace the deception. But he leaves them to consider what a
terrible aggravation of their approaching destruction it would be, to find, as
assuredly they would, were not his advice complied with; all such their
delusive and ill grounded presumptions, and expectations, issue in fearful
frustrations* and astonishing disappointments. This is the purport of that
expression in our Text; And while ye ^ook for Light, ^e turn it into the Shadow
of death, and make it gross darkness.

Our way is now cleared to a very weighty and awakening,

DOCTRINE It is the high concernment of all Orders of Men, among a Professing
People, with whom God has been long, to little purpose, pleading a
Controversy, and who on that account have reason to expect more terrible
out-breakings of divine Wrath upon them; to endeavor, in their several
Capacities, A Speedy and thorough REFORMATION of all GOD-Provoking Evils in the
midst of them.

This People to whom our Prophet mins^tred, were a People upon whom the Signs
and ^okens of Gods wrath were very discernable, God had been for a long time
pleading a Controversy with them: He had melted and tried them in many a
Furnace, and yet their dross was not purged away; The Judgments God had spent
upon them were to little purpose: They continued a Stubborn Rebellious and
Disobedient People. The Prophet assures them their abiding unreformed under the
reiterated Strokes of divine displeasure, by which God had been Essaying their
Amendment and Recovery, out of their Sinful State and Condition, was
displeasing to God, and would be of the last disadvantage to themselves: for
this God would make Jerusalem heaps, A den of dragons, their Cities should
become desolate, and without Inhabitant; for this God would feed them with
Wormwood, and give them the water of Gall to drink, Jer. 9 11, 15. He would
dash them one against another, Even the Fathers, and the Sons together, he
would not pity, nor spare, nor have Mercy, but destroy them, Chap. 13, 14. v.
And yet he improves these severe threatenings, and denunciations as a Stock
suitable, and proper enough to graff this Serious and Awakening Exhortation
unto Speedy Repentance* and Reformation upon, as being the only way and means
left to them, by which they might prevent the more terrible out-breakings of
divine Vengeance, with the which they were menaced.

But I come to a more distinct Consideration of the Doctrine, in Four
Propositions.

I. PROPOSITION.
GOD Sometimes has, and for a long time pleads a Controversy with a Professing
People. Three Conclusions will give us what may be needful to be spoken on this
head.

I. Concl. GOD Sometimes has a Controversy with a Professing People.

It is a Singular favor of God unto any People, to bring them near, and take
them into a Visible Covenant Relation with himself. A favor, which a People
are as far from meriting and deserving* as they are of improving and observing
with due thankfulness, and proper returns of gratitude. It is by his Covenant
that God makes over himself to a People, and undertakes to be their God, and
the God of their Children after them. It Is this makes an Eternal God to become
their Refuge* and puts everlasting arms underneath them. Hither is owing, and
to be referred the Lords revealing, making known, and preserving to a People
the gracious and glorious discoveries of his will, relating to the way wherein
they may expect all outward, spiritual and eternal blessings* according to the
terms and conditions of the Everlasting Covenant, ratified and confirmed in
Christ, the Great and Alsufficient Mediator of it. It is because God is a God
in Covenant with a People, that he vouchsa^es to them the enjoyment of his
Word, Worship, Ordinances and Institutions; the whole of the means of Grace,
the which God, by his Spirit, is pleased to bless unto the Conviction,
Conversion, and Regeneration of Souls* in order to their fellowship with Him,
and Enjoyment of him, both in a State of Grace, and Glory. Well therefore might
the holy Moses break forth into that rapturous Exclamation, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy
art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O People Saved by the Lord, the
shield of the help, and who is the Sword of thy Excellency! But as the
Privileges of a People, who are in Covenant with God, are confessedly, and
inexpressibly great, so also are their Duties and Obligations. Such a People
are under Sacred and inviolable Engagements to Love, Fear, Serve, Worship,
Believe in, rely and depend on, and walk before God in all the ways of the
Covenant. Thus we find God stating the Case betwixt himself, and his Covenant
People Israel: Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13 And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to
Love him, and to Serve the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul; to keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command
thee this Day for thy Good. A Covenant People are not left at their Liberty,
whether they will Love, Fear, Serve and Obey the Voice of God in his Commands,
or not. They are under the highest, and most awful Obligations imaginable to
the whole of Covenant duty; not only from Gods express Command and Precept, who
is their King, Lord, and Lawgiver; but also, by virtue of their own Professed
Subjection unto God, which is absolutely necessary in order to their
maintaining a well grounded hope, and expectation of receiving from God the
benefits, and blessings of the Covenant. The whole of this is well expressed by
Moses in that Pathetical Address to Israel, Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18, 19. This day
the Lord thy God has Commanded Thee to do these Statutes, and Judgments: Thou
shall therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy Soul.
Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God; and to walk in his ways,
and to keep his Statutes, and Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken
unto his Voice. And *the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
People, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments: And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made, in
Praise, and in Name, and in Honor, and that thou may be an holy People unto
the Lord thy God as he has spoken. They are therefore most Solemnly cautioned
to take heed to themselves, and beware, left they should forget and forsake the
Lord, his Worship, Fear and Service; because by this means they would assuredly
forfeit all those desirable blessings, which a course of Obedience would crown
them with, and pull down upon themselves the just rebukes, and terrible
revenges of Heaven Deuteronomy 28. 15, ad ^inem. Both of these the holy Moses,
excellently represents to Israel, as a means to engage unto a diligent
discharge of Covenant duties. Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 16, 17, 18. See, I have set before
thee this day, life and good, and death and evil: In that I Command thee this
day, to Love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
Commandments, his Statutes, and his Judgments, that thou may live and
multiply; and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the Land whither thou go^st
to possess it. But if thine heart turn away, so that thou will not^ hear, but
shall ^e drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; I denounce unto
you this day that ye shall surely perish, etc. Does God then take a People into
Covenant with himself? Are such a People under Obligations to Serve him? Is he
graciously pleased to allow them all just and due encouragement to allure and
bind them to his Service? Has he been wanting to caution, and antidote them
against a forgetfulness of him, and the duties they owe him? Has he plainly
assured them what fearful Calamities a course of disobedience will bring upon
them? Surely then if they rebelliously renounce the fealty and homage they owe
to God, wickedly withdraw themselves from his Reasonable Service, abandon
themselves to those base and vile Practices, which are the abominable things
his Soul hates, he has just reason to resent the wrong and injury done Him, to
controvert with and testify against them that their sinful ways are highly
displeasing to him; and altogether unanswerable to the Obligations he has laid
upon them But this is sometime the state of the case betwixt God and his
Covenant People. It was so with respect to that People of whom we read, Judge.
2. 11, 12. And the Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
served B^alim: And they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, which brought
them out of the Land of Egypt, and followed other gods of the People that were
round about them, and bowed themselves to them, and provoked the Lord to anger.
This was the ground of the Lords Controversy with them, a Controversy pleaded
to the astonishment of themselves, and the Nations round about them. And this
brings us to the,

II. Concl. When God has a Controversy with a People ^e will Plead it with
them. While a Professing people do walk with God in the ways of the Covenant,
they may expect to be ^ettled and continued under dispensations of Grace and
Mercy; God will be with and for them so long as they are with and for him: But
if they neglect to express a due regard and deference to his holy and righteous
Commands, which they ought to observe as the only Rule, and proper Measure of
their whole behavior and deportment toward him, they have all the reason in
the World to conclude that God will take notice of it, and soon make them
sensible by the Effects of his just displeasure, that he is a God of knowledge,
and that by him actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3. That his eyes behold, and his
eye*lids try the Children of Men, Psalm. 11. 4. This is the purport of that
Address of the Prophet Azariah to King Asa: a Chron. 15. 2. The Lord ^s with
you while ye are with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you, but if
ye forsake him, he will forsake you. When Sin abounds among a Professing
People, they may not think that God will wink at it; or suffer them to persist
therein without a sufficient discovery of the displeasure he concieves at it;
he will let them know he resents the injury, and will plead with them for it,
and lay open his controversy before them in all the parts and pleas of it. Thus
the Prophet assured that People: Isai 3* 13, 14. The Lord stands up to plead,
and stands to judge the People: He will enter into judgment with the ancients
of his People. It Is a Metaphor taken from Persons that rise up, and stand
before a Judge, while they are pleading their controversy, endeavoring to make
the best of their ^^use. The Lord declares he is not in the least unwilling to
have an Hearing, and refuses not to stand a Trial, no, he is earnestly
desirous of it, and makes them the Offer: Isa 43. 26. Put me in remembrance,
Let us plead together, declare thou that thou may be justified. God then
will plead his Controversy with his People, and there are two ways, especially,
by which he pleads it.

I. By His Word. Not by an audible voice from Heaven, but by his word in the
Mouths of his holy Ambassadors whom for this End, as well as others* he
delegates, and sends to them. Upon this Errand the Prophets of old were sent,
'Twas their business and duty to carry the Lords Messages to his People, to
acquaint them that the Lord knew, and was angry with them for their Sins. God
gives them the State of the case betwixt Himself and his People, Commissions
and Commands them to tell them of it, and to let them know who it was that sent
them; they must read their Commission, and Preface all their addresses to them
with ^, Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 2. 3, 4. Son of Man, I send thee to the
Children of Israel, to a Rebellious Nation, that has rebelled against me: they
and their Fathers have transgressed against me, even to this day: for they are
impudent Children and stiff hearted, I do send Thee unto them, and thou shall
say unto them* Thus says the Lord God. Go they must for no excuse will be
allowed, Jer. 1. 7. Thou shall go to all that I shall send Thee, and whatsoever
I command Thee, Thou shall speak. Go they did; And with what a Lofty and
Majestic Style, with what a becoming Gravity and grandeur of Spirit, are they
represented to us in the Sacred story of the Church, discharging the imposed
Task, standing up and appearing as Advocates to plead the cause of their
Glorious and Injured Lord and Master? A Professing people, by turning their
backs upon God, by relinquishing his Worship, Fear and Service, do cast an
aspersion upon God. Will you observe their appearance in his Vindication? Jer.
2 4 ad 10. ver. Hear ye the Word of the Lord O House of Jacob, and all the
Families of the House of Israel: Thus says the Lord, What Iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
Vanity, and are become vain? etc. After this manner the Prophet Micah, by Gods
express Command, contends with Israel. Micah 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. Hear ye O Mountains
the Lords Controversy, and ye strong Foundations of the Earth: for the Lord
has a Controversy with his People, and ^e will plead with Israel: O my People,
what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against
me, for I brought Thee, etc. That ye may know the Righteousness of the Lord.
Will they suffer the merciful Conduct of Gods Providence toward his People, to
be loaded and blemish't with unworthy Imputations? No surely, They will tell
such a People, that if Israel is become a Servant, if he be treated as an
home-born Slave, if his Land be laid wast, and his Cities burned without
Inhabitan; God is not to be blamed, They must thank themselves for it, who had
procured, and hastened such Judgments upon themselves, by their forsaking the
Lord their God, when he led them by the way. Jer. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17. Must they
in pleading God's Controversy with a degenerate People lay open, and expose
before them their sinful Rebellions, and Transgressions, with all the
aggravations they are attended with? See their Commission for it. Isa. 58. 1.
Cry aloud, spare not, li^t up thy voice like a Trumpet, show my People their
transgressions, and the house of J^cob their Sins. A Commission executed by
them with an undaunted boldness, with a freedom, and intrepidity of Soul well
becoming the Ambassadors of that God who rules over all, unto whose Just and
Sovereign Empire, the mightiest Monarchs, as well as their meanest Peasants do
owe an universal Regard and Deference. Isa. 1. 4, 6. Micah 3. 8. ad 12. Jer. 5.
7, 8, and 7. 9, 10, 12. and 9 2. ^d 7. Ezekiel. ^2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Must they
while managing the Lords Controversy with his People, denounce against them the
terrible and dreadful Judgments of Heaven, as a means to provoke them to a
sense of their duty, and deter them from a persistance in their evil courses?
With what a remarkable Faithfulness is the order attended! Isa. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. Let us hear its Thunders. Zeph. 1. 2, 3. I will ^tterly consume all things
from off the Land, says the Lord: I will consume Man and Beast, I will consume
the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Fishes of the Sea, and the stumbling*blocks
with the Wicked, and will cut off Man from off the Land says the Lord. Once
more; Must they notwithstanding their menacing a degenerate People with Wrath
and Vengeance, endeavoring to make them sensible that God is yet treatable,
and upon their Repentance, and Reformation, ready to recieve and embrace them
in the Arms of his Mercy? with what a pressing importunity, and sweetness of
Address are such counsels, and cautions urged upon them? Zeph. 2, 1, 2, 3. Jer.
4 1. If thou will return O Israel, says the Lord, return unto me, and if thou will put away thi^^ abominations ^ut of my sight, then shall thou not remove.
The same counsel and advice we find repeated, and that after a mo^^solemn
denunciation of wrath and judgment, Jer. 26.(...) The Lord has sent me to
Prophecy, against this house and against this city, all the words that ye have
heard. Therefore now amend your ways, and your doings, and obey the Voice of
the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he has
pronounced against you. It Is true, God has long since desisted the calling
forth, and improvement of persons in such an extraordinary way and manner; but
the methods used by them in pleading the Lords controversy with a professing
People, are transferred by him into the circumstances of the Gospel Ministry,
whose work it is as wise Stewards of the Mysteries of God, to give unto all
their portion in Season; to observe the way, frame, temper and conversations of
all that are under their care and inspection, and to hand forth to them, the
counsels and advices which their condition, and necessities require. Thus P^ul
instructs his Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season and
out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.
For them to decline the pleading Gods controversy with a Sinful People, or to
neglect a thorough and impartial discovery of his mind and will to them in the
Public dispensations of the word, is to falsify their trust, betray the cause
of God, and to render themselves guilty of base unfaithfulness to God and Man.

II. By his Rod: By judicial strokes and dispensations. When the voice of Gods
Word is despised, and slighted by a Sinful People, He then takes his Rod into
his hands, and they shall feel the Effects of his threatened Corrections. What
hope can they have if it should be otherwise? The strength of Israel will not
lie, nor repent, ^e is not a Man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15. 29. Thus God
pleaded his controversy with his People Israel: and in such away and manner may
a degenerate professing People, expect God will plead his controversy with
them. The like Sins, will in all probability, expose them to like judgments*
Judgments on every side, and of every sort will break in upon, and overtake
them, and extort that confession from them, which Israel uttered in the day of
Gods Visitations, Lam. 3. 14. The yo^e of my transgressions in bound by his
hands* they are (...) and (...) my neck, The Lord has accomplished his ^ury,
he has poured out his fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it
has devoured the foundations thereof, Lam. 4. 11. And indeed what other way
has God left, or what otherwise can he do for his People? Jer. 9 7. Therefore
thus says the Lord of (...), I will melt them and try them, for how shall I do
for the daughter of my People?

III. Concl. GOD insists upon his Controversy with his People, and continues to
plead it for a long time. When God enters the lists with his declining People,
he continues to disceptate with them, until he bring the quarrel of his
Covenant to an issue. This God does not, has not been wont to do speedily; He
has ever taken a Considerable time to do it in. The Posterity of Seth before
the Flood, in which the Line of the Church continued, were grown
Extraordinarily Sinful and Degenerate: Thus we read, Genesis 6. 5. And God saw the
Iniquity of Man was great in the Earth; Yet the Controversy God pleaded with
them lasted no less than One hundred and Twenty years, v. 3. How long did God
plead with his Israel, by a continued Series of Mercies and Judgments, before
he brought the Quarrel of the Covenant to an issue, and put an End to it by the
Babylonish Captivity? And does not this course excellently serve to illustrate
the Covenant, Grace and Mercy of God to his People? He delights in Mercy, and
is the inexhaustible fountain of Grace and Goodness: His Grace and Mercy are
Essential Properties of his Nature, and no small part of the Letters of his
Name. The long-suffering and patience God expresses toward his People, whilst
he is pleading his Controversy with them, do abundantly demonstrate him to be
Merciful and full of Compassion. It is indeed a part of his Covenant to visit
their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes: But yet when
he proceeds to this necessary piece of discipline, he delights to represent
himself under the most agreeable Character of a Tender hearted Parent, who
though he sometimes is forced to hearden his heart, and stop his ears against
^he Cries of his rebellious Children, knowing there is a folly in them, which
must be driven out by the rod of Correction; yet at another time, throws the
assumed rod out of his hands, being overcome by the erresistible force of his
bowel Compassions. Thus the case is represented, Hos. 11. 8, 9. and Psalm. 78.
38, 39. It is his long-suffering Grace and Mercy that puts him to wait upon his
People, and to see how they will behave themselves under, and what impressions
and dispositions the rod will work upon them. Thus we r^ad, Jer. 8. 6. I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Besides, the longer God waits upon and is
pleading the quarrel of his Covenant with his People, tho more, if they
continue impeditent and unreformed, will they ripen themselves for the ruin
which the putting a final issue to it will bring upon them. God waits on those
who are not in Covenant with him, until they are ripe for ruin. Gen, 15. 16.
The Iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. Much more will he do thus by
those whom he has taken near to himself. And to shut up this Conclusion, will
not this course render a People more abundantly ine^cusable, when a period
shall be put to the date of divine Patience, and Forbearance; and Judgment to
the uttermost is brought upon them, upon whom God has been so long waiting, and
with whom he has been using in the Course of his holy Providence all proper
means to ^eclaim, and reduce them to a sense of their duty, without gaining the
Expected point upon them? Jer. 25. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, v.

II. PROPOSITION.
The Controversy GOD pleads with a Professing People is, many times to little
Purpose. Although God plead with them, and draw out his controversy to an
extraordinary length, endeavor to win them by seasonable appearances for them
in a way of Sovereign and undeserved kindness, to drive them to Repentance, by
the severe Methods of his judicial dispensations, yet all is to no purpose;
they continue still an Imm^rigerous and rebellious People; and discover the
formidable power of that native Venom which broods in their hearts, over
which, nothing less than the irresistible, and unconquerable Grace of God can
triumph, and make a conquest. Thus God complains of his Israel, Hos. 7. 1. When
I would have ^ealed Israel, then the iniquity of Ep^raim was discovered, and
the wickedness of Samaria. The repeated Trials God has i^ th^s way, been
making upon his People, have Served for the most part to no other purpose, than
to give him the just occasion of Summoning the Heavens and the Earth to hear
and bear witness of his bitter Complaint against his Rebellious Children, whom
he had nourished, and brought up, dandled on the knee of his Merciful
Providence, frequently chastened with the rod of Affliction, that no means to
compass their reduction might be wanting; Children notwithstanding less
knowing, tractable and considerate than the brutish Ox, or stupid Ass. This is
the Language of that querulous Expostulation, Isa. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. It Is
possible, whilst the Correcting Rod lies heavy on them, we may find them
pretending to humble themselves, to turn to him that smites them, asking
forgiveness, and promising Amentment: but no sooner (...) the bitter smart
relax't, and the Judgment removed, but they are just the men they were before,
and make it appear that they flattered God with their Mouths, and lied to him
with their Tongues, Psalm. 78 35, 36, 37. This is the meaning of that Address:
Jer. 2 20. Of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy ^^nds, and thou
said I will not transgress, when upon every high (...), and under every green
tree, thou wanderest playing the (...). And what hope is there it should be
otherwise with a degenerate People, (unless God pour out upon them the
Effectual and Sovereign Grace of the Covenant) whose hearts are gone from God,
and who by a constant Course and Custom of Sinning, have brought themselves
under Spiritual Plagues and Judgments, and given their unbridled lusts such a
powerful Sway, and unconquerable Empire over them. Thus the Prophet tells that
People* Jer, 13. (...) Can the Eth^opian change his skin, or the Leopard his
Spots? then may ye also d^ good, that are accustomed to do Evil.

III. PROPOSITION.
Where the Controversy GOD is pleading with a Professing People does not Effect
their Amendment, they have reason to expect more terrible out-breakings of the
divine Anger upon them. However it may fare with others, a Covenant People must
not expect to escape Severe Animadversions upon them, for their Sins; and as
^in increases among them, their miseries will increase and multiply. This
truth stands upon a divine and unerring testimony; thus you find it expressed,
Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities. And if they will not take Gods Word
for it, they shall have his Oath, Amos 8. 7. The Lord has Sworn by the
Excellency of Jacob, Surely I will not forget any of their Works. No, no, A day
of reckoning will assuredly come, the Lord will adjust accounts with them, and
bring the whole to an even balance. Does He take pains by lesser, and lighter
Judgments, to reform and bring them back to their duty? And will not these
Effect the Errand they are sent upon? they have reason than to Expect the more
terrible Effects of his Wrath and Anger; for thus the threatening runs, Levit.
26. 18. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you
seven times for your Sins. And will not these Judgments procure their
Amendment? It follows next, Lev. 26. 23, 24 And if ye will not be Reformed by
these things, but will walk contrary unto me, than I will also walk* contrary
unto You, and will punish you yet seven times for your Sins. Is then the
Unreformedness of a Covenant People, under judicial dispensations provoking to
God? Are they, on this Score, threatened with severer dispensations of Anger and
Wrath? Does God want power to Execute the fierceness of his anger upon them? Is
he not faithful to his threatening as well as his promising Word? What then can
defend such a People from the heats of an anger that will burn to the lowest
Hell? What power can they find sufficient to bar the fatal Execution of that
Decisive Sentence, long since entered upon record against them? Jer. 15. 6, 7.
Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art gone backward, (though I have
endeavored to prick thee forward by my judgments) therefore will I stretch out
my hand against thee, and destroy thee; (...) weary with repenting. I will fan
them with a fan in the (...) of the Land: I will bereave them of Children. I
will destroy my People, since, they return not from their ways.

IV. PROPOSITION.
It is the high concernment of all Orders amongst a People, with wh^^^ the case
thus stands, in their several Stations and Capacities, to endeavor the Speedy
Reformation of the God provoking Evils in the midst of them. I shall briefly
propose a few things for the illustration of the Proposition.

1. Nothing less than such a Reformation will suffice to put an End to Gods
Controversy with such a People, and Secure them from justly expected and
deserved Judgments. It is true, God has given encouragement to a reforming
People, to hope and believe for his return to them in a way of Mercy and
Favor, and that he will repent him of the Evils he has threatened to bring
upon them. Jer. 18. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation,
and concerning a Kingdom to pull down, and destroy it; if that Nation against
whom I have pronounced turn from their Evils, I will repent of the Evil I
thought to do unto them. This duty God recommends unto, and urges upon a
degenerate People, threat'ned with the Effects of his sorest displeasure, Jer.
7. 3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, Amend your ways, and your
doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. For such a People God has
appeared in a way of Covenant Compassion, recovering them out of those depths
of Misery and distress into which, by their Sins, they have plunged themselves.
Judge. 10. 16. And they put away the strange gods from among them, and Served
the (...) was grieved for the miseries of Israel. But without such a
Reformation a Professing People have ^o reason ^o look for, or expect the
returns of Gods favor; he has threatened them, and will be as good as his
word, That if they walk contrary unto him, ^he will walk contrary unto them,
and continue them under the smarting Rod of divine Corrections, Levit, 26. 21.

2. When the Wrath of God has been poured out upon a People, and the more
terrible Out-breakings of it threatened, and justly Expected, they can never be
too speedy in their applications unto the only means of safety and security. In
no case can delays be supposed to breed, and bode greater hazard and danger.
For if the Reformation of every thing that is provoking to God amongst such a
People be not speedily pursued, whence can the neglect be supposed to flow, but
from a perverse resolvedness to persist in their Sinful Courses, and a wretched
insensibility of, and stupid unconcernedness about the miseries consequential
hereupon? And surely this cannot be imagined an Omen for good to them! The
Language of such a negligent People (for Actions Speak as well as Words) is
nothing less than a bold and daring challenge unto the Almighty to do his
worst; and informs the World, they are equally regardless of his frowns and
favors. What can the meaning of such an inadvertent conduct be but this, Let
Him make speed, and hasten his work that ^e may see it Isai. 5. 19? Will not
God then take up such a Resolution as this, As the fire devoureth the Stubble,
and the flame consumes the chaff, so their Root shall be rottenness, and their
blossoms go up as the dust, Isai. 5. 24.

3. All Orders of Men amongst such a People, should endeavor, in their several
Stations, and Capacities to promote this Reformation. For,

1. When God is pleading a Controversy with a degenerate People, all orders*
among them have reason enough to conclude, they have Some way or other
contributed toward it, and should there*upon take themselves concerned to
endeavor and put forward the Reformation, whereby the divine Anger may be
appeased. It is possible that those who lead a People may cause them to err,
and destroy the way of their paths, Isai. 3. 12. A culpable in-advertency in
them, a careless slackenning the reins of Government, may give a silent, and
powerful growth to those impieties which will cause the anger of the Lord to
smoke against a People. Their Secular Interest may possibly dispose them to
wink and connive at, or to be less active than is meet, for Persons in their
circumstances, in their appearances against and withstanding those corrupt
practices, which ripen a People for ruin and destruction. A burning Zeal in
them, for the Glory of God may be under too great damps and abatements. A
Spirit of fear, timorousness, and cowardice may, possibly, surprise and
indispose them to a vigourous and steady Execution of those Laws, by which bold
transgressors ought to be severely reflected on, that Others might hear, and
fear, and be discouraged from doing so wickedly. Whatever of this nature the
Rulers of a People may have to charge upon themselves, the consideration
thereof should doubtless be improved to invigorate their endeavor to pursue a
Reformation. Amongst the body of a degenerate People incentives to engage them
in the work of Reformation, can never be wanting, if the share they have had in
the Sins and Transgressions, which call for and demand it, be duly weighed and
considered. They will indubitably, upon their inquiry, find reason sufficient
to look upon themselves, as God accounts of them, A Sinful Nation, a People
laden with Iniquities. Cause they have to charge upon themselves, bold
transgressions against, and frequent violations of the wholesome Laws by which
their Conversations should be squared and ordered. Is it not the Custom of such
a People to neglect and despise the Orders and Calls of their Godly Rulers, to
Repent of and Reform their Immoralities? Are they not Arraigned for pulling
away the Shoulder, stopping their Ears, and making their hearts harder than the
Adamant and the nether Milestone, that they might not hear the Voice of God
speaking to them, by the Ministers of his Word, who are laboring their
Amendment and Reformation? Surely then it is their concernment to endeavor the
Reformation by which the heats of Gods anger may be allayed, and the returns of
his Favor and Mercy Secured?

2. It cannot be reasonably expected, that a Reformation will be produced
unless all Orders among a People engage in it* Godly Rulers should look upon it
their Place to lead the way, and go before the People in the Work of
Reformation; they should arise therefore, and be of good Courage, for the
matter belongs unto them, Ez^^ 9. 4. The Ruled amongst a People should
account it their duty, to follow the Encouraging Examples of their Godly
Rulers. When all Orders Observe their duty in this affair, there is matter of
hopeful Omen in it, that the work of Reformation will be carried on to Effect,
that the Lord will arise and have Mercy on his Zion, that the Set time to
favor her is come, Psalm. 102. 13.

3. All Orders of Men amongst a Professing People, have reason to expect a
proportionable Share and Allotment in the more terrible Effects of divine
Wrath, they are threatened with, unless a speedy Reformation divert the
impending Storm. And a right apprehension of their common danger should dispose
them to a joint and united Prosecution of it* This very Argument the Prophet
subjoyns to the Exhortation in our Text, Jer 13. 17. But if ye will not hear,
my Soul shall weep in secret places for your Pride, and mine Eye shall weep
sore and run down with Tears, because the Lords flock is carried away Captive.
He is commanded therefore to Say to the King and Queen, Humble your selves, sit
down, for your Principalities shall come down, even the Crown of your Glory.
Judah shall be carried away all of it, it shall be wholly carried away Captive,
ver. 18, 19. The Propositions being thus considered* I come to the,

APPLICATION.
1. The Doctrine discovers to us the reason why God is sometimes pleased, to
alter the course of his Providence toward a Professing People. If they be not
continued under the Sun shine of his favor; if ^e cease to act toward them in
such ways of kindness and goodness, as heretofore he has done; if Judgments
overtake them, and they fall under the visible Tokens, and Marks of his
displeasure; it is not because the Lord has le^^ off to be gracious, or is
unfaithful to, or unmindful of his Covenant; but because they have forsaken
him, and by their Sins exposed themselves to the just rebukes of Heaven: Thus
the Lord tells that People* Isai. ^9. 1, 2. The Lords hand is not s^^^tened
that it cannot Save, neither is his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But your
iniquities have separated between you and your God. and your Sins have ^id his
face from you, that he will not hear.

2. The Doctrine exposes the Sin and Folly of a Professing People in Forsaking
God, his Fear, Worship, and Service, and in giving themselves up to a way and
course of Disobedience to his holy and righteous commands. A Professing People
are under the most Sacred and indispensible Obligations to Love, Fear, Serve
and Worship God, and Obey the voice of all his Commandments, and have the
highest and greatest Encouragements imaginable, to dispose them to a discharge
of Covenant duty. They may promise themselves the enjoyment of Gods presence
and blessing, while they walk with him in the Commanded Path of Duty and
Obedience. But if they renounce the fealty and homage they owe him, will not
this open a fearful Gap for Miseries and Evils of all ^orts to break in upon,
and overwhelm them? And are they able to stand and stout it out against him?
can they ward off the blows of his furious hand, when he shall stretch it out
to lay hold on Judgment, and resist the impressions of his anger and
displeasure? Surely then it is their Sin and Folly to provoke and displease
him, since they cannot but be assured, that in so doing their own wickedness
will correct them, and their backslidings reprove them; and that God will
sooner or later, make them to know and see what an Evil thing and bitter it is,
that they have forsaken him; and that his fear has not been in them, Jer. 2. 19

3. The Doctrine gives us abundant reason to conclude it a matter of sad
thought, and awful consideration, when the Lord removes, by Death, many out of
every Order amongst a degenerate People, who were men well-qualified and
spirited to promote a work of Reformation. This is spoken of as a solemn token
of Gods anger and displeasure against a People, Isa. 3. 1. These are the
Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: and the removal of such is a
terrible Prognostic of fearful Calamities ready to break in upon a People.
When God intends to bring awful Judgments upon a People, he is wont to remove
such, whose earnest Prayers and Supplications would prevail to stay his hands,
and interrupt the course of his Judicial proceedings with them. What cause then
has New England of deep humiliation, and lamentation, from whom God has
removed so many of every Order, whose Abilities, Holiness, Zeal and
Faithfulness, together with their great interest in Heaven had rendered them
very choice, useful and desirable blessings? Time would fail me should I Essay
the Enumeration of all those, who deserve to be taken notice of under such a
Character. But yet it might be deservedly accounted piacular, not to make a
particular mention of those, Excellent and Eminent Persons, the Reverend Mr.
Samuel Torrey, and the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard, whose great multifarious
Services for God and this his People, as they ought never to be forgotten, so
can they never be duly remembered, without a just Tribute of Thankfulness to
God, who lent them so long unto us, and a becoming Sorrow of heart, that they
were so soon and at so critical a juncture removed from us. The year past has
called from us an Honorable, Useful, and Aged Counselor; and given us the
occasion of lamenting the Funeral of that Eminently holy, and aged Servant of
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Reverend Mr. John Higginson, by whom, many years
since (from the Place where I now stand) the Cause of God and this his
Wilderness People was so Judiciously stated and asserted. (...) New England how
wide are thy Breaches grown? Are they not Practicable enough, for a General and
irresistible Storm of Judgments to enter in upon Thee* But alas, alas for us,
how little are such awful strokes regretted, and laid to heart by us! And is
not this the more Ominous and Portenous, ^ith we have but too much reason to
conclude, God has taken away such Righteous ones from the Evil to come? Isai.
57. 1.

4. The Doctrine intimates to us that it is accounted a Singular Mercy of God,
and an Omen for good, when there are many in all Orders amongst a degenerate
People who are well qualified and spirited, to promote the Work of Reformation.
This is a Sign that God is not designed suddenly to break up house, and make
quick dispatch with them. Such will not only Mourn for, but resolvedly put to
an helping hand toward the Reformation of what ever is amiss amongst them.
Their Tears, Cares and Prayers and Assistances will be ever employed as a means
to stay the Lords hand, and to remove, as much as possibly they can, the known
Occasions of his anger and displeasure. When God designed to bring about the
Reformation of Israel, he advanced David to the Throne. This was the Godly man
whom God, in this respect, as well as others, set a part for himself, Psalm 4 3.
And you see the early Resolutions of that Excellent Person, Psalm. 75. 2, 4.
When I shall recieve the Congregation, I will judge uprightly, I said to the
^ools deal not Foolishly, and to the Wicked lift not up the horn. It was his
fixed resolve to Set no wicked thing before his Eyes, and to hate the work of
them that turned aside: Wicked Persons had no reason to expect any favor or
shelter from him, No, A froward heart, he was determined should depart from
him: The faithful in the Land whose Spirits had been discouraged, damp't and
cowed out, whilst a vile Person had been Exalted amongst them, might now
promise themselves and Expect all manner of Encouragement from him; for his
Eyes, he resolved, should be upon the faithful in the Land, that they might
dwell with him, and serve him. 'Twas by these he knew he should be assisted in
the Execution of the Noble design he had in his heart, to destroy all the
wicked out of the Land, and to cut them off from the City of the Lord, Psalm.
^01. per totum. Amongst the many things which offer a Melancholy prospect to
us, the consideration of this, that there are so many in Civil and Sacred
Order, and of the body of this declining People who are Persons of an Excellent
and Eminent Character, for practical Piety and Godliness, proposes to us
matter of singular Hope and Expectation. No doubt their care, and thoughts are
continually employed, in Studying and devising by what means, the true
interests of Religion may be subserved; this People recovered out of their
declining State, and the terrible outbreakings of the Divine Wrath averted from
us. What gratitudes and acknowledgments then, are there owing to God, on this
account, who has not permitted our condition to be such, That there should not
be a man left amongst us to stand in the Gap; or who might hopefully labor to
make up the breach?

5. The Doctrine calls upon all Orders of Men, to endeavor in their several
Stations and Capacities, a speedy Reformation of the God Provoking Evils
amongst us.

And,

First the Exhortation is Proposed to the Fathers of the Country, Political and
Spiritual.

1. Our Political Fathers are called upon to do all that lie^ in their power,
that this People, under their Conduct, may become a Reformed People. Can
encouragements be wanting ^o invigourate their utmost Application, unto an
affair of such grand and necessary importance? Are they not the keepers of both
Tables? Are they not armed with a Sufficiency of Power and Authority, to demand
and enforce the steady Observation of Holiness and Virtue? Should they not be a
Terror to Evil Works, and a Praise to those that do Well? Has not the Work of
Reformation a great dependence, under God, who has the hearts of all men in
his hands, upon their Courage, Prudence, Zeal, and Activity? We never read, in
Sacred, or Ecclesiastical Hystory, of any notable general Reformation amongst a
People, except the Magistrate did Countenance, and help it forward? Would Judah
have ever been Reformed if those Excellent Princes. Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
and Josiah had not bestowed their indefatigable care, and pains in producing
their Reformation? Most sure it is, that Religious and Reforming Magistrates
have all the reason in the World to expect, that their steady Engagement in a
Work so pleasing and grateful to Heaven, will secure to them the presence of a
Gracious, and Almighty God, and Entail his lasting blessing on them.

Should not many things be Essayed by the Civil Authority, toward the putting a
stop to the growth of those Immoralities, which will assuredly bring the
terrible Revenges of Heaven upon the People under their Conduct? Can they not
do much this way by being Exemplary to them in all manner of holy and
circumspect Conversation? Is it not to be hoped that their Religious Examples
will be attended with Potent Charms, and powerful Incentives? Will not the
Godly in the Land readily fall in, and comply with the Encouraging Precedent;
and Iniquity for shame stop her Mouth?

Should not Laws be Enacted for the Suppressing of Vice and Impiety? And if
Experience testifies the insufficiency of such as are already made to reach the
End intended by them, must not Others be Contrived and Established which will
offer a greater probability of Success? But will this answer the designs of
Reformation, if when all is done they be not duly, strictly, and impartially
Executed? To what End is the naked Sword in State born before the Magistrate,
but to signify his readiness to be a revenger, and to Execute Wrath upon him
that does Evil? Should not the Persons into whose hands the Executive Part of
the Law is betrusted, be Men of Prudence, Piety, Zeal and Courage, and should
not their attendance to their duty be Prudently looked into and observed? Will
not the Improvement of Persons of a contrary Temper and Character be altogether
disserviceable to the desired, and pleaded for Reformation? Ought not the Law
to be vigorously Urged and Executed, in which Provision is made for the Supply
of all Places, by a Learned Orthodox and Faithful Ministry, especially such as
have from the very first of the Settlement lived in a way of defi^^nce to
Gospel Order? Is it not necessary that every good thing be carefully cherished,
upheld, and promoted, and the things strengthened that are ready to dye?

May it, therefore Please your EXCELLENCY!

The Unerring Providence of GOD, and the favor of the best of QUEENS, have
placed your Excellency at the Helm of Government over this Province: You will
therefore SIR, Account it your Honor and Duty to resemble the Deity in all
acts of Piety and goodness; and to copy after the illustrious Example of Her
most Excellent Majesty, whose repeated PROCLAMATIONS against Vice, and
Immoralities, have abundantly convinced the World, that Her Majesty is at an
irreconcilable Enmity with every thing that has a tendency to draw down the
Wrath of an Almighty, and Sin hating GOD, on the Kingdoms and Plantations over
whom She Sways Her Imperial Scepter. GOD has adorned your Excellency with
admirable Accomplishments, and uncommon Talents: Your Excellency will give us
leave to expect, that they shall all be improved for the Glory and Honor of
God, and the Reformation of a People laboring under the just rebukes and
displeasure of Heaven, on the score of their Multiplied Transgressions and
Provocations.

Permit me SIR, to Observe, That your Excellencies very Honorable Father was
One of those Noble Patriots, under whose Religious and Auspicious Conduct were
laid the Foundations of our New England Heavens and Earth, I mean, their Sacred
and Civil Constitution, on which account, his Name is Worthy an Everlasting
Remembrance. It went well with that Generation, in whose stead is risen up
another Generation, who have in a great measure forsaken God, and Sinned away
much of his gracious Presence from them. How agreeable a thing will it be that
your Excellency by Powerful Example, and Proper Influence, on all who move
under you in a lower Sphere, should Endeavor the bringing back this People to
the Lord God of their Fathers? Thus doing God will be with own, bless and
prosper you; And your Excellencies Name will not only be hereby rendered dear
and honorable to the latest Posterity, but after, SIR, You have here Served
your Generation by the will of God, a safe Retreat will be Secured for you into
the Arms of Eternal Mercy.

AS for those Honorable persons that are, or may this day be Chosen to assist
his Excellency in Council; It is the earnest hope and expectation of those by
whom you are Chosen into that Post of Honor and Trust, and of all the
God-fearing Souls in the Province, that you will carefully intend and promote
the Speedy Reformation, of all that is provoking to God in the Land. Your
Honors are well acquainted with the Way, Humor, Frame, Temper, Temptations
and Provocations of this People, and will not be thereby discouraged from
attempting whatever is necessary to be done, for promoting a Work so desirable
and necessary. Whatever Oppositions, or Obstructions may lie in the way, the
Presence of God will easily remove, or help you to Surmount them. Will your
Honors then be pleased to Arise, and Buckle to the Work with a renewed
Application. God we trust, will own and crown your Endeavors with Success.
However it prove, your Honors will have comfort and Satisfaction in this, That
you have faithfully Endeavored the discharge of the trust Committed to you by
God and Man, and may be sure to obtain a Proportionable Reward.

THE Worthy Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, who have called me (the
unworthiest of all the Servants of the Lord in the Ministry) to Speak on such,
and so great an Occasion as this, will allow me the freedom of putting them in
mind, that they have a great Opportunity, Privilege and Advantage in their
hands, unto the doing of what is very considerable toward the promoting the
necessary Reformation, I am pleading for* You have the Privilege of Assisting,
at least, in the choice of those Worthy Persons, who are to be chosen to assist
his Excellency in Council, and to help manage the Affairs of the Public in
this Stormy and difficultly circumstanced Season; what care and conscience
ought you take that your Suffrages be given for those, who in the best of your
Judgment are duly qualified for so great a trust, and will be most likely to
address themselves, with an indefatigableness of Application, to the Opposing
and Discountenancing whatever is a ground of Gods Controversy with his People,
by whom you are betrusted. You will doubtless look upon it your duty and
concern, to consent unto the Laws which are yet necessary to be Made and
Enacted, for the Promoving and Securing the Religious; or Temporal Interests of
the Country. Your Prudence, Piety, Zeal for the Glory of God, and your
Country's good, are greatly relied on, and you will not fail to give signal
proofs and demonstrations of them. You forget not that the Country's Purse is
in your hands; you will be careful to Husband it to the best Advantage,
considering it is very low and reduced Circumstances; but yet will in no sort be
wanting to supply the Treasury, with what is necessary for the safety and
defense of the Country, and the honorable Support of the Government.

2. Here is a call to our Spiritual Fathers in the Churches* They will permit
One of the Meanest and Unworthiest of their Order to put them in mind, how
greatly they are concerned to do all they can to promove a Work of Reformation
amonst this People.

Reverend and Highly Esteemed: The Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd and
Bishop of Souls, has called us forth and set us apart to bear His Name before
this Generation of his People. We are under most Sacred, Solemn and Awful
Obligations unto a constant, careful, and conscionable improvement of all the
Talents and Abilities, the glorious head of Influences has furnished us with,
in order unto our Subserving their best and eternal interests. Our Endeavors
must not, and I trust, through Grace assisting, will not be wanting to lay before
them, plain, clear, full and awakening discoveries of the whole will of God
concerning them. Although we ought to acknowledge, with great Humility, and
Thankfulness the Lords Singular Mercy and Favor to us, in rendering us
Instrumental unto the Saving good of Many, through the Almighty Efficacy and
Influence, of his holy Spirit, that he has vouchsaf't to us so many Seals of
our Ministry, who truly fear, serve, and endeavor to glorify God by an holy,
useful, and Exemplary Conversation; Yet the dull, dead, careless, worldly,
sensual and inexemplary Conversations of many who make a Profession of
Godliness, the manifest Tokens of an Impenitent, irregenerate Spirit upon many
of the Standing and Uprising Generation; notwithstanding all Care and Pains
taken with them, to dispose them to a sense of their Eternal Concernments,
afford us matter of very trembling, and humbling consideration, and ought to
awaken us unto a Studious Thoughtfulness upon the properest Methods may be used
with them, by a blessing on which they may be rendered the glorious Instances
of Sparing and Saving Mercy. Great care must be taken that we do not give way
to discouragement: With a Sincere reliance on the Victorious Grace of God,
which alone is Sufficient to change and convert, the otherwise unconquerable,
hearts of Sinners. Let us resolve to persist in an Endeavor of making full
proof of our Ministry, Preaching the Word in Season and out of Season,
reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine: Mainly
insisting on those Truths, which tend to lay open the Nature and Necessity of
Conversion, and the danger of continuing in a Christless, and Impenitent State
and Condition. A due level must be taken at the Prevailing Sins and Vices of
the Times, and the present duty of them urged with a repeatedness of
inculcation. Alluring addresses are to be made unto Sinners, to invite them,
unto a forsaking the foolish, that so they may live; and a glorious Savior Set
before and offered to them, as the only way of obtaining Pardon, and
blessedness. We must never forget to be carrying our Flocks in the Arms of our
Faith and Prayers to the Merciful Throne; nor forbear to be wrestling with the
God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that ^e would pour out his
Spirit upon them, and attend the dispensations of the Word of his Grace, with a
divine blessing, and an irresistible Influence. An holy Discipline must be
constantly used, and improved upon the proper Occasions that call for it. Our
more private Personal Instructions, Exhortations, Cautions, Counsels. Warnings
and Admonitions, as Opportunity may be offered; would on a trial be found some
of the best Expedients, by which the designs of practical Godliness would be
wonderfully Subserved. The Lambs of the Flock must be tenderly regarded; it is
necessary we make them the Subjects of our cares, and repeated Instructions; it
is criminal to exclude them from the watch and discipline, their being a part
of the Flo^k, ^akes owing to them. Is it needless to add, that the Purity of
our Doctrine should be carefully represented to our Hearers, in the
U^^l^meableness of our Lives and Conversations? How altogether necessary should
we suppose it to be, that our Families be preserved under the exactest Order
and Regulations, and a due distance kept by all under the wing of our
domestical Government, from every thing which in others bespeak our just
Reproofs and Reprehensions? Would not a strict and cordial Union amongst our
Selves, the more Orderly practice of the Consociation of Churches, and
Upholding and Preserving the just Authority of Councils, without the least
infringement of the Liberties and Privileges by divine appointment belonging to
particular Churches; and the making due Provision for the trial of the
Abilities and Conversation of Such as are to be improved for Gospel Service, in
the Churches of the faithful, tend much to the Stengthening our hands, and be
of Singular advantage to us in the Pursuing of those things whereby the best
Good of this People may be hopefully Subserved?

Secondly (...) Here is a Call to the whole Body of this People; To endeavor a
speedy Reformation, of all the God Provoking Evils amongst them.

But (...) things b^^^, and I shall conclude.

1. Be careful to (...) your serves with the cause of God* Controversy with
you. A degenerate People are seldom duly inquisi^^^^ into the Cause of the
Controversy God is pleading with them: they are too apt to take up and concieve
a better Opinion of themselves than they deserve: and thus it was with that
People, though a very Sinful and Wicked People. Jer. 2. 35. Yet thou say
because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. And hence it came
to pass, when the Prophet denounced against them terrible threatenings by the
Command of God, they boldly demand, Wherefore has the Lord pronounced all this
great Evil against us, Or what is our iniquity? Or what is our Sin that we have
committed against the Lord our God? Jer. 16. 10. Until a People are convinced
of the causes of Gods anger and displeasure against them, there is no
Expectation or hope of their Humiliation and Reformation. That God has been
pleading and still continues to plead a Controversy with New England, is too
plain and evident to be denied. It is, indeed generally owned and confessed,
and were it not, yet the awful and terrible Judgments by which God has been
contending with us, are incontestible demonstrations of it. How greatly then
are we concerned to be Seriously inquisitive into the grounds and causes of it.

The Elders and Messengers of these Churches, assembled in this Town, in a
Synod, almost thirty years since, have Solemnly declared to the World, what the
Sins were which they concluded to be the Causes of Gods heavy Judgments on the
Land. The Public have an account of it in their hands. A great part of that
Assembly of good, holy Men, are gathered to their Fathers, but their Testimony
Survives, and will be a lasting and speaking Witness for God against us. For do
not these Sins yet remain Unreformed? Do they not still continue the Causes of
Gods anger against us? Is there not yet cause to Complain, that there is a
great and visible decay of the Life and Power of Religion amongst us? Are not
many guilty of Heart Apostasy from God? Has not the Glorious Gospel of the Son
of God been despised; A precious Savior, and the Offers of Eternal Salvation
in and through Him rejected, by Multitudes amongst us? Do not many make it
Evident that they are under the Power and Working of a Spirit of Unbelief and
Irregeneracy? Are not Church fellowship and other divine Institutions, for the
sake of which our Fathers in a special manner followed the Lord into this
Wilderness, greatly Rejected? Do not many Places live without the Settled
Enjoyment of the Means of Grace? Are not Execrable Oaths, and vain Swearing, by
which the glorious Name of God is fearfully Profaned, become a matter of too
common Practice? Is not the Rest of Gods holy Sabbath, by Multitudes horribly
Profaned and Polluted? Do not ill governed Ignorant Profane, and Prayerless
Families abound in the Land? Are not this People too generally guilty of
irreverend, and irrespectful behavior toward those whom God has Set over
them in Church and State? Are not Moses and Aaron, the Subjects still of their
Complaints and Murmurings? What a Prodigious discovery will an ordinary
Observation make to us of the Inordinate Passions, Sinful Hearts, Hatreds, Evil
Surmisings, Uncharitable Censures, Opprobrious Reflections, Reviling
Expressions, Backbitings and Slanders, whereby the holy Religion we make a
Profession of, is fearfully defiled; and the anger of the Lord most terribly
excited? Does not the Pride of New England testify to her face; and is there
not too general an affectation of such a slanting Garb, Mode and Dress, as is
highly Unbecoming a People under such sensible and continued rebukes of Heaven?
Does not the Shameful and worse than Brutish Sin of Drunkenness, like an
irresistible Inundation threaten to carry all before it? And may not the
formidable growth of this Impiety, be supposed in no small degree owing to the
just revenges of Heaven upon us, for debauching the Indian Natives of the Land,
in defiance to that truly Noble and Glorious Undertaking on foot, to bring
home these lost and bewildred Creatures, to the great Shepherd and Bishop of
Souls? Are not heinous, and fearful breaches of the Seventh Commandment, and
temptations thereunto become exceeding frequent, in the Land, notwithstanding
the Care is taken to prevent them? Does not a Worldly Spirit prevail upon us?
And are not the -- of a Public Spirit, Truth and Faithfulness, and the
Oppressions, Extortion, Fraud, Cheats and Cousenages so much and so frequently
complained of, the undeniable indications of it? Do we not live in the neglect
of a due and right improvement, of the Liberties and Privileges we are
permitted to enjoy, which might greatly subserve the interests and designs of
Religion amongst us? How careless are Multitudes, in managing the Choice of
those that are to Represent them in the Great and General Assembly? how many
neglect to improve the Liberty allowed em, and how many abuse it as unto the
Serving of a Party, or as a tool and instrument to gratify their Corruptions?
Is it not a thing would greatly conduce to the Service of Religion, and the
Promoting its Interests, if such were chosen for Grand-jurors and ^^thingmen,
as are Men of Piety, Zeal so God, and make Conscience of and fear an Oath; but
how careless are many Places as to this, nay are there not sometimes such
Chosen as discover an Intreague to defeat the good intentions they are designed
to pursue? How little care is there generally taken, especially in Country
Towns, to promote the Liberal Education of Children? How much is it become the
Practice of many Towns, so Study Tricks and Shifts whereby the Laws of the Land
obliging to the upholding and maintaining of Schools, may be wholly evaded and
lose its Efficacy? And is not this Provoking to God* and disserviceable to the
interest of Posterity? Have not all the Judgments whereby God has been for so
long a time contending with us, been ineffectual to reclaim us? And what but a
Perverse and Impenitent Spirit, hating to be Reformed, and refusing to Return
can be supposed the Ground and Reason of it? And do not these things give us
reason to conclude, that the uncomfortable Shadows of a dark Evening are ready
to spread their Sable Wings over us? Behold! Behold, O New England, the Cause
thy God has to be angry with Thee! And will thou not wash thine heart from
Uncleanness that thou may be Saved?

2. Seriously Ponder the Progress God has made in Pleading his Controversy
with us. Have we not been under a long continued Series of Judicial
Dispensations? Has not the Rain of our Land been frequently turned to Powder
and Dust? Have not our Husbandmen been called to howl? Have not devouring
Insects, consuming Droughts, and pinching Frosts repeated the Tokens of Gods
anger upon us? How often have Pestilential Diseases received a Commission to
March through the Land? And have not Multitudes hereby increased the number of
our Dead amongst us? Have not ruining and impoverishing losses by Sea been
multiplied upon us? Has not the Lord drawn out the Sword of the Covenant
against us? Has it not for almost four and thirty years, with little
Intermission devoured much Flesh, and increased the number of the Lords slain
in the Land? Are not many of our Sons and Daughters in Captivity? How many
Towns lie wast and desolate without Inhabitant, and this by the Lords moving us
to Jealousy with those who are not a People, and provoking us to anger with a
foolish Nation? Are not our Frontiers, notwithstanding all means to relieve and
support them, in a wasting, consuming and miserable Condition? Has not the
Stink of our Camps been sent into our Nostrils, and our hopefulest Expeditions
frowned upon and disappointed, so that our Enemies laugh amongst themselves,
and those that hate us clap their hands? Have not Spiritual Flagues been poured
on us? Is not the Word to many become Penal, Blinding and Judicial? Is not the
Spirit of Grace, as to its Converting and Regenerating Influences under
powerful Restraints? Do not the terrible and amazing tokens of a Perverse,
Refractory, Unyielding, Insensible Spirit appear upon us, notwithstanding all
the terrible dispensations of Gods Wrath against us? And are not all these
things a sure and undeniable Evidence, that God has made a Considerable
Progress in pleading his Controversy with us? And what can the United Voice of
all these Judgments be, But this, Be instructed O New England lest my Soul
depart from Thee? But what shall be attempted to put a stop to the terrible
Out-breakings of Gods Ang^^ and Displeasure, which these things are the assured
so runners of? A REFORMATION! A REFORMATION And what must be done that it may
be produced?

I must but briefly touch on the things that claim a Consideration by us.

Should you not then, O ye Covenant People of the Lord, with deepest
Penitential Mourning and Humiliation, fall down before a justly irritated and
offended God, and with ut-most brokenness of heart own, and acknowledge all
your mighty Sins and multiplied transgressions, and all their highly aggravated
Circumstances, as being Committed against so much Light, Love, Merciful
dispensations, Repeated Convictions, Warnings, Cautions, Confessions, Vows and
Promises of Amendment? Should you not humbly accept the Punishment of your
Sins, and Confess that God is Righteous in all his dispensations of humbling
Providence, by which he has testified his anger and displeasure against you?
And that in the midst of his Judgments, He has remembered Mercy, Punishing you
less than you have deserved? Is it not duty to repent of, hate, abhor, turn
from, forsake, and loath your selves for all the high handed Provocations,
whereby you have incensed the Divine Majesty against you, and so far caused Him
to become, and act toward you as an Enemy? Is not the Pardoning Grace and Mercy
of God through the Almighty Redeemer, to be humbly and earnestly implored, and
sincerely relied on? Should you not Endeavor a full purpose of heart, to
renounce all the ways of Sin and Folly, and walk uprightly with God in all the
duties of the Covenant? And can any of these duties be performed by you, unless
the Lord by the irresistible Grace of his Spirit turn, change and make a
victorious Conquest upon your hearts, taking away the heart of Stone, and
giving you an heart of Flesh? Is it not then your high concernment, by earnest
Prayers and Supplications, to implore this Mercy from the Hands of a God
hearing Prayer, that He would take the Work into his own handy, pour (...)
Spirit upon You, and your Children, ^end^^ the Means (...) Grace, and Ministry
of his Word* (...) (which yet thro'^ (...) Favor ^r^ continued to you)
Powerful to the Sub^ing your ^^^rts unto (...) and the (...) your Souls from
under the power of your (...) L^sts and Corruptions, that so you may be
inclined (...) his ways and obey his Commandments? Should you (...) Endeavor
to recover (...) Government From the La^^^^ishments and Deaths that are upon it
(...) Should not tho Worship of God be more Religiously Observed, and Upheld in
your Families? Ought you not to Prize God^ House Ordinances and Institutions;
Honor his Sabbaths,and Reverence his Sanctuary,and improve the dispensations
of his Word for your Spiritual Good and Edification? Should not all the
Liberties you yet Enjoy, be carefully and conscientiously improved and
husbanded to the best advantage, for the promoving and subserving the Interests
of Religion and Reformation? Should not all that are truly Godly Stir up
themselves to lay hold on God, and humble themselves under a Soul awakening
sense of their deadness, dullness, carnal Mindedness; want of due Watchfulness
over themselves, their hearts and ways? That they have Maintained no more of
Fellowship and Communion with God, been no more Circumspect and Exemplary in
their Lives and Conversations, Shown no more Zeal for God, and given so little
Obstruction to the growth of Sin and Profaness? Should they not associate and
combine together, and by the properest Methods they can think upon,
Endeavoring to d^mp, discourage and put a stop to whatsoever is matter of
Provocation to the pure Eyes of Gods Glory in the Land? Are any possible
Encouragements wanting? Is not the Lord yet treatable? As yet he owns a
Covenant Relation to us; and has a considerable Interest amongst us. The Decree
has not yet brought forth. Why do we not then gather our Selves together, and
take words to our Selves (since he is pleased to put them into our Mouths) and
say, T^k^ away all iniquity and receive us graciously. May we not upon so
doing, Expect to hear that Gracious Resolve of his, I well heal their
backslidings, I will have them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him,
Hos. 14. 2. -- 4. But if these things are neglected b^ us, and we resolve to
plod on still in a way and (...) of (...) and Wickedness, Can it be long before
the ^^^zing and irresistible Strokes of an Omnipotent Arm, Expose the folly of
all the Carnal Confidences and Securities we rely upon, and offer us occasion
with the bitterest Lamentation and dolefullest Accents, to grown out the utter
Disappointments, of our Hopes and Expectations, as they did? Jer. (...). 14,
15. The Lord our God has put us to Silence, and give^ us Water of ^all to
drink, because we have Sinned against the Lord. We looked for Peace, but no
good Came; and for a time of Health, and behold trouble.

FINIS.

