THE Piety and Duty OF RULERS To Comfort and Encourage THE MINISTRY of CHRIST.

As it was represented in a SERMON at the Lecture in Boston, before HIS
EXCELLENCY and the GENERAL COURT, June 10th. 1708.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN M.A. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Tibi DOMINE, Tibi maneat Gloria Illibata: Mecum been Agitur, si Pacem habuero.

Bern. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green: Sold by Benj (...) at his Shop
under the Townhouse, at the Head of King Street. 1708.

To the Honorable and Virtuous Lady, Mrs. REBECCA DUDLEY, Consort to His
Excellency, JOSEPH DUDLEY Esquire GOVERNOR of New England.
MADAM,
I Humbly crave leave to Prefix Your Honorable Name to these few Pages, which
appear Public at Your Desire. Indeed I find that a just and necessary
Vindication of my self would have constrained me to Publish the Discourse; that
the World may see how clear I stand either of Impudence or Flattery; the foul
Characters that some have so unkindly and unreasonably bestowed upon it. I fear
not but the Impartial Reader will easily Acquit me, and justify the Sermon to
be both Modest and Faithful. I have no little Reward in its being Esteemed so
by the Government, and no body would suspect it possible to disoblige the
Ministry by this Affectionate respectful seeking their Comfort. My Single Aim
was to this, and it was but strict Justice to acknowledge the Piety of the
Government, whereinsoever They Endeavor it.

Madam, Your Regard to the Ministry and Worship of CHRIST is not Suspected:
it is one Small Testimomy of it that You require this Publication: And if GOD
shall please to comfort any of My Reverend Fathers or Brethren hereby, You will
be sure of the more of their desired Prayers, as I shall of their Love and
Blessing.

Madam, The Good GOD has in His Gracious Providence crowned the long Trial of
Your Faith and Patience, with many bright days since HIS EXCELLENCIES Return:
W. justly admired Your Exemplary Resignations before, and must own You to be
the Same for a visible Humility and Devotion since: Now that many more days of
the Outward Smiles of Providence might be Your present Portion, if GOD please,
but especially a daily Growth in Grace, with a continual Advance in Communion
with Heaven, and the Consequent Eternal Glories thereof, is the Prayer of

Madam, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, BENJ. COLMAN.

THE Piety and Duty of RULERS, To Comfort and Encourage the Ministry of CHRIST.
II. CHRON. XXX. 22. And Hezekiah spoke Comfortably unto all the Levites, that
taught the Good Knowledge of the LORD.


IN the Context we have a Record of the glorious Beginning of King Hezekiahs
Reign. The wicked Ahaz, this pious Prince his Father, had transgressed sore
against the Lord xxviii. Chap. 19, 22, 23, 24, 25. verses.
, forsaken His Altars, exhausted the Sacred Treasures of his House, cut in
pieces the Holy Vessels, and at last shut up the Doors of it; making himself
Altars in every Corner of Jerusalem, and High Places in every City of Judah, to
burn Incense unto other gods. This was the forlorn State of the Church upon
Hezekiahs Accession to the Throne, who immediately, even xxix. 3.
in the first year of his Reign, in the first Month, opened the doors of the
House of the Lord and repaired them; Summoning the Priests and the Levites to
v. 5.
Sanctify themselves and the House; to humble themselves for the Sins of their
Fathers v. 6.
, to renew their Covenant with the Lord v. 10.
, and to offer a Sin offering for the Kingdom v. 21.
, to make Reconciliation with the Blood upon the Altar, and Atonement for all
Israel v. 24.
. When this was done he proceeded to proclaim a Chap. xxx. 6, 7, 8, 9. verses.
Solemn Passover, which was joyfully and religiously Solemnized: With great
Gladness; says the verse before the Text, and the Levites and the Priests
praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud Instruments unto the LORD. It
was at the Celebration of this Passover, the Joy whereof had been never equaled
since the days of Solomon v. 26.
, that the Good King among other Expressions of his Devotion gave that which
the Text records to his Immortal Honor; And Hezekiah spoke Comfortably unto
all the Levites, that taught the good Knowledge of the LORD.

We may here remark,

1. The Character of the Persons concerned, Hezekiah and the Levites: On both
sides Persons of Distinction, the One in Civil, the Other in Ecclesiastical
Office. Hezekiah was no less than the King of Judah, the Supreme Civil Ruler:
the Levites were Ministers of Religion, after the Priests the Sons of Aaron;
the Tribe whom God had separated and consecrated to Himself out of all Isreal
to do the Service of the Tabernacle. So that the Civil and Sacred Orders are
here together, the Prince and the Prophet, the Ruler in the State, and the Holy
Teachers in the Church.

2. Let us attend unto the thing related as passing between them, which is the
Kings speaking Comfortably unto the Levites. The like we read in the 35. Chap.
2. v. of Josiah, that he set the Priests in their charges, and Encouraged them
to the Service of the House of the Lord. His Dignity made this Condescension in
the sight of men, yet was it but strict Piety and Duty to God. He might have
required 'em only with the stern Majesty of a King, but as became his Devotion
he mildly and kindly bespoke 'em, with a sweet and gracious Affability. His
Countenance, his Behavior, and all his Words did abundantly express his Royal
Favor and Grace toward 'em, for their Encouragement in their Holy
Ministrations. Nor are we to interpret these Comfortable Expressions of Good
Words only, Be ye warmed, be ye filled; without the substantial fruits of a
Princes Favor and Care. Much less may we think them like the Empty Respects,
flatteries and promises of Modern Courtiers; but all was Cordial, unfeigned and
from the Heart: As we may read in the 31. Chap. 21. v. that in every work,
which he began in the Service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in the
Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.
Wherefore,

3. The real Reason of this Princely Grace of the King is subjoyned, and that
is, the Levites teaching the good Knowledge of the Lord. The Reason is taken
partly from their Office, more especially from their Fidelity therein: And so
it answers the Apostolic Precept, Esteeming them very highly in Love for their
Works sake. It was one part of the Levites Office to instruct the People in the
Knowledge and Fear of God: their work was to teach: which reproves and condemns
the Idle Pastor, who Labors not in the Word and Doctrine, to feed their Flocks
with Saving Knowledge, And King Hezekiahs regard to the Teaching Levite may
well call to Mind the like Royal Examples, which have blazoned the British
Throne, in our late Sovereign Princes, who have required their Highest Prelates
to be frequent in Preaching the Word Themselves; promoting at the same time
such unto their Richest and Noblest Sees, as were desirous of teaching the
People the Knowledge of God. In the day when Popery abdicated the Throne,
Princes like holy Hezekiah ascended it, and they spoke Comfortably, and to this
day continue the same Gracious Expressions to all the Levites that teach the
Good Knowledge of the Lord.

The Good Knowledge: Knowledge is Good: Prove. 19 2. That the Soul be without
Knowledge is not Good: But of all Knowledge none is like that which we have of
the Blessed GOD from his Word: Of this we may say, as our Savior said of God,
Why call we any other Good? there is none Good save that One, which is of GOD.
They that teach this good Knowledge faithfully, are to be held among Men
eminently Good, Worthy of double Honor, meriting to be spoken Comfortably unto
by their Princes and Rulers: Each of them singly, and all of them together, do
merit this treatment and a singular Regard: And accordingly, though the Text
denies not but that the King might frown upon the Idle and Vicious Levite, if
there were any One so; yet is it express on the other hand, that he spoke
comfortably to all those Levites, that did faithfully teach the Good Knowledge
of the Lord.

The DOCTRINE I would offer from the Words is this.

That it is a very Noble and Pious Disposition in Civil Rulers, and their
Incumbent Duty, to Comfort and Encourage the faithful Ministers of CHRIST in
their Holy Work.

Before I add a Word more, I have a double Presumption to Apologize for; that I
should presume to Preach to, or to plead for, my Superiors of both Orders. I am
very sensible that a Concio ad Magistratum calls for Learning, Gravity and
Authority much beyond my Years, and that the Noble Subject (Pro Clear) does
equally require the same. Yet I hope it will not be unacceptable at this time
to Either Order, if I essay with all possible Deference and Humility, to assert
the Honors which it has pleased God to entitle his Ministry unto, and which it
will be the Care and Pleasure of pious Rulers always to pay unto them.

Wherefore I beg the leave of this Honorable Audience to pursue a little these
two Enquiries.

1. How Civil Rulers are to endeavor the Comfort and Encouragement of the
Gospel Ministry?

2. Why they should do it, or what are their Obligations hereunto. The
Enquiries are both Copious, and being to get hastily through them I must be brief
and general.

I. How, or which way, are Civil Rulers to endeavor the Comfort of the
Ministry? or, What is the Comfort which the Ministry craves or challenges of
them by the Laws of the Gospel? What is it that will comfort the faithful
Dispensers of the Word, and what are the Regards which for this end the Civil
Ruler owes unto the Ecclesiastical Order?

To apprehend this aright, we must consider our Rulers in their Legislative
Power or Trust, and in their Executive, and finally in a Personal and more
Private Character, as Christians of a Superior Degree only.

I. In their Legislative power and trust, it belongs to the Civil Ruler to
speak comfortably to the Ministry, by Enacting Good LAWS for the Honor and
Establishment of Religion within their Government. This lies near the heart of
every good man; and one of the greatest Comforts he can have that wishes well
to the Religion of a Place, aiming at the Glory of God and the Salvation of
Souls, is to see a Bulwark of good Laws for the defense and propagation of the
Truths and Laws of God. These Laws must needs respect, 1. The Public Worship
of God, both Natural and Instituted. 2. The Peace, Order, Discipline and
Government of the Church. 3. The Honorable Maintenance of the Ministry. And 4.
A Peoples Morals.


1. The Comfort of the Ministry depends very much on good and right Laws
respecting the Public Worship of God, and that both Natural and Instituted:
that the Holy Ordinances of God be duly administered and attended according to
His Appointment in His Word. Indeed Magistrates may not frame and invent at
their pleasure Modes and Exercises of Divine Worship for their People: GOD by
whom They rule has given Them and Us a Law how He will be Worshipped: to alter
this or to add unto it were to offer Strange Fire for hallowed Incense and with
the face of Homage manifestly to kick at his Soverain Authority, despising his
most perfect Word. Nor may the Ruler invade the Priest, Office to Officiate in
their Holy Ministrations, unto which they are Ordained. It was unto Uzziahs
destruction that his heart was lifted up to transgress against the Lord his
God, when he went into the Temple of the Lord to burn Intense upon the Altar of
Incense: 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 16, -- 21. Nor was it Disloyalty or Rebellion in
Azariah the Priest and his valiant Brethren when they withstood him, and said
unto him, It pertains not unto thee Uzziah to burn Incense unto the Lord, but
to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn Incense: Go out
of the Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine
Honor from the Lord God: And when he despised the faithful admonition, being
Enraged at it, The Lord smote him beside the. Altar, with the Censer in his
hand; the Leprosy rose up in his forehead, and he hasted to leave the Sacred
place he had invaded, being a Leper to the day of his death, and so cut off
from the House of the Lord, whither he had gone so presumptuously. Now though
this Instance alone be eno' to warn the Highest Persons unto all possible
caution, not to trespass upon the Enclosures of Gods Ministry, consecrated to
Divine Service; Nevertheless we must by no means think that the Magistrate has
nothing to do, or to concern himself ex Officio, about the Institutions of God.
The Civil Powers may Enact the very Laws of God about his own Worship under
temporal Penalties, preserving an Indulgence unto tender Consciences: They may
take Laws out of the Word of God and make 'em their Own, Commanding People to
regard the holy Ordinances of God, to get and uphold his Worship among them, to
Sanctify the Sabbath, to reverence Gods Sanctuary, to build themselves decent
places for the Public Worship, and frequent them in the stated seasons thereof
with Solemnity.

It belongs also to the Rulers Province, to provide that Ministers do their
Duty in the Public Administrations that pertain unto their Office; that
neither by gross Neglects, Unreasonable Absence from their Charge,
Non-residence, open Idleness, or any Scandalous course of Vice, they do not
defeat the glorious Design of their Ministry: in all which Cases the Civil
Cognizance is merited, and needed to rebuke and remedy the Evil; and Rulers
ought to provide accordingly in subordination to the Laws of Christ, provided
in that case already. So that if the Sons of Eli will make themselves Vile, to
cause men to abhor the Offering of the Lord, it is duty of the Judge in Israel,
though he be their Father, to provide them not only a light Rebuke, but a severe
Censure, Degradation and Punishment.

In all such Cases both Ministers and People owe Obedience and Submission to
the Civil Ruler, as in our Context the Priests and the Levites obeyed the
Summons of the King, and did the thing which he required in the cause of God
and agreeable to his Will: xxix. Chap. 15. v. And they gathered their Brethren,
and Sanctified themselves, and came according to the Commandment of the King,
by the Word of the Lord. Being that the Kings Commandment was according to and
grounded on the Law of God, they conscientiously obeyed it, in deference both
to God and the King.

Nor are the Holy Sons of Levi and Aaron duly comforted in the work of the
Lord, in their Serving at the Tabernacle and Temple, unless the Civil Power do
thus engage on their side. For as the World goes, it is necessary for the
Powers' on Earth to enforce that under present bodily Pains and temporal
Penalties, which the Great GOD has more awfully commanded on pain of Eternal
Damnation: that bold Sinners who have no regard to their Souls may be
restrained however by what they have for their Bodies, their Name, Estates and
outward Interests; and that men who will not Fear God so as to be religious in
secret and in heart, may however for Fear of Man at least not be Audacious and
Insolent, blaspheme the Name of God, nor spit at his Altars; which many profane
Wretches would do, if the Civil Sword did not defend and do Honor to the
Worship of God.

2. The Comfort of the Ministry depends very much on Good and Right Laws with
respect to the Peace and Order, Discipline and Government of the Churches. It
is true, that the Magistracy are not to assume to themselves the Administration
of Church Censures, but to preserve inviolate unto the Ministry the Power of
Judgment, which Christ has lodged in them: Yet is it not to be though it that the
Magistrate must sit by Unconcerned, and quietly see things run to Confusion,
and the wounds of Churches to Gangreen and grow Incurable: Or if the State of
the Church be visibly Consumptive, and it be sensibly pining and languishing
away, the Pastors not eno' laying it to heart, and the People through
Inadvertence willing to have it so; Is it not Laudable and a Duty for Rulers in
such a case to take Care? to issue out their Authoritative Orders, to stir up
Ministers and People to their Respective Duties? for the Revival of dying
Church Order, and the Spirit of true Devotion, with practical Godliness, which
depend so much thereupon.

As therefore it is the worthy Care of Rulers to Admonish the Churches of any
gross defects and negligences, hazards and dangers, maladies and distempers,
which they discern upon us at any time in Spiritual Respects; So also their
Wisdom and Piety would be greatly displayed at this day, and they would do much
to comfort the faithful Ministers of Christ through the Land, if they could any
way provide to heal the long Unsettlement of bereaved Churches, together with
the criminal shameful Quarrels that occasion it; to give Authority also to
Ecclesiastical Councils in their Determinations; and to make People know that
there must and shall be some End to their Strifes and Discords, the Parents of
every Confusion and Evil Work, the bane of all Religion.

It belongs also to the Civil Powers to call Synods upon Occasion for these
Ends, and then to give their Sanction to their just and approved Resolutions.
Nor are the hands of Aaron strong, but when Moses, his Brother and his Lord,
stands by and assists him.

3. The Comfort of the Ministry depends very much on Good and sufficient Laws
for the Honorable Support and Maintenance thereof, and that in a Wise and
Right Manner. So Hezekiah comforted the Levites in the Text, as we read in the
xxxi. Chap. 4. v. Moreover, he commanded the People that dwelt at Jerusalem, to
give the portion of the Priests and the Levites, that they might be Encouraged
in the Work of the Lord. The Wise King knew that they could not cheerfully,
diligently, wholly devote themselves to the Study of the Law, the Instruction
of the People, and the Ministrations of the Sanctuary, without that Honorable
Subsistence, which God had provided for them.

I need not say how Noble the Provision was that God made for the Tribe of
Levi, nor how plain the Gospel Institution is, That they that Preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. So has the Lord Ordained, even as we know that
under the Law, They who did Minister about Holy things, lived of the things of
the Temple, and they that waited at the Altar were Partakers with the Altar. 1
Cor. ix. 13, 14. Which Institution has its foundation in strict Equity and
Righteousness v. 7. For who goes a Warfare at his own Charges? who planteth a
Vineyard and eats not of the Fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock and eats
not of the Milk of the Flock? Nay, the Advantage of the Exchange is so much on
the side of the People, that after all they do by no means pay the Labors of
their Faithful Pastors, nor recompense for the Profits received by those
Labors if it be not their own fault: v. ii. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? No truly, it is
a small matter for People to subsist them in a few outward things, whom God has
separated wholly from worldly things, to Serve them in their Spiritual and Soul
concerns.

Now I need not labor much to prove to You, that there can be no great Comfort
in the Ministerial Work without a decent outward Subsistence: Unless the Angels
of the Churches were already (...), as the Angels of God above, as the Saints
will be in the Resurrection State; when as they shall no more Marry, so neither
shall they need Food or Raiment for the Body. But while this Treasure (the
Gospel Ministration) is in Earthen Vessels; and Spirits in Flesh, of as many
necessities and bodily wants as their Nei'bours, are employed in these holy
Services for your Souls, there must be a laudable Provision for their Bodies
and Families, or they must be left desolate and Comfortless. There can be no
Comfort to be sure in Pinching and Starving Circumstances, in Rags and
Nakedness, in the Cries of hungry Children, or in the prospect of meaness and
want for their Families after them. If it was Infamous in Jeroboam to make
Priests of the Lowest of the People, 'twill be no less in us to degrade the
Sacred Order to the lowest, by one Method or another, whether by Maintaining
the Ministry so Meanly that none but the Lowest will come into it; or if they
do, that according to humane prospect they shall be sure to have their Families
among the least in Israel. [Which were as if all the Sons of Aaron were for
ever to inherit the Curse of Eli's House, crouching for a piece of Silver and a
Morsel of Bread, and saying, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the Priests
Offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.]

Had I time I should here have added, that the Ministry alone is a sufficient
Care and Labor for the whole Life: that our whole Time and Strength is too
little for it to discharge it faithfully: that we need no Avocations or
hindrances from the wants of Families, or from Worldly Secular Businesses: That
the Office is Generous and Noble, as well as the Work Great and Heavy: that the
Minds employed in this Sublime and Holy Service should be supposed Superior,
and improved by a Learned Education: that their Rank and Place among men has
always been next to the Civil Magistrate; and this not only by the Custom of
all Nations, but by the Grant of God Himself, and therefore it is not of mere
Courtesy, but of Right and Natural Decency: that where there has been any
Hierarchy, whether of Gods Ordination among the Jews, or of Humane
Establishment (we say) among Christian Nations, not to name the Orders of old
in the Idolatrous Heathen World; I say, wherever any Hierarchy has been set
up in the World, distinguishing the Clergy into diverse Orders and Degrees, the
Superior Order has been ever graced in the first Rank of Nobles: I might add,
That the Ministerial Work is not to be levelled which Mechanic Labors,
Merchandise, nor other more Liberal Employments neither; the Practice of
Physic, or the teaching of Philosophy, not excepted: [To acknowledge which is
but a meet Respect to the Great God, in whose immediate Service we are; as also
it is but a decent respect to our own Souls, for the Improvement of which in
Spiritual Knowledge, their Perfection, Conversion and Salvation, we are
employed; And surely, to teach the Good Knowledge of the Lord is of more
Excellency and Use, than to be Professors of any Secular Science, ignorant of
which we may live and die and yet be Saved.] Now if the Office be so Superior,
the Maintenance should be also Honorable, or it is very Indecent and Unsightly.

I must needs add one thing more here: That the want of a Comfortable Support
for the Ministers of the Gospel is a great Wrong to Souls. It is so very often
to the Souls of your Ministers: they cannot be so faithful as they desire to be.
I have heard some of our Reverend Brethrer complain of this with great
Affliction, "That they have not Time to Study as they would, "That they cannot
make the Pastoral Visits which they gladly would to the Families under their
Watch; because their own Families being Numerous, and their income Small, they
must spend a great part of the Week in Secular Affairs. Thus they are bereaved
of the Comfort of the Sense of having done their Duty to your Immortal Souls.
Again, It is a great Injury to the Souls of People, the precious Souls of your
Families and Children. These suffer in Spiritual respects, by Ministers
suffering in temporal things: They are not so fed and watched over as else they
might be: And so in pinching their faithful Pastors, People do eventually
Starve the Souls of their Households.

To Conclude, I know not how the Public can be Innocent, if Lawgiver; do not
make a just Provision for the Maintenance of the Ministry: In a great part they
must expect to answer to God for the Neglect there is in the Land as to the
Care of Souls; and if Religion and Learning be lost, and our Souls after them,
it will be in a great measure owing to this, That we have not hearts big eno'
to part with a few Carnal things to Save all.

4. And Lastly, The Comfort of Gods Faithful Ministers does very much depend on
the Provision of a sufficient Body of Laws, with respect unto Peoples Morals.
This is a very wide and extensive Head; Namely, the Sobriety and Righteousness,
Purity and Blamelessness of People in Word and Action, in their whole Conduct
and Behavior, in every Relation and Circumstance of Life. The Religion of a
People appears in Practice, in Obedience to the Moral Law. If this is
religiously observed, if men lead Sober, Righteous and Godly Lives, then have
Ministers the Consolation of their Labors, then have they not spent their
Strength for naught and in vain; but they behold the fruits of the Grace of God
in their Hearers hearts, shown out of a Good Conversation: Then is the Gospel
of God our Savior visibly Adorned, and your Apostolic Pastors have no greater
Joy.

But if the Laws of a Land do not provide against all Scandalous Immoralities,
Rulers do not speak Comfortably to any that have the least Respect for
Religion: they are grieved, scandalized, offended at bold and lawless Vice
defying our Holy Religion: their righteous Souls are vexed at the filthy
unrestrained Conversation of the Wicked. It Is true, God will set a Mark on them
that weep in Secret for the open Sins of others, but by Man they are not
Comforted. How could our Faces and Hearts be otherwise than Sad, if there were
not Good Laws for the Suppressing and Punishing all kinds of open Profaness, or
seeret Frauds and dishonesty, Impurities and Lusts. Our Comfort greatly depends
on the Laws in force, and from time to time Enacted, against Blasphemy, Cursing
and Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Undutifulness of Children and Servants,
Seditions, Murders, Pernicious Strifes, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Thefts,
Abuses of our Nei'bours Good Name, and whatever Moral Turpitude there is to
pollute a Land and corrupt Good Manners.

And next to the good Laws in force among us against such Scandals, we have no
greater Comfort than the Royal PROCLAMATIONS that have been issued out from the
Throne, For the Encouragement of Piety and Virtue, and for the Preventing and
Punishing of Vice, Profaness and Immorality. In this the Magistrate is the
Minister of God unto us for Good, a Terror to the Evil, and a Praise to the
Good. Romans xiii. 3, 4. He is by Office, as has been often said, Custos
utriusque Tabuloe, the Defender of both the Tables of the Law, as well as of
the Faith. He succeeds in Moses Place, who having received the Law from God,
then saw to it that the People kept it.

I have done with the first thing wherein Civil Rulers are to endeavor the
Comfort of those that teach the good Knowledge of the LORD, Namely, In their
Legislative power and trust, by Enacting good Laws for the Honor and
Establishment of Religion within their Government. I will be more brief in the
other Instances.

II. It belongs to Rulers, and all Public Officers, Superior or Inferior, in
their Executive trust and power, to Comfort all those that stand up for GOD or
are more immediately related to his Service, by the Faithful Execution of those
good Laws, that relate to Religion, the Honor of God, the Observation of the
Divine Law, and the Prosperity of the Church of Christ. We have Good Laws
against Immoralities and Contempt of the Divine Ordinances; herein the
Legislative Power have endeavored our Comfort: It now and always lies with the
Honorable Judges, the Worshipful Gentlemen in Commission for the Peace, with
Inferior Officers in every degree of Power or Trust, to the faithful discharge
of which Respective Trusts they are Sworn and under the Oath of God, as
Revengers to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil: without which the
Magistrate does at last hold the Sword in vain, and the Penalties threatened in
the Law prove an Empty Noise and a Lie. Laws not duly Executed are but Powder
without Ball; there is a terrible blaze and sound but no Execution done: the
Wicked have no Terror from them, nor the Good any Comfort.

More especially the Ministry wearing no Secular Arms for their own. Defense,
they are more Peculiarly the Care of the Civil Sword, to protect them from all
Open Wrongs and Affronts; the wicked in the World being ready to trample them
in the dust, and withold their Legal Rights: And the more backward they are
to Assert 'em, and fill their Superiors Ears with Complaints; of Them
especially to whose Service in Spiritual Respects they are devoted; in this
case the Magistrate should not always wait for a formal Complaint, but find a
Tongue for the Dumb and an Arm for the Meek, be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to
the Lame, and Search out the Cause Himself. For there is a Modesty in Superior
Minds which restrains them from Complaints and causes 'em rather to suffer
wrong: And there is a Regard to Men's Souls in many of Gods Servants so Superior
to their Care about their own Temporal Concerns, Seeking not theirs but them,
that they had rather Silently Suffer at home than their holy Ministrations
should suffer with unreasonable men abroad.

III. And Lastly, Much is Incumbent on Civil Rulers for the Comfort and
Encouragement of the Ministry, in a Personal and more Private Character, as
Christians of a Superior Degree only. And under this Consideration of
Themselves, they should hold Themselves obliged to comfort the faithful
Teachers of the good Knowledge of the Lord.

1. In taking care to give a Virtuous and Religious Example in their own
Conversation, both Private and Public. Authority and Dignity carries so much
of the Stamp and Image of God upon it, that though it receives its highest Grace
and Luster from Religion, yet to the Eyes of Inferiors it reflects back also a
great honor on Religion, and the Doctrine of God our Savior is Eminently
Adorned thereby. It Is a Comfortable thing to see Those, of whom it is said, Ye
are gods, paying the profoundest Veneration and Homage to the Great GOD by whom
they Rule; and they that give Laws to others paying Themselves the most careful
Obedience to the Divine Law.

That when we come into your Presence, your Wife and Grave, your Pure and
Devout Discourse may be long remembered with Reverence.

That the Virtue and Order of your Families, may like that of Joshua and David
show the whole Land what the Fear of the Lord is.

That the Religious Sanctification of the Sabbath by your Households, and your
constant reverent Attendance on the Private and Public Worship of God, may
visible testify your respect and honor to Gods holy Institutions.

For which End I cannot but wish, and with the lowest Deference would earnestly
commend it to the Consciences of Some whom I greatly honor in their Civil
Character, That all our Rulers might stand complete in their Christian
Profession: And while they fill our Conspicuous Seats at the Council Board, in
Courts of Justice, and in the Assemblies for Worship, their Place might not be
left empty at the Table of Christ: An Example that must needs hurt our
Churches, and the Souls of the Vulgar, from Persons of your Knowledge, Gravity,
and believed Piety.

Magistrates should be among the first at the Temple, and there and every where
their Lights should Shine before Men; Not in the vain Spirit of John, who
sought Fame from a false Blaze, Come, see my Zeal for the Lord: [Tho' it must
be said, that it is as Impolitick as it is profane for Rulers to live in
Irreligious Courses: And yet a mere Mask of Religion is a Mean Disguize, as
well as horrid; to seek to establish our Power by abusing and affronting the
Glorious and Fearful Name of God.]

2. It beseems the Christian Magistrate to speak Comfortably to the faithful
Ministers of Christ, by giving open Respects and Honors to their Persons,
treating one always with distinction before the People. As Fathers, says the
Apostie; as Children, though it the good King Hezekiah, Chap. xxix. v. 11. My Sons,
said he to the Levites, My Sons, be not negligent. And it is Remarkable with
what Affability, Friendship and Love the Pious Kings of Israel were wont to
treat the Prophets of the Lord.

A pious Ruler will never be a Stranger to his faithful Pastor, if it be not
his own Will and Fault, which is not to be supposed neither. [Nor is it the
single Comfort of a Venerable Superiors Respects, that we have in the
Friendship of a Pious Ruler; but as King Saul himself once asked of the Prophet,
it honors us before the People, and most effectually teaches them to venerate
their Teachers.

Certainly our Gracious QUEEN has taught all in Subordinate Place their true
Honor and Duty, promising in Her Proclamation against Vice, a Distinction in
Her Royal Favor to Persons of Piety and Virtue. No Earthly Prince can go by a
more perfect Rule, than this by which GOD governs His own Regards, which is His
Own Moral Image and Grace.

3. It is expected of the Civil Ruler to speak Comfortably to those that teach
the good Knowledge of God, by excelling others in a cheerful Readiness to
Support the Divine Worship with their outward Estate. It Is supposed, that
generally they are distinguished by Providence with Riches as well as Honor
and Power; and if so, they are Poor Comforts at last to their Respective
Churches if they do not lead in a Generous Contributing to the Maintenance of
the Ministry. If a rich Magistrate is seen to Pinch, what will not others do,
who are of Estate as mean as their Quality? When the Building of the Temple was
to be provided for, King David first exhausted his own Royal Treasures, and
then the People gave largely. This also was one way wherein Hezekiah spoke so
comfortably to the Levites and the Priesthood, v. 24. He gave a Thousand
Bullocks and Seven Thousand Sheep, and the Princes gave a Thousand Bullocks,
and Ten Thousand Sheep, and a great number of Priests Sanctified themselves:
And in the xxxi. Chap. 3. v. we read further, that Hezekiah appointed the Kings
portion of his Substance for the Burnt-Offering.

God has honored Rulers above others, and He expects that they do more than
others to honor Him. Where He gives Riches in Abundance, He looks that Men do
proportionably cast into his Treasury out of their Abundance; or else let the
Poor Widow throw in her Single Mite, and Heaven will account that she has done
more than all the Great and the Rich.

Having urged You so far, I will not Suppress two Tho'ts more, wherein the Rich
and Honorable may greatly comfort the Churches and Ministry of Christ. The One
is, By devoting a Select Son to the Service of the Temple, and leaving him an
Inheritance equal with his Brethren. The Other is, That you would employ some
suitable parts of your Estates as a Tribute to God and his Ministry in
Founding, Endowing, Establishing and Securing Schools for Literature and
Religion: More especially, our fair and loved Mother the COLLEGE, which Happy
Foundation God has signally blessed and made the Great Glory of the Land;
filling every Chair of Honor almost with her Worthy Sons. The flourishing of
that Society is the Great Joy and Comfort of the Ministry and so is the present
happy Settlement thereof, as was abundantly testified to the Honorable COURT
in the united Addresses of the Ministers the last year. And whatever it shall
please God to direct the GREAT and GENERAL COURT further to do, in their
present Session or hereafter, for the Security of that Body and the more
Honorable Support of the Reverend President, it will greatly comfort the
hearts of the present Ministry: So great a part of Whom must always own Him,
with great Reverence and Love, a Wise and Careful Eather to them, in their
happy Education under his Immediate Inspection and Institution.

I have done with the First Enquiry, and it may be, almost presumed too far on
your Candor and Indulgence in some particulars; wherein at last I would by no
means be understood to pretend to direct my Superiors.

I will not enter on the Second thing propounded, left I trespass Egregiously
on your Patience, Namely.

II. To give the Reasons of the Doctrine, or to prove it to be the Rulers
Incumbent Duty, to Comfort and Encourage the faithful Ministers of Christ in
their holy Work. The Word of God requires this of Magistrates, [censures the
wont of it, and brands those Reigns wherein Religion was not cared for,
perverted, depraved, and the Prophets ill treated.] Ministers need this Comfort
and Help in their hard and difficult Work, [to oppose men's Lusts, and bear up
under the double measure of Trouble that falls to their share.] The Efficacy
and. Success of the Ministerial Labors does under God very much depend on the
Rulers Countenance and Influence. The Nature of Magistracy speaks it to be the
Rulers incumbent Duty to encourage the Ministry of God, being the Ordinance of
God, to rule and judge for Him, and accountable to Him, the Supreme Governor
and Judge of all the Earth. Not to add, that a Land has no more faithful
Friends and richer Blessings in it, than the faithful Ministers of Christ: Nor
the Magistracy any surer Support than the Encouragement of Religion; their
Power being from God, the Reverence of Whom once failing the foundation of
Government is rased.

But I hasten to some brief and particular Application of the Doctrine And the
USE may be in a threefold Address. 1. To our Honored Magistrates. 2. To
Ministers. 3. To the People.


1. It addresses to our, Civil Rulers, that Religion may always have this
Countenance and Comfort from them.

We cannot but own the Piety of our Rulers in their open and avowed Respects
unto the Churches of Christ, and the holy Pastors of them. We give thanks to
God, for the Great Comfort we have in the Devotion and bright Virtue of many of
our Magistrates; for the Good Laws we have in defense of the Faith and Worship
of Christ; and against Scandalous Immoralities; and that the Seats of Judgment
are filled with Men of known Integrity and Religious Zeal.

We have Great Consolation in His EXCELLENCIES Noble Example; His Wise, Grave,
and Occasionally Religious Conversation; the visible Order and Devotion of his
House, and his tender Fatherly Carriage, toward the Ministers of Christ; Of the
Body of Whom I have this most sure and certain Knowledge, that they are greatly
comforted in Him.

In the Times of the Romish Superstition, I am told, it was the first Proposal
or Enquiry at the opening of the Parliament, What more is to be done for the
Holy Mother the Church? Far be it, that in our happyer Days of Reformed
Religion, the Ministry and Pure Worship of God should have less of the
Legislators Care. Suffer me then to pray that the Comfort of these Churches may
always lie near Your hearts, and have some Consideration with You in every
Session.

More especially, the more Honorable Support of Ministers through the Land would
be one most worthy Care of the Assembly. I speak not from Want, or for any
Self-Interest, being by the good Providence of God, and the Care of my Beloved
Church, equal in Salary with any of my Brethren: But I speak from a tender
feeling of the Slender Circumstances of Many (my Betters) in other Places; and
from an easy foresight of the Detriment that must come unto our Churches, if
there be not an Enlargement in the Maintenance of the Ministry in most Places.
For as this is in the People a too palpable Evidence of a Lean Profession, I
mean of their not profiting by the Word; So is it the ready way to make lean
and Poor Preaching, by Starving men's Parts and Oppressing their Graces.

The Poverty of the Land is no Objection against doing more than is done for
the Ministry. People might do much more and not feel it. Nay it were the way to
grow Rich, if we did our Duty in Supporting Honorably the Worship of God. For
as it is the Blessing of God that makes rich, so He has told his People that
their defrauding Him is their own Impoverishment: Mal. iii. 8, 9, 10. Ye have
robbed ME, -- in Tithes and Offerings: Ye are cursed with a curse. -- Bring ye
all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my House, and
prove me now here-with, says the LORD of Hosts, if I will not open you the
Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing, that there shall not be room
eno' to receive it.

Again, There is no fear of the Idleness, Pride or Luxury of the Clergy, from
that decent and just Maintenance I am pleading for. I plead for no
Sumptuousness or Excess, but bare Convenience. And if Professors of the Gospel
are against this, their Devotion is too much like what the Fable tells of the
Illiberal Bishops Blessing, not amounting in real Value unto the price of a
Farthing.

We ought with Thankfulness to acknowledge the Piety of the Government, in the
good Provision made to Pay out of the Public Treasury the Dues of Ministers
wrongfully detained from them; and to Tax the respective Towns or Precincts in
proportion: And we may lay it down for a Rule to us, that the Ministry can
never be Comfortable, while in the Settlement of Ministers there continues a
necessity of driving Sordid Bargains about a Salary, or while after settlement
they are forced either abjectly to beg and entreat, or resolutely to scuffle
and fight for their Dues by solemn Engagements.

I shall not need to address You again about the College; to speak comfortably
always to the Sons of the Prophets at Bethel, which has indeed been to Us as
the House of GOD and the Gate of Heaven, for the Heavenly Issues thence, which
have refreshed the City of our God.

I will rather mention with great Honor the present Care that the Governmen is
showing, with respect unto the Miserable Places of darkness and Irreligion,
that have hitherto Shut out the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ from among
them, counting themselves unworthy of Eternal Life, Your Desires and Labors
after a Mission of some Worthy Persons into such perishing Places; and for
their Honorable Support in such difficult Posts, do greatly comfort us, and we
Pray the Great LORD of the Harvest to prosper You, and to send forth Laborers
into his Harvest.

And now, Finally, Need I again Exhort You, Much Honored, to be Religious Your
Selves, to fear the GOD by whom You rule, and to Serve Him who honors You
among His People? You must needs think Your Selves Obliged to shine before Us,
in all Virtue, in Devotion, in Faith, in Zeal; in a Public respect to the
Institutions of Christianity, and in an Abhorrence of all Immoral Practices;
more especially let me say, of Frauds and dishonesty, of nauseous Drunkenness,
of Sabbathbreaking, of Unnatural Strifes in Churches, and the Contemptuous
Spites of many against their holy Pastors.

II. My next Address is unto my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the MINISTRY.
If it be our Rulers Duty and Piety to comfort Us, we must needs think it Our
Own,

1. To endeavor in our Places to comfort our Faithful Rulers. The Obligation
is certainly mutual, and it is but a grateful Return unto the Good and Gentle,
nay a Duty even to the Froward. Therefore let us fervently Pray for our Rulers,
which is Good and Acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2,
3. Let us be Examples to our Flocks of Loyalty, Humility, Peaceableness,
Meekness, Love, Honor, Obedience and Submission in all just Cases: that if we
are at any time falsely Accused, we may be able with Truth and Assurance to make
the Apostle's Noble Defense, Act. xxv. 8. Neither against the Law, nor the
Temple, nor yet against CAESAR have I offended any thing at all. Finally, let us
be Just to do our Rulers Honor wherein they do well; owning it with Pleasure,
and blessing God for it; influencing our respective Charges to do so likewise.
We have no Liberty to grieve or disrest them, if They are bound to speak
comfortable to as.

2. Let us be comforted in the Countenance of our Rulers. This is a Duty also
which we owe unto GOD and Them. Let us take the Comfort which God gives us;
This also is the Gift of God. We have our precious Opportunities of Service: We
enjoy great Quietness; and may be as Good and do as much good as we will, and
have Praise of the Powers that are: This should make us the Easier under our
Difficulties, and the more Cheerful in our Work. So were the Levites whom
Hezekiah comforted, v. 25. The Priests, -- the Levites, -- and all the
Congregation -- rejoiced. So there was great Joy in Jerusalem.

3. If it is the Duty of the Civil Ruler to speak comfortably to the Ministry
of Christ, Then certainly it is the Duty of Ministers to comfort one another.
You must needs confess this Inference to be very Just and Natural, and alas! it
is no less Necessary. We do not comfort and assist one another through this Land
as we ought: Some through Negligence, some through Disaffection, prejudices, and
diverse Interests. Our Independency in this sense, is our Woe already, and will
be our Ruin if it be not remedyed, We should Uni^^ (...) Strength if we would
not be Feeble: By Separateness we are broken one of another. We should Visit
one another oft'ner, and be more Open and very safe in Communicating our Tho'ts
to one another. We should tenderly Sympathize with one another under
Difficulties, and be ready to Succor under Wrongs. We should freely Advise and
Hearten one another when Aggrieved, and above all men Bear with and Forgive one
another, and he that is Chief should be Servant of all. We should rejoice in
one another Gifts and Graces, Credit and Esteem, Use and Serviceableness; and
whether we think the same thing in Smaller points of Church Order, yet ought we
to appear One in Faith, in Charity, and Zeal for practical Holiness. Finally,
we should beware of the Evil Spirit of Credulity against Elders, lightly taking
up Accusations against them; but let our Religious Zeal be under the Restraints
of the Law of Charity.

III. I will Conclude, with a brief Exhortation to the People.

1. To Imitate their Good Rulers, wherein They are Exemplary in their Regards
to the Ministry of Christ. Inferior People must needs hold themselves obliged
in their Places to be Comforts to their Ministers, since the Highest Orders of
Men are bound to be so. Wherefore People ought conscientiously to Love their
Ministers, to Pray for 'em, to assist and Support 'em. They should be very
Careful not to grieve 'em, contemn or wrong 'em, in Word or Deed.

2. Obey the just and wise Laws made for the Comfort of the Ministry. As for
Instance, Do but be Just to your Agreements with your Ministers. If we could
but obtain this in many Places of the Land, it were a Great Point. Yet should
Christians blush to need this Exhortation. Read how the People of Judah obeyed
the Command of the King in giving the Levites cheerfully their Portion: xxxi.
Chap. 5, 6. verses. As soon as the Commandment came abroad, the Children of
Israel bro't in Abundance the First Fruits of Corn, Wine and Oil, and Honey,
and of all the Increase of the Field, and the Tithe of all things bro't they in
Abundantly: -- the Tithe of Holy things, which were Consecrated unto the LORD
their God, and laid them by heaps.

3. Let People learn from our Doctrine, to know their own Happiness when they
have Rulers that set Themselves to Encourage the Ministry and Service of God.
None but a Sanballat or Tobiah can be grieved at it, to see the Civil Ruler
seeking the Welfare of Israel. It should raise our Value, Esteem and Love, and
put us on doubling our Prayers for, and our Endeavors to comfort Such Rulers.
The Good Job was such a Ruler; He chose out their Way, and sat Chief, and dwelt
as a King in the Army; as one that Comfort the Mourners: and he tells us how
it endeared him to his People: Job xxix. 23, 24. They waited for me as for the
Rain, and they opened their Mouth wide as for the latter Rain: If I laughed on
them they believed it not, and the light of my Countenance they cast not down.
They were refreshed by such a Rulers Presence and Countenance, Wisdom and Care,
even as the Thirsty Earth is by the Showers of Rain: They prized his Favor,
and were Solicitous not to lose the light of his Countenance shining upon them:
They Presumed not upon his Condescentions to diminish his Authority, and to
blow upon the Light that cherished 'em: They were careful not to Grieve him, to
make his Countenance to fall, or to make him Change his Looks and Carriage
toward 'em: The Light of my Countenance they cast not down.

Thus I have endeavored to go through our respective Duties from the Text, and
now will dismiss the ASSEMPLY as the Levites did the Great Congregation of
Israel and Judah, in the last Verse of the Chapter. Then the Priests the
Levites arose, and blessed the People: and their Voice was heard, and their
Prayer came up to His Holy Dewlling Place, even unto Heaven.

Even so Comfort the Hearts of your faithful Pastors, and you will inherit
their louder and more fervent Blessing: Their Invigorated Prayers for You and
your Posterity will come up to the Holy dewlling place of GOD, even unto
Heaven, obtaining the Effusion of every Sort, and every Measure, of Spiritual
Blessing, from on High.

FINIS.

