THE DANGER Of Not Reforming Known Evils OR, The Inexcusableness of a Knowing
People Refusing to be Reformed.

As it was set forth on a Day of Public FASTING, April 16. 1707. at Hatfield.

By William Williams, Pastor of the CHURCH there.

Isaiah I. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
Land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword: for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green. 1707.

THE Danger of Not Reforming Known Evils.
I. Samuel III. 13. For I have told him, that I will judge his house for ever,
for the iniquity which he knows: because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.


GOD's own visible People are not exempt from Judgments; yea those among them
who are truly godly and dear to God, if by their sinful carriages they cast
dishonor upon God, and upon Religion; do expose themselves to many humbling
and afflictive rebukes from God in this World. Though their Sin be pardoned, and
shall not condemn them in the other World: yet God sees it necessary for the
vindication of His own Name, and the promoting of their good, to give some
public testimony of His displeasure against Sin. Not only such as are of a
profane and vicious Spirit, whose carriages are an open defiance to Heaven; but
many times the Sins of those who are upright and sincere, do help to bring
public rebukes and judgments upon themselves and others. God was so displeased
with the Impatience and Diffidence of Moses and Aaron, that he excluded them
out of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32.51.52. God was so offended with David in the matter of
Vriah, that He brought a great deal of sorrow upon his Family and Kingdom: So
provoked with Solomon for his Connivance at, and Encouragement of the Idolatry
of his Wives, as to rend away ten parts of the Kingdom of Israel out of the
hand of his Son. And in the Context God denounces an awful threatening against
the House of Eli for his undue toleration and connivance at the wickedness of
his Sons. Such examples should instruct us, not to be high minded but fear: Not
to think our selves secure because of any visible relation to God; but to carry
a holy awe and trembling upon our hearts, of his Holiness and Jealousy, who is
of purer Eyes than to look upon sin.

In the words we may take notice of three things.

1. A severe Threatening denounced against the house of Eli, [I have told him;]
by the message before sent to him [that I will judge:] The word signifies
either to Condemn, Punish, or Destroy. Here it seems to intend to punish. [His
House] That is, his Family or Posterity, which is often called a man's House.
[For ever] That is, either till they are utterly wasted and consumed, or rather
for a long time, as the phrase for ever is often used. This was in part fulfilled
when his two Sons were slain by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4 11. And in part when
Saul slew Ahimeleck and his Family, 1 Samuel 22.18. And finally when the
Priesthood was translated from the House of Eli, and of Ithamar, to that of
Eliazar, by Solomon about Eighty years after, 1 Kings 2.27.

2. The reason of this threatening is, Because his sons made themselves vile,
and he restrained them not. Their Sin was very horrid and prodigious, as is
reported in the preceding Chapter. Their Sins were such as rendered them
abominable to God, and contemptible to the People: they brought their Sacred
Offices and Gods Holy Ordinances into contempt. Yet their Father did not use
that Authority which God had given him as an high Priest, as a Judge or chief
Magistrate, in punishing them, as by the Law of God he was obliged to do: but
contented himself with an easy and gentle reproof.

3. The Aggravation of this Sin, which is especially taken notice of as the
immediate, procuring cause of the Judgment: For the Iniquity which he knows.
He could not pretend Ignorance, or want of evidence, that the matter was
uncertain: the cry of their wickedness was got abroad among all Israel: and God
had particularly warned him of it by a messenger sent to him, as you read, in
Chap. 2 27 and sequ. But though the matter was so notorious, yet his Parental
fondness and indulgence seems to have bribed (...) judgment that he does not
attend his Duty to God and them, in punishing of them suitably to their horrid
Guilt.

That is the clause in the Text that I would particularly take notice of at
this time, and from it you may take this Doctrine.

DOCT. It is Highly Offensive to God, and shows Men to be very faulty; when
they will not Reform what they Know to be amiss.
This Aggravated Eli's Sin, that he knew his Sons to be vile, and did not do
what he might and ought to have done to restrain them. Sometimes a People, and
so particular Persons Sin through Ignorance, they are under disadvantages to
know the mind of God in particular cases; or else the matter is disputable, its
a question to them whether the thing be a Sin: now though this don't wholly excuse
Sin, yet it lessens it; it is not so heinous nor so aggravated. But when men
have so much light held forth, that Sin is particularly discovered, and God is
plainly testifying against it, and they are often confessing it, yet do not set
themselves to reform it, but persist in it still; this makes them very guilty
before God, and shows their offense to be very great. Hence it is God threatens
in a peculiar manner to punish His Own People, Amos 3* 2. You only have I known
of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your
iniquities. Why is this? Not because God loves them less than He does other
People; but because His Name and Honor suffers more by their Sins, and they
being committed against more light than the Sins of others, are the more
inexcusable. Job. 15 22. So James 4 17. To him that knows to do good and does
it not, to him it is Sin. (i. e.) It is so with peculiar aggravations.

I shall first give you the confirmation of the Doctrine, and then make some
Application of it.

1. The Truth of it appears in this, That it discovers a prevailing Love to
Sin. It shows that Sin has got a great deal of power in their hearts, the more
light is resisted in Sinning, the stronger and deeper love men have to it:
their pleas and excuses for it, their willingness to justify it, their
readiness to roll it as a sweet morsel under their Tongues; shows their hearts
to be much set upon it, that it has a great interest and activity in their
affections, and this corrupts and blinds their judgments. Were there such a
hatred and abhorrency of Sin, as ought to be, it would engage to watchfulness
against it, and care to resist it, and shun Temptations when offered, and put
upon endeavors to mortify it: but men's eagerness in serving it under light and
conviction, is a sign it has got a great deal of power in their hearts. This
reason the Apostle gives us why Balaam was so set to curse Israel, 2 Pet. 2.5.
He loved the Wages of Unrighteousness. Now to Love Sin is a bad sign: Where it
reigns it shows a man's State to be bad. The Psalmist gives it as the Character
of a Wicked man, Psalm 52.3. Thou Love evil more than good. When men prefer
Sin before Holiness in their ordinary habitual course, it shows their State to
be bad; shows the heart to be in a bad frame and very much wanting as to the
Exercise of Grace, which ought to be maintained. Now Love to Sin, very much
aggravates Sin. Joh. 3 19. This is the Condemnation that light is come into the
World, and men love darkness rather than light.

2. It shows want of Love to God; too little sense of and regard to Gods honor
Sin is loathsome and abominable to God: He looks upon it with displeasure and
abhorrency, and it should be so looked upon by us, and be the object of our
hatred and displeasure. And where a spirit of Love to God is kept in Exercise,
it will be so: they that love the Lord will hate Evil, so the Psalmist
expresses his indignation against Sin, Psalm. 101.3. I hate the works of such as
turn aside, it shall not cleave to me: And Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false
way. If Persons have a tender respect to Gods Glory, His Name and Honor be
dear to them; this will make them afraid of provoking Him, of doing any thing
that will lessen and obscure it; and make them watchful against all
encroachments of Sin, and be ready to say as Joseph, Genesis 39.9. How can I do
this great Wickedness and Sin against God? When therefore persons persevere in
the practice of Known Evils; though they See Sin, are unwilling to forsake it:
it shows either the want of Love to God, or the want of the Exercise of it. For
if a principle of Love to God were in Exercise, Sin would be a burden and a
grief to the Soul; Holiness would be desired and endeavored after with all
possible means, Joh. 14.23. Now this will be readily granted, that men are very
much to blame either when they hant a spirit of Love to God, or don't maintain
it in a lively exercise and activity; for God is worthy of our Love; our best
affections are due to Him, both upon account of his infinite and amiable
Perfections, and his innumerable and repeated Benefits; and also because this
is the great principle of all Evangelical Obedience; nothing is well done in
Religion without it.

3. It is an argument of much Deadness, Stupidity and Sleepiness of Conscience,
that Sin can be let alone, and suffered to lie quietly in the Heart. A tender
Conscience may be sometimes clouded with Ignorance, and through mistakes pass a
wrong judgment in particular cases, and so suffer the Man to lie for a time in
some Sin without Repentance; but otherwise a wakeful and tender Conscience will
smite and condemn for Sin; it is Gods Deputy in the Soul, and will take His
part, and witness for Him when His Honor is contemned, and His Law violated.
When David had but cut off the skirt of Saul's robe, presently his heart smote
him, 1 Samuel 24.5 When Peter remembered the words of Christ, he went out and wept
bitterly, Math. 26 75. A sensible Conscience, will fill the Soul with
disquieting accusations, and make it uneasy under the burden of its own guilt,
and restless to be delivered from it, and from the burdensome and distressing
effects and consequents of it: and therefore will put upon the use of proper
means for it. When the Apostle had stirred up the Consciences of the
Corinthians, to reflect upon their Sinful connivance at the Incestuous Person
among them, and their pride and unhumbled Spirit, not mourning for and over
him; you see how it wrought in them, 2 Cor. 7.11. They could have no rest till
they were thoroughly clear of it, and had by unfeigned Repentance testified
their displeasure against it. Now it is every ones unquestionable duty, to get
and keep a tender Conscience; and their Sin, to give way to Security and
Sleepiness of Conscience, for when such a frame of heart prevails, it shows a
careless, unwatchful, unthinking heart; the want of a due sense of Gods
unspotted Holiness, and Purity, and the certainty of his Righteous Judgment;
the want of care to please God and approve their hearts to Him in a holy
Conversation. Yea, if Conscience be suffered to fall asleep, the Soul lies like
a Town unguarded, ready to be a prey to an approaching Enemy: Satan easily gets
an advantage over such, many sad breaches are made in the Peace of their Souls,
and many defilements contracted, to their unspeakable prejudice.

4. Because it shows a greater Voluntariness and Freedom in Sinning. Such don't
Sin through inadvertency, or from the sudden surprizal of Temptation; but with
more deliberation. Now the more freely men commit Sin, and the more of the
consent of the Will there is in it, the more vile it is. It discovers a very
bad state or frame of heart, that men have lost in a great measure the sense of
Gods Authority, and the awe of His Judgment: and therefore such Sins are the
more heinous and offensive to God: Joh. 15 22. If I had not come and spoken to
them, they had had no Sin, but now they have no cloak for their Sin. The coming
in of so much Light, made their Sin inexcusable, and took away all pleas and
pretenses, they had to excuse or cover it before. They cant say they did not
know it was Sin, or that it was a thing so offensive to God, or would be of
such a dangerous tendency to themselves. The coming in of Light discovers these
things to them. Hence Christ tells us, that such Sins expose to greater
Judgment: Luke 12.47. The Servant that knew his Lords will and prepared not
himself to do according to it, shall be beaten with many stripes. And as
hereafter it exposes to a sorer Condemnation, so at present, whenever the
Conscience of a Sinner comes to be awakened, the remembrance of the Light that
has been resisted, the warnings and convictions that have been slighted; makes
deep wounds in the Conscience, and procures many heart-piercing fears, and
agonies of Spirit. Its great folly for any to expose themselves to these
disquiets of Conscience, by giving way to such Conscience-wasting Sins.

5. Because it shows, that there is but little Dread upon their hearts of Gods
Judgments, either felt or threatened. Sin exposes men to the just displeasure of
a Holy and Righteous God; and He is many times in His Providence revealing His
wrath against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, and expects that
these things should be an awe upon their hearts, and be a means to restrain
them from adventuring any longer in their impenitency: But when his Wrath is
not made visible in the Punishments of Sin; yet it is always discovered in his
Threatenings against it, and hangs like a flaming Sword over the head of a
Sinner. These should be an awe to Persons and make them afraid of exposing
themselves to Divine Justice: so they have been to some. David, said, Psalm
119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.
And Job says, Chap. 31.23. Destruction from God was a terror to me, and by
reason of his highness I could not endure. And it should be so with others: God
requires men, Psalm. 4 4. Stand in awe and sin not. And said, Isa. 26.9. When
his Judgments are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the World will learn
righteousness. Corrections should be instructive, we should learn the evil of
Sin by them, and be afraid of continuing in it. If there were any suitable awe
of the Justice, or Truth of God upon the heart, any sense of the terribleness
of his displeasure, and what a fearful thing it is to be the sorrowful subject
of his Threatenings or Judgments, it would be so. Those therefore are very much
to blame, whose hearts are glued so fast to their Lusts and Idols; that rather
than part with them, will slight their own Mercies, and expose themselves to
the Wrath and Jealously of a Sin revenging God. And though Knowing the Judgment
of God in his threatenings or providence, will not be checked or restrained by
it.

I pass to the APPLICATION.
USE I. This shows us that a People under the prevailing of an Unreformed
Spirit, are many times more Culpable in the sight of God, than they are aware.
Not only the Evils that prevail among them, are in themselves, and in their own
nature, very offensive to God: but their not improving the light held forth to
them, for their Conviction and Reformation; renders their Sin very culpable,
and highly aggravated in the sight of God. It is to be blamed, when a People
corrupt themselves, and grow degenerate; but it is worse, when they continue
so, and will not be reclaimed: They are to blame upon a double account.

1. With respect to their Unthankfulness for the Light that is held forth to
them Their not improving of it, and submitting to it, shows their low esteem of
it; that they don't as they ought, acknowledge the Mercy of God in it. It is a
great frown of God upon a People, when he lets them alone in their Sins,
without using the means that are proper to convince, reform, and convert them,
and bring them back to their duty: When He suffers them to walk in their own
ways, as he did the Gentile World, Acts 14 6 When He lets them alone, as Hos. 4
17. When He leaves them to blindness, and darkness; and will not vouchsafe to
use those means with them, that he is wont to do with his People: don't discover
their Sin or danger to them* nor call them to Repentance: It is a sign God has
marked them out for his vengeance and displeasure. But it is on the other hand
a great mercy and blessing when God takes pains with men to bring them to a
sight of Sin, and a conviction of their duty; reveals his will to them, shows
them how they should govern themselves, and order their conversations;
testifies against their Evils; warns them of the danger of Sin, and encourages
them to obedience by promises of Mercy: these are sit means to work upon a
heart, and gain men to their duty. God reckons it a great indulgence to Israel,
Psalm. 147.19. He gave his Statutes to Jacob, and his Judgments to Israel, etc.
And justly takes it ill, when it is not duly received: Hos. 8.12. I have
written to them the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing. Or a foreign thing, as a thing they had no concernment in; not
belonging to them; nor did desire to be governed by. Whatever pretenses men
make of thankfulness for the word of God, and speak of it as a privilege, that
they have light, and means of Grace; yet if they don't yield Obedience to the
light, and conform themselves to the Commands of it; they are Practically
Unthankful; and do in effect, cast it behind their backs, as Neh. 9.26.

2. In that an Unwillingness to be Reformed argues much of an Incorrigible
Spirit. It shows their hearts are set upon their Evil ways: Hos. 11.7. My
People are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to the most High,
none at all would exalt him: it shows the Inveterateness of a disease when it
resists, and overcomes healing Medicines. So when suitable means are used to
bring a People to Repentance; and all prove frustrate and ineffectual; when
nothing will do, it shows much Incorrigibleness and of Irreclaimableness. When
they say; either in Words or Practices, as they, in Jer. 44.16. As for the Word
thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.
And 2 Chronicles. 36 15, 16. When this comes to the height, Judgments come on
irremedilesly, and there is no resisting or escaping. Ordinarily, this spirit
does not come to the height at once, but grows upon a People gradually. Now
this is a great degree of it, when they withstand means of Conviction, don't
hearken to the voice of Gods Warnings or Judgments; when they Plead for Sin,
and are unwilling to Repent, Reform and Turn to God unfeignedly. To be of such
a spirit, as to slight Reproofs, and contemn Reprovers, is a very bad Estate.
Its bad enough when the hearts of a People are gone off from God, and set upon
their Lusts: but it is worse, when they will Not return; but persevere in their
evil ways.

USE. II. May be to Warn you that you don't resist the Light, that should
discover your Sin, and bring you to your Duty. It is a dangerous thing to
neglect to Reform what you Know to be amiss: there is a great deal of Sin in it,
and it exposes those who are guilty of it, to many Judgments. Eli had been
before now warned of the wickedness of his Sons; but his Sinful Indulgence
toward them blinded him: and here God tells him, He will Judge his house for
ever. So the Prophet declares against Amaziah, 2 Chronicles 25 16 I know God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened
to my counsel. Notwithstanding evident testimonies from God, men do sometimes
harden their hearts: and by persisting in Sin, expose themselves to Spiritual,
Temporal, and Eternal Judgments. I will mind you of some of the ways whereby
Persons do sometimes do it; that you may be cautioned against them.

1 By pleading the Example of others. Bad Examples are very pernicious, and a
great occasion of hardening men in Sin. Jereboam's Idolatry had a fatal
influence upon all the succeding Kings of Israel. You find in Jer. 44 17. They
justified themselves in their Idolatrous practices, from the Example of their
Kings, Princes, and Fathers before them: So it is now, some stand upon their
own vindication on such grounds, as to many particular evils: they are not
alone in what they do: Many men that they know do so, and such as are wise and
good men too. But this is no sufficient vindication. If the thing be in its
nature or under such circumstances, evil; the practice of others, will not make
it good, how many or whosoever they be. You know that good men have their
failings, and in many things carry corruptly. But besides, all are not good
men, that are taken to be so. Many that the World calls Wise, Knowing men; are
and will be found Fools at last: but if they are never so good, or wise; you
must follow none any farther than they follow CHRIST, 1 Cor. 11.1. Precepts
must be your Rule, not Examples: Isa. 8.20. There Is hardly any Duty but some or
other fail in; or any Sin, but some have fallen into, and more especially in a
degenerate time; a great laxness, both as to principles, and practices, is wont
to prevail among a People. So that if you make this a Rule, you will find very
little to be Reformed; yea a great part of your Bibles must be laid by, as
useless and unnecessary.

2. By entertaining Prejudices against those that Warn and Reprove them; as if
they did it not in faithfulness to them, but upon some ill design. This was one
reason why they rejected the word God sent by the Prophet, Jer. 43.2. The Lord
has not sent thee, but Baruch the Son of Neriah sets thee on: So Jer. 6*
10. -- The word of the Lord is unto them a reproach: -- They interpret faithful
reproofs to be reproaches, they say they are railed upon. Ahab was prejudiced
against Elijah, and Micajah, as if their reproofs were only from want of love
to his Person: he counts them his Enemies, and thence takes nothing kindly.
Sometimes persons pretend, that others would restrain them from their just
Liberties; or they don't know the circumstances of their condition; sometimes
that they aim at their own particular interest. But these pretenses are
ordinarily from the deceitfulness of Sin; or the efficacy of Satan, to harden
the heart; there is no just reason for them. Our duty, when reproved, is
seriously to examine the case, if the Word of God condemns the practice, that is
sufficient to deter us from it; for it is by this that God will justify, or
condemn us.

3. By trusting to their Religious Privileges, or seeming Goodness in other
cases. The carnal Jews when reproved for their Oppression, Injustice, Idolatry;
and called to amend their ways, they boast of their Privileges, Jer. 7.4. The
Temple of the Lord are these: as if their visible relation to God, and external
observations would secure them from Judgments. So she makes this a cloak for
her wickedness, Prove. 7.14. I have Peace Offerings with me, this day I have
performed my Vows. Thus carnal Christians rest upon their External shows of
Devotions, because they attend the Worship of God in Public, Pray in their
Families, and the like, that therefore God will excuse their Immoralities: They
trust in their righteousness and commit iniquity, as in Ezekiel. 33.13. But alas
these things do rather aggravate, than at all excuse Sin; and show that men
know their duty. God calls for Universal Obedience; the doing of one duty will
not compensate for the neglect of another, James 2.11. Herod did many things,
and heard John gladly: but would not part with his Herodias. The Pharisee could
boast, he was no Extortioner, no Adulterer: but he could not say, he was not
Proud, and Self-confident. God that calls you to Pray, to Hear, to Meditate
upon his Word; calls you also to Live Soberly, and Righteously, to walk Humbly
with God. Partiality in Religion spoils it, and utterly frustrates men of the
Rewards of it: James 1.26. If a man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his
Tongue, his Religion is vain. If the heart be upright, All Duty will be chosen;
and All Sin avoided, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have
respect to all thy Commandments.

4. By Presuming upon the Mercy of God; hoping that shall secure them from the
strokes of Justice. They Sin freely, and cry, God is Merciful: they don't think
God will be so severe, as He threatens, or men would have them believe: Deuteronomy.
29.19. When he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself, saying,
I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart. This hardens
the hearts of abundance: They take up wrong conceptions of Gods Mercy; as if He
were of so pitiful, and tender a Nature, that He could not bear to see men
suffer what He threatens. But you must know, God is Just, as well as Merciful;
and it is no Unmercifulness for God to Punish men according to his threatening.
Yea, his Truth and Faithfulness oblige him to it. God has determined the way
and time for the Exercise of his Mercy; and if these be neglected, no Mercy
will be shown. The very Devils may as well hope for Mercy, as impenitent
Unbelievers, who neglect in the day of Salvation to seek for Mercy in a Gospel
way. You cannot take a more direct and ready way to turn away the Heart of a
Merciful God from you, than by abusing his Goodness to strengthen your selves
in Rebellion against Him: This is a most vile Abuse of it, and an Unreasonable
inference from it: Romans 6.1. Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound?
God forbid! it is a thought to be abhorred.

5 By entertaining Purposes of future Repentance. Men know their course is
Evil, and such as God condemns: that this and the other practice which they
indulge* is sinful; they dare not justify it: but they still their Consciences
with this, that they intend to Repent of it, and reckon upon no great
difficulty in it: it is but repenting, and all shall be well. These purposes of
repentance for the future, harden abundance, and make them bold to continue in
Sin, against all Counsels, and Reproofs. But alas Repentance is not so easy a
work: the heart that is now so much in love with Sin; and so full of enmity to
Holiness, will not easily be changed. A deceitful heart will find other
excuses, when the present are answered: the old man will struggle hard, before
it is subdued. But repentance is a Grace of Gods giving; the heart of stone is
too hard, for any created power to break. And as it is what God gives, so it is
what he gives freely, 2 Timothy 2 25. If God peradventure will give them
repentance. Many that presume upon having repentance at leisure, find
themselves disappointed; either a sudden Death arrests them, or a hard heart,
and a sleepy Conscience seizes upon them. It is a bold adventure to reject Gods
gracious Offers, presuming upon Future Time, or Grace.

USE III. Of Examination and Expostulation with you, whether you are not faulty
in this matter. Are there not several things which you know to be Duties,
neglected; several things, that you know to be Sins, practiced? We live in a
land of Light, have great advantages to know the mind of God, to know how we
should adorn the Gospel, and our profession of it. The Grace of God toward us,
both as to Light and Peace under Gospel Privileges, is very peculiar and
distinguishing. And although there may be Errors in practice that arise through
Ignorance, and inadvertency: and some points that are disputable, that persons
are not so well satisfied about. Yet surely, the Evils of this Country are for
the most part in such things as are Known, yea such as have been often
Acknowledged; sometimes in a more Public manner, both by Civil and
Ecclesiastical Rulers: and often in a general way upon such days as this. It is
not the want of Light, but the want of Improving, and Submitting to the Light
that we have, that retards the Reformation, which has been so long called for.
Let me prosecute this Expostulation in the following particulars.

1. As to the great Duty of Improving Seasons and Means of Grace, unto a
Repentance from Dead Works, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; to a getting into a
Converted and Pardoned Estate, while the Patience and long-suffering of God is
continued: Is not this a thing abundantly Known and Confessed? Certainly
Persons that have been bred up under the Calls of the Gospel, and have had the
duties of it so frequently inculcated upon them, cant be ignorant of these
things. The word is plain and positive concerning them pressing a present
Repentance and Conversion to God, Isa. 55 67 Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him whilst he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, etc. 2 Cor. 6 1, 2. Behold now is the accepted
time; now is the day of Salvation, etc. And Heb 3 5. And how plainly does it
warn of the danger of neglecting it: Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation? There will be no escaping or avoiding the forest
condemnation. God shows the riches of his Grace in affording the Seasons of
Grace unto men; these are not to be slighted and trifled away; but seriously,
seasonably, and faithfully improved. It is a great dishonor cast upon Christ,
and contempt of the Love of God in the work of Redemption, when Peace and
Reconciliation with him, are not regarded; when the fruits of redeeming love in
Sanctification, and Holiness, are counted a Misery, rather than a Privilege. It
is a daring presumption, as well as positive Disobedience, when God calls for
present Repentance and Conversion, to defer the matter to future care. Surely,
men know it is their duty to put Honor upon the Lord Jesus Christ, to
acknowledge him in his Office of a Redeemer. Surely it is fit that He, who has
been at the expense of his precious Blood, undergone such abasement, and
sufferings; should be glorious in the Eyes of those to whom he is offered; and
the fruits of his Redeeming love, be received with all Thankfulness. This is
plainly required. Joh 5.23. He will have all men honor the Son as they honor
the Father: and how is Christ honored, if he be not believed in, and obeyed?
Joh. 3.23. Heb. 5.9 Does not every one confess that there is no other way of
Salvation but this which God has consecrated through faith in his Blood? Yet
alas how many are there who neglect these great duties; Live in impenitency,
and unbelief, are very little concerned to obtain a real Union with Christ, and
Communion in the Benefits of Redemption; make no great matter of letting slip
the Seasons of Grace; feel no Misery in their Estrangement from God, captivity
to Sin, and Satan; don't groan after Redemption; are more intent upon securing
the World, than obtaining Heaven; are more inquisitive what they shall Eat and
Drink, and wherewith they shall be Clothed; than how they may glorify God,
adorn the Gospel, secure the happiness of their Souls in Christ, and an
unfailing Title to that Glory which he has purchased?

2. As to the Means of Worship which God has appointed, whether Public,
Private, or Secret. Certainly, the Omissions of them that are among us, are not
through Ignorance Men know and confess that God is the Supreme and first Being,
the fountain of Goodness; and thence the proper object of Worship; that all our
Mercies flow from Him; should be asked by Prayer, and acknowledged with Praise.
As to the Secret Duties of Worship, how plain is the Precept, Mat. 6 6 When
thou prayest, Enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, Pray to
thy Father which is in Secret. etc. Every man has Personal Wants, Sins, and
Temptations; many concerns that are most fit to be transacted in Secret between
God and his own Soul; therefore, to Omit it, is both an act of Disobedience to
God. and a great prejudice to your Selves. Yet, are there not such who are
Strangers to this Duty? can seldom find time to converse with God in Secret
Duties; can often Sin in Secret; be Wanton, Unjust, Intemperate, in Secret; but
don't Pray in Secret: And as to the Public Worship of God, how plainly has God
enjoined the several parts of it? And particularly, that very much neglected
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, obliging all his Disciples to do it in
Remembrance of Him, Luke 22 19 That they might keep up a thankful Memorial of
the Death of Christ, and the great Ends of it; and restify their dependence
upon him for the blessings purchased by it. God having received so full
satisfaction, and the Covenant of Grace so fully confirmed on us: That Love to
Christ, and hatred of Sin might be excited, increased, and inflamed by the
lively representation of his painful Sufferings and bitter Death. But though
these things be so plain, yet how many are there who live from year to year in
the neglect of it? Pretending a (...) ^^^paration for it, and a fear of
polluting and (...) it: but really from a slight and low esteem (...) Gods
Authority enjoining it. For if it (...) from a real tenderness, they would set
themselves to understand the nature, end, and use of it; would be wait their
ignorance, reform their Lives, cry day and night to God for his Sanctifying
Grace to purify their hearts, and fit them for Communion with God in it: but
alas, how is this neglected? Such Persons will be very inexcusable in the Day
of Christ. You pretend a zeal for Christ's Institutions, and commend your
Forefathers that ventured their blood to rescue your Ordinances from Popish
corruptions; and yet when you may attend it in Gospel Purity, turn your backs
upon it!

3. As to Families; do not men Know that it is their Duty to Educate and
Instruct them in Religion, and Virtue; and restrain from Impieties and
Immoralities? This is plain, Prove. 22 6 Train up a Child in the way he should
go; -- Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: For
this Abraham is honored and commended by God, Genesis 18 19 I know Abraham that
he will command his children and household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment. It is the way for Parents to be
instruments to convey the best Blessings to their Children. Not only the ties
of Religion, and Conscience, but of Nature also, oblige to it. To neglect it,
would be to be worse than the Ostriches of the Wilderness. Are they not such as
you have solemnly Dedicated to God, and professed a desire that they may be the
Lords? Now it will be gross hypocrisy in you, to be negligent of their
Education; as well as great Unfaithfulness to God and to their Souls. Have not
you been the immediate instruments of propagating Original Sin to them? and
should not this oblige you, to do the best you can for them, that they may be
delivered from the guilt of it? Besides, You have a special interest in them,
are always with them, know their Tempers, and Dispositions; have peculiar
advantages to be insinuating Principles of Piety, and Virtue; to inure them to
the practice of Religion, Civility and Industry. The great concern of upholding
Religion, and Propagating of it to succeding Generations should be a pressing
encouragement hereunto. The Work of Christ in our Towns and Churches, will soon
languish, if this be neglected: they will be like unpolished Stones, unfit to
be laid in any building; if a virtuous and pious Education be neglected. The
present, sorrowful State of many of our Children, snatched from us and exposed
to a Popish and Heathenish Education, should awaken to serious reflections
whether among other just reasons for it, God may not be pointing at this
neglect. Its certain, Eli's Posterity smarted for his Indulgence, as in the
Text. So did David's, though he was a very holy man. These therefore, who Know
all these things, and yet neglect a Godly Education of their Families; who
indulge them in ignorance of things fundamental to their Salvation and
Conversion: connive at their irreligiousness, rudeness, disorders, neglect of
Family Worship, not Sanctifying the Lords Day; or allow irreverent clownish
carriages: are greatly to blame. What excuse so ever may be made for such
things among Heathen; they are certainly inexcusable among those that profess
themselves Christians, who Know their duty, and have so many encouragements to
do it.

4 Do not men Know that an inordinate Affection to the things of this World, is
very unbecoming those that Profess Christianity; and most frequently forbidden
in the Word of God? James 4 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that
the friendship of the world is enmity with God, etc. Heb. 13.5. Let your
Conversation be without Coveteousness: Mat. 6 19, 20, 31, 32. Yea, God has
told you that this is Idolatry, Col. 3.5. When that Esteem, Love, Complacency,
Desire, which is due to God; is set upon the World: this is as real Idolatry,
as men's bowing down to a Stock or a Stone: And when God has plainly declared
wherein this inordinacy of heart discovers it self, in anxious, perplexing,
disquieting cares; neglecting a dependence upon God, or satisfaction with the
disposals of his Providence; in greedy, violent desires; when they will be
rich, as the Apostle speaks. 1 Timothy 6.9. We are told, Prove. 20.22. He that
makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent. Men often wrong their Souls, and
wound their Consciences, as well as blast their Reputation, when they take any
unrighteous ways of gain; defraud, oppress, and overreach in their dealings;
don't deal truly and honestly; or neglect paying of just debts; or necessary
acts of Charity; dare not depend upon Divine Providence, on the encouragement
of the Promise; but withold more than is meet: when they begrutch God His due;
and the Poor, their due; count themselves losers in all that they dispose in
Works of Mercy and Charity. Or when their worldly cares encroach their time,
and thoughts; choke convictions, hinder the Duties of Religion, or occasion
Formality, and Slightiness in them; when the care for the Body crowds out care
for the Soul; and things of the World make them neglect Heaven. Now does not
such a Spirit too much prevail, notwithstanding convictions and professions to
the contrary? Is it not a thing evident to considering and observing Persons,
that the Abatement of Love to Christ, and the increase of love to the World, is
a main root of the degeneracy that has grown upon us? How much cause is there
to think that Gods impoverishing Providence point at this evil, and give us
special reason to lament our too great aversion, to Reform it!

5. Does not every one Know, that Intemperance is an Evil? The very light of
Nature condemns it; Civilized Heathen have abhord it, and born witness against
it. The word of God does this more especially, not only witnessing against the
grosser acts of it, in notorious Drunkenness, and shameful Spewing: but all the
tendencies that way; and the occasions of and inducements to it; forbiding men
to tarry long at the wine, Prove. 23.20. Yea, not so much as to look upon it
when it gives its color in the Cup, and moves it self aright, Prove. 23 31. (if
such a sight proves a temptation) and denounces a Woe against those that are
Strong to drink Wine, and men of Strength to mingle Strong drink, Isa. 5.22.
That can pour down cup after cup, without being intoxicated, and bereft of the
exercise of Reason. And does not the Gospel more especially require men to live
Soberly, Titus 2.12, 13. To govern their Appetites as to Meat and Drink; and
are not some under special engagements, not to frequent Taverns, or give way to
an inordinate affection to Strong Drink? If yet any act contrary hereunto, and
needlessly spend away their Time and Estates, in indulging a Tippling humor, and
gratifying the inordinacy of their Appetites; to the wounding of their
Consciences; quenching their convictions; dishonouring their Profession;
impoverishing of their Families; and refuse to be reformed, as is the
deplorable case of some, that will certainly be found very culpable before God,
and altogether inexcusable: These things with others of the like nature (that
might have been named) are too sad evidences of a great abuse of Light that
has been afforded.

USE. IV. Of EXHORTATION, Be persuaded then to Reform those things that you
Know to be amiss, and are plainly discovered to be Sins: If you neglect this,
there will be just cause to fear that Gods displeasure will be continued, and
increased. God is as angry with men's Pride and Stubbornness in contempt of his
Warnings, as formerly. Its a dangerous thing for a People against whom God has
a controversy, to delay their Repentance, and to continue the causes of his
anger. For as it is with particular Persons, so it is with a People; God limits
the time of his patience, how long He will wait before the decree shall bring
forth, and his wrath break out, till there be no remedy. Our Wisdom therefore
is to take up the matter quickly, as in Numb. 16.49. To remove what we Know is
Evil; and to search out what we know not. In particular, I would here say.

1. Reform such things as your own Consciences tell you are amiss, and do often
smite and condemn you for. Conscience is Gods Monitor in your breasts, and you
should listen to it (as you would to a messenger from Heaven) when it warns you
of Evil committed, or Duty neglected. Is not Conscience often smiting of you?
Sometimes when you hear Sin reproved, and sometimes when a day of distress and
affliction comes; when you think Death and Judgment are near. Are there not
many inward disquietments, and perplexing thoughts arising in your hearts? Are
there not secret Resolutions to avoid those Evils, or do those duties that
Conscience deals with you about? Oh then obey the voice of Conscience in these
things, whatever it be that it witnesses to, don't slight or smother it, and
withstand the checks of it: If you don't carry kindly toward it as a friend;
you must expect that it will shortly carry toward you as an enraged Enemy, and
will dreadfully upbraid you for the violence done to it: A wounded Spirit who
can bear? Prove 18.14.

2. Reform what you often Confess to be Amiss. Doubtless, besides Public
Prayers, and solemn Confessions, that are made on such Days as this, wherein we
are uttering many things against our selves, for the vindication of the
Righteousness of God in the things He has brought upon us: I say* besides
these, God has your particular and personal Confessions, in the daily Prayers
that you make. How often are you bewailing the Mispense of Time; abuse of the
Seasons and Means of Grace; Unthankfulness for Gospel Mercies; Barrenness, and
Unprofitableness under Divine Cultivations; the neglect of government over your
Spirits and Passions; inordinate affection to the things of the World; and a
too great indifferency and coldness in the things of God and your own
Salvation? Now will you not be self-condemned, if notwithstanding these
Confessions, these things are still continued! How sad is it, when a man's
Prayers serve only for a testimony of his hypocrisies! And evidence the
deceitfulness of his heart in the religious shows that he makes. If there were
a hearty Sorrow for such Evils, and a due sense of them; it would be manifested
in a serious endeavor, both to reform, and mortify them.

3. Reform such things as are plainly Witnessed against from the Word of God.
You all confess the Word of God to be the Rule according to which our Lives and
Actions should be ordered: that it is to be our Guide, as to matters of
Institution, and as to moral duties; Truth, Justice, Temperance, Charity,
Modesty, and the like. When ever therefore your Duty laid down in it, is
cleared up from it in the Ministry so plainly that your Consciences cant
gainsay it; be careful that you don't withstand any such Counsel, or Message
from God to you. David says, Psalm. 119 161. -- My heart stands in awe of thy
word. God looks with a gracious respect to those that tremble at his Word, Isa.
66 2. When any Duty is enforced by it, or Sin condemned, we should submit to it
with reverence, and thankfulness. It is not matter of Liberty, whether you will
receive, or reject the Commands of God; but what God requires, Must be
cheerfully submitted to. Indeed, where matters are disputable or dark to them,
there it is men's duty to enquire to labor to have their doubts resolved: but
where matters are plain, and unquestionable; as in duties of Love to God, and
Men, especially in Moral Precepts and such things as all agree to be duties;
and a man's own Conscience cant gainsay it: if in such cases men don't hearken
to the voice of God, He will surely require it of them. To enforce this
Exhortation, I shall add these following Considerations

1. The neglecting to Reform what you Know to be Amiss, will argue you to be
guilty of great Hypocrisy in your solemn transactions with God on such days as
these. It Is a thing confessed, that days of Humiliation without Reformation, are
not acceptable to God; but rather days of Provocation, Isai. 58.5, 6, 7. There
is not that Humiliation, Repentance, brokenness of Heart for Sin, humble
waiting upon God for Mercy, as ought to be: but men put off God with empty
shows, and external devotions, which rather heighten, than moderate his anger.
If there were a serious desire, and engagedness of Heart to be reconciled to
God; they would be willing to remove what lies as a bar in the way to it; did
men count Sin to be so bad, as they profess it to be; certainly they would be
willing to let it go. To pretend to desire Peace, and Atonement with God, and
to neglect the Terms upon which He offers it: what is this but to act
hypocritically? To cry for favor and pardoning Mercy; and perpetuate the
grounds of Gods controversy: what is this but to mock God, to flatter Him with
your lips, while your hearts are far from Him? it evidently shows the
carnality, and selfishness of men's hearts, in such Prayers: Hos 7.14. They
assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against me.

2. Consider what losers you have been, and are still like to be, by not
Reforming the Evils God has witnessed against. It is confessed, that the Sins
of Gods professing People, are the Provoking Causes of their calamities: Micah
1 5. For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sin of the house
of Israel. Idolatry, Oppression, and neglect of Gods Worship prevaild; and that
brought on abundance of Misery. It is the abounding of Iniquities among us,
that has made way for the many Rebukes of Heaven, that we have been under: and
neglecting to be reformed, has continued them; our own experience may convince
us, what losers we have been hereby: we have forsaken God to our Loss. Is not
much of the presence of God lost? His gracious spiritual presence in His
Ordinances, and His protecting Presence in His Providence: what losses in your
Outward comforts; in your Liberties, Estates, Families? Men have been violent
to serve their Lusts; and have smarted sorely for it. And is it like to be
otherwise still? Can we expect that God will change the methods of his
Providence, if there be no change for the better in us? Jer. 7.5, 6, 7. If ye
thoroughly amend your ways, and your doing; -- Then I will cause you to dwell in
this place, etc. God is immutably Just and Holy. If our carriages are changed;
then we become meet subjects for His Mercy to be exalted upon. Surely then the
bitter fruits of Sin should make every one willing to forsake it: Surely, it is
time to grow wiser, to say as Hos. 2.7. -- I will go and return to my first
Husband, for then was it better with me then now. Some men think to advance
themselves by Sin; to get Estates, and raise their Families, by Injustice,
Oppression, and a violent pursuit of the World: but they consult shame to their
house. What are men like to get by greediness, intemperance, sottish neglects
of their Souls, and the great Salvation provided for them through Christ; but
sorrow here, and eternal ruin at the last?

3. If you Reform what you Know to be Amiss; it will give ground to hope that
God will show you what you know not. Some are asking, Wherein shall we return?
If this question be serious; Surely, such will reform what they do Know to be
Evil: if otherwise, they act like them in the Prophet, Exek 14.3, 4.7. And
expose themselves by their mocking of God, to greater Judgments. But God is
ready to Teach those that are willing to Do their Duty, Joh. 7 17. Phil. 3 15,
16 Job Prays with the more confidence, Chap. 34 32. That God would teach him
what he knows not; while he resolves, that wherein he has done iniquity, he
will do so no more.

4 Thus to do, will give hope, that God will have a gracious respect to our
Prayers this Day. For God does not begrutch Mercies to His People, if they are
but Obedient: Isa. 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good
of the land. We have very great and weighty Requests to present before God this
day; That God would bless Our Sovereign, and our Nation; smile upon their
Warlike Preparations; still honor them with Success and Victory; give
Enlargement to His Church; and a Revival to the Oppressed, Persecuted Members
of it; would preserve our Land from the incursions of Adversaries; would bless,
guide and prosper our Military Forces; that He would remember and restore our
distressed Captives. Surely, there is no considering Person, but accounts it
would be a singular Mercy, if our Prayers for these things, might be accepted
at the Throne of Grace. And will you not be prevaild with so far, as to part
with your Sins, that you may obtain these Mercies? Oh that you would consider
it! Were it not better to part with the dearest Lust, than to be an Achan to
trouble our Israel at such a day as this? How reasonable are Gods demands! When
he calls men to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts; to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World; to love God, and love one
another; and especially, to love your own Souls, by being thoroughly careful to
Redeem time, and improve all helps, to secure the happiness of them in Christ,
while the day of Salvation is continued; to turn to Him by a through Repentance,
and acknowledgement of our offenses, and a humble application to the blood of
the Covenant, that God would Pardon our Sins, and heal our Land. God requires
no compensation for the wrongs we have done Him; no requitals for his injured
Name and Glory, which has suffered so much by us. But if you will return to
Him with all your hearts, accept His Redeeming Grace, and resign your selves to
His Service in Sincerity, He will be gracious and prevent us with blessings of
goodness: Zech. 1.3. -- Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will
turn unto you, says the Lord of hosts. And can any be unwilling to this? Many
are ready to say, They would be willing to part with many Pounds of their
Estates; yea to venture their Lives, that they might enjoy peaceable days
again: And will you not part with your Lusts for it? Abridge your selves of
Unlawful Liberties, be humble and holy that you may obtain it! Psalm. 50. ult.
-- To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of
GOD.

FINIS.

