A MEMORIAL Of the Present Deplorable State of New England.

A MEMORIAL Of the Present Deplorable STATE of New England, With the many
Disadvantages it lies under, by the Maladministration of their Present
GOVERNOR, Joseph Dudley, Esquire. And his Son PAUL, etc.

TOGETHER WITH The several Affidavits of People of Worth, Relating to several
of the said Governor's Mercenary and Illegal Proceedings, but particularly his
private Treacherous Correspondence with Her Majesty's Enemies the French and
Indians.

To which is Added, A Faithful, but Melancholy Account of several Barbarities
lately Committed upon Her Majesty's Subjects, by the said French and Indians,
in the East and West Parts of NEW ENGLAND.

Faithfully Digested from the several Original Letters, Papers, and MSS. by
Philopolites.

Printed in the Year, MDCCVII. and Sold by S. Phillips, N. Buttolph, and B.
Elliot. Booksellers in Boston.

A MEMORIAL Of the Present Deplorable STATE of New England.
THE Inhabitants of New England had for many Years before the Late Happy
Revolution, Enjoyed the Liberty and Property of as Free and Easy a Charter as a
People could Desire; and this too, with as much Satisfaction and Loyalty on
their part, as Malice and Envy on that of their Enemies; who, from a
Persecuting Spirit, looking upon this their Charter with an evil Eye, took up
an Implacable Resolution of Robbing them of it. They had no sooner Effected
this, but a vast Scene of Misery appeared; and they found among the Principal
Instruments of this Mischief, One, The present Governor, J. Dodley, Esquire is a
Native of New England, Born at or near a place called Roxbury, 2 Miles from
Boston.
whom their own Womb had brought forth, and whose Breasts had Nourished! But
the Unhappy (or rather Happy) Reign of the Late K. J. running Precipitantly
upon its own Ruin, made well for the Deliverance of New England; without which,
doubtless the People had fell a Sacrifice to French and Popish Slavery:

We shall not Recriminate here the Mismanagements of the then Governor Sir
Edmond Andross, since that Gentleman is now in a Future State; but by the way,
we think it highly Necessary to say some Matters of Fact, of the present
Governor Dudley, who, (under the said Sir E. Andross) acted as President of
the Council, and One of the Quorum in all his Affairs.

The Behavior of this Man, so soon as he arrived, struck (...) the first
Opportunity to discover him of a Mercenary Interest. Indeed, the People were
something Surprised to see the public Offices and Places of Trust snatched
from them, and Conferred on Strangers on one hand, and the Avarice and Beggary
of a Crew of Mercenary Fellows, Supported by Extortion on the other. But, when
the President was pleased, out of an Active and Passive Principle, to tell our
Countrymen, in open Council, That the People in New England were all Slaves;
and that the only Difference between Them and Slaves, was their not being
Bought and Sold: And that they must not think the Privileges of Englishmen
would follow them to the end of the World. I say, when the People heard this,
they looked upon themselves in a manner Lost. On one Hand they saw their Enemies
invested with a full Power in the Government; on the other they saw themselves
not only turned out of the Public Ministry, but under a Necessitous Fear of
being Quiet, lest their Estates should be Siezed, and themselves Imprisoned. On
this side they saw their Wives and Children, their Fathers, Mothers, etc.
Butchered daily by a Handful of Barbarous Indians; on the other side, little or
no Resistance made by their Armies, which were Commanded by those of the Romish
Religion; insomuch that it seemed rather an intended Massacre, than a Desire of
putting an End to a Diabolick and Bloody War. They saw then, that they had to
their Cost, brought forth a Prophet, who told them they were Slaves; and they
then saw his Prophecy fulfilling; In fine, they saw all this, but perceived no
way to Escape; till throwing up their Cries to Heaven, they were animated by
Divine Power, to Rescue themselves and Children from the approaching Ruin.

Under the Pressure of all these Grievances, they Unanimously arose, upon the
coming in of the late King William, of Blessed Memory, Siezed the Government
for His Majesty's Use; and, amongst the rest of the Authors of their Miseries,
not unjustly Imprisoned this their present Governor.

From that time New England took Heart, and concluded that Heaven was removing
from them all the Plagues in their Land. They indeed Thankfully Rejoiced to see
themselves Restored to their Ancient Liberty, as afterward in a great Measure
they were by another Ministry.

And thus much for the former Actions of the Author of the following Matters of
Fact, which has rendered His Love to his Native Country, His Veneration for the
Liberty and Property of a Free People, His Fidelity, Justice, and Loyalty, in
delivering the Oppressed, and detecting the Queen's professed Enemies, but the
Reverse of Good Men's Actions, and ought to be Remembered only as so many
Monuments of Infamy.

But to come down to our Memorial, and inform the World of the modern
Mismanagements of this unhappy Gentleman, we humbly Declare, That

THE Trade with the French and Indians, being so countenanced by the Governor,
that without speedy Remedy, the Country is in great Danger of being Ruined,
which will plainly Appear as follows:

First, In the Year 17^5. The Governor sent his Son, William Dudley with
Captain Vetch, to Canada, under a pretense of Redeeming Captives; but brought
very few back to Boston of those that were there, and them of the Meanest sort,
leaving the Principal of the said Captives behind, to give them occasion of
going again, that they might have a Pretense to Color their Treacherous Design
of Trading, as Appears by the said Vetch's Acknowledgment, of going to Settle a
Correspondency with the Enemy, and carrying a Cargo out with him of 800 l.
which, according to their Disposal, might amount to near 3000 l. as
particularly Shot, which was Sold at 13 Sous per Pound; whereof they carried a
considerable Quantity, also Rigging, Pitch, Iron, and other Necessaries, fit
for supplying the Indians and French; and this done under a Color, of the said
Vetch's going to get in a Debt due to him, from the French, of 800 l. with the
Governor's Approbation.

Secondly, For Settling a Correspondency with the French Governor at
Port Royal, for Exchange of Prisoners; Whereas, it was indeed, only a Cover for
an Illegal Trade; when, at the same time, the French there, were drove to such
extreme Hardships, for want of Ammunition, Provision, etc. that most of their
Principal People were forced to go out a Privateering on our Coasts, who were
afterward taken and brought into Boston; particularly one Battis, a Man of
great Note and Service among the Enemy, who had been a Barbarous, Murdering
Fellow, to the English: He, with all the other French Prisoners, were sent to
Canada and Port Royal, and Discharged; but great part of our People that were
Prisoners, were left behind at the same time, and that, because our Governor
had been false in his Promise, to the French Governor, who had restrained the
Indians from disturbing our Fishery, and indeed would not allow them any
Ammunition for a considerable time, till our Governor taking that Opportunity
of the Indians, great Want countenanced a Trade with them, and supplied them by
the Vessels that were sent as Transports (as aforesaid) to fetch Prisoners;
when at the same time they were made Vessels of Merchandise, as appears by the
Indian Traders on their Trial.

Thirdly, The Country are at a vast Charge, in maintaining an Army Yearly, to
March several Hundred Miles up into the Country, to Destroy the Indians Corn,
the better to disinable them to Subsist; for they have been so Reduced (as by
Information of the Captives) that a great part of them would Perish for Want,
were it not for the Supply they had from the said Indian Traders; who
particularly, Sold about Eight Quarts of Indian Corn for one large Beaver Skin;
which Trade has been all along countenanced by the Governor, which
sufficiently Appears, by his being always Unwilling the Prisoners taken in that
Trade should be Fined, or Punished, even owned by Vetch, as in his Petition
more at large, is set forth.

Fourthly, The Country was at a great Expense, in Erecting a Fortification at
Casco Bay, and maintaining a number of Soldiers for securing the same, thereby
to suppress the Enemy, and keep sure Footting in that part of the Country; and
the Governor, through some Design or Neglect, did suffer those Soldiers to
remain there without any Commission Officer, to the great Dissatisfaction and
Dread to the Soldiers; insomuch, that they Declared to Captain Cally, (a Member
of the Assembly at Boston) that when the Enemy came upon them, they would
Surrender the Fort, and dare not Resist for want of a Commission. Then Captain
Cally made Application to the Assembly, which he found Sitting when he came to
Boston, and they represented to the Governor, that speedy care might be taken,
that some Person might be Commissionated to Command that Fort, which, with a
great deal of Difficulty, was at last Obtained.

Fifthly, And further, as to the Governor's countenancing this Private and
Illegal Trade, the Country has been at vast Expense, occasioned thereby;
insomuch, that at one Sessions the last Summer, the Assembly were forced to
raise 33000 Pounds, for Supporting and Maintaining the Charge they were put to,
by the Enemies Invasions, after they had a Supply; that whereas, if things were
rightly Managed, and the Enemy kept back for want of those Supplies, one Third
Part of the said Sum might have answered the End. The Indians that were
Supplied by those Traders, are the only People that Destroyed our Eastern
Parts, the Fishery, and the Coast of Accady; and also the very same that were
at Destroying of Newfound land; particularly one Escombu^t, a Principal
Commander among them, who is generally one that Heads the Indians, when they
come to Destroy the English in New England.

Sixthly, The Governor, with his Son Paul, not being Content with what Money
they come fairly by, and over greedy of Gain, are very Screwing and Exacting
upon the People, particularly upon sundry Inhabitants, taking away their
Privilege in catching of Whales, a Privilege they have Enjoyed many Years
before; that is, (under Pretense of Drift Fish) what Whales are taken by Her
Majesty's Subjects, he takes from them by Force, not giving them the Liberty of
a Trial at Common Law, but for his own Ends, decides the Matter in the
Admiralty, where his Son Paul is the Queen's Attourny and Advocate, thereby
Encroaching the whole to themselves, a thing never heard of before, and very
much to the Prejudice of Her Majesty's good Subjects there, and that without
Remedy.

Seventhly, As to the Address the Governor Obtained, pretended to come over
from the General Assembly at Boston, in his favor, for his Continuance, it was
no more than what he Clandestinely procured, by sending to his particular
Friends; such, who being either Related to him, or bore Commissions under him,
dare not deny his Request, and was never approved nor allowed of by the
Assembly; but on the Contrary, had not the Majority of the Country, waited in
Expectation of Her Majesty's Favor, in sending another Governor, they would
largely have signified their Resentments and Dissatisfaction, in the
Administration of Dudly's Government.

Eighthly, While the Great and General Assembly at Boston were Sitting, there
arrived a Flagg of Truce from Canada, with a haughty Demand of the Governor,
for all the French Prisoners, charging of him with breach of Promise, which was
the occasion of the French Governor's not sending several of the Prisoners,
particularly a Minister that was taken Captive at Derefield, detained by the
French, who might have been Discharged with sundry others.

Ninthly, The Lower House, mistrusting the French Flagg of Truce coming upon a
Trading Design, as well as for Prisoners, ordered the Flagg of Truce to be
diligently Searched, who found on Board their Vessel sundry new Arms and
Ammunition, hid in Private Places, particularly new Bullets, hid among Pease,
and yet denied by the Commander, who was an English Renagado, which Ammunition
being brought before the Assembly, were generally concluded to be Bought in
Boston; whereupon, the Governor interposing the Matter was hushed up and
Connived at, to the great Dissatisfaction of the Assembly, and Country in
general.

This being realy the State of New England, and its Provinces, it may very well
be called Deplorable, when it is rendered the very Scene of Arbitrary Power,
with all that is Miserable: But to proceed, before I come down to the several
Affidavits upon these Heads, it is Convenient to Recite some Letters from the
Inhabitants of that Place, who, under a deep Sense of their Approaching Ruin,
have breathed forth their Complaints in the following Words.

Boston, New England, October 2. 1706. SIR!
INasmuch, as you have Expected from me, a true and brief Representation of
several Matters, relating to this Province, I shall, with all possible
Faithfulness, endeavor it. Our present Governor is not without a number of
those, whom he has by Promotions and Flatteries made his Friends; but this
hinders not a much more considerable number, from wishing, that we had a
Governor, who would put an end unto the horrid Reign of Bribery, in our
Administration, and who would not infinitely Incommode Her Majesty's Service,
by keeping the People in continual Jealousies of his Plots, upon their most
Valuable Interests.

What the disposition of the People toward him is, you may guess by this:
There was lately prepared an Address from hence, to the Queen, upon many
important Articles; but by certain Arts there was got into it a Clause, to
desire of the Queen, that this Governor might be continued, the
Representatives Voted all the rest of the Address, but this Clause they
absolutely Rejected; they could not get above Five or Six Votes for it, so the
whole Address, (which was contrived by a Party for nothing but that Clause)
fell to the ground.

There happened lately a number of Persons, namely, Boreland Vetch, Rouse,
Lawson, Philips and Cauplin to be taken managing an unlawful Trade with the
French and Indians, the Commodities wherein they Traded, were such, that the
late Act of Parliament made their Crime to be High Treason, and we had no Act
of the Province relating to that Matter, but was defectively Expressed: Our
merciful Assembly was mighty loathe to proceed unto so severe a Judgment as
that of Death, upon these Offenders. The Offenders Petitioning for it, the
General Assembly were (very much by the Governors influence) drawn into it, to
take the Trial of them into their own Hands; and as only Guilty of an High
Misdemeanour, the Vote for it was obtained in a Thin House, upon an hurry at
breaking up; and some Clauses in the Charter were so Construed, as to
Countenance it. Upon their coming together again, they would fain have revoked
their Votes, as fearing, that the very Persons who had been their Tempters into
it, would turn their Accusers, and improve it by way of Complaint, for the
Enemies of our Charter to work upon; but the Governor would by no means permit
the Revocation of that wrong Step, (if it were one) so the Trial proceeded, and
the Offenders were Fined in several Sums, by an Act of the Governor and
Assembly.

It is now said, that the ungrateful Men who were saved from the Gallows, by
the Tenderness of the Government, are now cutting our Throats, and Petition
home against the Government, for Fining them instead of Hanging them; yea, it
is also said, that the very Person who was the chief Cause of drawing the
Assembly into this extraordinary Proceeding, intends to make an ill use of it,
against the Country; if you are sensible of any thing of this nature carrying
on, we pray you to add unto the rest of your Offices, that of an Intercession,
that an harmless People, surpised into any Error, may not be Punished any
otherwise, than by the removal of such as have been the Causes of it; and so
much for that.

Sir, You would do a vast Service to the Crown, if you would set forward the
designs of reducing Canada, and possessing Nova Scotia, a much less Fleet than
what annually goes into the Indies, coming early enough in the Spring, may
easily do the former, even in the way thither; and a Scotch Colony might be of
good Consequence to do the latter; but if any assistance from New England
should be expected in this matter, it is of absolute necessity that the Country
have a Governor whom the People may somewhat Rely upon.

Sir, You are Born to do the Queen and the Nation Service; you are spirited for
great undertakings; you are highly beloved and esteemed among our People in
this Land, and wherever you have come, it is wished that you may do some
considerable Action in this Affair.

I have been earnestly Solicited to Address one of the most Illustrious
Patriots of the English Nation, my Lord High Treasurer, with some of these
Intimations: That Noble Person is known to be such a Patron to all good Men,
and such a defense of Oppressed Innocence and Liberties, that we all fly to him
as our unquestionable Refuge. I am well satisfied there would need nothing (to
speak Humanely) to make this Country Easy and Happy, but for that excellent
Person to have an exact Representation of our Circumstances; nothing hinders me
from attempting it, but the hazard of doing what may be thought a presumption
in one so much a stranger to him, nevertheless, I am desired by some
considerable Persons to move you, that you would wait upon his Lordship, and
fully acquaint him with the Matters now laid before you,

May the Almighty prosper you; I am, Sir, Your Obliged Servant, etc.


Sir,
I may inform you of one Action lately done among us, which I know you will be
pleased withal. Upon the advice of the extreme Distress whereto the French
Invasion had brought St. Christophers and Nevis, the People of New England, in
a most Christian manner expressed their Charity toward those, who perhaps
would have hardly done the like for them, on a like Occasion. We made a
Collection for the Relief of their Necessities, the Collection was, as I am
told, between 7 and 800 l. in this Collection, there were two Churches in
Boston, the South and the North, one gave somewhat above a 100 l. the other
gave a little under it. Certainly, a Country so ready to serve Her Majesty, and
to help their fellow Subjects, ought to have a room in the Thoughts of all good
Men in the English Nation.

The foregoing Letter carrying with it so many undeniable Truths, the World
must of consequence concede with the general Exclamations of the now Distressed
New-Englanders. Indeed the Public had not been alarmed with these Distant
Calamities, had the inexorable Authors of them adhered to reitterated
Grievances, from those who too severely suffered under their Protection. The
Author of this Letter, who is a Person of a Character beyond the reach of Envy,
and one who is a great Blessing to his Native Country, had not invoked the
Protection and Assistance of others, without a due sense of the Danger his
innocent Neighbors and Countrymen were exposed to. To Report all the Letters
of Complaint from these Provinces, would be too Voluminous and tiresome to the
Reader; we will only mention one more, which, though short and plain, carries
nothing but Veracity with it.


Sir,
ALL the People here are Bought and Sold, betwixt the Governor and his Son
Paul; they are so Mercenary, there is no Justice to be had without Money: There
is not one Public Place in the Government that is worth Money, but what the
Governor or Paul goes Halves with: In short, the whole Country is very uneasy,
and the People here are so universally set against him, that Her Majesty can
scarce give a greater Instance of Her tender Care and Regard to them, than by a
removal of him, which, to my certain knowledge, would be soon followed by a
Sincere and Hearty Acknowledgment of Her Majesty's Singular Favor to them, in
that Particular.

R. A


In the foregoing Letters we find several things Worthy our Remark; but I shall
only mention the Three following:

(1.) That without Money, there is no Justice to be had in New England; So that
the meaner sort, doubtless, is in a Deplorable Condition; the faces of their
Poor being ground to Dust; their Widows Houses laid Waste, and the hopes of
their Offspring cut off. From whence we may infer, that New England having a
Governor, whose God is the Mammon of this World; whose Principles act Counter
to the Design of his Power; and whose Drift is the Ruin of his own Country; the
Inhabitants thereof have nothing but Justice on their part to Petition Her
Majesty to throw him aside.

(2.) A general uneasiness under, and opposition to this Governor, through the
whole Country. And this, methinks, might stop the Mouths of some People here,
(who, not knowing the Nature of this affair, no otherwise than as their
Interest leads them to side with the Governor, or by Virtue of a bare
Friendship Contracted with him whilst he Resided in England) and put a Period
to all their Objections in his Behalf; especially One, unhappily let slip from
the Mouth of a Gentleman too well known for his great Learning and Parts, to be
thought so over-sighted, and that is to this Effect. If a Governor must be
removed for every trivial Complaint, there would be no End of such Removals;
and Her Majesty's Ministry would be wholly taken up with turning out, and
putting in. I will not pretend to affirm the Reason that produced this hasty
Plea for our Criminal Governor; but sure I am, the Author of it knows too much
Law, than to extenuate the like Crimes in others. And a weak Argument I take it
to endeavor the influencing our Superiors in Redressing Grievances of the
Subject, when the several matters of Fact Sworn to, are laid down before them:
But, to say no more, this Gentleman has not been the first that has over-shot
himself in Defending things of this Nature. And,

(3dly,) A fervent Desire to be eased of Oppression, i: e. That they might be
capable of acknowledging with Respect and Gratitude, the mighty advantages of
such a Deliverance to the Queen of Great Britain; to a Queen who is all
Justice and Piety, Peace and Union; and a Queen who will not only hear the
Petitions of her Subjects, but maintain them in their Rights and Privileges.
Let not New England doubt then of finding Redress, from so Great and Gracious a
Mistress, notwithstanding the subtle Designs and Evasions of Evil-minded Men.
And so we come to present the Reader with a further Account of the said
Mismanagements, by another Hand.

SOmetime in the Spring of the Year, 1706. Mr. Dudley, the present Governor of
the Province of Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire, writ a Letter from Boston,
Directed to Mr. Richard Waldron, and my self, to use our Interest to prevail
with the Council at an Assembly, to Draw up an Address to the Queen, That Her
Majesty would please to continue the said Dudley in the Government of
New Hampshire: Whereupon the said Waldron (after he had Communicated the Letter
to me) drew up an Address, and showed it to the Assembly, and prevailed with
them to pass it in Both Houses, with little Alteration. And this is the Address
that is now come over from the Province of New Hampshire. The Assembly was much
against it, but we thought it would be best for us to do any thing that would
please the Governor at that time; considering, that we were always in danger
of the Enemy, and concluded, it was much in his Power, under God, to preserve
us, having often heard him say, that he would stop the Courier of the Indians
and French, (when he pleased) in a Month or Six Weeks time; and I did then, and
do still believe, that he could prevent the Indians and French from coming upon
us, and Killing us as they did; for I know that he had Correspondence with a
Friar or Jesuit, or one so called, a Frenchman that Lives among the Indians,
and has great influence over them, who Writes himself Galen Emesary. The
Governor, to my certain Knowledge, did order sundry things that were sent him;
and, considering the great Correspondence (he told me) he had with the
Governor of Port Royal, it caused a firm belief in me, that he could do what
he would with the Enemy: These, with other Motives, pressed us forwards to get
the Address passed, concluding all these things would add to our Peace, if
rightly improved; and the Indians, about that time, and for many Months before,
had done little or no Mischief, and for my part, I did really believe, that it
was the Governor's Interest that caused our quiet, but soon found we were
Mistaken, finding out, that much about the same time that Waldren and my self
were forwarding the Address to Her Majesty, to continue Mr. Dudley Governor,
he was countenancing a private Trade with the Indians and French, our Enemies,
as we found by woeful Experience: For soon after those Traders went to the
Eastward, the Indians came sharply down upon us about the latter end of June
last, Killed Six People, Wounded two, and carried away two from the Town of
Almsbury, and a little before they Killed Lieutenant John Shapleigh, at the
Town of Kittery, and a whole Family, as a Man, Wife and Children, all Killed
and Scalped out of the Township of Dover; and one Man Killed with Swan-shot out
of the Township of Hampton; and Nine Killed, one Wounded, and one carried out
of the Township of Exeter. All these Barbarities were committed before I came
from thence, which was about the beginning of September last; God knows how
many have been thus Barbarously Murdered since. Captain Vetch, and Captain
Lawson, oftentimes told me, that they had oftentimes acquainted the Governor
with their design of going to the Eastward upon Trade, and had the consent of
him, and did solemnly protest they would not have gone without it: And I do
believe, and it is generally believed in New England, that the Governor did
know of this Trade, and no doubt but he was to have a share of the Profit. When
these Traders came from the French and Indians, one of their Vessels stopped at
the Isle of Shoals, near the Province of New Hampshire, the Master's Name was
Rouse, who brought to that place from Port Royal Seven Prisoners; and Capt.
Jethro Furbur being at the said Isles of Shoales, at the said time when the
Vessel came in, heard the said Prisoners affirm, That the Eastern Indians had
no Shot, nor Bullets, nor Lead to make any, and it was very scarce with the
French, insomuch that they could not supply them, so that the Indians were like
to Starve for want of Ammunition; for great part of their Livelihood depends on
their Guns to Kill wild Beasts and Fowl, etc. whereby we find it was not the
Governor's Interest he had with the Enemy, to prevent their coming upon us,
but it was for want of Ammunition: And those Prisoners that were brought from
Port Royal, which Capt. Furber spoke with at the Isles of Shoals, did further
affirm, That they heard the Governor of Port Royal say, That he had given his
Letter to the Governor of Boston, that he would not supply the Indians with
Powder nor Shot, but that he would do all he could to prevent the Indians
coming upon the English, and had been as good as his Word; but that the said
Governor of Boston, or his People, had supplied the Indians with more
Ammunition than he was able to do; for the Traders from Boston brought it by
Tun^; and that if this Trade had not been encouraged by the Governor, we
should have had no Men Killed, nor indeed any Disturbance amongst us. It is my
Belief, and it seems very plain to me, that the Governor intends to forward
the French and Indian Enemy to Destroy all they can, and keep the Country
alarmed, thereby to put them to such vast Charges, as will Ruin the whole
Government, by Killing some and Impoverishing the rest. There was never such
Taxes on the Poor People as now; 33000 l. being raised a little before I came
away, and many great Sums not long before that. I was credibly Informed that
some Persons were forced to cut open their Beds, and Sell the Feathers to Pay
their Taxes. I do'nt remember that ever there was any of the Indian Enemy
Killed or Taken since Mr. Dudley came over Governor, except an Old Woman, and
two others I took to be Girls by their Scalps; and some few taken near Port
Royal taken by Major Church. So that instead of being Destroyed, I wish they be
not preserved: For, Six Months before it came to pass, the Governor Mr. Dudley
told me, what Methods the Indians would take when they came again, and it
proved accordingly. He told me, That the Indians would not come in any great
Body as they used to do, but they would come in small Numbers, no Number above
Thirty, and so Line the Woods from Dearfield, which is the South-West side of
the Massachusetts Government, and all along the Woods, just without the Towns to
Casko Bay, which is the North-East Part of Inhabitants at this time. And this
Method I am afraid will be continued till the Country is for a great part
Destroyed, if Mr. Dudley be continued Governor. As for the Address he obtained
of the Militia of Massachuset's Bay, it was a forced thing; for the Officers
are beholden to him for their Commissions, and if any Refused to Sign what the
Governor got drawn, he could put them out, and put in others as he pleased.

Thus having given the Public an Exact Relation of the present State of
New England, it remains only that we Produce a Confirmation of all that has
been said. To which end we will begin with the several Affidavits and
Depositions already made, and which are as follows.

The several Affidavits as they were laid before the QUEEN and Council,
relating to the Governor of New-England's Mercenary and Illegal Proceedings,
but particularly his private Correspondence with Her Majesty's Enemies,
especially the French and Indians.
The Two Affidavits of Mr. John Calley.
JOhn Calley of Marble-head, in the County of Essex in New England, now in
London Mariner, Deposes and says, That he does and has good reason to
Believe, That Her Majesty's Colonies of New England, are in great Danger of
being Ruined by reason of Governor Dudleys* Countenancing a Trade, and
Correspondence with the French, and Indian Enemies, and many other his
Irregular practices: Also says, that the said Governor did in the Year, 1705.
send his Son William Dudley, with Captain Samuel Vetch to Canada under a
Pretense of Redeeming Captives; who accordingly went and brought back only a
few of the meanest of the English Captives; Leaving the chiefest of them there
for an Occasion of their returning again to Canada to Trade, and settle a
Correspondence with the French; and that the said Vetch did carry out with him
a Cargo of about 800 lib. Value in Iron, Pitch, Rigging, Shot, etc. Which Cargo
upon a Moderate Computation, might Produce near 3000 lib. And that the said
Vetch did also pretend that he went with Governor Dudley's Approbation to get
in a Debt, of 800. lib. Contracted in time of Peace; And due to him from the
French, of which matters and things he this Deponent, has been credibly
informed* and Believes them to be true. And further says that it did appear to
the General Assembly of the Massachusetts Colony in New England, that Captain
William Rouse was (the better to color a Trade with the French, and Indians)
sent to Port Royal with a Flag of Truce, under Pretense of settling a
Correspondence with the French Governor there for exchanging Prisoners; and
did Trade not only with his own Vessel, but had also as the same Time two other
Trading Vessels with him, under his own Direction, and did bring back Furrs,
etc. To above 2000 lib. Value; and that the said Dudley did allow one Dishey
Foe, a French Prisoner on his Parole, to go in the same Vessel with the said
Rouse, who acted as Interpreter between the said Rouse and the Indians, in
Trading with them; and that the said Flag of Truce meeting with one of the two
other Vessels, the said Foe was put into the same with several Goods, and
Merchandises, out of the said Flag of Truce, with which the said Foe was
Trading; and that the said Foe returned again to Boston, and that when the said
Furrs, etc. were brought to Boston, it was alleged, that they were brought to
Pay French Men's Debts in New England, but that it was Proved that the said
Furrs, etc. were mostly purchased by the Goods carried out in the Vessel of the
said Rouse and were Seized, yet cleared afterward; And the said Rouse declared
to the said Assembly, that he had done nothing but by Governor Dudleys
approbation; and that it appeared to the said General Assembly, that the
Enemies distress through want of Ammunition, Provision, etc. before they were
by the English supplied, occasioned many of them to go out a Privateering on
the English Coast, some of which were taken and brought into Boston, and were
afterward with other French Discharged and sent to Canada, and Port Royal, and
among others one Battis a Prisoner kept for Murders, etc. by him committed upon
the English in cold Blood, and under a Flag of Truce, and he being a Man of
great note and Service among the French and usually joined with the Indians,
whilst the English Prisoners were still detained, because Governor Dudley had
as was alleged, falsified his Promise to the French Governor, who had
restrained the Indians from Disturbing the English Fishery or otherwise; and
would not allow them any Ammunition for a considerable time, nor until they were
supplied by the English Vessels sent under the pretense of Fetching Prisoners,
about which Letters were produced from the French Governor. And this Deponent
further says, that it appeared to the said General Assembly, that the
endeavors of the Country, by a chargeable maintaining an Army, and sending
them yearly several hundred Miles to destroy the Indians Corn, thereby to
distress and subdue them, have (by their being supplied in their great
Necessities, by such Traders, for great Prices) been in a great measure
frustrated, and that if the said Indians had not been so supplied many of them
must have perished through want; and that Governor Dudley, generally showed an
unwillingness that such Traders when taken, should be punished, or Fined; and
further says, that the above said Colony, was at a great Expense to Erect a
Fort at Cascobay, and to maintain Soldiers for Securing the same to suppress
the Enemy, and keep sure Footing in that Part of the Country, yet that
Governor Dudley suffered those Soldiers to remain there without any
Commission Officer, to the great dissatisfaction and dread of the said
Soldiers, insomuch that they declared to this Deponent, a Member of the said
Assembly, that if the Enemy should come upon them they would Surrender the said
Fort, and dared not Resist for want of a Commission; and that he, this Deponent
coming into the Assembly then Sitting at Boston; and Informing them thereof,
the said Assembly Represented to the Governor, the necessity of speedily
Comissionating some person to command that Fort, which after some considerable
time was obtained: And this Deponent further says, that the said Colony, has
by reason of such Illegal Trade been put to vast Expenses to secure themselves
from the Invasions, of the Enemy; and that in one Sessions the last Summer was
raised by the said Assembly, about 33000 lib. When as otherwise one third part
thereof might have been sufficient. And further says, that the Indians, that
have been thus Supplied are the only People, that destroy the Eastern parts of
the Country; the Fishery and Coast of Accady, and are, as this Deponent has
been credibly Informed, and does believe the very same Indians that were at the
destroying of Newfound Land, and headed by one Escombuet, that usually heads
the Indians, when they come to destroy the New-Englanders. And this Deponent
further says, that he has been credibly Informed and has good reason to
believe; that Governor Dudley does several ways Illegally exact from Her
Majesty's Subjects several Sums of Money, and Deprives them of their
Privileges in catching of Whales by force, taking Whales from the Fishers
under Pretense of Drift-fish; and obstructs the course of Justice; and
Particularly that one Clap took by force a Whale from one Newcomb, upon which
the said Newcomb sued Clap, and obtained Judgment against him, and for which he
was cast into Prison, and then was cleared by Governor Dudley, without any
satisfaction made to said Newcomb. And this Deponent further says, that he is
informed that an Address has been sent to Her Majesty, Representing, as if the
People of New England Prayed for the continuing the said Dudley, their
Governor; but that he does in part know, and has been informed, and has
great grounds to believe, that the far greatest part of Her Majesty's Subjects
in New England are very weary under his administration, and that the said
Governor Dudley did cause to be Prepared an address to Her Majesty, for his
Continuance, and the same to be sent up and down the Country, to get hands
thereunto, and that the same was only Signed by such persons as were in
Commission under him, or influenced by him. And that he this Deponent does know
that an Address was presented to the House of Representatives, to be Signed,
Praying for several Favors from Her Majesty, but because in the said Address a
prayer for his Continuing Governor was inserted, the whole Address was by the
said House Rejected: And that he does believe, that if an Address to Remove him
has not been presented, it was because they had an Expectation that Her
Majesty, would suddenly favor that Country with a better Governor: And
further says, that whilst the Assembly was Sitting there arrived a Flag of
Truce from the French Governor, with a haughty Demand of the French Prisoners,
in New England, and charging Governor Dudley with Breach of his Promise, and
his permitting English Trading Vessels on their Coasts; whereupon the House of
Representatives Suspecting the Flag of Truce to come upon account of Trade,
Ordered the Vessel to be searched, and that there was found on Board the same
New Arms and Ammunition, hid in private places, particularly shot among Peace,
yet denied by the Commander thereof, who was an English Renegado; part of which
being brought before the said House, it was Generally concluded, that they had
been newly bought in Boston; but the Governor Interposing, the matter was
hushed up to the great dissatisfaction of the General Assembly, and Country in
General; and although the Assembly moved the Governor for a strict Guard to be
kept on the Vessel or Flag of Truce, nothing was done. This Deponent further
says, that the House of Representatives, Insisted not only upon far greater
Fines to be laid on the foresaid Traders, and others Concerned: but also that
they should stand upon the Gallows, and suffer Twelve Months Imprisonment, and
continued insisting upon the same about Three Weeks, but Governor Dudley, not
consenting thereto, by his Wearying out the said House, and persuading them to
Moderate their Sentence; to the great dissatisfaction of the Council, and the
said House; at last the House altered their Sentence; to the Fines they now
Stand Charged with.

John Calley.
Jur. 2 die Jun. 1707. coram me. Thomas Gery.

JOhn Calley, of Marble-head in the County of Essex in New England, now in
London, Mariner, Deposes and says, That about the middle of the Month of May,
1706, This Deponent was Chosen an Assembly-Man, or Representative for the said
Town of Marble-head, to sit in the Great and General Court or Assembly at
Boston, for the Province of the Massachusets-Bay in New England, on the last
Wednesday of the said Month of May; and accordingly this Deponent took the
usual Oath and was a Member of the said Court or Assembly,; and that in the
beginning of the said Sessions, the House of Assembly, or Representatives,
being Informed by some Captives redeemed out of Captivity from the French and
Indians That there were some English Persons Trading in the Eastern parts of
New England with the French and Indians; and that one Captain Samuel Vetch was
returned to Cape Ann, from such Trading; whereupon this Deponent was Authorized
by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, to Search for the said Persons so
Trading as aforesaid, and to Seize their Goods, Vessels, and Effects, and in
Pursuance of his Commission this Deponent at Marble-head aforesaid, found one
John Curtys Pilot of the said Vessel, Coming privately on Shore, to go to Mr.
John Borland of Boston Merchant, who was concerned in the said Vessel and
Goods, and Seized the said Curtys, whom this Deponent Carried to Boston, where
he was Examined before the Governor; and Council: And there gave an Account
upon Oath of the said Voyage and Trading, as by his Testimony, given in upon
the Trial appears; and afterward this Deponent Seized the Stoop or Vessel
called the Flying-Horse, Archibal Furgison Master; and the Resolution, Thomas
Barrow Master; Wherein was found-sundry Parcels of Goods brought back again in
the Flying-Horse and not Disposed of in the Trade abovesaid, and this Deponent
put the Vessel and Goods into the Possession of Mr. William Pain, Deputy
Collector of Her Majesty's Customs at Boston aforesaid; and amongst the Bills
of Loading, Orders, and Papers, found on Board the Flying-Horse, it appeared
that the said John Borland, Samuel Vetch, and Roger Lawson, were owners of the
said Sloop Flying-Horse, and the Cargo put on Board her for the Voyage
aforesaid: Which Amounts to the Value of Eight Hundred Pounds, as the said
Curtys Informed this Deponent; whereupon by a Vote of the House of Assembly, a
Messenger was sent for the said Vetch, Borland, and Lawson, and upon their
Examination before the said House, and other Evidences that were Produced
against them, the said Borland, Vetch, and Lawson, Were Committed to Prison for
Treason, in Aiding, and Assisting, Her Majesty's Enemies Contrary to a Late Act
of Parliament made in England: And this Deponent further says, that he was
sent in the Province Galley to look for other Persons that had likewise been,
and were Trading with the French and Indians, and it appeared that William
Rouse, John Philips, and Ebenezer Coffin, had also been Concerned for Illegal
Trading with the French and Indians: And upon their Examinations and Evidences
Produced against them, they were Committed by the said House of Representatives
for Treason as the other were, who were all Continued in Prison upon their --
for several Weeks, the General Court or Assembly, still Sitting, and that the
Prisoners Petitioned the said Court, to be Tried for High Misdemeanors only:
Which the Lower House would not Consent to, for some Weeks when the
Contrymen in the General Court being wanted at Home, upon present Occasions,
and to Guard their Families, being then Invested in several Places by the
French and Indians, who had been supplied by the said Traders with Shot and
other Necessaries, as by the Evidence appeared, but were still detained by the
Governor from their Lawful business, who was altogether averse for Trying them
for Treason, and used Strenuous Arguments, and his utmost endeavors to Try
them for High Misdemeanors, Alleging (amongst other things) that they had
Power by the Charter to Try them so, and to lay Fines; and Mulcts, and
Imprisonments upon them; Which would be of much greater advantage to the
Country, than to Try them for Treason. And the said Governor having Wearied
out the Assembly, and keeping them only on that Affair; and when many of the
most Prudent Men of the Assembly were gone, to their Respective dwellings, he
over persuaded the Remainder (which could but just make a Houses) to alter
their Vote, to Try them for High Misdemeanors instead of Treason. As they were
at First Committed, which by his means was consented unto, and they were all
afterward Convicted of High Misdemeanors, and fined, as by their Trial
Appears wherein the Governor still interceeded for the moderating thereof, and
by his means they were Reduced to the several Sums, they now stand Fined for.

Colonel Partridges Affidavits.
William Pattridge, of Portsmouth in the Province of New Hampshire in
New England; now in London, Esquire Deposes that Sometime in the Month of January,
1702. Col. Joseph Dudley Governor of the said Province, and of the
Massachusets-Bay, did Dispose of two Great Guns out of Her Majesty's Fort, at
New Castle, in the Province of New Hampshire, and received the Money for the
same: And this Deponent further says, that one Mr. Theodore Atkinson, being an
Officer appointed to Receive a Duty the General Assembly had laid upon all
Boards and Staves exported out of the said Province of New Hampshire, (and
Naval Officer there) was threatened by Mr. Paul Dudley the Governor's Son, and
the Queens Attorney to have turned him out of his Place, for not Paying the
Money due the Preceding Year, as agreed for. And this Deponent Paid Ten or
Twelve Pounds in Part of what was behind, that the said Officer might not be
turned out of his Place, which Sum the said Atkinson afterward repaid to this
Deponent; And that a year or two afterward the said Paul Dudley told this
Deponent, that the Governor should turn the said Atkinson out his of Place,
for that he had not Paid him all that was agreed for, whereupon this Deponent
acquainted the said Atkinson therewith, who replied that there was not above
Five or Six Pounds behind, and he would Pay it the next Post: And that sometime
in the Month of August last, as this Deponent was coming away, to his best
remembrance, the said Atkinson told him he had Paid Twenty Pounds a year, for
both his Offices: And this Deponent further says, that having occasion to run
the Bounds of a Piece of Land he had Bought in Portsmouth; he Wrote to the said
Mr. Paul Dudley to Procure the Governors Order to the Sheriff, to accompany
the Persons Appointed to run the Line or Bounds between this Deponent, and the
Adjacent Freeholder, for fear of any Disturbance, and he would be at the Charge
thereof; but sent no Money, and the said Paul Dudley sent this Deponent word
that it could not be done, or to that Purpose: And the next Post this Deponent
ordered his Friend in Boston to Pay the said Paul Dudley Ten Pounds, and
thereupon an Order came to this Deponent by the next Post; and the Business was
afterward done in three or four Hours time, and the Charge to the Officers and
Sheriff was not above the Sum of Twelve Shillings: And this Deponent further
says, that upon the Fifth Day of August last, some of the Men belonging to Her
Majesty's Ship the Deptford, then Riding in the River of Piscataqua; came on
shore at the Town of New Castle aforesaid, and took from thence by the Captains
Order as they said one Jethro Furbur Master of the Ship called the William and
Richard, and forthwith set Sail and Carried him to Boston, in another Province;
where Captain Stuckley Commander of the Deptford, and Captain Mathews Commander
of the Dover, entered a Complaint against the said Furbur, in the Court of
Admiralty at Boston, for Shipping two of their Men: whereupon this Deponent
wrote to Col. Dudley the Governor, how that Captain Stuckley had Carried away
the Master of his Ship, Loaded with dry Fish, bound to Leghorn; having cleared
the Custom-House and obtained the Governors Pass to the Fort, and earnestly
desired Relief: And Enclosed to the Governor a Protest against the said
Stuckley, but sent no Money either to the Governor, or his Son; neither could
he obtain any Relief; whereupon this Deponent took Horse and went to Boston and
applied himself to the Governor, acquainting him, that the Fish on Board his
Ship was a Perishing Comodity; and if any Water should come into the Ship the
Cargo would be utterly lost; for as soon as Captain Stuckley carried away his
Master, the rest of the Men run away from the said Ship, into the Woods; And
this Deponent was informed the said Ship swung too and again, in the Tide, and
was like to Sink, and could not get a Man on Board her: And this Deponent
further informed the said Governor, that there was great Fleet of English and
Dutch Men of War in the Straits, and if his Master could Sail before they came
out, his Ship would be out of Danger of being taken, but if the Master was
Detained, he should Lose his Ship and Cargo: And that if the Master had done
any thing Amiss he ought to be Tried at Piscataqua, and not at Boston; but this
Deponent could get no Relief from the Governor; and thereupon went to the said
Paul Dudley, the Queens Advocate, of the Court of Admiralty, and Offered Ten
Thousand Pounds Bond, with good security to Pay whatever the Courts Sentence
should be; Provided his Master and Ship might go: But all in vain, and his
Vessel was Detained above Three Weeks, and when she came into the Straights,
the Men of War was come out Seven Days before she Arrived there, and afterward
was taken, and further says not.

Colonel Partridge's Affidavits.
William Partridge of Portsmouth, in the Province of New Hampshire, in New
England, makes Oath, that he does believe that Joseph Dudley Esquire present
Governor of New England, did Countenance a Trade with the French and Indian
Enemies, and says, that he the said Dudley did keep Correspondence with one
Gallen Emissary, a French Friar or Jesuit, that Lives among the Indians; and
the said Dudley owned to this Deponent, that he had a great Correspondence with
the Governor of Port Royal: And this Deponent says, that Captain Vetch, and
Captain Lawson often told this Deponent, that they had acquainted the said
Dudley with their Voyage to the Eastward, when they Traded with the French and
Indians, and that he Consented thereto; and that soon after they had so Traded,
the Indians came down and Killed Lieutenant John Shapeley at the Town of
Kittery; and a Man, his Wife and Children in the Township of Dover; and Killed
one Man with Swan-shot out of the Township of Hampton; and Killed Nine; and
Wounded one out of the Township of Exeter; and about the latter end of June
last Killed Six, and Wounded Two; and carried away Two out of the Township of
Almesbury; all which Persons were Killed and taken in this Deponent's
Neighborhood, as this Deponent has heard, and verily believes, being informed
so by those that were at most of their Funerals. And this Deponent further
says, that there was not to his Knowledge, any of the Indian Enemies Killed
since the said Dudley was Governor, except an Old Woman and two others, that
seemed by their Scalps to be Girls. And this Deponent further says, that the
said Dudley told this Deponent Six Months before the Invasion by the Indians,
that when they came again they would not come in any great Body, as they used
to do, but not above Thirty in a Company, and so Line the Woods from Dearfeild
to Casko-Bay, which is above a Hundred Miles, which Method the said Indians did
after take in their said Invasion: but how the said Dudley came to know that
they would so do, this Deponent knows not; but says, that the said Dudley
often told this Deponent, that he could stop the Career of the French and
Indians when he pleased, in a Month or Six Weeks time.

Will. Partridge.
Jurat Vicessimo, primo die Junij. Anno, 1707. Cor. me W. Rogers.

Mr. Thomas Newton's Affidavit.
THomas Newton of Boston in New England, at present in London, Gent.
maketh-Oath, that he has Lived in New England for near Sixteen Years last
past, and during that time has been well acquainted with Colonel Joseph
Dudley, the present Governor of the Province of Masachusets-Bay and New-
Hampshire: And that since the said Colonel Dudley was Governor there, this
Deponent was credibly Informed, that several Persons having purchased Lands at
Nashobah and Nipmuck, within his Government, and wanting a Confirmation of
their Titles, by an Act of the General Court, (as is usual in such Cases) they
could not obtain the Governor's assent thereto, without giving him Money, and
part of their Lands. And this Deponent further says, that he being Deputed by
William Atwood Esquire to be Deputy Judge of the Court of Vice Admiralty, as well
as of the Collony of Rhode Island, as for the Provinces of Masachusets Bay, and
New Hampshire, was prohibited by the said Governor from going to Rhode Island,
and Condemning some Prizes brought in there, unless this Deponent would procure
the Governor One Hundred Founds, and that his Son should go Advocate thither;
and threatened this Deponent to raise the Posse Comitatus upon him, if he
offered to proceed without his Order, or License under his Hand. And this
Deponent also further says, That one Mr. Stephen Minot, having Built a very
Convenient House for a Public Inn or Tavern, upon a place called the Neck, the
Governor having a Tennant who kept a Public House near to it, Prohibited the
Justice to grant a License to the said Minot, though it was Requested by the
General Assembly; but the said Minot could not obtain a License for his House,
until he complied with the Governor upon hard Terms. And this Deponent
moreover says, that Sentence in the Court of Vice-Admiralty being given by
this Deponent for a Saylor, against a Master of a Vessel for Wages, from which
the said Master appealed to the High Court of Admiralty in England, but not
giving Bond to Prosecute as is usual in such Cases, Process was granted against
the said Master, and the Marshall took him into Custody thereupon, yet the
Governor abused the Officer, and discharged the said Master contrary to Law,
and by that means the Saylor left his Wages, and his Charges and Costs: And
lastly, this Deponent says, that the People in New England in general, are
much dissatisfied with the said Colonel Dudley, and would rejoice to have him
removed from his Government; and further says not.

Colonel Partridge's Certificate.
WHereas an Address from Her Majesty's Assembly, in the Province of
New Hampshire, in New England, has been lately sent over, Praying her Majesty's
Continuance of Colonel Dudley Governor of the said Province; Now the Truth and
Occasion of Procuring and sending the same, was thus:

Coll. Dudley, who is not only Governor of New Hampshire, but also of the
Massathusets-Bay, and lives at Boston, 60 Miles from New Hampshire, Wrote to
some Principal Gentlemen, to Prevail with the Assembly of New Hampshire, to
Present an Address to her Majesty for the Purpose aforesaid, and in Compliance
with this Desire, and in Order to Prevail with the Assembly, the said Gentlemen
Prepared an Address accordingly, and showed it to the Assembly, who, in some
time after, though with great Difficulty and Reluctance, were prevailed on to
Sign the same, with little Alteration. The Chief, and indeed the Only
Inducement to which, was the Apprehension they were then under, that it was
better for them to do any thing that would Please the Governor; and that it
was in his Power to Contribute much to the Advantage and Security, or to the
Mischief and Prejudice of that Province; and not any Opinion they had of the
Conduct and Integrity of the said Dudley, who is generally Disliked and
Ill-Thought of in both Provinces, where he is Governor; and has given too much
Reason and Occasion to Suspect his Regard to the Good and Welfare of those
Places, especially when his own Interest stands in Competition, or a fair
Opportunity offers, for his Profit and Advantage.

All which is humbly Certified and Submitted, Wm. Partridge.

Thus far the Affidavits of the Illegal and Disloyal Practices of our
Governor. Can any Man that loves not a French Interest, call those Trivial; or
say, they are not worthy of the severest Resentments? With what Face Men now
adays can go about to Justify Crimes that have so near an affinity to High
Treason, is a wonder to me; and yet pretend at the same time to be Loyal and
True to their Country. Crimes of the most pernicious Consequence to a State;
and which, among all Nations, have been Punished with the utmost Severity. The
Athenians, notwithstanding the Liberty they gave to some of their Rulers, yet
they appointed a Reckoning Day among them; so that those that thought
themselves not accountable whilst in Authority, found at last a very strict
Account to be given to certain Auditors, and a worser Punishment inflicted on
them if Criminal, than the abused Clemency of this Age can produce: To do
Justice and Right is the most invaluable Jewel in Magna Charta; and a Blessing
which no People in the World can boast of, like those of the British Nation.
The New-Englanders are of the same Tribe; have the same Liberty to, and the
same Property in the Enjoyment of the many Legal Privileges in that Charter
contained: They are not Slaves, as their conceited Governor once told them;
but have still a right Legally to oppose his Pride and Covetousness; have still
a Right to Petition for a Better, that will not be Bribed to do Evil; they have
a Right to tell the World, and that loudly, That for a Governor to furnish the
Enemy with Powder and Shot, etc. to destroy his own Countrymen, is a Wretch
not only fit to be Discarded, but to be for ever forgotten among Mankind.

The Cries sent up to Heaven, by the many poor Souls lately most inhumanely
Butchered by the Merciless Indians, with our own Instruments, have reached the
Ears of the Almighty, and will certainly draw down Redress from him, who is not
only Rex Magnus and Rex Solus, but Judex Supremus, who has Imperium fine fine,
as well as fine Limite, to whom we commit all that has been already said.

And now to Conclude all, (that our Readers may have a just Sense of the
unaccountable Cruelties acted by the Indians, upon our English in New England)
we shall present them with the following Particulars, lately sent over to us by
a very great and good Man.

An Account of several Barbarities lately committed by the Indians in
New England; Intermixed with some Memorable Providence.
AStonishing Deliverances have been sent from Heaven, to many of our Captives.
They have been many a time upon the Point of Destruction; but, These poor ones
have Cried unto the Lord, and He has Remarkably delivered them.

It Is a Wonderful Restraint from God upon the Brutish Salvages, that no
English Woman was ever known to have any Violence offered unto her Chastity, by
any of them.

It Is wonderful, that no more of the Captives have been Murdered by them,
neither when they were Drunk, nor when the Caprichio's, and the Cruelties of
their Diabolical Natures were to be Gratified.

It Is Wonderful, that when many of the Captives have been just going to be
Sacrificed, some strange Interposition of the Divine Providence has put a stop
to the Execution, and prevented their being made a Sacrifice. The Stories are
numberless. Take a few of them.

A C^^e of Indians had been three Days without any manner of Sustenance. They
took an English Child, and hung it before the Fire to Roast it for their
Supper; but that these Canibals might Satiate their -- I want a Name for it, --
as well as their Hunger, they would Roast it Alive. The Child began to Swell. A
Cannow arrived at that Instant, with a Dog in it. The lesser Devils of the
Crew, proposed their taking the Dog instead of the Child; they did so, and the
Child is yet Living! Her Name is Hannah Parsons.

A Man had Valiantly Killed an Indian or two before the Salvages took him. He
was next Morning to undergo in horrible Death, whereof the Manner and the
Torture was to be assigned by the Widow Squa of the Dead Indian. The French
Priests told him, they had endeavored to divert the Tygres from their bloody
Intention, but could not prevail with them; he must prepare for the terrible
Execution, His cries to God were hard, and heard; when the Sentence of the Squa
was demanded, quite contrary to every ones Expectation, and the Revengeful
Inclination so usual and well-known among these Creatures, she only said, His
Death will not fetch my Husband to Life; Do nothing to him! So nothing was done to
him.

A Woman was carried aside, by her Monster of a Master; he fastened a Rope about
her Neck; it was in vain for her to contend, the Hatchet must presently have
dispatched her, if the Halter had failed; she had no Remedy but to Cry unto
God: Her Master throws up the end of the Rope over a Limb of a Tree; he ascends
to hale her and tie her up; and then a fine Exploit for the Wretch! a memorable
Name! However the Limb happily breaks down he falls; full of madness he goes to
repeat his brave action: An Indian Commander just in the Nick of Time comes in
upon him; Reproaches him very bitterly; Takes her away from him; and sends her
to Canada.

But we ought not to pass over the mavelous Display of the Power of God, in
supporting and preserving the poor Captives when they Traveled through the
horrid Wilderness, oftentimes much more than a score of Miles in a day, and
through very deep Snows; and with vast Loads on their Backs, and grievously
pinched with Hunger, having scarce one bit of any Refreshment, for whole days
together. Poor, Weak, sick Women have done so!

One cannot well imagine any other than Supernatural and Angelical assistances,
in some of the instances.

The Indians came upon the House of one Adams at Wells, and Captivated the Man
and his Wife, and assassinated the Children; whereof one, who had an Hatchet
struck into his Skull, and was left for dead, was strangely recovered. The
Woman had Lain in about Eight Days. They dragged her out, and tied her to a
Post, until the House was rifled. They then loosed her, and bid her walk. She
could not stir. By the help of a Stick she got half a step forward. She looked
up to God. On the sudden a new strength entered into her. She traveled that
very Day Twenty Miles a Foot: She was up to the Neck in Water six times that
very Day in passing of Rivers. At night she fell over head and ears, into a
Slough in a Swamp, and was hardly got out alive. She got not the least Cough
nor Cold by all this: She is come home alive unto us.

Many more such Instances might be mentioned. We will superfede them all, with
a Relation of what befell Mrs. Bradley of Haverly. Ab una Disce omnes.

This Virtuous Woman had been formerly for Two Years together a Captive in the
Hands of the Barbarous Indians; a subject of wondrous Afflctions, of wondrous
Deliverances. Her Husband at length found her out, and fetched her home, and
their Family went on happily for six years together after it. But, the Clouds
return after the Rain.

On February 6, 1703-4. She with her Sister, and a Maid or two, and some
Children, (a Man being also in the Room,) were talking about the Indians, and
behold, one of the fierce Tawnies looked in, with a Gun ready to fire upon
them. The Englishman pulled him in, and got him down, and Mrs. Bradly took the
opportunity to pour a good quantity of scalding Soap, (which was then boiling
over the Fire) upon him, whereby he was killed immediately, Another of the
Tawnies followed at the Heels of his Brother, who stabbed the Englishman to the
Heart. Unto him she dispensed also a quantity of her Soap, which not killing
him, she with the other Women and Children ran into the Chamber. The House was
fired by the Indians, and Mrs. Bradly with her Companions found it necessary to
retire behind the House. One of the Women fell into the Hands of the Indians;
and they that remained were Mrs. Bradly and her Sister; each of them having a
Child of Mrs. Bradlies with her. The Sister was discerned by the Indians, who
commanded her to come out unto them, and threatened that they would else cut her
to pieces. Mrs. Bradly very generously bid her sit still, and wait for a better
time to escape; and offered her, that inasmuch as the Indians knew of but one
there, she would be that one, and go out in her stead. She did so, and thereby
her obliged Sister and the Child with her were preserved; but Mrs. Bradly was
no sooner come to the Salvages, but they employed a Head-breaker on the Child
that she brought unto them.

She was not entered into a Second Captivity; but she had the great Encumbrance
of being Big with Child, and within Six Weeks of her Time! After about an Hours
Rest, wherein they made her put on Snow Shoes, which to manage, requires more
than ordinary agility, she traveled with her Tawny Guardians all that night,
and the next day until Ten a Clock, associated with one Woman more who had been
brought to Bed but just one Week before* Here they Refreshed themselves a
little, and then traveled on till Night; when they had no Refreshment given
them, nor had they any, till after their having Traveled all the Forenoon of
the day Ensuing; and then too, whatever she took, she did through Sickness throw
it up again.

She underwent incredible Hardships and Famine: A Mooses Hide, as tough as you
may Suppose it, was the best and most of her Diet. In one and twenty days they
came to their Headquarters, were they stayed a Fortnight, But then her
Snow-shoes were taken from her; and yet she must go every step above the Knee
in Snow, with such weariness, that her Soul often Prayed, That the Lord would
put an end unto her weary Life! until they came to another Place, where they
stayed for three Weeks together,

Here in the Night she found her self ill, and having the help of only one
Woman, who got a little Hemlock to lay about her, and with a few sticks made
shift to blow up a little Fire, she was in half an Hour Delivered of the
Infant, that she had hitherto gone withal. There she lay till the next Night,
with none but the Snow under her, and the Heaven over her; in a misty and rainy
Season. She sent then unto a French Priest, that he would speak unto her Squa
Mistress, who then, without Condescending to look upon her, allowed her a
little Birch-Rind, to cover her Head from the Injuries of the Weather, and a
little bit of dried Moose, which being boiled, she drunk the Broth, and gave it
unto the Child.

In a Fortnight she was called upon to Travel again, with her Child in her
Arms; every now and then, a whole day together, without the least Morsel of any
Food, and when she had any, she fed only on Ground-nuts and Wild-onions, and
Lilly-roots. By the last of May they arrived at Cowesick, where they Planted
their Corn; wherein she was put unto a hard Task, so that the Child extremely
Suffered. The Salvages would some times also please themselves, with casting
hot Embers into the Mouth of the Child, which would render the Mouth so sore,
that it could not Suck for a long while together. So that it Starved and Died.

There they staid until they Wed their Corn, but then some of our
Friend-Indians coming on them, killed Seven of them, whereat away they fled for
Canada, and never saw their Corn-field any more. But they made a Forty-days
Ramble of it, before they reached thither, in which, if at any time, her Heart
began to faint, her Mistress would be ready to strike the Mortal Hatchet into
her Head,

The French being thought more Civil to the English than to the Indians, her
Mistress thereat Provoked, resolved, that she would never Sell her to the
French. Accordingly she kept her a Twelvemonth with her, in her Squalid
Wigwam: Where, in the following Winter, she fell sick of a Feavour; but in the
very height and heat of her Paroxysms, her Mistress would compel her sometimes
to Spend a Winters-night, which is there a very bitter one, abroad in all the
bitter Frost and Snow of the Climate. She recovered; but Four Indians died of
the Feavour, and at length her Mistress also. Another Squa then pretended an
Heirship unto her, with whom she lived, and saw many more strange Deliverances.
They had the Smallpox in the Family; but she never had it. She was made to
pass the River on the Ice, when every step she took, she might have struck
through it if she pleased Many more such Preservations might come into her
Story.

At Last, there came to the sight of her a Priest from Quebeck, who had known
her in her former Captivity at Naridgewock. He was very Civil to Her, and made
the Indians Sell her to a French Family, for Fourscore Livers, where though she
wrought hard, she Lived more comfortably and contentedly.

She poured out her continoal Supplications to Heaven; Sometimes Two or Three
of her own Sex, would by Stealth, come to join with her in Supplicating to the
Glorious LORD. She had her Mind often Irradiated with Strong Persuasions and
Assurances, that she should yet See the Goodness of God, in this Land of the
Living. Her tender and Loving Husband, accompanied Mr. Sheldon, in his Last
Expedition. He found her out, and fetched her home, a Second time; She arrived
with those of the Last Return from the Captivity; and affectionately calls upon
her Friends, O magnify the LORD with me, and let us Exalt his Name together*

Because of its having some Affinity with the foregoing Relations, and that we
may at once discharge our selves of what we can relate concerning our Captives,
we will proceed with a Copy of a Letter sent unto one of the Ministers in
Boston.

A Letter from a Captive at Port Royal.
Sept. 18. 1703. Reverend Sir,
THE Occasion of my now Writing to you is because I lie under a Vow and Promise
to the Great and Almighty God, to declare and make Known his wonderful Goodness
and Mercy to me, and livewise to have His Name Blessed and Praised in your
Congregation on my Behalf. I shall briefly Inform you.

Being taken a Prisoner some time last January by the French: in going to
Port Royal we met with very Tempestuous Weather, and were fast in an Harbor
near Cape Sables. And here two Frenchmen had Orders from their Captain to take
me with them, and go to Port Royal by Land. They took with them but little
Bread; and we Traveled one Night in the Woods in a miserable Condition. I had
my self no Shoes nor Stockings, but a piece of Skin wrapped about about my Feet;
and the Snow being very deep, we could not Travel, being Weak for want of
Provision, and lost in the Woods, not knowing which way to go.

One of the Frenchmen Loaded his Gun, and Presented it at me, telling me, That
it was impossible to find Port Royal, I must Dye, and they must Eat me. Then I
begged leave to Pray unto God, before he Killed me, and he Granted it. As I was
at Prayer, it struck into my Mind, That I had formerly heard your self declare
in your Pulpit, what Great and Wonderful Things has been done by Prayer;
particularly, That it had stopped the Mouths of Lions, and that it had Quenched
the Violence of the Fire. So I earnesty begged of God, that he would manifest
his great Power to me, by turning the Hearts of those that were about to take
away my Life.

The Words were no sooner out of my Mouth, but the Frenchman seeming to have
Tears in his Eyes, bid me rise up; he would try one Day longer. And he bid me
go and get Wood for a Fire. It presently grew Dark; and then I made an Escape
from them, and hid my self in the Woods, until the next Day that they were
gone; and then I found the way out of the Woods, unto the Waterside, where I
got Clams.

These Frenchmen found the way to Port Royal, and there told what they had
done. The Governor put them in Prison, and sent out Two Men, and Charged them
not to return, until they had found me, Dead or Alive. In Four Days after these
Frenchmen left me, they found me Alive, and brought me Provision, and a Pair of
Shoes, and carried me to Port Royal.

These and many other Favors have I received from my Good God in the time of
my Imprisonment; Blessed and for ever Praised be his Holy Name for it. Pray,
Sir, give me Directions what I shall do for the Great and Good GOD.

W. C.

OUr Eastern Indians had no sooner, with all possible Assurance renewed their
League of Peace with us, but being moved by the Instigation of the French, they
Perfidiously and Barbarously Surprised Seven more of our naked and secure
Plantations; and coming at once into the scattered Families, they did, on
August 10, 11. 1703: Reward the Hospitable Civilities that were shown them,
with the Murder of above Seventy English People, and the Captivity of near an
Hundred. Upon this there Ensued Lesser Depredations, and Captivations, as the
Treacherous Enemy found Opportunity for them.

About half a year after these Calamities thus begun on the Eastern Parts of
the Country, the Western had a taste of the same Cup given to them. On Feb. 29.
1703 4. An Army consisting, as it was judged; of about 400 French and Indians,
made a Descent upon the little Town of Deerfield, the most Northernly
Settlement on Connecticut-River, which had long been a watchful and an useful
Barrier for the rest of the Plantations in the Neighborhood.

They Surprised the Place about an Hour or Two before Break of Day, and in a
little time, not without Loss to themselves, Butchered and Captivated above 150
of the People.

Mr. John Williams, the Worthy Minister of that Pious and Holy Flock, was
carried into Captivity, with Five of his Children; two of which were Slain; and
his Desirable Consort beginning to Faint at about a Dozen Miles of the doleful
Journey, they there, like themselves, cruelly Murdered her, and left her for
the Funeral which her Friends afterward bestowed on her. Before they reached
unto Mont Real, a Journey dispatched by the Parcels now divided in Twenty Days,
more or less, near Twenty more of the Captives lost their Lives; for the manner
was, that if any found themselves not able to Travel through the Deep Snows now
on the Ground, the Salvages would strike their Hatchets into their Heads, and
there leave them weltring in their Blood.

FINIS.

