Corderius Americanus.

An Essay UPON The Good EDUCATION of CHILDREN. And what may Hopefully be
Attempted, for the Hope of the FLOCK. IN A FUNERAL SERMON UPON Mr. EZEKIEL
CHEEVER. The Ancient and Honorable MASTER of the FREE SCHOOL in Boston. Who
left off, but when Mortality took him off, in August, 1708, the Ninety Fourth
Year of his Age. With an ELEGY and an EPITAPH upon him.

By one that was once a Scholar to him.

Vester [CHEEVERUS,] cum sic moritur, non moritur. BOSTON, Printed by John
Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the
Corner of School-street. 1708.

An Historical Introduction.
DUTY to the Merit and Memory of my Departed MASTER, is now in its Operation.
The Fifth Commandment well considered will demand such a Duty. When Quirin^^
made a Marble Monument for his Master, there was this Effect of it, Invisunt
Locum Studiosi Juvenes frequenter, ut hoc Exemplo Edoc^i, quantum Discipu^i
(...) praeceptoribus suis debeant, perpetuo meminisse velint. Scholars that saw
it, Learnt from the Sight what Acknowledgments were due from Scholars to their
Masters. I wish my little feeble Essay for Mine, may in any measure animate the
Gratitude of any Scholars to their Well-deserving Tutors.

A due Care about a Funeral for the Dead, among the Jews had that Phrase for
it: A Bestowing of Mercy. But the Sermon which I have Employed on the Funeral
of my Master, must be called; A Doing of Justice. And I am very much
misinformed, if this were not the General Voice of all the Auditory.

Perfection in this Life, is to be Despaired of, must not be pretended to.

I am not insensible, that the Critics find Gross Faults even in those
Classick Authors, to whom, if our Exercises be not conformed, our Masters will
mark what we do. Tully himself himself will be hardly allowed by Va^la and
Erasmus, to have written True Latin, in his; Diutius Commora^s Athenis erat
Animus ad te Scribere: And, Quum in animo haber^m navigandi. Yea, in his own
Time, his Friend Attieus charged him with False Latin, and he was put upon
pleading the Authority of T^ren^^ in his own Defense. Linacer, one of our
Greatest Critics for the Latin Tongue, never could endure the Ciceronian
Style; Ciceronis dictionem, nunquam probare potuit, nec si^e Fastidi^ audire.
These Critical Folks, Employ their Satyrs, [And, by the way, this very word may
be also criticized upon; for it should be writ, Saetir, or, Satur, and
originally signified nothing but, A well-fil'd Writing:] upon Ovid. They say
they find him for ever stumbling at the Threshold, and blundring in his first
Verse. To mention only our Two School-books. The one begins, Parve, nec
invideo; Which they say is not Good Sense; for it should have been, Parve sed
invideo. The other begins, In Nova ^ert animus mutatas dicere forma^, Corpora,
which, except you will help it off, with calling it a Figure, they say is very
Nonsense. I am sensible that Ingenious Men do take his part, against these
Hypercritical Objectors. Nor would I make my self a Party to Objections that
seem to have no better Foundations. I only show how ready some Folks are at
Fishing for Carps. And indeed, Though his Metamorphosis has fewer Faults, than
the rest of his Works, yet it is not without them; Among which, I must my self
confess, his confounding the Suns Diurnal and Annual Motion, in Phaetons
business, is hardly Excusable. Nor can Virgil himself altogether escape the
Lash; even Virgil, of whom it is mentioned by Macro^i^^ as his Praerogative, ut
nullus Laudibus crescat, nullius vituneratione minuatur. The Learned not only
tax the Modesty, of his Hero, who when he comes to Speech-making, begins with
S^m^pius Aeneas, but find many odd mistakes in him: and now and then such
Forgetfulness; as, Al terram Hesperiam venies, and anon, ^^certi quo (...)
^erunt. But if the Aen^^domasti^ of the Envious Carbilius, or H^r^nnius's
Collections of the Faults in Virgil, were in our hands, we should say, Who can
stand before Envy? In our Age, none was reputed a more Excellent Latinist than
Milton: and yet there are those who find passages in him, which are so far from
Elegant, that they are not Proper Latin; they offend against the Rules of
Grammar. There was not a more Elegant Writer of the Latin Tongue in these Later
Ages than Strada; and yet how severely exposed, (...) a famous, but waspish
Grammarian, in a Book Entitled, Infamia Famiani Stradae?

The Grammarians have Escaped as little as their Authors. Futschius who
publishes them, yet is forced sometimes to Disparage them. And Priscian
himself, of whose Head we are so tender, yet in his very first Lines, hardly
keeps out of Barbarisms. When Valla and Erasmus, and Li^a^er have done their
best, Sanctius comes, and then Schioppius, and will have us know, they have
scarce done any thing at all.

The Grammar now taught in our Schools goes under the Name of Lillies; though in
his own time, he modestly declined the honor of it; and it is well known, that
the English Rudiments were done by Colet, the Syntaxis was done by Erasmus, and
other parts by other hands. Even this Grammar is not without its Faults; and
besides other just Exceptions against persisting in the use of it, and thereby
prolonging the Reign of the Ferula, which cannot be heard; ( Inexorable Custom
will not hear them!) there are those who find it not free from Solaecisms.

We must not wonder at it then, if the Best of our Masters, be thought attended
with their Imperfections. Whatever mine might have, they are buried. And we
generally concur in acknowledging, That New England has never known a better. I
am sure, I have as much Reason to appear for him, as ever Crito for his Master
Socrates,

The Short History of his Long Usefulness, is to be comprised in the Ensuing
Articles.

He was Born in London, many years before the Birth of New England. It was Jan.
25. 1614.

He arrived into this Country, in June 16^7. with the rest of those Good men,
who sought a peaceable Secession in an American Wilderness, for the pure
Evangelical, and Instituted Worship of our Great Redeemer; to which he kept a
strict Adherence all his Days. He then Sojourned first a little while, part of
a Year, at Boston; so that at Boston, he both Commenced and Concluded his
American Race. His Holy Life, was a Married Life.

He began the Laborious Work of a Schoolmaster, at New Haven; where he
continued for Twelve Years.

From New Haven, he removed unto Ipswich, in December, 1650. where he Labored
Eleven Years.

From Ipswich, he removed unto Charlstown, in November, 1661. where he Labored
Nine Years.

From Charlstown, he came over to Boston, Jan. 6. 1670. where his Labors were
continued for Eight and Thirty Years.

He Died, on Saturday morning, Aug. 21. 1798. In the Ninety Fourth Year of his
Age* After he had been a Skilful, Painful, Faithful Schoolmaster, for Seventy
Years; And had the Singular Favor of Heaven, that though he had Usefully spent
his Life among Children, yet he was not become Twice a Child; but held his
Abilities, with his Usefulness, in an unusual Degree, to the very last.

It is a Common Adage in the Schools of the Jews; A Just man never dies, till
there be born in his room, one that is like him. So Crown a Town as Boston, is
capable of honorably Supporting more than one Grammar School. And it were to
be wished, That several as Able as our CHEEVER, might arise in his room, to
carry on an Excellent Education in them. Our Glorious LORD can make such men.

But, Oh! That SCHOOLS were more Encouraged, throughout the Country!

I remember, the Jewish Masters have a Dispute about the Reasons of the
Destruction of Jerusalem. And among the rest the Judgment of R. Menona, was; It
had not been destroyed, but for their not minding to bring up their Children in
the School. Verily, There cannot be a more Threatening Symptom of Destruction
upon us, than there would be in this thing; If we should fall into the Folly
of, Not minding to bring up our Children in the School.

The Pastors of the Churches must more bestir themselves. O Men of God, Awake;
And let the Cares of our ELIOT for his Roxbury, be a Pattern for you*

An ESSAY upon Well-Taught Children; And upon an Able and Faithful TEACHER of
Them.
2 Timothy III. 15. From a CHILD, thou have known the HOLY SCRIPTURES, which are
able to make thee WISE UNTO SALVATION.


IT was a Great CASE, which the Parents to a Son of Great Hope, once put unto a
Messenger of Heaven; Judge. 13.12. How shall we order the Child, and what shall
we do unto him? The Education of our Children is a point of inexpressible
Consequence; of unparallelled Importance. Unworthy to be Parents, most worthy
to be Esteemed rather Monsters than Parents, are they, who are not sollicitous
to give their Children an Agreeable Education. There is no Serious Religion in
those Parents, who are not sollicitous, that their Children should have a
Religious Education. Our Children are so Numerous; The Temptations which
Endanger the Ruin of our Children are so Innumerable; that we ought
frequently, and earnestly to insist on this point, Their Agreeable and
Religious Education. We will now therefore Enquire; How shall we order the
Children; and that shall we do unto them?

I will answer in one word; Let the Children have such an Education as Timothy
had. We have before us a Description of that Education; and a Direction to give
you this.

DOCTRINE. That Saving Wisdom is to be fetched from the Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures; and the Early Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, is the way to be
Betimes made Wise unto Salvation.
That we may more intelligibly prosecute this Doctrine, we will first a little
Entertain our selves with the History of, A Child made Wise unto Salvation, by
the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. A TIMOTHY, and the Education of a Lovely
Timothy, shall be first a little set before us.

Our Timothy is now Addressed by the Aged Apostle Paul, at this time a Prisoner
at Rome; with an Epistle written by him, a little before his Martyrdom: An
Epistle, which Chrysostom ingeniously calls, Our Apostles Last Will and
Testament. In this Epistle, Our Apostle Exhorts his Excellent and Beloved Son
Timothy; [a Son, he might well call him, having so many ways both Adopted him,
and Instructed him:] He Exhorts him to Stedfastness in the Faith and Work of
His Glorious LORD. One Argument, with which he inculcates this Exhortation, is
his Education. For one Educated in the Way of Truth, and in the Knowledge of
the Holy Scriptures, to forsake the Way of God, is worse than for another to do
so. From such as are Well Educated, there are Better Things expected than from
others. Consider this, O Apostates from a New-English Education; Consider it,
you that Forget how you have been Educated, lest the Wrath of Heaven tear you
to pieces, and there who none to deliver you. When the Son and Grandson
perhaps, of those that have been Faithful Servants of God shall first Go off to
an Observable Degree of Bigotry, for the Superstition, against which his
Progenitors had born glorious Testimonies; and then go on to a Malignity
against the People of God among which, he has had his Education; and publish
his Malignity with abhorred strains of Profaness, and Atheism: It Is not enough
to call upon such an one, with the old Jewish Rebuke, (...) Thou Vinegar, the
Son of Good Wine! It must be said, he is a dreadful Spectacle. He has made
himself so; And one may tremble to think, What the Holy God will ever long make
of him. Friend, When the Goodness of a Young man, like the Morning Cloud, and
the Early Dew, soon passes away, the Justice of God is not long upon the
Deliberation, What shall I do unto thee! What shall I do unto thee!

Our Timothy was very happy in his Education. It may be Edifying for us, a
little to Reflect on the Occasion of this Education, and the Influence of it.

Our Timothy had a Godly Mother, and a Godly Grandmother. He might suck in
Knowledge and Goodness with his Mothers Milk. He might be Taught the Right
Ways of the Lord, while his Grandmother had him by his Leading-st^ings. Both
of them were Jews; And probably they were Early Converts to Christianity. His
Father was a Gentile! Whether a Proselyte or no, we are not informed. But he
also was Converted unto Christianity at the same time with his desirable
Consort. They had before this, betimes begun to give their little Son, the
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. An Early Tincture of Scriptural Piety thus
took the Mind of the Child. But when the Parents were brought home to the
Blessed JESUS, they wholly committed, as it seems, their Little Son, unto the
Care of that Venerable Minister, who had been their Spiritual Father. Having
themselves got good by a Minister of God, they must have their Child, in the
way of getting the same Good. They begged Paul, to take the Tuition of him; Oh!
happy Child, in the Hands of such a Tutor!

Well; And what was the Effect of this Education? Our Timothy did himself prove
a Christian of the First Race; yea, and an admirable Minister, His Labors in
the Harvest of the Lord, were Extraordinary; Every one wondered, how any one
man, could ever Labor so abundantly. He was of a Feeble Constitution; and of
such an Abstemious Temperance, that he was even blamed for it; but one of an
Active Soul, One of a Flaming Zeal. The Great Paul could give this Testimony of
him, That he did not know another man in the world, who so Naturally took to
the doing of Good; Who so Readily and Cheerfully Laid Hold on all Opportunities
to be Serviceable An Angelical sort of a man; One highly Esteemed by John, as
well as by Paul; Those Angels in Flesh Loved him dearly. He was an Angel in the
Church of Ephesus; The Ancients agree to call him. An Admirable Young man. At
last, he became an Old man. And then, One Day the Votaries of Diana carrying
their Images about the Town, and with Masks and Clubs, and Dances, committing a
thousand Insolences, this brave man Stepped out into the Street, and would have
persuaded them, to leave off their Idolatries and Impieties: Whereat the
Enraged Mob, fell upon him, and Murdered him. He had the Crown of Martyrdom. He
obtained a claim to a part in that Resurrection, which his Tutor once declared
himself sollicitous, By any means, to attain unto. What? And will the Early
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures make such a man?

I now with some Enforcement, can tell my Hearers over again.

That they who would be wise unto Salvation, must know the Holy Scriptures: And
that for Children to know the Holy Scriptures, is Early Wisdom, and Saving
Wisdom.

I can demand their Attention to several Propositions; And such too, as it were
to be wished, all our Children were well acquainted with.

I. To yield Obedience unto God, in the Ways and Rules of His Holy Religion;
This is to be, WISE UNTO SALVATION.

There is an Holy Religion, wherewith we are to Glorify GOD in this World. By
doing so, we secure our Title to an Eternal Glory with God in another and a
better World. Now there never was a Truer Assertion, than that; Psalm. 111.10.
The Beginning of Wisdom, (...) the Fear of the Lord. All they that give
themselves to it, have a good Understanding. It must needs be our truest
Wisdom, to Glorify the GOD that made us; For by doing so, we Answer the End for
which He made us. There is nothing so Reasonable as to be Religious. It must
needs be our Truest Wisdom, to make sure of Eternal Glory in another and better
World; For we can be sure of nothing in this World; We are sure, that we shall
shortly be stripped of everything in this World. There is nothing so Profitable,
nothing so Necessary, as to be Religions. The Rules of Religion are prescribed
by the Only Wise GOD; The GOD of whom we are assured, Psalm. 145.5. His
Understanding is Infinite. They must needs be Wise Rules; It must needs be our
Wisdom to adhere unto them.

One main stroke in Religion is, FAITH toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Faith is
in the Bible often called by the Name of, Wisdom. It Is most Justly called so.
It Beholds, It Receives, It Enjoyes, that Glorious CHRIST, in whom there is,
The Wisdom of God. And, The End of our Faith will be the Salvation of the Soul.

Another main stroke in Religion is, REPENTANCE toward God. Repentance is a
Resipiscence, of Growing Wise again. It must be Wisdom, to Abhor Sin, to Avoid
Sin; Sin is always Folly; To Sin, is to Do very Foolishly. And, Repentance,
This will be unto Salvation.

There is no man, but what will own, It Is the Wisdom of every man, to Save his
own Soul: For, What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose his
own Soul? Now the Issue of conformity to the Rules of Religion, will be the
Salvation of the Soul. We read, Heb. 5.9. CHRIST, is the Author of Eternal
Salvation, unto all them that obey Him.

II. Our KNOWLEDGE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, is that by which we come to know the
Rules of Religion, and be Religiously wise unto Salvation. The Rules of our
Holy Religion, are all of them delivered in those Oracles of God, which we
call, The Holy Scriptures. If ever we come unto Salvation, it must be by
conversing with the Holy Scriptures. We are so called upon; Joh. 5.39. Search
the Holy Scriptures, for in them ye think, ye have Eternal Life: and they are
they who testify of me. It was very Fit, that the Will of God, giving us the
Rules of Living unto Him, should be contained in some Writings or other. These
Inspired Writings which we have in our Old and New Testament, are the only
Ones, that can pretend unto this Dignity. In these Holy Scriptures we have the
Rules of Religion, and the Rules by the Observation whereof we shall be wise
unto Salvation. Here, (...) i^ the Gospel, whereof we are told; Ephesians. 1.13. It
is the Gospel of your Salvation. If we lack the Knowledge of this Gospel, we
shall miss of Salvation, and be Destroyed for the lack of Knowledge. If we do
not know the Gospel, we shall be a people of no understanding; Of such a
people, how terribly it Thunders! He that made them will not have mercy on
them; He that formed them, will show them no Favor. What is all the Learning
in the World, without the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures! There were (they
say) two hundred thousand Books, in the Library which Ptolomy Erected at
Alexandria; but it was the Addition of the Hoi Scriptures, which made it a
truly Learned Library. And whatever we have Learnt from all our Books, it is the
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, that will bring us to the Truest, and indeed
the only Learning. A Dying Grotius, or Seldom will tell you so?

But what sort of Knowledge is requisite?

Be sure, A Doctrinal Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures is requisite, that we
may be Wise unto Salvation. We read, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid unto them that be Lost. We must know Doctrinally the main Things that are
communicated unto us in the Holy Scriptures. The Creation of Man by GOD; The
Confusion of Man by SIN; The Redemption of Man by CHRIST. These are the main
Things in the Holy Scriptures. If we are Ignorant of these Things our Ignorance
will plunge us into Everlasting Darkness: Verily, It lays us in Chains of
Darkness?

But then, a Practical Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, is also requisite, We
know to little purpose, except we Do according to what we know. We read, Joh.
13.17. Since ye know these things, Happy are ye, if you do them. Knowledge must
be as John Baptist was to our Savior, only a praecursor to Goodness; and we
must say, That which comes after it is preferred before it. We must know the
Truth and Walk (...) the Truth. We must Know God, and Serve Him. We must Know
Christ, and Grow in Grace. The Lamp is without Oil; it will go out in
Everlasting Darkness, if the Knowledge be not soaked and dipped in Love. It was
the saying of Maximus Tyrius long ago; Scientiae quis usus esse potest, nisi ea
agamus? We must Know and Hear our Duty, and we must be Doers of the Word, and
not Hearers only. Else we are not Wise unto Salvation. We foolishly Deceive
our selves, in our Hope of Salvation, If we do not Know practically, our
Knowledge will not render us Wise unto Salvation. It will but Aggravate our
Damnation; and there can be no Wisdom in That. If we Rebel against our Light,
it will not be saving wisdom. No, It will be a Folly that will Damn the
Rebellious. We read, Mat. 7.26. It Is the part of, A Foolish man, who builds his
House on the Sand, and Great is the Fall of it. It has been well enough
sometimes thus expressed, One Apple of the Tree of Life, in practice, is of
more account than Ten of the Tree of Knowledge. Thus Homer makes Phaenix, the
Tutor of Achilles, (...). It is the sweet Conjunction of the Knowledge and
Practice, of the Holy Scriptures, that will gain our point. A Conjunction that
infallibly foretells a Salvation to the uttermost.

III. The Inference from hence is; That the EARLY KNOWLEDGE of the Holy
Scriptures, is the way to be BETIMES made wise unto Salvation.

And now there is a Twofold APPLICATION to be made of this Observation. We will
discourse on this Observation, by Applying it unto two sorts of persons.

I. It is the Interest of all TEACHERS to Begin Betimes, in Teaching of
Children, the Early Knowledge of the HOLY SCRIPTURES, that so they may be WISE
UNTO SALVATION. It is to You, O TEACHERS; unto You first, there must now come
the Word of the Lord. It must come, with an Answer to Diverse Enquiries.

We will, First, Enquire, and Declare, WHEN should we Begin to Teach our
Children, the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures?

BETIMES! BETIMES! Let the Children have the Early Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures. That Princely Preacher, the Prince of Anbalt, would say; The Holy
Scriptures, what are they but the swaddling Clothes of the Holy Child Jesus? HE
is to be found in every Chapter. I will then say, Let us Teach our Children the
Holy Scriptures, as soon as we can after they come out of their Swaddling
Clothes. This is the Direction of the Holy Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy Children. And Ephesians. 6.4. Your Children, Bring
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. But the HOLY SCRIPTURES have
not Expressly said, How Early, we shall Begin to Teach our Children, the
KNOWLEDGE of them. However, we may easily Determine it.

First; How Early do the Children begin to be capable of Knowing and Minding
what is in the HOLY SCRIPTURES? Most certainly we should Begin as soon as we
can. As soon as the Children can know, so soon should we Teach them, what they
should know. So much there is to be Learnt, it is pity any Time should be Lost.
No doubt, they Began so soon with Solomon; Else he would not have said, Prove.
4.3, 4. I was any Fathers Son, a Tender and only one in the sight of my Mother,
Then he Taught me.

Again; How Early do the Children begin to Know Other Matters? Why should we
not begin to Teach them something from the Holy Scriptures, that may (...)
them. [Laeca^it hic Infans,] as Early as we Teach them things Less Worthy, Less
Useful! Can we Teach them, what they have to us? Methinks, we may then Teach
them, what they owe to the LORD, who made both us and Them? Their Little Souls
are precious Cabinets. Why should not the Best Things be First put into them?
We are so called upon; Matthew. 6.31. Seek first the Kingdom of God. Even so,
with the First, Let them Learn the Things that Concern the Kingdom of God.

Once more; How Early do the Children Begin to Know, and to Do, what may be
Hurtful to them? It Is very Early, that they Learn the Things Condemned in the
HOLY SCRIPTURES. Why should they not as EARLY Learn the HOLY SCRIPTURES, which
do condemn those pernicious and provoking Evils? Why should they not know the
Precepts of God, as EARLY as they know how to Break the Precepts? Why should
they not be Taught, that they must Fear God, and Love Christ, and Hate Sin, as
EARLY as they can Learn to Sin? Especially since this would be the way to
preserve them from Sin. A Child no sooner begins to do any thing Rational, but
Satan begins to show it, how to do something that is Criminal. Methinks; I see
the Image of it; Rev. 12.4. The Dragon stood to devour the Child as soon as it
was born, Then say I; It becomes us to be Aforehand with the Dragon, if it be
possible: To stand Ready with the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, to rescue
the Children from the Venomous Designs of the Dragon upon them.

There is a plausible Objection, against this Early Essay, to give our Children
the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.

Will not this be to make the Children, Take the Name of the Lord in vain?
Would it not be more Discretion, to stay till the Children are themselves come
to some Years of Discretion?

It is Easily Answered. Will you never Teach the Children, till you see them
have the Grace, that will keep them from Taking the Name of the Lord in vain?
Rather Teach them, to Keep them from it. And let our Discretion Teach us to
manage the matter wisely, in Teaching our Children. Teach them with all
possible Gravity; And Teach them to be Gra^e, in every thing, that relates to
God, and their Souls. Consider also the Capacity of the Children: Teach them,
what shall be Good for Them; And forbear the Rest, until they shall be more
Able to Bear it:

We will, Secondly, Enquire, and Declare, WHAT is that Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures, which we are to Teach our Children?

Truly, AS MUCH as ever WE CAN help them to; All the Knowledge, that they can
Take in, still as we find them Able to Take it in. More particularly*

First; The HISTORIES of the Holy Scriptures; We are to Teach Them unto our
Children. Children are naturally taken with Histories. Now, instead of Corrupt
Stories, and Idle-Fables, Why should we not single out the Histories in the
Holy Scriptures for them? Only, It would be advisable always to clench the
Histories, with some Admonitions of Piety, which are to be gathered from them.
There are none of those Histories, but it may be said upon them; Psalm. 19.11.
Thy Servant is warned by them.

Secondly; We are to Teach our Children the PRINCIPLES of the Holy Scriptures.
Tell the Children, What the Holy Scriptures have Taught us to Believe thou GOD,
and His Perfections, and His Works: About the Fall of Man, and the Method of
his Recovery out of that miserable Fall; About the Lord Jesus Christ, Who He
is, and what He has done, and what He will do, for His Chosen People. We read,
That the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; are the Milk for Babes. That
these things may be the better taught, an Orthodox CATECHISM, is to be
Employed. They should say their Catechism, and be Rewarded when they can say
it. But then, we should put Lesser Questions unto them; unto which, their YES,
or NO, will give us to perceive, Whether they understand what they say. Canvas^
the matter with them. Ask them several things about it. Cause them to take much
Notice of it. See whether they have taken a Right Notion of it. We read, 2 Timothy
1.13. There is a Form of sound words, which they must hear from us.

Thirdly; We are to Teach our Children the COMMANDMENTS of the Holy Scriptures.
There are the TEN Commandments. The Children should be made to know, What is
Implied in them, What is Forbidden, What is Required. How, as it has been of
old noted, the First Table of the Commandments, is a Loadstone of the Second;
the Second is a Touchstone for the First. There are many LESSONS, which are to
be inculcated on them; Lessons by which their Manners are to be regulated* GOOD
LESSONS FOR CHILDREN may be the Title for them.

But there is one very Great Article, which is often to be insisted on. The
Children have, mostly, been Baptized. O make 'em know the Intent and Meaning of
their BAPTISM. As soon as ever you can, inform them, that they have been
Baptized! and beget in them an awful Sense of their Baptismal Obligations* Tell
them, Now, my Child, you must be a Servant of a Glorious CHRIST, and be afraid
of Defiling your self with (...) Sin, since you have been wasted in the Name,
of the most Holy Lord. Say to them; as he, 1 Chronicles. 2^.9. My Child, Know thou
the God of thy Father, and serve Him with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind;
If thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou Forsake Him, He will
cast thee off for ever. You cannot imagine, how much Efficacy this Teaching may
have upon them.

Fourthly; The Children should LEARN TO READ the Holy Scriptures; and this, as
Early as may be. To School therefore with them. Let them not be Loitering at
home, or playing abroad, when they should be at School. Be more concerned for
their Schooling, than for their Clothing. If there be any, as I suppose there
cannot be many, so necessitous, as to call for it, let us in this Town go on
with our CHARITY-SCHOOLS. When the Children can Read, the Holy Scriptures,
charge them, and cause them, every day to Read that Book of Life. Hire them to
Remember what they Read; To get Select Sentences of the Holy Scriptures into
their Memories. And then; Show them, how to make PRAYERS out of what they Read.
Help them to turn all into Prayers, That they may be Wise unto Salvation, Oh,
Teach them to Pray! When once it comes to be said, Behold they Pray! it is
likely, that it may quickly be said, They are wise unto Salvation. The Bible
was well called, by one of the Ancients, Epistola Omnipoten^is Dei ad Creaturam
suam. A Letter from the Almighty GOD, unto His Creatures, It should be
considered as a Letter from the Almighty God unto our Children. They should be
taught accordingly to Read it, and Reverence it, and Answer it.

This it will be, for the Children to know the Holy Scriptures.

We will, Thirdly, Enquire and Declare, WHO it is, that it to Teach the
Children, the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. Come ALL HANDS to the Work.

In particular; The PASTORS of the Flock; They must not neglect the Children of
the Flock. The Charge of our Lord unto them, is that; Joh. 21.15. Feed my
Lambs. It seems proposed, as if it were, at least, one Third part of the
Pastoral Charge. O men of God, How many ways may you Devise Good, in this Great
Affair; to make the Children under your Charge, Wise unto Salvation! In the
midst of many such Devices, I will mention one, which the Excellent Mr. White,
in his Manual for Parents, has proposed; That Ministers would sometimes Preach
at the Schools, as well as Catechize; Because as he says, The Preaching of the
Word, is the Converting Ordinance. And when Sermons are brought unto the
Schools, the Children must needs hear with more Attention, and (...) of such
Things as do more immediately concern them, which, in the Public Assemblies,
are not so much meddled withal; and the Ministers should condescend unto such
Expressions as might work most with them, which would not be so fit for a
larger Congregation.

The MASTER and MISTRESS, in the SCHOOL, may do much in this Noble Work. We
read, The Little Ones have their Angels. Truly, to Teach the Little Ones, the
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, and make them Wise unto Salvation, it is a
stately work; I had almost called it; A Work for Angels. It is an Hard Work to
keep a School: and hardly ever duly Recompensed. I suppose, It is easier to be
at the Plough all day than in the School. But it is a Good Work: It is Gods
Plough; and God speed it! I would not have you weary of it. Melchior Adam did
well to call it; Molestissimam, sed Deo long gratissimam Functionem; A^ work,
though very Tiresome, and Troublesome to the Flesh, yet most highly Acceptable to
God. Go on with it Cheerfully; And often Teach the Children something of the
Holy Scriptures; often drop some Honey out of that Rock upon them. Who can
tell, but you may Teach them the Things that shall save their Souls, and they
shall bless God for you and with you, throughout Eternal Ages? Every time a New
Child comes to the School, Oh! why should you not think! Here my Glorious LORD
sends me another Object, on which I may do something, to advance His Kingdom in
the World!

No, nor will we Excuse the very SERVANTS in the Family, from this Blessed
Work; Even the Handmaids in the Family, as they are Dressing and Feeding the
Children, O Handmaids of the Lord How much may you do, to instlil the Knowledge
of the Holy Scriptures into the Children! If our Servants would once come to
take pleasure in such a thing, to keep Teaching the Children something from the
Holy Scriptures, O my Children, [for such Servants are worthy to be called,
Children!] How much would you Adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior! It was
certainly a good Speech, which I find written by a Person of Quality. It is
certainly, the Highest Dignity, if not the Greatest Happiness, that Humane
Nature is capable of, here in this Vale below, to have a Soul so far
Enlightened, as to become the Mirror, or Conduit or Conveyer of Gods Truth to
others. Now, even a Domestic Servant, may arrive to this Dignity, this
Happiness. Yea, Let all Ranks of men aspire of (...) it.

But; Lastly, and yet First of all, O PARENTS Arise; This matter chiefly
belongs unto you; we also will be with you. None, I say, None are so much
concerned, as Parents to look after it, that their Children be taught the
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. Our famous King Elfred, procured a (...),
That every man who had but as much as Two Hides of La^d; should bring up his
Children to Learning, till Fifteen-Years of Age at least; that so they might
Know Christ, and Live Happily; Else he said, They were but Beasts and (...)
press it, That Parents give their Children all the Learning they can;
especially that which will bring them to Know Christ and Live Happily.

Parents, What Motive can you desire more than this? It Is the way to make the
Children Wise unto Salvation. Certainly you Desire the Salvation of your
Children. You have had your share among the Causes of it, that they are by N^
(...) Children of Wrath. And would you not see them Saved from that Wrath? Did
you duly Teach your Children the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, there would
be a likelihood of their being those Children; 1 John 2.13. Little Children ye
have known the Father. And, Oh! what would be the Fruit of this Knowledge?
Truly, This is Life Eternal. You Lodge in the little Souls of your Children,
the Seeds of Life Eternal; if God please to make them so. What a charming word
is that? Genesis 18.19. He will command his Children, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord. But if the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures be withheld from the
Children, they perish, they perish dreadfully. If the Understandings of the
Children be Darkened, they will be Alienated from the Life of God; They will be
Slaves to the Power of Darkness; They are in the Broad Way to Eternal Darkness:
if they Know not God and the Lord Jesus Christ, their Doom from the Lord will
be, Depart from me, I know your not. Oh, Look upon the Children, which you have
so often set on your knees, which always ly so very near to your Hearts; How
can you bear to have them thrown into the place of Dragons? They infallibly go
thither, if by the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, you do not Save them from
thence. Austin says of his Excellent Mother, Toties Filios par^uri^bat, quoties
a Deo eor deviar^ ^^^nebat; She fell into Travail for them, as often as she saw
them fall into Folly* Oh! Parents, Be continually in Travail for your Children,
that you may Save them from al Sinful Folly. We read of a Child; 2 King. 4.19.
He said unto his Father, my Head, My Head!

PARENTS, These are the Cries, which the Souls of your Children make in your
Ears; My Head, my Head! Oh! That you would fill my Head with the Knowledge of
the Holy Scriptures! My Heart! my Heart! It will be a very Dungeon of
Wickedness, if you do not by the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, purity it!
It is a solemn Expression of the Martyr Cyprian. There are Parents, who so
neglect their Children, that at the Last Day, their miserable Children will cry
out, Parents sensimus Purricidas; OUR PARENTS HAVE BEEN OUR MURDERERS!
PARENTS, Beware of, Coming under so Bitter a Condemnation. Let the Command of
GOD, and the Promise of GOD, at last prevail with you. You have it in those
Terms; Prove. 22.4. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it. God puts these Children into your Hands. He
says, Here, Take this Child; Let it be taught the Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures. I will Reward all thy pains. Thy well-instructed Child, shall be
thy Comfort, thy Credit, a Blessing to Others in the World. If it miss of
Salvation, yet thou shall have peace in thy mind, that thou did thy Endeavor
to make it Wise unto Salvation. But if it want Knowledge, and Saving Wisdom
through any gross Negligence of thine, thy punishment shall be terrible, in the
Day of the Lords pleading with thee.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding, to do your part,
that your Children may not want Understanding, or Die without Instruction. It Is
the wish of Heaven ever you; Deuteronomy. 32.29, O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that [so some render it] they would consider their Posterity.

But then, it is the Interest of all CHILDREN, to Learn the Knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures Betimes, that so they may be Wise unto Salvation. We have many
Children in the Auditory. I wish the Little Ones would now give a great
Attention.

This Country once had a Brave man in it, whose Name was Mr* Giles Firmin. That
man was pious, from his Early Childhood. And that which brought him to his
Piety was this. When he was a Schoolboy, he with other Lads went unto the
Lectures of the famous Rogert; where they could not get into the Thronged
Auditory. The Zealous Preacher saw them in the Porch, and lifting up his voice,
he called unto them. Children, I hope you are come hither for a Christ;
Remember what I say unto you; If you will have a Christ for your Savior, you
shall have him. This word struck little Firmin to the Heart; By this Word, God
Quickened him; he became a Godly Child, and he dyed not long since, a very Old
man, and one of the best men in the World.

I will now say, Children, I hope you are come hither that you may be made wise
unto Salvation. And if any of them, are not Attentive, I hope you that are
their Tutors, will afterward Repeat unto them the Admonitions which are now
provided for them.

Come, ye Children, Hearken to me, I will teach you, what you ought to do.

You ought, First, To be Willing to be Taught the Fear of the Lord. When your
Teachers would Learn you something of the Holy Scriptures, be willing to Learn.
Be not ^o^^^e to wait upon their Teaching. Do not strive to get away from their
Teaching. Be not so set upon your Childish and Foolish Play, as to count every
minute a weary Hour under their Teaching. Rather come to your Teachers, and beg
it of them, I pray, Teach me something. Oh! Count it a Privilege, to be Taught
any thing of the Holy Scriptures. Prize, Prize the Sincere Milk of the Word.
Prize, Prize the Word of God, as being Sweeter than the Honey and the
Honeycomb. Count the Knowledge of GOD, and CHRIST* and Heavenly Things, a more
precious Things than any in the World

Yea, Secondly; You ought never to be Satisfied. Know as much of the Holy
Scriptures as ever you can, and never count that you know enough. Get your
Catechism exactly by Heart. Become able to Read the Bible. Read something of it
every day. A^k abundance of Questions about what you Read. You are fond of
Ornaments* (...) Despise all Ornaments in comparison of this; To be Adorned
with the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.

But, Thirdly, Be sure to Do what you Know from the Holy Scriptures that you
ought to do. As now; Do not you know from the Holy Scriptures, that you ought
to Keep Holy the Lords Day, and to Honor your Parents, and rather suffer any
thing that tell a Lie: Do not you know from the Holy Scriptures, That you ought
to Pray (...) Secret every day, and Pray without Ceasing? Oh! Do these Things,
my Children. Be sure to Do^ such Things. What have the Holy Scriptures told
you, concerning Early Religion? In them you have heard your Savior say, Prove.
8.^7. They that seek me early, shall find me. There the voice of your Savior
in, Matthew. 19.14. Suffer little Children to come unto me, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Well then, Betimes, now in your Childhood, Oh! Come to a
Glorious CHRIST put your selves into His Hands. Beg of Him, I beseech, them O
Lord, to deliver my Soul, Why, why, should your Childhood be nothing but
Vanity! Nothing but a Long Step in the Arms of Death and Darkness.

Remember; Children; There have been many Children in the World, who have in
their Early Childhood, by the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, been Wise unto
Salvation. You have in your Hands, the Narratives of many such, that have been
in our Days. And such there were in the Days of Old. Origin was one* Little
Origin, when he was hurt a Child, would Rejoice the Heart of his Father, by his
Readiness to Learn the Holy Scriptures, which he set him to Learn. And while he
was yet a Child, he had so much of GOD in him, that as he lay asleep, his
Venerable Father would lay his hand on the Breast of the Child* and say with
unspeakable Joy; Here Is a Little Temple of God! And there was a late Child at
Antioch; One little more than seven years old; The Lad was Examined about what
was in the Holy Scriptures, by bloody Persecutors, who stood ready to Murder
him; He notably told them, There can be but One God, and our Christ is the True
God; They asked him where he Learned this; He replied, I Learned it of my
Mother, It was with my Mothers Milk that I sucked it in. On this, they horribly
scourged the Lad, and then butchered him with hideous Torments: He smiled under
his Torments, and he dyed a Martyr of the Lord. Oh! That our Children were so
Disposed!

The Infant-Children of the Faithful, are the Children of God. God calls them;
Ezekiel. 16.21. My Children. God forbid, That our Children as soon as they come to
Act Reasonably, should be so Unreasonable, as to make themselves, the Children
of Satan. Children, If you Hate that which is Good, if you Disobey your
Parents, if you Speak Wicked words, and call Wicked Names, and Lie, and Curse,
if you Steal, and if you play on the Lord's Day; Whose Children are you? Verily,
your Spot is, that you are not the Children of God; you make Satan your Father;
You do like the Children of Satan. How odious a Spectacle are you! But Serious,
Gracious, Dutiful Children, always breathing after the Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures, How Lovely a Spectacle!

It was the Speech of one that was Wise Betimes; Psalm. 119.147. I prevented the
Dawning of the morning, and I cried; I hoped in thy Word. While you are yet
Children, you must have Piety Rectifying, Sanctifying, Purifying of your
Childhood. While Reason is but upon the Dawning with you, there is Reason that
you should mind Religion. There was once an incomparable Child, of whom we
read, 1 Samuel 3.1. The Child Samuel ministered unto the Lord. A Child, which was
Visited and Possessed by the Spirit of God; A Child, which quickly answered the
Calls of the Holy One; A Child, that would leave his Sleep, to hold Communion
with the Lord. O most amiable Child!

Children, It Is your Dawning Time. It may be your Dying Time. A Child once grew
very Solid, and was more for his Book than for his Play, and Prayed unto God
more than once every day. Being asked the cause, the Child said, Why, I was in
the Burying-place a while ago, and there I saw a Grave shorter than my self!
Children, Go unto the Burying-place; There you will see many a Grave shorter
than your selves. It Is now upon Computation found, That more than half the
Children of men Die before they come to be Seventeen Years of Age. And what
needs any more be said, for your Awakening, to Learn the Holy Scriptures!

We read of such a thing as that; Isa. 65.20. The Child shall die an hundred
years old. You may Die in your Childhood: But you should be ambitious, that if
it should be so, you may die an hundred years old; have as much Knowledge and
Virtue, as many men of an hundred years old. It was a brave stroke in an
Epitaph, on a Child; Praeterquam aetatem nil puerile fuit. Some of you can
Construe it. I will do it for them that cannot.

Except his Age, the Lovely Lad
Nothing that looked like Childhood had.
The Small as well as the Great, are to Stand before the Judgment Seat of God.
Oh, That while you are yet Small, you would be Greatly Affected with the Day of
Judgment. If you go on to do amiss, think, I know that for this, God will bring
me into Judgment. The Holy Scriptures give you the Knowledge of such a thing.

Children. You may by your Piety, approve your selves the Regenerate Children
of God, while you are yet Children. Cry unto God, My Father! Ah, Children; Be
afraid of going Prayerless to Bed, lest the Devil be your (...)-fellow. Be
afraid of Playing on the Lord's Day, lest the Devil be your Play-follow. Be
afraid of Telling Lies, or speaking Wickedly, lest that Evil Tongue be one Day
tormented in the Flames, where, A drop of water to cool the Tongue, will be
roared for.

We read Matthew. 18.10. The Little Ones have their Angels. Dear Children; Behave
your selves, as having the Angels of God looking upon you, the Angels of God
looking after you!

Oh! That our Glorious LORD, would set home such Thoughts as these, upon the
Hearts of our Children; And Give perfect Hearts unto them.

If they don't mind these things, in this more public Dispensation of them,
will you that are their Teachers, more privately inculcate such Things upon
them? I had the Happiness of an Education under a Schoolmaster who was
Exemplary for doing so! Before we part, I am to tell you more concerning him.

You shall give me leave to conclude with a very Reasonable COROLLARY.

Worthy of Honor are the TEACHERS that Convey Wisdom unto our Children; Worthy
of Double Honor the Happy Instruments that Convey Saving Wisdom to them! There
are some whose peculiar Profession it is, to assist the Education of our
Children; and it is therefore their Endeavor to give them a Religious
Education. Their Employment is to bestow Useful and Various Learning on our
Children; but they make their Employment, a precious Advantage to Learn them
the Holy Scriptures, and make them Wise for Eternity.

These our SCHOOLMASTERS, deserve a great Encouragement. We are not Wise for
our Children, if we do not greatly Encourage them.

The PARTICULAR PERSONS, who have their Children, in the Tutelage of Skilful
and Careful Schoolmasters, ought to make them suitable Recompenses. Their
Stipends are generally far short of their Deserts. They deserve Additional
Compensations. Their pains are not small. What they Do is very Great. And
surely our Children are very dear to us, I need not quote E^ripides to tell
you, That they are as the very Life and Soul, unto all Mankind. I cannot but
observe it with a just Indignation; To Feed our Children, To Cloth our
Children, To do any thing for the Bodies of our Children; or perhaps to Teach
them some Trifle at a Dancing School, scarcely worth their Learning, we count
no Expense too much; At the same time to have the Minds of our Children
Enriched with the most valuable Knowledge, here, To what purpose? is the cry: a
little Expense, how heavily it goes off! My Brethren, These things ought not so
to be. Well-taught Children are certainly very much to be accounted of. When
the Mother of the Graechi was asked for the sight of her Ornaments, how
instructively did she present her Two Sons brought up in Learning and Virtue,
as the brightest of all her Ornaments! If we were duly sensible, how vast a
comfort it is, how vast a Concern, to have Well-taught Children, we should
study all the ways imaginable, to express our Thankfulness unto the Teachers of
them. And it will not be complained, That a Mecanai is to be no where found,
but in Horace's Poetry. The Christian Emperor Gratian, One of the Best men,
that ever Swayed the Roman Scepter, conferred Riches and Honors on his Master
Ausonius, and he sent him that agreeable Compliment with them; Sir, I have paid
what I Owed, and I still Owe, what I have paid. Language agreeable to the
Spirit of Christianity! Yea, a Zeno, that was a Stranger to it, yet has this
recorded in his Commendation, That he would give his Master, as much again, as
the wages he asked of him. I hope, he will not be the only One, that shall have
such a thing spoken of him!

And the more Liberal Provision the PUBLIC does make for Industrious,
Well-accomplished, Well-disposed Schoolmasters, the more is the Public Wisdom
Testified and Propagated! Ammi^nus Marcellinus, the Historian, though a great
Admirer of Julian and of Paganism, yet condemns his prohibition of
Schoolmasters unto the Christians: Illud autem inclemens obruendum perenni
silentio, quod arcebat docere, Magistros Rhetoricos et Grammaticos, Ritus
Christiani Cultores. But, Syr^, If you do not Encourage your Schoolmasters,
you do a part of Julianism, and as bad as Prohibit them. Certainly; If
something of Julianism did not prevail too much among us* (which among a People
of our Profession is highly scandalous,) we might ere now have seen, besides
the petty Schools of every Town, a Grammar School at the Head Town of every
County, and an Able Schoolmaster with an am^le Salary, the Shepherd in it; a
Thing so often, so often unsuccessfully petitioned for! We hear Good Words now
and then spoken for the Tribe of Levi. I desire, to speak one for the Tribe of
SIMEON. The Simeonites were the Schoolmasters that were Scattered in Israel. I
assure my Self, That Ours, do watch against the Anger which is fierc^, and the
Wrath which is cruel; and that they use not Instruments of Cruelty in their
Habitations; but prudently study the Tempers of the Children, they have to deal
withal. Though Moses left them out of his Blessing; [the Tribe not having then
done any thing since Jacobs dying Oracles, to signalize them.] Yet our Glorious
JESUS, has a Blessing for them. They Serve Him wonderfully. His People will
also Bless them, and Bless God for them. And so will I this Day do for MY
MASTER, in this Congregation of the Lord.

SCHOOLMASTERS that have Used the Office well, purchase to themselves, a Good
Esteem to Outlive their Death, as well as Merit for themselves a good Support
while they Live. It Is a Justice to them, that they should be had in Everlasting
Remembrance; And a Place and a Name among those Just men, does particularly
belong to that Ancient and Honorable Man; a Master in our Israel; who was with
us, the last Time of my Standing here; but is lately Translated unto the
College of Blessed Spirits, in the Mansions, where the FIRST RESURRECTION is
Waited and Longed for. Allow me the Expression; For I Learned it of my Hebrew
Masters, among whom it is a phrase for the Death of Learned and Worthy men,
Requisite ^unt in A^na^miam C^lestem.

Perrius the Master to the Nephews of Augustus, had a Statue Erected for him;
And Antoninus obtained from the Senate, a Statue for his Master Fronto. I am
sorry that Mine has none. And Ca^o counted it more glorious than any Statue, to
have it asked, Why has he None? But in the grateful Memories of his Scholars,
there have been and will be Hundreds Erected for him.

Under him we Learnt on Oration, made by Tully, in praise of his own Master;
namely that, Pro Archad Poeta. A Pagan shall not outdo us, in out Gratitude
unto our Master. There was a famous Christian in the Primitive Times, who wrote
a whole Book, in praise of his Master Hierotheus; Entituling it, (...)
Concerning the Blessed ^ierotheus. And if I now say a few things, Concerning
the Blessed CHEEVER, no man who thinks well of Gratitude, or likes well to see
the Fifth Commandment observed, will confuse it.

In the Imperial Law, we read, that Good Grammarians, having taught with
diligence Twenty Years, were to have Special Honor conferred upon them. I
Challenge for MY MASTER, more than a Treble portion of that Special Honor.
But, Oh, Let it all pass through him up to the Glorious LORD, who made him to be
what he was!

His Eminent Abilities for the Work, which rendered him so long Useful in his
Generation, were universally acknowledged. The next Edition of, Tranquillus de
Claris Grammatitis, may well enough bring him into the Catalogue, and
acknowledge him a Master. He was not a Mere Grammarian; yet he was a Pure One.
And let no Envy Misconstrue it, if I say, It was noted, that when Scholars came
to be Admitted into their College, they who came from the Cheeverian
Education, were generally the most unexceptionable. What Exception shall be
made, Let it fall upon him, that is now speaking of it.

He flourished so long in this Great Work, of bringing our Sons to be Men, that
it gave him an opportunity to send forth many Bezaleels and Aholiabs for the
Service of the Tabernacle; and Men fitted for all Good Employments. He that was
my Master, Seven and Thirty Years ago, was a Master to many of my Betters, no
less than Seventy Years ago; so long ago, that I must even mention my Fathers
Tutor for one of them.

And as it is written for the Lasting Renown of the Corderius, whose Colloquies
he taught us; That the Great CALVIN had been a Scholar to him; So this our
AMERICAN Corderius had many Scholars that were a Crown unto him; yea, many that
will be his Crown in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming; yea,
many that were got into the Heavenly World before him. And the mention of the
Heavenly World, leads me to that which I would principally take notice of* His
PIETY, I say, His PIETY; and his care to infuse Documents of Piety into the
Scholars under his Charge, that he might carry them with him to the Heavenly
World, When Aristotle set up a Monument for his Master Plato; he inscribed upon
it, this Testimony, HE WAS ONE WHOM ALL GOOD MEN OUGHT TO IMITATE, AS WELL AS
TO CELEBRATE. MY MASTER went through his Hard Work with so much Delight in it, as
a Work for GOD and CHRIST, and His People: He so constantly Prayed with us
every Day, and Catechis'd us every Week, and let fall such Holy Counsels upon
us; He took so many Occasions, to make Speeches unto us, that should make us
Afraid of Sin, and of incurring the fearful Judgments of God by Sin; That I do
propose him for Imitation.

Verily, If all Schoolmasters would Watch for Souls, and wisely spread the
Nets of Salvation for the Souls of their Children, in the midst of all their
Teaching; Or, if the wondrous Rules of Education, lately published and
practiced, in that Wonder of the World, the School of Glaucha near Hall in the
Lower Saxony, were always attended; Who can tell, what Blessed Effects might be
seen, In very many Children made wise unto Salvation? Albertus, who from his
Great Learning had the Syrname of Magnus, desired of God some years before he
died, That he might forget all his other Learning, and be wholly Swallowed up
in Religion. I would not propose unto you, My Masters, That you should Forget
all other Learning. By all means furnish the Children with as much Learning as
ever you can. But be not so Swallowed up with other Learning, as to Forget
Religion, and the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. Look upon other things to
be (as a Speech in Parliament once elegantly called them,) only the Et
Caetera's, to Religion. Why should not a Schoolmaster be to his Children, A
Schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ? This was the Study of our CHEEVER. The
famous Dr. Reynolds, in a Funeral Sermon on an Excellent Schoolmaster, in the
City of London, has a passage worthy to be written in Letters of Gold. Says he,
If Grammar-Schools have Holy and Learned men set over them, not only the
Brains, but the Souls of the Children might be there Enriched, and the Work of
Learning and of Conversion too, be Betimes wrought in them!

I shall not presume to Dictate, upon this matter, or to Enquire, Why
Castalio's Dialogues, be not Looked upon as one of the best School-Books, for
the Latin Tongue, in all the World? Or, Why for the Greek, there is no more
Account made of Posselius? Or, indeed why (to express my self in the Terms of a
Modern Writer) there should not be North-west Passage found, for the Attaining
of the Latin Tongue; that instead of a Journey, which may be dispatched in a
few Day, they may not wander like the Children of Israel, Forty years in the
Wilderness. And why they should so much converse with the Poets, at that Age,
when they read them, with so much Difficulty, and so little Relish. But I will
venture upon it, as neither a Tedious Parenthesis, nor a needless Digression,
to single out only Two passages of many this way which in my small Reading I
have met withal.

The first is this; I have seen this Experiment among others recorded of one
that had a Number of Little Folks under his Charge.

Moreover, He made it his Custom, that in every Recitation, he would, from
something or other occurring in it, make an occasion, to let fall some
Sentence, which had a Tendency to promote the Fear of God in their Hearts;
which thing sometimes did indeed put him to more than a little study; but the
Good Effect sufficiently Recompensed it.

Another is this. A late Writer has these words; Many Children are sooner
taught what Jupiter, Mars, and such Pagan Gods were, then what, Father, Son,
and Spirit is. Augustine of old complained of this; of Learni^g in the Schools,
Joves Adulteries; and for giving an Account of such things, says he, ob hoc
bonae spei puer appellabar. Luther also complained, That our Schools were more
Pagan than Christian. I refer the unsatisfied Reader, to Pasors Preface to his
Lexicon. I knew an aged and famous Schoolmaster; that after he had kept School
about Fifty years, said, with a very sad countenance, That it was a great
Trouble to him, that he had spent so much time in Reading Pagan Authors to his
Scholars, and wished it were customary to read such a Book as Duports Verses
upon Job, rather than Homer, and such Books. (...) God, put it in the Heart of
a Wise Parliament, to Purge our Schools; that instead of Learning vain
Fictions, and ^ilthy Stories, they may be acquainted with the Word of God, and
with Books containing Grave Sayings, and things that may make them truly Wise
and Useful in the World.

Ye have heard, what MY MASTER was, In the School. Sir Walter Ra^leign commends
it as a piece of wisdom, to use great moderation when we are treating men with
Commendation. I will not forget the Rule, in carrying on my Commendation of my
Master. But I will say very much in a Little. Out of the School, he was One,
Antiqua (...); A Christian of the Old Fashion: An OLD NEW-ENGLISH CHRISTIAN:
And I may tell you. That was as Venerable a Sight, as the World; since the
Days of Primitive Christianity, has ever looked upon.

He was well Studied in the Body of Divinity: An Able Defender of the Faith and
Order of the Gospel; Notably Conversant and Acquainted with the Scriptural
Prophecies; And, by Consequence, A Sober Chiliast.

He Lived as a Master, the Term, which has been for above three thousand years,
assigned for the Life of a Man; he continued unto the Ninety Fourth year of his
Age, an unusual Instance of Liveliness. His Intellectual Force, as little
abated as his Natural. He Exemplified the Fulfillment of that word, As thy Days,
so shall thy Strength be; in the Gloss which the Jerusalem Targum has put upon
it; As thou wast in the Days of thy Youth, such thou shall be in thy Old Age.
The Reward of his Fruitfulness! For, Fructus Liberat Arborem! The product of
his Temperance; Rather than what my Lord Verulam assigns, as a Reason for
Vivacious Scholars.

DEATH must now do its part. He Died, Longing for Death. Our old SIMEON waited
for it, that he might get nearer to the Consolation of Israel. He Dyed Leaning
like Old Jacob, upon a Staff; the Sacrifice and the Righteousness of a Glorious
CHRIST, he let us know, was the Golden Staff, which he Leaned upon. He Dyed
mourning for the Quick Apostasy, which he saw breaking in upon us; very easy
about his own Eternal Happiness, but full of Distress for a poor People here
under the Displeasure of Heaven, for Former Iniquities, he thought, as well as
Later, Ones. To say no more: He Dyed, A CANDIDATE FOR THE FIRST RESURRECTION.
And Verily, our Land is Weakened, when those Fly away, at whose Flight me may
cry out, My Father, My Father, the Chariots of New England, and the Horsemen
thereof.

GRATITUDINIS ERGO.
An ESSAY on the Memory of my Venerable MASTER; Ezekiel Cheever.
Augusto perstringere Carmine Lauds.
Quas nulla Eloquij vis Celebrare queat.
YOU that are Men, and Thoughts of Manhood know,
Be Just now to the Man that made you so.
Martyred by Scholars the stabbed Cassian dies,
And falls to cursed Lads a Sacrifice.
Not so my CHEEVER, Not by Scholars slain,
But Praised, and Loved, and wished to Life again.
A mighty Tribe of Well-instructed Youth
Tell what they owe to him, and Tell with Truth.
All the Eight parts of Speech he taught to them
They now Employ to Trumpet his Esteem.
They fill Fames Trumpet, and they spread a Fame
To last till the Last Trumpet drown the same.
Magister pleased them well, because 'twas he;
They saw that Bonus did with it agree.
While they said, A^o, they the Hint improve
Him for to make the Object of their Love.
No Concord so Inviolate they knew
As to pay Honors to their Master due.
With Interjections they break off at last,
But, Ah, is all they use, Woe, and, Alas!
We Learnt Prosodia, but with that Design
Our Masters Name should in our Verses shine.
Our Weeping Ovid but instructed us
To write upon his Death, De Tristibus.
Tully we read, but still with this Intent,
That in his praise we might be Eloquent.
Our Stately Virgil made us but Contrive
As our Anchises to keep him Alive,
When Phaenix to Achilles was assigned
A Master, then we thought not Homer blind:
A Phaenix, which Oh! might his Ashes show!
So rare a Thing we thought our Master too.
And if we made a Theme, 'twas with Regret
We might not on his Worth show all our Wi^,
Go on, ye Grateful Scholars, to proclaim
To late Posterity your Masters Name.
Let it as many Languages declare
As on Loretto-Table do appear.
Too much to be by any one expressed:
I Will tell my share, and you shall tell the rest.
Ink is too vile a Liquor; Liquid Gold
Should fill the Pen, by which such things are told.
The Book should Amyanthus-Paper be
All writ with Gold, from all corruption free.
A Learned Master of the Languages
Which to Rich Stores of Learning are the Keys;
He taught us first Good Sense to understand
And put the Golden Keys into our Hand,
We but for him had been for Learning Dumb,
And had a sort of Turkish Mutes become.
Were Grammar quite Extinct, yet at his Brain
The Candle might have well been lit again.
If Rhet'rick had been stripped of all her Pride
She from his Wardrobe might have been Supplied.
Do but Name CHEEVER, and the Echo straight
Upon that Name, Good Latin, will Repeat.
A Christian Terence, Master of the File
That arms the Curious to Reform their Style.
Now Rome and Athens from their Ashes rise;
See their Platonic Year with vast surprise:
And in our School a Miracle is wrought;
For the Dead Languages to Life are brought.
His Work he Loved: Oh! had we done the same^
Our Play-dayes still to him ungrateful came.
And yet so well our Work adjusted Lay,
We came to Work, as if we came to Play.
Our Lads had been, but for his wondrous Cares,
Boys of my Lady Mores unquiet Prayers.
Sure were it not for such informing Schools,
Our Lat'ran too would soon be filled with Owls.
It Is CORLET's pains, and CHEEVER's, we must own,
That thou, New England, art not Scythia grown,
The Isles of Silly had o're-run this Day
The Continent of our America.
Grammar he taught, which 'twas his work to do:
But he would Hagar have her place to know.
The Bible is the Sacred Grammar, where
The Rules of speaking well, contained are.
He taught us Lilly, and he Gospel taught;
And us poor Children to our Savior brought.
Master of Sentences, he gave us more
The we in our Sententi^ had before.
We Learned Good Things in Tullies Offices;
But we from him Learned Better things than these.
With Cato's he to us the Higher gave
Lessons of JESUS, that our Souls do save.
We Construed Ovid's Metamorphosis,
But on our selves charged, not a Change to miss.
Young Austin wept, when he saw Dido dead,
Though not a Tear for a Lost Soul he had:
Our Master would not let us be so vain,
But us from Virgil did to David train,
Textors Epistles would not Cloathe our Souls;
Paul's too we heard; we went to School at Paul's.
Syrs, Do you not Remember well the Times,
When us he warned against our Youthful Crimes:
What Honey dropped from our old Nestors mouth
When with his Counsels he Reformed our Youth:
How much he did to make us Wise and Good;
And with what Prayers, his work he did conclude.
Concerned, that when from him we Learning had,
It might not Armed Wickedness be made!
The Sun shall first the Zodiac forsake,
And Stones unto the Stars their Flight shall make*
First shall the Summer bring large dri^ts of Snow,
And beauteous Cherries in December grow;
E're of those Charges we Forget^ul are
Which we, O man of God, from thee did hear.
Such Tutors to the Little Ones would be
Such that in Flesh we should their Angels see,
Ezekiel should not be the Name of such;
We'd Agathangelus not think too much,
Who Served the School, the Church did not forget;
But Thought, and Prayed, and often wept for it.
Mighty in Prayer: How did he wield thee, Prayer!
Thou Reverst Thunder CHRIST's-Sides-piercing Spear?
Soaring we saw the Bird of Paradise;
So Winged by Thee, for Flights beyond the Skies.
How often we saw him tread the Milky Way,
Which to the Glorious Throne of Mercy lay!
Come from the Mount, he shone with ancient Grace.
Awful the Splendour of his Aged Face
Clothed in the Good Old Way, his Garb did wage
A War with the Vain Fashions of the Age.
Fearful of nothing more than hateful Sin;
'Twas that from which he labored all to win,
Zealous; And in Truths Cause never known to trim;
No Neuter Gender there allowed by him.
Stars but a Thousand did the Ancients know;
On later Globes they Nineteen hundred grow:
Now such a CHEEVER added to the Sphere;
Makes an Addition to the Luster there.
Mean time America a Wonder saw;
A Youth in Age, forbid by Natures Law.
You that in the other Hemisphere do dwell,
Do of Old Age your dismal Stories tell.
You tell of Snowy Heads and Rheumy Eyes
And things that make a man himself despise.
You say, a frozen Liquor chills the Veins,
And scarce the Shadow of a Man remains.
Winter of Life, that Sapless Age you call,
And of all Maladies the Hospital:
The Second Nonage of the Soul; the Brain
Covered with Cloud; the Body all in pain.
To weak- Old Age, you say, there must belong
A Trembling Palsy both of Limb and Tongue;
Days all De^repit; and a Bending Back,
Propt by a Staff, in Hands that ever shake.
Nay, Syrs, our CHEEVER shall confute you all,
On whom there did none of these Mischefs fall.
He Lived, and to vast Age no Illness knew;
Till Time, Scythe waiting for him Rusty grew.
He Lived and Wrought; His Labors were Immense*
But never Declined to Praeter-perfect Tense.
A Blooming Youth in him at Ninety Four*
We saw; But, Oh! when such a sight before!
At Wondrous Age he did his Youth resume,
As when the Eagle mew's his Aged plume.
With Faculties of Reason still so ^^ight,
And at Good Services so Exquisited;
Sure our sound Chiliast, we wondering thought,
To the First Resurrection is not brought!
No, He for That was waiting at the Gate
In the Pure Things that fit a Candidate.
He in Good Actions did his Life Employ,
And to make others Good, he made his Joy.
Thus well-appris'd now of the Life to Come,
To Live here was to him a Martyrdom:
Our brave Macrobius Longed to see the Day
Which others dread, of being Called away.
So, Ripe with Age, he does invite the Hook,
Which watchful does for its large Harvest look*
Death gently out the Stalk, and kindly laid
Him, where our God His Granary has made.
Who at New Haven first began to Teach,
Dying Unshipwreck'd, does White-Haven reach.
At that Fair Haven they all Storms forget;
He there his DAVENPORT with Love does meet.
The Luminous Robe, the L^ss whereof with Shame
Our Parents wept, when Naked they became;
Those Lovely Spirits wear it, and therein
Serve God with Priestly Glory, free from Sin.
But in his Paradisian Rest above,
To Us does the Blessed Shade retain his Love.
With Rip'ned Thoughts Above concerned for Us,
We cannot but hear him dart his Wishes, thus.
'TUTORS, Be Strict; But yet be Gentle too:
'Don't by fierce Cruelties fair Hopes undo.
'Dream not that they who are to Learning slow,
'Will mend by Arguments in F^^io.
'Who keeps the Golden Fleece, Oh, let him not
'A Dragon be, though he Three Tongues have got.
'Why can you not to Learning find the way,
'But through the Province of Severia?
'Twas Moderatus, who taught Origin;
'A Youth which proved one of the Best of men.
'The Lads with Honor first, and Reason Rule;
'Blowes are but for the Refractory Fool.
'But, Oh! First Teach them their Great God to fear;
'That you like me, with Joy may meet them here.
H' has said! --
Adieu, a little while, Dear Saint, Adieu;
Your Scholar will not be Long, Sir, after you.
In the mean time, with Gratitude I must
Engrave an EPITAPH upon your Dust.
It Is true, Excessive Merits rarely safe*
Such an Excess forfeits an Epitaph.
But if Base men the Rules of Justice break,
The Stones (at least upon the Tombs) will speak.
Et Tumulum facite, et Tumulo superaddite carmen. (Virg. in Daphn.) EPITAPHIUM.
EZEKIEL CHEEVERUS:
Ludimagister;
Primo Neo-portenfis;
Deinde, Ipsuicensis;
Postea, Carolotenensis
Postremo, Bostonensis
cujus
Doctrinam ac Virtutem
Nostri, si Sis Nov-Anglus,
Colis, si non Barbarus;
GRAMMATICUS,
a Quo, non pure tantum, sed et pie,
Loqui;
RHETORICUS.
a Quo non tantum, O^^ate dice^
coram Hominibus,
Sed et Orationes coram Deo fundere
Efficaci^^imas;
POETA,
a Quo non tantum (...)
Sed et
Caelestes Hymnos, Odasque Angelicas,
canere,
Didicerunt,
Qui discere voluerunt;
LUCERNA,
ad Quam accensa sunt,
Quis queat numerare,
Quot Ecclesiarum Lumina?
ET
Qui secum Corpus Theologiae abstulit,
Peritissimus THEOLOGUS,
Corpus hic suum sibi ^^nus Cha^um,
deposuit.
Vixit Annos, XCIV.
Docuit, Annos. LXX.
Obijt, A.D. M.DCC.VIII.
Et quod Mori potuit,
HEIC
Expectat Exoptatque
Primam Sanctorum Resurrectionem
ad
Immortalitatem.
Evuvijs debetur Honos. (...) FINIS.

