The Vain Youth Summoned to Appear at Christ's Bar. OR, AN ESSAY To Block up
the Sinful Ways OF YOUNG PEOPLE, By Most Solemn Considerations, Relating to
that JUDGMENT unto which they are hastening. In a Lecture-SERMON, Preached at
York, in the Province of Main; June 25, 1701.

By SAMVEL MOODEY, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST there.

The Second Edition Enlarged.

Prove. IX. 12. If thou be Wise, thou shall be Wise for thy self: But if thou
Scornest, thou alone shall bear it.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, at the North End of
the Town, 1707.

TO THE READER.
IT was a Signal Favor of God to His People Israel, that He raised up of their
Sons for Prophets, and of their Young Men for Nazarites. This has the Lord done
for His People in New England: Of which the Author of this Sermon is One, and
not the Least Instance.

Some of his Friends having desired me to give my Attestation to what is
herewith Emitted, I can with much freedom of Spirit do it: For I have Perused
it with great satisfaction. It is Evident that the Author has an Earnest and
Holy Desire to Promote the Salvation of Souls; Especially of the Young
Generation. It is an Happy Omen to a Land, when Young Preachers do so. The
Spirit Breathing in this Discourse, Debaseth Man, Exalts Grace, and lays
CHRIST in the Foundation of all. It must needs be a Singular Joy to me, when I
see any of those Scholars who have sometimes had their Education under me,
doing so. And I do the more Rejoice, in that whereas I did my self Publish Two
Sermons on this very Text, Preached in Cambridge Twelve Years ago, I see
another, and One of my Academical Children Concurring in the same Design. I
Hope and Pray that as the First Impression of this Practical Discourse found
General Acceptance, that this Second Edition of it, will be likewise Blessed to
the Spiritual Benefit of many Readers, and add to the Pious Authors Crown in
the Day of CHRIST.

Increase Mather.
Boston September. 12th. 1707.
THE Vain YOUTH Summoned to Appear at Christ's Bar.
ECCLESIASTES, XI. 9. Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart
Cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and Walk in the Ways of thy Heart, and in
the Sight of thine Eyes: But Know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into Judgment.


THE Invaluable worth of Gods Word, may be Argued from the Infinite
Excellencies (particularly the spotless Purity) of the Glorious Author, Ephesians.
6.17. It may also be strongly inferred from the Blessed Effects thereof, 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17. And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee Wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That
the Man of God may be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works. But
they are of special Use to Young Folks, Prove 1.4. They give Subtilty to the
Simple; To the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion. They Exhort Young Men to be
Sober; And Teach Young Women to be Sober-minded also: Chaste and Good in their
Place, Tit. 2 4, 5.6. And that their Adorning (without) should be in (...)
Apparel; with Shamef^^^ness and Sobriety: And (within) the Ornament of a Meek
and Quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great Price, 1 Timothy 2 9. 1
Pet. 3.3, 4. In a word, The Sacred Oracles do sufficiently abound with
Examples, Precepts, Exhortations, Motives, Directions, Solemn Warnings, and
Severe Reproofs; together with Promises and Threatenings: All which have a
direct Tendency to the Reclaiming inconsiderate Youth from the deadly Evil of a
Vain Conversation, and Encouraging them to walk in the New and Living way; that
when the Great Judge shall Appear to the shame of others, they may be comforted.

Our Text is a most Pungent Reprehension of Young Folks, for the Vanity of
their Hearts, and Extravagancy of their Lives. It seems plainly to be Levelled
against the Uncoverted: And they are bid to Solace themselves with Jovial
frames in their Pernicious ways, at their utmost Peril: Rejoice O Young Man,
etc. q. d. Well, Vain Youth (seeing thou art set upon it) Trifle away the
bright and pleasant Morning of thy short Day; and the Golden Spring-season of
that One Year more than thou may be let alone in Gods Vineyard: But yet I
Solemnly Declare, (and take notice of what I say) thou shall for all thy
Fleshly Lusts, those of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, be Judged Impartially,
Condemned Irreversibly, and Punished Eternally: Be it known to the
Flesh-pleasing Wanton, that if he WILL Gratify his Youthful Lusts, instead of
Fleeing them; whither he will or no, he MUST and SHALL Hear of these things in
the Great Audit DAY. But to prevent all this, will you Open your Hearts to
Receive this very Solemn Truth;

DOCTRINE. That GOD would have Young People to Know, that if they indulge
themselves in Sinful Pleasures, He will call them to an Account for all their
Youthful Vanities.
There be Three PROPOSITIONS in the Doctrine: [I.] There are many Sinful
Pleasures, in which Young People are prone to Indulge themselves. [II.] For all
these Youthful Vanities, God will call them to an Account. [III.] This is a
Truth, which God would have Young People to Know.

PROPOSITION I.
There are many Sinful Pleasures, in which Young People are prone to Indulge
themselves. The very Foundation of our Nature is laid in Corruption, Psalm.
51.5. A Nature not only stained with the Guilt of Adams first Sin, who was our
Representative, and in whose Loins we then were; but wholly depraved, and full
of the Seeds of all manner of Sin: which is discovered by the Actions of Little
Children. A Stubborn and Disobedient Heart, must needs be the cause of those
cross fits, which are common to Children before they can speak or go alone. And
does not the Pride and Malice of their hearts appear, in the words and actions
even of Sucking Babes?

These Early Fruits of Pride, Malice, Envy, Revenge, etc. are Actual Sins, though
of Ignorance. And if they are not against Light, yet neither are they for want
of Light; for we find by sad Experience, that as soon as the light begins to
discover moral Good and Evil, it does rather irritate the Corruptions of the
heart, and inflame their Desires after forbidden Fruit, than bear down and
overcome them. Indeed, the early instructions and restraints of Godly Parents,
have no small influence on some Children; not only to prevent the out-breaking
of much Evil, but also to the seasoning of their Hearts with Grace betimes. Yet
how many are there that break all bands and bounds, taking their swinge in all
kinds of Youthful Vanities! Who as they increase in Days and Years, go on from
one sinful Pleasure to another; and many, many are the wicked Practices that
Corrupt Youth, through the Temptations of a Subtle Devil, and an Ensnaring World,
are hurried into: Yet not against their will; for the most wicked and deceitful
courses are very agreeable to an Heart deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.

I shall undertake to speak particularly of the various ways of the Hearts of
Young Men and Women; only give a few Hints, leaving it with their own
Consciences, to tell them more at Large, what have been their several Pleasant
Walks, in the Garden of Sinful Delights.

There is the way of Uncleanness; in Heart, Lip, and Life; with others, or
alone: The way of Lying; for Sport, or to Excuse their other faults; and
sometimes one against another, out of mere Malice and Revenge. The way of
Pride; in ambitious, self-conceited thoughts, boasting expressions, and
inordinate imitation of the newest Fashions. In short; There are the ways of
Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Disobedience to Parents, Drinking, and Stealing,
that are very pleasing in the Eyes of Vain Youth; insomuch, that the wise man
does not think it enough in the close of this Chapter to call them Vain,
Childhood and Youth (says he) are Vanity.

PROPOSITION II.
For all these Youthful Vanities, God will call Young People to an Account.
When God at first made man, He gave him a Law, to be the Rule of his Life;
annexing Promises and Threatenings to that Holy, Righteous and Good Law. And
though by our Apostasy, we have rendered our selves unable to keep the Law of God;
yet, it is nevertheless binding; especially to them who have it not only written
on their Hearts, as even the Heathen are said to have, Romans 2 14, 15 but more
fully, and less darkly in their Bibles; with the addition of the Gospel, by
which the Law is Established, Romans 3.31. God has not lost His Right to our
Obedience, because we have lost our Power of Obeying: And being Rational
Creatures, we must of necessity, be accountable to Him who is our Lawgiver and
Judge, Romans 14.10.12. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. So
then every one of us shall give Account of himself to God Even that GOD who is
ready to Judge the Quick and Dead; 1 Pet. 4, 5. i. e. All that ever have had,
or shall have a being in the world, from the First Man Adam, to the Last Child
that shall be Born. And as this Judgment shall be Universal with respect to
Persons, viz Youth as well as Children and Infants below them, and Middle, with
Old Age above them; so it shall be Universal with respect to the Works done in
the Body, Eccl. 12.14. For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every
Secret thing, whether it be Good or Evil. And surely, Wanton, Proud, Malicious,
and all Sinful words, are to be reckoned among those Works: Not so much as an
Idle Word shall escape the Reckoning Day, Mat 12.36 Yea, God knows all the
wicked and Vain Thoughts of men, Job 42.2. Psalm 94.11. And does most certainly
keep an exact Account of them; and will call to a strict Reckoning for them, on
that Day, when the Small as well as the Great shall stand before God; and the
Books being Opened, they shall be Judged one of those things that are written
in the Books, according to their works, Rev. 20.12. Nor should the distance of
this Great Day make it less awful to any of us: For there will be a Day of
Particular Judgment, which shall unalterably determine our Final and
Everlasting Estate, as soon as our Souls are separated from our Bodies, Heb.
9.27. Which may be the case of the Youngest of us all, within a very few Days
or Hours; before the next Sabbath, yea, before we see the light of another Day.
And truly the General Judgment may be nearer than we imagine. The Lord may come
unlooked for, and surpriz Young Ones in the midst of their Carnal Mirth and
Jollity, before they are aware, to cut them asunder, and appoint them their
Portion with Hypocrites, who shall for ever weep, wail, and gnash their teeth,
Mat. 24 48, -- And as Young Folks are wilful and uncontroleable in their
Wickedness; resolved that the Lord shall not Rule over them: whom all the
Commands, Promises and Threatenings of the Law and Gospel can nothing move; and
with whom all the means and methods that God is using, are altogether
ineffectual for their reclaming: So it shall be as fruitless for them to use
any Endeavors for an Escape from Gods Tribunal: Heb 2.3. How shall we Escape,
if we neglect so great Salvation? As there is no darkness nor shadow of Death,
where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves from the presence of God Now,
Job 34 22. so it shall be utterly in vain for them Then, to say to the
Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of Him that sits on
the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; when the Great Day of His
intolerable Wrath is come, Rev. 6.16, 17. Thus, because Young Men will indulge
themselves in Sinful Pleasures, GOD will call them to an Account for all their
Youthful Vanities.

PROPOSITION III.
This is a Truth which GOD would have Young People to Know. Young Men Rejoice
in their Youth, as if they were made for nothing but Merriment; and their
Hearts Cheer them in the Days of their Youth, just as if it were always to be
Springtime with them. They can Read, and Meditate on the former part of our
Text with Delight. How pleasing is the Counsel, in the sense their wanton
Hearts would have it taken in? Words could scarce fit them better. Walk in the
ways of thine Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: This is what they would
have! But God would have them to Read, and solemnly to Consider the whole
Verse. They must take this stinging BUT with the rest; Know thou, that for all
these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.

For the further Illustration of this Third Proposition, it may be Enquired,
What it is for Young Men to Know this Truth? Why God would have them to know it
And, Whence it is that they are so Unwilling to Know it?

Quest I. What is it for Young Men to Know this Great Truth?

Answ. In Genesis It is more than barely to Know that such a Truth is written in
their Bibles: It is to Realize the Truth of it, and to Think much upon it. Yea,
it is to Know (as the word in Scripture, frequently signifies,) so as to be
Affected with it and to act accordingly. For Vain Youth to Know, that for all
these things they must come to Judgment, in the sense of our Text, is for them
to Know it, not only Notionally, with a Speculative, Barren, Unpractical
Knowledge; but Feelingly, with a Knowledge that is Heart-affecting and
Operative.

More Particularly.

1. For Young Men to Know aright, is for them firmly to Believe the Truth of
this. All-concerning Doctrine, of a Judgment to come. To Realize it to
themselves, that they must certainly, and may quickly Dye: For God often
shortens the days of them who are Wicked Overmuch, and Foolish, Eccl 7.17*
Those who indulge themselves in Youthful Lusts often Dye in Youth, Job 36.14.
And after Death comes the Judgment, Heb 9.27. To Know aright, is to Believe all
this; and further, to Realize the Second Coming of Christ to Judgment; when He
shall Descend from Heaven, with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God; whose Voice shall Raise the Dead, 1 These 4.16. And that
when He comes with Clouds, Every Eye shall see Him; and those also who Pierced
Him; -- (Have not Young men done so by their Sins?) And all the Kindreds of the
Earth shall wail because of Him, Rev. 1.7 Neither shall so much as one Proud,
Unchaste, Disobedient, or Vain Thought, Word or Action, escape Unaccounted for,
in that Day of Reckoning. Thus to Know is mote than to Hear and Read these
things; It is to Believe and Realize them.

2. For Young Men to Know this Truth, as they should, is for them with
frequency and seriousness of Soul, to Consider of it. It Is not enough to
Believe, that, if we indulge our selves in Sin, God will Judge and Condemn us
for our Sins; but we must take it into solemn Consideration: If it be an
Article of our Faith, it must be the Subject of our Meditation. We should be
often thinking of, and with the greatest seriousness Revolving in our minds,
this Eternal Concern of our Souls. Hence we find Knowing and Considering
frequently joined together in Scripture; Thus, 1 Samuel 25.17: and Isa. 1.3.
Israel does not Know. My People do not Consider. Not to Consider of this Truth,
is not to Know it aright. Again, Isa. 41.20. That they may See, and Know, and
Consider. So that when God bids Young Men Know, what the Latter End of a Vain
Life will be, He would have them to take it into most serious Consideration:
And it will be their wisdom so to do, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were Wise; that
they Understood this; that they would Consider their Latter End! And not only
to Consider what it shall be; but withal to think how they shall be able to
hold up their heads in that Day! What they shall have to say for themselves!
How they can bear to hear (and yet hear they must) that dreadful Sentence, Go
ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And
further, to consider what it will be to lie in Hell among Devils, and Damned
Men and Women for ever! And thus to consider would affect their Hearts; which
also is included in Knowing aright. But this brings us to the Third Particular,
under the First Enquiry.

3. For Young Men to Know the Great Truth before us in the sense of our Text,
is for them to be deeply Affected with it, and Concerned about it. To Know, is
in this sense also frequently taken in Scripture: Thus, 1 King. 8.38 Job 13.23.
Make me to Know my Transgression and my Sin. And yet nearer to the present
purpose, does that fervent Prayer of Holy David seem to be, Psalm. 39.4. Make me
to Know mine End, i. e. so as to lay it to heart. It was an Affectionate
Knowledge that he there desired. So Ezekiel 16 2. Cause Jerusalem to Know her
Abominations. God would have her to lay to Heart her Sins; to be deeply
Affected with them, and Sorrowful for them, when he speaks of her Knowing them.
So that, Know thou, etc. in our Text, is as much as if God had said, And will thou indeed, Vain, Foolish Young Man? -- Art thou resolved to wallow in the
mire of Sin? Then I would have thee to Know, by Believing and Considering, --
Yea, let it sink into thy Heart, and fill thy Soul with trembling, that I will
most surely, and shortly too, call thee to a most strict and solemn Account,
for all thy Youthful Vanities; and thou shall find them to be Dear bought
Pleasures: -- And if Young Men did know this Great Truth thus Affectionately,
they would soon come to know it Practically which is the Fourth and Last Thing
intended in this right Knowledge, of which we are speaking.

4. To Know this Truth aright is to Know it Practically. For Young Men to Know,
that if they indulge themselves in Sinful Pleasures, God will call them to an
Account for all their Youthful Vanities, is for them to act as men who do
Realize the Truth hereof; as those who have frequently taken it into serious
Consideration, laid it to Heart, and have been deeply Affected with it. This,
in General, is to Know the Truth before us Practically, even to Practice
according to such a Knowledge.

But, more Particularly.

This Practical Knowledge includes, or comprehends these Three things in it;
viz Faith, Repentance, and New Obedience.

1. To Know this Truth Practically, is to be driven thereby out of our selves,
to JESUS CHRIST in the way of Faith. When the Young Man does consider, that he
has been a great Sinner; this or that gross Sin his Conscience charges him
with; and he hears God calling, as it were from Heaven to him, and saying, O
Vain Young Man! I will shortly reckon with thee for all thy Sinful Delights: I
have them every one written down in my Book. Being deeply affected herewithal
(which we supposed under the Third Particular) he looks about him for a way of
Escape; saying within-himself, How shall I avoid this terrible Account, with
the dreadful Condemnation and Eternal Misery that is Consequent thereon? As the
Jailer, Act 16 30 What must I do to be Saved? And now, if the Lord in His Free
Love and Infinite Mercy save from flying to the strong Hold of
Self-Righteousness for Safety, which is as natural and common, as it is
dangerous and fatal I say, if it please God, by such a word as that, Isa. 64.6.
All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; to discover the Vanity hereof; and
withal, to make discovery of JESUS CHRIST as the Only and Alsufficient Savior,
Act. 4 12 Neither is there Salvation in any other; for there is no other Name
under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be Saved. And as there Is no
other Savior, so there Needs no other: For He is Able to Save to the
uttermost, all that come unto God by Him; seeing He ever lives to make
Intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. Who came into the world to Ransom lost Souls
from Sin and Wrath, Mat. 1.21. Job. 6.38. 1 These. 1.10. Whose Arms are always
open to receive all that come aright unto Him, how vile soever they have been.
Who never did nor will He, in any wise cast out such as do come, Joh. 6 37 Then
the Poor, Convinced, Trembling Sinner, is Enabled by the mighty Power of God
(even the Exceeding Greatness of that Power whereby Christ was raised from the
Dead, Ephesians. 1.19) to consent that Christ shall be his Savior, and to accept of
Him on his own Terms: And this is true Faith, Joh. 1.12. Put to as many as
Received Him, to them gave (...) to become the Sons of God; even to (...) that
Believed on His Name. And this is Practically to Know the Great Truth contained
in our Text; and when we come thus to Know it, we Know it as God would have us
to do; whose very end in laying before us the danger of those Sinful Ways in
which we have been walking, is to drive us to Christ, by whom alone we may
Escape that danger. Thus to Believe in Christ, is Practically to Know the Truth
in hand: which in the First Thing.

2. The Next thing included in a Practical Knowledge of the Truth before us, is
Repentance. This Grace never fails to follow or rather to accompany Saving
Faith But to imagine that Godly Sorrow for Sin goes before Faith, is the
dangerous mistake of many poor Souls, who think they must mourn for sin to fit
them for Christ; and when they think they have so done, they hope Christ will
accept of them; and to Him they go; (if it might be called going to Christ;)
but with the Young Man in the Gospel, too full of themselves to have any room
left for Jesus Christ, Mat. 19.20. Its true, a Soul must be Humbled before it
can Believe, but that Humiliation which goes before Faith, has not a drop of
Godly Sorrow for Sin in it. No, it consists rather in the sense of an hard
Heart, that cannot mourn for Sin; yea, that is empty of all Good, and full of
nothing but Sin; unworthy of the least crumb of Mercy, so much as to be stayed
from going down to the Pit for one single Day. So that the Humbled Soul comes
to acknowledge, (and how Evident is it?) that nothing but Free Grace can help
it. Yea, after all its Sighs and Groans, and earnest Cries for Mercy, if God
should kick it away from His Footstool (where it lies prostrate, with its mouth
in the Dust) into the Bottomless Pit, yet God is Righteous! This is that
Humiliation which goes before Faith: But brokenness of Heart for Sin follows
after: To our sense, feeling and observation it does so; though it does really
accompany faith, being infused with it into the Penitent Believing Soul. Thus
it is a sense of the Love of God in Christ to a most vile, wretched Sinner, that
breaks the Heart, fills it with shame and sorrow; yea quite melts it down into
Penitential Tears, which now at the first discovery of the Everlasting Love of
GOD, the Father of Mercies, through a sweet JESUS, do flow freely from that newly
Created Principle of Life in the Soul, as Waters from a Living Spring. Search
the Scriptures, and see if it be not so? Ezekiel. 16 63. That thou may Remember
and be Confounded, and never Open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when
I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God.
Mark the Convexion; Then ashamed, when I am pacified. You know that without
(or, which is all one, before) Faith, it is impossible to please God, ( Heb
11.6) by Repentance or any act of Obedience: But being United to Christ by
Faith, the Soul derives Virtue and Strength from the full Fountain of Life, to
mourn for Sin, even all Sin, as the greatest Evil; as against GOD and CHRIST.
Oh, that ever I should offend and grieve a GOD so Good, whom I now see to be my
Loving Friend and Father in Christ! And He Loved me, while I was polluted in my
Blood* and kicking against His Bowels, Ezekiel. 16 6, 8. And when I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood, I said unto thee, Live: -- And
thy time was the time of Love. 1 John 4.19. We Love Him because He first Loved
us. Ungrateful Wretch that I am! that ever I should make the Lord of Angels, to
stand and knock at the Door of my Heart, til His Head was filled with Deu and
His Locks with the Drops of the Night, Cant. 5.2. And all this after He had
Loved me, and Dyed for me, that He might wash me from my Sins in His own Blood!
Thus the Soul melts, when Christ speaks Peace, by the sweet still Voice of His
Spirit. And this is true Repentance, taken in a more restrained sense; for
largely taken it includes New Obedience; and Faith also is necessarily implied
in it: But we are speaking of these Graces distinctly; and New Obedience is the
Third and Last thing comprehended in this Practical Knowledge.

3. Saving Faith, and that Repentance which is unto Life, will be fruitful in
Good Works. The Soul that has tasted the bitterness of Sin, cannot now drink in
Iniquity like Water, as heretofore it has done. And who ever has had a sight of
Christ, by Faith* and tasted that the Lord is Gracious, will be testifying his
Thankfulness by Sincere, Constant and Universal Obedience. He will not allow
himself in the Omission of any known Duty: his failings and short comings,
backwardness to, and Spiritual Deadness in Duty, is a Burden which rather than
any thing in the World, he would get rid of. And he is still endeavoring to
press forward. All that he has Done he thinks not worth looking on; he does as
it were forget it, through the earnest Desire that he has to those things which
are before; even those further Degrees of Obedience, which he presses after,
Phil. 3.13, 14. And this is New Obedience; and this is Practically to Know the
Great Truth before us; And thus would God have Young Men to Know it; Eccl.
12.13, 14. Fear God, and keep His Commandments, -- For God shall bring every
Work into Judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be Good, or whether it
be Evil. Seeing we look for Christ's coming to Judgment, what manner of Persons
ought we to be, in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? Thus much in Answer to
the First Question.

Quest. II. Why would God have Young Men to Know that they must come to
Judgment?

Answ. 1. That so they may Live and be to His Glory. Vain Youths do nothing but
Dishonor God, before they come to the Knowledge, of which we have been
speaking. Now, this Vain, Ungodly Life, is quite beside, and contrary to the
great End for which we are Made, Preserved and Redeemed. But the thorough
Knowledge of this Truth, would set us upon Glorifying God; and this is one
great reason why God would have us to Know it. But they who are most concerned
in this Text and Doctrine, cannot, as yet, feel the strength of such a Motive.
Therefore,

2. The Lord Respects our own Everlasting Good and Advantage herein. He looks
down from Heaven and sees the Generality of Young Men and Women merrily posting
along the Broad Way that leads to Destruction and Eternal Damnation, and out of
Pity and tender Compassion He calls after them to make a stop, and seriously to
Consider whither they are going, and what the End of this Course will be?
Whether it would not be better for them to turn quite about, and to get in at
the Strait Gate, and walk on in the Narrow Way, though something more Difficult,
since it leads to Everlasting Life and Glory? Mat. 7.12, 14. Enter ye in at the
Strait Gate, for Wide is the Gate, and Broad is the Way that leads to
Destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Because Strait is the Gate,
and Narrow is the Way which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.
Thus God Blessed for ever, who can no wise be profited by His Creatures, would
have us Know this Truth for our own Good, Job 5.27. and 22.2.

Quest. III. Whence is it, that Young Men are so unwilling to Know, that they
must come to Judgment; and their Hearts and Lives be Exposed to Public View
then?

Answ. 1. It is partly through the Temptations of Satan, their Potent, Subtle and
Malicious adversary. This Roaring Lion makes it his business to devour Souls, 1
Pet. 5.8. And he knows that if he can keep the thoughts of Death, Judgment and
Eternity cut of the minds of Young People, he shall obtain his Ends. And great
is the Advantage, and many are the Devices that he has to take Young Ones off
from the Consideration of their Latter End, 2 Cor. 2.11. He will tell them, its
too soon yet; they may delay a little longer: He makes some believe that
Religion is attended with innumerable and insuperable Difficulties: O how
harshly will the Devil represent a Godly Life to them! And on the other hand,
How will he set forth the Pleasures of Sin! He knows how to bait his hook,
according to the Constitutions, Callings and present Employment of Young
People. And if he cannot Wholly shut out Religion, he will persuade them that a
Little is Enough. If they comply with some Duties, why may they not be excused
as to others, that have more of Self-denial in them? Or if they take up with
the whole Form of Godliness, without the Power of it, he has them fast still:
If they have had some sad thot's about their Sins, he will make that pass with
them for thorough Repentance; and a Vain Confidence to be saved by the Blood of
Christ (though never washed in that Fountain; nor heartily sensible of their
Need, yea and extreme Necessity of being sprinkled with it every Day) for true
Justifying Faith: And if they have some good wishes, and external performances,
this, says the Father of Lies, is true Gospel Obedience. If he cannot get them
to be openly Profane, they may be prevailed with to be Secretly Wicked; and one
Sin lived in, loved and allowed of (he knows) will Effectually undo them. He
may sometimes for bear Tempting to Grosser Immoralities, lest their False Peace
should be disturbed, and so his strongest Hold weakened. But who can trace this
Old Subtle Serpent? Thus, its partly from the Devil and Satan.

2. Its partly also through the Evil Examples and Solicitations of wicked
Companions. And how prevalent are Evil Examples! It is exceeding natural for us
to be drawn away thereby: Why else is that Prohibition given, Exodus 23.2. Thou
shall not follow a Multitude to do Evil? Sad Experience assures us that it is
too true with respect to the present Rising Generation. Young Men do see, that,
for the most part, those who are Young like themselves do take their swing in
Youthful Vanities, and are little concerned about the Practical Knowledge of
the Truth in hand, so as to Believe, Repent, and Obey the Gospel. If some few
are in good earnest for Religion they are Objects of Scorn, as too Precise, if
not downright Hypocrites. But this is not all; the Devils Children will Tempt
one another; and draw by Solicitations as well as Example. They will urge for a
Combination in wickedness, Prove. 1.13, 14. We shall find all precious
Substance: Cast in thy Lot with us. Prove. 7.22, 23. With much fair speech she
caused him to yield; with the flattering of her lips she forced him: He goes
after her straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or a Fool to the
Correction of the stocks; till a Dart strike through his Liver; as a Bird hastes
to the snare, and knows not that it is for his Life. And Oh! How hard is it
for a Poor Graceless Young Man or Maiden, (it is of and to such I am speaking) to
withstand these pleasing Solicitations! And how many are undone for ever by
Evil Company! Yet others will not take warning. Thus, you see Satan is not the
only Destroyer of men! They prove, as it were, Devils to one another. It is
much through the Evil Examples and Persuasions of Companions in Sin that this
truth is unknown, unthought of.

3. It is partly also, yea principally from themselves, that Young Persons come
short of their Duty, while they rush into Sin. The hearts of Vain Youths are
naturally full of Enmity against God, and therefore cannot be subject to His
Law, Romans 8 7. We have hearts by Nature bent to Evil, only to Evil, and that
continually, Genesis 6.5. There are many Youthful Lusts that keep multitudes from
knowing the things that belong to their Peace, in the day of them: Genesis 8.21.
The imagination of man's Heart is Evil from his Youth. Were it not for Inward
Corruption, it would be easy to resist and repel the assaults of Temptation. We
are for the most part, of our selves inclined to do that which Satan and Others
tempt us to. Thus by our own Lusts, we are enticed and drawn away, Jam. 1.14.
Our worst Enemy is in our own Bosoms, conspiring with Satan in shedding the
Blood of our precious and immortal Souls! This may be Written on the Graves of
all those Vain Youths that go on and Dye in their Sins, Hos. 13.9. Thou have
Destroyed thy self.

APPLICATION.
USE; Only by way of EXHORTATION: To such as are Young. O Remember now thy
Creator, (who will be thy Judge) Even now, in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them, Eccl. 12.1. Thou art in the midst of Pleasures. Profits and
Honors: Thou have a merry Heart and a pleasant Countenance: It is Springtime
with thee, and a serene Morning: There are a Thousand Beautiful Objects before
thine Eyes: All thy Senses may be gratified: Tomorrow may be be as this Day,
and much more abundant. Thou do promise thy self a long Summer, fruitful in
all kinds of Heart-chearing, and Flesh-pleasing Delights. Now who shall dare to
break in upon thee, to interrupt thy Joy, and spoil thy Cheer; to block up thy
ways, or present any mournful Object before thine Eyes! BUT Know thou that for
all these things thou must come to Judgment. If Young Men will indulge
themselves in Sinful Pleasures, God will call them to an Account for all their
Youthful Vanities: And this is a Truth that God would have Young Men to Know:
Hear it then, and Know it for thy Good: Believe it, and Realize the Truth of
it: Consider of it frequently, fixedly, even till thou art deeply and duly
affected with it; and then it will influence thy Conversation: And so thou will
come to Know it Practically also, by going to Christ in the way of Faith,
repenting of thy past Sins, and yielding New Obedience for the future. This,
you have heard, is a right Knowledge* Be Exhorted thus to Know the Truth before
us; Or, (which is all one) to be truly Religious.

It is necessary that we add Motives to Enforce this Exhortation.

MOTIVE I.
The Time of Youth is the very best Season that ever you can have, to set about
this Work in. For now, ordinarily, the Heart is most tender, the Affections
most lively and flowing, the Conscience most wakeful, and the Will most pliable
to the motions of the Holy Spirit; which are now also most frequent and
powerful. Worldly encumbrances, in Youth, are not so many; the habits of Sin
not so deeply rooted, as they will come to be by long Custom, after which it
will be next to impossible successfully to Engage in this work: Jer. 13.23. Can
the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also do
Good, that are accustomed to do Evil Yet, let not Old Sinners be discouraged;
for, if they will now put an end to all Delays, and Cry mightily to God; all
things are possible with Him, Mat. 19.29. But, Oh! It is the greatest Folly in
the world, to let the time of Youth slip; which is on all these accounts, and
many more, the Choicest season in which to secure and Interest in Christ, and a
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven. Early Seekers shall be sure Finders, Prove.
8.17. Those that Seek me Early shall Find me. And will not this move you to
Remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth, before the Evil Days come?
Eccl 12.1. In the Concerns of the present Life. Wise men will take the first
fair season to prosecute their Designs; and he is accounted a man void of
Understanding, who, having a business of great importance to accomplish, yet
will busy himself about Trifles* and neglect one opportunity after another,
wherein he might easily secure his Life, Honor or Estate lying in extreme
hazard. But how much more Unwise are they who have a blessed Season in their
hands to secure their Eternal Interest, and yet neglect it? Prove. 17.16
Wherefore is there a Price in the hand of a Fool to get Wisdom, seeing he has
no Heart to it? Our own and others Prudence and Diligence in matters of this
vain World, will Condemn our Negligence and Folly in things of Eternal weight
and moment, 1 Cor 9.25. Now they do it to obtain a Corruptible Crown; but we an
Incorruptible. Shall I then prevail with you to set about this work, now in the
Morning of your Age* because this is most certainly the Best Time.

MOTIVE II.
As Youth is the Fittest Season, so it may be the Only Time that ever we shall
have, in which to get an Interest in Christ, and make our Peace with God. We
have not the least assurance that we shall live past our Youth: And after this
present, uncertain Life, there will be no work to be done for our Souls, Eccl.
9 10 Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy Might; for there is no
Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go.
Does it not then stand us in hand to be up and doing, now, even now, before it
be too late? If it were a matter of Indifferency, that might be done, or let
alone, the Case were otherwise: But it is a work that must be done, or we for
ever undone: And Now is the time, and for ought we know, the Only time; and
shall we yet sit still, as if we had nothing to do? On! There are many now in
Hell who sinned away their Youth, which was to them the Only time lamenting
their unaccountable Madness, with inexpressible anguish of Soul* Have we not
followed Younger than our selves to the Grave? And whose turn it may be next
God only knows; who has kept it secret in His own Breast, for this very End,
that we might be always ready, Luk 12 40. Be ye therefore Ready; for the Son of
Man comes, at an Hour when ye think not. Suppose you were Condemned to Die at
a Humane Bar, and sent back to Prison till the Day of Execution, which we will
suppose to be only with the Judge; the Sentence to be performed when he should
give Order: Suppose now the Judge should send a Messenger to assure you that if
you would humbly acknowledge the vileness of the Fact committed, and Petition
for your Life, it should be granted on your Request? Would you say* I Will take
it into Consideration; there is no haste; I may not be Executed this
Twelvemonth yet; and if I get a Pardon before that Day, all will be well? O
Unconverted Young Man, or Woman, this is thy very Case! Thou are under a
Sentence of Condemnation; Joh. 3.18. He that Believes not is Condemned
already: But, as yet, thy Judge is, by His Ambassadors, entreating thee to
seek for a Pardon, 2 Cor 5 20. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we Pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled
to God. Now Pardon and Peace may be had, if you seek in Earnest. And will you
not be in Good Earnest, when it is for your Life, even the Eternal Life of a
Soul, which He who went to the Price of it, declares to be more worth than a
World? And if you defer but till Tomorrow, it may be too late, Prove. 27.1. Art
thou not then worse than Distracted to venture the loss of so Precious a
Treasure on so Extreme an Uncertainty as is a frail brittle Life, the slender
Thread whereof, thou art by thy Delays, every Day provoking God to cut
asunder? Oh! That you would know the things of your Peace, in this the Day of
them, before they are hidden from your Eyes! Luk 19 42.

READER, If, after thou have put off from the shore of this world, and Launched
into the boundless and bottomless Ocean of Eternity, where God shall Rain Fire
and Brimstone upon thee, in a horrible Tempest, Psalm 11.6. And all the Billows
of His Enraged Fury shall roll over thy Soul, to swallow thee up in the Gulf of
Despair; If then, I say, when thou shall be sick of thy foolish Bargain in
letting go Eternal Joys for Vanishing Pleasures, thou mighted Recant, and
return back again, I would not be so Earnest with thee: But thou are going the
way whence thou shall not return, Job 10 21 And many Dye in Youth, Job 36 14
And some that live past their Youth are, by the Righteous Judgment of a
Sovereign God shut up under Unbelief, Isa 6 9. Thou think of Repenting
hereafter; but what if Christ should then say to thee, as to them, Luke 19 42.
Now the things of thy Peace are hidden from thine Eyes? Truly if thou Delayest
I fear it will come to this, e're long, or worse.

MOTIVE III.
Is it not Infinite Mercy, that thou have any Time and Space to Repent, Means
and Seasons of Grace? Rev. 2.21. I gave her space to Repent. Luke 13 7. Behold
these Three Years I come, seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree. Consider how many
Thousands and Millions have been, and are in the world that never, so much as
once, heard the Joyful Sound of the Gospel, or any News of a Savior.
Multitudes, Multitudes, that no man can number, do Perish for lack of Vision:
Rom 11:22* Behold the Goodness and Severity of God: Toward others Severity;
but toward thee Goodness; if thou despise not the Riches of His Goodness,
Forbearance and Long-suffering, which leads thee to Repentance: And after thy
hardness and impenitent Heart, treasurest not up unto thy self Wrath, against
the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. Will not the
Thunders of Sinai Fright thee from Sin; nor the smiling Beams of Love on Mount
Sion Draw up thy Soul to Christ?

Our Great Master (the God of Abraham) has sent me this Day to Woo you for His
Only Son JESUS, the Antitype of Isaac: I knew before I came that you were
Naturally Averse to the March; and I therefore begged of the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ to send me Good speed this Day; while I am now managing a
Heart-winning Argument; Even the Loving kindness of the Father of Mercies to
you; and the Love (stronger than Death) of His Dear Son; who by the Ministry of
His Word, and the Motions of His Spirit is waiting for your Answer. Will you
go? The most you can Lose is a Mortal Crown; the least you shall Gain is an
Inheritance incorruptible, Undefiled, that shall never fade away. God is
drawing thee with Cords of a Man; with Bands of Love Hos. 11.4. And that, not
common Love only, in such fruits of His Bounty as the Heathen world is favored
withal; but Gospel Grace, which teaches us to Deny Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this Present, Evil World.
Ungrateful Sinner! Thou have had more Merciful Kindness, and Long-suffering
Patience Expended on thee in a few Sabbaths, than whole Nations have had in
many Ages. Oh! That ever an Offended GOD should thus be first in seeking
Reconciliation with Rebellious Sinners! With US, and not with Fallen Angels?
With US, and not with the most of Fallen Mankind! With US still, when the
Treaty is Ended with Multitudes! Astonishing Grace! Stupid Sinners, that are no
more affected with it! It Is a Mercy indeed to have a space to Repent: But a
greater Mercy to have a Heart to improve it.

MOTIVE IV.
Forego Sinful Pleasures we must, if we Resolve to be truly Religious: But
there are sweeter Delights that we shall have in Exchange. Prove. 3.17* Wisdoms
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Psalm. 63.5. My
Soul shall be satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness. Psalm* 36* 8 9. They shall
be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thine House; and thou shall make
them drink of the River of thy Pleasures. For with thee is the Fountain of
Life: In thy Light shall we see Light. What is the very Cream and Quintessence
of all Flesh-pleasing delights, in comparison of that Spiritual, Heavenly Joy,
which at times, and commonly at our first Conversion, diffuseth it self all
over the Renewed Soul? Mat. 9.2. Be of Good Cheer; Thy Sins be Forgiven thee
Romans 8.16 The Spirit, it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
Children of God. 1 Pet. 1 8. Believing we Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory. This is now wonderful (yet no more strange than true) that we might
have a more pleasant Flight to the Paradise of Angels, than our slide can be,
down the Hill of worldly Pleasure, to the Valley of the shadow of the Second
Death, the place of Dragons! Its true, Gracious Souls often walk in shady
Valleys; yet, even then what Evil need they fear? The Lord is with them, Psalm.
3 4. And if Weeping endure for a Night, JOY will come in the Morning, Psalm. 30
5. Indeed, it is so: I have no design to delude thee: If, the most of thy
Lifetime, thou should be greatly troubled, yet, Read Psalm. 37.37. The
Latter End will be Peace. In a word; The Worst of Religion is better and more
eligible than Sins Best: Otherwise Moses made an unadvised choice, rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season: Esteeming the Reproach of Christ, greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt, Heb 11.25. And will not all this move you to change your
Course? Believe others Experiences: or rather believe GOD, and make trial,
whether it be not so of a Truth. What though thy carnal Reason and corrupt Will
do contradict this truth; cannot He who causes the Light to shine out of
Darkness, Enlighten thy mind, renew thy will, and so change the whole frame and
temper of thy Soul, that thou shall come to take sweet delight in those Duties
of Self-denial that are now an intolerable Burden to thee? Was it ever heard
that any truly Converted man did repent his Choice? Or do thou think in thy
own Conscience, that it will grieve thee in a Dying hour that thou have broken
off from Sinful Companions, and spent much time in Praying, Reading and
searching thy heart, while others have been Drinking. Sporting, and Studying
variety of Diversions, to pass time away? Did ever Dying Man or Woman, with
they had spent less time in Duties of Religion, and more in Sin and Vanity?
Now, one would think, you should be willing to do that which you may be sure
before hand you shall never Repent of: Godly Sorrow works Repentance unto
Salvation, not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10.

MOTIVE V.
To turn from Sin to God, is the way to have all things, Temporal and
Spiritual, go well with you while in this World. Hereby you shall have better
Security in the Promise of God, never to want Food or Raiment, or any thing
that is really Good for you; than if you were now put into Possession of an
Estate worth Ten Thousand a Year. So that I may say to you, Believe in Christ,
and you are made for this life, in a more sure and better sense, than he is
said to be so, who has a great Estate befallen to him: For, Riches certainly
make themselves wings, Prove. 23 5. But the Promise of God is surer than Heaven
and Earth, Mark 12.31. Psalm. 84* 11* The Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no
Good thing wilt He wit hold from them that walk uprightly. Mat 6* 33* Seek
First the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all these things
shall be added. He that spared not His own and Only Son, but delivered Him up
for us, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Rom 8.32. Nor
shall you meet with on Temptation or Affliction, more than you shall have real
need of, 1 Pet. 1.6. All which coming, not from the Wrath of an Enemy; but the
tender Love of a Father, Heb. 12*6 7. shall be turned into Choice Mercy,
working together for your Good, Rom 8.28. And increase the weight of your
Eternal Crown of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. In a word; God will never leave you nor
forsake you, at any time: Yea, He will take Effectual care also, that you shall
never utterly depart away from Him, Jer. 32.40. Until, having guided you by
Counsel, He shall bring you safe to Glory, Psalm 73.24. And if this will not
move us, what will? It Is as much our Interest as it is our Duty to be
Religious, and that in our Youth too, Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man to bear
the Yoke in his Youth. Yea, every Circumstance of our Condition, from our
Conversion to our Dissolution, shall be so wisely and graciously ordered, that
it could not be so well if it had been otherwise in one particular, 2 Samuel 23,
5.

MOTIVE VI.
This is the way to Dye in Peace and Comfort: A Godly Life will make a
Deathbed Easy. The different Ends that men make, are according to different
Lives that they lead. If we never saw, we may doubtless have heard of the
Lamentable Condition of some Vain* Wretches on a Deathbed; how intolerable the
lashings of their awakened Consciences have been then, who have indulged
themselves in the Pleasures of Sin while health lasted. Call Time again! Call
Time again! was the Despairing Out cry of One: Of Another, I have had a short
Moment of Pleasure, and I must to Hell for ever! Wishing but for this
mitigation, That he might by Frying behind the Fire in the Chimney, and not in
Hell. It Is true, Wicked men may Dye Peaceably, or rather Securely; their
Consciences being fast asleep till they awake in Flames: And, on the other
hand, the Godly may Encounter with many Fears, and Temptations, and Terrors on
a Deathbed; but, at furthest, the Soul is at perfect Liberty, as soon as it
has broke Prison from its mortal Body; and many times, Enjoyes a blessed
Serenity of mind a considerable time before its departure. These were some of
the Deathbed Expressions of a Gracious Young Woman who lately departed from
us; Sweet Jesus! When shall I come to thee? My Soul longs to be with thee!
Which I suppose the repeated some Scores of times: And being asked by her
Husband whether she could be willing to leave him, and the Children, and all?
Freely can I leave all the World, said she, that I may go to CHRIST. It is a
thousand times harder (added she) to Secure an Interest in Christ, than it is
to Dye: And if you make Religion your business, it will be but a little while
before we shall meet again: If I were to continue with you (she went on) we
would strive who should run fastest in the ways of God: But I know I shall Dye,
and go to Sweet JESUS. -- And such Examples are to be heedfully minded, Psalm.
37.37. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for the end of that Man is
Peace. Would we then Dye in hope and comfort? (For Dye we must;) This is the
only way for us so to do; Make we it our only business to secure a part in
CHRIST, who has taken away the sting of Death, and perfumed the Grave, 1 Cor.
15:55, --

MOTIVE VII.
In the Last Place, Be Exhorted, O Young Man, to Know, that if thou Indulgest
thy self in Sinful Pleasures, GOD will call thee to an Account for all thy
Youthful Vanities; because the right Knowledge of this Truth, is the Only way
to be Acquitted at the Bar of Christ, in the Great Day of Judgment. Vain Young
People, they deserve to be Judged and Condemned to suffer the Vengeance of
Eternal Fire: But by Faith, Repentance, and New Obedience, they may escape this
dreadful Sentence. If we Believe in Christ for Justification, who shall Condemn
us, or lay any thing to our Charge? Romans 8.33, 34. But, if we get not the Judge
to be our Friend, we shall never be able to stand in the Judgment. Read over
that twofold Sentence, of Absolution and Condemnation, Mat. 25.34, 41. Come ye
Blessed, and, Go ye Cursed: Which of these would ye have pronounced to you?
(For one of them hear you must) You Will readily answer, Oh, I hope I shall in
that Day stand among the Sheep, at Christ's Right Hand, to hear that Joyful
Sentence, Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the Foundation of the World. But then, like the wise Virgins, you must now
get the Oil of Grace, in the Vessels of your Hearts, with your Lamps of
Profession, Mat. 25.4. You must Believe Heartily, Repent Un^^ignedly, and Obey
Sincerely; and all this ^^eedily too, or your case will be formida^^e in that
Day; and your Lodging among Devils, where the Worm Dies not, and the ^ire is
not Quenched, Mark 9.48. Read and Tremble at thy dreadful Doom; When the word
Jesus shall be Revealed from Heaven, with his Mighty Angels, in flaming Fire,
taking Vengeance on them that Know not God, and that Obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction, from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of His Power, 2 These. 1.7, -- Oh! To
be thrust away from all the Good Company in the whole World, and chained down
in a dark Prison (if it were only the Darkness of the Place, that might fill
thee with Horror) and the Iron Gates thereof Barred, Bolted and Locked, by Him
that Shuts, and no man Opens: and there to lie on a Bed of Flames; and suck in
smoke of burning Brimstone, for thy common breath! To drink of the Wine of Gods
wrath, out of the Cup of His Indignation! And thus to be Tormented Day and
Night, without a moments respite! And though thy Conscience shall Justify God,
yet, through Extremity of Anguish, thy Mouth shall Everlastingly Curse and
Blaspheme Him. And, all this while, to have thy Conscience upbraiding thee of
wilful Folly, as the cause of thy Ruin: -- As Reuben to his Brethren, -- Spoke
I not unto you, saying, Do not Sin! -- I might have been now (will thou then
think) walking the Golden Streets of New Jerusalem, in Company with Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and Holy Martyrs of JESUS: Yea, have been Equal to Angels;
and joining in Consort to sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb, who is now
leading such as I once scorned, to Fountains of Living Water; and fulfilling
that Promise to His Disciples, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the
Vine, until that Day when I drink it New with you, in my Fathers Kingdom, Mat.
26.29. And Christ Himself shall, Ten Thousand times over, bid them welcome to
His Fathers House and Table, and that River of Pleasures that is at His Right
Hand for ever-more. Thus, it shall be another Hell in the midst of Hell to
think What a Kingdom thou have Sold for a Song! There shall be weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, when thou shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of God; and thy self thrust out! You may make a poor shift
without God and Christ, Pardon and Grace, now a little while; but what will you
do in that Day? Do the very Devils tremble at the forethoughts of it, and shall
senseless Sinners be nothing moved! Is there a Door of Hope opened this Day, by
the Gospel, and will you not make your Escape? Are you resolved to see the
worst of it; in hopes you shall be able to bear the wrath of an angry Judge?
Poor Worm! Never think so: If thy strength were the strength of Mountains, and
thy flesh of Brass, thou could never bear up under it; Nah 1 6. Who can
stand before His Indignation? Who can abide in the Fierceness of His Anger? His
Fury is poured out like Fire; and the Rocks are thrown down by Him. How can thy
heart endure, when God shall thus deal with thee? And how do think to wear
out an endless Eternity in the Place of Dragons? Suppose thou were cast Naked
into a deep Pit, full of Toads, Serpents, Vipers and Adders, that would crawl
over thy Flesh, and in at thy Mouth: -- Or, Suppose thy self shut up, but for
one Night, in an House haunted with Evil Spirits; how terrible would Either of
these be? Yet, nothing to what thou art like to Endure throughout the Endless
Age of Eternity: And all because thou will not believe the Report of these
things, till there be no Remedy. What would the Damned in Hell give for the
Opportunities you now Enjoy! Might they be sent back again into the world, and
tried once more, for a few Months or Days, to hear Sermons, read Good Books,
and make their Prayers to God; how Zealously would they improve every inch of
Time? But they know it shall never be granted them. They foolishly let slip
their Season; and will you do so too? You must not, then, think it hard to be
Damned at last, after you have had fair Warning, and wholesome Counsels; with
which I shall Conclude.

COUNCEL I.
Begin with Consideration. Commune with your own Hearts, Psalm. 4.4. Take some
time every Day, solemnly to Consider what you were made for: What you have been
doing ever since you came into the world: And what the End of a Sinful, Merry
Vain Life will be: Yea, think, and think again: What it will be to Live in
Heaven of Hell for ever. Consideration is the First step toward Conversion;
Psalm 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies.
The Prodigals return began here, Luke 15.17. And when he came to himself, he
said within himself, How many hired Servants of my Fathers have Bread enough
and to spare, and I Perish for Hunger: I will arise now and go to my Father: If
men were once come to themselves, they would no longer act like men beside
themselves: And it is by Serious Consideration, that we must be brought to our
right mind. Be persuaded then to follow this Direction, you that are Young, if
it were but a Quarter of an Hour in a Day, to set fixedly on this work; and,
one would think, that were a small matter to do for a Good God, and a Precious
Soul. Some, I hope, will do more, but, Oh! that others might be brought thus
far; even to think seriously on ETERNITY, or some other awakening Subject for
one Quarter of an Hour in a Day: Better think of it now than in Hell, where the
Consideration of Endless Eternity, does more than double their present misery.
Oh! Little did I think (says a Damned wretch to himself) that it would come to
this! Oh! That I had but Considered my ways, while I was in the way, before I
came to this Endless End! Why thou that Read these Lines, may answer the
Call of God, Hag. 1.5. Thus says the Lord, Consider your Ways. The great
advantage of Consideration is this, that it represents things, both past and
future, as present. Thus the Convinced Sinner does think with himself; Such and
such a Sin I committed so many Days, Months, or Years past, and then it
troubled my Conscience for the present, but because Sentence was not speedily
Executed, therefore my Heart was fully set in me to do Evil, Eccl. ^.11. But
now I see my Sins all to stand in the Light of His Countenance; and an once
provoked God is as angry with me still for those unrepented of Abominations
that I long ago committed, as if I were now in the very act. On the other hand;
Consideration looks forward, and brings pale Death, that King of Terrors, and
the cold Grave, that dark, silent House within plain view. Suppose thou were
now on thy Sickbed given over by the Physicians, and thy sorrowful Friends
weeping at thy Bedside, and taking thee by the cold hand, while thou art
gasping for Life: Yea, Suppose thy self a Dead Corpse, nailed up in a Coffin,
carried on the Shoulders of men to the Pits brink; then lowered down into the
Grave, ready to shut her mouth upon thee; the Worms soon feeding upon thy Body;
and thy Soul, in the mean time, appearing Naked before thousands of Angels,
that always attend Christ the Judge: and so go on to the Resurrection, and last
General Judgment; and by fixed Consideration thou may bring all these things
as it were before thine Eyes: and by this first step thou will be prepared to
go on in the use of all other means of Grace. But we are fallen on,

COUNSEL II.
Be Advised and Directed with unwearied Diligence, to attend on, and improve
all Appointed Means of Salvation. Read Good Books; Especially the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is
in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3 15 Lose no opportunity of waiting at the Posts of
Wisdoms Doors, Prove. 8.34. For Faith comes by Hearing, Romans 10* 17. Let no
trivial Excuses, arising from the Foulness or Coldness of the Weather, or from
tolerable Illness of Body, keep thee at home, when it is said to thee (at least
by the silent Language of others Good Example) Come, Let us go up to the House
of God. And Fervent Zeal will keep thee Warm; and Pardon of Sin will make thee
Well! Multitudes have bewailed their too Seldom; few ever their too Frequent
attending the Public Ministry. And think of the Sabbath before it comes: Look
on it as a Soul market day: Cry mightily to the Father of Lights, from whom
every Good and Perfect Gift comes down, that He would please to assist the
Minister, and accompany the Word to thy Soul: Improve every Sabbath, as if it
were to be thy last: Take heed how thou hear; and take pains to remember
what thou hear: Beg hard for a Blessing after Public Duties are over: Set
thy self every day in the week, to call to mind as much as may be of the last
Sermons that sounded in thy Ears; still lifting up thy Heart to God for a
Blessing. Be often in the Field, or Closet, Meditating. Praying, Bemoaning thy
self, and seeking most Earnestly after Christ. Bewail thy wants; Especially thy
want of Faith; the want of which very few see: and yet they must see, and
bitterly bewail it, if ever they come to Christ aright. Acquaint some
Experienced Christian or Minister with thy Case; and be not ashamed to ask
Advice, lest the Son of Man be ashamed of thee, before His Father, and before
the Angels. The Public Ministry may not reach thy case so particularly, as we
may come at it by Private Conference: And may thou not Eternally Perish,
through thy neglect in this one Point. But we pass on to,

COUNSEL III.
Cherish the Motions and Strivings of Gods spirit with you, in the use of
Means. God is will not to move on the Hearts of Sinners, at the same time when the
Word is sounding in their Ears, or the Rod laid on their Backs. Oh! Improve
such Opportunities: All Endeavors in the use of Means will nothing avail,
unless the Holy Spirit Co-work by internal Operation: And when He is pleased so
to do; when we find good Motions, Inclinations and Purposes wrought in our
hearts, while we have been Reading, Hearing, Praying, or Exercised in
Meditation, let us look on them to be the Strivings of the Holy Ghost; and
beware of Quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. If we have always hitherto
resisted the Holy Ghost; let us never do so any more. These are golden Season;
let us therefore improve them while we may; for God has said, that His Spirit
shall not always Strive with man, Gen 6.3. But what will become of us, if the
Spirit should, by our grievous Opposition, and bold Transgression, be provoked
totally and finally to leave us? Our case will be little better than that of
the Damned, already in Hell: Isa 6.9.10* Hear ye indeed, but Understand not, --
Make the Heart of this People fat, make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes:
lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with
their Heart, and Convert and be Healed. If it once come to this, thou art a
gone Man! Oh! How dangerous is it to put away, or wear off Convictions? But, To
Cherish the Divine Breathings, is the ready way to Conversion. Let it be thy
Desire and Prayer that God would strike home, and take His own way to bring
thee to Heaven, though by the Gates of Hell! If thou art not sufficiently
humbled; beg of Him that He would not spare as a Spirit of Bondage, that in due
time thou may also Experience His sweet Operations as the Comforter: For,
although there be no gracious Qualifications going before Faith, yet, the Spirit
does ever convince and pierce, so as to humble the Soul, before He works Faith:
After which Preparation-work, we should also cherish and comply with the
Motions and Strivings of the same Blessed Spirit, encouraging and persuading us
to believe in Christ.

COUNSEL IV.
Avoid and Abstain from those things that would render the Use of Means, and
the Strivings of the Spirit there withal ineffectual. As, Evil Company; the
willing practice of known Sin; giving ear to Carnal Reason, and Satan's
Temptations: How often have hopeful beginnings been brought to worse than
nothing by Evil Company! Shun it therefore, and strive to get and be among the
Sober and Godly: For the Wise man tells us, that to walk with Wise men is the
way to be Wise our selves; but a Companion of Fools shall be Destroyed, Prove.
13.20. There is no hope of you, O Vain Young Men, unless you may be prevailed
with to take your leave of Sinful Companions, and avoid the occasions of Sin.
You Will say, This is a hard Lesson! But what is it that makes it so? If GOD were
your Father, you would find but little delight in the Society of His bitter
Enemies. If you were the Loyal Subjects of CHRIST, and led by His SPIRIT, your
Confaederacy with Traitors and Rebels, such a will not have this Man to Rule
over them, would not be so strong, as the Objection supposes it now to be. Did
you ever see a Sheep accompany the Swine that wallow in the Mire; or if fall^n
in, unwilling to get out again? O you had need Cry to God* that He would change
your Hearts* and then your Course and Company would soon be changed. But in the
mean time you must deny your selves as to this vicious Inclination of your vain
Hearts to Bad Company; Yea, thou your former Companions should have you in
Derision. Would any man living be so Foolish, as to be Laughed out of the use
of necessary means for supporting and defending his Life; or Destroy himself to
gratify a Fools humor? Remember, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and
the Violent take it by Force. If ever you be saved, you must strive against the
Wind and Tide of Evil Examples without, and Vile Affections within. Consider
then, who and what has been hitherto a hindrance of your Conversion; and avoid
those Persons, Things and Practices, as you would save your Souls: If I gain
not this Point, I lose all my Labor; and you lose your precious Souls for
ever: It Is, as we use to say, a desperate case! Forsake the Foolish and Live; or
if you keep them Company, their way leads down to Hell. What shall I say to you
in this case? Do this one thing; The next time thou art Enticed by Sinners, and
as it were compelied to consent; only ask them who thus act the part of Satan,
Whether they will stand and answer for themselves and thee too at Christ's Bar?
And if they can give thee no Security in this matter, thou have a just Plea for
thy Noncompliance with their Solicitations.

COUNSEL V.
Be Exceeding Cautious, lest you should mistake Convictions, followed with
External Reformation, for Sound and Through Conversion. Conversion is a great
work, and mistakes about it are as common, as they are dangerous, and of
dreadful Consequence. Nothing more usual than for men to think themselves in a
Good Estate, before they have any Saving good wrought in them; not only
Deceiving others, but their own Souls, Jam. 1.26. And, Oh! How awfully sad is
this Self-deceit! For a man to think, because by the Word, or some solemn
Providence, he has been Awakened, Startled, and Convinced of Sin, and hereupon
has been brought to leave this and that old trade of Sin; and to practice many
External Duties, and that with some joy and delight; as Herod heard John
gladly, and did many things: And those Self-deceivers of old, Ezekiel. 31.33. Isa.
58. begin. To conclude that all is well on no better grounds than these, is a
dreadful Delusion of Satan, and our own deceitful Hearts. I would not lay a
stumbling block in the way of any Upright heart; but I cannot be Faithful to
God and your Souls, if I don't Warn you of this Danger; For to think we are
Converted when we are not, is the ready way never to be Converted. But you will
ask, How shall I know when the Work is indeed wrought? I Answer, When you have
so Endeavored to use the Means, perform Duties, and mortify your Sins, as that
you have found by sad Experience, your utter Inability to act, speak or think
any thing aright, (for men will never believe but they can do something that is
Good, till they have tried) and when hereupon, you have seen the absolute
Necessity of the Almighty Power of GOD to work Faith in you, Ephesians. 1.19. And
that not only the Deed, but the Will also is the work of His own Good Pleasure:
And when you have found your selves thus Spiritually Dead, and unable to think
so much as one Good Thought, you have also found and felt the Eternal Father
drawing you to Jesus Christ, and enabling you to lie at His Feet for Mercy,
acknowledging that it would be Just with Him to deny you the least crumb or
drop, to satisfy your Spiritual Hunger and Thirst; yea, and to throw you into
Everlasting Burnings: And then, while you have been Crying for Mercy, or
Groaning under Misery, God has of His mere Love, stretched forth His Hand and
lifting you up from the very Dust of Self-loathing and Deep-abasement of Soul;
and discovering Christ to you, has enabled you to Embrace Him, as the Only and
Alsufficient Savior; As more Precicious than Rocks of Diamonds, or Mountains
of Gold, 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore which Believe, He is Precious. If you
have found it thus; and when you find also that you fetch strength from the
Lord Jesus Christ to perform Duties; and an inward new Disposition of Soul,
sensibly to acknowledge Him when you have done, as Psalm. 115* 1. Not to us, Not
to us O Lord; but to thy Name be Glory for thy Mercy, etc. Then you may
conclude, you are Created a New, in Christ Jesus, to Good Works We (says the
Apostle) are of the circumcision, who Worship God in the Spirit; Rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh. In a word; We may conclude
we are Converted, when we come, by Supernatural Light, to see so much of the
Worlds Vanity, Christ's Beauty, Sins Deformity, and Heavens Glory; that the
bent and by as of our Hearts, the stream and current of our Thoughts shall be
toward things Spiritual and Eternal. But if we would not be mistaken, we must
after all our Searchings, Pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139 23, 24. Search me
OF God, and see if there be any Wicked way in me; and Lead me in the way
Everlasting.

COUNSEL VI.
I would advise you to set about this Great Work Presently, without any further
Delay. Begin this Day: the Present-time, you have heard, is the Best time, and
may be your Only Time: You have put off long enough already: It Is a wonder of
mercy that you are yet on this side of Hell: that yet God is Commanding you,
and Beseeching you to accept of His Son, and Salvation through Him; 2 Cor. 6.20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did Beseech you by us; We
Pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God: Now Christ is willing to
receive you: He will in no wise cast you out, if you Now come unto Him, Joh. 6*
37. But you can have no assurance that Christ, and Pardon may be had tomorrow,
2 Col. 6.2. Behold, Now is the Accepted time, Now is the Day of Salvation: Nor
is it very likely that you will have any Desire to seek Him Hereafter, if you
neglect to do it Now; the same Discouragements that you have to Day, you may
have in greater force Tomorrow, and next Day, and next Week; if you should
live, which is most uncertain. You must therefore Resolve, by the help of God,
which He is ready to afford, that you will break through all Discouragements, and
forthwith begin to work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Don't go
into Vain Company as soon as you are departed hence, left you forget these
things, or lose a sense of them. But rather get alone, and begin with (the
Practice of the First Counsel) Consideration: Realize it to you selves, when
alone, that there is a Heaven of unconceiveable Glory above, and an Hell of
unutterable Torment below; and think with your self, In one of these places, I
must be as long as the ETERNAL has a Being: and that according as I improve, or
mispend my time here, even that little inch of fleeting time, that God may yet
indulge me withal. And so go on from Consideration to Prayer, and the other
forementioned Means and Directions. Beg of God of Bless these Counsels to you,
as knowing how soon you will forget them, and how certainly neglect to put them
in practice, if left to your self. Improve Sabbaths especially; Pray hard for
Converting Grace, before, in, and after every Sermon you hear: Thus, Seek the
Lord while He may be found, Call on Him while He is near, Isa 55.6. Truly
Repent, and God will abundantly Pardon, ver. 7. Only remember, in must be NOW
God will have it so: Thus says the Lord, return ye Now every man from his Evil
way, Jer. 18.11. To Day, if you will hear His Voice, Heb. 3.7. But not one
Promise in the whole Bible that assures you, if you seek Tomorrow you shall
find: but on the contrary, it is said in Prove. 1.24, 28* Because I have Called,
and ye Refused, -- Therefore shall they Call on Me, but I will not Answer. No
time like the Present: Now or Never.

COUNSEL VII.
Finally. When you have done all that may or can be done, before or after
Conversion, Renounce all your own Righteousness as Eiliby Rags, in Point of
Justification; Casting your selves at the Foot of Christ, waiting for Mercy,
Free Mercy; Pleading only the Merit of Christ's Blood, and your own Wretched
Helpless Circumstances. I would solemnly Advise, Entreat and Warn you to beware
of putting Duties, Endeavors, and moving Affections in the room of CHRIST: Oh!
When we are warm and lively in any Duty, and then find something within us,
saying, as it were, unto us, Now thou have done well; now God will love, accept
of, and save thee! Let us Reject all such motions of Spiritual Pride; -- and
say with our selves, God might justly Damn me for the many Sins of this Duty,
if I had none other; -- Yea, for this particular Sin of Privy Pride, that has
now been stirring in my Heart. God be Merciful to me a Sinner, is more becoming
Language, for a vile Lump of Corruption, than, God I thank thee, I am not as
other men, etc. Come as with a Rope about thy Neck and say;

O GOD, Most High! I have Affronted thee to thy Face: I have Deserved Hell a
Thousand times over: I have made nothing of Abusing thy Kindness, and grieving
thy Spirit, and kicking against the tenderest Bowels of thy Love: it is a Wonder
of Wonders that I am out of Hell! Much more, that I should be once more invited
to come to thee for Pardoning Mercy! LORD, I come at thy Call, and am ready to
Subscribe any Terms; Only give me Grace to perform them; and all for the sake
of (...) more Honored thee by His Righteousness, than any Sinner ever
Dishonored thee by his Iniquity; So that thou can loss nothing by Receiving
me to Mercy!

Thus READER, Withdraw thy self, when thou have finished a few Lines more; and
Throwing thy self down in the Dust, Address the Throne of Grace, in behalf of
thy Poor, Perishing Soul; and never fear: -- It shall never be said, that the
Compassionate JESUS, the Merciful King of Israel, who Prayed and Died for His
very Murderers; did yet, after He had spared thee in thy Rebellion so long, at
last take the advantage to hang thee up, as a Monument of His Wrath when thou
have thus put thy self into His Hands, Joh. 6.37. Him that Comes to me, I will
in no wise Cast out. Only, since Christ has so long waited on Thee, be willing
to seek and wait a little while for HIM: Cant. 3.4. It was but a Little that I
passed from them, but I found Him. And having once found Him, He is thine for
Ever: And having CHRIST, thou Possessest All Things: Thou can Desire no
more, Col. 3.11. CHRIST IS ALL.

THE END.
BOOK'S Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, at the North End of Boston. VIZ.
MEditations on DEATH. Delivered in several Sermons, on diverse Texts. Singular
Obedience the Property of a True Christian. These two by J. Mather, D.D.

A Caution against Coveteousness.

A Young Follower of a Great Savior.

The Greatest Concern in the World.

The Religion of the Closet.

The Best Ornaments of Youth.

The Impenitent Sinner disarmed of his Plea for his Impenitence.

Also now a Printing, and may shortly to be Sold, by Timothy Green, a Small
Book, Entitled, The Spirit of Life, Entering into the Spiritually Dead. An
Essay, to bring a Dead Soul into the way wherein the Quickening Spirit of God
and of Grace is to be hoped and waited for: And to Prophesy over the Dry Bones
in the Valley of Death, such Words of the Lord, as use to be the Vehicles of
Life unto them.


