A Dissertation, WHEREIN The Strange Doctrine Lately Published in a Sermon, The
Tendency of which, is, to Encourage Unsanctified Persons (while such) to
Approach the Holy Table of the LORD, is Examined and Confuted.

WITH AN APPENDIX, SHOWING What Scripture Ground there is to Hope, that within
a very few years there will be a Glorious REFORMATION of the Church throughout
the World.

By I. Mather, D. D.

Job 8 8 9, 10. Enquire I Pray thee of the former Ages, and prepare thy self to
the search of their Fathers, we are but of Yesterday, and know nothing, shall
they not teach thee? Ezekiel. 44. 9. Thus says the Lord God, no Stranger
Uncircumcised in heart, shall enter into my Sanctuary. Boston: Printed by B.
Green, for Benj. (...) at his Shop under the Townhouse, at the Head of King
Street. 1708.

SAcramenta non Largiuntur aliquid Gratioe sed renunciant et ostendunt quoe
divina Largitate nobis data sunt.

Calvin. Instit. L. 4. cap. 14. S. 17.

Sacramenta tantum Conversis sunt instituta.

Pareus in Cat. Explicat. Q. 84.

The Preface.
THERE are in Mr. Stoddards Preface to his Sermon, several Passages very
Exceptionable. One is, his Complaining, That those Holy men who first Planted
this Land, did not acknowledge a Public Government in the Church. Which is a
mistake. For they did declare in the most Public manner that can be, That
there is a Form of ChurchGovernment, which is of Divine Institution, and also
what that Form is. Not only has Mr. Cotton done it, in his Book of the Keys of
the Kingdom, and of the Way of the Churches in New England; And Mr. Hooker, in
his Survey. And my Father, in his Answer to Thirty Two Questions; which goes
under the Name of the Elders of New England. And Mr. Norton, in his Answer to
the Queries, Proposed by Apollonij, (a Famous DutchMinister of the Presbyterian
persuasion) a very Learned Book, and the First that ever was Written in
New England, or I suppose in America, in the Latin Tongue. But moreover, a
Synod of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches, Meeting at Cambridge, 1648.
has Published a Platform of Church Discipline, Gathered out of the Word of God.
Blessed Mr. Norton, in his Dying Sermon, Expressed himself thus, Remember that
we have the Pattern in the Mount, I mean we have the Scripture as a Rule, and
you have the Platform of Church Discipline, given to you in way of Counsel, as
the Confession of our Faith, in this way of Church Government; that which for
the Substance of it owns the Cause Congregational, if any are departed from it,
let them look to it; I know none of the Elders that are receded from it. It was
given many Years ago as the Confession of our Faith to this Country, and to
the World. It is distinct from the Episcopacy, and from the Presbyterian Way;
from the Morellian Way, and from that of Separatism; and is for the Substance
of it, precisely the Way Congregational: We have the Pattern: only this is
complained of, that it is not practiced, though we had it many Years ago. Now
Practice is the end of Doctrine; -- Let the Churches look to it, we are all
concerned herein. Our Fidelity in this cause is our Crown. See that it be not
taken from us. Thus spoke that Learned and Holy man, who was in his time the
Glory of Boston, in the Last Sermon that ever he Preached; and therefore his
Words ought to have the more Weight with us. Were the Platform of Discipline,
together with what was Unanimously agreed unto concerning the Conscociation of
Churches, in the Synod which met in Boston, 1662, duly attended, we need no
other, nor better Church Government, than what our Blessed Predecessors have
commended to us. It is true, That they never did acknowledge such a Scheme of
Church Government as Mr. S. and perhaps no man besides himself, would have. But
there is no reason that therefore they should be Charged with Failure in not
acknowledging a Public Government in the Church.

Another Particular in his Preface, which has given Offense, is, The Conclusion
of it, desiring the Reader, Not to act like those, who told the Prophet, As for
the Word which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hearken to thee. But is he a Prophet Divinely Inspired? Is the not hearkening
to his New, and Singular Notions, which are Contradictory not only to the
Doctrine taught by the Former Ministers in New England, (Prophets if ever there
were any among us) but also by the whole Body of Protestant Divines in the most
Reformed Churches, a Sin like that of the Jew, who regarded not what the
Inspired Prophet delivered to them in the Name of the Lord. When we are
satisfied that his New Doctrine is according to the Word of the Lord, we will
readily hearken to it, and say as a great Man among the Reformers did, Veniat,
Veniat verbum Dei, et si nobis Essent Sexcenta colla, Subijceremus. In the mean
time, we shall endeavor to Examine all things, and hold fast that which is
good. There have been some who by reading the Books of their Antagonists, have
been brought over to their Persuasion. Vergerius took Calvin's Institutions into
his hands purposing a Confutation of it, but was himself confuted by it. Dr.
Owen designed an Answer to Mr. Cottons Book of the Keys, but upon a serious
consideration of it, declared himself to be of the same judgment. Mr. Robinson
(a Worthy Divine) by a Book which Dr. Ames Wrote against some of his Opinions,
was brought off from his Rigidity in diverse Points, Lately in Holland, a
Learned man whose Name was Christopher Christopher, Published a Book in which
he ascribes to Angels things Peculiar to the Holy and Eternal Spirit. Dr.
Witsius, now Professor of Divinity in the University of London, Wrote against
him, and he was thereby Reduced from his Errors. I Expect no such thing from
Mr. S. He that has slighted Mr. Gillespies Arguments, will doubtless do so by
mine. Yet would it be no Dishonor for him to change his Opinion, Nullus pudor
ad mepiora transire. However, I hope that by this Collision the Truth will
gain, and the Churches be more Established, in an adherence to the Doctrine
which they have according to the Word of the Lord, been Taught by those Blessed
men, who now rest from their Labors. And it is a rejoicing to me, in that I
know I shall by what is here done, obtain the Blessing of the Prayers of many
Godly Souls in these Churches, which I value above all the Gold in America.

Notwithstanding his Errors (for so I must account them) in the Controverted
Questions, I esteem him a Pious Brother, and an Able Minister of the New
Testament, a Serious Practical Preacher, in his Ministry designing the
Conversion and Edification of the Souls of men; and as such, I do, and shall
Love and Honor him: and hope that we shall in the Lords time, meet where
Luther and Zwinglius differ not in their Opinions.

When Mr. Blake Published a Discourse, in which he maintains, that a Doctrinal
Faith without a Justifying Faith, gives right to the Sacrament; Mr. Baxter said
of him, If he be angry at my speaking these things, I cannot help it; I am
bound to tell him as a Faithful Brother, that I doubt God is angry at his
Doctrine, and the great Wrong he does the Church of God thereby. So say I to
Mr. S. I believe that by his Sermon, he has grieved the Holy Spirit of God in
the Hearts of many of his Children; and that he has pleased and gratified the
Spirit of the World. If Blessed Cotton, Eliot, Mitchel and other Servants of
the Lord, once among us, but now among the Spirits of Just men made Perfect,
were still Living on the Earth, how would they be grieved to see such a Sermon
Printed in New England! But God for Wise and Holy Ends, has left this Brother
to unhappy Mistakes. And there have been men of Eminent Piety, and in Learning
much beyond him and me, and that in Serviceableness to the Interest of
Christianity in the world, have far Excelled us both, who nevertheless have
been left to greater Errors, than any thing Published in Mr. S. his Sermon, or
in his Discourse of Instituted Churches; or in his Plea for Tithes. I might
Instance in Tatian (who was Justin Martyrs Scholar) and in Origin Bardasenes,
and Tertullian. Nor are any of the Fathers (as they use to be called) who have
written much, free from mistakes; and some of them great ones. Austin (then
whom there was not a greater among them) Published a Book of Retractions. So
did Mr. Baxter, not long before he went unto his Everlasting Rest. In which
Book, I perceived by Discourse with him a few Weeks before his Decease, he took
great satisfaction. It would be no Dishonor to the Name of that great Man, if
he had written more Retractions.

But let us abide in the Truth. The Lord help us all, especially those of us
who are (as I am) hastening out of the World, To hold fast that we have, that no
Man take our Crown.

As for the Quotations, in the subsequent Discourse, they are not mentioned as
though the Cause did at all depend on Humane Authorities. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to that, there is no light in them. But
for two Reasons, I have thought it necessary to produce them. One is, That so
the Churches may see, that the impleaded Doctrine is a New, Up-start, Singular
Opinion. And the other is, Because several of the Authors cited, Confirm what
they Assert with Solid and Irrefutable Arguments. In the mean time, they who
have given out, That there is nothing but the Judgment of Authors, can be
brought to Confute the Novel Doctrine, will here see that, and themselves too,
Confuted from clear Scripture and plain Reasons.

Mr. S. his Sermon is a Melancholy Subject, since it tends to the Deformation
of these Churches. I was the rather willing to Conclude my Dissertation, with a
Comfortable Appendix, relating to the Great Reformation of the Churches in
Europe, now (I hope) at the Door. It will (I doubt not) shortly appear, whether
the design of Providence in Planting Churches in New England, was not
(according to Mr. Brightmans Prophesy, and as other Eminent men have
Conjectured) to show unto the World a Specimen, of what shall more Generally
obtain in the Glorious Times Approaching.

There is a late Writer, who has made some Attempts on the Revelation. He would
persuade the World, that Antichrist shall Reign yet these Three Hundred Years.
If he had said Six Hundred, he might have produced as good Reasons for it, as
he has done when he tells us of 2018. He quarrels with Mr. Medes Apocalyptical
Scheme: which farmore Learned and Judicious men than himself, yea, and Foreign
Divines too, have not only approved but applauded and admired. In his own
Opinion, he has outdone all the Men in the World, who have been before him.
Old Joseph Mede, (as he speaks) and Mr. Whiston, and the Bishop of Wocester
too,( Quanta Nomina!) are but Dwarffs in the Eyes of this Giant. He would have
us think, that the Notion of the Saints of the First Resurrection, their
Reigning with Christ a Thousand Years, not on Earth but in Heaven, was his
(...). Whenas the Learned A. B. Peganius, in his Explication of the Apostle
John's Visions, p. 242, 243, 259. asserted it long before him. And Piscator also
in his Commentary on the Apocalypse, who brings strong Reasons for a Liternal
Interpretation of the Resurrection spoken of, in Rev. 20. In which another
singularly Learned man, ( viz. Alstedius de mill Annis, p. 228, 229.) concurs
with him, who nevertheless has endeavored a Refutation of his Notion, that
that Reign will be in Heaven only, but not on Earth. This new Writer Wonders
that no body in the World but himself, should know that Popery began in the
Year 758. And if it had been true, I should have wondered at it also. In the
mean time, it is to be wondered at, that any one should think, that the Man of
Sin was not Born into the world, until he was become a strong stout Man, able
to supplant Kings, and overset Governments. I shall say nothing of this Authors
Extolling several Corrupt Arminian Annotators, as the best Expositors; nor of
his mis-interpreting clear Texts of Scripture, that prove Justification by the
Imputed Righteousness of Christ only; which Doctrine Protestants generally have
asserted and maintained against the Papists: nor of the Nestorianisme, which I
understand is in another of his Books, that I have not seen; but I cannot but
take notice of his having the vanity to tell the World, That he will veniare to
Prophesy, that when he is Dead, the Divine Providence will raise up some or
other, who will think that he has been a person Illuminated and Qualified, to
discover the mind of his Master further than ever any had done before him; and
that it will be matter of wonder to Posterity, that so many important Truths
should continue unknown to the Churches, sc. Until he brought them to Light. P.
37. There is such a Nauseous tang of Vainglory, scattered up and down in his
Writings, as I must confess has made me quite Sick of him. And his Scheme on
the Apocalypse, is the most Fanciful and Injudicious of any that I have met with.

He thinks, that the Tenth part of the City, spoken of, Rev. 11. 13. is fallen,
and that it fell when Constantinople was taken, A. D. 1453. That the Seven
Thousand Names of men, were the Eastern Nominal Christians: That the Dead
Bodies of the Slain Witnesses, were the Calixtines in Bobemia, who complied
with the Papists. He says, that the Witnesses are Risen long ago; that they
Rose A. D. 1516. A World of such Phansies he has; the Recitation whereof is a
sufficient Refutation of them. If the Resurrection of the Witnesses was past so
long ago, how is it that there have been since that, such General Slaughters of
the Witnesses? Alstaedius observes, that in the Space of Forty Years, from the
Year 1540. the Papists Slew and Martyred, no less than Nine Hundred Thousand
Protestants. Have not the Witnesses in these late Years been Slain in France,
Piedmont, Hungary and in some Provinces in Germany? Not to speak of other Lands.

In the Appendix, I have mentioned that which of all Conjectures, when the Year
of Antichrists Reign will Expire, seems to me the most probable. It is not
good to be Over-positive in the Computation of Times, since although the
Scripture cannot Deceive us, Historians may. I remember that in Discourse with
Mr. Beverly in London, about his 1697. He told me, that he did no more Doubt,
whether his Conception in that matter would prove Solid, Than he Questioned
whether Tomorrow would come after to Day. Yet he Lived to see himself mistaken,
as to the main of what he then expected. And indeed when men are Extraordinary
Confident in their Notions, they are usually Deceived. Mr. Jurieu speaks of his
Interpretation of the Vials, with the greatest Confidence, yet I humbly
conceive, That therein he has missed it, more than in any of his Expositions.

The Sermon with which this Dissertation is Concluded, was Preached some Years
ago, and Transcribed by one who took it in Shorthand, and brought his Copy to
me for Perusal. The Design of it is the same with the annexed Appendix; and
there is an Agreement of Thoughts in both. I was willing on this Occasion to
commit it to the Press, because it is accommodated to the Capacity of Ordinary
Readers, who I hope may (if the Lord shall so please) be Edified by it.

Boston, August 28, 1708.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 5. read Sacramenta. l. 6. r. Nostrorum^ p. 27. l. 8. r.
Unregeneracy. p. 35. l. 15. r. Hominem. p. 41. in the Margin, r. Whiston. p.
53. l. 9. r. Poner^. p. 61. l. 3. r. est. p. 95. l. 12. dele at.

A DISSERTATION Concerning Right to the Sacrament.
CHAP. I.
The Assertions in Mr. Stoddards Sermon which are Offensive. The Question
rightly Stated. The Negative to his New Notions maintained. The first Argument
against them Produced. That his Sentiments are contrary to many Scriptures in
both Testaments. Such as were Ceremonially Unclean might not meddle with Holy
Things. The Gentiles would not Permit those whom they Esteemed Unholy to be
concerned in their Sacred Mysteries.
IN Mr. Stoddards Sermon on Exodus xii. 47, 48. lately Published, there are
many Passages which have given Offense to the Churches in New England, as being
contrary to the Doctrine which they have learned from the Scriptures, and from
those blessed Servants of the Lord, who were the Instruments in the hand of
Christ in building Sanctuaries for His Name, in this part of the Earth. But
there are Especially two Heterodox Assertions therein; One is, That
Sanctification is not a necessary qualification to Partaking in the Lords
Supper. The other is, That the Lords Supper is a Converting Ordinance;
Consequently, That Persons who know themselves to be in an Unregenerate Estate,
may and ought to approach unto the Holy Table of the Lord, whilst they remain
in their Sins. For the right Stating of the controversy, we must remember that
the Question is not (as some of Mr. S. his Arguings do insinuate) Whether the
Church must certainly know that those whom they admit to their Communion are
Sincere in their Profession of Faith, and Repentance; for God only knows the
hearts of all men. Nor is the Question, Whether a Christian must have Assurance
of his being in a good Estate before his Partaking; for that Ordinance is
appointed for true though weak Believers, that so their Faith may be
Strengthened. And there are many weak but true Believers, who have not
Assurance, and for them with due Preparation to attend upon the Lord in this
holy Institution, is the way to obtain Assurance. Nor is the Question, Whether
Persons Orthodox in Judgment, and not Scandalous in their Conversation, are not
to be Esteemed as true Believers: To Affirm that would not be an Error
comparable to Mr. S. his Positions. I conceive more than that, or then a mere
Negative Righteousness, is requisite as a sufficient ground for Rational
Charity, to conclude that there is a Work of Saving Grace wrought in the Soul:
The Scripture acknowledges none to be Righteous, but such as Positively do
Righteousness, 1 Job. 3. 7. And Mr. S. himself complains of those who judge men
to be Converted because (...) carry themselves Civilly and Religiously. But the
Question is, Whether God requires Unsanctified Persons while such, to come to
his Table; and Consequently, Whether the Church may admit into their Holy
Communion in Special Ordinances, such as are not in the judgment of rational
Charity, true Believers? This being the Question, I maintain the Negative.

My first Argument shall be that which being Cleared, may be Instar Omnium; it
is this, Assertions which are contrary to many Scriptures, ought not to be
received by the Churches. But the impleaded Assertions are contrary to many
Scriptures. I begin with a Scripture, which is like a flaming Sword to keep all
Unregenerate Persons from daring to approach unto the Holy Table of the Lord:
It is in, Mat. 22. 11, 12. And when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw
there a man which had not on a Wedding Garment; and he faith unto him, Friend,
how came thou in hither, not having a Wedding Garment? And he was speechless.
When it is said, How came thou in hither? It is as much to say, Thou art a
bold Intruder, thou ought not to be here. It is then Evident, that they who
come to the Lords Table without a Wedding Garment, are Guests more bold than
welcome. The Church is the House where the Marriage Feast is (...). It Is true,
that the Servants were (...) added to Invite all; but (as our Great Cotton
Holiness of Church Members. p. 64.
observes) they were not commanded, to bring all into the House; but such as in
Obedience to the Invitation put on the Wedding Garment. Otherwise the Servants
themselves would displease the Lord by bringing in such unmeet Guests to his
Holy Table. As he was offended with the Guest that presumed to come without the
Wedding Garment, so he must needs be offended with the Servants for affronting
him with such a Guest, had not they who are not able to discern as their Lord
can, thought him to be adorned with that Garment. Could the Guest have said,
The Servants found me in my Rags, and commanded me in their Lords Name to come;
if they had not also required him to put on the Wedding Garment in order to his
coming to their Lords Table, he would not have been speechless. For he might
have said, I was commanded to come; and therefore why am I taxed for coming?
The scope of the Parable is (as Mr. Baxter Disputation of Right to Sacraments.
p. 129, 144.
observes) to show, that he who Invited them to come, did intend that they
should come with that Preparation as is suitable to the Nature, and for the
Honor of the Master of the Feast: otherwise they would be obnoxious to a
greater Punishment than those that never came. Now by the Wedding Garment,
Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, and Inherent Sanctification also, is
doubtless intended. To Come in hither, is to come into the Church. It remains
then, that the Lord will Condemn those men who come into his Church, and so to
his Holy Table without true Faith and Holiness. Learned Mr. Gillespy Aarons
Rod. p. 570.
replies to Mr. Prin, who maintained (as Mr. S. does) that the Lords Supper is
a Converting Ordinance; that if it were so, the intruding Guest needed not to
have stood speechless, when the King said to him, how came thou in hither?
Mr. Prin's Divinity (Mr. S. his Divinity say I) might have put the answer into
his mouth, I thought it to be a Converting Ordinance, and that thou would
not have Condemned those that came without a Wedding Garment, since here at the
Marriage Feast they may get one. Another Scripture, (and a terrible one it is)
which is very contrary to Mr. S. his impleaded Assertions, is that, 1 Cor. II.
27, 29. Whosoever shall Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. He that Eats and
Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation (or Judgment) to himself. The last
mentioned, Judicious and Learned Authors argues very rationally; that if the
unworthiness of a particular Act in respect of the manner of doing it, may make
a man Guilty, and expose him to Judgment, how much more the unworthiness of his
Person? He that in respect of his state is an unworthy person, will not eat and
drink worthily, or with a due meetness and preparedness for such an Ordinance:
But this is true of every Unregerate man. He that is yet in his Sins without
true Repentance for them, and that has not an interest in Christ by Faith is
unworthy, and therefore will Eat and Drink unworthily at the Lords Table, if he
shall presume to come thither. A particular act of Ungodliness may render a man
unworthy; that is to say, unmeet to partake at the Lords Table. A Churchmember
falling into a scandalous Sin is justly kept from the Sacrament, until he has
manifested sincere Repentance: Then surely they that are in a state of
Ungodliness, and that never Repented of any Sin, are not worthy or meet
Communicants. If impenitence for a particular sin makes a man unfit for the
Lords Supper, certainly impenitence under a state or course of sin does so much
more. As long ago as the famous Council of Nice, it was given as a Rule, that
they who are admitted to the Communion, should as to their inward State be true
Penitents, which therefore should be Enquired into. And it is an Article in the
Doctrine of the Church of England, that men who have not true Faith, do at the
Lords Table Eat and Drink Condemnation to themselves. The Words of the
Twenty-ninth Article are these, The Wicked and such as are void of a lively
Faith, although they do carnally and visibly press with their Teeth, (as S.
Austin says) the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, yet in no wise are
they partakers of Christ, but rather to their Condemnation do Eat and Drink,
the Sign or Sacrament of so great a thing. In the Articles of Religion in
Ireland, Anno 1615, are the same words. And is it not strange, that when
Protestants in England and in Ireland insert among the Articles of their
Religion, that if men who have not a lively Faith partake of the Sacrament,
they Eat and Drink Condemnation to themselves, a Minister in New England, shall
say to those who have not a lively Faith, you need not fear any Condemnation
for your coming to the Sacrament in your state of Unbelief? Moreover, the
Apostles Words, in 1 Cor. II. 28. are contrary to the New Doctrine of the
Sacraments being a Converting Ordinance, and that Unsanctified Men,
notwithstanding they know their Unregeneracy, should venture to partake of it;
Let a man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that
Cup. What must he Examine himself about? Is it not whether he has Grace in his
Soul? And whether he is a person duly Qualified for so Sacred an Ordinance? If
then upon Examination he finds that he has not any Gracious Qualifications,
ought he to Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup? Yea, (says Mr. S.) For
it is not said, let him Examine whether he should eat or forbear; but the
meaning is, That be should Examine what need he has of it. But does not the
Apostle himself plainly enough tell us, what he means by this Self-Examination?
2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your self whether you be in the Faith: Prove your own
selves, know you not your own Selves: how that Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? That is to say, Persons not approved of. In the continuation of Mr.
Pools Annotations, the Judicious Dr. Collings, (for I am well assured that he
Wrote the Annotations on the Epistles to the Corinthians, as well as on a very
great part of the New Testament besides) has a solid Interpretation of the
Scripture now under consideration. His Words are these: He is to Examine
himself about his Knowledge, whether he rightly understands what Christ is,
what the Nature of the Sacrament is, what he does in that Sacred Action; about
his Faith, Love, Repentance, NewObedience, whether he be Such an One, as God
has Prepared that holy Table for, it is the Childrens bread, and not for Dogs,
a Table Christ has Spread for His Friends, not for His Enemies. And so let him
eat, having so Examined himself, not otherwise. Whence it appears, that neither
Children in Age, nor Understanding, nor Persons nor in the use of their Reason,
nor Unbelievers, nor Persons under the guilt of Sins not repented of, have any
Right to the Lords Supper accordingly was the Practice of all the Primitive
Churches, and all Rightly Reformed Churches. This is sound Divinity, but not
like Mr. S. his Sermon. The Name of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs (who when a Student
in Immanuel College, in the University of Cambridge, was our famous Mr.
Hookers Pupil) is and ought to be Precious among the Churches in New England.
Because it is my design to endeavor the Establishment of the Churches in the
Present Truth; I am willing to cause some Passages in an Excellent Book of that
Gospel Preacher to be Transcribed. Thus he speaks: Gospel Worship, p. 233, 234.
This Ordinance, it is the Ordinance of Spiritual Nourishment, of eating the
Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood in a Spiritual way. Now it must needs
Suppose that first there must be Life, before there can be any Nourishment
received in. If it be appointed to nourish and increase Grace, then surely
there must be Grace before; What nourishment can a dead Child take? The very
first thing that is to be done is nourishment here: The Word has power to
convey Life, and then to nourish, but we Read of no such thing here, but that
which is to be done here, is presently to feed, to Eat and to Drink, that is
the End of the Sacrament; therefore it must be supposed, that thou must have
Spiritual Life, there must come no Dead Soul to this Ordinance, but those who
are quickened by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, they must come for nourishment. The
act here required does Note, That only those that are Holy and Godly can
receive this Sacrament; we are required by the Apostle to Examine our Selves:
To Examine our Selves of what? It must be of our Godliness, Examine what Work
of God has been upon the Soul, how God has brought the Soul to Himself, and
what Graces of the Spirit of God are there, and how we have been brought into
Covenant with God. Now if only those can receive Worthily, and are to come that
first Examine themselves, then certainly Such only as are Godly are to come,
for they only can perform those acts that are required. It is a Sacrament of
Communion with God, and Communion with the Saints, Now what Communion has
Light with Darkness? What fellowship has Christ with Belial? If it be a
Sacrament of Communion, of coming to the Table of God; will God have Enemies to
come to his Table? You will invite no Enemies to your Tables, but your Children
and Friends: So they must be the Children of God, and the Friends of God; those
that are reconciled to God in the Blood of his Son, and those that are his
Children, that must sit at his Table: therefore they must be Holy. Thus blessed
Mr. Buroughs.

The Scriptures which have been already mentioned, are a sufficient
Confirmation of the Truth, in opposition to Mr. S. Assertions. In another
Discourse of his, he supposes (as did Mr. Johnson, the famous Separatist in
Amsterdam) that we must fetch our Schemes of Church Discipline out of the Old
Testament, and not out of the New only. By the way, if it be so, why does he in
that other Discourse, maintain that there is no Scripture for a ChurchCovenant,
when the Old Testament speaks so much of it, as has rendered it needless to be
expressly required in the New Testament. But let us consider, whether there are
not Scriptures in the Old Testament, which his Notions do not at all comport
with. What else shall we say to that Scripture, Cant. 4. 12. Where Christ
compares his Church to a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a fountain sealed?
But Mr. S. his Doctrine has a tendency to break down the enclosure, and lay it
open to the Wide World, for almost all comers to enter into it. Our Savior
Christ invites his Friends to Feast with him at his Table, Cant. 5. 7. Eat O
Friends, Drink O Beloved. Unregenerate persons are not his Friends, nor does he
take Complacency in them, so as to invite them to sit down with him at his
Table. Christ would have the Gates of his Church set open that the Righteous
Nation who keeps the Truth may enter in, Isa. 26. 2. How contrary is this to
those that would open the Doors of the Church to a Nation of Unconverted men,
and who invite those who they think have no Sincerity, or truth of Grace in
their Hearts to enter in? There is another Scripture in the Old Testament,
which relates to New Testament times, though expressed in Old Testament Phrases.
It is that, in Ezekiel. 44. 7, 9. You have brought into my Sanctuary strangers,
uncircumcised in Heart, and uncircumcised in Flesh, to be in my Sanctuary, to
pollute it, even my House, when you offer my Bread, the Fat, and the Blood, and
they have broken my Covenant; -- Thus faith the Lord God, No stranger
uncircumised in Heart, shall enter into my Sanctuary. The Jewish Masters inform
us, that their Fathers were very strict in their admitting Proselytes: v.
Ainsworth on Genesis 17.
they say they admitted no Proselytes in David's time, left they should join
themselves to his People out of Fear: Nor in Solomon's time, lest they should
come because of the great Prosperity which Israel then had. They say, He that
comes for any of the Vanities of the World, is no Righteous Proselyte. It seems
by the Prophet Ezekiel, the Jews were grown remiss in their admitting
Proselytes, and for this the Lord was offended with them. If the Lord was
displeased with those Ministers, who brought into his Sanctuary men
uncircumcised in Flesh, and uncircumcised in Heart, most certainly, He is not
pleased with those Ministers under the New Testament, who would admit either
Unbaptised or Unregenerate persons to his Holy Table. The Church is Gods
Sanctuary. Unregenerate persons are Uncircumcised in Heart: The Holy God is
offended with those Ministers that would fill his Church and his Table with
persons which they themselves think are Uncircumcised in Heart. Moreover, We
read in the Old Testament, That Porters were set at the Gates of the House of
the Lord, that none who were Unclean in any thing should enter in, 2 Chronicles. 23.
19. Was not the Temple a Type of the Visible, as well as of the Invisible
Church? Did not this signify, that Officers in the Churches should be careful
that those who are Morally Unclean, either as to their Conversations, as
Scandalous persons are, or as to their State, as Unregenerate men are, ought
not to have the Church Doors set open to them? There are other Scriptures in
the Old Testament inhibiting under severe Penalties, such as were Ceremonially
Unclean from partaking of Holy Ordinances, Lev. 7. 20. The Soul that eats of
the Flesh of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings that pertain unto the Lord,
having his Uncleanness upon him, that Soul shall be cut off from his People.
Have not all Unregenerate persons their Uncleanness upon them? Is not the Lords
Supper a Commemoration of a Blessed Sacrifice? Then this awful Commination
concerns them, if they shall presume to Eat of that Sacrifice! We read
particularly that such as were unclean might not Eat the Passover, Numb. 9. 6.
Ezra 6. 21. Joh. 18. 28. Does not this Typifie that they who are Unclean either
in course of Life or in State, should not come to the Lord's Supper? To this
Mr. S. Answers, That the Ordinance, of the Old Testament, were not Types of the
Ordinances of the New Testament. Surely, He knows that all Divines who have
Written on the Types affirm what he denies, he had need to bring some solid
reason, for the Refutation of them all. But how does he prove his Tenet? By
nothing but Pythagoras his Ipse dixit, his usual way of Demonstration is a mere
Dogmatical Affirmation without any Proof at all. Fateor vetera Sacramento
fuisse figuras non modo Christi sed et nostrarum Sacramentorum, says the
incomparable De Sacramentis. P 349
Dr. Whitaker: He consesseth what Mr. S. denies. Dr. Goodwin In his Discourse
of Church Government. P 30, 31.
has evinced that the Ordinances of the Church of Israel were Types of ours.
And the Apostle Paul does expressly declare it, notwithstanding Mr. S. has made
bold to contradict him. The Apostle shows that both the Ordinances and
Providence which the Children of Israel were Subject unto were (...) Types,
instructive to Christians under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 10. ver. 6. and 11. The
definition of a Type belongs to the Ordinances of the old Testament, with
respect to those of the New Testament: A Type is an instituted resemblance of
Gospel Truths and Mysteries. The Children of Israel had Types of all
New Testament dispensations. Our Spiritual Sacrifices were shadowed forth by
theirs, 1 Pet. 2. 5. If the Ordinances of the Old Testament were not Types of
Gosple Ordinances, then Circumcision was not a Type of Baptism, but it was,
Col. 2. 11. 12. If he denies this, Anabaptists it may be will give him thanks.
If the Ordinances of the Old Testament were not Types, then the Passover was
not a Type of the Lords Supper: But it was so in many respects. The Israelites
Eating the PaschalLamb, Typified our feeding upon Christ by Faith in the Lords
Supper; they were to Eat it with bitter herbs, signifying that we should come
to the Lords Supper penitently mourning bitterly for our Sins: The Jews might
not have any Leaven in their Houses at the time of the Passover, signifying
that those who eat the Lords Supper should come without the Leaven of Malice or
Hypocrisy in their Hearts, 1 Cor. 5. 7. The Paschal-Lamb was to be Eaten by the
whole Family, signifying the Spiritual Communion of the Church, as being one
Body or Spiritual Family, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. See my Brother Samuel Mather of
the Types. P. 528, 529. In the first Edition.
No Uncircumcised Person might Eat the Passover. Thus no Unbaptised Person, nor
any who are Uncircumcised in Heart have a Right to the Lords Supper, nor may
such as are apparently Unregenerate be received to that Holy Ordinance. It has
by great Divines been thought a good Argument, if the Jews were kept from
Partaking in the Sacrifices, and from entering into the Temple, and from Eating
the Passover on the account of Ceremonial Impurities, then men now may be kept
from the Sacrament in case of moral Impurities. A good Argument this must needs
be, since the Apostle himself does Argue after that manner, 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17.
compared with Lev. 26. 11, 12. Mr. S. Pretends, That this appointment that
unclean Persons might not come to the Passover, did signify that those who are
Spiritually Unclean shall be Excluded out of Heaven. Thus did Erastus (the most
corrupt Writer on the subject of Church Discipline that ever appeared in the
World) say long before him. Mr. Gillespy replies to him, that if the shutting
one out of Heaven were the only thing signified thereby, there would not be a
fit analogy between the Type and the thing Typified; for a Jew might be
excluded out of the Temple and from holy Things, and yet be admitted again: but
we cannot say so of Exclusion out of Heaven. To Conclude this Argument; the
light of Nature dictates unto men, that unholy Persons should not meddle with
Holy Things. Hence even the Gentiles would not suffer those whom they esteemed
Unholy to be concerned in their Sacred Mysteries: They would say, Procul O
Procul este Profani; the Eleusinian Mysteries (though most abominable) were by
them accounted most sacred, and Collier Dictionary, in verbo Eleusis.
one was appointed to make Proclamation.

(...)

(...)

If any man be a Sinner let him be far from approaching hither. Now shall
Heathen Exclude Unholy Persons from their Sacrifices, and shall Christians
admit them to their Sacraments!

CHAP. II.
The Second Argument Propounded. They who are not fit to be admitted Members in
Particular Churches, are not qualified for Admission to the Lords Table.
Unsanctifyed Persons are not fit Materials for a Gospel Church; Proved by
several Scripture Arguments. In the Primitive Times of Christianity none but
Such as were thought to be Converted, and Godly were received in Particular
Churches: Known Hypocrites may not be received.
IF there were but one Scripture in all the Bible, that did clearly Contradict
the Strange Doctrine, the Confutation whereof I have (by the help of Christ)
undertaken, that were sufficient, how much more when there are so many?
Nevertheless, I hope some Readers will remember what they have received and
heard, and be Confirmed in the Old Truths, if we proceed to some further
Arguments, which are built on a Scripture Foundation.

I then in the second Place argue thus, They that are not duly Qualified to be
Members of Particular Gospel Churches, are not fit to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. This will be readily yielded, so that it is needless to spend time in
the Proof of it. I will not deny but that persons may be admitted to Baptism on
the account of their being of the Visible Church, which many are, though not in
Fellowship with any Particular Church. This was the Judgment of our Famous Dr.
Owen; as himself assured me, in Letters I had from him Forty Years ago, and I
remember that in one of his Printed Books he affirms it. And that he is so far
from confining Baptism to a particular Church, as that he does believe that no
Member of a particular Church was ever regularly Baptized, because Baptism
precedes Admission into a particular Church. Professing Believers and their
Seed have right to Baptism, whether they are of any particular Church or no, on
the account of their Relation to the Catholic Visible Church. Certain it is,
that the Apostles Baptized many who were not joined to any particular Church,
as I have In my Discourses of the (...) Baptism. chap 10.
else where many years ago more fully declared. But the Lords Supper may not be
Administered to any, who are not Members of some particular Instituted Church:
Nor indeed to them, except in a Church Assembly, 1 Cor. 11. 20. Papists allow
the Dispensation of this Ordinance unlimited. They approve of Private Masses,
supposing the Priest and one more to be enough for Administering the Eucharist.
Episcopal Divines also allow of Private Communion. But Dr. Goodwin Of Church
Government. chap. 7.
has Solidly, and Learnedly discovered the Error of that Practice. I proceed to
Assume, Unsanctified Persons are not fit to be Admitted Members in Particular
Churches. None but such as are (so far as men exercising a due Charity are able
to judge) Sincere Converts, or True Believers on Christ, ought to be received
into tho Churches. Rough Stones were not laid in Solomon's Temple, but such as
were hewn, and prepared, 1 King. 6. 7. Surely then Unconverted, Unprepared
Sinners ought not to be laid in Christ's Temple. Every particular Evangelical
Church is a Temple of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. The Church in Ephesus was the
House of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. To admit Unholy Persons into his House, cannot but
offend him, who has said, That Holiness becomes his House for Ever, Psalm. 93.
5. Unsanctified Persons are unbecoming his House, and unmeet to be there.
Churches ought to receive into their Communion all and only such as they may
reasonably hope that the Lord has received them, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3. It is said
concerning the Primitive Christian Church at Jerusalem, that the Lord added to
the Church such as should be Saved, Acts 2. 47. Ought not the Lords Stewards to
be faithful in his House, and to do nothing therein but as they see the Lord
going before them, receiving whom He receives, and refusing whom He refuses?
But this they do not if they add to their Churches, such as they themselves
Judge not to be in a State of Salvation. If (says that venerable man of God Mr.
Cotton (...) Supra P. 57.
we did find it affirmed in the Scripture, that the Lord added to his Church
Ignorant, or Profane, or Unregenerate Men, we might venture to do so too. But
there is no such Word in all the Bible: Although His Holy Providence permits many
such to get into Churches, it is not with His good liking but the contrary.
Were not the Servants guilty of a culpable and Sinful sleepiness, when Tares
were manifestly appearing in the Lords Field: It pleases Christ to see good
Seed in His Field, but it is pleasing to His Enemies to see Tares there, Mat.
13. 24, 25. They then that care not how many Tares spring up in the Lords Field
offend him, and gratify his great Enemy who delights to see it so, and
rejoices when he hears men pleading to have it so: Which truly is a sad
Thought, and I wish men of such Principles would lay it to heart, and consider
whom it is that such Unsanctifyed Principles Please, and who is displeased with
them. But to go on: Were not those who were the Members constituent of
Particular Churches in the Apostolical Times, in appearance and in the judgment
of rational Charity, Godly Converted Persons? An old Puritan Minister Mr.
Fenner Alarm. 2d part P. 92, 93.
who was a Conformist has zealously Testified to this Truth. When (says he)
They unto whom the Gospel came Embraced the Word Sincerely, or else to see to,
as far as Paul, and others could Judge then they were a true Church. There must
be a Congregation of People that do profess the Pure Religion and make it
appear, at least in the Judgment of man, that they are Godly in Christ Jesus:
This is an inseparable mark of a true Church as we see, 1 Cor. 14. 33. This was
the Old Puritan Doctrine. The People of New England are the Posterity of such
Men: The Lord keep them true to the Holy Principles of their Predecessors. The
Church in Rome is now degenerate, and become no Church of Christ, but an
Habitation of Devils, Rev. 18. 2. But the Members of the first Church there,
were such as the Apostle esteemed beloved of God, and called to be Saints, Romans
1. 7. And such as had from their Hearts Obeyed the Gospel, Romans 6. 17. The same
is to be said of the Members in the Church at Corinth, They were Sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called to (...) Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 3. The Members of the Church in
Colossi, Were Saints and Faithful Brethren in Christ, Col. 1. 2. Those in the
Church at Ph^l^poi, Were Saints in Christ Jesus, and such as bad a good Work
begun in them: Their Profession and Conversation was such, as that the Apostle
judged that it was meet for him so to think of them, Phil. 1. 1, 6, 7. When
there was a Particular Church first Gathered at Ephesus, the Members
Constituent of it, Were Saints and Faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 1. These
things cannot be denied. But Mr. S. has the strangest Notion that ever was
heard of in the World. For (page 23.) his Assertion is, The Saints by calling
are to be accepted of the Church, whether they be Converted or no. But did you
ever hear of Unconverted Saints by calling before? Had he said, Visible Saints,
and Seemingly Called, but not Really and Inwardly such in the sight of God, may
be accepted by the Church, he would have affirmed, that which no body will
contradict; but as he expresses it, his Notion is Contradictio in adjecto, ae
notorious Contradiction of it self. Certainly, so far as men are Sanctified,
they are Converted. If they are called to be Saints, they are called out of
their Worldly, and so out of their Natural Unconverted Estate, Joh. 15. 19. It
is true, that Hypocrites were admitted into Churches in the Apostles days: But
that was because they were not known to be such; for if they had they would not
have received them. As soon as Simon Magus discovered his Hypocrisy, the
Apostle Peter Excomunicated him, Act. 8. 20, 21* When Hypocrites got into the
Churches, it is said, They were brought in unawares, Gal. 2. 4. And that they
crept in unawares, Jude 4. Hypocrisy is a simulation of Sanctity. The reason
why Latent Hypocrites were admitted into the Church, was because they Seemed to
be Real Saints. When their Hypocrisy is discovered by any Fundamental Error in
Judgment, or Scandal in Conversation, they ought to be cast out of the Church,
Rev. 2. 2. And being out are not to be received, without a manifestation of
Repentance. Known Hypocrites are not fit materials for a Church of Christ. Mr.
Cotton, in his excellent Treatise of the Holiness of Church Members, argues
thus; Such as are destructive to the state of the Church, are not fit Materials
for the building of the Church: But this is true of Hypocrites. They are dead
Members in the Body, like dead Branches in a vine, whom the Lord will cast off,
and destroy the Church with them, when they grow numerous, Isa. 9. 17. He
argues weightily, and in my apprehension, irrefragably, when he thus reasons,
Such Members and such only are we to admit into the Churches, as in charitable
Discretion we judge suitable to the Pattern of the Members of Churches Planted
by the Apostles. But the Members of Churches Planted by the Apostles were such
as were in charitable Discretion judged to be Saints by Calling, and faithful
Brethren; therefore such Members and such only are we to admit into our
Churches: Thus Mr. Cotton. Now if we may not admit any others into our
Churches, than we may not administer the Sacrament unto them. When Unregenerate
men desire to be of our Communion, if their Unregenacy be manifest, we should
say to them as the Lords Servants did to those Hypocrites, who would have
joined with them in a Sacred Fellowship, Ezr. 4. 2, 3. They came to Zerubbabel,
and to the chief of the Fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you, for
we seek your God, and we do Sacrifice unto Him, -- But Zerubbabel and Joshua,
and the rest of the chief of the Fathers in Israel said unto them, You have
nothing to do with us, to build an House unto our God, but we of our selves
together will build unto the Lord God of Israel.

CHAP. III.
The Third Argument Produced. God allows of none to come to the Lords Supper,
but such as have a right unto it, Unsanctified Persons have no right to that
Ordinance, Coram deo, they are not really in Covenant with God; Therefore have
no right to the Seal of the Covenant: The Grace Exhibited and Sealed in the
Lords Supper they have no Title unto, therefore they have no Right to the Sign.
WE have done with the Second Argument, which refutes Mr. S. his Assertions,
and proves the contrary. We proceed to a third Argument, which is this;

If men meddle with that which they have no right unto, they have not a Divine
allowance for their doing so. We cannot suppose that the Presumption of men in
laying a claim unto that which they have no right unto, has a Divine
Approbation. But Unsanctified persons have no true right to the Lords Supper.
They that have a right to the outward Sign, have also a right to the inward
Grace signified thereby. The Lord has joined the Exhibiting Sign, and the Grace
Exhibited thereby, together. But Unregenerate persons have no right to the
Grace signified in the Lords Supper. It does Seal to the worthy partaker, all
the Blessings promised in the New Covenant, and in particular the Remission of
Sins. When our Savior instituted this Holy Supper, he said to his Disciples,
This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission
of Sins, Mat. 26. 28. The Sacrament ought not to be Administered unto those, to
whom we cannot in charitable Judgment say, You are in Covenant with God, and
the Blood of Christ has obtained for you, the Remission of your Sins. But an
Unconverted person his no real interest in the Covenant, Ephesians. 2. 12. As long
as he is to be Converted, he has nothing to do with Gods Covenant, Psalm. 50. 16,
17. He has no right to any of the saving Blessings promised in the Covenant. It
is Faith in Christ which gives a right thereunto. They then who are in a state
of Unbelief, have no right to the Salvation of the Covenant; and consequently,
no right to the Seal of that Salvation. The Question is not, (as in the stating
of it has been declared) Whether some Unregenerate men have not a visible right
to the Sacrament Coram (...), so as that the Churches charitably judging them
to be Sanctified persons, cannot refuse them; but whether they have a right
Coram Deo; or whether God bids them come to his Table, before they have
repented and turned from their Sins? The Old Protestant Doctrine, was, That it
is only a Justifying Faith, that gives right to the Sacrament in the sight of
God: It is the Visibility of that Faith, which gives a right before men. The
reason why some Unregenerate persons have a right to Sacraments before men, is
because they seem to be Regenerate, and to have that Faith, which gives them a
right unto the Grace Exhibited therein. Men look on the Outward appearance, but
cannot look on the Heart, as the Lord does, 1 Samuel 15. 7. To give the Sacrament
to those who are not, so far as men can Judge, in a Regenerate Estate, is to
set the Lords Seal to a Blank: It is to Seal a Pardon to those whom the Lord
has not Pardoned, and whom we are not by any rule of Charity bound to believe
that he has Pardoned.

CHAP. IV.
The Fourth Argument mentioned. There is in Scripture no Promise of Conversion
by the Sacrament, nor Example of any One Person Converted thereby. The
Pretenses which some have made about this matter are Mistakes. A man may
Possibly be Converted at the Administration of the Lords Supper, and yet not
Converted by it. That may be an Occasion of Conversion, which is not appointed
to be a Converting Ordinance.
JUdicious Divines have reasoned thus, If the Sacrament were a Converting
Ordinance, and that therefore Unregenerate Persons should come to it in order
to their being Converted, there would doubtless be some Promise, or some
Example recorded in the Scripture of Person, so Converted, for the
Encouragement of others. But this there is not: There are Promises that the
Word of God shall be blessed for the Conversion of his Elect, Psalm. 110. 2.
Isa. 52. 15. and 55. 12. But there is no promise of Conversion annexed to the
Sacrament, which supposes Conversion. Another Ordinance is spoken of as the
Ordinary means appointed for Conversion, viz. The Preaching of the Gospel, Romans
10. 14. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. If Faith should
come by partaking at the Lords Table, would rather come by Seeing then by
Hearing, which the Scripture says not. Nor is there any example there, of Faith
ingenerated by the Sacrament. Mr. Prin confidently affirms that many have been
Converted by the Sacrament, and that they had never been Converted, if for
their scandalous Lives they had been debarred from that Ordinance. Mr. Gillespy
Ubi supra. P. 936.
replies to him, that he does confidently deny it, and withal adds, that if any
man should come to him, and affirm that his very receiving the Sacrament did
effectually Convert him, he Durst not give Credit to him. But suppose There
have been some Persons in the World, whose Conversion has been occasioned by
their coming to the Sacrament; that does not at all prove that it was their
Duty to come in their Unconverted Estate. A man's doing a Sinful Act may by the
Providence and wonderful Mercy of God be an occasion of his Conversion. An
Eminent Divine speaks judiciously in affirming that it is one thing to Prove
that the Sacrament may be a means of Conversion, and that eventually it has so
come to pass; and another thing to prove that it is Commanded to the
Unconverted, or allowed them to be used for that end. Reverend Mr. Baxter
Second disput. P. 138, 139.
says that he never knew of any Converted by Receiving the Sacrament, but he
knew some who having been instructed concerning the danger of coming to the
Lords supper in an Unconverted estate (other kind of Doctrine then that taught
by Mr. S.) were so awakened in their Preparations for the Sacrament, as that
their Conversion was occasioned thereby. And some that by the serious Speeches
and Prayers, of the Minister at the Administration have been Converted, but
none that were so by receiving it self. Thus that great Man. It may further be
added, that some who have come to the Sacrament in their Unregeneracy, the
thought of their great sin and guilt contracted on their Souls thereby, has
been such a Terror to them, as has occasioned their true Repentance and
Conversion to God. But this does not Prove the Lords Supper to be a Converting
Ordinance, but the contrary rather.

CHAP. V.
The Fifth Argument Produced. That if the Lords Supper were appointed to be a
Converting Ordinance, it ought not to be withheld from the Profanest Men in
the World. The oddness of that Nation, that the Sacrament is appointed to be a
Converting Ordinance to Church Members, and to no body else but a Church
Member. Mr. Gillespy, Judges this to be an Irrational conceit. Churchcensure
is appointed for the recovery of a fallen Brother, rather then for the
Conversion of an Unconverted Person.
ANother Argument which is a clear Confutation of what Mr. S. affirms, is this,
If the Lords Supper is a Converting Ordinance, then Profane Persons ought to be
admited to partake of it. For we may not withold from the Profanest Person in
the World that which is appointed to be the means of his Conversion. Nay, the
more Wicked any are, the greater reason there is that the means of Conversion
should be applied unto them. Therefore it is that the Gospel is to be Preached
unto the worst of Sinners, yea, to Publicans the worst of men, and to Harlots
the worst of Women, because that is an Ordinance appointed for Conversion, Mat.
21. 31. But such are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. Mr. S. himself
confesses that. But then how does he Answer this Unanswerable Argument? He has
Excogitated a new notion and an odd one; viz. That the Sacrment is a Converting
Ordinance for Church Members only, and not for other men. P. 27, 28. I think
the honor of this Invention belongs to himself alone. For in my small reading,
I have not met with it in any other Author. His alleging that it is an
Ordinance appointed for the Conversion of Non-Scandalous Church Members and
none others, is that which Logicians call Petitio Principij, or a begging of
the Question. I should rather think as Learned Gillespy does, whose Words are
these: If the Sacrament is a Converting Ordinance for known Impenitent
Scandalous Profane Persons within the Church, (to make it a Converting
Ordinance for Non-Scandalous Persons only, is a Phansy peculiar to Mr. S.) What
reason is there imaginable why it is not also a Converting Ordinance for
Heathen, Pagans, Turks, Jews, or have we the least hint in the Scripture that
an Ordinance which may convert the Profanest Un-excomunicated Person within the
Church, cannot Convert both Heathen and Excommunicated Christians? What
rational Reply Mr. S. can make to this I know not, unless he will Pretend that
a Church-censure, and why not a Sacrament, is an Ordinance appointed for the
Conversion of one within the Church; but not for any other: But then Disputat
ex non concessis, he takes it for granted that the Person under censure is
Unconverted; whenas that Ordinance is appointed for the Recovery of a fallen
converted Brother, 2 These. 3. 15. It is charitably supposed, that the Subject
of it has Spirit in him as well as Flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5. That the Spirit may be
saved. Pareus his Interpretation of that Scripture is, Ut mortificetur vetus,
et vivificetur novus home, ut spiritus sit salvus, h. e. ut miser Peccator
tandem fiat salvus spiritu, vel juxta spiritum, h. e. juxta novum et
spiritualem bominum. He supposes, that the Corinthian notwithstanding the
scandalous and heinous Sin, he was fallen into, had a principle of Regenerating
Grace in his Soul, which needed reviving, as well as the Old Man in him, to be
further mortified. He gives a solid Reason for his so Expounding the Apostles
Words. Mr. Cotton faith concerning the Incestuous Corinthian, Though the Apostle
commanded him to be cast out of the Church, yet neither his crime nor his
censure does convince him to be an Hypocrite: he might be nevertheless a Saint
by calling, and sincere in heart too, though in that act wicked and scandalous in
Life. In the Second Epidle, when Paul Exhorts the Church to restore him to
former communion, he does not speak of his censure as the means of his first
Conversion to Christ; but only as the means of his Humiliation and Repentance.
The Incest which Lot committed was as odious and foul a Sin as that of the
Incestuous Corinthian, yet the Scripture does not brand him for an Hypocrite;
but acknowledges him for a Righteous Soul. Thus Mr. Cotton. It remains that
the new devised Distinction, of the Lords Supper being appointed to be a
Converting Ordinance for Church Members; but not a Converting Ordinance for
Non-Members, is not Solid nor Scriptural.

CHAP. VI.
A Sixth Argument Produced. That Opinion which a Contrary to the Profession and
Practice of the Churches in the Primitive, and Purest Times of Christianity,
and to the Judgment of the most Eminent Reformers in these Latter Ages,
especially Presbyterians, and which agrees with the Doctrine of Papists, and a
Looser sort of Protestants, ought not to be received among the Churches in
New England. But all this is true of Mr. S. his Opinion. Evinced by an
Induction of Particulars. President Oaks his Judicious Assertions.
Although there may be, and often is a New Discovery of Old Truths, on which
account every Doctrine which may to some seem New, is not to be rejected as
Erroneous. Nevertheless, such Notions as are really Novel, and Singular, should
be Examined before they be received. I proceed therefore to a sixth Argument,
which shall be this;

That Opinion which is contrary to the Profession and Practice of the Churches
in the Primitive and Purest Times of Christianity; and to the Judgment of the
most Eminent Reformers in these Latter Ages, and which agrees with Papists, and
a Looser sort of Protestants, ought not to be received among the Churches in
New England. It would be an heinous Apostasy should it be so. But all this is
true of Mr. S. his Opinion now impleaded. An Induction of Particulars will
clear the Argument before us. We have already Evinced from the Scripture, that
the Holy Apostles Admitted none into the Churches by them Gathered, but such as
they in judgment of Charity supposed to be true Penitents and Believers on
Christ. And very many of the Church Members in the Primitive Christian Church,
were real Converts. Although there were Three Thousand Members added to the
Church in one day, such a character is given of them in general, as gives
sufficient ground to believe, that they were truly Converted and real
Christians. For they were pricked at the Heart with a sense of their Sins, they
received the Word gladly. They are commended for their singleness of heart,
Act. 2. 46. They willingly parted with their Estates toward the Propagation of
the Gospel and of Christianity; they submitted to Baptism, and owned themselves
to be Christians, when their doing so, brought not only their Estates, but
their Lives into Peril. What greater Evidences of a real Conversion could there
be desired? And it is wonderful that in so many Thousands in the first
Christian Church at Jerusalem, not above two persons were discovered to be
Hypocrites. How it was with Christians in the next Ages to the Apostles, the
Holy Writings do not inform us, the Apostle John having Written the Two last
Books of the Sacred Canon. But from the Ancient Fathers (as they use to be
called) we know, that there was a very strict Discipline Exercised in the
Admission of Members into Church Fellowship, and to the Lords Supper. Justin
Martyr who lived in the very next Age to the Apostles, and not Fifty years
after John's Death, Apol. 2.
testifies that in those Days, such as were admitted unto the Sacred
Communion, were Examined whether they could or would in all things conform
themselves, to the Word and Will of God? This is what none but Regenerate
Persons, or real Converts do. The same Author speaking of the Lords Supper, has
these Words, This Food is with us called the Eucharist, which is lawful for
none others to partake of, but for him that believes these things to be true,
which are taught by us; and is washed in the Laver for the Remission of Sins,
and for Regeneration, and that Lives as Christ has commanded. Now I ask, Were
not such Christians real converts so far as men can judge? Origin who lived in
the next century, says, That in those Days Centra Ce^juna. I. 3. p. mihi. 142,
147.
Christians did initiate none but Converted ones in their Mysteries, and that
they did all that possibly they could do, that their Churches might consist of
none but such as were Endued with Spiritual Wisdom, and that therefore they
that joined to them submitted to severe Examinations. It is evident from the
Writings of Tertullian and Cyprian, that in their Time the Churches were
exceeding careful not to admit Unregenerate Persons to the Sacrament: They
would keep them as Competentes, and enquire into the sincerity of their
Repentance, and this a long time before they would so much as receive them to
Baptism. There was in the more Primitive Times of Christianity, when the Temple
of God was measured, and the Altar and them that Worship therein, were
according to the Divine Rule; and before the outer Court was given to the
Gentiles, (...) between four and five hundred years of the Christian Era, a
very great strictness in Admitting to Sacraments. Not only Protestants, but
some Popish Authors have acknowledged this. That very Learned Bishop Gabriel
Albaspineus (who dyed when he was but thirty years old, has De ritibus Veteris
Ecclesioe
Elaborately cleared this. And Durandus Rational. Divin, I. 2. cap. 55. Number. 1^.
acknowledges, That there was wont to be a Proclamation in the Church when the
Sacrament was to be Administered, the Proclamation was, Sancta Sanctis, Holy
Mysteries are only for holy Persons: If any is not holy let him not come to the
Table of the Lord. How does this agree with Mr. S. his Doctrine, that
Sanctification is not a necessary Qualification to partaking in the Lords
Supper? Debasing the matter of particular Churches, and Laxness in Admission to
all special Ordinances will unavoidably bring in great Corruption. Dr. Owen has
evinced that the letting go this Principle, That particular Churches ought to
consist of Regenerate Persons; brought in the great Apostasy of the Christian
Church, therefore let the Churches in New England beware of it. There were in
the midst of Antichrist's reign, when the Church and true Christianity all
Europe over was overwhelmed with Popish Darkness, holy Churches in Bohemia. A
late Mr. Whitson Essay on the Revelation, P. 266.
Excellent Writer, who has made notable enquiries and discoveries in
Apocalyptical Mysteries, supposes that the Bohemian Churches are in special
intended, by the Hundred Forty Four Thousand, who stood with the Lamb on Mount
Sion, being the first Fruits unto God; a large harvest of Professors of the
true Religion being to appear a Hundred Years after them. These Bohemian
Churches made great Conscience not to admit Persons into their Communion,
except they were in the Judgment of rational charity Godly Persons. Comenius,
De Eccles. Discipline Bohem. P 45.
who had reason to know it, gives us an account how very strict they were in
admissions to the Lords Supper, requiring not only a Profession of
Christianity, but Sincere repentance appearing in the Fruits of it. The
Reformation which began in Germany by Luther, was at first very Imperfect: All
forts of Persons were admitted to the Sacrament; Luther was at first much
disaffected toward the strict Discipline of the Bohemian Churches: But
afterward he changed his Judgment, and greatly admired the Gospel Order among
them. This was a change for the better, though Popish Authors have sufficiently
abused him for it. Many of the most Eminent Reformers were for a strict
Discipline respecting Admissions to the Lords Table. Calvin began it in Geneva,
Melch. Adam in vita. Calvin.
although he thereby made some of the greatest men in the City to become his
Enemies. Beza Epist. 14.
laments the remissness of the Protestant Churches in this matter, and advises
that the Persons admitted to the Lords Table should be Men with Converted
Hearts. Bucer Script. Anglic. Chap. 17. P. 482.
finds fault with the English Congregations for their want of due care therein,
and that Persons who had been Baptized, were admitted to the Lords Supper
before they were duly qualified. He insists on it, that there should be
manifest signs of Repentance in them before they Partake at the Lords Table.
Chamior, Chemnitius, and Gerhard, commend the Strictness of the Primitive Times
in the Probation of their Communicants and wish it were restored, and revived
in all the Churches of the Reformation. And shall it be Preached down in
New England? The Good Lord pardon the Man that has done so! Mr. S. pretends to
be a Presbyterian, I wish he were so, one like the Presbyterian, I wish he were
so, one like the Presbyterians of the Union in London,and I should have no
contest with him, as to the Question now before us. But sure I am, that his
Notions are some of them as Contrary to the Presbyterian Principles as any
thing can be. Nor are there any Men in the World who have Written more
Strenuously against that Error of the Sacraments being a Converting Ordinance,
then Presbyterians have done. Mr. Gillespy a Famous Presbyterian in Scotland,
has by twenty Arguments Proved that the Sacrament is not by Divine Institutions
a Converting, but a Confirming Ordinance. Mr. S. has been heard saying that
those Arguments were weak Childish things. A greater deference to so Learned
and holy a Man would better have become him. Mr. Baxter (whom the World must
acknowledge to be a Man of a great Acumen) was as able to Judge of the strength
of an Argument as Mr. S. Yet he has defended Mr. Gillespies Twenty Arguments
against Mr. Prins Exceptions, Mr. Gataker a most Learned Presbyterian has
proved (and confirmed his Assertion by a Cloud of Witnesses among the Ancients)
the Sacraments are not Converting Ordinances. Mr. Vines was also a Learned
Presbyterian, who in his Treatise of the Lords Supper demonstrates, that it is
not a Converting Ordinance. For thus he reasons.

1. No effects can be ascribed to this Sacrament which fall not under the
signification of it, they do not Exhibit any grace, but what they signify or
figure out the sign and the Thing signified are not such Strangers, as that one
thing be signified, and another wrought: But the Conversion of a Sinner is not
signified in the Sacrament, or Sealed. There is no outward Element that sets it
forth to us. Bread, and Wine speak Nourishment, but not the giving Life. Does
Bread and Wine give life to one that is Dead; Meat is not set before Dead Folks.

2. This Sacrament by the Institution of it, Presupposes those that reap the
benefits of it to be Converts, and in Grace, to have Faith in Christ, and to be
living Members, And if this is presupposed by this Ordinance, then it is not
first wrought by it. They are Children whose Bread this is: Living Members, and
not Wooden Legs that are capable of this benefit.

3. The Word is the only Instrument to beget Faith. And therefore men without
Faith may be invited to Hear the Word. If they come not With Faith, they may
come Far Faith. If they come Unclean, they may yet come to be Cleansed: But the
Lords Supper is not of that Nature. It supposes some Foundation laid by the
Word, that it may have Effect. The Converting Ordinance must go before the
Confirming. Thus Mr. Vines. To that Objection, that a man may possibly be
Converted at the Lords Supper, he answers; That it is possible that a man may
be Converted by some words uttered at the Ordination of a Minister; but will
any one thence infer, that Ordination is a Converting Ordinance.

But to go on. The Reverend Mr Richard Baxter, a Man Famous throughout both
'Englands, was an Eminent Presbyterian.' He declares his concurrence with Mr.
Vines. And he further argues thus; It is one and the same Covenant by which God
bestows Christ, and right to the Sacrament, and on the same condition. But the
Covenant bestows Christ only on the condition of saving Faith; therefore it
bestows right to Sacraments only on the condition of Saving Faith. Again, he
Argues; God gives a right to Sacraments to none, but to those to whom, he
gives right to Remission of Sins. But he gives right to remission of sins, to
none but true Believers, therefore he gives a right to Sacraments to none
others. He proceeds further to maintain this Proposition; See right to Sacram,
Disput. 4. P. 350, 359, 370.
God has not commanded or allowed any that have not Saving Faith to claim,
receive the Sacrament in that condition, but has made it the necessary order of
their Duty, first to repent and believe, and then to claim, and receive the
Sacrament. Argu. 1. If no man is commanded or warrented to receive the
Sacrament, without a Profession of true Faith, then not without that Faith it
self. But the Antecedent is true, therefore the Consequent. The Consequence is
plain, because no man is commanded or warranted to make a False Profession. But
to Profess that Faith which they have not, is to Lie or make a False
Profession. Argument 2. No Commandments are produced in Scripture which will
Warrant a man to receive the Sacrament, without a saving Faith. Object. Every
Jew and his Children were commanded to be circumcised, though they had not
Faith? Answ. They were not commanded to be circumcised, whether they consented
to the Covenant or not. For circumcision was a Token of the Covenant, and it
was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. The Parent professed an
hearty consent to the Covenant: An hearty sincere consent to the Covenant, is
Saving Faith. He that does really choose the Lord to be his God, is a true
Believer. Thus Mr. Baxter.

I have cited these Testimonies, to show that Mr. S. his New Doctrine, is not
only contrary to what Divines of the Congregational Persuasion, (such as the
Pastors of the Churches throughout New England have formerly been) but also
most opposite to what has been Taught by our Presbyterian Brethren. I shall
from among them produce but one Witness more against him, viz. that super
Eminent Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Stephen Charnock. In his Excellent
Discourse of the Lords Supper, See his Works, vol. 2 P 781, 791, 792.
he lays down this Proposition: Only Regenerate Men are fit to come to the
Lords Supper. This Proposition he Demonstrates. It is Evident, For, 1. A man in
his Natural Estate retains his Enmity against God. This Bread belongs to
Children: Unregenerate men are not in a state of Sonship. 2. For such to
approach the Lords Table is a mocking of God. For to come to God and Seal the
Remission of Sin, when they have no mind to come up to the condition on which
the Pardon is proposed, is to mock him. 3. An Unregenerate man is not in
Covenant with God; because he has no Faith, the condition of the Covenant, Ephesians.
2. 12. Therefore he has no right to the Seal of the Covenant. 4. An
Unregenerate man is Dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. What has a Dead man to do with a Feast?
The very end of the Sacrament is perverted, when the Richest viands are taken
by a man spiritually Dead. 5. The Sacrament is an Ordinance of inward Communion
with Christ. Christ must be let into the Heart, before he Sup in it, Rev. 3.
20. The Door must be opened by Conversion, before Christ will Feast with the
Soul. 6. This Ordinance is to be received by true Christians only. But Renewed
men only are such. Free men only have a right to the Privileges of the City;
and true Christians to the Privileges of the Church. The Lords Supper is not a
Converting Ordinance, neither in the Intention of God, nor the Ordination of
Christ in the first Institution. No man can reasonably expect his Conversion,
by coming in such a posture whereby contracting more than ordinary Guilt of the
Blood of Christ, he incurs a greater Damnation. It is not likely to be a
Converting Ordinance. For, 1. Baptism is not a Converting Ordinance, much less
this of the Supper. That supposes Faith, Romans 4. 11. It is appropriated for
the Covenant, it supposes that condition in the Receiver which the Covenant
requires. 2. This Ordinance is appointed for Nourishment, and that supposes
Life. Bread and Wine are not to Enliven a Dead man, but to nourish and maintain
Life in a Living man. Christ in this Ordinance is offered as Spiritual Food;
and Spiritual Food supposes a New Birth. 3. Pre-examination implies it to be
no Converting Ordinance. If it were so, what need this Bar, So let him come,
not otherwise? He must Examine, whether he has true Repentance and Faith. That
which is Pre-required in the Lords Supper, it is not properly instituted to
Effect. 4. The nature of Excommunication speaks as much. Had it been a
Converting Ordinance, should not the Incestuous person rather have been kept in
the Corinthian Church for his Reformation, than thrown out? Converting
Ordinances may be dispensed to known Impenitent sinners. Christ Preached the
Word to the Pharisees; but he Administered the Supper only to his Disciples.
Christ Washed the Disciples feet before the Supper; thereby signifying that
only Sanctified persons are meet Guests for his Holy Table. Thus Mr. Charnock.

These are Plain and Weighty Arguments. They may be Cavilled at, but not easily
Answered. I omit to say that Mr. Doolittle, another Worthy Presbyterian Divine,
in his Treatise of the Lords Supper; which has been lately Reprinted at Boston,
holds forth a Doctrine before the Churches, very contrary to Mr. S. his Sermon.
The Churches in Scotland are Presbyterian: But they are wont to Examine their
Communicants concerning their Interior Spiritual State, before they admit them
to participate in the Lords Supper. Several of their Ministers in London, have
assured me that they do so. The Author of the Present State of Scotland,
Printed the Last Year, speaking of the Kirk-Session, which is their lowest
Ecclesiastical Court, informs us, that this Court is Judge of Admissions to the
Lords Table, or Debarring from it, in their respective Parishes. See the
Present State of Scotland. Printed 1707.
The Communicants are Examined by them as to their Knowledge and Conversation,
and their Resolution to Renew and Perform their Baptismal Covenant. They that
are really resolved to perform their Baptismal Covenar have a Work of Grace
wrought in their hearts. For such a Resolution, if sincere, is Grace; and
argues Regeneration. Let me further add, that several Pious Divines of the
Church of England, have Taught their People sounder Doctrine than this in Mr.
S. his Sermon. For Discourse of the Lords Supper. P. 49, 69.
Dr. Kidder (a worthy Divine) has these words, He that is fit to receive the
Sacrament, is fit to Die; and he that is fit to Die, is fit to receive the
Sacrament. -- We must put away our Sins by a true and hearty Repentance; unless
we do this, we shall eat and drink Damnation to our selves. Another Conformist
says, Mr. Tozer of Communicating. P. 56, 57.
We must Examine our selves, whether we be in the Number of the Faithful or
not. For as our Bodies can receive no strengthening from the Food we receive,
unless they have some Life in them before, so neither can our Souls, if they be
void of the Life of Grace, receive any comfort by the spiritual Food in the
Lords Supper; which does increase Life where it finds it, but works none where
there is none before. To say no more, Mr. Baxter in his Disputations of Right
to Sacraments, has produced above Threescore Protestant Divines, all who
assert, that it is a Justifying Saving Faith which gives right to Sacraments;
and that therefore they who are judged not to have that Faith, may not be
admitted unto that which they have no right to lay a claim unto. These things
being so, the Godly and Learned Mr. Vines might well say, That the Opinion of
the Sacraments being a Converting Ordinance, is a new up-start Opinion; and
that he wondered any one will stand up for it, since there is among Orthodox
Divines an Army to a Man against them. And as Mr. S. his Notions are against
the stream of the most Eminent, and Orthodox Divines, so they agree with those
who are in other Points very Heterodox in their Judgments. Popish Writers say
as he does. They are mighty sticklers for the Sacraments being Converting
Ordinances. Bullinger Dread, Sermon. 7.
(that great Reformer) his account of them is this, Docuit vulgus Sacerdotum et
Monachorum Sacramenta, non tantum esse signa Gratioe sed Gratioe causas, h. e.
quoe habent virtutem Conferendi Gratiam: Their Priests teach that the
Sacraments are not only Signs, but Causes of Grace. Which he confutes, by
showing that men ought first to have the thing Signified, before they have the
Sign, Greg. de valentia. Estius and other Papists, mention this as one
difference between the Calvinists and them, that the Calvinists held that
Sacraments are only a sign of Grace, and not a cause of it: Whenas Catholics
maintain, that the Sacraments work Grace in those that do not obicem ponere,
withstand their operation. Some Lutherans also, who are a looser sort of
Protestants, and in the Doctrine of the Sacrament come nearer to the Papists
than the Reformed do, make the same complaint against the Calvinists. Brockmond
(a bitter Lutheran) mentions it as a Calvinian Error, that Sacraments are not
Instituted to be means of conferring Grace: he charge Zuinglius, Beza,
Daneus, Musculus, and Piscator, as Guilty of this supposed Error. If some
Prelatick Writers in our own Nation say as Mr. S. does, shall Christians in
New England conform to such Principles, when their Fathers came into this Land
whilst it was a Wilderness, that so they might Enjoy a more Pure Discipline?
And yet in the beginning of the English Reformation, there were Principles
avowed by those Reformers contrary to Mr. S. his Doctrine. They would have a
visible Church to be a Congregation of Faithful Men; whenas Mr. S. his Doctrine
allows them to be a Congregation of Unfaithful or Unsanctifyed men. The English
Liturgy requires the Minister to give Warning to the Congregation before the
Sacrament is to be Administered, and that be should say to them, that it will be
dangerous for them, if they presume to come unworthily. My Duty is to Exhort
you to consider the Dignity of that holy Mystery, and the great Peril of
Unwortby receiving; and so to search, and examine your own Consciences, and
that not lightly, after the manner of Dissemblers with God, but so that you
come holy, and clean to such an heavenly Feast, in the Marriage Garment
required by God in the holy Scripture, and be received as worthy Partakers of
that holy Table: Otherwise the receiving of that holy Communion does nothing
else but increase your Damnation. Repent you of your Sins, else come not to
that holy Table, lest after the holy Supper the Devil enter into you, as he did
into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquity, and bring you to Destruction
both of Body and Soul. Verily, this is holy and excellent Doctrine which those
Pious Reformers taught the Nation. Just such Doctrine as this used to be
Preached in New England by those blessed Souls, who are now among the Spirits
of Just men made Perfect; nor did any man dare to Preach it down, except one of
late. Did those Reformers in England teach, That men should not presume to come
to the Lords Table without a Wedding Garment; and does a Minister in New England
teach, That they may come without that Garment, and that it is no Presumption
in them to do so? Do the Reformers say, You that truly Repent of Sin take the
Holy Sacrament; and is there a Minister risen up in New England, who says to
his Congregation, yea, to all the Congregations throughout the Land, You that
do not truly Repent of your Sins, come take this Holy Sacrament, you may
lawfully do it, nay God commands you to do it, as much as he commanded the
Children of Israel to Eat the Passover? Did the Reformers teach, That if
Persons did come to the Sacrament without the Wedding Garment, they would
increase their Damnation; and does a Minister in New England say, it will
probably be their Conversion, and not their Damnation? Did the Reformers
instruct those that came to the Lords Table, first to Examine their
Consciences, and that not lightly after the manner of Dissemblers with God; and
is there a Minister in New England that has both Preached and Printed, that no
man need to Examine himself whether he should eat or forbear, only Examine what
need he has of the Sacrament? What will become of the Churches in New England,
if such Doctrine should take with them?

I shall conclude this Chapter, with the Testimony of an Eminent and now
Blessed man of the Congregational Persuasion, Famous in these Churches. I mean
Mr. Urian Oaks, my intimate and most dear Friend and Predecessor in the
Presidentship of the College in Cambridge. There has lately been communicated
to me a Sermon of his, on Ephesians. 1. 8. Preached August 2. 1674. wherein I find
these words following, written with his own Hand; Hereby you may judge aright
for your own meetness for ChurchFellowship and Full Communion in the Ordinances
of Christ. Examination of the Application of Redemption will be of great use in
this case. I make it out unto you thus: The Church (that is the Church
Mystical) is, both the Subject and the Effect of Application. Now none have a
real right in the sight of God to ChurchFellowship and Ordinances, but such as
are real Saints, real Members of the ChurchMystical, and so the real Subjects
of the Application of Redemption. Indeed Churches have Right and Warrant to
admit to Church Fellowship and Ordinances, such as are but Visible Saints, and
have Redemption applied to them in appearance only, because they are not
Heart-searchers, have no judgment of Certainty concerning other men; but must
proceed by Rule according to the judgment of Charity. But such as are only
Visible Saints, unto whom Redemption is applied in Appearance only, have no
real right in the sight of God to demand Church Fellowship and Ordinances. A
mere outside Visible Saint, that has a goodly appearance of a work of
Application and no more, sins in demanding Church Fellowship and Ordinances,
but the Church does not sin in granting his desire in that respect. Therefore
before you demand Fellowship with this or that Church, Examine the work of
Application; what Experience you have had thereof. And though you can not get
absolute Assurance, yet endeavor to get some comfortable Persuasion, and
grounded Hope of it; that Redemption is in part applied unto you: And then get
within the Gates of Jerusalem, as soon as you can. It will be worse for your
own Souls, than for the Church, if you rush upon Ordinances when you are unfit
for them. Thus Mr. Oaks has Rightly and Judiciously stated the Controversy.

There has likewise been brought to me, several very Judicious Sermons on (...)
122. 2. Written by the same Hand, which I heartily wish the Public had the
benefit of them. That Excellent Preacher Wrote Largely, I think all that he
delivered in the Pulpit, although being blessed with a strong Memory, he there
made no use of his Notes. In one of those Sermons, I find these words Written
with his own Hand; (they are in a Lecture Sermon, Preached Sept. 4. 1672.) Be
sure of your fitness in some measure for Church Fellowship; that you are
competently Qualified for the Communion of Saints in an instituted Church
before you desire and sue for it. It is the Certain Duty indeed of all under
the Gospel-Call, to join themselves to Churches, and get into Church Communion.
But their first Duty is to get Gospel-qualifications, for such Fellowship. Oh I
therefore make sure of this in the first place. Consider seriously, and you
will find it to be a clear Truth; that as it is commonly said, to be fit for a
mercy is better than merely to have and enjoy the mercy; so to be fit for this
Privilege of Church Communion, is in some respects, yea absolutely a greater
mercy, and more desirable than to enjoy it. And let me deal faithfully with
you, and tell you plainly, Unless you (...) duly Qualified, it is much better
for the Church and for your selves too, that you forbear. Better for your
selves in that case to be Out than In; for you would but aggravate your sin and
misery by abusing Church Priviledges, and profaning Gods Glorious Name, by a
careless formal Use of Holy Ordinances that you have no right unto; and God
will certainly call to a sad Account for such things one Day. You go the next
way to undo your selves, if you press into Church Fellowship when God and
Conscience tell you, that you are unfit and unworthy. And it is much better for
the Church of God, that Un-qualified persons be kept out. For they are good for
nothing, but to pester Churches and create Trouble, and be a burden and grief
of Heart to the Godly in such Societies. Therefore it is promised to the Church
of God as a singular mercy, in the Day of the best and most glorious
Reformation and Condition of it in this World, that there shall be no Canaanite
in the House of the Lord, Zec. 14. 21. You will say, What are the
Qualifications which must be found in such as are Admitted into Churches duly
Reformed? Answ. A man is duly Qualified for Church Communion, when he is
Qualified in Gods Account, and in the Churches Account. 1. In Gods Account: and
that is when a man is Converted and Regenerated in Truth. He that has indeed an
Interest in Christ, has Married the Son of God, has his Sins Pardoned, his
Person Accepted, and Adopted, Sanctified, made a New Creature. Such an one as
he is a Member of the Invisible Church, so he is inforo Dei, truly Qualified
for Communion with any Church Visible. I do not press the absolute necessity of
full Assurance: But, Oh! get a comfortable Persuasion of your fitness in this
respect. What good would it do you, if all the Saints and Churches in the World
should Admit and Embrace you as duly Qualified, and God himself should judge
otherwise? Make sure that you join to Christ, before you join to the Church:
Get Faith in Christ, and then Footing in the Church. Room within the Gates of
the City of Refuge the Lord Jesus, and then room within the Gates of Jerusalem.
Right to ChurchOrdinances in the sight of God, and then orderly. Admission to
the Possession and Participation of them. 2. In the Churches Account. In foro
Ecclefioe, such are Qualified for Admission, as are Visible Saints, or Saints
in Appearance, or to the judgment of Charity. As true Faith and Grace Qualified
a man for Member-ship in the Mystical Body of Christ, or the Church Invisible;
so an Appearance of Faith and Grace to the rational Charity of the Church
Qualifies a man for Admission into a Visible Church. Here Idem este esse et
apparere, to be a Saint, or appear to be a Saint is all one to the Church, that
are required to pass a Judgment of Charity, and not of Certainty and
Infallibility on those that tender themselves to their Communion. But what are
those (...) or Evidences the Church must look at, and acquiesce in? Answ. 1. A
competent Knowledge. There may be much Knowledge where there is no Grace, but
there can be no Grace, where there is no Knowledge of those Truths that ly
within the Foundation of Religion. Such a measure of Knowledge as may let
Christ into the Soul, as Mr. Hooker speaks. 2. A credible Profession, or Assent
to the substance of the Doctrine of Religion. He that Embraces a Fundamental
Error in Religion, is an Heretic; and therefore to be rejected, Tit. 3. 10. 3.
Some manifestation of an Experimental Saving Work of Grace upon the Soul. Grace
probably wrought in the Heart, or credible Expressions, Manifestations,
Discoveries of a Work of Grace, qualifies for Acceptance with the Church. 4. A
blameless Conversation. Not Living in the practice of any Known Sin; or
Neglecting the practce of any Known Duty, at least Impenitently, and as to a
Course.

Thus did our Renowned President Preach to his Flock, and to all the Churches
in these parts. And now by the Publication of these Fragments of his Sermons,
being Dead be yet Speaks. How most contrary is this Doctrine, to that lately
Published in another Sermon? These few words of his, do sufficiently refute the
Sophistry in Mr. S. his Arguments. Mr. OAKS was a man of Rare Learning;
another Drufius, and of Great Piety, and every way True to the Interest of
Christ in these Churches. Happy was the College, and all the Churches when he
was the President; thus to Instruct and Principle the Young Scholars, in order
to their being made Serviceable in Building up, and not Pulling down the
Sanctuaries of God.

CHAP. VII.
The Seventh Argument against the impleaded New Doctrine. That it is impossible
for Unregenerate Persons, whilst such, to be Worthy Partakers at the Lords
Table: Therefore God does not command nor Allow of their being there. Not
having Grace, they cannot Exercise Grace, which is requisite in order to a
Worthy and Profitable receiving.
AN enlargement on the former Argument, was necessary for clearing the Truth
under Consideration. Before we proceed to Answer Mr. S. his Allegations, one
Argument more against the Impleaded new Doctrine shall be briefly touched upon.
It is this, If it is impossible for Unregenerate Persons whilst such to be
worthy Communicants at the Lords Table, then they have no Command or allowance
from God to be there whilst in their Sins. For God approves of worthy and not
of unworthy Partakers at his Table, but it is impossible for Unregenerate
Persons whilst in their Natural Unconverted Estate to be worthy Receivers.
They that cannot Exercise Grace cannot be worthy Communicants at the Lords
Table. One reason why Children and Distracted Persons may not come to the Lords
Table, is because; they are not capable of Exercising Grace: Although it may be
there is the habit of saving Grace in their Hearts. Such Communicants as are
acceptable to Christ, Exercise Grace when at his Table. The Spices in his
Garden Flow out there. Cant. 4. 16. But this Unregenerate Persons are not
capable of. How should they Exercise Grace who have none? The worthy
Communicant does Exercise the Grace of Thankfulness to God, for His Infinite
Mercy in sending his Son to be our Savior, and for all the Benefits of
Redemption. The Lords Supper is therefore usually called the Eucharist. The
Graces of Faith, and Repentance, and of love to Christ, and to his Saints, and
the Grace of an hearty forgiveness of Injuries (which Unregenerate Persons are
Strangers unto) ought to be Exercised by those who approach to the Holy Table.
And Christians should come from the Lords Table with confirmed resolutions to
walk with God, and to keep all his Commandments, and with holy longings for
Heaven, and to be with Christ. These are things which Unregenerate Souls are
Strangers unto, and therefore are not such Communicants at the Lords Table as
Christ approves of, or that can receive with Profit and Spiritual advantage to
their own Souls.

CHAP. VIII.
Mr. S. his Arguments brought under Examination. Most of them do as strongly
Prove, That Scandalous Unregenerate Persons may be admitted to the Lords
Supper, as that Non-Scandalous ones may. The Objection of John's Baptism
considered. Baptismal Regeneration an Error. A Minister that knows himself to
be Unregenerate ought not to Administer the Lords Supper, whilst in his
present State. The Example of Judas no Demonstration. It cannot be Proved that
he was admitted to the Lords Supper.
HAving Proved the Negative, (notwithstanding, Affirmanti in cumbit probatio)
in the Question before us, it remains that we take into consideration what Mr.
S. does allege for his new Tenet, he confesses that Scandalous Unregenerates
ought not to be admitted to the Lords Supper, which is a good confession so far
as it goes. Yet most of his objections against the Doctrine commonly received
in the Churches, do as much enforce the admission of Scandalous as of
Non-Scandalous Unregenerates to the Sacred Table, as in the Sequel of our
Discourse will appear. He pretends ( page 10) that it is not to be imagined
that all Baptized by John were Regenerate, or judged by him to be so. But with
what reason does he confirm his Assertion? With none at all. Why might not John
judge all the Persons by him Baptized as Regenerate? I doubt not but John had
more Charity for his Disciples then Mr. S. seems to have, considering that
those Baptized by him confessed their Sins, and Professed Repentance, and
brought forth fruits meet for Repentance: He would have been uncharitable in
not judging them to be Regenerate, Mat. 3. 6, 8. There is a difference between
judging a Multitude to be Regenerate as considered Collectively, and as
considered Distributively. A Minister that has a great Flock may fear that
there are some Hypocrites among them, nevertheless if he should be enquired of
concerning any particular person among them, do you not judge that person to be
a true Believer? His charity would make him say, I do so. But Mr. S. adds
further, If Unregenerate Persons might not be Baptized, the Pharisees would not
have been blamed for Neglecting Baptism. But in this I take him to be under a
Mistake: For the thing that the Pharisees are blamed for, is, Their rejecting
the Counsel of God, viz, the Counsel which God gave them in John's Ministry to
repent and bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, but they are not blamed
because they did not offer themselves to Baptism, notwithstanding their
rejecting the Counsel of God, Luke 7. 30. What Mr. S. says implies that John
would have Baptized them, but that they refused to be Baptized by him, when as
the truth is otherwise; that they would have been Baptized, but John refused to
Baptize them. Thus say the Centuriators, Pareus, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Gillespy, and
among our New England Divines, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Norton, and Mr. Cotton, Holiness
of Church Members. P. 97.
His Words are these: Either John Baptist Excluded the Scribes and Pharisees
and profane People from his Baptism, or else he made himself more unfaithful in
Gods house then the Scribes and Pharisees. For this was a great part of their
Temple Pollution, that they made the House of God a Den of Thieves, Mat. 11.
17. But if John Baptist received them to his Baptism, he then made the Church
(or house of God) not only a Den of Thieves, but which is worse, a Generation
of Vipers. The Scribes and Pharisees were Heretics in Doctrine, Superstitious
in Worship, Notorious Hypocrites in Profession, and Covetous Worldlings in
their Conversation. Thus Mr. Cotton. It is not at all probable, or to be
believed that John would call them a Generation of Vipers, and Baptize them in
the same Breath. But Mr. S. further objects, That the Children of Gods People
should be Baptized, who are generally at that Time in a natural condition. The
Answer to which, is, That we are to judge as charitably of the Child as we do
of the Parent: we Baptize them as being Disciples, and Believers, and visibly
belonging to the Kingdom of Heaven. Dr. Goodwin says that the Infants of
Believers are Purissima pars Ecclesioe the purest part of the Church. Of
Infant Baptism. 3d. Edit. P. 301.
Mr. Baxter has these Words: It is unrevealed whether God gives Infants
usually any Inherent Special Grace or not, but if he does, it is far more
likely that He does it before Baptism, by virtue of the Covenant, which says,
the seed of the Righteous is blessed and Holy, than that Baptism should be
instituted to confer it, which is instituted to other ends to all others: I
suppose Mr. S. does not concur with Dr. Burgess, Dr. Ward, Mr. Bedford, and
other Writers Epispocally inclined, who maintain Baptismal Regeneration, as a
ground for Infant Baptism. If that were a true notion, then (as De Sacramentis.
p 88.
Dr. Whitaker observes) Children ought to be Baptized though against the consent
of their Parents, which some of the Popish School men, because they believe
Baptism to be a Regenerating Ordinance, are so absurd as to affirm. But to
proceed: Mr. S. (p. 13) asserts, That a Minister who knows himself Unregenerate
may nevertheless lawfully Administer Baptism and the Lords Supper. Men who are
destitute of saving Grace may Preach the Gospel, and therefore Administer and
so partake of the Lords Supper. I am mistaken if in this Logic there is not
Sophistry. And I am afraid that this passage in Mr. S. his Sermon, will
encourage ungodly Men to usurp the Sacred Calling of the Ministry; and to
continue in their usurpation. That an Unregenerate man supposed to be
Regenerate may Preach the Word is not denied. An Hypocrite may have great
Gifts, which Talents he ought to improve to the Glory of God, and the Good of
Men. One that is himself Unconverted may be instrumental in Converting of
others. I once had the happiness of a Singular accquaintance with a very Mr.
Ben. of Dorchester.
Eminent Minister in England, whose Effectual Conversion was brought about by
means of a Sermon, which himself Preached. But the Argument from Natural to
Instituted Worship will not hold, Nor can I Easily be of Mr. S. his Opinion,
That a man who knows himself to be Unregenerate may lawfully, or without
offending God, administer the Lords Supper. It is true that he ought to attend
the duties of his Office, but it is no less true, that he ought to be qualified
for his Office, before he undertakes it, which he is not, if he knows himself
destitute of Saving Grace. He cannot have a Divine approbation to meddle with
that which he is not qualified for; the Lord says to the Pastor of a Church,
seed the Flock with the Word, and with Sacraments, but he says withal, do it in
Sincerity and not in Hypocrisy. As for Judas, he was a man not only
miraculously gifted, but by all good men thought to be a true Believer. Only
Christ knew him to be a Devil, Job. 6, 70 Considered as such an one, the Lord
(...) new it could not approve of his meddling with Holy Things, nor did he
please God (...) it, Heb. 11. 6. His immediate Duty (...) himself sincerely to
believe on the Name of Christ, and then to Baptize others into His Name. A
Polluted Jew was Commanded to Eat the Passover, but not in his Pollution. His
immediate Duty was to cleanse himself from his present Impurities and so to
Eat. The like is to be said as to a Christians Eating, or a Ministers
Administering the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 28. It is fearful Impiety and Atheism
for a Man that lives in Secret Wickedness to Administer the Sacrament. Guilt
and horror of Conscience will at last be the Fruit of it. There was an amazing
instance of it in a Bishop in Ireland, John Atherton Bishop of Waterford in
Ireland. Set the account of his Penitent Death. Published by Dr. Barnard. P. 52.
who indulged himself in secret unnatural uncleaness, which was after some time
strangely Discovered, and he was Tried, Condemned, and Executed: He Died very
Penitently, but complained bitterly of the horrors his Conscience was in, at
the remembrance of his having not only Partaked, but Administered the Sacrament,
when he knew himself to be Wicked. Should the Churches in New England consist
generally of Unconverted Members, and be under the Guidance of an Unconverted
Ministry, what may we suppose will be the dire Effects of it! The Lord will
then say to us, as Jer. 2. 21. I had planted thee a noble Vine wholly a right
Seed, how then art thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a Strange vine unto
me? But not to Divert from the Subject before us. It has been objected by some,
(and I expected that Mr. S. would have insisted on it, which he does not, only
mention his Baptising) that Judas did receive the Sacrament, and that therefore
Unregenerate Persons may claim an admission to it. But it was never yet proved
that Judas did Partake in that Ordinance. The contrary seems evident from, Joh.
13. 30. Nor is it credible that Christ would say to Judas, My Body is broken,
and my Blood shed for the Remission of thy Sins. It is the Judgment both of
Chrysoft. Hom 71. in Job Gerhard Harm. Cap. 172.
Ancient and Modern Divines, that our Lord Jesus Christ in saying to Judas,
What thou do do quickly, Excommunicated him before he Administered the Lords
Supper. But if it should be granted, (which is datum sed non Concessum) that
Judas was admitted to Partake: That proves not that unregenerate persons
should come to the Lords Table. It does not at all follow that since Christ
chose Judas to be an Apostle, when he knew him to be a Devil; that a Church may
choose one whom they know to be a Devil, to be their Pastor. Christ knew Judas
to be a Traitor, and a Devil, by his Divine Knowledge as he is God, and so
knows the hearts of all men, Job. 2. 25. Rev. 2. 23. We may not thence infer,
that this act of Christ is to be Presidential to those who have only an Humane
Knowledge. Some of the Schoolmen have argued Rationally and Orthodoxly about
this matter. V. Gillespy. B 3. (...). 10.
They say, It is not Lawful for us to follow the Example of him who is the
Supreme Lord, in giving Holy things to them who are before him unworthy. God
permits Sin when he has power to hinder it; but it does not therefore follow,
that we may permit Sin to be committed, when we are able to prevent it. To that
objection, how could Christ give the Sacrament to Judas, when he himself had
commanded, Not to give Holy things to Dogs? Their Answer is, That this
Prohibition does indeedly upon Dispensers of the Sacraments, but binds not the
Lawmakers.

CHAP. IX.
The Argument taken from the Jews being all Admitted to the Passover, Examined
and Refuted. Those Allegations that it is Lawful for Unregenerate men to give a
Testimony to the Death of Christ; and that they need the Blessings Exhibited in
the Sacrament, do as much Prove that Scandalous, as that NonSeandalous
Unregenerates should come to the Lords Table. We must distinguish between a
Right to Sacraments in foro Dei, in the sight of God; and in foro Ecclesiae, in
the sight of Men. This distinction in according to Scripture, and improved by
Learned Divines.
THE Cardinal Argument which Mr. S. his Discourse mainly turns upon, is taken
from the Law of the Passover. Such Persons, (he says) as might Lawfully come to
the Passover, may also if they have Knowledge to Discern the Lords body: (he
intends no more than a doctrinal discerning, or he says nothing) come to the
Lords Supper. But Unregenerate Persons might come to the Passover, therefore to
the Lords Supper. Answ. Negatur Major omnino. The first Proposition is denied.
The Passover was appointed for the National Church of Israel. A Learned Dr.
Goodwin of Church Government. P. 161.
Doctor in Subjects of this Nature, has Evinced, That the Church under the
Gospel is Congregational, and not National. When there was a National Church,
there was a Worship for the whole Nation, as a Nation to come unto. If a
National Church is of Divine Institution under the New Testament, then there
must be National Officers. This will bring us to an High Priest. A late Lamb,
in his Suit against Dr Owen, and Independency. P. 127, 128.
Apostate Independent Anabaptist, who is turned a Zealous Conformist, and
become Osor sui Ordinis, as Apostates use to be, thinks that the Christian
Church should for Orders sake be under an High Priest. This will infallibly
bring us to the Pontiff at Rome. So then this Argument from the Passover, which
was Proper to the Israelitish Nation, does not demonstrate what it has been
produced for. Although Gospel Mysteries were Typifyed by the Passover,
Nevertheless, it was Instituted in Special to be a Commemoration of a wonderful
Deliverance to that Nation, on which account the whole Nation were to observe
it. But to reason from thence, that therefore all who are called Christians,
should come to the Lords Supper, is inconsequent Argumentation. But if Mr. S.
had reasoned thus, the whole Nation of Israel being the Subjects of a
Redemption out of Egypt, they and they only might eat the Passover, which was
Instituted as a Commemoration of that Redemption. In like manner, the holy
Nation of true Believers, being the Peculiar People, who are the Subjects of
the Redemption of Christ, all and only they have a right to Partake of the
Lords Supper, which was Instituted to be a Commemoration of that blessed
Redemption; his Argument would have been Sound and Solid, and Gospel Truth: But
what does his arguing Prove, as by him Propounded! If it Proves any thing, it
Proves that Scandalous, as well as Non-Scandalous Unregenerates, should be
admitted to the Lords Table, which he is not arrived to that Latitude, as to
maintain it. I do not believe, that he is of that extensive Charity, as to
think, that none of the Males belonging to the Jewish Nation, were Scandalous
Persons. It is past doubt, that very many of them were Adulterers, Thieves,
Liars, Slanderers, and Perjured Persons: Jer. 7. 9, 10. Now if a man should
argue thus, All the Males of the Jewish Nation were to come to the Passover,
Deuteronomy. 16. 16. But many of those Males were of very Scandalous Lives, therefore
men of very Scandalous Lives ought to come to the Lords Supper. How would Mr.
S. answer him? If he will say (as Mr. Cotton, and from him our famous Mr. Ans.
to Apol. Preface. P. 41.
Mitchel does) That more Positive fruits of Regeneration, are required in the
Church Members of the New Testament, than of the Old: He gives up the cause,
and answers his own strongest Argument, and this he must say or admit very
Scandalous Persons, to the holy Table of the Lord. Why does not Mr. S. argue,
That all Children of thirteen years old should come to the Lords Supper, for
the Jewish Writers tell us they did to the Passover. But Mr. S. goes on, ( P.
11, 12.) in Saying, It is Lawful for an Unregenerate man to Celebrate the
Memorial of Christ's Death, and to give a Testimony to the Death of Christ; and
that which God Teaches us in this Ordinance is very needful for Unregenerate
men to Learn; that which we Profess in this Ordinance is very needful for
Unregenerate men to Profess, Namely, their need of Christ, and the Saving
Virtue of His Blood. Therefore Unregenerate men have right to come to the Lords
Supper. Now is not all this weak arguing? Can a Superstructure of Truth stand
upon such Feeble reasoning? It is answer enough to say, That these things may
be applied unto very Scandalous Persons, yet they have no right to the Lords
Supper, by Mr. S. his own confession. But he Proceeds, If it is Lawful for all
the Adult Members of the Church to Partake of the Lords Supper, then it is
lawful for some Unregenerate men to do it. But Ergo: But he should remember
that, Qui been distinguit been docet. There is a fallacy in the Argument for
want of a Distinction often mentioned, between a right to Sacraments in the
sight of God, and a right before men, or as to the Churches Approbation. If
this is not remembered, the true State of the Question is forgotten: The
Argument ought to be formed thus, All the Adult Members in the Church have in
the sight of God, a right to the Sacrament: But some Adult Members in the
Church are Unregenerates and Hypocrites, therefore some Unregenerate men, and
Hypocrites have in the sight of God, a right unto the Sacrament. Now the
Proposition, or Major of his Syllogism is denied. Nor has Mr. S. in all his
Sermon said any thing to Prove it: His confounding a right to Sacraments, in
foro Poli, as Divines express it, in the sight of Heaven, with a right in foro
Solt, in the sight of men, has led him into Mistakes. Hence he argues, It is
Lawful for Unregenerate men to keep Covenant with God. Who can deny that? But
they must really be in Covenant with God, before they can Keep His Covenant. If
men come to the Lords Supper in their Sins, they will not thereby keep Gods
Covenant, but Profane and Pollute it. Men may be visible Saints, and Pollute
it. Men may be visible Saints, and externally in Covenant with God, and often
renew their Covenant by coming to His Table, and yet God not approve of their
meddling with his holy Institutions, but says of them, That they have nothing to
do, to take His Covenant into their Mouths, because they hate Conversion and
Godliness, in the Power of it. Let not this seem strange, See Mr. Pools Annot.
on Psalm. 50.
for it is Plain clear Scripture, Psalm. 50. 5, 16, 17. When Mr. S. argues, That
it is the Churches duty to receive Unregenerate men, Nay, to require them to
come to the Lords Table, and it would be very strange (he thinks) that it
should be the Duty of the Church to require them to come, and yet their Duty to
stay away because Unconverted. ( p. 12, 24.) But let it not seem a Paradox, to
say, it may be the duty of the Church to receive those, who nevertheless ought
not to come to the Lords Supper, because, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia.
Some men know that by themselves which if the Church knew of them, they would
never receive them. Who ought to come, and Who are to be received, are two
distinct Questions; as Catech, in Quest. 131.
Ursin and Pareus have rightly determined. Another great Divine Gillespy. Ubi
Supra sic etiam, Rutherford apud Baxter. p. 390.
distinguishes these two things, Who ought to come to the Sacrament, and who
ought to be admitted. None ought to come, except those who truly Believe and
Repent; none ought to be admitted, except such as are supposed to be Believers
and Penitent. Mr. Vines also in his Treatise of the Lords Supper,
distinguishes between Christ's Guests, and the Churches Guests: Visible Saints
are the Churches Guests: Real Saints are Christ's Guests. The reason why
Churches admit Visible Saints to the Lords Table, is, because they suppose that
Christ has done it, else they would not do it. God does not approve of the
Hypocrites act in coming to the Lords Table, Matt. 22. 12. Yet he approves of
the Churches act in admitting him, because they took him to be a Sincere
Believer, and were by the rule of Charity bound to think so of him. Why then
should Mr. S. think it strange, that it should be the Churches Duty to receive
some Unregenerate Persons, and yet their Duty to stay away; there is no
strangeness in it, since the Persons have a right before men, although not in the
sight of God. Suppose a Churchmember in esteem for his appearing Saint-ship,
yet Living in Secret Theft, Adultery, Beastiality; such horrid Instances there
have been in some Churches, not only as to Members, but as to Officers in them,
as long as their Sins were Secret, it was the Churches Duty to admit them to
the Lords Table, yea to admonish them of their neglect, in case they did not
come: Yet nevertheless, these vile Hypocrites did very wickedly in coming, and
made themselves thereby the more Guilty before the Lord, Jer. 7 -- 9, 10.

CHAP. X.
Another of Mr. S. his Arguments Examined, viz. That there is no certain
Knowledge who be true Sanctifying Grace. It may as well be argued, That
Orthodoxy in judgment is not a necessary qualification for the Lords Supper,
because that cannot be infallibly known to the Church, or to the Officers of
it. His Objection, That our Doctrine hardens men in their Unregeneracy justly
retorted on his own Doctrine. His Objection, That if Unregenerate Persons have
no right to the Sacrament, they that come, must have Assurance, answered. His
Plea, That in other Countries they are larger in their Admissions to the Lords
Table, than in New England, considered. His Mistake concerning Wendeline. The
Solemn Advice of the last General Synod in New England.
IT is reasonable that all Mr. S. reasons for his new Tenent, should be weighed
in the balance of the Sanctuary. He objects, That there is no certain
Knowledge who has Sanctifying Grace; and that if only Godly men were to be
admitted to Communion, there is not Knowledge enough on the Earth in order to
the Practice of it. If the Church were only to receive those that are
Converted, God would have given a certain Rule, whereby Converted Men might be
discovered from those that are Unconverted: To this purpose he speaks, p. 14,
15, 23. A Solution to this Objection may be given, (...) by Proposing another
Objection for himself to answer. He maintains, That none but such as have a
Dogmatical and Historical Faith, may come to the Sacrament. Heterodox or
Heretical Persons erring in any Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion,
may not come: Then according to his Notion, there must be a certain Rule
whereby it may be discerned what men's inward Sentiments, and the belief of
their Hearts is, Whether they do not speak falsely, when they say, That they
believe such Articles of the Christian Faith, as they pretend to believe.
Julian before his open Apostasy Professed, that he believed all the Doctrines
of Christianity, because he thought he should not obtain the Empire without
such a Profession. But afterward he declared, That he never believed any of
them. Arius Pretended, and by an Oath made others think, that he believed the
Deity of our Savior, that so he might have Communion with the Churches. And
yet all was a deceit, he believed it not. If then only Orthodox Christians must
be admitted to the Lords Supper, There is not (as Mr. S. Speaks) Knowledge
enough on Earth to order our Practice in this matter. Let him answer this, and
he will answer his own Objection concerning our Ignorance, of the Spiritual
Estate of men, whether they have true Saving Grace or no. No doubt he will say,
If men are Knowing, and Profess they believe the Principles of true Religion,
and do not Profess any Error that is inconsistent therewith; the Rule requires
that Churches who cannot Know the hearts, and inward Persuasions of men, should
accept of their outward Profession. And why then should we not believe, That
men that give us an account of their Conversion, and whose Conversations are
outwardly blameless and holy, are really according to what they seem to be? If
Mr. S. Argument is put into form, it will run thus, If it is true that None but
Regenerate Persons have in the fight of God a right to the Sacrament, then it
is necessary that the Church before they admit them into their Communion,
should infallibly know that they are Regenerate: But it is not necessary that
the Church should before they admit them into their Communion, infallibly know
that they are Regenerate; therefore it is not true, That none but Regenerate
Persons have in the sight of God a right unto the Sacrament. Now the
consequence is denied. The Church may and ought to admit those into Communion,
of whom they have no infallible knowledge, of their being in a Regenerate
Estate. Because, as we have showed they may have right before the Church, and
yet not before God. The Hypocrisy of a man's Profession, is a sufficient bar in
the sight of God, but it is not so in the sight of Men, if there is no evidence
of it, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Mr. S. has another objection, page 21. viz. That they who
maintain that only Converted Persons, should come to the Sacrament, by that
Doctrine harden Men in their Natural Estate, and hinder their Conversion, by
making them believe that they are Converted already. Whenas this Doctrine has
no such tendency, but rather the contrary, that men should endeavor to make
sure of their Conversion, that so they may Eat and Drink Salvation, and not
Damnation to themselves, when they approach to the Holy Table. But the other
Doctrine does rather tend to harden Unregenerate men in their Sins, by not only
promising but Sealing Life unto them, and thereby hindering them from turning
from their Evil way, Ezekiel. 13. 22. In the next Page he objects, That if only
Saints are allowed to come to the Sacrament, then a man must know himself to be
a Saint, before he can know that he is allowed to come. Answ. Although it is true
that if a man does know that he is not a Saint, but in a State of Sin, he ought
not to come; it does not follow that a real Saint should neglect coming,
because, he wants Assurance. There is a difference between a man's knowing that
he is Unconverted, and having some doubts about it. If after serious
Self-Examination, he cannot but hope that there is a Good Work begun in his
Soul, he ought to come although his Hopes are not Assurance. The Jews if after
they had searched for Leaven within their Houses, could find none, they were to
Eat the Passover. So if Christians upon Self-Examination, cannot find that they
are in a State of Hypocrisy, which is Leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 8. they ought to come
to the Lords Table. Every man ought to judge of himself according to what he is
really. If he is Regenerate he ought to judge so of himself: If he judges
otherwise, he sins and wrongs himself. This will not Justify his forbearing
the Sacrament: See Mr. Baxter ubi Supra. P. 374.
For one sin will not excuse another. One Thing more in Mr. S. Sermon I cannot
but take notice of: In pleading for the Admission of Unsanctified men to the
holy Table of the Lord; he argues, That the Worship of God must be carried on,
and that there is a great Scarcity of Godly men, it may be there may be but two
or three, sometimes in a Parish, and that no Country does neglect this
Ordinance as we in New England do, that in our own Nation at home, so in
Scotland, Holland, Denmark, Sweedland, Germany, France, they do generally
Celebrate the memoral of Christ's Death. Thus he Writes, Page 15, 16, 26. But
would he bring the Churches in New England back to the Imperfect Reformation in
other Lands, and so deprive us of our Glory for ever? As for Scotland, it was
before showed, that they use great Strictness in Examining their Communicants,
before they are admitted to the Lords Table: In the account of the
Ecclesiastical Government there, Printed in the Year 1696. We are told, that
Persons admitted to the Lords Supper, are interrogated whether they have
seriously considered the engagements which are upon them by their Baptism: And
whether they Worship God in Secret as well as in their Families, etc. As for
the Protestants in Frances although their Practice has been as large as what Mr.
S. pleads for, nevertheless, the Doctrine of their Eminent Divines has been
otherwise. Beza, In Quest. de Sacramtis.
has taught them, that none should be admitted to the Lords Table except they
give such an account of their Faith, as that their Pastor may probably gather,
that they are real Christians. The like is to be said concerning the Divines in
Holland, as is to be seen in the Writings of Voetius, and Zepperus, and Dr.
Hornbeck, Epist. ad Duroeum. P. 296.
who maintains, that Church Members ought to be holy Believers, and Decries
Bellarmines Assertion, that nothing internal is requisite for a Church Member:
And he commends Mr. Cottons Arguments, whereby he proves that Particular
Churches ought to consist of those who are in Judgment of charitable
discretion, Regerate Persons, and declares his concurrence with what Mr. Norton
has on that subject Written, in his Answer to Domine Appollony. There is lately
Published by a Dutch Minister in Leyden, with the approbation of a Classis, a
Catechism, in which is this Question, For whom is the Lords Supper Instituted?
Ans. For them only who are truly Penitent. And this Question, Who should keep
themselves away from the Table of the Lord? Ans. Hyopocrites, and they that do
not truly Repent. Thus does the Catechism of the Reformed Churches, instruct
their People in Principles directly contrary to Mr. S. his Sermon. But as for
the Lutheran Churches in Denmark, Sweedland, and in Germany, they are horribly
guilty of profaning the Sacrament. That learned, and Holy Man Dr. Pareus, told
them, that he did not Wonder at the Judgments of God, which were upon them,
when he considered how the Lords Table was profaned by unworthy Communicants.
And must such Churches as these be mentioned to upbraid the Churches in
New England, for their strictness in Admission to the Lords Table? Must the
practice of the Church of England be likewise produced, when our Fathers left a
pleasant land, and came into a Vast and Wast Wilderness, for no other reason,
but that so they might have a purer Discipline and Churches, then what in their
Native Land they had then (although through the Favor of God, their Successors
have now) Liberty to enjoy. Where will the degeneracy end? If there are but two
or three Godly men in a Parish, (as Mr. S. speaks) must we have Churches
gathered, and the Body of the People admitted to the Lords Table, when there
are but two or three among them fit to be there? If it should come to be
generally so, the Holy Lord will go far off from his Sanctuaries, and remove
these once Golden Candlesticks out of their places, which the Mercy of Heaven
avert. Mr. S. concludes with telling us, that Wendeline acknowledges, that
Sacraments may be Instrumental in beginning Faith: It Is well if he has one
Calvinian Divine on his side. It is true that the Learned Man by him mentioned,
does in several of his Exercitations against the Lutherans own, that Sacraments
may be the Organs of Grace, but then he adds that they are, not Physical, only
Moral Organs of it. But since Mr. S. has appealed to Wendeline, to Wendeline he
shall go, who in his Christian Theology, L. 1. Cap. 22. p. 461. Citante,
Baxter. p. 215.
says expressly, That the Apostles admitted none to the Sacrament, but such as
were Believers, at least in the Judgment of Charity, taken to be true
Believers, and that therefore the Sacrament was not the Instrument by which
Faith and Regeneration was began, and therefore (says he) neither is it now
such an Instrument.

It is a sad Consideration that any of those who should set themselves to
Promote a Reformation, in the Collapsed Churches in New England, by reducing
them to their Primitive Purity, endeavor the contrary. I shall conclude with
the Testimony of a whole Synod, the last General Synod that was in this Colony,
and according to all appearing Probability, the last that ever will be. This
Synod consisting of the Elders and Messengers of Churches, met in Boston in the
year 1679. To consider of two Questions. 1. What are the Evils which have
Provoked the Lord to bring his Judgments on New England? 2. What is to be done
that so these Evils may be Reformed? In Answer to the latter Question, there
are these two Paragraphs. 1. Inasmuch as the Present standing Generation (both
as to Leaders and People) is for the greater Part another Generation, than what
was in New England Forty years ago, for us to declare out adherence to the
Faith, and Order of the Gospel, according to what is from the Scripture
expressed in the Platform of Church Discipline, may be a good means to recover
those who have erred from the Truth, and to prevent Apostasy for the future. 2.
It is requisite, that Persons be not admitted unto Communion in the Lords
Supper, without making a Personal and Public Profession of their Faith, and
Repentance, either orally, or in some other way, so as shall be to the Just
Satisfaction of the Church, and that therefore both Elders, and Churches, be
duly Watchful, and Circumspect in this matter, 1 Cor. II. 28, 29. Act. 2. 41,
42. Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 9. Thus has Mr. Stoddards Doctrine been Condemned, by a
whole Synod of Elders, and Messengers of the Churches.

THE END.
An Appendix, TO THE Preceding Dissertation:
Showing what Scripture Ground there is to Hope, that within these very few
Tears, Glorious Prophesies and Promises will be fulfilled; with an account of
some Great Things which are now doing in the World.
THE Bold attempts, which have of late been made, to Unhinge and Overset the
Congregational Churches in New England as such, by Decrying the Holy Covenant,
whereby they are Formed and Distinguished; and by Endeavors to debase the
Matter of them, that instead of Golden Candlesticks, (as they have been) they
should become Brass, and Tin: Like as in Rehoboams time, the Shields of Gold
which Solomon had made were taken away, instead of which, Rehoboam made Shields
of Brass, 2 Chronicles. 12. 10 Gives us just cause of Trembling for the Ark of God;
and left his Glory should depart from us: Considering the Dark Aspect which the
Churches are at present under, I should be ready to Conclude, that in less than
one Generation, these Bethels will become Bethavens; were it not that the Happy
Time draws near, when there will be a Great Reformation of the Churches
throughout the Earth. When the Glorious things spoken concerning the City of
God, shall be accomplished, the Holy Oracles have assured us, That the Churches
as to the Matter of them, shall consist of Godly Sanctified Persons. Then the
Lord will purely Purge away the Dross, and Take away all the Tin: And the
Members of the Church shall be Converted Persons. The Gates will be Opened for
the Righteous Nation to enter in; there shall no more come in the
Uncircumcised, and the Unclean. Jerusalem shall be Holy, and Strangers shall
pass through no more. The People shall be all Righteous: There shall be no more
a Canaanire in the House of the Lord, Isa. I. 25, 27 and 26. 2. and 52. I. and
6021. Zech. 14. 21. The Sanctuary will be Cleansed; And there will be Purity,
both as to the Worship and the Worshippers, in the Lords Temple, Dan. ^. 14.
Rev. II. I. Now that within a very few Years, these Divine Predictions will
begin to be fulfilled Wonderfully, and so as the like has not been known in any
Former Generations, I cannot but from the Scriptures, in Consideration with the
present Disposition of Providence, hope and believe. No longer since than
Eleven Years ago, a very Remarkable thing has been done; which, ( if
Conjectures fail not) gives us to understand where abouts we are, as to what
the Revelation has told us, shall be fulfilled in the Latter Ages of the World.
If the Second Woe is indeed past away; behold the Third Woe comes quickly, Rev.
11. 14. And the Seventh Angel will Sound the Trumpet; and when he shall begin
to Sound, the Mystery of God shall be finished. As he has Declared to his
Servants the Prophets, and the Kingdoms of the World will Gradually become the
Kingdoms of Christ, until the whole World is become Christendom, Rev. 10. 7.
and 11. 14, 15. But that the Second Woe is past, and that the present Great
Earthquake among the European Nations is a Sign of it, there is great reason to
believe. It is generally agreed among Interpreters, that by the Second Woe, the
Turkish Empire is intended, which has for many Ages been a Woeful Plague to the
Third Part of men, by which Europe, a Third part of the formerly known World
may be meant. It is said of the Turkish Empire, That it is prepared for an
Hour, and a Day, and a Month, and a Year: Which according to the Prophetical
account, is Three Hundred Ninety Six Years, Rev. 9. 15. In Apoc. 9. 15.
Mr. Brightman, above an Hundred Years ago, did from thence conclude, that the
Turk, who began his Reign Auno Domini 1300. would cease to be a Woe to the
Apostate Christian World, in the Year 1696. Of this I made mention, in Of
Comets. P. 137, 138.
a Discourse Published Twenty Six Years ago; then hoping that Mr. Brightmans
Conjecture would prove true, which it seems to me to Admiration it has done.
But if we can find that this Remarkable Prophecy has been in our Time
fulfilled, even to a Day, it will be wonderful indeed. A Learned Mr. William
Whiston, in his Essay on the Revelation p. 187.
Divine, (who is now also a Professor of the Mathematics, in the University of
Cambridge) and who has given a greater Light into many Dark Scriptures, than
any Writer that I have met with, has endeavored to clear this matter. An Hour,
in the Prophetical Style, is Fifteen Days: A Day, is a Year: A Month, is Thirty
Years: A Prophetical Year, is Three Hundred Sixty Five Years. The Total is,
Three Hundred Ninety Six Years, and a Hundred and Six Days. This Author, by a
diligent search into Histories and Chronologies, finds that the Beginning of
the Turkish Empire, is to be Dated from May, 19. Anno Dom. 1301. To which add,
396 Years, and 106 Days, and we shall come to September the first, Anno Dom.
1697. On which very Day, by a famous Victory over the Turk, it seems as if an
End was put to the Second Woe; and immediately followed the Peace at Carlowitz;
which no Temptations have prevailed with the Turk to Violate. This (says my
Learned Author) is the more to be taken notice of, because it is so exact as to
correspond to a single Day, an accuracy not elsewhere to be observed in the
Prophetical Writings.

But to proceed; When the Reign of Antichrist is Expired, a Glorious Reign of
Christ will take place, and prevail in the World. To Antichrists Reign, there
is allowed Forty Two Months; or which is the same, a Time, Times, and Half a
Time: or (which is also the same) 1^60 Prophetical Days. All the Difficulty is,
to find the Time when the Ten-Horned Beast began his Reign. Concerning this,
the Infallible Oracle has given us a Character, Rev. 17. 12. The Ten Horns
which thou saw, are Ten Kings; which have received no Kingdom as yet: but
receive Power as Kings one Hour with the Beast. If we can find when there were
Ten Distinct Kingdoms in the Roman Empire, we are to reckon the Beasts Reign
from that very Hour. Of these Kings, Cluverius, Mede, Lee, and of late,
Monsiour Jurieu, and Dr. Allix, have Written. They did not at all rise at once,
but Gradually. Nor are we to count from the appearance of the First King, but
of the Last. Now as the Empire, in respect of its Real Power and Complete Howel
Hist. P 692. Paul. (...). P. 15.
Authority, ceased at the Death of Valentine III. which was Anno Dom. 455. So
in the Year, 456. all the Ten Kings did plainly appear. I do not Write these
things for the Information of Learned Men, who have addicted themselves to
Apocalyptical Studies: But it may be it will be a Satisfaction to some Readers,
to see when these Ten Kingdoms began. I shall therefore mention the Year of
their Rising, and the Names of every one of these Kings. v. Whiston. p. 228.
1. The Kingdom of the Greeks began, Anno Dom. 337. under Marcianus their King.
2. The Kingdom of the Romans, Anno Dom. 402. under Avitus their King. 3. The
Kingdom of the Suevi, Anno Dom. 409. under Rioiarius their King. 4. The Kingdom
of the Burgundians, Anno Dom. 413. under Gunderious their King. 5. The Kingdom
of the Visigoths, Anno Dom. 418. under Thoeodoricus their King. 6. The Kingdom
of the Vandals, Anno Dom. 435. under Gensericus their King. 7. The Kingdom of
the Britans, Anno Dom. 447. under Vortimer their King. 8. The Kingdom of the
Ostrogoths, Anno Dom. 454. under Theodomirus their King. 9. The Kingdom of the
Saxons, Anno Dom. 455. under Hengistus their King. 10. The Kingdom of the
Franks, Anno Dom. 456. under Childericus their King. So that in the Year 456.
There were Ten Distinct Kingdoms in the Roman Empire; Consequently from that
Year, we are to Date the Commencement of Antichrists Reign: which is to
continue from First to Last, but 1260. Years, which added to 456. brings us to
the Year, 1716. Which is but Eight Years hence; when it is to be hoped that
Beast will no longer be able to Domineer, nor to Oppress, and Persecute the
Church of God. It is true, That these Kingdoms have been subject to great
Mutations since their first Rise, nor have they been always exactly Ten.
Nevertheless, They were so without any alteration for a considerable Time; and
it is observable, that they are become so at this Day: For there is now in
Europe, 1. Hungary. 2. Muscovy. 3. Sweden. 4. Denmark. 5. Poland. 6. France. 7.
Spain. 8. Portugal. 9. Great Britain. 10. Prussia. The Creating of a King over
that Dukedom, has made the Crowned Heads in Europe to be Ten. Some of the Ten
Kingdoms mentioned, although in Europe are not within the Limits of the Old Roman
Empire. Nevertheless, there are now Ten Sovereign States within those Bounds,
which is observable, viz. 1. The Hereditary Dominions of the Emperor of
Germany. 2. The Electorate of Bavaria. 3. The Switz Cantons. 4. The Dukedom of
Savoy. 5. The States of Holland. 6. The Republic of Venice. 7. The Kingdom of
France. 8. The Kingdom of Spain. 9. The Kingdom of Portugal. 10. The Kingdom of
Great Britain. [See Mr. Whiston P. 235.] Several other things may be mentioned,
which confirm our Hopes that Antichrists Reign will Expire in the Year 1716.
It is an Ingenious Observation, which Villalpandus (and from him Mr. Mede) has,
and is improved by Mr. Whiston, Ubi Supra. P. 80, 81.
That the Inner Court of the Temple, was to the Outward Court as, 12. to 42. or
360. to 1260. Of this he (who being Mathematical Professor, was able to do it)
has given a Mathematical Demonstration. The Inner Court, which was to be
Measured, Rev. 11. 1. Relates to the Purer State of the Church, in the
Primitive Ages of Christianity for 360 Years after John had his Apocalyptical
Visions. The Outer Court, Relates to the Antichristian State of the Church,
which was to succeed, and continue 1260 Years. The Apostle had his Vision, A.
D. 96. Which added to 360, makes 456. at which Period ends the Pure State of
the Church; and the Antichristian State begins, and continues 1260 Years,
until 1716 When we may expect a Notable Downful of Antichrists Kingdom, and a
Glorious Exaltation of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. The but now
mentioned Author, has another acute Observation P. 237
viz. That the famous Number of Two Thousand and Three Hundred Days, spoken of
by the Prophet Daniel, ( chapter 8. v. 14.) will Expire in the Year, 1716. This
Vision (he says) which Determines the Period of the Churches Pollution, to
2300. Days: from the time that it was seen, does most Exactly and Surprizingly
agree with the Computation above, h. e. to A. D. 1716. For 2300 Chaldean Years,
of 360 Days, are Equal to 2266 Julian Years, and 344 Days, or in a round Number
to 2267 Julian Years, and the Date of the Vision is in the Third Year of
Belshazzar King of Babylon. If we add to that Year, 2267 Julian Years, it
brings us to A. D. 1716. One Observation more. The Pope of Rome, who is by the
Apostle called, the Man of Sin, and in the Revelation, the False Prophet, and
the Second Beast, who has Two Horns; and in Daniel, the Little Horn, who was to
be Diverse from the Ten Horns, and was to obtain his Dominion some time after
them: And should Domineer for a Time, and Times, and the dividing or part of
Time, Dan. 7. 24, 25 By the Division of time, (as our P. 4 and ^44.
Author observes) a Prophetical Month, (and not half a Year as has commonly
been supposed) is intended. For the most Eminent and Remarkable Division or
Part of a Year is a Month, as the most Eminent part of a Month is a Week; and
of a Week a Day; and of a Day an Hour. So then a Time, and Times, and a
Division of Time. makes a Thousand, an Hundred, and Ten Years. Now that the
Pope of Rome has Domineered ever since the Year 606 cannot be doubted. For then
he was Declared to be, the Universal Bishop and Head of the whole Church; which
ambitious Title Proclaimed him to be Antichrist: As also some of his
Predecessors Bishops of Rome had confessed, that no one but an Antichrist
would usurp that Title. Add to Six Hundred and Six, Eleven Hundred and Ten
Years, allowed for the Dominion of that Horn, and it brings us to A. D. 1716
for the Expiration of his Reign. Let me add further, That my worthy Friend, Mr.
Samuel Putto (who is (if Living, as I hope he still is) the Reverend and Aged
Pastor of a Church on Sudbury in Suffolk,) has a peculiar Notion, which
nevertheless falls in with 1716. He In his Revelation Unvailed. P. 35, 36.
apprehends, that the Epoch of the Number of the Beast 666. begins not from
the first Rising of the Beast, but from his first Marking time, Rev 13. 17 or
his first causing his Followers to receive a Mark in their Foreheads or Hands,
as a note of Distinction of the Bestian, from the Opposite Party. This Mark he
thinks began, in the Year 1050. Add to that 666, and it brings us to 1716.

But these things may not be so understood, as if there should be no Anti
christ or Pope in the world after that time: For he must continue in being, to
the Second coming of Christ; when that flaming Fire, in which the Lord shall be
Revealed from Heaven will utterly consume him, Dan. 7. ^^. 2. These. 2 8 After
the Seventh Trumpet shall begin to Sound, there are Vials (containing the Woes
of that Trumpet) to be poured out on the Antichristian World. How long a space
of time the Vials, or any one of them will take up, the Scripture has not
Revealed. I know there is an Anonymous Author, who pretends, that the pouring
out of each Vial, will comprehend the space of Thirty Six Years. The Author was
(as I have been informed) Mr. Cussion, a Minister at Denwar, in Norfolk. But
his Applications are perfect Mistakes; nor is there any Solidity in his
Foundation. We must distinguish between the Reign of Antichrist, and his Life.
The Power of the Beast, is his Power of making War, and Overcoming the Saints,
Rev. 13. 7. This we may hope, will within these very few Years come to a
Period. But his Life will be prolonged still. The Tyranny of the Beast ends
with the Sixth Trumpet. But his utter Destruction is not before the Conclusion
of the Seventh Trumpet. Rome was not Built in a Day, nor will it Fall in a Day.

Toente (...) erit Romanam perdere Gentem --

Its true, that things are now hastening to their Center; hence swift
Revolutions are to be Expected. Nevertheless, since every one of the other
Trumpets has a considerable space of Time, we may not think, that the work of
the Seventh Trumpet, which contains Seven Vials, and Seven Thunders will be
dispatched in a few Days. That Trumpet ends with the Resurrection of the Dead,
and Conflagration of the World, 2 Pet 3. 12, 13. Rev. 11. 18. The Scripture
speaks of a Twofold Fall of Babylon. The first is Partial, and to be expected
in less than Ten Years. The other is Total, under the Last Vial of the Seventh
Trumpet which is yet to Sound, Rev. 16, 17, 19. Although the utter Abolition of
all Antichristian Power, is not to be expected in our Days Nevertheless, we
have Scripture Ground to Hope for the speedy Accomplishment of Great things, e.
g.

1. That at the Period so often mentioned, there will be an End of the Tyranny
both of the Ten Horns, and of the Little Horn. They shall not have Power to do
any more such mischief in the world, as for many Ages past they have done.

2. That the Church shall then put off her Sackloth. That the 1260 Years for
the Witnesles to Prophecy in Sackloth, will then Expire. Yea, that they shall
obtain an Happy Resurrection and Ascension to Heaven, their Enemies to their
nolittle Amazement beholding them; the Supreme Powers where they have been
Slain, putting great respect upon them, Rev. 11. 11, 12. We have reason to
expect.

3. That One (and a principal one) of the Ten Kingdoms whereby the Beast at
Rome has been supported, shall undergo a mavelous Revolution, Rev. 11. 12,
The same Hour there was a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the City
fell. By the Tenth Part of the City. I understand one of the Ten Kingdoms, into
which Babylon the Great City, i. e. Rome has been divided. Which of those Ten
Kingdoms it is, a very few Years will Determine. Dr. Goodwin In his Exposition
of the Revelation, P. 116.
Conjectured long since, it would be the Kingdom of France; for that very many
Witnesses and Martyrs have been there. Cocceius also thinks, that by the Tenth
part of the City, France is intended. Several things may incline us to be of
that Opinion. For France has been the greatest of all the Ten Kingdoms. And it
was as Mr. Whiston Page 235.
observes, the T(...) the Tenth and Last of the Kingdoms in order of its Rise,
that it therefore Denominated the Beast, a Beast with Ten Horns, arising
exactly the very same time with the Beast, and that it alone of all the Ten,
has never been Conquered since its first Rise, and as it all along has hitherto
continued, so probably it is not to Fall in the Prophetical phrase, till the
End of that Grand Period, 1716

4. It is to be hoped that the Restoration of the Jews is near at hand. Does
not the Prophet Daniel tell us, that when the Time, Times, and Half a Time is
expired, the dispersion of the Holy people (so are the Jews called) shall be
finished, Dan. 12. 7. And our Savior has told us, that Jerusalem shall be
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,
Luke 21. 24. When the time, times, and half a time is accomplished, the times
of the Gentiles will be fulfilled, then Jerusalem shall be no longer (...)
down. To this agrees that of the Apostle, Romans 11. 25, 26. Blindness is happened
to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come its, so all Israel
shall be Saved. It is foretold by one of the Prophets, that when the Jews shall
be called, the Great Trumpet shall be blown, Isa. 27. 13 That Great Trumpet, I
take to be the same with the Seventh Trumpet in the Revelation; John Expounds
Isaiah, in Rev. 10. 6, 7. But concerning the Salvation of Israel, I have
Written largely, in a Discourse which was Printed at London, Forty Years since;
and have not seen cause to alter my Judgment on that Subject, and therefore
shall not add more at present. And I am still of the Opinion, that the Jews
Conversion will be brought to pass in an Extraordinary manner, as Paul's was, by
an Appearance of Christ to them. The Reasons for this mentioned in my Dia triba
de signo filij Hominis, Printed at Amsterdam, 1682. are of weight with me,
notwithstanding I proposed it only as a Problem. Several things very
Remarkable, have lately come to pass, which are a great Encouragement unto
Faith and Prayer, that the Glorious things to be done in the Latter Days, make
have upon us; e. g.

1. The passing away of the Second Woe, before mentioned, at least wise, videtur
quod sic.

2. Some Protestant Princes have of late been Valiant for the Truth upon Earth,
and have given a Check to the Persecutions, and Tyranny of the Popish Anti
christian Party. This has the King of (...) done. Providence has smiled on the
Pious Endeavors of that Prince, to Unite the Lutherans and the Calvinists,
which has obtained among those in his Dominions; and other Foreign Churches
express a greater desire of Union, than ever was observed in the former Age.
Also, that Kings being Declared the Sovereign of Newfchatel, has secured the
Protestant Religion in that Country. It is Remarkable, that this was done on
the same Day, that the Popish Religion was banished from that Country 177 Years
before. And the King of Sweden, has caused 800 Churches of Protestans in
Silosia, to be restored notwithstanding the obstinate Resistance of the Popish
Clergy against it. That K. also being thereunto advised, by (the Best of
Queens) the QUEEN of Great Britain, insists upon it, That Calvinists, as well
as Lutherans shall have Liberty of Conscience, and that if any Papists being
convinced of the Falsity of their Religion, shall embrace the Protestant (which
is the only true) Religion, they shall not on that account be Persecuted. These
hopeful Beginnings are a Sign that Antichrist is falling, and the Kingdom of
Christ on the rising Hand. The truth is, the Popes Kingdom has been falling for
these several Ages. And notwithstanding his regaining some Countries which had
rejected him, the Pope is a Little thing at this day, compared to what he was
in some former Ages; when all the Princes in Europe stood in awe of him. Within
this Year or two, Notable Shakes have been given him. His Espousing the
Interest of the French King, has justly provoked not only the King of Spain;
but the Emperor of Germany also: and what the issue of those Resentments may
be, Time will discover. Moreover, Some Letters inform us, that very lately a
considerable Number of People within the Venitian Territories, are grown sick
of Popery; and incline to the Protestant Religion: And a misunderstanding there
is, between that Republic and the Court at Rome. The Pharisees of Old would
compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes for Hell. So have their genuine
Offspring the Jesuits, done to make Proselytes for Antichrist. But signal
Rebukes have lately attended them, For the Roman Catholics in Armenia, are
brought to Confusion. And the Emperor of China, has caused the Popes Legate to
be put to Death. These are Remarkable Providence.

3. Of Late God has wonderfully Animated many Good men to endeavor a
Reformation of Manners. The first Christian Emperor came out of Great Britian,
and his Mother Helena, the first Christian Empress was born there, viz. at
Colchester in Essex. And the first Christian King Lucius was Born there also.
And this Holy Design for a Reformation of Manners began in England. The present
Generation has been unhappily Debauched by those who made England to Sin; but
of late great care has been taken for the Education of a Young Generation, in
the ways of Piety, whom it is to be hoped the Lord will acknowledge for a
Generation to Serve Him. It may be the Lord will visit the Land of our Fathers
Sepulchers with sore Judgments, because of the Crying Sins which have been, and
are still there; yet surely He has Mercy in Store for the Isles afar off, This
attempt for the Reformation of Manners begins to take in other Protestant
Countries also, which is an happy Omen.

4. That which is most worthy our taking notice of, is what has lately been
done in Germany. We that live in a remote American Wilderness may well be
strangers to some considerable motions and transactions in other Parts of the
World. Nevertheless, we are informed of a Notable Reformation advanced in
several Provinces in Germany. Not long since, a number of Students in the
University of Lipsick, gathered into a Private College for the Promoting of
Scripture Knowledge, by means whereof real and practical Christianity was much
advanced. As this New Reformation has obtained a footing in diverse Provinces in
Germany, so especially in that part of Saxony, which belongs to the King of
Prussia, and in other Parts of the Dukedom of Branderburge. The chief
instrument in Promoting this work was, that Excellently Learned, and Holy Man
Dr. Spener, he is lately Deceased, to the unspeakable Loss of the Churches in
that part of the world. Next to him, Dr. Frank has been an Eminent Instrument.
Not above Fourteen years ago, viz. in the year 1694. there was by the Favor of
the King of Prussia, an University opened in the City of Hall in Saxony. This
is in a few Years time (which is wonderful) become the most flourishing of all
the Protestant Academies in Germany; Four Years since, there were above 3000
Students there. This Famous Academy is under the Inspection of Three Learned
Doctors in Divinity, who make it their business to promote Religion, as well as
Learning; and Enquire into the Spiritual State of the Young Scholars,
especially of such as are designed for the Ministry; Admonishing them, that
they are not to take up the Ministry as a Trade, or to get a Living thereby,
but to Promote the Glory of God in the World, and the Salvation of the Souls of
men. By means thereof, many happy Instruments are sent forth, who make it their
Design to promote Christian Knowledge and Practice. There has also been an
Hospital lately Erected at Glauca near Hall, wherein many poor Children are
advantaged with a Pious Education. Concerning this Hospital, many things little
less than miraculous, have been credibly reported. Such Instances of the Power
of Faith and Prayer, as have been very Remarkable. It can not be supposed, but
that Satan and his Instruments will rage at these Attempts for a Greater
Reformation, in the Churches which are called Reformed. The Chief Instruments
in Promoting it, having declared, that a Corrupt Clergy, who had only a Form of
Godliness without the Power of it, were the great Obstructors of that Purity
and Piety which ought to be Endeavored after, they brought upon themselves a
Storm of Indignation from that Tribe of men, who in a way of Derision called
the Reformers, by the Name of Pietists. And Antipietists charged them with
Fanaticism, nay with Heresy: Hereupon the King of Prussia appointed
Commissioners, to enquire into the Doctrine, Principles, and Practices of those
who were Nicknamed Pietists, and the Commissioners found them to be men Solid
and Orthodox, and such as really deserved to be Esteemed Pious men. The History
of these things is that which very few in New England have had any Knowledge
of; and I have therefore been the more willing to take notice thereof. There
has been nothing Parallel to it, since the First Reformation, near Two Hundred
Years ago. The Relator, in a Book Translated into English and Printed at London
1705. Declares these things to be of indubitable Truth, and judges them to be
among the Greatest Transactions at this Day in the World.

Some have observed, That in these Latter Ages, each Century has been attended
with considerable Motions in the World, respecting Religion. So it was Three
Hundred and Fifty Years ago in England, when Wickliff was raised up to testify
against the Idolatries of the Church of Rome. And his great Patron, the Duke of
Lancaster, said to the Bishop of London, Fuller Hist. B. 4. P. 135.
I will bring down the Pride, not of you alone, but of all the Prelates in
England. And Great Commotions there were near the beginning of the next
Century, when John Huss, and Jerome of Prague were Martyred, and Perfidiously
Murdered, contrary to the Emperors promise of safe Conduct, through the
Instigation of a Popish Council. Some have thought, that Huss was inspired when
he said at his Death, You may Kill the Goose, ( Huss in the Bohemian Language,
signifies a Goose) but an Hundred Years hence, a Swan ( Luther signifies a
Swan) will appear, and you shall not Kill him: Which came to pass accordingly.
Also Jerome of Prague told them, You shall Answer for this an Hundred years
hence. In the following Century, Luther and Zwinglius were the principal
Instruments in Reforming Germany and Switzerland. The beginning of the Last
Century was Remarkable, as for the Wars in Germany, especially in Bohemia on
the account of Religion; so for the attempts of some Eminent Divines to revive
Primitive Christianity. In that Pious design, Dr. Gerhard, and Dr. Meisner,
Professor in the University at Writtenberg, were engaged. He had an intention
of opening a Practical College, for the Students in that University, or a
Collegium Pietatis; but the obtaining of what he desired, was reserved for
another Age.

In Mag^^ voluisse sat est.

As for this Present Contury, it begins wonderfully: And will probably be the
most wonderful Age that ever was since the World began. It is a little
surprising, that a Cardinal, who lived 250 Years since, should be aware of
this. Yet so it was: For (...) Citante Whiston. P. 236.
so long ago, building his Opinion on Daniels Numbers, concluded that soon
after the Year 1700, Antichrist will be Destroyed, and the Church have a
Glorious Resurrection.

There are some Learned men, who begin the Rise and Reign of Antichrist (and
consequently his Ruin) Later than I have done. They supposing his Rising to be
upon the Deposition of Augustulus, the last Roman Emperor, which was A. D. 476.
Conclude that the Beasts Dominion will end 1736. When also according to the
Chronology of the Samaritane Pentateuch, which exceeds the Hebrew 311 Years, it
will be Just 6000 Years since the World was Created. If the time should be
protracted so long, 28 Years will soon be Expired.

That the Time for the fulfilling of Glorious Prophesies is near, we have
Scripture ground to Hope, because of that Light in Apocalyptical Mysteries,
which has in the Last Age broke forth. Mr. Mede has in my Opinion, Excelled all
(and yet there are above 30.) who have Written on the Revelation. Which has
often made me think, of what an Aged Gentleman many Years since affirmed to me,
viz. That when he was a Student in the University of Cambridge, it being known
that Mr. Mede was Studying the Revelation, the Puritans of those Days, (as Good
men were then honorably Nicknamed) in their Private Meetings used to Pray
much for him, that the Lord would discover to him the meaning of that
Mysterious Book. Of late, many other Learned men have bent their Studies that
way; particularly Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Moar, Dr. Cressener, Dr. Allix, Mr. Lee, Mr.
Jurieu, Mr. Phillipot, Mr. Garret, Mr. Cradock, Mr. Petto, and last of all Mr.
Whiston: And they have made happy Discoveries. Now the Un-sealing of these
Mysteries, is a sign that the Time of the End is at hand, Dan. 12. 9.

For my own part, I do not expect to Live to the accomplishment of these
things, which I have now mentioned as not far off. Nor can I desire to continue
so long in this Sinful World. Nevertheless, I am comforted in seeing the Day is
approaching, when the Kingdom of Antichrist will receive an happy fatal blow,
and the Holy Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ will prevail, and break in pieces
all that shall stand in opposition thereunto. That Pious man, Mr. Carter, [See
his Life, P. 10.] (who was a Minister of Christ at Bramford in Suffolk) was
often heard saying, I have had a longing desire to see or bear of the Fall of
Antichrist, but I check my self, I shall go to Heaven, and there the News of
it will quickly arrive. Undoubtedly, the Glorified Spirits in the Heavenly
Jerusalem, although they are not concerned in our Particular Affairs,
nevertheless, are not Ignorant of the Great Things done on the Earth, wherein
the Church in General is concerned And the Tidings of the Downfall of Mystical
Babylon, when they shall hear of it, will cause them to Rejoice. Rejoice over
her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and prophets. AMEN!

A SERMON
SHOWING, That the Present Dispensations of Divine Providence declare that
Wonderful REVOLUTIONS in the World, are near at hand.
PSALM LXXV. 1. That Thy Name is near, Thy Wondrous Works declare.


SOME Passages in this Psalm give us to understand, that it was Written by
David after the Death of Saul, and probably after the Death of Is^^besheth
Readiness Son and Successor, whereby, way was made for David to have a peaceable
Possession of the Kingdom, which God had long before promised unto him, And we
find him here promising God, that when Power shoul'd be put into his Hands, he
would use it for these ends, that it was given to him for. Namely, To protect
and encourage righteous Men, to suppress Vice, and to punish Sinners. This
verse is Gratulatory, it does contain matter of Thanks giving, not only David,
but those that did adhere to his Interest in opposition to the House of Saul,
are here brought in as giving Thanks to God, in the beginning of this verse
it is said, we give Thanks unto Thee, O Lord. All the Godly People throughout
the Land, who were firm to David's Interest gave thanks, as being affected with
the consideration of what God was about to do for him, they bless the Lord for
the Mercy, which they should all have in such a King and Ruler as David. The
Reason why they gave Thanks is expressed, in the Words that have been read. viz.
In that Gods Name was near, we give Thanks unto thee for thy Name is near. Gods
Name is often put for himself, in the Scripture, Thy Name is near, i. e. Thou
thy self art near, The Attributes of God (which are Himself) His Power and His
Truth were very speedily to be revealed by His Fulfiling of what He had
promised, thus was His Name near. And this was Evident from the Works of God.
They were then in the beginning of a Wonderful Revolution. A wonderful change
of the State of Affairs, throughout the whole Nation. And they did conclude
that God would go on with his own Work, Thy wondrous Works declare that Thy
Name is near, that Thou art about to perform the Wondrous Things promised
concerning David's Kingdom. The works of God toward David were very wonderful,
his being preserved, when there were such attempts against him, from time to
time, and God's removing those, that were the chief enemies of David's
Interest, first Soul, then Abuer and after that Isbbosheth, Gods removing them
in such ways, as he did. These were wondrous Works, and did show that God was
about to perform His Gracious Promises.

The Doctrinal Truth, at present, before us, is, That when God's Time for the
Accomplishment of Glorious Promises, is near, His Wondrous Works will declare
it.

Joseph said unto Pharaoh, Genesis 41. 25. God has showed unto Pharaoh, what he
is about to do. When God is about to do wonderful Things in the World, He is
wont to show it, His Works in Consideration with His Word, do then declare it.
The Doctrine may be confirmed in Three Propositions.

PROP. I. That whatever God has promised will in the appointed time be
certainly performed. Gods Promises are all true Promises, 2 Samuel 7. 28. Thou
have promised, and thy Words are True, faith David. There is no Deceit, nor is
there any mistake in Divine Predictions or Promises, Rev. 22. 6. These sayings
are faithful and true, what ever God has spoken shall faithfully and truly be
performed, if God has promised, the thing is as certain to be done, as if it
were already accomplished. Hence as to the great Promise concerning the coming
of Christ, the Prophet speaks, as Isa. 9 6. Unto us a Child is born: Although he
did utter those Words above seven Hundred years, before Christ was born into
the World, yet he faith, unto as a Child is born, the Thing is as certain to be
done, as if already done. Although it may seem Improbable, and to the Judgment of
Men Impossible, that such a Thing should ever be, yet if God has promised it,
his Wonderful Works will accomplish it. It was very unlikely, that David should
come to enjoy the Kingdom, such an obscure man as he was, when Soul had a
Mighty Army to oppose him, and Children of his own to be his Successors, all
these things notwithstanding, God, that had promised it, did bring it to pass.
And this God also does in the Time which He had prefixed, Isa. 60. ult. One
shall become a Thousand, and a little One shall become a great Nation, the Lord
will hasten it in its Time. A very Improbable thing, that a little One should
become a great Nation, nevertheless this was to be in the Time appointed. Hence
it is said Ha^. 2. 4. The Vision is for an appointed Time, it will speak and
not Lie, though it Tarry, wait for it, it will come and not Tarry. It will not
Tarry beyond the appointed Time. Although it may Tarry longer than Men have
supposed or desired, notwithstanding that, it will not tarry a Day, or an Hour
longer than Gods appointed Time, then it will come, and will not lie. Exodus 9.
5, 6. The Lord appointed a set Time, saying, to morrow the Lord shall do this
Thing in the Land, and on the morrow God did that Thing, He did not only do the
Thing He said He would do, but on the very Day He said it should be Done. But
the Truth of this Proposition is evident from several Things.

1. From the Name, and glorious Attributes of the Blessed God. When God does
fulfill His Promises He does make it known that He is Jehovah, and in as much as
His Name is Jehovah, it is Impossible that any Word, that He has spoken should
fail as to the Accomplishment of it. The Lord said, that He was not known unto
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, by His Name Jehovah. Exodus 6, 3 but by that
Name, He would then be known unto the Children of Israel. The meaning is, not
that Abraham was Ignorant of that Glorious Name as a Title peculiarly belonging
to the True God, for he called the place where a Lamb was provided for a
Sacrifice instead of Isaac, by the Name of Jehovah Jir^h, therefore the meaning
is, That God was not known to the Fathers, by Fulfilling the Promises He had
made, to the Patriarchs, and which were to be performed to their Children after
them, but to Israel, He would make known, that He was Jehovah, by giving a
Being, and Actual Existence to those Promises. God is a God of Infinite Power,
and a God that keeps Truth for ever. When Men fail in the Performing of what
they have Promised, the reason is because they want Truth or Power to do, as
they have said they would do. Men that have no truth in them will promise what
they never intended to do, like the Devil who promised the Lord Jesus Christ,
that if He would Worship him, he would give Him all the Kingdoms in the World
to be his. The Devil never intended to do any such thing, nor was it in his
Power to do it; but now as to the blessed God, It is Impossible that He should
Lie, He is God that cannot Lie, Romans 3. 4. Let God be True, and every Man a
Liar, i. e. Every Man that does call the Truth of God into Question, let that
man be called a Liar, for so he is and a Blasphemer too. So then, that
Attribute of Divine Truth proves this. And as for the Power of God, that is
Infinite, He is the Omnipotent God, He is (as some have observed) above Seventy
Times, in the Scripture styled the Almighty, he has Power to do, whatever He
will do, Job 42. 2. I know that Thou can do every Thing, and that no Thought
can be withheld from the^ God can do Things that are above the Power of Nature
when he pleases; and will do so, rather than (...) Word, His Promise shall not
be made good. When God Promised that Sarah should have a Son, because it was
above the ordinary Course of Nature, she could not believe it, the Angel does
therefore Rebuke her saying, Genesis 18 14. Is any thing (...) hard for the Lord,
though this be above what is usual, yet if the Lord has spoken it, is it too
hard for him to cause it to be so? It was a Thing very unlikely, that the
Children of Israel should be brought out of the Land of Egypt, considering that
they were a poor unarmed People, and were dispirited by the Slavery and Cruel
Bondage which they had, for a long time, been in, and their Enemies were more
in Number than they, nevertheless, since God had made such a Promise, He did
bring it about to show His Power, He saved them for His Name sake, that He
might make His mighty Power known. That the Jews should be brought out of
Babylon, was more Improbable than their deliverance out of Egypt, because the
King of Babylon was a far more potent Prince, than Pharaoh King of Egypt;
nevertheless, in as much as God Promised it, His Power did effect it, Jer. 50.
34. Their Redeemer is Strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Gods Strength and
Power is such, as He could do that Wondrous Thing. So, that the Jews who at
this Day, are the most forlorn Nation in the World, should again be called and
become the People of God, is Incredible to many, but the Apostle proves that it
shall be so, from the Infinite Power of God, Romans 11. 13. God is able to Graft
them in again, because He is able, and has so Promised, it shall surely be
done.

2. This is evident from, The Stability, and Immutability of the Divine
Decrees. Psalm. 33. 11. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
Thoughts of his Heart unto all Generations. What God has Promised, He has
certainly Purposed to perform, His Promise is the effect and declarative of his
Decree. The Purpose of God shall stand, yea, and it shall stand forever. Men do
oftentimes purpose and change their mind, but God does not so. Therefore the
Apostle speaks of the Immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6. 17. When men
'purpose, and do not accomplish what they intended, the reason of their not
doing of it, is either for want of Wisdom or of Power; many times for want of
Wisdom, because they did not at first see the inconveniency of such a
Resolution, which they have taken up, therefore upon second thoughts that are
wiser they change their minds, but God is Infinitely Wise, and therefore, He
does not change His Mind. The Decrees of God are so wise, as that wiser cannot
possibly be, and thence they are Immutable. And as for the Power of God you
heard, that was Infinite, and therefore His Purposes and consequently His
Promises must needs hold good. Hence Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 29. The
Strength of Israel, is not as a man that He should repent, as for what God has
spoken of Ruin to come on the House of Saul, He will not Repent of it, and as
for what God has promised concerning David, and his House, He will not change
His mind, for if He should, that would Argue Weakness in Him, whenas He is the
Strength of Israel, the Strength of Israel will not change His mind. The
Decrees of God are in Zech. 6. compared to mountains of Brass, the Prophet
there sees Four Chariots which came from between two Mountains of Brass,
signifying the Judgments of God coming upon His Enemies, in order unto the
deliverance of His People, and these Judgments are but the effects of the
Decrees of God, compared to Mountains of Brass, for that they cannot be
removed, or Frustrated.

3. The experience of all Ages confirms this to be so. Psalm. 119. 160. Thy Word
is True from the Beginning, ever since the World began, in all Ages of it, God
has made Good His Word, and truly performed what He has promised. Particular
Saints have always found it so. There were peculiar Promises made to David that
God would give him the Kingdom, and after that, God promised that a Son of his
should succeed him in the Throne, and particularly that Solomon was the Son,
that should be his successor, now Solomon does with great affection take notice
how God had performed His Word, 1 King. 8. 24. Thou have kept with my Father,
(says he.) that thou promised'st him, and what thou have spooken with thy
mouth, thou have fulfilled with thy hand, as at this Day. Thou did tell my
Father David that I should succeed in the Throne, and Build this Temple, and so
it is this Day. So the Promises God has made Concerning His Church, we have
seen them fulfilled in all Preceding Ages, God has verified His Word, as when
He did Promise to Abraham, that his Posterity should be brot' out of Egypt
after a long time of affliction there; this Promise that God made to Abraham,
Four Hundred and Thirty Years before, it was, at last fulfilled, and God kept
His Word to a day. And therefore it is an observable Scripture which you have to
this purpose in, Exodus 12. 40, 41. It is said, It came to pass at the end of
the Four Hundred and Thirty Years, in the self same day it came to pass. You
see, that God kept His Promise made to Abraham, to a day, in bringing His
Posterity out of the land of Egypt. So the great Promise which all the Fathers
lived upon, concerning the coming of Christ, and his Dying to save His People,
it was Declared unto Daniel, that within Seventy Prophetical Weeks, that is
Four Hundred and Ninty Years, this should be accomplished, and we know that it
was so. The Promises made concerning the Calling of the Gentiles, and the
enlargement of the Church, the pouring out of the Spirit in the Days of the
Messiah, we know how these Things are fulfilled, and therefore what Glorious
Things are yet remaining to be done in the World, God will certainly do them in
the Time thereof. That Is the first Proposition.

PROP. II That the Works of God, especially some of his Works, are very
Wonderful! Thy Wondrous Works! Says the Psalmist here, in the Hebrew it is
Nipbleothecs, Mirabilia tua, thy Marvels. The work of Creation is indeed, a
wonderful work, it is Wonderful, to consider, what variety of Creatures, the
great and glorious God has given a Being to. If we look here, on the Earth,
what variety of Creatures are there? That (as some have observed,) among the
Beasts of the Field, there are no less, than an Hundred and Fifty Beasts of
several kinds, that God has made; and of the Fowls of the Air, no less than
Five Hundred sorts of them; and as for Insects, Creeping and Flying Things. No
less than Ten Thousand of them have Naturalists taken notice of. And as for
Plants, they are innumerable, some Writers say, more than Eighteen Thousand
differing in kind. If we look into the wide Sea, what Innumerable Creatures are
there! And if we look up to Heaven among the Stars of God, we Ignorant Mortals
do not know what Creatures may be there; so that the Works of Creation, are
wondrous Works. But the Works that my Text refers to, are the Works of Divine
Providence, these are Wonderful! Psalm. 107. 8. And several times in that Psalm
it is said, Oh! that men would praise the Lord, for his goodness, and for his
Wonderful Works unto the Children of men. The Works of Gods Providence, toward
the Children of Men are exceeding Wonderful! In His Preserving and Providing
for them. But most of all the Works of Providence with respect to the Church of
God, as in Psalm. 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken, concerning thee, O thou
City of God! And God does Wondrous Things, in order to the Accomplishment of
those Glorious Things. The Churches preservation is one of those Wonders. He
has promised that He will uphold His Church in the World; even to the end of
it: That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail to destroy His Church on Earth;
and His Providence in that respect is Wonderful! The Churches Preservation is a
continual Miracle, considering how small they are, and the number of their
Enemies, how many and Mighty their Enemies are! And how few the Lords People
are if we look all the World over; Yet although they have so many Enemies, that
do hate them, and that would be glad, that there might not be one Godly man
upon the Face of the Earth; still God keeps a number in the World, that do fear
Him, and serve Him, and a Wonderful Thing it is. Gods Wonderful Dealings with
David, in carrying him safe, through so many Enemies and dangers was an
Example, a Type of His Providence toward His Church in all Ages of the World.
I have formerly showed you how the Church of God is like the Bush that Moses
beheld, that was Burned and yet not Consumed. It is said Act 7. 31. That Moses
did Wonder (...)! he wondered to see a dry shrub, all on a flame and yet not
Consumed. The Church of God is that Bush that has been all on a flame, for
these Five Thousand Years, and not Consumed! No, nor shall it be while the
World stands. This is a Wonderful Work of God! And the Work of God in
delivering His Church, is also very Wonderful. He uses to beliver His people in
such a way as they never dreamed of in such a way as men never thought of, Isa
64. 3, 4. (...) against their Enemies, which the Children of Israel never
thought of: They did not look for such Things; they little thought that God
would deliver them. First by bringing Ten Plagues on the Land of Egypt; and,
when that would not do, by destroying the King of Egypt, and all his Nobles in
one day, that so His People might besaved. These were terrible Things, that
were not looked for, till God did them. So does the Lord deliver His people by
such Instruments (many times) as were very unlikely to be Saviors, His Works
are Wondrous in that respect. When the Children of Israel were oppressed by the
Midianites, God wrought Salvation for them by Gideen, an obscure Man, of a poor
Family in Manasseh, and he the least of his Fathers Family, this Gideen, with
Three Hundred Men must deliver the Lords People from more then an Hundred
Thousand Enemies that came in Arms against them, this was a Wondrous Work. So
that David must be a Deliverer was Wonderful, David (the Son of Jesse) a poor
Shepherd must deliver the Lords people from the Syrians, and Ammonites, and
other Nations. And I am persuaded, that there is, at this Day, some David
keeping the Sheep, whom God will raise up to do Great Things for His Name:
Remember, that I told you so, for some of you may live to see it. And the Work
of God in Reforming and Refining His Church, is not less Wonderful, than that
of Delivering them. When the Church is exceedingly Degenerate, when there is a
general and deep Apostasy, that, Now, there must be a Recovery, is a Mavelous
thing. The Antichristian Apostasy was a General Apostasy, The whole World
Wondered after the Beast, and the Reformation, that was begun near two Hundred
Years ago, was a most Wonderful Work of God. Hence Rev. 15. 2, 3. There was
seen a Company with Harps of God in their Hands, standing on a Sea of Glass
mingled with Fire: A Company that was Washed from Antichristian Pollutions; and
then it is said, Great and mavelous are thy Works, O Lord! It was a Great,
and Mavelous Work of God, thus to begin, and carry on the Work of
Reformation. That Is the Second Proposition.

PROP. III. That when God's Time to accomplish the glorious Promises made to
His People us near, His Wondrous Works will declare it. Hence the Scriptures
speak of the signs of the Times, whereby we may discern that God is about to do
Great Things in the World, Mat. 16. 3. Christ tells the Jews that they did not
discern the signs of the Times; and what were the signs of those Times? Truly
the Wondrous Works that were done by the Lord Jesus Christ. The Blind were made
to see, the Lame marvellously made whole; these were the signs of the Times,
these were signs that God was now coming to fulfill the Glorious Promises made
concerning what should come to pass in the days of the Messiah. So with respect
to Christ's Second Coming, there will be signs of that, Wondrous Works of God,
which, when we see them, we may conclude, that the Lords Name is near. Thus
has Christ, our Lord, instructed us, Luke 21. 30, 31. When the Fig Tree buds
forth, you know that Summer is near, so, when you see these Things come to
pass, then knew that the Kingdom of God is near, yea, at the Door. And will
hasten on the World er'e Men are aware of what is Coming on them. But then it
will be Enquired.

By what Wondrous Works dath God declare, that his Name is near?

For Answer Briefly,

1. By prodigious Signs. Thus when the Lord was about to save His Israel of
old, Psalm. 135. 9. He showed Tokens and Wonders in the Land of Egypt. Prodigies
are called Wonders, in that they cause Men to Wonder, and there were many of
these when God came down to deliver His People. It is an old Observation, That
when the Lord is about to bring Changes on the World Predigious Signs precede,
as Indications of the Strange things that must happen. And that Observation is
according to Scripture, for so Christ Intimated unto His Disciples, that before
the Wonderful Changes coming on the Jewish Nation, there should be Prodigious
Signs, that they might from thence Conjecture what God was about to do. Luke
21. 11. There shall be fearful Sights, and great Signs from Heaven. The Jewish
Historian does give us an Account concerning those fearful sights; He says,
that ever Jerusalem there was a Blazing Star, in the Form of a Sword, impending
over the City, an whole Year together. And that, in the Air, there were seen
Armies Encountering one another. And in the Temple there was a Voice heard,
saying, Let us depart from this Place. The Great God, does Commission His
Angels to do such Things, as these are, that so men may prepare for what is
coming, or, if found unprepared, be left the more Inexcusable.

2. When we see, That God is removing these Things out of the way, that would
obstruct the Accomplishment of His Promises we may then conclude, that His Name
is near, 1 Samuel 3. 12. When I begin, I will also make an end; says the Lord.
When God does begin in a way of Judgment toward His Enemies, He is wont to go
on in that way, and work, as sure as He begins He will make an End. Hence the
Scripture speaks of the beginning of revenges, on the Enemy, Deuteronomy. 32. 42. So
when God does begin in a way of Mercy toward His People, He is wont to go on,
in that way. Now God usually begins His Work by removing those Things, that
stand in His way, by strange Providence He does remove them. He does cause
Earthquakes, which make Mountains to fall down before Him, Zech. 4 7. What art
thou O great Mountain! Thou shall be made a plain before Zerubbabel. There was
a Baby lexian Mountain; God made it a Plain, that His people might be
delivered. There was a (...) Mountain, that did oppose their going on with the
Building of the Temple. God made that Mountain to fall down before Him. There
are Things that obstruct, and there are Persons which obstruct the Work of God,
and commonly the greatest in the World are the chief obstructers thereof. But
now when Gods time is come to save His People, He takes them out of the way,
and thereby shows what He is about to do. When Gods Time was come that David
must be seated on the Throne, Saul must die. and Abner die, and Ishbosheth
also, these were admirable Providence, that so way might be made for God to
perform what he had Promised unto David. And when the Children of Israel, were
near their Deliverance, God removed their chief Enemies. There was Pharaoh the
King of Egypt to oppose, but him did the Lord dethrone. The Prophet Habbakkuk
takes notice of it, Hab. 3. 13 When thou wentest out for Salvation to thy
People, thou did wound the Head, in the house of the Wicked. Was not Pharaoh
that Head in the House of the Wicked? When we see such Things in the World,
when we see God Wounding, and drowning the Pharaohs of the World, in the
Red Sea of His Wrath, we may Conclude that His Name is near.

3. Strange unaccountable Impressions on the Spirits of men de declare that His
Name is near; for God does Spirit men according to what he designs to bring to
pass in the World. He does raise up Instruments, and Spirit them for that Work,
that He has designed them unto. So that this or that Instrument, whom God will
make use of, shall be strangely Inclined to engage in such a Work, and all the
World shall not dissuade the Man from being concerned in that Work God Spirits
him unto. Thus when God delivered His People of old, by Othniel and Gideon. It
is said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon them. He filled them with Courage and
Resolution, that venture they would, God and His Angels were with them, and
Spirit them, in those great undertaking. Soul in the beginning of his Reign did
well, he was an Instrument to deliver the Nation from Arbitrary Power, which
the Ammonites did exercise over them, God did wonderfully Spirit Him for that
Service. It is said I Sam. 11. 6. That the Spirit of God came upon Saul, and
then he was full of indignation and Zeal to deliver the Children of Israel from
those that did oppress them, This now was the Finger of God. And the Lord does
not only Spirit a few choice Instruments whom He singles out to do His Work by,
but He does Influence the Spirits of Men generally after a strange manner.
There are sometimes unaccountable Impressions on the Spirits of the Multitude
Inclining to do what God has decreed shall be done, which declare that His Name
is near. A very strange thing it was that the Egyptians should show kindness to
the Children of Israel; that they who were their Inveterate Enemies, should
furnish them with Gold, and Jewels: but the hand of God was in it, Exodus 11. 3.
God gave them favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. God shows His Sovereignty
most eminently, by His Ruling in the Hearts, and over the Spirits of Men, Psalm.
29. 10. God sits upon the Floods, He sits King forever! He overules the
Tumultuous Spirits of men, so that they shall be biased and inclined to the
very Thing, that Heaven has appointed to bring to pass. When Gods time was
come to set David in the Throne, the Spirit of the Nation generally was
Inclined to make David their King. Such Things as these mentioned are
intimations to us of the Lords Name being near. Thus have you heard the
Doctrine explained and confirmed, in the Particulars, which have been Insisted
on: All I shall say by way of Application is only a Word of EXHORTATION.

What should the Exhertation be? Let it be in the Words of Christ to Thomas,
Joh. 20. 27. Be not faithless, but believing. As to Gods Promises, be not
faithless but believing. As to Promises made to particular Believers, and as to
the Promises made to the Church of God, and the Glorious Times that are
hastening on the World, be not faithless but Beliveing. Something by way of
Encouragement let me speak; and something by way of Caution and Counsel.

Consi. 1. It is certain that the Church of God upon Earth shall have a happy
Day of it. Great shall be the Peace and Prosperity of the People of God,
throughout the World. Those Things shall come to pass that will make the Times
Happy. Good Rulers make happy Times; and God has Promised that Blessing to His
People, Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing
Mothers, and that Promise of Judges, as at the First, and Counselors as at the
Beginning, is yet to be fulfilled in a more glorious manner than ever has been
known upon the Earth. What an Happy Change have we seen of late, in our own
Land and Nation? What sad Times were there a few Years ago, when the vilest
Debaucheries were openly Practiced. When Prisons were filled with Good men.
When faithful Ministers of God were not permitted to Preach the Gospel. Things
are much better there, now; and they will be better than they are. The First
Christian Emperor that ever was in the World came out of Britain, viz.
Constantine the great. I am persuaded God has signal Mercy in store for that
Land. Yea, and a Revolution is hastening on the whole World, which will make it
look with quite another face than it does at present, For, The Mountain of the
Lords House shall be Established in the Top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the Hills, Isa. 2. 2. They, that are now under Foot shall be
above the Hills, and the Nations shall flow to the House of the Lord. It is
said, Rev. 9, 10. We shall reign on Earth. It is not said we do reign, no, but
we shall reign on Earth; such a Day there shall be, when the People of God
shall reign, not only in Heaven forever; but upon this very Earth. (...) have
been Persecuted, and Oppressed, and Here they shall Reign. Again, it is Sin and
Unrighteousness that makes the Times to be Evil; but there are Holy Times a
coming, Zech. 14. 20. Holiness to the Lord shall be written on the Bells, and
Horse Bridles, and on every Pot in Jerusalem; very Holy Times there shall be
throughout the World; and therefore happy Times.

Consi 2. This happy Blessed Day is near at hand. When the man of Sin shall be
once removed, then the Church of God shall see good Days, and that will be
er'e long. He has but Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years allowed him to Reign in,
and that Time is almost Expired, I doubt not, but that it may be demonstrated
from Scripture and History, that more than 1200. of those Years are past. We
see the beginnings of what the Scripture has spoken with respect to the
Destruction of Antichrist. 2. These. 2. 8. It is said, That the Lord will
consume him with the Breath of His mouth, and Destroy him, with the Brightness
of his Coming. So that there is a Consumption to come upon Antichrist by the
Breath of the Lords Mouth, as a forerunner and certain Symptom of his utter
destruction by the Brightness of the Lords Coming. The Man of Sin has been in a
consumption almost these 200 Years Bellarmins complains that ever since
Protestants have Preached that the Pope is Antichrist, his dominions have been
lessened. Thus has he been consuming a long time. We may therefore hope that
his final Ruin draws on apace. We are now come to the extremity of Times, and
therefore Motions, and Revolutions in the World will be exceeding quick; when
things come near to the place where they must center, they move very swiftly.
All the great Revolutions in the World shall center at last in the Kingdom of
Christ. That and that only is the Kingdom that cannot be shaken. The Lord will
overturn, overturn, overturn until he comes, whose right it is to have the
Crown on His Head, and the Scepter in His Hand, and to Him will He give it.
Revolutions will therefore be very quick and amazing to the Nations. By that
time the Work of one Revolution is well over, another comes on the back of it.
The Lord will make greater Changes in the World, in one Age now, than in many
heretofore. The Scripture speaks of Christ's Davidical Kingdom, God has
Promised, that He shall Sit on the Throne of David, Ezekiel. 37. 24, 25. There is
Reason to believe, that this Generation shall not wholly pass away, before that
Promise be fulfilled in a more Glorious manner than ever yet. I will mention
one Reason to you, which is of weight with me, whatever it may be with others.
It makes me to rejoice in Hope that the Glorious Times we look for are not far
of. It is this: The Light concerning these Truths is wondrously broke out upon
the World in this last Age. In the former Ages, few of the Lords Worthies had
their Hearts inclined to study the Revelation Great Calvin though one of the
best, and most Judicious Interpreters that ever wrote on the Bible, professed,
he could not tell what to make of that obscure Portion of the Sacred Book. But
in this Century, in the which God has cast our Lot, to be, many have been
searching into those formerly sealed Mysteries, and have made great
discoveries. It is said, Dan. 12. 4. Seal the Book till the Time of the end,
many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be Increased. In this Last Age,
there have been many Discourses, and Knowledge is Increased. A Sign that the
Time of the End is at hand, Rev. 22. 10. Seal not the Sayings of the Prophecy
of this Book, for the Time is at Hand. Do we not see, That the Day Star is
risen. The light begins to prevail, a Blessed Sign, that the Glory of the Lord
will shine upon the World er'e long. I might have added, that the expectations
which are raised in the minds of men, concerning some great Work of God, near
to be accomplished, seem to be Ominous. Travelers say, that the Turks and Jews
have strange Sentiments in their Spirits of Great Changes hastening on the
World. And which is more, there are many amongst the Fearers of the Lord that
have so. When the Time of Christ's first coming drew nigh, there was Waiting and
great expectation of it, Joh. 4. 25. There was then a looking for Redemption in
Israel, Luke 2. 26, 38. That might be the inducing cause, which made many Jews
about this Time come from all parts to dwell at Jerusalem. Act. 2. 5. So
doubtless there will be in many the like hopes before the great Redemption,
when the Lord will appear the second time to Salvation.

Consi. 3. The Works of God, at this Day, declare that His Name is near. That
God is about to do some Wonderful Thing, in the Earth. Yea, that our David
shall now in a little time have the Kingdom which God has promised him. Is not
the Lord making way for it? Is not the Lord shaking Heaven and Earth? Is not
the Lord shaking all Nations, at this day? Do not our Eyes behold those very
things, which Christ Himself has mentioned as the Signs of His Coming, and
Kingdom being at the Door? Is there not Distress of Nations with great
perplexities, the Sea, and the Waves Roaring? Is there not a Storm amongst the
European Nations, the Sea and Waves thereof Roaring so Loud, that we in
America, Three Thousand Miles Distant, are Amazed with the Noise they make? Had
such Things as these Happened a Thousand years ago, we could not from thence
have argued that the Kingdom of Christ was near: But since they come to pass
toward the End of the Fourth Monarchy, under it is last Head, they are a great
Argument, that the Lord is Near, His Works declare it. And you must Give me
Leave, (though I have done it when discoursing on another Scripture) again to put
you in mind (once mentioning such Wondrous, and Astonishing Works of God is not
enough) let me therefore again remind you of the Dreadful EarthQuakes, which
these late Times have been attended with. Earthquakes, are sometimes
Prognostics of State-Quakes, Kingdom-Quakes, Nation-Quakes; Historians speak
of an Universal Earthquake perceived in all the Parts of the Known World; the
like never sampled in any Age which happned, at the Death of Julian the last
Heathen Emperor of Rome, after which were great Commotions and Devastations
throughout the Empire. Judicious Interpreters have thought that this very
Earthquake was Predicted Rev. 8. 5. That the Prophecy was fulfilled both in a
literal and a Mystical sense, the former being an Indicating Sign of the
Latter. Our Lord speaks of Earthquakes in diverse Places, as precedaneous to
His Coming, Luke 21. 11. That is, say some before His Providential Coming to
destroy the Temple, and Burn the City of Jerusalem, so has the Prophesy in
part, been accomplished. (...) speaks of five famous Cities in Asia, that
perished by Earthquakes 6 years before the fatal ruin of Jerusalem. Other
Historians mention twelve Cities, which at one time, and thirteen Cities which
at another time, were swallowed up by fearful Earthquakes, all in the Reign of
Tiberus Nero. But the like signs will appear again, when the Name of the Lord
is near as warnings to the world, that the Great and Notable day of the Lord is
near, it is near. And have not such awful Signs as these been multiplied in our
days? Have there not been Earthquakes, and that in diverse places? Has America
been free from them? Has not the Island of Jamaica been trembling? Are not many
hundreds there, gone down into the grave, in a moment? Was not Lima in Peru
ruined by an Earthquake? And have there not been Earthquakes in Asia, not long
since? Did not 5000. Souls in Smyrna, lately perish by an Earthquake? But most
of all in Europe. Did not the Lord shake Naples a few years ago? But what has
been done in the garden of Europe? What has been in Sicily! How many Cities and
thousands of Souls, (an hundred and forty thousand, as some have computed) have
the Earthquakes swallowed up within these few years? The Lords wondrous works
show that his Name is come near to Babylon. He has shaken terribly the Earth,
in one of the Territories thereof. And I am persuaded, it is portentous that
ere long the Voice of the Angel will be heard, saying, Babylon is fallen! is
fallen! And what shall I say more? Are there any other wondrous Works of the
Lord, for me to Commemorate this Day? Has not God been doing wonders in
England, in some late Years? I have received it from very good hands, That
Miraculous Cures have been there, wrought by the Finger of God! And what does
the Lord say to us, and to the whole World, that shall hear of his mavelous
Doings? Does he not say, that there is some Extraordinary work of God as the
very Door? Does He not say, That rather than his Enemies shall not be
Destroyed, or the Promises made to his People not Performed. He will bring them
to pass in a Miraculous way. When one was restored to Life, by touching the
Dead Boxes of Elisha, 2 King. 13. 21. that Miracle was a Sign that the Children
of Israel, who were in a Dead Estate, should be Revived. The Church of God has
been in a Sick Estate a long time. May the late Miraculous Cures be a sign of
its speedy Recovery! Several late Writers are of Opinion, That when the Kingdom
of God shall appear in its Glory, the Gift of Miracles will return; and that
these late Wondrous Works, are Drops before a Shower. Miracles are called
Powers. If the Lord is come with Power, we may hope that He will appear in
Great Glory.

Now, then let me proceed to set before you some Cautions and Counsels.

1. We are to be Cautioned against being Perc^^ptory, and Particular in our
Timing of Future Events. Some Good men have been so, by whose Mistakes,
Atheists and Adversaries of the Truth have been Hardened in their Infidelity. A
Jesuit writing on the Revelation does bitterly Insult over Mr. Brightman,
because of his Mistaking in some Apocalyptical Computations. When men who are
disaffected see those who have been mighty Confident in their Timing future
Events, deceived, they conclude that all that has been Written about
Prophesies, to be fulfilled in these last Days, is mere Phansy and Delusion. We
may safely upon clear Scripture grounds affirm, that the Morning of the Great
Day of Judgment is Near, but for any to fix on the Particular year, when that
Day shall begin, is too much Boldness and Presumption. What the Holy Angels of
Heaven, who will be Eminently concerned in the Glorious Transactions of that
Day, know now concerning it, is not for us to say, but our Lord before his
Ascension said, Of that Day and Hour knows no man, No, not the Angels which
are in Heaven, neither the Son of Man, but the Father only, Mark 13. 32. Let
not us Sinful Creatures, then take upon us, to Determine the Hour. when this
shall be. Some who have done so, have Exposed themselves to just Censures, for
their arragant Rashness Again, We may boldly Assert, That Antichrists Time is
well nigh Expired. And Modest Conjectures, as to the Year of his fatal
Overthrow, are to be Encouraged; but Peremptoriness therein, is not
Commendable. It is very clear from the Scripture, that the Reign of
Antichrist, from first to last, shall not continue for more than a Time,
Times, and Half a Time: or Forty Two Months; or Twelve Hundred and Sixty
Prophetical Days; which are all the same. And I conceive that it is very clear
from the Scripture, That Antichrists Reign begins from the time, when the Roman
Empire being broken, Ten Kings rose up thereon, not Subject to the Power of
Rome; as before all Princes in the Empire had been. The Ten Horns receive their
Power as Kings, one Hour with the Beast, Rev 17 12. This notwithstanding, we
are in the Dark, as to the Particular Year, when the Ten Horned Beast began his
Reign. For the Empire was not Dissolved, nor did the Ten Horns all appear, in
one Day. There was the space of no less than an Hundred Years, between the
appearance of the First and of the Tenth Horn. Antichrists Reign could not
begin with the First Horn; for then it would have been out, above an Hundred
Years ago: If it begun with the Last of the Ten Horns, than he has still more
than Ten Years to Reign. But it may be, we must not know, till the Event shall
be the Interpreter. The Babylonian Captivity, was to last but Seventy Years;
yet the Jews were at a loss, as to the Beginning, and consequently as to the
Expiration of those Years. For there were three Steps or Degrees of that
Captivity the First, in the Days of Jebeiaki^^, when Daniel went Captive: the
Second, under Jeronias, when Ezekiel went Captive: the Last under Zedekiah,
when the Temple and City was Burned. It is to this day Disputed amongst Learned
men, at which of these Three Captivities, did the Seventy Years Commence. Very
Judicious Writers, conceive, that it was not at the First, nor at the Last of
them. A little time will now make a more clear Discovery, when the Churches
Captivity under the Spiritual Babylon began, and consequently when it will end.
When the Disciples were very desirous to know, whether at that Time, the
Kingdom should be Restored to Israel, the Lord, willed them to understand, that
it was not for them to know the Article of Time, which the Father had put in
His own Power, Act. 1. 7.

2. Remember, That a little before the Glorious Times come, there must be Great
Troubles in the World. Just before the Death of Saul, whereby way was made for
David to posses the Kingdom, he was in the greatest Distress, that ever in all
his Life; namely, when Ziklag was burnt, and his own friends begun to speak of
Stoning him. A little before break of Day, is the Darkest time of all the
Night. That Is one of the Mysteries of Providence. The Lord causes the Light to
shine out of the Greatest Darkness. What a miserable, what a forlorn, and
hopeless, Estate, were the Children of Israel in, when the Time of their
Deliverance out of Egypt, was near. The Christian Church was never in more
Imminent Danger of an utter Extirpation, than in the Reign of the Emperor
Dioclesian, the most Cruel Persecutor that ever was, who Resolved to Extirpate
Christianity out of the World, and thought he had done so, Erecting Pillars
with that Inscription, Deleta Superstitione Christiana: Not unlike the French
Dioclosians Boasting, that he has Extirpated the Protestant Heresy out of his
Dominions: But these things were done by that Emperor, when the Churches
Glorious Deliverance and Advancement under Constantine was very near. When the
Seventh Day came, and the Trumpet Sounded, the walls of Jeriche fell even with
the Ground. In like sort, when the Seventh Trumpet Sounds, Mystical Babylon,
typified by Jericho utterly cease. But before that, toward the end of the
Sixth Trumpet, there is a sad Slaughter of the Witnesses. There are that now
make it a Question, Is the Last Slaughter of the Witnesses past, or future? I
will freely Declare my own thoughts to you concerning it. I hope there will be
no more a General Slaughter of them. It seems to me, that the Lord by wondrous
works, has in diverse Lands, as a first Fruits begun their Resurrection. Is not
a Spirit of Life from God, wondrously entered into the Vaadois of late? Yea, and
into those Protestants in Great Britain, who have witnessed against the
Remainders of Popery; and this after they had been under a Civil Death, from
the Sixth Month, in the Year One thousand Six hundred and Eighty three, to the
First Month, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty Seven; which is
three Prophetical Days, and an Half. Liberty (which is Life) was then
Restored, and is since Confirmed to them; and that by wondrous Providence and
Revolutions. So that I hope (especially Considering, that the Second Woe seems
at the same time to be passing away) we may Conclude, That the Winter is past,
and the Singing of Birds is come. Nevertheless, Great troubles are to be
Expected in the world by Wars, and other tremendous Judgments of God. There is
a Scripture in Daniel yet to be fulfilled; Namely, that in, Dan. 12. 1. where
it is said, There shall be such a time of trouble, as never was since there was
a Nation, to that same time; and at that time thy People shall be Delivered.
The Third Wo-Trumpet is yet to Sound; and it will Sound quickly; and the
Clangor of it will be terrible over all the Earth.

Lastly. Oh! Be much in Prayer to God, every soul amongst you that Fears His
Name. Glorious Prophesies and Promises are come to the Birth: You may hasten
them by Fervent Prayers to the Lord, Day and Night continually. When Daniel
understood by Books, the Number of the Years whereof the Word of the Lord came
to Jeremiah the Prophet, that He would accomplish Seventy Years, in the
Desolation of Jerusalem; he (...) his Face unto the Lord, to seek by Prayer and
Supplication. So now, when we understand, that the Twelve Hundred and Sixty
Years, for the Churches being in Sackloth, are to be shortly Fulfilled; Let
this Meditation, but Life into our Prayers. And if the Lord from on High, Pour
out a Mighty Spirit of Prayer on His People, for the Accomplishment of His
Promises. THAT it self will be a Blessed Evidence, That His Name is Near. You
therefore that make Mention of the LORD, Keep not Silence; Give Him no Rest,
till He Establish, and till He make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth.

FINIS.
Errata in the Preface.
Page 4 l. 6. r. Meliora. P. 5. l. 21, and l. 27. r. Retractations.


