Meditations ON DEATH^

Delivered in Several SERMONS, Wherein is showed; I. That some True Believers
on CHRIST are afraid of Death but that they have 20 (...) Cause to be so. II.
That Good Men as well as others may be taken out of the World by a Sudden
Death. III. That not Earth but Heaven is the Christians Home.


By I. Mather, D.D.

Heb. 11.16. Now they desire a better Country, that is, an Heavenly.

Boston, in N. E. Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, 1707.

TO THE Reader.
IT becomes those who feel themselves going out of this World, (as I
considering the Advances of Old Age which have overtaken me cannot but do) to
think much of Another. For which cause most of the Subjects insisted on in my
Public Ministry for several of the last Years of my life, have been such as
are proper for one that knows he must shortly put off his Earthly Tabernacle,
and be gone into the World of Souls. Therefore have I of late^ time Discoursed
so Largely concerning Death, the Resurrection, the Day of Judgment, and of
Heaven and Eternal Life. Some of my Hearers having desired my Meditations might
be Published by the Press, and some of them having Contributed toward the
Impression, I have singled out these few Sermons, and have Perused and
Corrected the Notes, which were brought to me from one who wrote after me in
Shorthand. If there is in these a greater Inculcation and Laxness of Style,
than in such as have been all written with my own Hand, the Candid Reader will
Excuse it; nor will that make them the less Edifying to them whose Edification
is Chiefly intended by them.

If Preparation for Death, and a greater Willingness to leave this Earth, and
Holy Longings in the Hearts of Believers (and yet patient waiting for the Lords
Coming) to be at Home with CHRIST in Heaven, shall in any measure be the fruit
of what is written, my Labor therein is not in Vain.

I knew an Aged and Eminent Minister of GOD, who for the space of Fourteen
Years before his Death, continued Longing for his Dissolution. I have seen the
words I here Transcribe, written with his own Hand: Because (said he) God has
let me see such Vanity and Emptiness in the best of those Comforts which this
Life can afford, that I think I may truly say, that I have seen an End of all
Perfection: Therefore if it were the Will of God, I should be glad to be
removed hence, where the best that is to be had does yield so little
Satisfaction to my Soul, and to be brought into His Presence in Glory, that
there I might find (for there I know it is to be had) that Satisfying and
Alsufficient Contentment in Him, which under the Sun is not to be Enjoyed. In
the mean time, I desire to stay the Lords Leisure. But, Thou, O Lord, how Long!
Thus that Holy Man did Express his Holy Desires. This brings to mind Austin's
Devout Reflection on those words, Exodus 33.20. There shall no man see me and
Live. If it be so, then Lord let me Dye that so I may see thee.

Old Mr. John Dod (whom Mr. Capell was wont to call John the Divine) would be
often Expressing his Longings to be in Heaven: And although some said to him,
they did not like a Servant that would have his wages before his work was done,
that did not make him of another mind. Mr. Sydrack Sympson speaks of a Good man
who was ever and anon saying, I wish I were in Heaven. Unto those that blamed
him, supposing he did not do well so frequently to wish himself there, he
replied, Whether I do well in it or no, I am sure I wish I were there. Is it
ill done for a Christian (with a Patient Submission to the Will of God) to wish
he were in a World in which there is no Sin, and where JESUS CHRIST is to be
seen in all His Glory? Ioh. 17.24. Phil. 1.23. It is reported of the Apostle
Andrew, that when some were willing to have Endeavored the Redemption of his
Life (...) of the hands of his Enemies, he desired them not to do it; and the
reason he gave, was, that he did exceedingly desire to be with CHRIST. The Good
LORD give to me more of those Desires, and grant that both the Writer and the
Readers, may Rejoice together in the Heavenly and Eternal World. In the mean
Time it is matter of the deepest Humiliation to me, That although I have (after a
poor manner the Lord knows) been Preaching the Gospel (this Summer it will be)
Fifty Years, I am not fully ripe for Heaven to this Day; For were I so, I
should then be here no longer.

Boston N. E. April 29. 1707. INCREASE MATHER.

Meditations ON Death: And on the Believers Deliverance from the Fear of it.
Heb. II.xv. And Deliver them, who through Fear of Death, were all their
Lifetime subject to Bondage.


THE Apostle in this Context, shows why it was necessary that the Son of God
should Assume Humane Nature; Namely, that He might be capable of Suffering and
Dying for the Salvation of His People. If He had been God only, He could not
have suff^red. Eternity cannot Dye. Therefore i^ was necessary that the Son of
God should become the Son of Man. In this with the preceding Verse, he mentions
two very Blessed Effects of the Death of Christ.

1. One is, That thereby the Devil is destroyed: He through Death has destroyed
the Dev^^. Not that he is destroyed as to his Being, but only as to his
Dominion.

2. Another Effect of Christ's Death is in the words read, Nam^ly, in that a
Deliverance, a Salvation has thereby been accomplished. We may observe in the
words before us;

First, The Subject of this Deliverance: He has delivered Them says the
Apostl^; that is to say, The Children of God. He had before spoken of Christ as
saying to God. Here am I, and the Children thou have given to me. Those
Children whom God has given to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, Them has
He Delivered.

Secondly, He shows what they are Delivered from: They are Delivered from
Bondage. They were by the Curse of the Law in Bondage; bound over by the Law to
suffer Death, not only Temporal but Eternal. But they are delivered from
Eternal Death, and from the Curse of the First Death too. That Death is more
obnoxious to them, than they are unto it; for by means of the Death of Christ
it is a Conquered Enemy.

Thirdly, Here is the Reason of that Bondage which they had been subject to*
and are delivered from* viz The continual Fear of Death, that held them, that
bound them. Men who know that Death is their Enemy, and it is imp^^^^ble for
them to avoid that Enem^* must needs have many sad Reflections and Fears in
their minds about it. But this Believers on Christ ought not to have.

DOCTRINE. That the Children of God are Delivered from that Bondage, which
through the Fear of Death Christless Sinners are subject unto.
The Doctrine may be Cleared in Four Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
That Death is a Formidable Evil. To Nature it is so. Although there are those in
the world that through Faith and the Fear of God, are carried above the fear of
Death; Nevertheless, it is in it self considered a Formidable Evil; and is
therefore called, The King of Terrors, Job 18.14. It exceeds other Evils as
much as a King exceeds other men. It is a most terrible thing: Job 24.17. They
are in the Terrors of the shadow of Death. Look as there is nothing to Nature
more pleasing and desirable than Life: Eccl. 11.7. Light is sweet; That is to
say, the light of Life, that is sweet to Nature; and says Solomon, It is a
pleasant thing to behold the light of the Sun: His meaning is, to live here in
the world; For when men are in the dark Grave they behold the light of the Sun
no more. So on the other hand, to be deprived of Life, to be subject to Death
is the most unpleasant and undesirable thing to Nature that can be. And
therefore it is that men Naturally do choose any thing rather than Death: Job
2.4. All that a man has will he give for his L^fe. Men had rather be Poor than
Dye, rather be Sick than Dye; they had rather Live miserably than not at all:
So then Death is a Formidable Evil.

The Enquiry may be, Whence is it so? How does it come to pass that Death is
thus Formidable, that the thoughts of it does cause Fear and Dread to be upon
the spirits of men naturally?

Answ. 1. A Cruel Enemy has by the Righteous Judgment of God the Power of
Death. The Devil is a Bloody Enemy: In Rev. 12.3. he is called a Red Dragon,
because he is a Bloody Devourer: And he has the Power of Death. And therefore
the Jews of old were wont to call him by the name of the Angel of Death. The
Angel that kills men they called by the name of Asmodaeus, which signifies a
Destroyer; and so does the Scripture call him by the same Name; 1 Cor. 10. 10.
The Murmerers were Destroyed (...) the Destroyer. God let loose Satan upon them
to kill them. And the He^brews also called the Devil by tha^ name of Abaddon,
which signifies the same thing: So does the Scripture ca^^ the Angel of the
Bottomless Pit, Rev* 9.11* Yea, the Scripture says Ex^presly, that he has the
Power of Death* Heb. 2.14. He that has the Power (...) Death, that is the
Devil, says the A^postle; which words may not be (...) understood as if the
Devil had (...) absolute Power of Death, to kill who^ he will, and when he
will; for if (...) were so, there would be no living (...) the world; The Devil
and his (...) Angels under him would soon destro^ all the men on the face of
the Eart^* But therefore his Power is limited (...) the most High God, that he
can infli^^ Death on no one beside those (...) whom God gives him leave to do
(...) We see it in Job; he had power (...) take Jobs Estate away from him,
(...) power given to him also to kill (...) Children every one of them by
rais^^ a Storm; he had power to inflict a sore Disease on the Body of Job, but
yet could not take his Life away from him, which fain he would have done, when
he said to God, all a man has will he give for his Life. God said, he is in
thine hand, but spare his Life. He is said therefore to have the Power of Death
for two Reasons.

1. In that it has been through his means that Death has come on the Children
of men. The Devil has killed all the men in the world; he has been the Death of
all the men in the world, namely by drawing them into Sin. No man had ever Dyed
if it had not been for Sin. The Devil brought Sin into the world and so Death:
He was the first Sinner that ever was, and he caused the first Man that ever
was to Sin; and in so doing he Killed him. Yea he Murdered him in the day he
caused him to Sin. Therefore Christ says, Joh. 8.44. The Devil is a Murderer
from the Beginning; because he Murdered the first Man by introducing Sin into
the world: And did then Murder all Mankind in one day. In as much as he has
been able by hi^ Temptations to cause men to Sin he has the power of Death; and
so fa^ forth as he has still power by hi^ Temptations to draw men into Sin* he
has the power of Death over them*

2. He is said to have the Power o^ Death, because of his being an Executioner.
He does by the permission and appointment of the Sovereign Judge of all the
world, Execute Death o^ the sinful Children of men. As the Executioner has the
power of Death when the Malefactor is delivered into his hands, to deal with
him according to the Law and the appointment o^ the Judge; such a power of
Death has the Devil* it is a Righteous thing with God when men have hearkene^
to the Devil, and in compliance with him have sinned, to make him the
Instrument of their Punishment. Thu^ when there was a terrible Plague i^ Egypt,
in which not one Family escaped, it is said, Psalm. 78.41. That the Lord sent Evil
Angels among them. Evi^ Angels were the Instruments of the Providence of God in
this Destruction. Now this adds to the Terror and Affrightment of Death. It is
a terrible thing to fall into the hands of a merciless Executioner. When David
was doubtful lest he should fall into the hands of his inveterate Enemies, from
whom he could expect no mercy, he said, The Terrors of Death are fallen upon
me, Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon me, and Horror has overwhelmed me,
Psalm. 55.4, 5. This must needs be a frightful thing. As Saul when he was told
he should be with the Devil the next day, he was sore afraid, and ^ell down on
his face on the Ground. He swooned away with the Fear and Horror of it. This is
one Reason why Death is so frightful to Sinners.

2. Death is a Sign of the Anger of God. It is a sign that man by Sin has
^ransgressed His Law, and so incurred His Displeasure. Now nothing can ^e
thought on so formidable as the Anger of God. The Devil who is ^fraid of
nothing else, trembles at the thoughts of the Infinite Wrath of God Therefore
the greatest of Men and the strongest of Sinners may wel^ tremble at it. We
read of Great Men* Kings, Captains, and Mighty Men that Cry to the Rocks to
fall on them* and the Mountains to cover them from the face of Him that sits on
the Throne saying, The Great day of His Wrath (...) come, and who shall be able
to stand* There is no standing before the Al^mighty God when the Great Day o^
His Wrath is come. The reason wh^ some Sinners have no tremblings (...) heart
at the thoughts of Death an^ Wrath to come, is because Conscienc^ is asl^ep;
but that will wake soone^ or later, and then they tremble: Isa* 33.14. The
Sinners in Sion are afraid fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites* Who among
us shall dwell with the de^vouring Fire, who among us shall (...) with
everlasting Burnings? The ange^ of God is such: And how far will the Fire
reach* Deuteronomy. 32 22. He kind^^ a Fire in H^s A^ger* and it shall burn (...) the
lowest Hell. Though some Sinne^ are Fearless for the present, yet (...) are not
so. There are Sinners that have dismal apprehensions of the Anger of God. It is
as formidable, and far more formidable than their saddest Fears concerning it.
Psalm. 90 11. As is thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. There are Sinners that have a
servile Fear of the Great God in their minds, says M^ses, thy Wrath is
according to tha^ Fear. In some cases, the fear of Death is worse than the
thing it self* but it cannot be said so of the Wrath of God, or of Death when
it comes armed with that Wrath. It is the Wr^^h of One that is of Infinite
Power; the Wrath of Almighty God: the Wrath of One that is Eternal. Now says
the Apostle, Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the
Living God. Sinners who Dye under His Wrath, must needs be exposed to fearful
Misery, since He lives for ever to Punish them. The though^ of this causes
Fear.

3. Death does d^ssolve the Union be^ween the Soul and the Body; by means
whereof the Body is subject to such Change as is dismal to Nature. Death makes
a separation between the Bod^ and the Soul* Eccl. 8.8. No man (...) power over
the Spirit to retain the Spi^rit; neither (...) power in the day (...) death.
Death comes like an Officer and says, Immort^^ Soul come forth! Luk* 12.20.
Thy Soul shall be Required (...) thee. Death comes then as an Offi^cer, and
Requires the Soul. Accord^ingly the Immortal Soul then leave^ the Body when
Death comes. (...) said of Rachel, Genesis 35.18. As (...) Soul was departing, for
she dyed. (...) read of a Young Damsel of Twelv^ Years old that Dyed, and was
by the Almighty Power of the Lord Jesus Christ raised to Life again; it is said
(...) her, Luke 8.55. That her Spirit cam^ into her again. Her Soul had bee^
gone for some time out of her Body* Now to have that intimate Unio^ which has
been between the Soul an^ Body for so many Years dissolved, (...) that which
Nature dreads, and trem^bles at the thoughts of: For then (...) Body becomes
subject unto a dismal Change. The Beauty of the Body turns into Blackness and
Deformity. There was a Personable Young Man urged to have his Picture drawn; he
refused it, but said to his Friends, I give you leave to do it after I am Dead
a few days. They did so four days after he was Dead, but he was then a
doleful Object, a rueful Spectacle. Death turns the Body into Corruption. It Is
said of King David, that he saw Corruption, Act. 13.36. After he was Dead his
Body saw Corruption. The Body becomes meat for the worms to feed upon, which is
(...) dismal thought to Nature. Hence ^ob said, after my skin worms shall
de^^roy this Body. Worms must destroy first his skin, then the rest of his
bo^y. In another place he sets this forth ^ith a mavelous Elegancy of
Ex^ression; Job 17.14. I have said to ^orruption, thou art my Father; and to
(...) Worm, thou art my Mother and ^^ster. As a Child bears the likeness (...)
his Father, so I bear the likeness of Corruption. The Mother and Chil^ dwells
together in the same House; (...) says he, I and the Worms shall dwel^
together in the House of the Grave* This makes Death frightful.

4. At Death the Soul goes into the immediate Presence of the Great God* The
Naked Soul appears before Go^ the Judge of all. Now that is dreadful thing: For
that Lord is Terrible God: Neh. 1.5. He is Great and a Terrible God. And (...)
said, Job, 37.22. With God there (...) terrible Majesty. Men are oftentime^
afraid to come into the presence (...) Earthly Majesty: Many would trem^ble to
come into the presence of (...) King, or a Great Man. But then wha^ is it to
come into the presence of the Terrible God? Job 31.23. Destruction from God was
a terror to me; and (...) reason of His Highness I could not e^^dure. Now at
Death the Soul come before His Highness. It is a dreadf^^^ thing to have to do
with God, altho^^^ but Mediately in His Ordinances: Psa^* 89.1. God is Greatly
to be feared in (...) Assembly of His Saints. To come thus into the Presence of
God is awful: But much more to have to do with God ^mmediately. When the Lord
appeared to Jacob in a dream, he was marvell^^sl^ affected with it; Genesis 28.16,
17. God is in this place, and I knew (...). And he was afraid, and said, how
drea^^ul is this place? The Holy Prophet Isaiah when he had a Vision of God*
se^ting as a Judge upon an high Throne, it was very terrible to him, he Cried
out, Woe is me, I am ^ndone; for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts, Isa. 6.5. h^e. (...) have seen Him as a Judge. A^ Death when the Soul of
a man or woman is gone out of the Body, they see the Great God sitting as a
Judge upon a Glorious high Throne* Souls are therefore said to Return unto Him,
^ccl. 12*7. The Spirit returns to God that ga^e it. When the Body returns to
the Earth, the Spirit, the immortal Soul returns into the hands of God, ^o be
Judged by Him, to receive a ^entence from Him: Heb 9.27. It Is appointed unto men
once to dye; but afte^ this the Judgment. Whenever any Dye, immediately they go
to Judg^ment. The Great God passes tha^ Judgment on them, that in the hearing
of the whole world will be passed o^ them at the Last Day.

5. At the Hour of death men enter into Eternity. One of the Ancients call
Death Ostium Aeternitatis, The Doo^ of Eternity; for that it lets men into
Eternity. Then are they fixed dow^ for ever and ever, in a state that i^
unchangeable. Hence when (...) was dead, it was said to him, There (...) a
great Gulf fixed. Eternity is a great Gulf, and at death men are fixed i^ that
Gulf, whence they shall not retur^ into this world any more. They shall go from
whence they shall not return even into the Land of darkness and the shadow of
death. If Sinners could live again after they are dead, death would not be so
formidable to them* But of that there is no hope. Indeed the greatest part of
those that dye (...) far would be glad if they might com^ into this world
again: But of that there is not the least hope; Isa. 38.18 They that go down
into the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. When men are gone down into the Pit of
the Grave, how long shall they continue there? Job tells you, Job 14.12. Man
lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be no more. He shall never rise till
that day come when the Heavens shall be dissolved. There cannot be a more awful
Subject for men to meditate on, than that of Eternity; that at the Hour of
death they must go into an Eternal State: They pass either into Eternal Weal or
Woe. Now a man that knows this, and yet does not know which of them it shall be,
may well be afraid to dye.

PROPOSITION II.
Christless Sinners have just cause to be afraid of Death. If they are afraid
to dye and leave this world, who can ^lame them? True it is, that some
Christless Sinners are Fearless of death, (...) it proceeds from Ignorance:
they ^now not what an Enemy Death is unto them, and the mischief and m^^sery it
will bring upon them: (...)* 28.15. They have made a Covena^^ with Death, and
are at an agreement (...) Hell. They fear neither Death (...) Hell. Alas! Many
of them (...) False Persuasions concerning the Happiness in another world,
which makes them they fear not Death. The^ have deluded hopes that it shall
(...) well with them. Some are so vain (...) to think, if they can but say,
Lord have Mercy on me, when they come (...) dye, that will save them; and (...)
then it shall be well with them. (...) Deluded Souls! Others there are (...)
are mere Atheists: They hardly belie^^ that there is a God; Psalm. 14.1. (...)
Fool has said in his heart, there is (...)* Then they need not be afraid (...)
Death: if there is no God, they (...) no^ fear Eternal punishment. (...) some
are so brutish as to think, (...) no difference between the Sou^ a Man and a
Bruit, and (...) that there is no Heaven nor (...) nor Judgment to come. Such
(...) the Sadduces, who said there was no Angel nor Spirit, or immortal Soul.
Why should such fear Death? One of the Popes being a great Atheist, (...) ready
to dye uttered such (...) words as these, Now (says (...)) I shall know whether
three things be true, that I could never Believe: (1.) I shall know whether
there is a God or no. (2.) Whether I have an immortal Soul or no. (3.) Whether
there is an Heaven and an Hell or no. Such Atheism as this makes Christless
Sinners that they fear not Death. Yet it is not so with all of them. As for
some, yea many of them, the prospect of Death is most dismal to them. I have
Read of one going to die, who Cried out, Oh that I might live, though it were the
life of a Toad. Some great Men have been dismally afraid of Death. A Great Man
in Rome, the Emperors greatest Favorite, was hor^^^ly afraid of Death. He
profess he (...) be content to be in any misery, (...) loofe the use of all his
Limbs, and (...) in Poverty (...) always in Pain, so he might live and not dye.
One o^ the Kings of France, the thoughts o^ death was so dismal to him, that he
Commanded on a great Penalty, that no man should mention Death in hi^ hearing;
and Charged his Physician that if he saw the symptoms of death on him* he
should not dare to tell him of it So are Sinners kept in Bondage all their
days, through Fear o^ Death: And Christless Sinners have just cause thus to Fear
it.

For,

1. They are in Bondage to him that (...) the Power of Death. As Saton is a^
Executioner they are under his power; Act. 26.18 Paul was sent unt^ the
Gentiles for their Conversion* that they might be turned from the Power of
Satan. So then Christless Sinner^ are under the Power of Satan. H^ is their
Prince; They are his (...) Subjects, yea Slaves. The Dev^^ Subjects are all
Slaves. He is (...) Prince of this world* Christless Si^^ners are his, he has
Power over them* And no Prince in (...) ^orld has suc^ an influence upon his
Subjects, as Satan has over Christl^ss Sinners; Ephesians. 2.2. The Prince of the
Power of the air works in the Hearts of the Children of disobedience. He works
Evil desires in their Hearts. Sometimes he works horrid Fears in them;
Especially when they are Dying, and Repentance is like to be too late. Some
sinners when going out of the world, have thought they saw Satan standing at
their Bedside, ready to carry their Souls before the Tribunal of the most
High. Though all sinners are not so sensible of it, yet it is true of them all
that are in a Christless s^ate, that Satan stands by them, and is ready to
devour them. As it is said of the Woman in the Revelation, who brought forth a
Man-child, the Dragon (although he had no power over that Manchild,
nevertheless,) stood by ready to devour him. So it is with a Christless sinner
when he comes to d^e, the Dragon of the Bottomless Pit stands ready to devour
him Then surely he has cause to be afraid of Death.

2. Death will deprive the Christle^ Sinner of all that is good and desi^abl^*
Whatever his Heart is set upon death will take it from him. Some have Hous^s
which they take delight (...) but when Death comes, thou shall go out of thy
House, and never com^ into it more: Job 7.10. He shall re^turn no more to his
House, neither sha^^ his Place know him any more. Other^ have Estates, Riches
which they ar^ taken with, and their Hearts are se^ upon them. Ay, but at Death
the^ enjoy these no more; Psalm. 49.17* He carries nothing away with him, an^
his Glory shall not descend after him* It was said therefore to the Rich Foo^
in the Gospel, when he boasted of hi^ Great Estate, Thy Soul shall be Required
of thee, and then whose shall these things be? To be sure, they shall (...)
thine no longer. Others there ar^ that their Hearts are set upon their Friends,
their Relations, their Chil^dren in a special manner, but when Death comes they
are separated from them too, and shall never see an^ one of them in this world
again. There are some whose Hearts are set upon Vanity and mad Mirth, among
their Ungodly Companions. A Christless sinner as for Heavenly Joy he is a
stranger to it; but as to his Earthly Joys, Death puts an End to them all. The
Destruction of Babylon is set forth by that, Rev. 18.22. The Musician, the
Trumpeter, the P^p^r shall be h^ard no more at all in thee; and the Light o^ a
Candle shall shine no mo^e at all in thee; and the Voice of the B^ideg^oom and
the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee. So it is when Death comes, all
these things they are no more at all heard of. Therefore a Great Emperor when
he saw (...) must dye, Cried out d^lefully, O (...) tre^ula, quae tanden
abitura (...) in loca. Nec solitos dabis jocos: Oh! my trembling Soul, whither
art thou going now! Thou shall never have any more sport; thou usest to ^elight
in merry Company, and in ^assing Jokes, but now no more of them. And which is a
much sadder thing, at Death the Christless sinne^ is deprived of all means, and
of a^ offers of Grace and Salvation. H^ shall never hear one Sermon more he
shall never see one Sabbath more and the Holy Spirit of God will ne^ver strive
with him any more. A^ long as sinners are in this world the^^ is hope; Eccl 94.
To him that is joyne^ to the Living, there is hope. There is some hope he may
be Converted, and hi^ Soul Saved. It may be some Sermon or some Providence will
be blessed (...) as to awaken him unto a sincere Re^pentance. But when once he
cease^ to be among the Living, there is n^ hope nor help for him. A Christle^^
sinner when once he is Dead, he is (...) the same condition with the Fallen
Angels, for whom there is no hope.

3. Christless Sinners have cause to b^ afraid of Death, in respect of that
which shall follow. And what is that? Yo^ see what it is, Rev. 6.8. I looked
an^ behold a Pale Horse, and his Name tha^ sat on him was Death, and Hell
followe^ with him. So it is when a Christle^^ sinner dies, Hell follows with
Death. Therefore Christ says, Luke 12.4, 5. Be not afraid of them that kill
the Body, and after that have no more that they ^an do, but fear Him that after
He has ^illed, has power to cast into Hell. So ^t is with those that dye in a
Christ^ess Estate, after their Bodies are kill^d their Souls are cast into
Hell. If ^here were only a First Death, there would be no great cause to fear;
Aye but there is a Second Death. That is the most terrible Death in respect of
the Painfulness of it. Some Bodily Deaths are very Painful, but no Death ^f the
Body is so painful as that of the ^oul. Think, and Oh! that Sinners would think
seriously of it; Suppose ^ man to be in such Pain as some have ^ndured by a
grievous Disease, sup^ose the Gout, or the Tooth-ake, and that Pain should
continue to all ^ternity, what a miserable Case would ^ach an one be in? Aye,
but the ^ains of the Second Death are far ^ore intolerable than any Diseases;
and yet the Pain and Pangs of it will continue for ever. The Second (...) is
that which the Sinners in Sodom (...) now suffering; of whom it is said, (...) 7.
They suffer the Vengeance of (...) Fire. Sinners that dye in a Christl^^^
Estate are cast into Hell, where (...) Worm dies not, and the Fire (...) shall
be quenched. Oh! the hardne^^ and the madness that possesses (...) hearts of
the Children of men, (...) they can hear such Truths as th^se (...) from the
infallable Word of Go^ and yet dare go to sleep before (...) have made sure of
an Interest (...) Christ. Let that be the Use of (...) has been spoken.

USE.
Oh! Let Christless Sinners be Awa^^^ned to make sure of an Interest in Christ
that so they may be delivered from (...) in Bondage through the Fear of (...)
Remember you are in danger Death continually. Yea, Young (...) are so. An Old
Man sees Death (...) his Face, but a Young Man's (...) is a deceitful Enemy to
him, it is (...) his Back, and knocks him (...) unto the Grave e're ever he
thinks of ^t. The Jews have a Proverb among them, That there are Skulls of all
sizes in Golgotha: That is, there are Persons of all sizes in the Grave; the
Small as well as the Great are there. No m^n knows how, or which way Death will
come upon him. Sometimes it is by ^udden Strokes that they little think of.
Some by Storms and Tempests ^e carried into Eternity. Seafaring men above
others had need make sure of an interest in Christ, considering what dangers
they pass through. Be (...) known to you, that if Death come ^n you before you
have made sure of ^n interest in Christ, it had been better for you never to
have been Born: For none b^t Christ can deliver from Death and the Fear of it.
No one Else can deliver from the Curse of the first Death, none Else can
deliver from the Second Death. It is He that ^a^eth from Wrath. The Second
Death (...) called W^ath, being the terrible Effect of the Wrath of God; and
con^^sting chiefly in the Impressions of the Wrath of God on the Soul (...)
ever. It is Jesus that delivers from (...) Wrath to come.

Consider also; That if you be (...) Christ, you need not fear any Death* For
then you are delivered from (...) Second Death: On such the Secon^ Death shall
have no power. And suc^ are delivered also from the Curse (...) the First
Death; that it shall do the^ no hurt in the world. If you are (...) Christ you
may Triumph over Death* You may say, Death! Oh! Death! Com^ and Welcome; I
should be glad (...) meet thee. If you are in Christ (...) may sing at the
thoughts of Death with transport of Joy; yea and (...) to see the Face of
Death. As (...) Martyr said, When I behold the amiab^^ Face of my Lord Jesus
Christ, I can (...) Death in the face without any Fea^* Therefore make sure of
Christ, (...) then the day of thy Death will be (...) to thee than the day of
thy (...) For it is said, Blessed are the Dead (...) dye in the Lord, they rest
from their L^^bours, and their Works follow them.

PROPOSITION III.
The Fear of Death does cause Bondage. Especially the Fear of the Second Death
does so. Fear is a servile thing. Hence Rom 8.15. the Apostle speaks of a
spirit of Bondage unto Fear. And (...) may say of this Fear as it is said
^oncerning the Sinai Covenant, Gal. ^ 24. It gendreth to Bondage. They (...)
are under the Covenant of works, (...) Covenant does bind them over (...)
Death, until they have an interest (...) the Covenant of the Gospel, which
(...) declare that Believers are deli^ered from that Bondage, from that Fear.
Of Believers only it is said, that they are not come to Mount Sinai, ^o
Blackness and Darkness and Tempest, Heb. 12.18. Several things ^llustrate the
Truth before us.

1. Bondage to an Enemy is Involuntary* (...) man is not willing to be in
Bondage (...) an Enemy that hates him. He may (...) willing to be in Bondage to
one whom he loves. Sometimes a Servant among the Children of Israel would (...)
be set free; for (said he) I love my Master, Exodus 21.5. But the (...) is
otherwise as to being in Bonda^^ to an Enemy; that no one is willin^ to be.
Death is an Enemy, and the fear of it is that which sinners would be rid of if
they could. They are n^ willingly afraid of Death.

2. They that are in Bondage (...) Enemies endeavor to be delivered from them.
As they wish they were del^^vered, so they will endeavor to (...) set at
Liberty. Thus the Jews a^^tempted to be delivered from the Bondage to the
Romans from time (...) time. Sinners would be deliver^^ from the fear of Death,
and therefo^^ attempt it, some in one way, some (...) another; although in vain.
Some e^deavour to drown the fear of Dea^^ by overwhelming themselves with (...)
World: So did Cain, Genesis 4.14* (...) said, every one that sees me will (...)
me. Thus was he subject to Bonda^^ through the fear of Death all his (...)
time. But then that so he (...) drown that Fear, he gives himsel^^ building of
Cities. Others (...) put away the Fear of Death by Mirth and Music. As we see
in Saul: An Evil spirit from the Lord terrified him; the Devil was let loose on
him, and terrified him with the Fear of Death; he sends for a Musician and an
Harp, that he might be delivered from that Bondage. And some endeavor to be
delivered from the Fear of Death by betaking themselves to Good Works, to
External Devotions. Thus the Jews did; Mic 6.7. They say, Will ^he Lord be
pleased with Thousands of Rams, with Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I
give my Firstborn for my Transgression; the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my
Soul? They would appease an angry Deity, and deliver themselves from the fear
of Death and Wrath, by Sacrifices of their own. We know Papists will almost
Fast themselves to Death, and cruelly afflict their own Bodies, thereby
thinking to make satisfaction for their Sins, and so to deliver themselves from
the fear of Death and Hell. In our own Nation, in the time of Popery there were
Kings and Great Men, when the^ had been guilty of Murder, and their Consciences
terrified them with the fear of Hell and Eternal Punishment they would build
Monasteries, and (...) take themselves to works that were accounted
Meritorious, that they might be delivered from that Fear.

3. The thoughts of being in Bondage unto an Enemy it is Perplexing and
Tormenting. And so is this Fear: 1 John* 4.18. Fear has Torment in it. The Fear
of Hell and Wrath especially ha^ Torment in it. And thus indeed the Fallen
Angels as well as Sinf^l Man are in Bondage, through the fear of Hel^ and Wrath:
Jude 6. ver. They are reserved in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the
Great Day. The disma^ thoughts of the Day of Judgment i^ a Terror to the Devils
themselves. Those Chains of Darkness they ar^ held in them, and cannot get rid
o^ them. It is a Torment to them to think of the Judgment to come. When they
saw Christ, they Cried out, Ar^ thou come to Torment us before the time* It is
then a tormenting thing to those Evil Spirits to think of the Wrath of God, and
the Hell that is reserved for them. Thus it is with some Sinners on Earth; they
are always on the wrack with fear of Death and Hell. That miserable Francis
Spira said, that he did believe that the Torment of Hell could not be more
grievous, than that Fear he was in of going to Hell. We see then that this Fear
causes Bondage.

PROPOSITION IV.
That although the Children of God are some of them subject unto the Fear of
Death, they have no just cause to be so. Two Particulars are contained in the
Proposition now before us.

1. That Gods Children are some of them subject unto Fear, by reason of Death.
We find Examples of it in Scripture: Hezekiah was an Excellent Holy man, yet
when the Prophet Isaiah came to him, and told him he should set his House in
order, for (said he) thou shall Dye and not Live, Isa. 38.3. Hezekiah wept
sore. The tidings of his Death caused him to weep sore. (...) man was a very
Pious man, yet (...) says, Psalm. 88.3. My Soul is full (...) Trouble; my Life
draws nigh unto (...) Gravepunc; The apprehension of his be^^ing near unto the
Grave, was a trou^ble to his Soul. And although Davi^ when he wrote the Twenty
Thin^ Psalm was above the fear of Death as in the fourth Verse, I will not fea^
although I walk in the valley of the shado^ of Death: Yet at other times the
ap^prehensions of Death was a terror (...) him; Psalm. 55.4. The Terrors of
Death are fallen upon me. And there are se^veral things which are the Reason
(...) that fear of Death, which Gods ow^ Children are sometimes subject unto*

As now;

1. There is Nature in them as well (...) in other men: Heb. 2*14. The Children
are partakers of Flesh and Blood. The Children of God are Flesh and Bloo^ as
well as other men. Now N^tu^^ shrinks at Death. Though they have Grace in them*
which does sometime^ carry them above the fear of Death* yet they have Nature
in them too, and that shrinks at it. Nature shrinks at the thoughts of the
Souls being separated from the Body: Therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.4 Not
that we would be Unclothed: Not that we desire to have our Souls separated
from our Bodies. It would be contrary to Na^u^e to desire Death for it self:
But that M^rtal^ty might be ^wal^^^ed (...) in Li^e: That our Souls might be
United to an immortal Body. Especially there are some kinds of Death, which
Nature is averse from. As to Dye by the hand of an Enemy, Nature shrinks at
that: Therefore when the Prophet Samuel was directed to go and an^int David to
be King, he said, 1 Samuel 16.2. How can I do it? If S^ul know it, he will Kill
me. So the Holy Prophet Jeremiah, Jer 37.20 Pe^i^i^r^ed the King that he might
not be sent to the House of Jonathan, to Dye there: To dye in Prison, to dye
under the hand of a cruel Jaylo^ Nature shrinks at it. So as to those Deaths
that are very Painful, Nature shrinks at them. Therefore (...) the Holy Martyrs
knew that (...) were to be Burnt to Death, or To^^tured to Death but did not
shrink (...) it, (as some of them did not) it (...) Supernatural, it was was
from a m^^raculous Work of the Spirit of (...) resting upon them, and operating
(...) them. There are also some of (...) Children who are naturally of
Mela^^choly Tempers and Dispositions* (...) that dark humor causes Fear. (...)
are apt to be frighted at an Evil (...) less formidable than Death.

2. The Blessed God (...) sometimes (...) Holy Ends suffer Satan to Terrify
(...) own Children with the Fear of Death* The Devil is a malicious and lyin^
Spirit: He will say to his own Chi^^dren, that they need not be afraid (...)
Death, that it shall be well with the^ after Death: And he will say the d^^rect
contrary to the Children of Go^* Even as the False Prophets among (...) Jews,
that were acted and influenced (...) Satan, Ezekiel* 13 23* did strength^^ the
hands of the Wicked, that (...) should not return from their Evil ways, and
did promise Life unto them, and made the hearts of the Righteous sad. So does
Satan do; promises Life unto the Wicked, (...) those that are in a state of
Sin; this he does that so they might not repent and turn from their Evil ways:
And in the mean time he makes the Heart of the Righteous sad; he tells them
that Death will bring them to Hell. When Satan was let loose upon Job, he did
sadly terrify him: Job 7.14. He complains that he was scared with Dreams, and
terrified with Night V^sions. Satan was in it. And so does he oftentimes deal
with the Children of God; he scares them and terrifies them with dark Visions
of Death and Hell and Eternal Wrath; and though it is but a Dream and they need
not fear, yet it is very perplexing to them. And God has very holy ends in
permitting Satan thus to buff^^ His own Children. It is to humble them and to
make them more Prayerful, and more careful to build upon ^ sure Foundati^n for
Eternity.

3. Some who are true Believers (...) Christ, have not Assurance of their (...)
Estate: Not a sensible Assurance of (...) God is their Friend, but they are
^^fraid He is their Enemy. Job say^* Job 33.10. He counts me for His (...). God
was his Friend, and intend^^ him nothing but Friendship in all (...)
afflictions; but he thought otherw^^^ in his dark Temptations. All (...)
Attributes of God are Engaged for (...) Salvation of the true Believer; (...)
yet some of them in their dark (...) have concluded the contrary; (...) 77.3. I
remembered God, and was troubl^^ When he remembered the Mercy (...) God, he was
troubled; as fearing (...) did not belong unto him; but (...) Gods Mercy was
clean gone for (...) When he remembered the Power (...) God, he was troubled; as
fearing (...) Power was engaged against him. (...) he remembered the Justice of
God* (...) was troubled; as fearing that (...) would condemn him. It is true
^^^deed as to some of Gods Child^^^ they have a blessed Assurance of (...) Good
Estate, and of their future Eter^al Happiness. Christ said to His Disciples,
Rejoice that your Names are ^ritten in Heaven. There are some ^f the Children
of God, that by His Word and Spirit are assured that their Names are written in
Heaven; and ^^en no wonder if the thoughts of ^eath be exceeding Joyful unto
them, (...) that they know full well that when (...) they leave this world,
they shall ^e in Heaven. But it is not so with (...): Some who are Children of
Light, (...) walk in Darkness. Isa. 50.10. Ye ^^at ^ear the Lord, and walk in
Darkness, and see no Light. Some that fear the lord have not the light of His
Coun^^nance shining on them, and then ^hey may well be afraid of Death; the
^houghts of it may well be a frightful (...) unto them, when they know not that
will become of them after Death (...) all Eternity. But then,

4. There is one thing more that is to (...) of the Children of God a cause of
their being afraid of Death, and it is the ^^ddest cause that can be; they have
given way to Temptations, and have (...) Souls within them. Guilt (...) Fear.
When Adam had sinned, he (...) afraid and hid himself, and said (...) God, I
heard thy voice, and was afra^^* The Guilt of Sin makes men afraid (...) look
the Dreadful God in the (...)* A man that has the Guilt of Sin (...) his Soul,
is very unfit to Dye; or (...) draw near to God, as men do (...) they Dye: Heb.
10.22. Let us (...) near with a full assurance of (...) having our Hearts
sprinkled from an (...) Conscience. If there is an (...) Conscience, then there
is Fear: (...) such a one knows not how to (...) nigh to God. That may be the
(...) of a true Believer; he may fall (...) some great Sin, and then the
thoug^^ of Death must needs be terrible to hi^ until he has renewed his
Repentan^^ and Faith in the Blood of Christ. (...) it was with David in that
matter (...) Vriah the Hirtite; he was lamenta^^^ Estranged from God. If
Sickness (...) then come on him, and Death had a^^peared to him whilst he lay
(...) ^he guilt of those heinous sins, he must ^eeds have trembled at the sight
of it. Thus we see that Gods Children are ^^me of them afraid of Death. But,

2. As for Believers that walk with ^od, they have no just cause to fear Death.
and that is intended here in the Text, ^hen it is said, We are delivered from
(...) ^ear of Death. Not that Believers (...) all of them delivered from
fear^^g Death, but from having any just (...) to fear it. They ought not to
(...) it.

For,

1. Death cannot be in the least Hurtful (...) them* It is a Serpent that has
no (...) in it: 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death, ^here is thy Sting? O Grave, where is
(...) Victory? Death, have thou a Sting? ^here is it? Have thou a Victory?
Where is thy Victory? Thou have no Victory over us, but we over thee. Thanks be
to God, that gives us the ^^ctory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. jesus Christ
by His Death, has been ^he Death of Death; and He there^^re says, Hos. 13.14 I
will Ransom them from Death; (...) from the Gra^e: O Death, I will (...)
^lague; O Grave, I will be thy (...). Christ has by His Death (...) His
Children out of the (...) him that has the Power of (...) out of the hands of
the Devil, (...) he cannot lay a claim to them, he (...) ^ay a finger on them;
he would (...) fingering their Souls when (...) they are out of their Body, but
(...) shall. As the Destroying (...) might not touch any of the (...) of
Isr^el* when the blood of (...) Paschal Lamb was sprinkled on (...) Houses, so
they that have the (...) of Christ sprinkled on their Souls (...) ^^eserved in
Jesus Christ, even as (...) Children of Israel were preserved (...) the
Destroying Angel, Jude 1. (...) Christ has both by His Death and (...) Almighty
Power, rescued (...) of the J^ws of that (...) you may see a Type, (...)* There
was a Poor Lamb (...) the Paws of a Lion, (...) and delivered the (...)
destroyed the Lion. So that Lion that would devour the Children of God, Jesus
Christ has destroyed him and delivered His Lambs. Yea, Christ has saved them
from that which makes Death formidable, namely, the Second Death. He says of
the Believer, he shall not be hurt by the Second Death, Rev. 2.11. If he shall
not be hurt by the Second Death, then the First Death shall do him no hurt. The
Hell which follows Death makes it formidable, (as has been showed) but this
Believers are by Christ delivered from. The Jailer of Hell cannot carry any
thither, except he has leave from Christ to do it: For Christ has the Keys of
Hell and Death, and we may be sure that He who has the Power of th^se Keys,
will not give order for the Door of Hell to be opened for any Child of His to
be ^^rried into that Everlasting Prison. Christ has obtained the Favor of God
for them, and so delivered them from ^he Power of Satan: Romans 5.10. We (...)
Reconciled unto God by the Death of His Son. Christ has satisfied (...) Law for
them, therefore they cann^^ be Condemned. The Execution^ cannot take hold of
them, since the (...) is satisfied. The sting of Death is Si^ and the strength
of Sin is the La^* As for the Law, Christ has satisfi^^ it on the behalf of
those that belie^^ on Him: Therefore they are safe. (...) Law is not for the
Righteous: (...) Law cannot Condemn a Righteo^^ man: The Believer is Righteous,
b^^cause Christ's Obedience is imput^^ to him: Romans 8.1. There is no
Co^^demnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus. So then Death cannot (...)
them, why then should they fear it?

2. Death will be wonderfully (...) unto them: Phil. 1.21. For me to (...) is
Gain. Death of an Enemy is b^^come a Friend, yea a Good Friend (...) them. As
when Ahimaaz was (...) a messenger to David, it was said (...) him, 2 Samuel
18*27. He is a Good (...) and comes with Good Tidings. (...) so the Believer
may say concern^^^ Death, it is my Good friend, and (...) to me with Good
tidings! What do Believers gain by Death? They gain a perfect deliverance from
all Evil. Death puts an end to all their Sins, and to all their Sorrows. It Is
therefore said of such, Eccl. 7.1. A Good Name is better than Precious
Ointment, and the day of a man's Death, is better ^han the day of his Birth. If
he is one that has a Good Name, the Name of a Righteous man, of an Holy man,
and deserves that Name, then the day of his Death will be better than the day
of his Birth. The day of his Birth brought him into a sorrowful troublesome
World, but the day of his Death puts an end to all his troubles. Therefore
Believers are said to Rest when they Dye. The Righteous are taken away from the
Evil to come. They ^est in their Beds. Some of them have ^ad but little rest in
the world, but Death brings them a Writ of Ease. Then they fall asleep. They
that sleep in Jesus God will bring with Him. When Believers Dye they Sleep in
Jesus. Death delivers them not only from all their Afflictions, but which is
i^^finitely better, from all their Sins (...) Now they are freed from the Guilt
(...) Sin, and from the Power of Sin, and (...) the hour of Death from the
Being (...) Sin: Romans 6.7. He that is Dead (...) freed from Sin. This is a most
won^derful thing: For Sin brought Dea^^ into the world; but God makes Death to
put an end to Sin, as to those tha^ are His Children. After Death the^ shall
never be so much as one (...)* Thought in their Hearts to Eternit^* Thus are
they delivered from Si^* Why then should they be afraid t^ Dye? Why should not
Death be wel^come, that puts an end to all their Diseases both of Soul and Body?

And by Death they gain the great^est Good, as well as a deliverance from all
Evil. A Child of God gains Hea^ven by Dying. As the Children o^ Israel when
they passed over the R^^ver Jordan, that River was not to (...) a Flood to
drown them, but a passag^ into the Land of Canaan. So (...) is Death to a Child
of God a passag^ into the Heavenly Canaan: 2 Cor. 5.1. If our Earthly
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have an House not made with ^ands, Eternal in the
Heavens. And in Heaven they gain a blessed Perfection. The Scripture therefore
speaks of the ^pirits of Just men being made Perfect. The Souls in Heaven are
made Per^ect in Holiness. There is a perfect Conformity unto the Will of God in
Heaven; as in the Holy Angels, so in the Glorified Souls in Heaven which are
like the Angels. And they have ^ wonderful Perfection in Knowledge: ^ Cor. 13
9. Now we know but in part, ^ut when that which is Perfect is come, that which
is in part shall be done away. There is no more comparison be^ween the
Knowledge of the most ^earned man on Earth, and of a Saint (...) Heaven, than
there is between the ^nowledge of a Man and of a Child. An Eminent Divine
says, that the ^oul of an Infant when separated from ^he Body, has a far
greater Knowledge (...) ever Solomon had. A Perfection (...) Knowledge as well
as Holiness is desirable. If I may tell you my (...) thoughts, I sometimes
think with (...) self, that if any thing in the (...) would make me desire to
Live long^^ on the Earth it would be this, (...) by Reading and Meditation I
mig^^ gain more Knowledge, -- Especial^^ in the Mystery of CHRIST; but (...) I
consider, if Christ bring me to He^^ven, I shall know more in One Da^ than I
could gain by a Thousand (...) hard* Study in this World. The things show that
Death is Gainful. (...) Heaven Believers gain the sight (...) and a blessed
conversation with (...) Friends that are gone thither before them; their Godly
Parents, their Chi^^dren, and other dear Friends: Ye^ and with those that they
never knew* They shall sit down with Abraham* Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom
(...) God; and so with the Prophets an^ Holy Apostles. And which is in^^^nitely
better and more desirable, (...) they gain a sight of JESUS CHRIST in all His
Glory. They behold the (...) Christ Jesus at the Right Hand (...) God: They see
Him as He is; and they see in the Humane Nature of Christ, more of God than is
to be seen in all the Creation besides. In seeing of Jesus Christ they see God;
and then they gain the utmost of Blessedness that can be gained: Mat 5.8 (...)
are the Pure in Heart, for they shall see God. When they dye and leave this
world they shall see God, and that is Blessedness So then Gods Children have no
just cause to fear Death, which will be thus Exceeding Gainful to them.

USE.
Here is a Double EXHORTATION.

I. Unto those that have just cause to Fear Death. That indeed is the wo^ul
Case of all that are in a state of Sin, they have just cause to be afraid of
Death. Oh! (...), Do not rest in ^our present State. It is not a condition to
be rested in. If you were ^n Bondage unto Enemies as to your ^odies, certainly
you would not be at ^est without Deliverance. The Lords People speak sadly,
Neh. 9.37. (...) Kings whom because of our Sins thou (...) set over us, have
Dominion over our B^^dies, and we are in great Distress. (...) thou a Sinner
because of thy sin* Spiritual Enemies h^ve Dominion (...) thee, thou art in
Bondage to (...) of Terrors; in Bondage to (...) ^^^lor of Hell, who has the
Power (...) Death. Oh! Rest not in such a co^^dition. Remember there is but
(...) way to be delivered, and that is (...) going to Jesus Christ the Son of
Go^* Joh 8.36. If the Son does make you (...) shall be free indeed. Oh! then
(...) to Jesus Christ the Son of God, (...) you may be delivered from that
(...) ^ondage which at present you are (...)*

And Remember that there is D^^^^verance to be h^d for the poor (...) of Hell:
Isa. 49.24. Shall (...) ^awful Captive be delivered? Shall (...) ^rey be taken
out of the hand of the (...)? Yea, says the Lord, they shall ^elivered out of
the hand of the (...) one. The Devil is that (...) Christ has delive^^^ Poor
Undone Creatures out of the hand of that Enemy. The Souls that were a Prey to
him, Jesus Christ has set them at Liberty, if they will become His Servants.
But then you must be sensible of the Misery of the Bondage that you are in, so
as to Cry to Heaven for Deliverance. As the Children of Israel when in Egyptian
Bondage, they Sighed because of their Bondage, and Cried, and their Cry came up
to God. So thou a poor Creature, must be sensible of thy Bondage, (...) Slavery
to Sin and Death and Hell, and Cry to God and to Jesus Christ. Go to Him in a
way of Prayer and Faith.

II. As for the Children of God, the Exhortation to you is, Live above the Fear
of Death. It is true this Perfection is not attained by all Gods Children. Some
of them are too much afraid of Death, as has been showed; but they are more
afraid than hurt. And should therefore Chide themselves out of those Fears: As
one of the Ancients did, saying, Egredere anima egredere, quid times. O (...)
Soul, why art thou afraid to go out (...) my Body, go forth, and fear no^* And
many times when they come (...) Dye the fear of Death vanishes awa^* I remember
a Pious, Praying Hol^ Woman who Died many Years ag^* was sorely afraid of
Death, especial^^ of the pains and pangs of it that the^ would be terrible, and
she was Exe^^cised with fears concerning her ow^ future happiness, but when
Death came she hardly felt any pain, and (...) last words she spoke were these,
(...) has not seen, nor has it entered into (...) Heart of man to conceive the
things (...) God has prepared* And so she Dye^* Well then be not afraid, be not
(...) down with the fear of Death. An^ in Exhorting you to this, I do no^
Exhort you to a Perfection that is no^ attainable. There have been Servan^^ of
the Lord, who have been far from being afraid of Death. We have in^stances in
the Scripture of it. Aaron when God told him he should go (...) Mount Hor, and
Dye there, he were readily. And Moses when God bid ^im go up and Dye in Mount
(...), made no more of Dying, than ^ man does of going up into his Chamber to
fall Asleep. Good ^ld Simeon said, Now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace. He was very ^illing to Dye; was far from being a^^aid to Dye. And the
Holy Apostle ^aul was not afraid of Death; says (...), I desire to depart. So
in all (...) there have been those that have been far from being subject to
Bondage through the fear of Death. Some when Dying have said, Now is the (...)
^^me that I have long wished for. That Holy man Mr. Dod, when he was sick and
like to dye, the Physician told ^im the danger was over, he should ^^cover and
live longer, Ah! (said (...)) You think you comfort me, but (...) ^^ouble me. I
thought I had come to an ^aven of Rest, must I put back again to (...)? Some
poor weak Women who ^re naturally of a fearful Heart, yet (...) been above the
fear of Death. (...) Author relates concerning a Godly Woman, that when those
(...) were about her told her there (...) the symptoms of Death on her. (...)
you so? (said she) Am I Dying* Oh! Then Bless the Lord O my (...) all that is
within me Bless His (...) Name. Death is more welcome (...) we, than all the
Riches of this (...) would be. So then this Perfect^^^ (...) attainable. And
that we may (...) it*

1. We should familiarize Death (...) daily thoughts of it. We read in (...)
Gospel concerning Joseph of (...), that he had his Sepulcher (...) his Garden:
If he did but step i^ his Garden, he would be thinki^^ of Death, Ioh. 19.41.
That Exe^^plary Christian Mr. Ignatius Iorda^ if he did but step out on any
oc^^^sion into the City, would frequent^^ say, I am going into the Town (...)
some Business, whether I shall (...) into my House again alive I do (...) know.
How many occasions (...) we to think of Death? In my (...), they are strange
persons (...) go to Sleep at Night and not think of Death; that can put off
their Clothes, and not think of putting off the Earthly Tabernacle; that can
lie down on their Beds, and not think of lying down in the Grave. Now if we
Familiarize Death by frequent Meditations on it, that will help to take away
the fear of it.

2. Think much on JESUS CHRIST. Think much on the Death of Christ. Christ has
gone through the gates of Death; and shall we that are Christians be afraid to
follow Him? And He has taken away the sting of Death. Think much on the
Righteousness of Christ, and what He has purchased for us by His Obedience. An
Eminent Minister in London when Dying said; If I look on my best Works, my
Prayers, or the best Ser^ons that ever I Preached, I am troubled, and my spirit
is cast down within me; but when I look on Christ and His Righteousness I live,
I (...) not afraid of Death at all. I remem^er one of the Martyrs Expressed
himself to the same purpose. An^ then,

3. To Walk with GOD is the way (...) be above the Fear of Death. Tak^ heed of
giving way to Sin and Temptation, and bringing Guilt on your Souls. Great Peace
have they that keep His Law, and nothing shall O^^fend them. Be careful then to
kee^ even Reckoning with God ever^ Day. If we are careful to be alway^ serving
God; always doing tho^^ things that are Pleasing in His sigh^ then Death will
find us so doin^* Blessed is that Man whom Dea^^ when it comes shall find so
doing.

Meditations ON Sudden Death.
Occasioned by several Late Sudden Deaths in Boston, as well as in several
other Towns in New England
Mark XIII.xxxvi. ^est Coming Suddenly, He find you Sleeping.


IN the Five Last Verses of this Chapter, we hear the Lord Jesus Christ
Exciting and Exhorting His Disciples unto constant ^atchfulness; and this He
does three ^^mes over. It is a Duty of Univer^^l Concernment. Christ therefore
^ncludes His Discourse with saying, that I say to you, I say to all, Watch* Not
only you that are now present (...) hear me, but all others that may (...) of
it; let them Watch. The Moti^^ from whence this Exhortation is urge^ is,
because men are uncertain and ign^^rant of the time of the Lords Coming ver.
33. You know not when is the (...) therefore Watch and Pray. The Lord knows the
time, but you know it no^* This is Illustrated by a Parable, v. 3^* (...) a
Master of an House taking (...) ^ourney into a far Country, and a^^pointing to
Each of His Servants the^ several Employments; and comman^^ed the Porter to
Watch: To wat^^ that Thieves did not break into (...) House; to watch that none
of (...) Servants did desert their Masters Se^^^ice. Now for the meaning of
thi^ Christ is the Master of the House, (...) Church on Earth is His House:
H^^^ven is a far Country, into which (...) is gone, and will return. In the
(...) time, He expects that His Servants ^^^ligently attend the work He calls
(...) to; and that they should not (...) themselves in Sleep and Sloth. (...)
over again with the same Ex^^^tation, and with the same (...); ver. 35. You
know not when the ^^ster comes; whether at Evening, or (...) Midnight, or at
Cock-crowing, or in (...) Morning. These words have (...) unto the several
Watches in use* ^long the Jews. The first Watch (...) from the Sixth to the
Ninth (...), called the Evening Watch. The (...) Watch began at the Ninth hour,
(...) contined till Midnight. The (...) Watch began at Midnight, and ^^^tinued
Three hours longer, to the ^ock-crowing, v^z. the second time (...) the
Cock-crowing, who is observe^ (...) to Crow louder* and with more (...) than at
first. The fourth Watch (...) at the Sixth hour, when the (...)* which is here
called the (...) The Children of men know not (...) the Lord will call them out
of (...) world, whether in their Child^^^ Youth, Middle Age, or Old Age* (...)
is further required ^o (...), from Two very (...) Considerations.

1. In that the Lord may come Su^^denly; they know not how soon, ho^ suddenly.

2. If He should do so, there is da^^ger lest they be found Sleeping* which
would be very uncomfortable, sin^^ the Lord had Commanded them (...) Watch. For
a Watchman to (...) found Sleeping is a sad thing. (...) Christians are
appointed Watchmen therefore should be careful that the Lord may not find them
Sleeping at (...) Coming. There is a Threefold Coming (...) Christ intended
here. There is His P^^^vidential Coming, to take Vengeanc^ on the Jewish
Nation. And there is (...) Personal Coming to Judge the World* And His Coming
at the Hour of Death* At present our Discourse will be (...) with respect to
that Coming*

DOCTRINE. Considering that Death may co^^ upon Men Suddenly, they should (...)
Watchful and Careful lest the (...) then find them Sleeping.
Four Propositions will Clear the Doctrine.

PROPOSITION I.
That sometimes Death comes on men ^ery Suddenly. It has ever been so in ^ll
Ages of the world; therefore if ^f it be so in our Days, we need not wonder at
it: Numb. 6.9. If a man Dye very Suddenly. Implying that men (...) Dye so.
Death does often over^ake them when they no more think ^f it than the Fishes of
the Net, or the Bird of the Snare in which it is taken: Eccl. 9* 12. Man knows
not his time; but (...) the Fishes are taken in an Evil Net, and the Bird in
the Snare, so are the Sons ^f men Snared in all Evil time, when it ^alleth
Suddenly upon them. It is true, that Death does sometimes give warn^^g of its
approaches, by lingering ^^ckness, by bodily Pains, by decays ^^rough Age; but
it is not always so: (...). 21.13* They go down to the Grave (...) Moment. Ver.
23. One Dies in his (...) strength, being wholly at Ease. And ^^^etimes when
Sickness overtakes (...), it makes quick work of them: It uses to be so when
God visits a Peo^ple with the ^l^gue. As in Egy^^* Psalm. 78 50. God gave their
Lives (...) to the Pesti^ence; and then at mid^night they were struck Dead in a
Mo^ment. Thus in David's time, 2 Sa^* 24.15. It Is said, that from the morning
(...) the time a^p^^nted: which is supposed to intend the Evening Sacrifice*
the^ dyed by the Plague Seventy Tho^^sand Men, in (as some compute it) ^^bout
Twelve Hours time. Sometime^ yea oftentimes, men are subject (...) Death*
without any Sickness at (...)* Some accident not thought of puts (...) end to
their days. It may be an ^n^expected fall brings sudden Death o^ them. As it
was with Eli, he (...) from his Seat, and that fall killed him* Sometimes a
fall from an House e^^poseth to Sudden Death. God the^^^fore Commanded the
Children of I^^rael that when they built an Hou^^* Deuteronomy. 22.^. they should make
(...) on the Roof of it. Their (...) h^d Flat Roo^s; and the (...) would have
Battlements, that is Bre^^ work there, lest thou bring Blood upon thy House if
any fall from thence. The neglect of such a necessary provision to prevent it,
might make them guilty of their Neighbors Blood. Sometimes the fall of an
House brings sudden Death on those it falls upon. So it was with Job* Children,
a Tempest of Wind rose suddenly and blew down ^he House, and all Jobs Children
were killed in a Moment by the fall of that House upon them. And thus it was
with the Philistines when they were in Da^ons Temple, and very merry, ma^ing
themselves sport there, the House ^ell and Three Thousand that were (...) the
Roof, besides those that were ^n the House were all killed. Not (...) Years
since, when the Earth^^^kes were in Sicily, in one Town ^hree Hundred persons
with the Priest ^^ying Mass, were crushed to Death (...) the fall of the Church
upon them* and in another Town above a Thou^^nd men and women were killed
^hilest they were at Divine Service, (...) the Houses falling on them.
Sometimes Death siezes on men at the very (...) when they are Worshipping Go^*
It was so with Eutichus, when amo^^ the Lords People hearing a Serm^^ falling a
sleep he fell down from (...) high Loft and was taken up Dead. (...) Galileans,
Luk 13.1. when they (...) Worshipping God they were Kill^^ suddenly. Pilate sent
Soldiers (...) them that mingled their Blood (...) their Sacrifices. That is
supposed (...) be the reason of the quarrel betwe^^ (...) was on the Governor
of Judea, and Herod^* Galilee* yet he comes into Herod's J^^risdiction, and
kills the Galileans. Ho^ many have there been in the wor^^ Hundreds of
Thousands that have Dyed suddenly by the Sword? When there was a Civil War in
the (...) of Israel, between the Tribe of B^^^jamin and the other Tribes, in
(...) day fell by the Sword Twenty (...) Thousand men; in another day
Ei^^^^teen Thousand men: and after (...) on another day, of the Benjamites
(...) fell Dead Twenty Five Thousand (...)* And when there was W^r between
Iereboam and Abijah, in Ier^boams Ar^y there were Slain Five Hundred Thousand
Men. In David's time when ^bsolom Rebelled against the King his Father, 2 Samuel
18 7, 8* There fell Twenty Th^usand Men; and ^he Wood devoured more than the
lord. How did the Wood devour them? It Exposed them to Sudden Death. Possibly
the wild Beasts in the Woods si^zed on them, and suddenl^ destroyed them. As
indeed it was often so in the Land of Canaa^. ^ kn^w not whether there is any
Land in the world that the People in it are so s^^ject to Destructi^n by Wild
Creatures, as in that Land they were. Lev. 26.22 The Lord threatens them that
He would send Wild Beasts them, that should rob them of the^^ Chil^ren; and
that they should be ^ew in number. It was a frequent thing for Lions, Bears,
Le^pards suddenly to destroy People. We have an in^^ance in the Samaritans, 2
King. 17.^^ They fea^ed not the Lord, therefore the Lord sent Lions among them
that (...) them. And other ways men are often taken out of the World by Sudde^
Death. Sometimes by Drowning when they little think any such thing* So 'twas
with the Egyptians, Exodus 1^*13. The Egyptians whom you have (...) this day,
you shall see them again (...) more for ever: That is, alive no (...) for Ever.
They did see them (...) on the shore next morning. Thoug^ they are now alive
pursuing of yo^ (says Moses) before tomorrow the^ shall be all dead: and so
they were* Sometimes by Thunder and Lightni^^ men are killed Suddenly. Thus
(...) was with Jobs Servants: Job 1.^* The Fire of God Consumed them. (...) it
was with Two Companies of So^^diers that were sent to Apprehen^ the Prophet
Elijah; 2 King. 1.1^* There came Fire down from God (...) Consumed them. And in
Senacheri^ Army, One Hundred and Eighty (...) Thousand Dyed in one Night. (...)
Angel Slew them probably wit^ Lightning. It seems to be with (...) to that
awful Providence that those ^ords were written, Isa* 33 14. The Sinners in Sion
are (...). Who among (...) shall dwell with the (...) Fire? And sometimes by
Earthquakes men have dyed Suddenly: They have been well and in health, and in
l^ss than a quarter of an hour Dead. It was so ^ith the People of Sodom and
Gomor^^h, and with Corah and his Compa^y. Many such dismal instances there have
been not only in former Ages, but in our Days also.

Quest. But whence is it that God does sometimes take men out of the world very
Suddenly?

Answ. 1. God does sometimes send such awful Providence as signs of His Holy
Displeasure. Although it is not always so, nevertheless it is oftentimes so. And
therefore when Corah and his Company were suddenly Destroyed, Moses said to the
Children of Israel, that they might thereby understand that those men had
provoked the Lord, Numb. 16.30. And truly it is (...) with all that Dye
Unprepared* that Dye Suddenly before they are fit to d^e* it is from the
displeasure of God If Death take hold of them, they perish for Ever. Therefore
sudden Death is threatened in the Word of God on such Sinners; Psalm. 64.7.
Suddenly shall they be W^unde^* And, Prove. 29.1. He that being often Reproved,
hardens his Neck, shall Suddenly be Destroyed. Thus is Babylon threatened, Isa.
47.11. Desolation sha^^ come upon thee Suddenly. And if (...) Sudden death
shall find men commiting some great Sin against the Lord* we may conclude that
it comes as (...) sign of His Displeasure. As wit^ Nadab and Ab^hu; they
offered strang^ Fire to the Lord, and when they were doing that, Fire came from
the Lord and devoured them. A plain Evidence of their displeasing the Lord i^
what they did. Thus it was wit^ the Philistines; they were Worshipin^ an Idol,
and Blaspheming the God (...) Israel, and m^king themselves spor^ with Sampso^*
and now the House (...) and slew them suddenly. Thus Zu^^ri and Cozbi, a
Javelin Wounded them to Death when in the very act of Wickedness. Thus
Belshazzar, in the beginning of the Night was Carousing with his Companions;
and it is said, Dan. 5.30. In that Night was Belhazzar Slain. A sudden death came
on him as a sign of Gods displeasure for his Impiety. Thus it was with Ananias
and Sapphira, that dyed with a Lie in their mouths. Thus when any shall be so
desperately Wicked is to wish sudden destruction to themselves, if they have
done that which they know themselves Guilty of, and it shall happen to them
accordingly. There have been such awful Examples in the World. There was one in
this Land who had done Wrong to his Neighbor and being Charged ^ith it, he
denied it with Impre^^tion, he wished to God that he might never speak more if
he did that thing, and he fell down immediately and never spoke more. So then
such Sudden strokes are sometimes a sign of Gods displeasure.

2. Such Awful Strokes come (...) Warnings to others. The sudden dea^^ of a
few, is sometimes a Warning (...) a Whole Town, to a Whole Land* It was so in
Samaria; Amos 4.11. The Lord overthrew some of them, as (...) overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah: (...) is to say, very Suddenly: And (...) was a Warning to the
Whole Land* Thus it was with* Jerusalem: Luk* 1*4, 5. Think ye (says Christ)
(...) those Eighteen on whom the Tower (...) Siloam fell and ^lew them, were
Sinne^ above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem* I tell you, Nay; but except you
Repent, (...) shall all likewise Perish. The f^ll (...) that Tower was Ominous
of a sud^den downfall of their City and Nati^on; that the Tower of the City an^
Temple would fall e're long. Suc^ Providence are loud Calls to Repentance. If
God singles out one Not^ sinner and strikes him suddenly, it (...) a Warning to
all the like sinners* (...) beware of doing as such a sinner (...) done. If a
Notorious Drunkar^ dies suddenly, that is a Warning (...) all the Drunkards in
the Country: It Is an Admonition to all that hear of it to Repent, that they may
be prepared for death.

PROPOSITION II.
Not only other men, but the Faithful Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, may
(...) taken out of the world by a Sudden (...). Christ sp^ke th^se words ^o His
own Disciples: Therefore it is not impossible but that such may die suddenl^.
Eli was a Good Old man, and yet he dyed suddenly. Eutych^s was a Pious Young
man, yet he dyed sudd^nly. The Prophet Ezekiel^s Wife was no doubt an Holy
Woman, but dyed suddenly. And we should be very Uncharitable if we should (...)
concerning those Seventy Thousand that dyed of the Plague in David's time, that
there was no Good men among them.

Quest. Whence is it that the Lords Servants sometimes D^e Suddenly?

Answ. 1. It is possible that Godly men may be Guilty of such Si^s either as to
Commission of Evil, or as to an Omission of Duty, as may provoke the Lord (...)
visit them with Temporal Death, (...) that Suddenly too. It was so with
V^^^zah, doubtless he was a Pious man* yet when he did rashly lay his han^ on
the Ark he dyed suddenly. Go^ smote him for his Error, and in a mo^ment he dyed
before the Lord. (...) it was with the Prophet, 1 King. 1^*24 he did being
deceived by a L^in^ Prophet, Eat and Drink in the pla^^ of which the Lord did
say, Eat (...) Bread and Drink no Water the^^ and because of that, when on
(...) Road a Lion met him and slew hi^ And many of the Corinthians d^ed for
their undue and unprepared comin^ to the Table of the Lord. Moses (...) in
danger of being struck with sudde^ Death, because he neglected to Cir^cumcise
his Child, Exodus 4.24. The Prophet Jonah because he omitted (...) Duty in going
to Nineveh, had lik^ to have been Drowned; he was (...) Overboard, and had
been Drowne^ if the Lord had not by a Miracle (...) mercy preserved him.

2. Many times God out of Kindness and ^ingular Love to His Servants, takes
them away Suddenly. It was so with Moses; Deuteronomy. 32 50. Though an Old man, ^e was
not subject to decay with Age, ^is natural force was not abated; but ^e died
suddenly. A sudden Death (...) those that are well prepared for it, (...)
indeed rather a Mercy than a Judgment. Thereby the Servants of God ^re
delivered from things which are ^ery undesirable. Ling^ing Pains are not
desirable; a sudden Death pre^ents them. And the Temptations of Satan are
thereby prevented* When ^he Servants of God are Dying, their Adversary the
Devil will (if God give ^im leave) be sure to fall on them. ^ome have had
terrible Conflicts wi^h ^atan when on Sick-beds, and Death-^eds. Now by sudden
Death we ^scape this Evil. It is a sad thing for (...) man to see his Relations
weeping a^out him, because they see him goi^g from them. Paul said, Act 21 13.
What mean you to (...) to bre^k (...) Heart? By a sudden Death the Lord keeps
His Ser^^nts from (...) sensible of that Affliction. Some in (...) world have
put it into their Liturg^* From Sudden Death Good Lord deliver* But a Good man
need not make the Prayer. Some Eminent Servants (...) God have Prayed (with
submission (...) the Will of God) that they might (...) a Sudden, rather than a
(...) Death. So did Mr. Brightman, (...) Eminently Holy and Learned (...)* And
the Lord granted his desire. (...) as he was on a Journey in a Coach, because
he would lose no time, (...) a Book in his hand he was taken (...) a fainting
Fit and dyed. And Mr. C^^^pel, he that wrote that Excellent (...) about
Temptations, which I supp^^^ some of you may have some, (...) often say, as Mr.
Brightman did; (...) God gave him also his desire. (...) after he had Preached
that Day, (...) performed Duties in his Family in (...) Evening, he went to Bed
and (...) immediately. But we must leave (...) matter with God to Order the
(...) and manner of our Death, as shall (...) most for His Glory, and not in
(...) ^ast be troubled, but rather rejoice at ^he thoughts of dying suddenly,
if so ^^all be the Will of God.

3. God sometimes takes away His ^^rvants by Sudden Death, to prevent ^is
People from Praying for the conti^^ance of their Life. The Lord has a ^ery
great value for the Prayers of (...) People, and would not have them ^ressle
with Him for that He is re^olved not to grant. There are some ^ery useful
Servants of Christ in the ^orld, it may be the welfare of Thou^^^ds is
concerned in such a man's life: (...) then he is sick and like to dye, ma^y will
be very importunate with God for him. As when Peter was in ^rison, it is said,
Prayer was made (...) ceasing by the Church to God for him* (...) 12.5. So
there are, that if they (...) Gods Prisoners, kept within doors (...) Sickness,
Prayer will be made for (...) without ceasing, to prevent which (...) Lord
takes them away suddenly.

USE.
Sinners who delay their Repentance, (...) so their Preparation for Death
pretending (...) ^^eir Sin and (...)* Young People are very apt to do (...)*
But that then way is their Folly. P^^^paration for Death is a great (...) yet
(...) that ^an do (...) thing are conce^ned to do it. (...) that are too Young
to Dye, let (...) put on their Repentance. The (...) have a famous Story of a
Young (...) that came to a (...)* and Prayed (...) to instruct him in the Law
of Go^* Said the Rabbi to him, thou art Child* and too Young. Oh* ((...) the
Child) I was in the Burying (...) and ^here I ^aw Graves which are short^^ than
I am, although I am but Eight (...) Old; and therefore I don't know (...) may Dye
too; and if I dye before I (...) instructed in the Law of God, what do (...)
think will become of my Soul? (...) therefore whether they be Elder (...)
Younger Ones, should put off (...) Repentance, since they may Dye (...) that
Suddenly; and then what will (...) come of their immortal Souls (...) ever*
There are (...) set before Delaying Sinners, which if ^hey will show themselves
Men, if they ^ill act like Rational Creatures, the ^erious thought thereon,
will make them resolve to delay this matter which is of the greatest Moment no
^onger.

Consider 1. That for any to (...) that Repentance which is necessary (...)
order to being Prepared for Death, (...) a great Provocation to God. Delays
provoke the Lord Exceedingly. For they are against His Express Commandment, who
does require men not only ^o Repent, but to do it Now: Jer. 25.^* Turn you Now
from your Evil ways. Eccl. 12.1. Remember Now thy Creator. And who then is it
that says, not ^ow but hereafter? Another* time will do as well as now. God
says* Heb. ^.7. To Day if you will hear His Voice, ^arden not your Hearts. But
who is* (...) that says to you, Harden thy heart to ^ay; Tomorrow will be
soon enough (...) Repent? Certainly it is the (...) that does suggest such
things to (...) Sinners. Now then it must needs infinitely provoke God when
Sinner^ will hearken to the Devil, rather than to Him. The Language of thy
(...) is, That for the present the service o^ the Devil is better than the
service o^ God. What horrible Blasphemy would it be, if any man should speak
such word, as to say the service of the Devil is preferrable to the service
(...) God? And yet every Sinner that d^^layes his Repentance does Practicall^
say so.

Consider 2. The Advantage that ther^ is in a present Turning to God in Christ
and the Disadvantage of Delays. (...) it now and you are sure to find
acep^tance with God: 2 Cor. 6.2 Behold Now is the Accepted time; Behold, No^ is
the Day of Salvation. Now, No^* come to God; Now the first thing yo^ do, before
tomorrow* and you man be sure God will accept of you. (...) Young Persons
repent and turn to the Lord, in case they live to Old Ag^ they will have a
longer time to serv^ God in; and their reward will be the greater. If a man
serve God but (...) Year he shall be rewarded; but if he continue serving Him
many Years, what a Glorious reward shall he have! What a Blessed thing will it
be for a man to be able to say to God on his Deathbed, as Ohaniah said to the
Prophet, 1 King. 18 12. I have feared the lord from (...) Y^uth. But Delays
are very Disadvantageous: The longer you delay your Repentance, the more
diffi^ult will the work be. If ever God give you an Heart to return to Him, it
will grieve you Exceedingly to think you turned no sooner. Austin in his
Confessions bewails it bitterly, that he repented no sooner. Though he did turn
to God before he was Old, yet he had spent a great part of his Youth in Vanity;
which made him mourn and say, Alas! That I served God no sooner. And alas! How
many Sinners have by their Delayings got incurable habits of sin? Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may you that
are accustomed to do ev^l, learn to do well: Intimating it will be a very hard
work for those that continue long in sin, to repent and turn to God. We may say
of the Conversion of an Old sinner, as Christ concerning the Salvation of a
Rich man, Mat. 19.26. With men it is impossible; but with God all things are
possible. Moreover, Del^ying sinners give an Advantage to Satan. The Devil that
says now it is too soon, will hereafter say now (...) too late: He will say to
you* Do you think God will take my leavings. Therefore delay not an hour longer.

Consider 3. That Delays in this matter are very Dangerous. Dangerous lest
there be never any true Repentance: Dangerous because Death may come Suddenly,
and then Repentance will be too late. Repentance is necessary to Salvation:
Except you Repent you shall Perish* says Christ: But if a man don't Repent
before Death, he cannot Repent at all* Psalm. 115 17 The Dead cannot Praise
thee. As for their Bodies they cannot speak a word; and for the Soul to Pray
and Cry after Death, will signify nothing. The Lord will then say, You should
^ave Repented sooner, then it had ^een happy for you. (...) was Good Counsel
that one gave to his Scholar, To be sure to Repent One day before he Dyed. If
so, he must do it immediately; for he did not know but the ^ext day he might be
Dead.

Consider 4. That Delays have proved (...) Eternal Ruin of not a few. Many a
Soul has been Ruined; and Perished Eternally, and Delays have been the cause
of it. GOD says, Seek ye the Lord while He may be found. Aye, but the sinner
neglects God till finding time is past and gone; and then it is to no purpose:
Luke 13.24, 25. Many shall seek to enter in at the strait Gate, and shall not
be able. The reason (...), the Door is shut; and then they cannot enter in.
Sinners delay Repentance till the Door of Mercy is but, then they Cry as the
Foolish Virgins did, Lord! Lord! Let us go to Heaven. Nay, but all Cries are in
(...), because they delayed their Re^entance until the Day of Grace was past.
It is with Sinners often in thi^ respect, as with miserable Esau; he came for a
Blessing, and sought it carefully with tears but was rejected because he did
not come soon enough* Thus Sinners delay their turning to God until it is too
late; and afterward they seek in vain. So that many have been undone by
Delays* How many Young Men have though^ that they would Repent in Old Age
(...) While they were Young they would walk in the sight of their Eyes,
pleasing themselves with a vain hope of Repentance in Old Age. Ah, Poor
wretches! Death siezed on them in their Youth, and they are for ever Miserable.
And how many have thought with themselves, When we come to lie on Sick-beds,
then we will Repent, and Confess our sins and Forsake them. But alas, Sickbed
Repentance is seldom true: Psalm. 78*34. They sought the Lord when He slew them;
but their Hears were upright. Not One in an Hundred perhaps, of those that
have been Sick and like to Dye, and then have made Promises to God that they
would Repent and become New Creatures, have kept their Vows to the Lord. We may
thence conclude, that a Sickbed Repentance is seldom true. Besides, how do
thou know thou shall lie on a Sick bed? Death may come ^uddenly. How many in
this and in other Towns, have gone into Eternity when they little thought of
it? They have been taken away on a sudden, without any Sickness to give them
Warning of the approaches of Death. Many have been Drowned; and others snatched
out of the world by unexpected and awful Providence. Let none of us then be so
Foolish as to delay Preparations for a Dying ^our. Say not the Thief on the
Cross Repented at the Last hour: And why may not I? There is but one such
instance in all the Bible, and will thou presume on that? How do thou know
that the Thief on the ^ross enjoyed the means of Grace; (...) that he Repented
not at the first Call? Will thou then Presume o^ that Example, considering thou
(...) slighted so many Calls? How do thou know that thou shall have s^ long a
time to Repent in, as that Thie^ had? He had several Hours; but i^ may be thou
may not have one Hour, no not one Moment! Oh! the^ Delay not this matter any
longer* but Turn to the Lord, and prepa^^ for a Dying hour: And say with
D^^vid, Psalm. 119 60. I made have, (...) Delayed not to keep thy Commandments*

We proceed to

PROPOSITION III.
That Men are very subject to a Sinfu^ Sleeping. Therefore Christ here (...) so
Earnestly Caution His Disciples against it. He does no less than Three times
one after another call upon them, Watch! Watch! Watch! Intimating that men are
in danger o^ Unwatchfulness; of Sinful Sleeping* There are but Two sorts of men
in the world, and both of them are subject to this Evil. All men in the world
are either Sinners or Saints.

1. As for Sinners they are miserable ^^eepers: Romans 13.11. It is high time
(...) awake out of Sleep. Implying that (...) are in a deep Sleep: And
therefore the Apostle says, 1 These. ^.6. Let not us Sleep as do others. It
(...) with a Sinner as it is with a Sleeper (...) many respects. Men that are
(...) do not see, nor hear as those (...) are awake do. David came and (...)
away Readiness Spear, and neither ^aul nor any of his Servants saw it, because
they were all asleep; a deep (...) from the Lord was fallen upon (...): 1 Samuel
20.12. So it is with ^^nners, their Spiritual senses are (...): Romans 11.8. The
Lord has ^iven them the spirit of Slumb^r; they (...) Eyes and see not; Ears
and hear (...). A man that is asleep cease (...) work: So does the Sinner as
to ^orks of a Spiritual Nature; Tit. 1.^1. They are to every Good work (...).
They are no more able to do (...) Good work, than one that is asleep (...) able
to attend the work of his (...). Men that are asleep are very subject to vain
Imaginations; to vai^ and foolish Dreams. A poor man (...) his Sleep may dream
he is vastly rich* may dream of Golden Mountain^* Thus it is with Sinners, they
are poo^ and miserable, and yet dream tha^ they are rich: Rev. 3 17. Thou (...)
I am Rich* and stand in need of nothing when thou art Poor and Miserable. (...)
were in a Dream, and that (...) them think so Men that are Slumbrin^ and
Sleeping, many times are dis^pleased with those that disturb (...) awake them.
So it is with Sinners* Therefore Solomon says, Eccl 9.1^* If thou reprove a
Scorner he will (...) thee. Men that are asleep are won^derfully Secure: Tho`
it may be the^^ are in imminent danger, they (...) fearless of their danger. A
man tha^ is asleep may be in danger of being Drowned, and yet have no fear
con^cerning it. As Jonah, the Vessel tha^ he was in was in extreme danger (...)
being Foundred in a Storm, but Iona^ had no fear about it; he was asleep (...)
the side of the Ship until the Maste^ (...) the Vessel awoke him, saying, What
^eanest thou, O Sleeper? Arise, and call (...) thy God. Thus Sinners are in
^anger of being Drowned in the Sea (...) the Wrath of God, and yet are not
^ensible of it; because they are asleep. ^olomon compares Drunkards, Pr^v.
^^.34 to a man that lies asleep on (...) top of a Mast in the mid^t of the
(...). A man that is asleep, and that on ^he top of a Mast, what danger is he
(...)? One little Turn of the Vessel Drowns him for ever. Thus it is with
^^nners. One that is asleep, the House ^ay be on (...) round about him, and
(...) fearless and careless, and not apprehen^^^e of the danger because fast
^^leep. So it is with Sinners: The ^ire of Gods anger is burning round about
them, and they are not sensible ^f it: Isa 42 25. He ^et them on Fire (...)
about, yet they knew it not, it bu^n^d them, yet they laid it not to hear^.
They were asleep, that was the cause (...) it. There is a Sleeping that is
Deadly: So it with the Sinner, he is (...) asleep Ep^ ^ 14* Awake thou that
Sleep, and arise from the (...). A Sleeping Poison is Deadly. There (...)
some Poisons that will cause a man (...) Sleep himself to Death. Sin is (...)
Poison. It is compared to the Poy^son of Aspes, Romans 3.17. The (...) is called
Somnisera. It Is report^ concerning Cleopatra, Queen of (...) that to escape
falling into the (...) of Enemies, she set an Aspe to (...) Breast that the
Poison of it might make her Sleep to Death. Ther^ are some Sleeping Diseases
very dan^gerous: The Lethargy many times (...) so. It is a Sleeping Disease
(...) proves Deadly to them that are taken with it; there is no awaking the^*
Thus many Sinners are subject to (...) dangerous and deadly Lethargy of Sou^ It
may be said of them, as it is said of (...) Babylonians, Jer. 51.57. They shall
(...) a perpetual Sleep; they shall not awake.

2. It is also true that the Disciples (...) Christ may be too much subject
(...) Sinful Sleeping. For Christ here speak^ to His own Disciples, intimating
(...) they* may be so. As to Natural Sleeping, the Disciples of Christ as well
as others may sin in that respect. When they indulge themselves in Sleep more
than Nature calls for, they mis^end precious Time; they are then guilty of
Idleness. And when they in^^lge themselves in sleep, at a time when ^hey ought
to be awake: when they are ^^eeping when they should be Praying ^^at's sinful.
Yet so it was with the Disciples. Christ said, Watch and Pray: ^ut they fell
Asleep. So when men should be Hearing the Word of God, ^hen to be Sleeping is
surely a very ^^nful thing. Eutychus a Pious Young ^an was made an awful
Example for ^his. Much indeed might be said to excuse him; for that it was at
Night ^hen Paul was Preaching, and he Preach^^ a long Sermon, and continued
till Mid^^ght: Eutychus being in a window (...) asleep, and fell down and was
ta^en up Dead. It was a sad thing that Death should find him Sleeping at a
^ermon; Act. 20.9. But there is a ^piritual Slumbring and Sleeping which
Christians are subject unto. It is said concerning the Ten Virgins, Mat. 2^*5.
They all Slumbred and Slept. (...) only the Foolish Virgins, but the Wise
Virgins were subject to sinf^^ Slumbering. It is true, they are no^ subject to
such a total fatal Sleep (...) Unregenerate men are. Neverthel^^^ a sinful
Sleepiness may prevail (...) them in too great a degree. I (...) the Spouse,
but my Heart (...)* Thus it may be with a Child of God, ^e may Sleep though his
heart Wak^^ Good Men may be too Secure, (...) then they are Asleep. They (...)
Dream of that Earthly Happin^^^ which they never shall enjoy; and (...) Dream
discovers them to be asleep* Thus it was with the Two Sons (...) Zebed^^; they
Dreamed of sitting (...) at the Right hand* the other at (...) Lef^ hand of our
Lord in His King^dom. And the Disciples said to Christ* Will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to Israel? They Dreamed of (...) Earthly Kingdom*
notwithstand^^^ what Christ had said to the contr^^^* And Gods own People may
be (...) Ca^nally* confident. Peter was (...) (...) he said, Though all men deny
the^ (...) I will not. And not only he, bu^ (...) the Disciples said they would
d^e (...) than forsake Him. They were ^^leep, and that Carnal confidence was
(...) Evidence of it. Although True Be^^^vers on Christ cannot live in sin, ye^
^hey may fall into very scandalous sin^* and this by reason of their not being
(...) Watchful as they ought to be. (...) Ioah had been du^ly Watchful* he had
(...) been overcome with Wi^e* No^ (...) guilty of Incest. Nor David (...)
^dultery. Some Godly men have (...) subject to such Falls as ha^ caused (...)
to go halting all their days (...)* they have made (...) Ship^^acks of their
Reputation* their ^^eepiness and Unwatchfulness has (...) the cause of it.

PROPOSITION IV.
Christians should be Watchful, lest when ^eath comes, and the Lord comes they
(...) found Sleeping.

1. Above all things. Men should be ^atchful that Death do not find them (...)
in a st^te of Sin. For a man that is appointed to watch to fall asleep is a
very great Evil. If a Watchman Sleep he is Exposed unto shameful Punishment.
Jewish Writers tell us, That when the Levites were set to Watch about the
Temple, the chief Commander would sometimes come to see if any were asleep: If
he found one waking and watching, he would say, Peace be unto you* But if he
found any one Sleeping* he would strike him a terrible blow, and cause his
Garments to be taken from him and torn in pieces; which was looked upon as a
most Ignominious Punishment. This gives light to that Scripture, Rev. 16.15.
Blessed is he that Watches, and keeps his Garments, that the shame of his
Nakedness do not ap^ear. So then Christians should be careful that the Lord
when He comes find them not Sleeping in a state of Sin. Therefore they should
be Careful that they do not imagine themselves to be in a Good Estate when they
are not so. A man that Dreams he has that which he has not, is asleep An hungry
man Dreams he i^ eating, but when he awakes he finds himself hungry: A thirsty
man Dreams he is drinking, but when he awakes he finds himself thirsty. Thus
it is with many sinners, they Dream that they have the Bread of Life, and the
Water of Life; that they have an interest in Christ, and yet deceive
themselves. Now such (...) in Exceeding Danger of loosing their Souls
i^recoverably: For as Death leaves a man, so will Eternal Judgment find him.

2. Christians should be Careful that they be not found in any Sleepy frame.
For although a true Child of God cannot be found Sleeping in a state of Sin, yet
he may be found under such a Sleepy frame as will be very uncomfortable. To be
k^pt from a Sleepy frame, is the way to be preserved from Scandalous f^lls into
sin. If a Christian ^hro' Unwatchfulness should fall into some g^ievous sin,
and Death should come upon him suddenly, before he has renewed his Rep^nance
for that sin, ^ow sad would that be? If Death should find him with his spirit
miserably out of frame; if Death should find him indulging himself in some
Intemperancy, or drowned in the World and in Earthly Cares, how unwelcome would
it be! Therefore Christians should often think on the words of Christ, Luke
21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts (...) overcharged
with Surfeiting and Drunken^ness, and Cares of this Life, and so the Day come
upon you unawares. A Christian that keeps in a Wakeful frame, may bid Death
welcome at any time: For he is always ready for it. And if Death finds him not
only in an habitual but in an actual Readiness for the Lords coming, the
suddenness of his Death would be a sign of Gods favor to him. His Death would
be a kind of Translation. We think that Enoch and Elijah were sing^larly
favored of God (and so they were) because Translated without Sickness. When
the Servants of God are always on their Watch, if they D^e Suddenly, they are
in a sense Translated. Such a Death does very much Resemble a Translation.

USE I.
We may hence see, that Watchfulness is at all times necessary for Christians.
As long as the^ k^ow not but Death may come sudden^^, Watchfulness is (...) for
them. It is not only a Duty (...) on all Christian^, but on them (...) Times. A
man that (...) appointed to Watch, must never (...) the time appointed for his
(...). It is mentioned (...) of the Watchmen (...), ^sa. 56 10 They are (...)
S^umber. In a time of War, for a Watchman to Sleep is Death. A Commander
finding a (...) Sleeping, he run him through with his Sword, and said, Dead I
found (...)* and Dead I ^eave thee. And truly (...) always a time of War with
Christians: alw^^es they are Engaged (...) a Spiritual Warfare: Therefore ^ust
ever be Waking, never be Sleeping.

For,

1. They are in Danger by Spiritual Enemies. Satan their great Adversary is
always Wakeful and Watchful (...) surprise them, and therefore they (...) need
to be always awake; 1 Pet. 5*8. Be Vigilant, for your Adversary (...) Devil
goes about like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Yo^ have a watchful
Enemy, therefore (...) watchful. It is said of the Lion tha^ he seldom Sleeps:
that no Animal live^ with so little Sleep as he does. Bu^ to be sure, the Lion
of Hell never Sleeps at all. Christians then can^ fall asleep but he will be
upon the^ presently, and get them into his Cruel snare. They cannot Sleep, but
he will observe it, and fall upon them speedily. Watch that you enter not into
Temptation. And the World i^ an Enemy which Christians are always Endangered
by. As for the Men of the world, they watch the servants of God as the Wolf the
Sheep: Mat. 10.16. I send you as Sheep among Wolves. The Prophet Jeremiah
complains, that there were those that watched for his Halting. There are men in
the world (...) very wicked, as that they will do (...) they can to cause a
Professor of ^eligion to sin, that so they may have ^^mething to blemish him,
and his ^rofession. The Ungodly Samaritans ^ould fain have brought Nehemiah to
(...) an ill thing, that they might have (...) to Reproach him, Neh. 6.13. ^he
Things of the world also have (...) in them: Therefore be watch^^l: 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be (...), fall into a Snare. Many a man (...) lost his Soul for
ever by pursuing (...) World. How many Professors of ^eligion have lost their
Souls by (...) Drowned in the World; that has (...) out the Heart of Religion.
They (...) lost their Reli^^^n by being too ^uch affected and addicted to the
World. Was it not so with Demas? ^ Tim. 4.10. A Good man gave it a^ (...) Dying
advice to his Friends, (...) lest the World Ensnare you: I have (...) that my
Great Enemy. But then (...) worst Enemy of all is Sin A (...) worst Enemies are
within-doors; (...) are those of his own House, o^ his own Heart. The deceitful
I (...) that are there will betray him into (...) hands of Satan, if he be not
exceed^ing Watchful. Therefore says (...) Aposte, Heb* 3.12, 13. Take heed
(...) there be in you an Evil Heart of Vn^belief, in departing from the Living
God* and lest your Hearts be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin.

2. There are Duties which Christian^ must always attend, which makes
Watch^fulness to be always Necessary. T^ Watch* is to perform Duty. (...) men
become more remiss in Religiou^ Duties than sometimes they have been they are
Asleep. That great Duty of Prayer is that which Christians mus^ always
attend^* Luke 18.1. Christ ^aught that men should Pray always* And
Watchfulness is necessary in order to a due Performance of that Duty^: Ephesians.
6.18. Pray always with (...) Prayer, and Watch thereunto. (...) another
Apostle^ says, Watch unt^ Prayer. Christians should watch their own Hearts,
lest they be out of frame so as to unfit for Prayer. They should (...) after
Prayer, to see what ^^swers are given to their Prayers: (...) the Holy Prophet
Habakkuk, having ^ayed, said, I will stand on my Watch, (...) will Watch to see
what Answer He (...) say un^o me, Hab 2.^. And in ^earing the Word Christians
should Watch. When they hear Sermons ^^ey should Watch, lest the Fowls of (...)
Air come and devour the good Seed (...) the Word; and Watch against all
^anderings of Heart when they should (...) unto what God is speaking to (...).
And Watchfulness is necessary (...) order to a due Sanctification of ^he
Sabbath Day: Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy. That Remembering implies
Watching, that so ^ur Hearts may be in Sabbath-frames (...) the Sabbath Day. We
must then (...) very watchful over every word. (...) says, Thou shall not
speak thy (...) ^^rds on my Holy Day. Be watchful ^gain^t all worldly
Discourses, which ^^ho' not suitable on Gods Holy Day, (...) very proper on
other Days. (...) watch against worldly Thoughts on the Sabbath Day, that they
don't get into your Hearts. O^ce more, The Lords Supper is an Ordinance that
Christians must attend so long as they live, and it requires Watchfulness. The
Primitive Christians had their Vigiliae, their Watchings before they came to
the Lords Table. Many of them would sit up and Watch and Pray all the Night,
that they might have Communion with Christ at His Table.

3. There is no Condition that men can be in, but Watchfulness is Necessary. If
they be in an Afflicted state, they* should be Watchful; Eccl 7.14. In the Day
of Advers^^y C^nsider. That Consideration implies Watchfulness. Christians
should watch against all hard thoughts of God, as if He dealt too severely with
them. They should be watchful that so no Discontented word, or murmuring
Expression at the Providence of God proceed out of their mouths. When David
was in Affliction, he Prayed that God would set a Watch before his Mouth, and
(...) the Door of his Lips, that so he (...) not speak one word displeasing
(...) God, as men under great afflictions (...) in danger to do, Psalm. 141.3.
Some (...) Servants of God have done (...) and it is Recorded in Scripture for
(...) end, that we might be the more ^atchful. A Christian should think, such
Eminent Servants of the Lord (...) Job, Jeremiah, Jonah, when under (...)
affliction did utter words un^^coming them, what cause have I (...) have not
that measure of Grace (...) they had, to be Watchful lest I (...) and worse?
And in a time of ^^osperity Watchfulness is necessary. (...) then we are in
great danger of (...) Asleep in a Bed of Security. (...) been too much so with
Good (...) confesses that it was so with (...), Psalm. 30.6. In my Prosperity
(...) never be moved. In a time (...) if men are not Watchful, (...) will
forget God. When thou have (...) full of Good things, then beware (...) forget
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.12 (...) did so, when he (...) he forgot the God that formed
him. And when men prosper in the world, if they grow Rich and Great they are
apt to forget themselves too. Therefore does the Apostle say, Charge them that
are Rich, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
Riches. It is a great Folly in them that do so* For Death may come Suddenly,
and then what becomes of their Riches* Or some other sudden Turn may deprive
them of all. We have Scripture instances of it. Nebuchadnezz^^ was the Richest
man on Earth, and had the greatest Honors, and he was taken with them: This
(said he) i^ Great Babylon, that I have made for the Honor of my Majesty! He
no sooner spoke the word, but there came a Voice from Heaven saying, Thy (...)
departed from thee, Dan. 4.30. (...) a sudden downfall had Haman, from the
Pinnacle of the highest Honor, to an ignominious Death? And Histories abound
with such like instances. The Famous Great Bell^z^ri^^ (...) his Eyes put out,
and sat begging (...) the high way. Date obolum (...), Give Poor Bellizarius
one half-^enny. Among the Romans, a Great (...) in the Morning as he went to
(...) Temple the People Worshipped (...), this very man before Night was (...)
to the Goal, and made the Scorn (...) Contempt of all the Town. It is (...)
unspeakable Folly for men to be ^^fted up with Prosperity. But if they (...)
not Watchful they will be so.

USE II.
Men should be always in a Prepared^^^^ for Death. The Motive in the (...) is
enough, viz. That Death may (...) Suddenly. You know not how ^^ddenly,
therefore you ought to be ^ver prepared for it. There is a ^atural Disease,
viz. the Ephial^es, which we commonly call the (...), (from the Gothic word
(...) ^^^nifying a Spirit) by reason whereof ^any Persons have Dyed in their
(...). That very Apostolical man, (...) Thomas (...) did so* None of (...)
^now* but it may be (...) to be (...)* Suddenly out of the world. (...) has
been the Lot of as Good men (...) we are. Eminent Servants of Go^ have Dyed by
Sudden Death; yea, and many Eminent Ministers of Christ too. I knew an Eminent
Minister in London, when Death siezed on him, he had only time to speak these
words* I am going out of the world, God show Mercy to my Family, and to my
Congregation. I knew another Eminent Minister in the City of Exeter, who Dyed
in the Public Assembly, joining with the People of God in Sing^ing a Psalm; he
went to Heaven Singing. There was another that was t^ have Preached the next
day, but wa^ found Dead in his Chamber, with hi^ Spectacles in one hand, and
his Sermon Notes in the other. Another Eminent man was to have Preached on the
Lords Day, he spent the day before in Prayer with Fasting in hi^ Study, in the
Evening complained (...) found himself not well, and in (...) hours time he was
in Heaven. An^ we have seen such instances among o^^^selves, here in Boston?
That Emine^^ (...) of God, Mr. Norton was taken (...) Death as walking in his
House. ^r. Oxenbridge when Preaching a ^ecture-Sermon, was taken with the
(...), went home and never came (...) of his Doors any more. And E^^nent
Magistrates have Dyed Sud^^nly. Three Worthy Governors, ^r. Hains the
Governor in Connecti^^ Colony; Mr Eaton the Governor (...) New Haven Colony;
and Mr. Prince (...) Governor of Plymouth, all these ^yed Suddenly. Then none
of us are (...) but that it may be so with us. (...) we not then concerned to
be al^ayes ready? If Death come Sudden^^ and find us unprepared, how (...) will
it be? I remember a man (...) this place, who received a sudden* (...) by which
he Dyed in a few (...), his doleful Cry was, Unfit! (...)! Death has given me
short (...). Oh! I am not fit to Dye* Oh! ^^ink of it, and Labor to be always
(...) to Dye.

Consier 1. That this is a matter of (...) Greatest Importance that can be*
Nothing of greater Moment can b^ laid before you. If a man be no^ Prepared and
if Death snatch him away Suddenly, there is no help for him. As the Tree falls
so it lies; as Death finds him so must he be for ever. Eternity depends on a
good Preparation for a Dying hour: For at that Moment when a man dies when his
immortal Soul goes out of his Body, it Launcheth into Eternity. Think of that
you that often see Ships Launched: Think, E're long this Immortal Soul of mine
must Launch out into the Sea that has neither Banks nor Bottom! It must Launch
out into the infinite Ocean of Eternity. But then if Death find a man well
Prepared, Blessed is he that ever he was Born into the world; he shall go into
Everlasting Habitations of Glory. Death will minister to hi^ an Entrance into
the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But on the other
hand, If Death come Suddenly and find him Unprepared, then he goes into a (...)
(...) Eternity. Dives Dyed and was ^uried, and the next thing we hear of ^im
is, Being in Hell he Cried out, I am (...) a place of Torment! Then how
in^^nitely are poor Mortals concerned (...) Prepare for Death, that they may
^^cape a Second Death, and be ready (...) a Blessed Eternity. 'Twas well ^^oken
by one of the Ancients, who (...), Men should not be careful so ^uch as to the
time and manner of their Death, whether they Dye a Lingering (...) a Sudden
Death, whether a Natu^^^ or a Violent Death, as what will ^^come of them after
Death, where ^^eir immortal Souls shall be disposed (...) when they Dye, and
what shall be ^^eir Condition in another World to (...) Eternity.

Consider 2. That if a Sudden Death (...) find any of us Unprepared, we (...)
be very Inexcusable. The Provi^^nce of God leaves us inexcusable* (...) has
given us to see others taken (...) before our Eyes by Sudden (...)* How many
have we known (...) heard of? Many in former Years, and of late more than a few
have Dyed Suddenly. And we shall be inexcusable if not Prepared, because Go^
has given us Time to Prepare: (...) 2.21. I gave her space to Repent. (...) has
the Lord given to every Soul (...) us, a Time to Repent in: To (...) He has
given Ten Years; to other^ Twenty, to some Forty Years (...) to Prepare for
Death and Eternity* And as the Providence of God, (...) the Word of God will
leave us Inexcusable if Death find us Unprepared* For God in His Word has been
(...) us in mind of our Mortality, (...) of our being subject to Sudden Death*
God in His Word also has told (...) what we must do, that we may be Prepared,
and always ready for Death* Your Bibles tell you what you must do* They that
have Bibles in their Houses if Death find them Unprepared for it, will be
inexcusable. That (...) Death when ever it comes may (...) us Prepared for it,

1. Make sure that we be in Christ that Death find us in Him. Says the
^postle, That I may be found in Him* (...) means that at the hour of Death
(...) Judgment he might be found in ^^rist. Not having my own Righte^^sness,
but the Righteousness of Christ. that Delivers from the Second Death. ^^ove all
things make sure of it, that (...) we Dye, and our Souls appear ^^fore the
Dreadful Tribunal of the ^^orious God, we may have a Righ^^^usness to show that
will Justify us ^^fore that Tribunal. There is no ^^her Righteousness but that
of Christ's (...) will or that can Justify in the (...) of God. But if we are
found (...) Christ, Death will be a Blessed ^riend to us: Rev. 14.13. Blessed
(...) the Dead that Dye in the Lord. That ^our greatest Concernment, to make
(...) that we be in the Lord, that ^eath find us in the Lord, so shall we (...)
Blessed for Evermore.

2. That we may have not only an (...) Preparation for Death, which all (...)
Believers have, but an Actual Pre^^^ation; let us be always at work for (...).
A Christian must never be Idle. When some would have per^^^aded Calvin because
of his bodily Infirmities to have intermitted his Studying, and Reading and
Writing* What (said he) would you have the Lord find me Idle at His Coming? A
Christian should never be Idle; (...) always at work for God. You (...) say,
Is this P^ssible? Truly it is very Possible. When Christians are following
their Particular Civil Callings, let them have respect to the Will of God and
to His Commandment therein: Let them be Diligent in their Callings, not merely
to get a Livelihood (though that they should aim a^ too) but out of Obedience to
God* Think, God has Commanded me t^ be Diligent, therefore I will be so* If a
Sudden Death comes on such a man when he is about the work of his Cal^ing, it
finds him at work for God* Well then be always doing something for God. I
Conclude with that Scripture, Luk* 12.43* Bless^^ is that Servant, whom the
Lord at (...) Coming shall find so doing.

Meditations ON DEATH, And on the Heavenly-Countrey Which Believers go into at
the Hour of Death.
1 Chronicles. XXIX.xv. (...) we are Strangers before thee, and Sojourners, as were
all our Fathers: Our Days on the Earth are (...) Shadow, and there is none
abiding^.


IN this Chapter we have an account of a very Liberal Collection which David
and the Princes of Israel made toward the Building of the Temple, with David's
solemn Thanksgiving on that occasion. (...) the preceding Verse he shows that
there was great reason for that Liberality; in-as-much as all the Estate and
Riches Enjoyed by them, came from God: Of thine own (said he) we have given to
thee. Although David and (...) Princes gave many Thousands (...) Pounds for the
promoting of (...) work, yet they gave not one Penny, but what God had given to
them. (...) God gives to us all that we Enjoy, it is but reason that we should
make (...) return of some part of it to Him again. In this Verse there is
another reason mentioned why it was very meet for them thus to dispose of some
part of their Estate, viz. in that that they were Strangers and Sojourners on
the Earth, as (said he) all our Fathers were. Their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were Strangers even before Men in the Land of Canaan, which is called the
Land of their Pilgrimage wherein they were Strangers, Exodus 6.4. In their Days
it was possessed by other Inhabitan^^: But (says he) we are Strangers before
Thee. Notwithstanding the Chil^ren of Israel were then possessed of ^he Land of
Canaan, they were Stran^ers before God. As if he had said, ^he Land is not our
own, it is Gods (...); we are only Tenants, and ^enants at will, and must not
continue (...) here. And then he adds, that (...) were S^journers: They were
(...) and Travelers bound for ano^^er Country. Therefore he does ^^rther
Illustrate it, by saying their ^ayes were like a Shadow. A Shadow (...) no
abiding substance, but soon (...) away. Such is the ^ife of (...) on the Earth.
Therefore (says David) we cannot make a better use of our Estates than to give
Liberally ^^wards the Building of a Temple^ (...) God* who is able to Reward
us, (...) that Eternally, by giving us: an ^^heritance in the other World (...)
we are going and where we (...) for ever, after our short time o^ (...) is
finished.

DOCTRINE. The Servants of God are very sensible that they are Strangers and
Sojourners on the Earth, and that they have but a Little Time to be in this
world.
Three Propositions are Contained in the Doctrine.

PROPOSITION I.
That the Servants of God are Strangers and Sojourners on the Earth.

For,

1. Not the Earth, but Heaven is the Country they belong unto. And that indeed
is the difference between the Servants of God and other men in the world. All
other men are but Sojourners on the Earth; they are not at their long Home. But
they cannot say, that Heaven is their Country to which they do belong, and to
which they are going. But this is that which the Children of God may truly say.
Their Hearts are there, their Treasure is there, and all their Desires center
there* It Is said of the holy ^^tria^ks, Heb. 11.16. They sought a ^^tter
Country, that is an Heavenly one. and this is Evident from Several things.

1. In that Heaven is their Fathers ^ouse. Heaven is compared unto an ^ouse: We
have an House Eternal in (...) Heavens. And it is Gods House. christ said unto
the Disciples, Joh. 4.2. In my Fathers House there ^re many Mansions. He is
called, ^ur Heavenly Father. Heaven is ^is Dewlling Place. Now where (...) man's
Father dwells, that is the Country, that is the Home to which he does belong.
Ubi Pater (...) Patria. Thus it is as to the Children of God. If it should be
asked, whither they are going? The answer must be, the^ are going home, they
are ^oing to their Fathers House, to their ^wn Country. And if it be asked
^here is that? The answer must be, (...) is Heaven; they are going thither
^very day.

2. As for the Children of God they (...) Born from Heaven. And then they have
an High Birth indeed. The Greatest man in the world that is i^ an Unregenerate
Estate is not so High Born, as they are who are Heaven-Born. A Noble Roman that
was put to Death for his Christianity, when some pityed him because of his High
Birth, said, It is not the Blood of my Progenitors, but my Christianity that
makes me Noble. Gods Children are Born from above, Gal. 4.26. I^^rusalem which
is above, is the Mother of us all. In the City of Jerusalem there was the Lower
Jerusalem and the Upper Jerusalem, called the Jerusalem above, viz. Zion, and
that was a Figure of the Church of God, the Mother of all the Faithful* Psalm.
87.5. Of Zion it shall be said, This and that man, that is every man is Born
there. So of the Heavenly Zion, This and that man, every man that belongs to
God has been born there. The Natural Birth is on the Earth; but the New Birth
is from Heaven. Regenerating Grace does not spring out of the Earth, but comes
down from (...) (...). As it is said of that Grace of ^piritual Wisdom, Jam.
3.17. It (...) from above. Even so, all the (...) of Gods Holy Spirit which
^^ntribute to make the New man, (...) descend from above. And there^^re
Believers in going to Heaven, do (...) go to their Native Country ^hence they
are Born.

3. As for the Children of God the (...) part of their Spiritual Kindred (...)
in Heaven: That then and not the (...) is the Country they belong (...). Their
Father is there, Mat. 5.^. Your Father which is in Heaven. (...) their Elder
Brother is there. Our lord Jesus Christ is the Firstborn of (...) Brethren,
and He is ascended (...) Heaven. In Luke 19.12. We ^ave a Parable of a Noble
man that (...) into a far Country to receive (...) Kingdom. Our Lord Jesus
Christ (...) intended by that Noble Man; and ^eaven is the far Country:
Thither (...) He gone to receive a Kingdom. And (...) of our Brethren, that are
so in a ^^iritual sense are in Heaven. There is not any Godly man in the worl^
but has more Friends, more Spiritua^ Kindred in Heaven by far than he ha^ on
Earth. All the Righteous me^ that have Dyed since Abel (the (...) Righteous man
that Dyed) and un^^ this day, they are all in Heaven; an^ they are the Brethren
of Believe^^ here on the Earth. Yes, and the (...) Angels too who are the
Nation^ of Heaven, they look on Believers here on the Earth as their Younger
Brethren; being Guardians to them the^ are very tender of them. According^ly
when John was ready to fall down and worship the Angel, ('it is like (...)
thought it was not an Angel (...) Christ,) Rev. 19.10. he said, Do (...); I am
thy Fellow Servant, and of thy Brethren the Prophets. Believers (...) on Earth,
and the Angels in Heaven* have the same Father. God is the Father of Angels in
respect of Crea^tion and Similitude: And He is the Father of Believers in
respect of Regeneration and Adoption. The Scripture speaks of the whole* (...)
and on the Earth. It is the same (...) of God; only those in Hea^^n are in
(...) ^pper room* and those (...) Earth are ^^ill here below* So (...) the
greatest part of their Kin^^d ^s in Heaven: That then is their (...).

4. Their inheritance is in Heaven. The (...) they have a right unto is there.
^ Pet. 1.4* An inheritance reserved in ^eaven for you. Where a man's Inhe^^tance
is, that is his Country. Thus (...) is as to Gods Children, in Heaven (...)
their Inheritance: They have* an (...) there that can never be taken (...)
them; Heb* 10.34. You took the (...) of your Goods joyfully, knowing (...) in
Heaven you have a better and a (...) ^nd^ring Substance. Believers (...) an
Estate there that will endure, (...) will never fail. The Richest (...) in the
world has no Estate com^^rable to what the meanest Saint has (...) another
World. All the Riches and (...) of Solomon was nothing to what (...) intends
for His Children; Ephesians* ^ 18. The Riches of the Glory of His Inheritance. They
have a Treasur^ laid up there, Mat. 6 20. Lay up for your selves Treasure in
Heaven. There are but very few of them that have any considerable Treasure here
o^ Earth, but then a vast Treasure is laid up in Heaven for them: There indeed
is their All. Paulinus an Eminent Minister in the City of Nola* when His House
was bur^t, and all his Estate taken from him, he looked an^ pointed toward
Heaven, and said, Ther^ is my E^tate, there is my All.

5. Heaven is the place where they shall abta^ longest: Therefore that is their
Home, the Country which they belong to. A Sojourner does not abide so long in
the Country he passes through, as in his own Country* There is no Comparison
between our abode on the Earth, and in tha^ World whither we are going. God
Promised concerning His People o^ Old, 2 Samuel 7.10. That they should have a
Place of their Own, out of which they should not be removed. This is fulfilled
unto the Elect of God. ^eaven is a Place of their own: And ^is a Place out of
which they shall (...) be removed. As for their Earth^^ Habitations, they must
be remo^^d out of them never to come into ^^em any more: Job 7.10. He shall
^urn to his House no more; neither shall (...) Place know him any more* But as
(...) their House in Heaven, they shall (...) be removed out of that for
ever^here they are in Everlasting Habita^^^ns, Luk 16.9. When once the Chil^^en
of God are got home, when once (...) are housed in Heaven, there they ^^all be
to all Eternity. Therefore ^avid could say, Psalm. 23. ult. Good^ess and Mercy
shall follow me all my ^ayes, and I shall dwell in the House of (...) Lord for
Ever. Heaven is that ^ouse of the Lord in which His Chil^^en shall dwell for
ever. Thus we (...) that not Earth but Heaven is the (...) belonging unto the
Servants of (...); therefore they are said to be ^^^angers here. The Believer
may (...) this Earth Gershom, (as M^se^ did (...) Son) saying, I am a Stranger
in a Strange Land. But Heaven is their Country. It was well replied by one o^
the Ancients* who when he was threat^ned with Banishment for his Religion You
(said he to his Persecutors) can^not Banish me out of my own Country Not Earth
but Heaven is my Country and Banish me out of that if you can* You may hasten
me to my own Country but you can never turn me out of it.

2. As for Strangers and S^j^urners many times their Dignity and Worth (...)
not known. Sometimes a Prince do^^ Travel Incognito in Foreign Countrie^ and
then he is taken to be but a^ ordinary man. And thus it is wit^ Gods Children,
who are like Princ^ in a Disguise in this world: (...) world little knows,
little thinks tha^ they are persons of such Worth (...) Dignity as indeed they
are; Psalm. 4^ 16. Thou make thy Children to (...) Princes in all the Earth.
The Chi^^dren of Christ are Princes in the Eart^* A^e, but they are not known
to (...) such They are thought by the (...) not to be as indeed they are; as
oft^^ (...) is with Strangers and Sojourners* (...) thus it was with our Lord
JESUS CHRIST: He was as to His Humane nature of the Royal Family of Da^^d; and
Born unto a Crown and King^^m: Therefore the Wise men said, (...). 2.2. Where
is He that is Born (...) of the Jews? That they knew ^^deed by Divine
Revelation: but o^^ers did not know it. Christ was (...) King Messiah, whom God
had pro^^sed to send into the world to be (...) Savior of it: The world did
(...) take Him to be such an one; Joh. ^* 10. He was in the world, and the
^^rld knew Him not. And the Jews ^^emselves, although they did expect the ^^ming
of the Messiah at that very (...) that Christ came, yet they did (...) know
that our Lord Jesus was (...). He came to His own, and His (...) received Him
not. Nay, some of (...) own Relations, some that accord^^g to the Flesh were
near akin to (...), yet did not know that He was (...) King Messiah which they
did ex^^ct to come into the world. Therefore Christ says, Psalm. 69.8. I am a
Stranger to my Brethren, and an Alien to my Mothers Children. Had the world
known that He had been such an One as He truly was, they would never have dealt
by Him as they did* If they had known that He had been the Lord of Glory, they
would not have Crucified Him. Our Lord Jesus Christ with respect to His Person
is the Eternal Son of God, but there were very few that knew Him to be so,
while He was a Stranger and Sojourner on the Earth. The Jews when they saw Him
hanging on the Cross, mocked and derided at His being the Son of God, Mat.
27.40* He said He was the Son of God, Le^ Him come down from the Cross, and we
will believe Him. Thus did they mock Him. And thus it falls out with the
Children of God, they are Strangers in the world on this account, for that the
world knows not what they are* They are the Adopted Children of God, but the
world knows not that they are so. They are Persons of the greatest Worth and
Excellency of any ^^at live on the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. The (...) are the
Excellent in the Earth. (...) the world does not take them to (...) so, because
their worth is not that which appears outwardly to a Carnal (...). It is in the
Grace which they (...) adorned with. The Righteous is (...) Excellent than his
Neighbor. It (...) their Righteousness, their Holiness ^^at makes them more
Excellent; ^^at's invisible, a Carnal Eye cannot be^^ld it. The Kings Daughter
is all (...) within. Believers have an ^ternal Glory, known to the Lord. ^hey
have not (it may be) Out^^rd Ornaments to set them forth be^^re the world, but
they have that ^^nament which is of great Price in (...) sight of God; so are
they the Ex^^llent in the Earth. The most Wor^^y men that have been on this
Earth, (...) been no more regarded than ^^^grims in Beggars Clothes would
(...) been, Heb 11.38. They (...) about in Sheepskins* and (...). The poor
Servants of God (...) were fain to go in Leathern Clothes, it is said* the world
was not worthy of them. This evil world was not worthy that such men should
live long in it. The holy Prophets were the worthiest men that lived on the
Earth in their Days, and yet the world did despise them, and treat them very
unworthily. The world did revile them, and speak all manner of evil of them.
The holy Apostles were among the Worthiest of men in the world in their Days,
and yet they were not esteemed as such, but were treated as men of no worth; 1
Cor* 4.13. We are made the Filth of (...) world, and the Off-^^^ring of all
things* So then they were l^ke Strangers and Sojourners, whose Worth was no^
known.

3. Strangers, Pilgrims, Travelers use to be inquisitive concerning the way to
the place whither they are going, (...) they should mistake the right way* And
so it is with the Servants of God* they are inquisitive concerning the way to
Heaven: They ^re asking after that way with great (...) of Soul; Jer. 50.5.
They ask the way (...) Sion with their Faces thither-ward, ^eeping as they go.
Thus are the Children of God Enquiring the way to the Heavenly Sion, and that
with great ^are and mournful frames, lest they should mistake their way. They
do ^o sooner take one step in the way to ^eaven, but they are very inquisitive
about that matter. As we see in ^he Converted Jailer, Act. 16.30. He was no
sooner beginning to set himself in the way to Heaven, but he ^akes a very
solicitous Enquiry. What ^^all I do to be Saved? What must I do ^o get to
Heaven? That I might take ^he right way that will bring me thi^her? They know
that the way of ^he Commandment is the way to Heaven, and therefore are very
desirous that they might know that way, that (...) may be Revealed to them:
Thus David, Psalm. 119.19. I am a Stranger (...) the Earth, hide not thy
Commandments (...). As if he had said, Will thou (...) tell a Stranger the way?
Any (...) that has common Ingenuity in him if a Stranger ask the way, he will
tell him. I am a Stranger, and will thou not tell me the way to Heaven? Surely
thou will. Oh! hide not thy Commandmens from me* since that is the way. These
are the Desires of a Child of God. And when once they are set in the right way,
they are very solicitous that they may not go out of it again: As in ver. 10. O
let me not wander from thy Commandments. And if they have missed their way and
gone astray, then are they exceeding desirous (as Travelers are will not to be)
that they may be returned into their way again: Last ver. I have gone astray
like a Lost Sheep, seek thou me. He Prays that he might be sought out, and
set in the way in which he shoulds^ go.

4. They that are not only Strangers but Sojourners, do not abide long where
they are. And thus it is with the Servants of God* they abide not long where
they are: They are Sojourners, they are Traveling, there is none (...) ^iding
for them here: Mic. 2.18. (...) (...), depart ye; this is not your Rest. So
^ust it be said to the Lords Servants (...) the Earth, This is not your Rest.
(...) must depart from hence, and that ^eedily; and therefore their Life on
^^rth is said to be a Pilgrimage; Genesis ^.9. Jacob said, The Days of my
Pil^^^mage have been Few and Evil. The ^^fference between a Stranger and a
Sojour^^^ or Pilgrim is this; A Stranger may ^^ntinue longer in a place than a
So^^urner or Pilgrim. A Stranger one (...) another Nation, may settle in a ^and
that is not his Native Country. (...) is said to be a Stranger because (...)
Born in the Land. But a Sojour^er or Pilgrim, is one that stays but (...) a
while: It may be he Lodges (...) a Night, and is gone the next day. (...) an
one is a Way-faring-man, here (...) day, and gone tomorrow; Jer. 4.8. Why
should thou be as a Stranger, (...) a Way-faring-man, that turns in and (...)
for a Night? Thus it is with (...) Children here on the Earth, this ^orld is
only their Inn, not their (...). As we shall see further in the (...)
Proposition.

PROPOSITION. II.
That men have but a Little Time to be on the Earth. Here their Days are as a
Shadow, and there is non^ abiding; here they don't dwell, bu^ only sojourn. The
comparison of ^ Shadow is used to set forth the Electing condition of men in
this world. To the same purpose Solomon has (...) Eccl. 6.12. His Vain Life
which he spend^ as a Shadow. Yea, the Life of man is compared to a Declining
Shadow; Ps. 102.11. My Days are like a Shadow (...) Declineth. When a Shadow
begins t^ Decline, it grows less and less by degrees, and is quickly gone. Or,
a^ the Original word imports* a (...) that is Extended* that is in E^ening
Shadow. You observe* that when ti^ almost (...) then is the greates^ Shadow,
and that Extended Shadow does in a very little time ^^nish into Darkness. Truly
so it is as to the Life of man here in this world; it i^ a Shadow that soon
vanishes away* And the Life of man now is very shor^ compared with what once it
was. (...) ^n the Beginning or first Ages of the ^orld* lived much longer on
the Earth ^han they do now, or have done for these many Ages last past. Before
^he Flood some Lived Seven, Eight, ^ea Nine Hundred Years and more* The first
man that ever was made did ^bide on the Earth Nine Hundred and Thirty Years.
Methuselah lived Nine Hundred and Sixty Nine Years. But ^ithin Eight Hundred
Years after the Flood, the Age of man was wonder^ully Contracted. In Moses's
time, which was Eight Hundred Years after the Flood, and more than Three
Thousand Years ago, Psalm. 90.10. Our Days (said he) are Threescore Years and
^en; and if they do amount to Four-^core, they are Sorrow and Trouble. ^t is
very rare for men to live longer ^han that. Indeed, there have been ^f Later
Time some that have lived ^bove an Hundred Years. Several in ^ur own Nation,
have lived above an ^undred and Fifty Years. One that ^yed lately in an Island
belonging to ^cotland, is said to have lived an Hundred and Eighty Seven Years.
But such instances are exceeding rare Nay, where there is one that lives to
Seventy, there are many that attain no^ to that Age. But if a man should live
an Hundred Years and more, that is but a little while. Jacob when he was an
Hundred and Thirty Years old said, Genesis 47 9* Few have my Da^es been. The Truth
before us appears from several things.

1. The Duration of this world as to the (...) F^rm o^ it, will soon be at an
end: 1 Cor. 7.31. The ^ashion of this world (...) away. The Scripture often
speaks of a wonderful Change which this Visible world shall be subject unto;
Mat. 24.35. Heaven an^ Earth shall pass away: 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. The Heavens
shall pass away with a great (...); the Elements shall melt with Ferven^ Heat:
The Earth and the Works of it shall be bur^t up. All these things shall be
Diss^lved. It will be so, and within a little time too. Some Divines have
thought* (...) as the Earth is the place (...) men have Sinned, (...) that they
who Dye with their Sins ^npardoned, shall be Punished there: that the place of
their Sinning shall (...) the place of their Torment; and that therefore this
Earth shall be turn^d into Hell. And many Writers, ^ot only Christians Ancient
and Mo^ern, but the Jews also, have thought ^is present world should not last
above Six Thousand Years, as it was ^ade in Six Days; and if so, within ^ few
Generations it comes to an end. ^owever, it is but a few Days compared ^ith
Eternity. What is Six or Seven ^housand Years, compared with Eter^^ty? It is
but as so many Days, nay (...) a few Hours; Psalm. 90*4. A Thou^^nd Years is as
One Day in the sight of (...). Yea, as a Watch of the Night. ^ Watch of the
Night, it is but for ^^ree or Four Hours; a Thousand ^ears compared to Eternity
are but as (...): yea, less than that. David ^^erefore says concerning his own
(...), Psalm. 39.5. Thou have made mine (...) as Nothing. So may we say of (...)
Age of this present World, it is as nothing before the Eternal God.

2. The Experience of all Ages d^es Confirm the Truth before us. One Generation
goes, and another comes; but there is no man does live throughout all
Generations. How many have there been in the world that are dead and gone out
of it? Some have made their Conj^cture, that there have been besides those now
living* Twenty Thousand Millions of men in the world since the Creation. But of
all those Thousands of Millions, there is not one of them to be seen upon the
face of the Earth. And how many Millions are there now living? Some late
Writers have made their Conjectures about that also. The Learned V^ssius
supposes Two Hund^ed Millions* Another Three Hundred and Twenty Millions.
Another, that there are Nine Hundred and Sixty Millions o^ men in the world.
How many there are is known to God, and to no man; but be their Number more or
less they will all be gone in a very little time. Hence Io^ speaking of the
Grave says, Innumerable are gone before, and ^very man is following, Job
21.32. A Famous Emperor having a mighty Army* consisting of Seventeen Hun^red
Thousand Soldiers, he ascended (...) Hill to view them, and when he ^pok'd on
them he fell a weeping* because (said he) in less than an Hun^red Years every
one of ^^ese men ^ill be Dead. So that the Experi^nce of all Ages convinces men
that ^hey are but Sojourners on the Earthpunc; Yea, and Experience teaches us,
that Gods Servants are but Sojour^^rs here. ^hey as soon go out of the world as
^ther men; Psalm. 49.10 Wise men Dye as well as the Fool and Brutish person. Not
only Brutish persons, that live as ^f they had* no immortal Souls; that ^ive as
if there were no world bu^ this* ^ut Godly Wise men are subject by Death, to be
removed ou^ of this world as well as others: Your Fathers ^here are they? And
the Prophets* d^ ^hey Live for Ever? The Pro^^ets, the ^ervants of God do they
live ^or ever? No, on this Earth they are ^ojourners* and quickly remove. Men
can not possibly preserve either their own life, or of those that are dear unto
them, when once their appointed time is come. He cannot by any means Redeem his
Brother, that he should live for ever, and not see Corruption. A man has not
power in the day of Death, he cannot retain his Spirit; he cannot keep his
immortal Soul in his Body any longer when once Arrested by Death.

3. The Scriptures do abundantly Testify concerning the Brevity of Life.
Considering that common Experience may convince men, one would be apt to think
there should be no need of the Scriptures saying any thing about it* Aye, but
Sinners are exceeding apt to Dream of a long time in this world, especially if
they live at Hearts case* and have the world about them* Amos 6.3. They put far
away the Evi^ Day, and drink Wine in Bowls. The day of Death will be an Evil
day to Sinners that shall be found without an^ Interest in Christ: But they put
far ^way this Evil Day. As the Rich ^ool said, Soul be merry, thou have Goods
(...) up for many Years. I shall live a ^ong life and a merry, thought he! Now
because men are so apt to be ^^cure, and to build their Nests here, as ^ho'
they should never be removed out ^f this world, the Scripture therefor often
puts them in mind of their ^wn Frailty, and that they must soon (...) gone; 1
Cor. 7.29. This I say, ^rethren, the Time is short. The time ^f your being here
on Earth is but ^^ort. And thence the Time here is ^^ckoned by that of Days,
Psalm. 90.^2. Teach us to Number our Days. ^he longest liver in the world does
^ot live so long, but it is an easy mat^er to number all his Days; to tell ^ow
many Days his Life has been. ^he Scripture Illustrates this by Com^^risons.
Hence David says, Psalm. ^9 5. that his Days are but an Hands-^^eadth. My Life
(says he) is bu^ ^ Span long. The life of man is com^^red to a vanishing
Vapor: Jam. ^ 14. What is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away. Therefore men are compa^ed to Flowers,
yea, to the Flower of the Field, Psalm. 103*15* A Flower is soon nipt and
bl^sted an^ the Flowers in the Field are more exposed to blasting than the
Flowers in the Garden. The Life of man is said to Flee away, Job 14.1, 2. Man
that is Born of woman is of few Days, ^e comes forth as a Flower, and is cut
down* he flees also as a Shadow, and continues not. The Sojourners on the
Earth are posting, yea flying out of it; Job 9.25, 26. My Days (says he) are
swifter than a Post, or a Ship under Sail, or an Eagle hasting to the Prey. A
man that goes Post quickly comes to his Journey's end. Ships at Sea, if they
have a fair wind, and Sail Day and Night, quickly comes to the desired Haven.
But then a Bir^ ^^yes swifter than a Ship can Sail, or (...) Post can run or
ride; and the Eagl^ is the swiftest of all Birds, and whe^^ hastening to the
Prey flies more swiftly than ordinary. These Scripture ^imilitudes are used to
set forth the ^hortness of man's time on Earth. And Job has another Comparison,
Job 7.6. My Days (says he) are swifter than Weavers Shuttle. The Weavers
Shuttle ^^ies from one end of the Web to the ^ther in a moment of time* This is
spoken to show how men are hastening out of the world; that they are Soj^urners
on the Earth, that their Days ^re as a Shadow, and that there is none abiding.

PROPOSITION III.
The Servants of God are very Sen^^ble of this. They are sensible that (...) is
not their Home: That there ^s another Country, and indeed another World that
they are hastening unto* They Esteem Heaven and not (...) as their Country.
And therefore they do on all occasions make a ^ree open Confession of it. They
are ^ot (as they have no cause to be) ^shamed of their Country. It is said of
the Patriarks, that they Confessed they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth, Heb. 11*13. Abraham made that Confession before the Children of Het^,
Gen^ 23.4. And Jacob made that Confession before King Pharaoh and all his
Courtiers, Genesis 47 9 The Years of my Pilgrimage: I have not attained to the
Years of my Fathers in their Pilgrimage. I (says he) and my Fathers before me,
Abraham and Isaac were Pilgrims here on the Earth, confessing their being bound
for another Country. And David did often make this Confession: Not only in the
Scripture now under our Consideration; but in Psalm. 39 12. I am a Stranger and
a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were* And, Psalm. 119 64. Thy Statutes have been
my Song in the House of my Pilgrimage. He did not look on this world as his
Home, but only as the House of his Pilgrimage. And therefore the Servants of
God are very sensible that they have but a little Time to be in this world.
Thus Job, Job 16. ult. When a few Years are come, I shall go the way whence I
shall not return. And as Age comes upon them, the sense of this does and may
well increase in them. Therefore Old Bar^^llai said, 2 Samuel 19.34. How long
(...) I to Live? That is to say, I have (...) long to live: I have but a very
^^ttle Time more to be here in the ^orld The like we see in Isaac, Genesis ^^ 2. I
am Old, and know not the day of (...) Death. He did not know but that ^e might
Dye before another Day, (...) therefore would dispatch a matter (...) was of
great moment that very (...). It is true, that Isaac lived Forty Three Years
after that, nevertheless ^hen he considered his Old age, he (...) not expect to
have lived so long. and we find that David Prayed that (...) might have more of
the sense of (...) upon his own heart, Psalm. 39.4. Make me to know mine End,
and the ^easure of my Days, and how frail I am. (...) is Faith in the Servants
of God, that (...) them to have a sense hereof. (...) is said of Abraham, Heb.
11.9. That (...) Faith he Sojourned in the Land, as in (...) Strange Country.
It was his Faith (...) made him sensible of his being (...) a Sojourner in the
world as he was. Faith in Gods Children has ^ Threefold Good Effect upon them.

1. It makes them see the Reality an^ Excellency of things that are Invisible*
One has well observed that Earthly minded men are apt to believe nothing but
what they see with their Bodily Eyes, and that what is spoken concerning an
Invisible World, is (...) and not Reality. But to Faith Invis^ble things are as
real as those that are Visible* Heb. 11.1. Faith is (...) Substance of things
hoped for, and (...) Evidence of things not seen. Things belonging to the
Invisible world* things that are of an Heavenly Nature, and that are not seen
with Bodily Eyes, Faith gives a Substance to them: It makes them Real. The Eye
of Faith sees that which the Na^^ral Eye cannot see. Moses by Fait^ saw Him
that is Invisible. That Heavenly World which is the Country the Children of
God do b^long unto it cannot be seen by men here on the Earth. It is a far
Country, and the sight of a Mortal Eye cannot reach so (...); but then it is
seen with an Eye ^f Faith, so as that the Believer does ^o more doubt that
there is an Heaven, than that there is an Earth which (...) Eyes behold, and
his Feet tread upon every Day; Heb* 11.3. By Faith (...) understand that the
Worlds were ^amed. The Worlds in the Plural ^u^ber; not only the Terrestial
^orld, but the Caelestial Wo^ld that out of sight, by Faith we know (...) there
is such a World, and that is a Glorious World: Ephesians. 1*18. Ha^^ng your
Understandings Enlightened, (...) you may know the Riches of the (...), etc. It
is by Faith that the ^ind of the Believer is Enlightened to (...) the Riches of
the Glory of the ^eavenly World. Yea, that it is so ^lorious as is
inexpressible and uncon^^veable by mortal men; 1 Cor. 2.^* Eye has not seen,
Ear has not heard; (...) has it entered into the Heart of (...), the things
which God has prepared (...) them that Love Him. The world-minded man says,
it is good to be the Earth still; he would be always abiding here. But the
Believer says of Heaven, as Peter said of being in the Holy Mount, when he was
with Christ there, and with Glorified Saints, Mat 17*4 It is g^od to be he^e.
So says the B^li^ver concerning Heaven, It is (...) to be there. The Apostle
thought that to be with Christ is much be^ter tha^ to be in t^is World. And the
Psalm^^t said, O^e Day in t^y C^urts is better t^an a (...) el^e-w^ere. So
says (...) B^liever, his Faith makes him t^ (...) and say, One Day in Heav^n
is b^^ter th^n never so many here on E^rth.

2 ^aith make^ the Believer see and b^ sensible of the Va^it^ of al^ things
here below: That they (...); Psa^* 39 6. E^e^y man at hi^ best (...) is
altogether V^^ity; they walk in a vain (...): and they disquiet themselves i^
Va^n. Vain Vain! (Says the Psalmist) yea Vanity i^ self, and altogether so A^l
the Pomp of this world is but an Empty show. Faith will m^ke (...) thus t^
trample upon all (...) things as Vanity. (...) (...) the Church is re^r^sented,
Rev. ^.1* as having the (...) under her (...). There is a Vanity in all Earth^^
Enjoyments on a Double account: (...) in that they cannot Satisfy. (...) when
they set themselves to seek ^^ese things, what do they do? They (...) for that
which will not satisfy! ^he Believer is sensible of it* he says, cannot find
that here on Earth that know is in mine own Country: All ^^ings here below
they cannot satisfy ^y Soul: But by Faith I have seen (...) in Heaven which will
satisfy my (...). God is there, and Christ is ^ere; and with His likeness I
shall be ^^^isfied. And Faith will make a man (...) that these things are Vain,
because (...) are Transitory: They soon come (...) an End. They are like a
shadow* that they soon vanish and disappear, (...). 119.96. I have seen an End
of all ^^fection: But thy Commandment is (...) Broad* All Perfection, all the
^^ppiness that this world can afford* (...) soon come to an end. I have (...)
(says D^vi^) that the Pleasures, Riches, Honors of this world have no perfect
Happiness to be found in them* But the Commandment directs men in the way to
Heaven, that great Commandment, Believe on Jesus Christ the Son of God, sets
men into the only way to Heaven, where Perfect and Eternal Happiness is to be
Enjoyed.

3. Faith puts the Believer upon preparing for another and a better World. And
that is a sure sign that he is sensible that he is a Stranger here: If he had
not a sense of that, he would never prepare for another world so as he does: He
would never make it his business to prepare for Heaven, if he did dream of a
long abode here below. The Believer prepares for Heaven by Repenting of Sin,
and by forsaking those things which render men that indulge themselves in them,
altogether unfit for the Heavenly World: 1 Pet. 2.11. As Strangers and
P^^grims, abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which War against the Soul. You are
Strangers and Pilgrims (says the Apostle) ^oing to another Country, therefore
^ust abstain from those things that ^ould hinder you in your way. So ^oes the
Believer, he orders his Con^ersation as one that thinks of and ^^epares for
another world. They (...) not by Sight, but by Faith* 2 Cor. ^*7. They don't
see by Bodily Eyes that is in the other World, but by ^aith they see those
Glorious things, and therefore they Walk and order their Conversation
accordingly. The ^eliever is careful in some measure to ^^ve in Heaven, yea, to
be daily Con^ersing with Heaven while on Earth: ^hil. 3 20* Our Conversation is
in Heaven. If the Children of God had not ^ sense of their being Strangers and
^ojourers on Earth, their Conversa^ion would not be in Heaven.

USE I.
For INSTRUCTION and INFORMATION.

Instruct. I. This should teach us Con^^ntation, and to Moderate our ^ff^ctions
(...) to all Earthly Enjoyments: Heb. 13.^* Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be Content with such things as you have. The Consideration of
the Vanity of the things here below, and that we are to be here bu^ a little
time, should make us Conten^ if we have not much of this world. A Traveller if
he has but enough to bea^ his Charges till ^e come home, that satisfies him.
The Children of God are in a Journey to their own Country, and if they have
but enough to support them until they come to their Journey's end, they should
rest satisfied: And Food and Raiment is Enough. If they have that they ought to
be Content. So says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.8 If we have Food and Raiment, let
us therewith be Content. For we can carry nothing away with us. (...) a man
have never so much of this world, he cannot carry one Penny, one Farthing with
him into the other World. And if he could, it wou^d be ^f no use to him there.
As a Martyr said, I am going to a Country where Money bears no Mastery: To
Heaven where Gold and Silver signifies nothing. Are you the Children of God?
Then what if you have but a little of this world, be not Discontented; ^ou will
have Riches enough when ^ou get home to your own Country. There you will enjoy
no less Riches ^han that of a Kingdom* Jam 2.5. God has Chosen this Poor of the
world, ^ich in Faith, Heirs of a Kingdom. Then (...) you have but little here
below, what matters it; when you have a King^om reserved for you in the
Coun^rey whither you are going. It was (...) to the Sons of Jacob, Regard not
^our Stuff, for the good of all the Land of ^gypt is yours, Genesis 45 20. So may
it ^e said to Believers, regard not much ^he things of this world, (which are
^ut poor Stuff) be willing to leave them behind you; for all the Good of Heaven
is yours. And if you abound (...) Earthly Blessings, be moderate in ^our
Affections toward them: Psalm. ^2.10. If Riches increase, set not your ^eart
upon them. Remember you are ^ravellers! When Travelers pass through a
Country, and see this and that desirable thing, they set not their Hearts on
them: (Especially if they have better in their own Country;) Because going
away from them. So are m^n in this world going away from all their delightful
Enjoyments. On the other hand; (...) the Lords Servants meet with great Sorrow,
they should moderate their Affections, because they are Sojourners and have no
abiding here. Their Sorrows will all be over in a little time; Job 14.1. Man is
of few Days and full of Trouble. This is some alleviation of the trouble* that
the days are b^t few. It may be there is a^ heavy Cross imposed on them; well
but they have but a little way to carr^ it. They will soon be at their
Jour^ney's end; and the consideration o^ that should moderate their Griefs and
keep them from Fainting: 2 Co^ 4.16, 17. We faint not. Why? Ou^ Light
Affliction is but for a Momen^ and that makes it light. This is the Use that
the Apostle makes of men being but a little time here in the ^orld, 1 Cor. 7
29. The Time is short: Therefore they that Possess should be ^s though they
Possessed not; and Re^oyce, and Weep as though they Rejoiced ^ot, and Wept not.
If you abound (...) says he) with Outward Comforts, (...) moderate your
Affections; the ^ime of your Enjoying them is short: And if you meet with great
Afflictions, moderate your Sorrows; the time of ^our bearing them is short.

Instruct. II. Hence they all whose Hap^iness is in Earthly Enjoyments are
Mi^^rable men. They whose Names are written on the Earth, and whose Portion is
in things here below are Miserable men indeed; Psalm. 17.14. The men of the
world, whose Portion is in this Life. They whose Portion is in this life,
suppose them to have never so great a Portion, if that be all, they are very
miserable. As indeed for the most part it is so, that they who have much of
this world given to them, that is their Portion; that is all the Good they must
ever enjoy* therefore miserable are they. Christ says of Ungodly Rich men, Woe
to them, for they have received their Consolation, Luke 6.24 All the Comfort,
all the Happiness that ever they are like to see, they have received it. It is
all in the vain things of this world; then they must needs be miserable: For
these things can never make the possess^r of them to be truly Happy. For a man
may have them, and yet lose his Soul* and so be Eternally Miserable. Wha^ if he
should gain never so much when God takes away his Soul, what good will these
things do him? Christ says, If a man should gain the whole World, and lose his
Soul, what is he profited? A Religious man did once advise a very Rich man, to
remember those words of Christ, and to meditate on them every Day, though it were
but for a^ Quarter of an Hour. Nay, these things will add to a man's misery, if
he Dies in his Sins at the last; he will be the more miserable, because of the
Earthly Felicity that once he had. As it was said to Dives, Remember in thy
Lifetime thou had thy Good things. That Remembrance made him the ^ore
miserable. There are some those Riches is Unrighteous Mammon: And if they have
got their abundance ^y any way of Unrighteousness, by ^ying, Oppression,
Cheating, Gaming, ^r by any such Ungodly Practices, the ^emembrance of it in
Hell will sting them, and aggravate their misery. ^r if they have abused their
Power ^o Oppress the Poor, or their Riches ^o nourish Pride and Voluptuousness,
^hese Gifts of God will be brought as Witnesses against them, to aggravate
their Codemnation at the Last Day. ^ow terribly does the Apostle Thun^er
against Ungodly Rich men? He ^ids them weep and howl because of ^he misery
coming on them* in that ^hey had defrauded the Poor, kept from the Labourer his
hire, and that Cried in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts against them, that they
had laid ^p a great deal of Gold and Silver* and that the Rust of that would
witness against them; and that they had lived ^ pleasure and been wanton, he
tells then* they are like Bruit beasts, fat^e^ for the Day of Slaughter, Iam*
5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Instruct. III. Here we see the Sin and F^l^y of those that demean themsel^es
a^ though they were not Sojourners on the Earth* As though they should continue in
this world for ever: As indeed that is the inward wish and desi^^ of the most
of men. They cannot say as Job did, Job 7.16. I would not live always. If God
should say to them, You shall have your Choice, either to live for ever on this
Earth, or to be with Me in Heaven, the greatest part of the Children of men
would choose to be here always, rather than to go to the Heavenly world. They
are not like the Holy Patriarks, that though they lived in one of the best Lands
in the world, yet they Desired the Heavenly Country* Heb. 11.16. And if we may
judge of the inward Thoughts of men by their actions* we must then Conclude,
that they think they are not Sojourners on Earth, but tha^ they shall abide
here for ever: Psalm. 49 11.13. Their inward thought is, that their Dwell^^gs
shall continue to all Generations: ^his their way is their Folly, yet their
^bsterity after them approve of it. therefore we see that men make very ^^eat
Provision for this world; and it ^ay be little or none at all for ano^^er
World. This their way is their Folly. If a man that is a Tenant (...) another,
and his Lease almost out, should now go to Building, would ^ot the world wonder
at his Folly? ^o is the Case here; Men are Tenants (...) will, the world they
live in is none (...) their own: Yea, and their Lease is ^^most out; What then
need they ^ake such ado to get so much of this ^orld? Man, the Lease of thy
Life is ^^most out; why then do thou set (...) Heart on the World as if thou
(...) to be here for ever?

Instruct. IV. If men are to be but a (...) while in this World, if they are
but ^ojourners here, then they ought to be ^ery ca^^ful not to mispend their
little ^ime, but to improve it well. If a man ^as a Commodity of great Worth
and Value, and but a little of it, he will be careful not to squander it away.
Verily Time is such a Commodity: Time is more precious than Gold* If a man had
all the Gold on Earth, (...) could not purchase one Day, one Hour of Time with
(...) all. And men have but a little of this Precious Commodity: Then had they
not need to beware that they squander none of it away. It is a sad thing to
hear some men speak as if Time lay on their hands. They will say, we went into
such an House, or into such Company to Pass away the Time. Alas for you! Go to
pass away the Time* The Time will pass away fast enough whether you will or no.
Time is going and flying when men are doing nothing: Time is going when men are
sleeping: Time is going, and will soon be at an End. Men should be careful so
to improve their Time, as to be able to give account of it to that God who gave
it them; 1 Pet. 1.17. God will Judge men according to their works, without
respect of Persons, Pass the time of ^ur Sojourning here in Fear. You are ^o
Sojourn here but a little while; therefore pass your Time so as you ^ay be able
to give a good account ^o God the Judge of all. Think often with thy self, Why
did God send ^e into the world? And why has He ^ontinued me therein? Has not
the lord allowed me so much time that I ^ight Repent of Sin, and be prepared
(...) another World before it is too (...)? The Lord said of Iezabel* Rev.
^*21. I gave her space to Repent, and (...) Repented not. God has given thee
space for that End, that so thou ^ayest Repent before Death puts an (...) to
thy Time. And Time is given (...) that so they may Serve and Glo^^fy God, and
do good to men while ^ere on Earth: Which after their ^ime is ended they cannot
do as now (...) may; Isa. 38.19 They that go ^wn to the Pit cannot Praise thee;
but (...) Living, the Living shall Praise thee. (...) a man has a great work on
his hands (...) but a few Hours in a short winters Day to dispatch that work
in, it makes him bestir himself. You have but a short winters Day to be here on
Earth, and that Day is far spent. Then are you not concerned to improve your
Time with all possible diligence? Therefore remember those words of Christ, Joh
9.4. I must work while it is Day, for the Night comes in which no man can work.
The Day of Life will soon be gone, and the Night of Death will soon be here.
Therefore improve your Time with utmost Care and Diligence. Remember also those
words of Christ, in Joh. 12 35. Walk while you have the Light, yet a little
while and you have the Light; therefore walk lest Darkness come on you. The
Light of Life is but for a little while, and the Darkness of Death will come.
You will be in the Dark Grave quickly: You will be in the Land of Darkness,
where the Light it self is Darkness. If a man live an Hundred Years, yet let
him Remember the Days of Darkness, for they are many. Yea, let him so remember
them ^s to improve his Time, in preparing ^or, and making sure of a better
World. And the rather because a man's time may Suddenly be brought to a Period,
^e knows not how soon. When the Morning comes, he knows not but that before
Night his Time may be ^rought to an End. Have we not ^ately seen awful
Instances of it, in ^oth Old and Young? A man knows ^ot when he comes to hear a
Sermon, ^ut that he may be Dead before the ^ermon is Ended Very lately in a
Town not far off, one came on the Lords Day well into the Meeting House, and
was carried out Dead. He was an Aged man. But let Young Men Hear the Word of
the Lord. They are apt to think, We have time before us, there is no fear that
we shall Dye. Nay, but thou may Dye before many Old enough to be ^hy
Grandfather. Have you not seen ^t? Was there not Two Days since, ^n this
Neighborhood a Young Man who went well to Bed, and was found Dead in the
Morning* This Providence is a Sermon to Young Persons, calling them to Redeem
their Time, to make sure of an Interest in Christ, and so Prepare for Death.
Oh! that God would awaken Young People among us, and make them wise to consider
their latter End, and to consider that their Time may be at an end before they
are aware; it may be before another Week, or another Day.

Instruct. V. If men have but a little Time to be here in the world, then they
should be thinking of that World where they must abide for Ever. They should be
thinking of going Home: Here is not their Home. No man is not at the Home where
he must dwell Everlastingly, while he is in this world. Every man in the world
is going home, and to a Long Home; Eccl. 12.5. Man goes to his Long Home. The
Grave is a long home. Some have been Lodged there this Five Thousand Years and
more. And then the Invisible World which men are going into, is an infinitely
longer Home than the Grave. They must rise out of the Grave; but they are going
to a World where they must continue to Eternity. All men are going to their
Long Everlasting Home; though not to ^he same Home: For they are not all going in
the same way. Some are going in a narrow clean Way; others in a broad and foul
Way. Some are going up hill, they that are going to Heaven do so. But they that
are going to Hell, are going down hill: Like the Gada^ene Swine when the Devil
was in them, they went down a ^teep place and perished. So they that go on in
their Sins, are going down ^ill they perish in the Deep. Nevertheless, all are
going to another world, to an Eternal World; to a World that is not seen and is
Eternal. It must needs be so, because the Souls of men are Immortal, and
therefore must ^bide for Ever in some world or other. They have Never Dying
Souls, and because their Souls are Immortal they must be for ever either in a
Happy, or in a Woeful Wo^l^. As ^or men that are in a state of Sin, and Dye in
that Estate, when once their Souls are out of the Prison of their Bodies, what
Prison are they in? It is said of the Souls of men who were Drowned and Damned
Thousands of Years ago, that they are in Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19 The Sinners who
lived in the Old world before the Flood, their Spirits are in Prison, they are
in a Dungeon. When wicked men dye, their Immortal Spirits go into a dismal and
an Eternal Dungeon; Jude 13. ver. For them is reserved the Blackness of
Darkness for ever. How long must they be in that dark dismal World? It is said
of Hell, There the Worm dies not, there the Fire never shall be quenched. As
for the Servants of God when they Dye, they go to a blessed World, they go to
Heaven: there is our House, there is our Home where we must be to all Eternity;
2 Cor. 5.1. We have an House Eternal in the Heavens. If Death find us believing
in Christ, and serving God, we shall go to a City which has Foundations. All
the Cities on the Earth shall perish, but the Heavenly Jerusalem is a City,
that shall abide for ever. Therefore should the Children of God be often
thinking of it. As the Prophet said to the Lords People, Jer. 51.50. Let
Jerusalem come into your minds. So should the Heavenly Jerusalem come into our
minds. Heaven! Heaven! Heaven! should come into our minds every Day, and often
in a Day.

USE II. For EXHORTATION.
Let the Servants of God make not the Earth but Heaven to be their Home.

Consider 1. How undesirable a world this is. This World is not Paradise now,
but a Prison rather to the Children of God. It Is a Vain World: Vain because
Unprofitable. What profit has a man of all his Labor under the Sun? What
profit when he has Labored for the Wind? A great Emperor who had passed
through many Offices, and at last obtained the whole Roman Empire, the
mightiest that ever was, after all made this Protestation before the world,
Omnia fui sed rihil profuit; I have been all things, but it profited me nothing
at all. Could a man grasp the whole World into his hands, it would not yield
satisfaction to his Soul. They say of Alexander the Great, that he wept because
there was but one world for him to enlarge his Conquests in. The Eye is not
satisfied with seeing. Some have Expressed it too argutely when they have said,
A round World will never fill a triangular Heart. But it is a serious Truth,
that all the things of this world cannot satisfy the vast desires of an
immortal Soul, but it will be wishing for something better than the best
Earthly Enjoyments, or than them all. Solomon was as Competent a judge of what
this world could afford as any man that ever lived in it. And the account which
he gives of it, yea, the Sum Total is that in Eccl. 1.2. All is Vanity. Not
only Vain, but Vanity it self. So that if a man could possess all the things
that are in the world, they are Nothing, for he possesses Vanity. 'Twas the
Expression of a Famous man, If all the World were to (...) Sold, it is not
worth a man's opening ^is Mouth to say, I will not buy it. And shall we make
this world then to be ^ur Home, when it is all Vanity? And ^ot only so, but
Vexation of spirit too, (...) Solomon there says. There is great Vexation
oftentimes in Obtaining the things of this world. Alas! Many ^et the world by
wounding their own ^onsciences, and that proves Vexation ^o them. And there is
great vexati^^ keeping the world. The Rich man's ^bundance will not suffer him to
sleep. (...) is reported that Cyrus made a poor ^an vastly Rich, who found such
^exation about the keeping and the ^isposal of his Riches, as that he gave ^he
greatest part of them away, and those rather to have only a moderate ^tate that
so he might Enjoy him^^lf, and live with greater Contenta^^on. There is great
Vexation in the ^oosing the world. If a man has been ^ich, and becomes Poor, he
is more ^iserable than if he had never had ^uch Riches: So that they are vanity
and vexation. But which is infinitely worse, this world is full of Sin; and
that has made it like Hell. The terrible Judgment of God for the Sins of men,
has suffered Satan to be the Prince of this world. He is not so by the Grace of
God, but by the Wrath of God. The Devils are the Rulers of the Darkness of this
world. And shall Gods Children make such a dark World their Home?

Consider 2. H^w Desi^able a Place that World is which Believers are going
unto. Certainly when Christians are loath to leave this world, they do not
meditate on Heaven so much as they should do, where there is nothing but what
is good, and every thing that is good. Are Riches desirable* In Heaven and
there only, are the true Riches to be found; Prove. 8.18. Durable Riches.
Earthly Riches are not Durable; but Heavenly Riches are a Substance that will
endure to Eternity. There are Glorious Riches to be found in Heaven For JESUS
CHRIST is there, who is an Inestimable and Inexhaustible Treasure. Does not the
^cripture speak of the Unsearchable ^iches of Christ? In Heaven the Infi^itely
Glorious GOD is to be Enjoyed* (...) Him we have an infinite Treasure. ^ea* all
Good at once to satiate our ^ouls: He is the Portion of His Children, and a
greater Portion cannot be* David says, God is my Portion for ever. When
^braham refused the Riches of ^he King of Sodom, God said to him, Genesis 15.1. I
am thy Exceeding Great Reward: Thou shall have Riches e^ough in me. Now if we
would make Heaven and not Earth our Home.

1. We should be willing to go Home. Should not a Traveller be willing to go
home? Why then should no^ Gods Children who are Strangers and Sojourners in the
Earth, be willing to go to their own Country, when ever ^t shall please the
Lord, this Year rather than the next Year if God will have it so. Such an Heart
was in Old Jacob, Genesis 46*30. N^w let me Dye, since I have seen thy Face. It
becomes a Child of God to speak after that manner, since by Faith I have seen
Christ, now let me Dye: As good Old Simeon also, when he had seen the Lords
Christ, said, Luke 2.29. Now let me depart in Peace. So the Believer that has
by Faith an interest in Christ, it becomes him to say, Now Lord let me depart
so soon as ever it shall please thee. It Exposes our ^eligion to the Censure
of the world, when we are loath to change Earth for Heaven. The Turks say that
Christians do not believe themselves when they talk of the Glory of Heaven: If
they did (say they) why are Christians generally so unwilling to Dye and go to
Heaven? Jacob said to Laban, Send me away that I may go my own Place, and to my
own Country, Genesis 30.25. And Laban said to him, Thou would needs be gone,
because thou sore longest after thy Fathers House, Genesis 31.36. So should the
Children of God desire to be gone to their own Country, and long after their
Fathers House.

2. If we would make not Earth but Heaven our Home, then let us get as much as
possibly we can of that which we shall carry to Heaven with us. Travelers
can^t carry Houses and Lands into their own Country with them, but if they can
meet with Jewels they will carry them with them. There are Jewels to be had*
that we shall carry to Heaven with us, if we can make our selves the owners of
them. Grace in the Soul is a Jewel. The Grace of Saving Knowledge is a Jewel;
that will go to Heaven with us. This is Life Eternal, to know Thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The Grace of Love is a Jewel*
that will go to Heaven with us. Charity abides, it never fails. The Grace of
Joy in the Holy Ghost, will go to Heaven with us. For there is fullness of Joy,
and Pleas^res for evermore. Then Labor after much of those Graces, much of
those Jewels that will go with us out of this into the Eternal World.

3. We should abound in those things (...) which we shall have a Reward in
(...)* The more Good we do on Earth* (...) more Glory shall we have when (...)
come to Heaven. Therefore sh^^ld we do all the Good we can, in all the way^s we
are capable of doing Good, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead which Dye in the
Lord, they rest from their Labor, and their Works follow them. Their Good
Works follow them. Deeds of Charity to the Lords Poor will follow them to the
Heavenly World. Christ said to a Rich man, Give to the Poor, and follow me, and
thou shall have Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 19*21. And for Works of Piety, which
have a tendency to promote the Glory of God, His Faithful Servants shall have a
Reward in Heaven. Therefore David in the Context before us, did Contribute so
Liberally to uphold the Worship of God: Shortly (says he) I shall be gone out
of this world, and then I can do nothing toward building an House for the
Lord, and therefore I have done it now. And he was (...) should be Rewarded in
(...)* Our Religious Duties and (...), our Secret Prayers will (...) in Heaven.
Pray to your Father (...) Secret, and your Father that sees (...) Secret will
Reward you Openly. He ^ill Reward you before all the Angels in Heaven, and all
the Saints that ^re there That will be an Open Re^ard indeed* So then we should
a^ound in Works of this Nature, and ^n Every Good Work. I Conclude with that
Scripture, 1. Cor. 15. last* ^e you always abounding in the Work ^f the Lord,
for as much as you know that your Labor shall not be in (...) the Lord.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
(...)* l. 19. for some r. seen. p. 128. (...) r. Mic. 2.10. p. ^53. l. 15* r.
Condemnation. p. 160. l. 16* dele not.

THE Contents.
MEDITATIONS on the Believers being Delivered from (...) of Death.
Text. Heb. 2.15. Page ^ (...). That the Children of God are delivered from
that Bondage which through the Fear of Death Christless Sinners are subject
unto. page 3 Prop. 1. That Death is to Nature a formidable Evil. page* 4 For, 1.
A Cruel Enemy has by the Righteous Judgment of God the Power of Death. page 5
What is meant thereby. page 7, 8. 2. Death is a sign of the Anger of God. page
^* 3. It dissolves the Union betwee^ the Soul and Body. page ^^ 4. The Soul
goes then into the immediate presence of God. page 14 5. At the Hour of Death
men en^er into Eternity. page 16 Prop. 2. Christless Sinners have just cause to
be afraid of Death. page 17 For, 1. They are in Bondage to him that has the
power of Death. page 20 2. Death will deprive the Christless sinner of all that
is good and desirable. page 22 They have cause to fear death in respect of that
which will follow death. page 24 Prop. 3. The fear of Death causes Bondage:
And this in several Respects. page 29, 30, 32. Prop. 4. That some true
Believers are afraid of death. page 33* The reasons of it. page 34, 36, 38, 39
That they have no just cause to fear Death. page 41.44 Use. A double
Exhortation. 1. To those that have just cause to fear death. Rest not in your
present condition* page 49. 2. To Believers. Live above the fear of Death. page
51 How may we attain to this. page 54, 55, 56.
MEDITATIONS on Sudden Death, Occasioned by Diverse late Sudden Deaths in
B^st^n, and in several other Towns in New England.
Text. Mark 13.36. page 57 DOCT. That considering Death may come upon men
Suddenly, they should be watchful and careful lest the Lord then find them
Sleeping. page 60 Prop* 1. That sometimes Death comes on men very Suddenly.
page 61 The Reason of it. page 67, 70 Prop. 2. The Faithful Servants of the
Lord Jesus Christ may be taken out of the World by a Sudden death. page 71 Use.
Sinners who delay their Repentance, and so their Preparation for death
pretending that they will do it hereafter, are to be convinced of their Sin and
Folly. p 75 This is urged with four weighty Considerations. page 77, 78, 80, 81
Prop. 3. That men are very subject to a sinful Sleeping. page* 84 Vnregenerates
are in a dead sleep, p. 85 The Disciples of Christ are too much subject to a
sinful Sleeping, page, 88 Use 1. Watchfulness is at all times necessary for
Christians. p 95, 98, 100 Use 2. Men should be always in a preparedness for
death. Em^^ent Servants of Christ, Ministers in special ^a^e been taken out of
the World by Sudden deaths. page 103, 104 Awakening Considerations and
Directions. page 105, 107, 108, 109
MEDITATIONS on the Brevity of man's Life on Earth, also Meditations on the
Heavenly Country which Believers go into at the Hour of Death.
Text. 1 Chronicles. 29.15. page 111 DOCT. The Servants of God are very sensible
that they are Strangers and S^^^ourners on the Earth, and that they have but a
Little time to be in this world. Prop. 1, That the Servants of God are
Strangers and Sojourners on the Earth, In what respects they are so, page 114,
115, 117, 119, 120, 122, 126, 128 Prop 2, That men have but a little time to be
on the Earth, page 130 Proved, page, 132, 134, 136 Prop, 3, That the Servants of
God are very sensible of this, page, 139 It is Faith that makes them sensible of
it, page, 142, 144, 146 Use I, Instruct. ^ This should teach u^ Conte^tati^n,
and to moderate our affections as to all Earthly Enjoyments, p^g* 14^ Instruct.
2, Hence they all whose Ha^^piness is in Earthly Enjoyments are (...)* page* 151
(...) We see the Sin and ^olly of those who (...) themselves as if they were to
live here (...)* page, 154 Instruct, 4, Me^ (...) very careful not to mispend
their ^hort Time, but to improve it well, page, 15^ Instruct, 5, We should be
(...) of that World where we must abide for ever* page, 160 Use II Exhortation:
Let the Servant of God make not the Earth but Heav^^ their Home, page, 163 Some
Considerations to Enforce the with directi^ns i^ order t^ereunto, page, ib^^ and
166, 167, 168, 169

