WINTROPI Justa.

A SERMON AT THE Funeral Of the HONORABLE John Winthrop Esquire. Late GOVERNOR of
the Colony of CONNECTICVT, in NEW ENGLAND; Who Died, at BOSTON, No^ 27. 1707
and was Honorably there Interred on December. 4. Ensuing; In the 69th Year of
his Age.

Quantula Vita hominum est? Morimur dum Vivimus, Eh^^. (...) sapis Exemplo,
Vive De^ et Patriae A Distich made by a Person of Quality, when he lay a Dying

Boston, in N. E. Printed and Sold by Timothy Green. 1708.

TO THE READER.
SOME Eminent Protestant Divines, as Nigh, and Sherwood, have Expressed some
Dislike for Funeral Sermons; And thus, the Famous Cartwright, supposing them to
come in the room of Trentals. In some Reformed Churches, as those of Holland,
there have been Decrees of Councils against them; And the Ecclesiastical
Discipline of the French Churches did Prohibit them. But their Design was
rather to Restrain the Abuse, than to Condemn the Use of them. They were
commonly filled with Immoderate and Untrue Praises of the Dead; and Polydore
Virgil pretends to give us the Original of such Orations. The Renowned
Hildersham therefore Ordered, That there should be no Funeral Sermon for him.
So did the Pious and Humble Mr. Carter of Bramford; Left (said he) something be
said in my Praise, beyond what is the Truth, and so I should occasion a
Minister in his Pulpit, to speak an Untruth, which would be a grievous Sin. His
Executors observed his Will: But this hindered not Mr. Samuel Ward (the Glory of
Ipswich,) from Employing his next Lecture in Lamentations for the Loss, which
the Church of God, sustained in the Death of a Person of such Eminence and
Usefulness. The Death of Men that have been Public Blessings, ought Publicly
to be taken notice of. The Elegy which David made upon Saul and Jonathan, was a
Funeral Sermon.

My Relation to the Author, forbids me to Recommend the Funeral Sermon, which
is here Published. The Design of it, is, more to Instruct the Living, than to
Embalm the Dead. The Reader will find no Encomiums here, but what all know to
be True. The Grandfather of the Gentleman, here spoken of, was the First
Governor, that New England saw at the Head of the Massachuset-Colony. Nor was
there ever any Governor, a Greater Blessing to the Colony. Winthrop and Cotton
(between whom there was the Greatest Intimacy,) were the Chief Instruments in
the Hand of CHRIST, for Laying the Foundations, both of our Civil, and our
Ecclesiastical Constitution. His Honorable Father never will be forgotten by
the Colony of Connecticut: It was by his Means, that their (...) was (...) for
them. His Name and (...) was known in other Lands, as well as throughout
New England. I had the Happiness and Honor of a special Acquaintance with him;
to which there was added this agreeable Circumstance, That I was the only
Person in New England, who had part of my Education in the same University,
where he had his many Years before; namely, The College of Dublin.

It must be always Acknowledged, That this SON of that Excellent Person, did
Patrissare, in respect of his Public Spirit, and Sedulous and Successful
Endeavors, to obtain a Confirmation of those Privileges for his Country,
which his Father had obtained for them. And there was this Addition to his
Honorable Character; (which ought to be every man's Ambition,) That his Last
Days were his Best Days.

This much I was willing on this Occasion, (...) Declare and Testify.

Increase Mather.

Mortality CONSIDERED. At the FUNERAL Of the Honorable John Winthrop Esquire
^^n. V. xi. -- And he Died.


THIS is the End of all Men; And, Oh! that the Living may lay it unto his Heart!

Ecclesiastical History mentions a Person of Quality, who came into a Religious
Assembly; a Place which it seems, he had not been much used unto; where the
Minister happened then to be Reading, The Fifth Chapter of Genesis. -- In the
Reading, he observed the Clause, -- And he Died, Eight or Nine times Repeted in
i^ And he Died! The Clause affected him, amazed him: This then, thinks he, will
be said of All Men; It will be said of me too And he Died! God Sanctified the
Though (...); It never left him, until it had made a Serious Christian of him.
The Repetition of it is this Day to be carried on* God grant, that it may be
with a Good and Great Effect upon this very Numerous Auditory!

We have before as, The (...) of the Antediluvian World* Probably (...)
preserved in the Upper Story of the Ark, such Writings and Records, as might
furnish that admirable Historian Moses, with Materials for this Ancient History.

It was a curious Meditation of the Blessed Austin; That there are Two
Societies, among the Children of Men; There are the Children of Cain, and there
are the Children of Seth. In the Antediluvian Chronicles, the Cainites and the
Sethites, give us a Type of what is carrying on to the End of the World. Among
the Cainites, you find, They Built Cities; they proposed fixed, settled,
lasting Habitations upon Earth. About the Biggest part of them, you find
Nothing spoken at all; They did Nothing worthy to be spoken of. Yet, you find
Arts Cultivated among them; Some of them are Notable Artists, and Learned men;
and by their Learning they obtain a Name for themselves. The Great Light of
Africa, carries on his Remarks; and from the Women mentioned among the
Cainites, he reflects, Terrenam Civitatem Carnales habituram Generationes. But
now, among the Sethites, it seems, as if they lived more like Pilgrims and
Strangers on the Earth. We read of no Cities among them. They look for the
Heavenly City; the place that Enoch went unto. All their Hopes, all their Joys,
are upon what is in the Heavens reserved for them. Among the Arabian Writers,
you will find surprising Traditions, That they maintained a most intimate
Communion with the Angels of GOD. But I must not impose Quotations from
Elmaecinus and Patricides, upon the present Auditory.

Well; Since these Two Setts, Two Sorts, Two Societies, are continued in the
world unto this Day under their different Characters; My Hearers, make a wise
Choice for your selves; Choose with whom you will Associate your selves. Choose
the People with whom you would be Gathered as your own People. It Is impossible
to Address you with an Exhortation of a greater Importance! Methinks, The
Consideration which is now brought from the Story of a Sethite, should Awaken
us. Death, Death, which you see Reigning from Adam, over the Ensuing
Generations: the Consideration of Universal Death, Unavoidable Death; Oh! How
should it Enliven our Piety!

In the Holy Line of the Patriarchs, single out one Exemple of Mortality, to be
at this time Discoursed on; It Is one whose Name was Enosh*

That I single him out; One of my Reasons is, Because he was a GRANDSON in a
Famous Family. First Adam appears; a Worshipper of GOD; a Believer on CHRIST;
the GOVERNOR anon of a Little World. Then Seth appears; the Substitute and
Follower of a Righteous Abel; and one that had on all accounts upon him, the
Image of his Father: Now comes on the Grandson, Enosh, of whom little more is
Reported but this, And he Died. Indeed one thing more is in the Report; which
is by some thus translated; Then began to be Profaned the Name of the Lord.
This Person Lived, it seems, to see much Profanity and Apostasy to gain upon a
Sinful World. Others rather keeping to our own Translation, Then began men to
Call on the Name of the Lord, suppose that Congregations were formed for the
Service of God; and one Enosh was a Great Encourager of them. Yea, some read
it, Then began Preaching in the Name of the Lord; The Hebrew word, (from whence
comes the Greek word for Preaching,) favors it. Probably Enosh was one who
heartily Countenanced the Best Preachers. Our Enosh would have such for his
Counselors. It Is more than probable, That the Protevangelium, in the Third of
Genesis and the Fifteenth, was the Text most usually Preached upon.

It Is an happy and a lovely Sight sometimes Exhibited, in the World; The same
Family sometimes has afforded Eminent and Renowned men, successively for Three
Generations. It was accounted a Singular Honor to the Family of the Curij at
Rome, that there arose from that Stock, Three Excellent Orators one succeeding
another. More than One Family in this Land have had the Greater Honor, of
yielding Three Ministers of the Gospel one succeeding another. But the Family
of the WINTHROPS, has this way something very Peculiar in it. Three JOHN
WINTHROPS, a Father, and a Son, and a Grandson, have by the Election of the
People, been made GOVERNORS over a People of God; And after all their Service
in their Generation falling Asleep, they must not without a sensible Interposal
of the Divine Providence to bring it about, ly^ together Encombed in the same
Sleeping-Place and Sepulcher. There is not such another TOMB to be seen in all
America.

One of the Seven Wonders of the world, was a TOMB. This may be Esteemed One of
the American world.

Another of my Reasons, is, Because I must make a profitable Reflection on the
Name of my Enosh. It has been commonly thought, That the Name of Enosh, is as
much as to say, Sorrowful Man, Afflicted Man, Miserable Man. Alas, In the
Vanity and Vexation which every day befalls every man, there is Enough and
Enough to Justify such a Denomination. But I forego the Thought. Eusebius has
better instructed me, That Enosh rather signifies, EPILESMONA, Forgetful Man,
or Forgotten Man. Truly, the wretchedness of Man lies very much in
Forgetfulness. For, first, Man did soon Forget his Obligations to God, and
continues to do so. Secondly, If Old Age comes upon a Man, he soon grows very
Forgetful of Every thing; and it is a principal Infirmity and Calamity of Old
Age thus to do. Thirdly, It is the Fate of a Man to be soon Forgotten; he
appears a very little while, and it is quickly Forgotten, that ever he was in
the World. Behold, the Elegancy of a passage in the Psalms, where the Name of
Enosh is used; Psalm. 8.4. What is Forgetful and Forgotten Man, that thou
should Remember him!

Enosh indeed is a Namesake for every man, in this Assembly. But, O Man, of
whatsoever thou art Forgetful, do not Forget this; And he Died; Oh! Do not
Forget this Maxim, which we are now going to insist upon;

Fallen Man is Mortal. There is no man Living, but anon this Account must be
given of him, He Died; this Account, He Is Dead. Or, if you will rather have the
DOCTRINE, in the Express words of the Scripture, take it so; Psalm 89 48. What
Man is he that Lives, and shall not see Death?

The Antediluvians indeed, were comparatively Long Lived People. But the most
mavelous Macrobius among them all, anon came to this; And he Died. The
Shortning of Humane Life, and then the Standing of it, at the Term it is now
set at, I have never yet seen, any Natural Reason given for it, though I have
Read what others have said on it, (besides a Collection of all in the
Incomparable Heidegger,) that could give any tolerable Satisfaction. This only
I have seen, That when Physicians, from whom the most of satisfaction might be
Expected, come to write of it, they give the least of any. In Reading
Beverovicius you will find it so. All the Reason that we know of it, is; It Is even
so, Lord of our Life, because it pleases thee! It Is now but a very Little,
Little while; A Time that may be measured by a Span; Though according to the
ancient Arithmetic of the Hand, wherein the Little Finger of the Right Hand
Contracted, signified an Hundred, it is well if it prove Half a Little Finger;
before every one of us has arrived unto the Period of his Life; And he Died.
The GOVERNOR of Israel said, Our Days on Earth are as a Shadow, and there is
none Abiding. Another GOVERNOR invites us now to insist upon (...) Every
Living man may say with him, ^^b 30.23. I know that thou will bring me (...)
Death. Though Ordinarily we do not know, the Time of our Death; nor the Way of
our Death; yet every man must certainly Know, That God will bring him to Death.
Though a man be never so Ignorant of other Things, yet this One Thing, he cannot
but Know most certainly, That God will bring him to Death.

Shall we now spend a few Minutes upon that Enquiry;

What are the Demonstrations, What the Admonitions, that we have of our own
Mortality?

I Confess, It Is a Satyr upon Mankind, for to make such an Enquiry. It is from a
Stupidity which deserves a Satyr, That we need any thing to mind us of our own
Mortality. A Foolish Lawyer not long ago, Published a Book, to Prove, That a
man might by Faith Escape Death; And he had the Folly to declare in his Book,
his own Faith, that he himself should never Die. God soon Confutes his Madness;
God makes him find, that the Writ of Death cannot be Quashed! That Mad Man has
no Professed Disciples among us; None that are so Vain as to Profess
Immortality. But we too too generally Live, as if we were so. We Live, as if
Death were an Article, of as Difficult Belief, as the Resurrection of the Dead.
It is needful, that we should be Enlivened with the Demonstrations of this
thing, That we are to Die. Sirs, Attend unto them!

I. We have the Admonitions of our Death, dispensed unto us in the Lively
Oracles of GOD. The infallible Word of GOD, has with Repeted Thunderclaps,
infallibly assured us, That we are to Dye. We have the Word of GOD for it; Heb.
9.27. It is Appointed unto men once to Dye. Some have Died Twice; [Those who
were miraculously Raised from the Dead, but not with the Better Resurrectim:]
But there is a Statute of Heaven for All to Die Once. The Word of GOD, which
miscalls Nothing, has called Men, by the Name of Methim, or, Mortals. We are
Instructed in the Word of GOD; [Rom. 8.21.] That every man is under the Bondage
of Corruption. By Corruption is meant Mortality. We are in Bondage to it; Bound
over to undergo it; And, as it is elsewhere said, The Fear of it keeps us in
Bondage.

We are assured in the Word of GOD, That Good Men as well as others, must
undergo the stroke of Death. We read, Job 14.1. Man that is Born of a Woman, is
of Few days. By, Man that is Born of a Woman, may perhaps be understood, that
Religious and Regenerate part of Mankind, who at the beginning of the Bible,
are called, The Seed of the Woman; [of her, who is called, The Mother of all
the Living;] The People that belong to Him, who is the Principal and the
Promised Seed of the Woman: Even These must see but a Few days in this world;
and those Few must be Evil Days, Winter Days The First Man that Ever Died,
was a Favorite of GOD.

We have the Law of Death, Declared and Pronounced, in the Word of GOD: A Law
ten thousand times more unalterable, than any one of the Medes and Persians.
Let us turn to the Law; Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall
Return. Death is by the Law of GOD, the Penalty of Sin. The Penalty was thus
Expressed, In the day thou Eatest, thou shall surely Die. Most Expressive is the
Gloss of Theodoret upon it; Mortalis eris, et singulis diebus expectabis
Mortem. It Is come to pass; By One Man Sin entered into the world, and Death by
Sin. We are involved in the First Sin of the First Man. I make no doubt, but
the Inspired Historian, intended an Illustration upon that very Text, Unto dust
thou shall Return, in this Emphatical word, which he makes the EPITAPH to so
many of the Fathers; And he Died! And he Died! He seems to say, Behold, The
terrible Threatening of Death, Behold, How terribly it is accomplished.

Remarkable is that Word of GOD; Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin, (or, Paid by
Sin,) is Death. Gerhard notes, That OPSONIA, which we render, Wages, properly
are, Gibaria quaedam et lautitiae, quibus milites alliciebantur, qui ventris
Gulaeque causa vitam habent Venalem; The D^ets and the Dainties, with the
prospect whereof, the Commanders drew their Hungry Soldiers to Expose their
Lives. We are here Elegantly called back, to Consider the First Sin of the
First Man. Sin, which is compared unto a General, enticed us with an OPSONION,
a Dish of Fruit, a Delicate Entertainment: But we found nothing but a miserable
Death in the Dish; while we were thus drawn to List under the Banner of the
Devil, in a Rebellion against the Holy GOD.

Sin, Sin, is the Sting of Death. It Is by our Sin, that we are Stung to Death.
An Angel of Death, upon it, comes Armed with a Commission to Cut us off.

Indeed, the Second Adam, will deliver us from the Death, which the First Adam
has brought upon us. But this Deliverance will be by a Resurrection of the dead
The Word of GOD, forbids all Imagination

(...) II. The Experience of dying Mankind, Admonishes all men to be mindful of
it, That they are also to Dye. O most overwhelming Admonition! Since all
Mankind in every Age has Died before us, and is every Day Dying about us, that
man is a Bruit rather than a Man, who Dreams, that he shall Escape the common
Lot of Mankind. We read; Eccl. 1.4. One Generation passes away, and another
comes. Yea, and the Generation that Comes, we see also Passing away. There
have never been above Two men, that have Escaped the Common Lot, for more than
Five Thousand Years, which have rolled away since the day that God made Man
upon the Earth. The Empire of Death is an Universal Monarchy. The King of
Terrors is a Monarch so Great, that he always has the Sun both Rising and
Setting in his Dominions. On the whole Face of the Earth it may be, there are
about Five Hundred Millions of People. In a few Years, there will no be One of
them left! And what is become of them that Peopled the Earth, in the Former
Ages? Death, Death has melted them all away, as Drought and Heat Consume the
Snow-waters. Our Sinful Earth, has never afforded, any Privileged Place unto
the Children of men, where the Arrest of Death could not come at them. Has
Holiness Exempted any man? Truly, No. The Holy Moses must have it said, Moses
my Servant is Dead. Has Courage done it? No; David was a Brave man; And he
Died. Has Vigor done it: No; Sampson was a Strong man; And he Died. Has Wisdom
done it? No; Solomon was a Wise man; And he Died. Has Riches done it? No;
Ahashuerus was a Rich man; And he Died. Have the Best Qualities imaginable,
preserved any man so Invulnerable, that the Arrows of Death could not come at
him? No; As Useful, as Humble, as Lovely a man as Paul, a man that had been
both in Paradise, and in the Third Heaven too, must have a Time of departure:
And he Died. Every Generation feels the Fulfillment of that Prophecy; Isa. 24.1.
Behold, the Lord makes the Earth Empty.

My Hearers, I will put you into a way to pursue this Thought, with a most
affecting Pungency! Pass over the several Streets of your Neighborhood. Stay;
-- Call to mind a Little: -- Who Lived in such an House, -- and who in such an
One, -- so many Years ago? -- But, where are they now? Oh! They are Gone! They
are Gone! The Places that have known them, shall know them no more. Death has
carried them off into the other World. -- We are deprived of our Senses, if we
do not now make that Conclusion; Isa. 20 6. And how shall we Escape? No, Never
think of such a thing!

III. Don't we Feel our selves Dying? Methinks, we are most Feelingly
Adomnished by this, That we are to Die. Our Constitution may be our Admonition.
The deadly Blow is already struck Death has already siezed upon us. Every Day
we may perceive Death growing upon us. What are all our Bodily distempers? They
are but so many Advances of Death. In all our distempers. Death is hacking and
hewing down our Tabernacle. The Enemy has broken in, and is breaking down, the
Carved work thereof, with Axes and Hammers. These things are the Messengers of
Death. A Wrathful King is at hand. The Term of, Mortis Caduceatores, has been
justly put upon them. We read, Job 30 22, 23. Thou dissolvest my Substance; I
know thou will bring me to Death. He Knew it, because he found a dissolution
already begun upon him. O Man, Thy dissolution is already at work upon thee.

Ingenious was the Parable of the Ancients. A man made an Agreement with Death,
never to call for him till he had first Warned him of it. At length, Death does
call for him; and the man Expostulates, That he was not Warned according to
Agreement. Say not so, replies Death, Say not so! Did not your Head Ache such a
day? Did not your Side Ache such a day? And such a day, did you not find your
Stomach out of Order? Those, Those are the Warnings that I use to give. Ah,
Sirs, if these be the Warnings of Death, you must not pretend, That you are not
Warned. More or less, we all have some Touches now and then upon our Health.
But this is the Language of them all; Man, Thy Death, Thy Death, is coming on.

Indeed all the Sorrows of Life, are called by the Name of Death. I am sure,
They tell us, That we are to die. Yea, The very Supports of Life, carry broad
Intimations of our Dying in them. We Die, if we don't now and then go to Sleep.
That very Sleep is the Shadow of death. Oh! Fall Asleep with such
Contemplations; These Eyes must shortly be Closed by Death! These Limbs must
shortly ly down in the Grave. Our Bread is the Staff of Life. If it were not
for that Staff, we should soon fall down unto the Earth, into the Earth, from
whence we fetch our Bread. Will it always keep us from Falling? No; it says,
My Friend, whence I came, thither art thou going. A Great part of the Food on
which we Live, is the Flesh of dead Creatures. We have Death Death, Dish'd out
unto us, on our Tables; DEATH in almost every dish. Oh! Feed with such
Contemplations; Feed on them too; Most certainly, I cannot always Live upon
the dead. Most certainly, dead Creatures cannot save me always from Death.

We see the Doctrine of Mortality, under some of its Demonstrations. But our
Main Work this Day, and indeed the Main Work of every man, every Day of his
Life, must be to make some Good Improvement of such a Doctrine.

I. Must we Die? Then we should Live in a Daily Expectation of our Death. A
Servant of God could say, 1 Cor. 15.31. I die daily. One thing in dying daily,
is to Live with some Expectation every day, as if this may be the day of our
death. I do not say, That a man should Live every day, as if he knew it were to
be the day of his death. A strain, whereof the Expression should be a little
mended. We may very truly and justly, and fairly thus Express it; We should
Live every day, as not knowing but that it may be the day of our death. We
know, That we are to die; But yet we may say with him; Genesis 27.2. I know not
the Time of my death. We do not Know, but this Week, nay, this Day, may be the
Time. Every Prayer we make, we may think, It may be this is the Last Prayer
that ever I shall make. Every Sermon we hear, we may think, It may be this is
the Last Sermon that ever I shall hear. Every time we are Conversing with our
Friends, we may think, This, may be the Last Time of my Conversation with these
Friends. And we may let fall some Weighty, some Useful Sentence unto them, upon
that Suspicion: Every Day we may think; It Is possible I may not Live to another
Day. So we are taught; Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of Tomorrow; for thou
know not what a Day may bring forth. Such Thoughts, Verily, They should be
very Frequent with us! Even Philosophy tells us, That the whole Course of our
Life, should be a Meditation on Death. But then, Let us call in Divinity. This
will prescribe, A Living to God, as the Preparation for Death, which must be
joined with the Meditation of it. And this I am now to proceed unto.

II. Must we Dye? Then our Speedy, our Thorough Preparation for Death, is the
ONE THING, that is needful for us. That Word of Command, is now given out, Make
all Ready. It Is the Counsel of Heaven unto us; Mat. 24.44. Be ye also Ready.
Really, the Longest Life is little Enough, to be all spent, in making Ready for
Death. Oh! It requires a mighty Preparation! Sirs, We ought immediately to make
sure of it, That when our Death arrives, it shall not prove a Trap-door, to let
us down into Wretched, and Woeful, and Hopeless and Endless Confusions. With a
Message like that, Isa. 38.1. Set thy House in Order, for thou shall Dye and
not Live; I now come unto you, Set thy Soul in Order, for thou shall shortly
Die, thou have not long to Live.

Here lies the Merit of the Case. The Last Thing that we can say, of this or
that Man, is, And he Died. But this will not be the Last Thing that will befall
the man. There is a Future State. There is a State of Misery, or of Happiness,
after Death.

Of a Wicked Man, we read, Luk 16.22, 23. He died, and was buried, and in Hell
he was in Torments. The Spirit of a Wicked man, is delivered over into the
Hands of Devils. When one part of him, is Covered with the Shadow of Death, the
other part of him is Broken in the place of Dragons. If the Relation might be
given, it would be this; And he Died: But then his Depraved Soul was cast into
an horrid Prison, where it lies in Chains of Darkness, waiting with Horror, for
the Eternal Judgment of GOD.

Of a Godly Man, we read, Rev. 14.13 He is Blessed, and he does Rest. His Death
deals by him, as the Wretches did by the Young Man in the Gospel; Catch the
Garment; the Person does Escape. So the Relation must proceed, concerning the
Spirit of a Godly Man, And he Died: But when his Body is Dead because of Sin,
his Spirit is Alive because of Righteousness: His Renewed Soul puts on the
Garments of Light: It fell into the Company of Holy Angels; and in the Paradise
of God, it keeps Joyfully Feeding on its Tree of Life; Joyfully looking for the
Appearance of the Great GOD our Savior, when its Felicity will be Perfected,
in the Raised and New Body to be bestowed upon it.

If these be the Consequences, Oh! What Preparation is to be Endeavored?

And what is it that will Prepare us for Death; for Blessedness at our Death?

In one word, It is Conversion to GOD. It is that Good Work, whereof we read,
Phil. 1.6. God has begun a Good Work in you.

Briefly, There are Three Points, which our Safety and our Comfort, at our
Death, will turn upon. I would propose them to the best Advantage. I will put
them into the most Advantageous Form. I will offer them in the Form of
Resolutions; Hoping that you will come into these most Reasonable Resolutions,
O all ye People, Every one of you.

First; Resolve thus; I am to Die; Therefore I will now fly to the Sacrifice
of a Glorious CHRIST, and plead it, and make it my Only Plea, that I may be
delivered from the Guilt of Sin, and the Wrath of Heaven. I will now fly to
the Righteousness of a Glorious CHRIST, and Thankfully, Heartily, Hopefully
Receive it, as the Incomparable Gift of Grace unto me, that I may Inherit the
Blessedness of the Righteous.

Again; Resolve thus; I am to Die; Therefore I will Resign my self up unto the
Spirit of the Lord, that all my Enmity to God may be subdued; that I may Fear
GOD, and Prize CHRIST, and Hate SIN, and Perfect Holiness in the Fear of God;
that the Image of Satan may be Extirpated out of my Soul, and the Holy Image of
the LORD Introduced, which may render me Meet for the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light.

All this is Habitual Preparation. An Actual Preparation is also Necessary.
Wherefore,

Lastly; Resolve thus; I am to Die; Therefore I will keep my Evidences for
Everlasting Life so Clear, that the Sudden Approach of Death, may produce no
Amazement in my Soul. I would keep my Soul in such an Heavenly Frame, that no
Sudden Approach of Death, may find me Indisposed for the Heavenly World.

How inexcusably Remiss are they, what Remissness, what Sotti^hness, beyond an
Epithet, are they Guilty of, who do not now come into these Resolutions! -- I
doubt, I have used a Term a little too Dilatory; that Term, I Will. Instead of,
I Will, and all that may look like the least, Hereafter, in the Case, Oh! Let
it all be done, Immediately! I say, Immediately!

III. Must we Die? Then we ought Now to Do, what we shall at our Death, wish to
have done. Our Death will bring us to a Right Sense of Things. Oh! Let our
Sense, that we are to Die, do so too! Men have the Clearest Sight of Things,
when they have the Dimness of the Shadow of Death upon their Eyelids. The
Thoughts of a Dying Man, are usually the Soundest and the Truest Thoughts. We
are so advised; Deuteronomy. 32.29 Oh! That they were Wise, that they would Consider
their Latter End. There is the Best Wisdom, with such as are so well Advised,
as to Consider, what Reflections, will be Grievous, Irksome, Full of Regret
unto us, in our Latter End; and Now, shun all that will then cause Reflections:
Consider, what Reflections will at our Latter End, fill us with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory; and Now do those things, which will then yield those
Reflections.

My Friend; Suppose thy self in thy Last Agonies; thy Breath failing, thy
Throat rattling, thy Eyes giving a ghastly Look, thy Hands clammy, and pulling;
and thy Soul, thy Soul, taking wing for the Eternal World; Consider, O my Soul,
What would I wish to have done, or to have left undone, at this Decretory Hour!
Oh! Regulate thy Life accordingly.

Do so particularly, in laying aside Contentions and Animosities. Men at the
Point of Death, are for Burying all Personal Controversies; they are for a
Reconciliation with their Personal Adversaries. Why should they Live so as they
would be Loathe to Die? Sirs, The Sun must not go down upon your Wrath; It will
be Sunsett presently!

IV. Must we Die? Then our Friends must also Die. We must not wonder at it. It
is what must befall every one of us all. Ambrose was in the right of it, when he
said unto Mourners, Quid absurdius, quam ut id quod scias omnibus esse
prescriptum, quasi speciale deplores? We are by a Greater Authority so called
upon; 1. Cor. 7.30. This I say, Brethren, The Time is short. It remains, that
they that Weep, be as though they Wept not. One says, When I have deplored the
Death of my Friend, as a Friend, I must learn to bear it as a Saint. It is a
wretched Virtue, not to know what else, than to Bewail the Dead. Oh! Let all
Friends look for a Parting Time. Live together, as they that must not Always
Live together. We see People every where Mourning over their departed Friends.
We must look for such things.

Must we so? Then let us Discharge our Duty to our Friends, before it comes to
this. Let us do them all the Good that ever we can, while we have, an
Opportunity to Do them Good. Let our Carriage to our Friends, be such, that if
they Dye before us, we may be able with inexpressible Consolation, to look back
upon our Faithfulness.

Let Me therefore deal Faithfully in this very Thing, with You, my Friends. I
must Faithfully tell you; If a Soul Related unto you be snatched out of this
world by Death, and you must own, you never did any thing for the Salvation of
that Soul, Suppose it one of your Children, or one of your Servants, or a
Relative nearer than either of them: Oh! the astonishing Anguish, which your
Souls, must on such a deplorable Occasion be filled withal! Sirs; We are to
Dye. We should first make Ready for our own Death; and then for the Death of
our FRIENDS. We don't know, which may get the start in the Race to the Goal of
Death.

V. Must we Dye? Yet let us Rejoice in a Redeemer, that will one Day save us
from Death Dying Saint; Let that be thy dying Song; Job 19.25. I know that my
Redeemer Lives; and that He shall stand at the Latter day over the Earth; And
He shall Raise me out of the Earth. O Joyful Tidings! The Resurrection was of
old called, The Consolation. Though the Pagans were Strangers to the Mystery, and
Scossers at it, [Witness Plinies flouts, Quae malum, ista dementia est, itorari
Vitam Morte!] Yet, The Children of God, even in the Secular Times [Called so,
Romans 16.25. because measured by Jubilees:] of the Old Testament, believed a
Resurrection. God promised them a share in the Blessings of, The Kingdom of the
Messiah. They Died, before these Promises were accomplished. Hence they
inferred, That they must be Raised from death, to Enjoy these Promises. It was
a Right Inference! Their Faith was God will Redeem my Soul from the Power of
the Grave. But then, the Gospel of the New Testament, has more Conspiciously,
more Abundantly, brought Life and Immortality to Light; a Resurrection, that
is, to a Life of Immortality. For now we have seen our Lord JESUS CHRIST
Himself Risen to such a Life; and so Risen, as to leave no Room for doubt, that
He will also Raise His Followers, to such a Life. He has told us, [For so it
should be rendered:] He that Believes on me, shall not die for ever: Though he
Dye, he shall not lie dead for ever. And we have, in His Resurrection, an
Irrefragable Proof, That He has not therein Deceived us. This, This then shall
be the Triumph of our Souls: LORD, When will Thou come, and make the Graves
yield up their Dead, and deliver the Lawful Captive, and the Prey of the
Terrible! Rejoice not against us, O our Enemy, Death; For, though we Fall, we
shall Rise again; when we sit in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto us!
Wherefore, Comfort one another with these Words. Among the Primitive
Christians, they would often have the Pourtraicts of Enoch, of Lazarus, of
Jonas, and of Ezekiels Vision, on their Caemeterial Cells, to Proclaim their
Comfortable Faith of the Resurrection, to sweeten their Habitation in the Dry
Pit in the Land where the Sun shines not. But on the Sepulchral Monuments, it
was usual for others of them to inscribe the First Letters in the Name of our
Savior. I ask not for those Actions, but for our Following of the Faith which
produced them!

Finally; Must we all Die? Then Persons in a Public Station are to Dye; Their
Public Station will not Secure them. Even those Men, who because of their
Vicegerency are called, Gods, yet have this Praemonition from Him, that is
Infinitely Higher than the Highest of them all; You shall Dye like Men. Hence
the Indian Kings of Mexico, would have their Coronation-Robes Painted with
Skulls and Bones of Dead Men, to mind them of their Mortality, with their
Sovereignty.

Give me leave, to do at least the part of a Deaths-Head among you!

OFFICERS of all sorts; You are to Dye. But then certainly your Behavior in
your several Offices ought to be such, that you may give up a Good Account,
unto GOD the Judge of All. It was a Voice that once came from the Imperial
Purple; the Speech of Alexander the Son of Mammaea; That he had an Hand always
in readiness, to tear out the E^es of Corrupt and Pareial Officers. It Is very
sure, The Great GOD, has such and Hand; He has Threatened, He will tear such in
Pieces, there shall be none to deliver them:

MINISTERS, They are to Dye. Then, My Fathers and Brethren, You should not be
Men of this World. You must Live like men on the Edge of the Eternal World. It
was a stroke in the Charge given to Ministers at their Ordination of old;
Habeatis Eternitatem in omnibus Cogitationibus vestris. How Painful, how
Watchful, how Faithful ought you to be, in the Discharge of your Ministry! In
what a continual^ Flame, to Do Good, and Serve Christ, and Win Souls? That no
part of your Work be found Undone, when your Working Time is done! Excellent
the Pattern for us, in One of the Ancients, who could say, Wherever I come, and
whatever I do, methinks, I hear the Trumpet of the Archangel, Arise ye Dead,
and come to Judgment!

MAGISTRATES, They are to Dye. Then, with what Fidelity, with what Integrity
should they acquit themselves! With what Concern for the Welfare of the People,
to whom they are Shields, by the Oath of God upon them! That when they Dye, it
may be Testified for them, They did Good in Israel; and had the Seven things,
which Maimonides tells us, the Jews required of every one that sat in a Court
of Judicature; Wisdom, Humility, The Fear of God, Contempt of Riches, The Love
of Truth, A Good Fame, and, To be Beloved of Others. Magistrates must not be
Insensible, that they are to appear before the Judgment Seat of GOD. Nuper eram
Index; Jam Judicor. --

GOVERNORS must also Dye; Emperors are Dead. What Obligations does their
Mortality lay upon them? Even among the Pagans, there were GOVERNORS, that
were Charming Exemples of Truth, of Justice, of Goodness, and of a Zeal for the
Public. Of such a Conduct, that like Nerva, they could Profess, Were I to
return to a Private Life, I have never done any One thing, that should make me
Afraid of any One Man in the World. Strangely Beloved among the People; styled,
like Titus, The Darlings of Mankind. The People have been ready to Adore them,
as they did the Antonines, and stigmatize the Houses that had not their Statues
or Pictures in them. Certainly, among us Christians, there should be a Greater
Excellency; I say, A Greater Excellency. So says our Savior, What do you more
than Others?

A GOVERNOR greatly and justly Beloved among his People, [Tis no Flattery to
Affirm, what Envy it self cannot Deny!] was Lately seen at the Head of One of
our Colonies. He is this Day to be Interred among us; it is with wondrous
Lamentations; with such as I may describe in the words of Suetonius upon the
Death of the Illustrious Roman; They are, Non secus atque in domestico Luctu
Maerentibus public Cunctis; Or, such as men have at the Loss of their own most
Intimate Relations.

The GENTLEMAN, by whose Death One of our Colonies, as Beheaded, lies a
Bleeding, and One who in the Confession of all men, had the, True spirit of a
Gentleman, will always be Remembered with Esteem among his People. I Confess,
we are sometimes affronted with False Praises in Funeral Sermons; which deserve
as much to be derided, as those Passages of Nero's Oration were by the Senate,
wherein he Cried up the Discretion of Claudius. I shall not be guilty of them,
when I say of this our WINTHROP; He will be ever Mentioned, as he was highly
Esteemed, very Particularly, for his Courteous way of Treating all men, but
especially Good Men, and Old Men, on all occasions; and for his Paternal, and
Patient, and Generous Administration of the Public Affairs.

His Excellent FATHER, One of the Best of Men, [Of whom we may also say, what
has been said of another, He was Son to an Excellent Father, and Father to an
Excellent Son:] HE laid that Charge upon him; That if ever he had an
Opportunity, to do any Service for his People, he should be sure to do it, with
all the Alacrity imaginable. He would speak of this Charge, and of the Vast
Impression it made upon him. He performed it, He fulfilled it. Our Enosh, never
Forgot it. He went over the Atlantic on purpose to procure a Confirmation of
their Invaded Liberties. GOD Prospered him: Returned him. He flew back with an
Olive Branch which proved a Garland unto him: The Obliged People (instead of an
Obsidional Crown for him) Chose him for their GOVERNOR. They said unto him, as
the General Assembly of old said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, for thou have
Delivered us. They found him a GOVERNOR, that fully answered their
Expectation. I am sure, I shall not fall under the Character, of a Simeon
Metaphrastes, for bearing such a Testimony.

And where, O Bereaved Colony, where will you now find a Strong Rod, by which
your Government may be Carried on? The Circumstances of the Day require an
Extraordinary Man; A Man, which none but a Glorious CHRIST can make for you.
Certainly, You will Present your most ardent Supplications unto Him for such a
Man. Your Brethren here, that Love you, will also Pray for you. We will Pray
for you, That there may be a Perpetual Reign of all Godliness and Honesty among
you, and Every thing that a People favored Above all the Families of the Earth
should have shining among them. We will Pray for you, That you may be a People,
who for Unity as well as Equity, and for Gratitude and Obedience unto Good
Rulers, and Thankfulness and Fruitfulness under your Evangelical Privileges,
may Adorn your Profession wonderfully.

When you Lost the GOVERNOR, who was the Father of him that is now taken from
you, I heard Funeral Sermons, Preached on those Words; 2 Chronicles. 34.28. Th^^
shall be Gathered unto thy Grave in Peace, neither shall thine Eyes see all the
Evil, that I will bring upon this Place. We will Pray, we will Pray, That
Unknown Evil may not now, be coming upon you

I will Conclude with a Good Advice to us all, which I have somewhere met
withal.

Since we have Lived here, and since we are to Die, and yet we Live after
Death, and others will succed us, when we are Dead, we are greatly Concerned,
To send Before us a very Good TREASURE; To carry With us a very Good
CONSCIENCE; And to leave Behind us a very Good EXAMPLE.

EPITAPHIUM.
OF Old, The Shorter the Epitaph, the Better and Brighter it was accounted; so
it contained the Achievements of the Person there Deposited. Plato thought
Four Lines Enough: And these Few Lines, if not Enough, yet will carry a great
deal of Merit in them.
LECTOR. Lacrymis Publicis nunc add Tuas;

Meretur utrasque Jactura Publica. Hic jacet,

JOHANNES WINTHROPUS Tertius.

Nescit Historiam Novanglicam qui hane Familiam Nescit. FUIT

JOHANNIS WINTHROPI Boni, Filius,

JOHANNIS WINTHROPI Magni, Nepos.

Didicit, ab illo Praestare Bona, ab hoc Magna. PATER PATRIAE: Vivus,
CONNECTICOTAE Delicium; Mortuus, Desiderium.


FINIS.

