A Funeral Sermon ON THE DEATH OF THAT Learned and Excellent DIVINE The
Reverend Mr. SAMUEL WILLARD, PASTOR of a Church of CHRIST in Boston, and
VICE PRESIDENT OF HARVARD COLLEGE. Who Deceased Sept. 12. 1707. Aetatis Suae
68.

By Ebenezer Pemberton, A.M.

To which is Annexed, A POEM, on the same Sorrowful Occasion, By the Reverend
Mr. BENJAMIN COLMAN.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Benj Eliot, and Sold at his Shop under the
West end of the Town House 1707

The Epistle DEDICATORY TO THE Congregation Lately under the PASTORAL CARE Of
the Reverend Mr. SAMUEL WILLARD.
DEAR FRIENDS,
THE Great God, who is the only Fountain of true Honor, has imprinted that
Majesty and Beauty on true Excellency and Piety, that they command Esteem and
Reverence from all that observe them. And the more Eminent any are in
Intellectual or Moral Perfections, the more diffusive in their Goodness; the
greater Honor is due to them when Living, and when Dead. Such as have been
Public Benefactors to the World by their Worthy Deeds, challenge the most
Public Acknowledgements. And to deny their Memory this just Tribute, will
argue an heavy Imputation of Ingratitude and Injustice, both to God and Them.
This seems agreeable to the Natural Notices of what is Good and Excellent,
which are engraven on the Minds of all men.

Hence the Very Unlettered Nations have had many Contrivances, some odd enough,
to Eternize the Memory of their admired Hero's.

That Part of the Heathen World, that has been better Disciplined, has always
had an Honorable Regard to the Names of their Departed Friends, who either for
Wisdom, or Courage, or Virtue, did singularly deserve of the Public. Funeral
Panegyricks were made to Celebrate their Praise; and the greatest Care was used
to transmit their Names with all Marks of Honor to their Latest Posterity.

The People of God themselves have in all Ages accounted it a part of Piety,
Justice and Charity to pay deserved Respects to the Memory of Great and Good
men.

The Jews were famous for this: They were wont to prepare the Bodies of their
Worthy's for their Funeral by Costly Spices, Rich Odours and Perfumes. This we
have an account of at the Death of Asa. 2 Chronicles. 16.14. To which Custom
possibly the Wise man alludes, when he tells us, A Good Name is better than
precious Ointment, Eccl. 7.1. Decent Sepulchers were provided for their
Interment; and Funeral Elegies made in their Praise. Their Names were not
mentioned without a Blessing on their Memory: And agreeably the Rabbis seldom
quote any Person of this Figure, but with that Form of Honorable
Commemoration, viz. Such an One of Blessed Memory.

The Primitive Christians accounted it no small part of their Religion, to do
Suitable Honor to the Memory of their Deceased Saints, especially Martyrs, and
faithful Pastors. They took care that the very Ashes of their Martyrs should
not be treated as Common Dust: They were wont to Enshrine their Remains of
Mortality in Tombs, and Erect Monuments, on which were Inscribed their Names,
Quality and Character. Funeral Orations were made upon them: And they had
Public Records, called their Diptychs, in which their Names were Enrolled with
all Circumstances of Honor. And in a little time they were prone to pay a
Reverence, to a fault great, to the very Dormitorys of those that Slept in
Jesus. To be sure in a few Ages they came to pay undue Honor to their Memory;
which opened the way to that Superstition, and Idolatry in their Invocation,
and Worship of Saints, which the Church of Rome has been for many Ages Infamous
for.

And though it becomes us to avoid all that was Superstitious, and faulty herein
practiced either by Jew or Gentile, Christian or Infidel; yet it seems
agreeable to the Light of Reason and Revelation to perpetuate the Memory of our
Worthies, and to mention their Names with due Respect. The Wise man tells us,
Prove. 10.7. That the Memory of the Just shall be blessed; i. e. shall be
praised as some; or shall be with praises, as others read it. And it is a
Command given, Heb. 13.7. Remember them that have the Rule over you, who have
spoken to you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversation. Indeed a great care is necessary that in all the Praises we give
to departed Saints, we ultimately respect the Glory of God, who was the Giver
of all their Valuable Endowments: Their Worthy Actions must be set forth in a
manner suitable, and with a just design, to incite the Living to an Honorable
Imitation of them. And thus there will be no real Inconsistency, but an
admirable Harmony, between Praising the Dead, and Instructing the Living.

I cannot therefore but think that I have done but my Duty, what Christianity
allows, and Invites to, in giving some Account of the Gifts and Graces of that
Excellent Person, who was lately Serving God, and the Interest of this
Congregation here below; but is now giving his Attendance on the Throne of the
Lamb Above: And am persuaded it may be many ways advantageous, especially to
this Flock of Christ; to gratify the desires of many, by a Publication of what
of his Character was delivered in the following Sermon, in which I have the
satisfaction to have said Less, than I am fully persuaded, was his Due. And
sure I am, this short account of this Servant of God may, through the Blessing of
Heaven, be of considerable Service to us, that have so long Sat under his
Shadow, and have had our Souls, if not our own fault, often refreshed with his
Dispensations.

The Great and Good things that are justly spoken of him, should lead us to
magnify Christ the Fountain from whence all his Accomplishments were derived;
and teach us what Honor is due to God in whom all Perfections do Concenter.
They tend to inspire us with Gratitude to Heaven for the bestowment of so Rich
a Blessing on us, and for the Continuance of the same for so long a season; and
so to breathe into us the Spirit and Temper of Holy Bernard, who on the Death
of his Brother Gerard broke out into that flight: Lord, Thou have given, and
Thou have taken away; though we grieve that Thou have Taken away, yet we cannot
forget that Thou did give him. His Character may Excite us to a strict
Examination of our selves, whether our Improvement of so great a Blessing has
been proportionable to our advantages, which hereby have been singular; and may
lead us to a solemn Consideration of that Awful Account we have to give up to
God of so Rich a Price we have had in our hands; and how Speechless we shall be
found if at the last we appear Strangers to Christ, and his Holiness. It may
serve to promote our Humiliation, and Repentance for our past barrenness under
such Manuring, as Heaven has afforded us, by the Care, Wisdom and Fidelity of
This his Servant: It may direct our Endeavors after, and Prayers for a
Successor, that may Enjoy a double Portion of his Gifts and Graces, to fit him
to Stand in the Gap that is made in our Hedge. In a word, it may animate us to
a due Imitation of his Holy Example, and to a just value for, and holy
Improvement of what of his WORKS are left in our Hands, by which though DEAD, He
yet Speaks aloud to us.

By his Printed Works He has Erected himself a Monument, that will Endure when
the Famed MAUSOLEUM's of the World shall moulder down, and be buried in their
own Ruins. These will render his Name a Rich Perfume to such as are acquainted
with them, and have a true Relish for Pure and Undefiled Religion. These
contain a Rich Treasure of Gospel Truths, which are adapted to advance our
Christian Knowledge and Practice. In Them we have the Depths of Divine Wisdom
and Grace, in the Salvation of Sinners discovered, from its first Design and
Projection in the Days of Eternity, to the Consummation of the Redeemeds
Blessedness in the Kingdom of Glory, where Hope shall be turned into Fruition,
and Faith into Open Vision.

Here Vide. His Treatise of the Covenant of Redemption.
we have the Sovereignty and Freeness of Divine Grace displayed, and the
Stability of the Believers Salvation asserted in the Account of those
Transactions between the Father and Son before the Foundations of the World
were Laid, concerning the Redemption of Lost man, when the Counsel of Peace was
between them. Here His Covenant Keeping the Way to Blessedness.
we have the Tenor, the Duties and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace Opened:
A Covenant under the Vows of which we were brought in BAPTISM, which we are
called to Renew at the TABLE of the LORD; and which is the Foundation of all
our Hopes for Eternity. Here His Discourses on the XXXII Psalm.
we have the Essential Characters of the truly Blessed Man. Here His Fountain
Opened.
the Polluted Sinner is directed to the true Fountain to cleanse in. Here His
Treatise of Justification.
the Condemned Rebel is instructed in the true way, how he may Stand in the
Judgment. Here His Remedy against Despair.
the Desponding Soul has a Remedy against Despair. The Prodigal Sons of men are
here His Penitent Prodigal.
drawn with the Cords of Love and Mercy to their Fathers Arms, to the Service,
Table, and Entertainments of his House. Here His Heavenly Merchandise.
we are taught what value to put upon Divine Truths, and how to improve Wisdoms
Market. Here His Barren Figtree.
the Carnal lazy Professor is Admonished of the Evil and Danger of Barrenness
in God's Vineyard. And His Peril of the Times.
the Hypocritical warned of the Peril of Formality in Religion. The Sorrowful
Christian has here The Mourners Cordial.
a Cordial provided to keep him from fainting. And His Book of Desertion.
the Deserted Soul is instructed how to improve the Hidings of God's
Countenance, so as to have the Joys of his Salvation restored. Here His
Christians daily Exercise.
the Tempted are directed how to understand the Wiles of Satan, and how to
behave themselves in their Christian Warfare, so as to come off more than
Conquerors. In a word, the true Believer is here His Child's Portion,
acquainted with his Dignity and Privilege, being Adopted into the Line of
Heaven; and what the PORTION he may live in Expectation of, and shall fully
Possess, when his Warfare shall be Ended, and he safely Conducted to his
Fathers Presence, where he shall SEE CHRIST AS HE IS.

The Valuable Treatises, in which we have these Heavenly Lessons; together with
a considerable number of Choice Sermons on particular Occasions, are Improvable
Talents, which we must Account for before the Judge of the World. And it
becomes us to take these, and improve them, as Elisha did Elijah's Mantle,
which dropped from him on his Translation; and see what Wonders of Grace, may,
through the Spirit of Blessing, be done by them on our Hearts.

And, I Trust, the Relation I stand in to you will allow me with importunity to
press on you, as well as on my own Soul, Some few Words of Counsel and
Admonition, which our departed Pastor often inculcated in the Course of his
Ministry, and which are worthy to be Written on our Souls with Indelible
Characters. viz.

Let us Labor to lay a good Foundation of Christian Knowledge, as the
foundation of Practical Religion. His whole Ministry was wisely fitted to lay
this foundation in us; and the want of it in many of his Charge he was wont
pathetically to Lament. This Knowledge we must Endeavor to get, and improve
in: which is necessary both to Truth and Growth in Grace. Without it our
Affections are but blind Powers: they may be moved, and made Tumultuous, but
not well regulated, and all the Impressions made on them will soon be Effaced.

Let us take care that all our Knowledge be Practical. To this End he opened
the Mysterious Doctrines of Religion; and set forth Christ in his Mediatorial
Al-sufficiency; That we might be Encouraged to Duty by that Provision made for
our Assistance, and Acceptance in Obedience.

Let us be Admonished not to Abuse the Doctrine of that Spiritual Impotence,
which has invaded Humane Nature, to Sloth and Negligence. He with Sorrow
observed in Conversing with Sinners, how they would fly to this as an Excuse
for their being Strangers to the Power of Godliness. But we must remember, our
Weakness lies in our Wills, it is chosen and obstinate; and is seen in
resisting the Grace which is offered, and which is sufficient for us; and
therefore can never Excuse in the Eyes of an Impartial Judge.

Let us Use utmost Caution that we do not take up with a Presumptuous
Confidence for true Faith. This is a Rock on which Millions have been dashed to
pieces. This Servant of God was frequent in Warning against this, and in
asserting the purifying influence of Saving Faith; and that an Unholy Believer
was the greatest of Contradictions. Let us see then that our Faith do not
separate Christ's Ephod from his Scepter: That it be not a Dead, but a Living
Faith; that will purify the heart, work by love, and overcome the World.

Let us be careful how we take our State to be Regenerate without Examination:
Too many it is to be feared, think they were Converted at such a Season, when
they were under Legal Terrors, and afterward had some sensible Consolation; and
they have recourse to this ever after, without trying themselves by their After
Lives, which have the black Marks of the Unsanctifyed upon them. This cheat we
have been often warned not to put on our own Souls.

Let us be careful to Sanctify the Sabbath of God. The Observation of which
will have a great influence upon the whole of our Religion, as has been often
Inculcated on us.

Let us remember the Solemn Cautions Entered in the Name of Christ against
Apostasy, and all approaches to it, either in Principle or Practice.

Let us be careful, in the discharge of the Duties of our several Relations, to
Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior.

Let us take the Counsels of God, which called us to Proficiency in the School
of Christ, to be Steadfast, Immovable, always Abounding in the Work of the
Lord, knowing our Labor will not be in vain.

These things, and many more, which we have Learned, Received, and seen in him,
Let us do; and the God of Peace will be with us. The Great Shepherd of the
Sheep will feed, lead, and defend this Flock.

In this way we shall Erect for him the most Honorable Monuments in our
hearts; and his Memory will be always fresh, and his Name pleasant to us through
the Days of Eternity.

I shall not add, But that the GREAT LORD and Head of the CHURCH may Shower
down all Spiritual Blessings on This Congregation; That the Kingdom of Christ
be here advanced by the Conversion of the Unbelieving, and Improvement of the
Believing in Holiness: That you may always Enjoy the Means of Grace, and Divine
Influences on them; that your Breach may be well Repaired; that your Houses may
be Bethels; and every Soul a Living Temple; and that we may all meet together
at last in the HOLY of HOLIES Above, and be FOR EVER with THE LORD.

Shall be the Constant Prayer of Your Affectionate Friend and Servant EBEN.
PEMBERTON.
Boston, October. 16th. 1707.
Besides small Literal Mistakes, and false Stops, there are these ERRATA's
which disturb the sense.
PAge 38. l 1. after men, add does. l. 11. for (are) r (is). p. 41. l. 24 dele
(at). p. 44. l. 26. for (Distriction) r. (Distinction). p. 46. l. 5. for (to)
r. (through) p. 73. l. 15. after (and) add (we). p. 74. l. 15. for (had stained)
r. (did threaten to stain). l. 16. dele (did threaten).

The following BOOKS Written by the late Reverend and Learned Divine Mr. Samuel
Willard, to be Sold by Benjamin Eliot at his Shop under the West End of the
Townhouse in Boston.
1 SPiritual Desertions Discovered and Remedied: being the Substance of Diverse
Sermons, Preached for the Help of Dark Souls laboring under Divine
withdrawings, from Psalm. 30, 7. Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

2 The Fountain Opened: or the Great Gospel Privilege of having Christ
Exhibited to Sinful men, wherein also is proved that there shall be a National
Calling of the Jews, from Zech. 13.1. In that Day there shall be a Fountain
Opened, to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for Sin and
for Uncleanness.

To which is Annexed a Discourse of Evangelical Perfection, or how far the
Gospel requires believers to Aspire after being completely perfect, from Math.
5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

3. The truly Blessed Man: or the way to be happy here and for ever: being the
Substance of Diverse Sermons, Preached, on Psalm XXXII. throughout.

4. The Peril of the Times displayed, or the Danger of Men's taking up with a
Form of Godliness but denying the Power of it: from 2 Timothy 4.5. Having a Form
of Godliness but denying the power thereof.

5. Morality not to be relied on for Life: or a brief Discourse discovering the
One Thing wanting, which leaves the Legalist short of Eternal Life: from Mark
10 21. One thing thou lackest.

6 Loves-Pedigree: or a Discourse showing the Grace of Love in a Believer to be
of a Divine Original: from 1 John 4 19. We love him because he first loved us.

7 The Christians Exercise by Satan's Temptations: or an Essay to discover the
Methods which this Adversary uses to Tempt the Children of God, and to direct
them how to Escape the mischiefs thereof: from 2 Chronicles. 21.1 And Satan stood up
against Israel and provoked David to Number the People.

8. Walking with God the Great Duty and Privilege of true Christians: in Two
Sermons: from Gen 5.24. And Enoch walked with God.

9. The Man of War: A Sermon Preached to the Artillery Company at Boston: from
1 Kings 9.22. These were men of War.

10. The best Privilege: A Sermon wherein the great advantage of Enjoying the
Oracles of God is displayed, and the Duty of such as have them is urged: from
Romans 3.1, 2 What advantage then has the Jew, etc.

11. The fear of an Oath: or some Cautions to be used about Swearing, if we
would approve our selves truly Godly: from Eccl. 9.2. As he that fears an
Oath.

12. The Checkered State of the Gospel Church: being the Substance of a Sermon
prepared for and in part Preached on September. 18. 1701. being a Day of Public
Fasting and Prayer: from Zech. 14.6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the light shall not be clear, nor dark. But it shall be one day which
shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor night; but it shall come to pass that
at evening time it shall be light.

A Funeral SERMON On that Learned and Excellent DIVINE The Reverend Mr. SAMUEL
WILLARD*
Matthew XXIV.45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant whom his Lord
has made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat in due season?

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.


IN the Conclusion of the former Chapter, our Lord-Redeemer entertains his
Disciples with a Praediction of those Desolations, that were coming upon the
Jewish Nation; In the final Destruction of their City and Temple, their Polity
and Worship; in which He would appear in the visible terrors of his Wrath, and
the Triumphs of his Power and Justice: and is therefore styled his Coming. Upon
this Praediction his Disciples came to Him as He sat on the Mount of Olives,
and put two Queries to Him, viz. When shall these things be? i. e When will the
final Ruin of Jerusalem Commence? The other Enquiry was, What shall be the sign
of thy Coming, and of the End of the World? This I understand to be distinct
from the former; and to refer to the Final Judgment. The reason why the
Disciples join these two Queries together, may be this, viz. They had happily
Entertained that Mistake, which prevailed in that day, that the End of the
World, or Final Judgment, would either Synchronise with, or immediately follow
upon, Jerusalems Destruction. Our Savior returns an Answer to both these
Questions; which though not fitted to gratify their Curiosity, yet was wisely
adapted to promote their praeparation for these his Awful Appearances. He
particularly acquaints them with some of the infallible Prognostics and
Forerunners of his Appearance in the Clouds of Heaven, to Judge the Quick and
Dead. For I can by no means persuade my self to subscribe the Opinion of some
Grotius, Dr. Hammond.
Critics of no common figure in the Learned World, who look upon the whole of
our Saviors Discourse in this Chapter, to look no further than the Destruction
of Jerusalem: But must think that a great part of this Discourse has a
principal aspect upon the Final Judgment. Now Christ applies the Doctrine of
this his Personal Appearance to Judge the World, to Engage them to greater
diligence and watchfulness, in their preparation to meet Him, when He shall be
revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, and with the Retinue of Mighty Angels.
This their preparation He further Excites them to, from two Considerations, the
Suddenness of his Appearance, and the certain Blessedness of such as shall be
found diligent and faithful in their Masters Work at his Coming* The latter of
which Arguments is contained in our Text. The words read, though in their general
scope are applicable to all Believers; yet nextly and peculiarly they belong to
Christ's Faithful Ministers; who are in an appropriate sense the Servants of
his House, the Stewards of his Family, and the Shepherds of his Flock. In them
we may observe two principal parts.

1. We have the Character of a true Gospel Minister; which is drawn.

(1.) From his Relation to Christ. He is Christ's Servant, and Christ is his
Lord. And every Gospel Minister is his Servant, not only by the common
profession of Christianity, but special designation; by their particular as
well as general Calling.

(2.) From his Work, i. e. to Rule and Feed Christ's Household* this is
Essential to the Office of a Steward in a Family, to assign to every Servant
his Work and Provision. He has the Care and Order of the other Servants
committed to him. The Church is Christ's own House, the Household of Faith; and
this must be cared for: fed with the Word and Bread of Life; governed and
ordered according to Christ's Institutions, who is the Great LORD of the
Household.

(3.) From those Virtues and Endowments which qualify him for his Post, and
which are to be Exercised in the discharge of the Duties thereof, viz. Fidelity
and Wisdom. He must be a Faithful and Wise Servant; faithful to keep the charge
and trust committed to him; and wise to discharge it in the best manner, so as
best to serve the end of it; the Good of Christ's Family, and the Honor of the
Great Master of it.

2. We have the reward of that Servant, who is wise and faithful in the Service
assigned him. He shall be Blessed when his Lord comes; which undoubtedly
intends not barely that he shall obtain true blessedness, but an Eminent degree
thereof, in proportion to his wisdom and fidelity.

I shall not Endeavor to grasp all these things into one Doctrine; But shall
consider them distinctly in that order in which they have been observed to lie
in our Text. So that there are these four things to be considered.

1. The Relation that a Gospel Minister bears to Christ, He is his Servant.

2. The Work incumbent on him, to Feed and Rule Christ's Flock.

3. The Virtues and Endowments that are necessary to the true discharge of this
Work. Fidelity and Wisdom.

4. The Distinguishing Reward, that shall be given unto him, by his Lord at his
Coming.

I. We are to Consider the Relation that an Evangelical Pastor stands in to
Christ: He is the Servant of Christ. The Great Doctor of the Gentiles glories
in this Relation, and challenges the acknowledgment of it from others, 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a man account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and the Stewards of
the Mysteries of God. The Honor of this Relation belongs not only to the
Exalted Station of an Apostle; but to the meanest in the Sacred Function in the
Successive Ages of the Church.

It must be acknowledged that there are several Ways in which Men, and other
Creatures, may truly come under this Denomination. By Creation, all Creatures
are his Servants: For He is Lord of Heaven and Earth: He has an unalienable
Propriety in, and an absolute Supreamacy over all Creatures therein, as they
are the Works of his hands. Subjection to his Government well becomes the State
of the highest Order of Created Beings. The bright Angels. of Light, who Excel
in Strength, are at his Command, and obey his Will. He stands at the Head of
the Lower Creation, and leads forth Creatures Animate, and Inanimate to Serve
him, at his Pleasure. The Sun, Moon, and Stars in their Courses; Stormy Wind,
Hail, Snow and Vapor, in their places are under his Command, and fulfill his
Will. Thus all men as they are the Creatures of God, are his Servants. He spoke
the Word, and we Started into Being at his Creating Call: He made us, and not
we our selves; Let us come before the Lord our Maker, and give him the Glory
due to his Name.

All professed Christians are his Servants by External Vocation; visible
Dedication, and solemn Stipulation. In Baptism we are openly consecrated to the
Service of the Living JEHOVAH: And did solemnly renounce all other Service,
unless in Subordination to Christ: And so we stand obliged to Christ as our
Master by our own free Consent and Compact; to which Heaven and Earth are
Witnesses.

All Believers are the Servants of Christ by Redemption, and the UNCTION of the
HOLY ONE. They are not their Own, for they are bought with a price, their
Spirits and Bodies are his Propriety. He has formed them for himself; and their
Ears are bored to the Posts of his Door. And these are of his Family.

But in a more Appropriate Sense, Evangelical Pastors are the Servants of
Christ's Family, by a peculiar Separation to Special Service; by which they are
distinguished not only from the World, but from the rest of Christ's own
Household. By a special Deputation He has Set them over his house; He has given
them a Commission to represent his Person, and Praeside under him in the great
Affairs of his Visible Kingdom, Worship and Service. To be separated to the
Work of the Gospel is not the peculiar privilege of an Apostle, but common to
every ordinary Gospel Minister. Christ has not left the Work of his House in
Common, but has drawn a Sacred Enclosure about it, to keep out vain pretenders,
that would take this Honor to themselves. A Liberty of Prophesying, as
asserted by some, is indeed but a liberty to overturn the Order of the Gospel.
All are intruders, and guilty of an Invasion upon the Sacred Office of the
Ministry, that have not their Mission from Christ. For how shall they Preach
unless they be sent? And who shall send them but Christ whose Ambassadors they
are? No man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is Called as was Aaron.
This authority the Apostles, who were the first Heralds of the Everlasting
Gospel, were immediately by Christ invested with: But this is mediately
communicated to Christ's ordinary Ministers, as their Successors. And these are
not of men, though they are by men, by whom they are authorized to dispense the
Unsearchable riches of Christ. Their Message they receive from Christ, whose
Messengers they are. Their solemn Charge is given in his Name, and by his
Authority they act. Agreeable hereto the Elders of Ephesus, though appointed by
an ordinary Call, are said to be made Overseers of the Flock by the Holy Ghost,
the Spirit of Christ, Act. 20.28. And none but such can Administer the Word and
Sacraments with Authority, or a reasonable prospect of Success. The Service
that every Gospel Minister is Engaged in has an immediate respect to Christ: He
assigns them their Work: Of his Revenue they are Maintained; and to him they
must finally give up an account. Thus in a peculiar sense they are the
Ministers of Christ; and only the Servants of their People for Christ's sake.
They are the Stewards of his Household; Laborers in his Vineyard and Harvest;
Whose Province is to Sow, Plant, Cultivate and Manure the Soil of the Church,
that Garden of Christ. And this their Relation to Christ tells us that their
Station is high and honorable; their Charge most important; and their Account
awful: That to contemn, insult, and outrage their Character, will be
interpreted as an insufferable Indignity offered to Christ himself; and that
their Master will highly resent it as such.

II. In the Second place we are to Consider the Work of Gospel Ministers. The
relation of Servants necessarily infers Work, and Service for their Lord. And
the special Service, which they are called to, is to Feed, Rule and Order
Christ's Family. They are Rulers over his Household to give them their Meat in
due Season. How honorable is their Work! How difficult their Post, and the
Service thereof! The dignity of their Station and Employment would well become
the Excellency, and its difficulty requires the power, purity, and activity of
the Highest Angels, that incircle the Throne of God. Their Work consists of two
parts, and we may Consider them distinctly.

1. The Work of an Evangelical Minister is to Feed Christ's Family. Christ's
Flock must be fed, and his Household must have suitable Provision made for them.
And this by Office belongs to Christ's Servants, to whom he has committed the
Word of Reconciliation. These are under the most Solemn Obligations, and awful
charge to take care of this; as they would not be found Idle Shepherds,
Slothful Servants, and Unfaithful Stewards, by their Lord at His Coming; and be
Animadverted on as such. What Christ pathetically inculcates upon Peter, has a
respect to all the Messengers of Peace, John 21.15, 16, 17. Simon Son of Jonas
love thou me more than these? -- Feed my Lambs -- Feed my Sheep -- Feed my
Sheep. The same address He makes to every Pastor with the like Expressions of
Endearment. This therefore is a principal, and essential part of their Office
Work, to give the other Servants of God's Family their Food.

This Food must be Spiritual: Such a Provision as may be a proper Entertainment
for the Soul: as may be suited to the Nature, Necessities, Spiritual Appetite,
and Cravings of an Immortal Spirit, As bodily Food does answer the wants of the
Body. Proper Food is Pabulum Vitae. It is necessary to the preservation, growth
and nourishment of the outward man: It is suitable in its nature and design, to
confirm and increase the strength and health of the Body: To repair the decays
of Nature, and maintain it in a due Temperature and disposition to discharge
the proper functions of life. Now in Analogy to this: Spiritual Food is
whatever tends to beget, maintain and improve the true spiritual life of man.
To nourish the Soul with Divine Knowledge, which is the proper food of the
Understanding; to beget and strengthen, to increase and nourish the Divine
Principles of Grace and Virtue in the heart; to advance the Soul from one
degree of Virtue to another; from it is Infant to a more virile State; To
restore it from it is decays and spiritual languishments to an athletick and
healthy Condition; This is to afford it suitable food. And this is the business
of the Stewards of Gospel Mysteries. Christ sends his Servants on this very
Errand to open blind eyes, to soften hard Hearts, to awaken secure Consciences,
and Edify the Body of Christ. And to feed Christ's Flock is to instruct their
ignorance, inlighten their darkness, to nourish them with spiritual wisdom and
virtue; to use proper methods to render their knowledge productive of an
Heavenly Conversation, and to turn the principles of Truth into living
principles of Action: It is to heal the wounded spirit, to comfort the
Disconsolate, to raise up the Dejected, to encourage the Fearful, confirm the
Wavering, reduce the Straying, to spur up the Loytering, and strengthen the
Weak, that they may advance to higher degrees of the Divine Nature and Life.
The Servants of Christ cannot indeed by any virtue of their own, or by the
proper force of their Dispensations convey life and strength to the Soul: Paul
may plant, and Apollos water, but God gives the increase: He blesses Zion's
Provision, and clothes her Priests with Salvation. They therefore are said to
feed Christ's Family, when they use the Means Ordained for their Spiritual
Nourishment. Now there are several Duties, in the discharge whereof, this food
and nourishment is to be afforded to a People.

To this end the Word of Truth must be dispensed, and applied. In which the
mysterious methods of Divine Wisdom and Grace must be displayed, and unfolded:
By this the knowledge of God and Christ is to be propagated, whom to know is
Life Eternal. The Preaching of the Gospel is a wise and condescending method in
which Christ is pleased to carry on a Treaty of Peace with Rebel Sinners. It is
a proper Remedy for the spiritual ignorance and blindness, the forgetfulness
and inconsiderateness of men. It is admirably adapted to rouse the secure and
stupid out of their Spiritual Lethargy; to convince them of their sin and
misery; to turn them from the Error of their ways, and transform them into the
Image of Divine Purity. It is fitted to build up Saints in Faith, Holiness and
Comfort. Agreeably we have this Encomium given of this Word of Grace, the
Dispensation whereof is committed to the Gospel Ministry: 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. It
is able to make Wise to Salvation: It is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. This is the 1 Cor. 4.15.
good Seed by which Sinners are begotten, and translated into the Kingdom of
Light and Grace. By this Saints are 1 Pet. 2.2*
nourished, and made to thrive in all the dispositions of Holiness. In this the
Wells of Salvation are opened, whence the disconsolate may draw Water with Joy.
And in the right dispensation of this the Servants of Christ are helpers of the
Believers Joy 2 Cor. 1.24.
. This Word they are obliged to dispense as they have Opportunity in their
Private Applications to their People; and in the Public Service of Gods house.

Again, they are to Feed the Household of Christ by a due Administration of the
Seals of the Covenant, the Sacraments of BAPTISM and the LORD's SUPPER.

They are Authorized to Baptize: Mat. 28.19. By Baptism they Enroll Souls in
the Number of Christ's Servants, and acknowledge them as the visible Subjects of
his Kingdom. Hereby they bring them under the Wings and Bonds of the Covenant;
under the Care and Government of Gods Family; and intitule them to the
provision of his Domestics.

By a due Administration also of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper these
Shepherds are to Feed the Flock of Christ. Herein Christ himself is set forth
as the proper Food of Souls. His Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Blood is Drink
indeed; and these are here under the sensible and lively Symbols of Bread and
Wine, Exhibited for the nourishment of Grace. Christ's Ministers are to prepare
their People for this Spiritual Banquet; lead them to it, that there they may
be Royally Entertained with the Heavenly Manna, the Bread of Angels; which though
not suited to the Gust of a Carnal Appetite; yet affords Superior Satisfaction
to the Spiritual Senses of the Divine Nature in the renewed; and it is Wisely
designed by it is Author to Maintain, Strengthen, and Perfect the Divine Life.
And hereby we are to be sustained in our passage through this Wilderness, till we
shall arrive safe at the good Land of Promise.

Again, Ministers must feed their People by their Prayers, both Public and
Private. A Minister will do more good, says Austin, Pietate Orationis, quam
facultate dicendi.
By their private and secret addresses to God for their Charge, and the success
of their work. For this they must daily bend their Knees before the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and in an holy agony, wrestle with God to obtain the
best of Blessings for themselves, and for their Flock.

Jacob's Ladder on which Angels were seen to ascend and descend, is thought to
be a lively Emblem of a Gospel Minister; who is first to ascend to Heaven in
holy Meditation and Prayer; and then to descend in holy Dispensations to his
people. In this way they are to storm Heaven, and with holy violence wrest down
the Blessing; give God no Rest till he comes and breathes his Holy Spirit upon
them.

Ministers are also to nourish their People by their Public Prayers. But then
they must see that they be proper for nourishment: Not dark, mysterious, and
unintelligible discourses; but proper addresses to Heaven, suitable to the
Majesty, and Purity of the Presence they approach; and the state, wants and
circumstances of Immortal Souls, whose Case they are to carry before the Throne
of Grace. Their Prayers must not be Doctrinal, but Devotional: Thus there must
be a care that they do not give their people Stones instead of Bread. And by
these well ordered Prayers, they will afford true food to Souls. And not only
as these Prayers are Means Sanctified, and approved to procure the Dews of
Divine Grace: But also as they have a natural tendency to refresh and cherish
the Souls of Gods People. These have a proper aptitude to inkindle Divine
Breathings in their hearts; to inspire them with the true spirit of Devotion,
to refine and purify their carnal affections, to help them to some spiritual
views of the beauty and excellency of Christ, and thereby to cherish the vital
flame of Grace, and make it burn with greater heat and light. The experience of
the Faithful will set a seal to this; that their hearts have been many times by
the Prayers of their Pastors, rapt up to Heaven in Holy ardours, dissolved in
love; their Souls pleased, and profited to no common degree.

In fine, they are to feed them by their Good Example. Copia Operum Egregia
Copia fandi. Austin.
They are under the awe of a strict Command from their Lord, to be Examples to
the Flock; In Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. The want of this in Ministers has a fatal tendency to
destroy Souls; to harden the profane and dissolute, to make them think all
Religion to be no better then a cheat and fiction; and it tends to make the
more serious to stumble, and despise the Altar of the Lord. The wicked Lives of
such will read loud Lectures of Atheism and Irreligion; while in their
Discourses they talk like Angels of Light. And many will give more credit to
the Life they live, than to the Doctrine they Preach. Their good Example will
be many ways beneficial: This will inform others in their duty, in their
spiritual danger, and proper remedy: and Examples are the most easy and
compendious way of Instruction: This will afford motive and incentive to
encourage and inflame persons to press forward in the Service of God, and
pursuit of the Heavenly Prize. Hence it is given as the property of the good
Shepherd, that He goes before the Sheep. Joh. 10.4. They must labor to go
before them in all parts of the Christian Life, and thereby recommend it to
their choice and practice, they must be, as far as may be, instances of the
comforts and joys of Religion. Thus they are in all things to imitate the
Great Shepherd of the Sheep; and this will be a Noble and Divine way of feeding
the Flock of Christ. These are the several ways in which the Servants of Christ
are to feed his Household; and if they neglect it, they must do it at their
Utmost Peril, and know they must answer for it at the Grand Visitation of the
Great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, which is expected.

2. We must consider the other part of their work: Which is to Rule, Inspect
and Order the Household. As the Church is a Society distinct from the World, so
it must be under a distinct Polity. A Government suitable to it is Nature,
Constitution, and End, was undoubtedly appointed for it. A Society without
Government will be but an Ephesian Rout. There can be no Unity or Harmony
between the parts of a Body Politic, if all its Members are in a State of
Equality, and of the same Use and Service; But Confusion and Disorder will
devour all that is good and beautiful without a Miraculous Interposition of
Heaven. And this can on no terms be allowed to be the State of the Church; that
House and Temple of the Living God; who is a God not of Confusion but of Order.
Now this Government lies primarily upon the Shoulders of the Lord Jesus Christ;
who is King of Zion, and Head of his Church. By his governing Providence he
preserves and defends it against all the assaults of the combined force and
malice of Earth and Hell. He has fixed it on a Rock, and the Gates of Hell
shall never move it. By the Secret Power of his Word, and the unconquerable
influence of his Spirit He rules in the Hearts of his People. And as the Great
Lawgiver of his Church. He has ordained Laws, Orders, Ordinances, Sacraments
and Censures. All which are appointed for the due regulation of this Special
Society. He does not Administer these in his own Person, for He is long since
with drawn as to Bodily Presence from his Militant Flock; and appears at the
head of his Triumphant People in Glory: And has appointed Officers, who, during
his absence, are to act in his Name, and to see that his Laws, and Orders, made
for the Government of his Visible Kingdom, be observed and executed; and the
charge of these is committed to the Evangelical Pastors. I shall not here
dispute who are the First Recipients of the Keys of Christ's Kingdom. Thus
much seems evident beyond contradiction, that it belongs to the Ministers by
Office to Exert this Power; that by their hands the Keys are to be turned both
in Opening and Shutting the Kingdom of Heaven; that they act herein under
Christ, by a power derived from him, what subordinate Helps to them, or what
concurrence soever of others with them, in the Exercise of this power, may be
thought requisite. The Pastor is therefore in our Text styled a Ruler over
Christ's Household: And submission to Spiritual Guides as such, is an
indispensible duty. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that Rule over you in the Lord; who
watch for Souls, as those that must give an account. Their Power is not Secular
but Spiritual. The Rods, Axes and Swords of Civil Government, are not the
Instruments of their Government. Their 2 Cor. 10.4.
Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual; yet mighty through God to dismantle the
Strong holds of the Kingdom of Darkness. Their Authority is not Legislative,
but only Executive. They are not 1 Pet. 5.^.
Lords of God's Heritage, nor have they 2 Cor. 1.24.
Dominion over the Faith of his People: They are to govern, not by their own
will and humor, but by the Laws of Christ; according to the Orders appointed
by his Sovereign Authority, and Governing Wisdom, who alone is Lord of
Conscience. In the Exercise of this Power they inspect the Household of Faith;
give every one their meat in due season. By this Authority they Preach, Pray,
and bless their Charge; by this they administer Sacraments, Censures: And in
the regular discharge of this their Trust they cannot be impeded, without a
Breach upon the Authority of their Great Lord and Master.

III. We must consider those Virtues and Endowments which qualify Ministers
for their Station and Work, and are to be exercised in the discharge of the
duties of it. And these are Fidelity and Prudence: They must be Faithful and
Wise Stewards. We must consider these distinctly, as they are exercised in the
discharge of the Trust committed to them. And,

(1.) The Gospel Minister must be Faithful. He is a Steward, and it is required
of a Steward to be 1 Cor. 4 ^.
faithful. Hence we have that charge, 2 Timothy 2.2. That these things be
committed to faithful men. The Charge committed to them is great, of the
highest importance: On the faithful management whereof, the Honor of God, the
good of Immortal Souls, and their own peace and Salvation, does not a little
depend Fidelity supposes a Trust committed or reposed; and intends a
conscientious regard to all the parts of it, as it respects Christ, their
Flock, and their own Souls. Now this Fidelity obliges, and disposes to the
observation of such Rules as these, viz.

1. Fidelity obliges the Gospel Minister to make the Honor of Christ, and the
good of Souls, the governing design of his Ministry: The End is the Rule to
direct our judgment and choice of means: A corrupt design in Spiritual Guides
will corrupt their whole Ministry; For that will be correspondent to that which
is their primary intention, and last design in their work. If a Minister be
under the governing influence of a worldly or ambitious spirit, all his
administrations will, in probability, be suited to the depraved inclinations of
that evil spirit: This will profane his most solemn and sacred performances.
There will be infinite hazard that his Doctrine, his Conversation, and
Discipline be all prostituted to base selfish designs; and that the whole of
his Ministerial Dispensations be calculated to the Meridian of Honor or Gain;
which he makes his ruling Interests. If it will serve this worldly design, he
will appear like an Angel of Light, all flame and zeal in the Cause of God; he
will speak like an Apostle with Fiery Tongues, as if he had been filled with
the Holy Ghost: But if another scene be opened; and he perceive that zeal for
the purity of Gospel Truth, for the chastity of Divine Worship, and beauty of
Holiness, will not advance, but contradict his carnal designs; no wonder if we
should see his zeal chilled, and a time-serving indifferency take its place,
and his courage wholly Exstinguished by a pretended Discretion. There will be
great danger that such will disguise Truth, varnish over Error, and rebate the
edge of the Word, that Sword of the Spirit, lest presumptuous haughty Sinners
be too deeply wounded. There is nothing tends more to corrupt the Fidelity of
Ministers, than false ends; for this will be a false bias to disorder them in
their whole Walk: Hence they are solemnly charged to take the oversight of
Christ's Flock, not for Filthy lucre: 1 Pet. 5.3. Such Buyers and Sellers
Christ will ere long come and Whip out of his Temple. Neither must their own
Applause and Repute govern them. It was part of Luthers Litany, for the Church,
A Doctore Glorioso, Good Lord deliver us. It was the Apostles profession, that
of men they sought not Glory, 1 These. 2.6. And it was the high Commendation
given by Paul of Timothy, Phil. 2.20, 21. I have no man like-minded, who will
naturally care for your state. For all seek their own, and not the things that
are Jesus Christ's. Christ's Servants if faithful, must be inspired with purity
of intention in their Dispensation of the Means of Grace: They must imitate the
good example of the ancient Stewards of the Mysteries of God; who could say, as
2 Cor. 4.5. We preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves
your Servants for Christ's sake. Thus Fidelity requires that they have the
Honor of God, and the Eternal Salvation of Souls, always in their Last View;
and then all their Endeavors will be levelled to promote these blessed
designs: and this will not permit them to debase their Heavenly Calling to
mean, earthly designs. If they be faithful, they will be jealous for the Glory
of Christ; and thirst after Souls, Gal. 4.19.
travail in birth with them till Christ be formed in them: They will Preach,
Pray, Reprove, Exhort, and Persuade, as those that have a just sense of the
value of Souls, and of that weight of sin and misery that lies upon them; and
as resolved to do all that they can to rescue them from Everlasting Burnings,
and lead them to the Kingdom of Unperishing Glory. Thus with the Flames of Zeal
and Love, and with the strength of unbroken resolution, they must prosecute
their Masters Work; that they may save Sinners from Death, enlarge the Kingdom,
and extend the Empire of Christ over the lost Rebel Sons of Adam.

2. Fidelity requires the Servants of Christ to furnish their own minds with a
suitable measure of Divine Knowledge. Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and we must ask the law at his
mouth. Ministers are appointed Guides to direct lost Souls to Glory: but if the
blind lead the blind, the issue will be unsafe; they may both expect to fall
into the pit of Everlasting Darkness. An Ignorant Minister cannot be faithful:
A Sun without Light, is not a greater Solaecism, than such an one: He must know
every part of his duty, otherwise He cannot do it faithfully. Evangelical
Pastors are to be Ready Scribes, well instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven;
they are to be like the good Householder that brings out of his treasure things
new and old. Mat. 13.52. It is not a small degree of knowledge that will be
sufficient to quality a person for the faithful discharge of the Ministerial
Office. There must be a considerable acquaintance with the Learned Tongues, and
Liberal Arts, which are subservient to Divinity: And a good Divine will make it
his great care to transfer the spoils of other Arts, to the Service of the
Temple. It was a Barbarous Age when there was reason of that complaint, viz.
Graece nosse suspectum Erat, Hebrai^e prope Haereticum; and such ignorance will
make it a dark Day with the Church of God: It will be covered with Clouds of
Error and Ignorance. It was a Comprehensive Petition which was once made by a
Grave Divine, when taking his farewell, for his bereaved Flock, viz. That God
would not leave them under the influence of a Dark Lanthorn, nor yet under the
false light of an Erratick Fire; which would bewilder them in the bypath of
simplicity. Ministerial Fidelity will engage persons to use utmost care to be
neither of these; that the light they give may not be faint through want of due
knowledge, nor false through Error.

This Knowledge must be attained in an ordinary way, by much Study, Meditation
and Prayer: For we are not born with it: Nor in this Age can we expect to be
qualified for this Work by a Miraculous Descent of the HOLY GHOST in Tongues of
fire, which was the privilege of the Apostles on the Day of Pentecost. We may
not without daring presumption depend on Extraordinary Visions, nor Immediate
Inspiration; but on the blessing of God on our Endeavors. This Faithfulness
must govern us in our Study, as well as in the Pulpit. And the care any take to
accomplish themselves with knowledge to an uncommon degree, is to be esteemed
true fidelity to those under their Pastoral Care; whose Service they are thus
preparing themselves for. All Ministers should labor to deserve the Character
of Apollos, a man Eloquent, and mighty in the Scriptures: They should fear to
run like Ahimaaz, on a Message, without suitable tidings to carry to a people.
They that are faithful will dread that Charge, 1 Timothy 1.7. who are desirous to
be teachers of others, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm.

3. Fidelity requires that they keep not back any part of the Counsel of God
from their Flock. A Steward cannot be faithful, if he withold any part of
that portion, which belongs to the Servants of the Family: What Christ has
appointed for them, they must give them in due season. The Holy Scriptures are
a Sacred Repository of Divine Truths; they are comprehensive of all Articles of
Faith, and Rules of Duty; and these must be opened. The Truth as it is in
JESUS, is perfective of the Understanding in Divine Knowledge, and Directive of
the Christians practice: And no essential part of this can be concealed,
without the guilt of Sacrilege to God, and Injustice to the Souls of men; and
both will infer unfaithfulness. The great design of Divine Revelation, is to
retrieve Sinners from their state of sin and misery, and advance them to a
state of Holiness, and complete Blessedness: The whole Counsel of God is of
Service to carry on this design of Grace.

It is to this end requisite that men be informed what was that state of
Honor, Holiness and Perfection, in which Man was at first Created; How he was
placed at the Head of the Visible Creation as Lord of the Lower World; How
bright with the Beauty of Holiness, and Glory of the Divine Image, and what
happiness he stood a Candidate for. They must be acquainted how this glorious
Son of the Morning is fallen, his pomp and glory laid in the dust: How he
revolted from God as his Sovereign Lord, and Supreme Good; and put himself
under a foreign Jurisdiction: What permanent Depravation and disorder in all
his powers is contracted; What impotency has invaded his Nature, and what
Treasures of Divine Wrath he is become Heir of; How the Infection and
Pollution, together with the guilt of the first transgression is intailed as a
cursed Inheritance upon all the Progeny of Apostate man.

They must be instructed in the blessed design of God to raise up, out of the
corrupt mass, and rubbish of the Apostasy, some Glorious Monuments to
illustrate the Honor of Sovereign Grace: The method in which this great affair
was carried on to success, according to the Infallible Counsel of God: The
Scheme of Apostate man's Recovery, which was projected, and methodized by
Unerring Wisdom; How all the Divine Attributes herein meet in an adorable
Harmony, and have a favorable aspect upon guilty man; must be, as far as is
clearly revealed, explained and set in a proper light. There must be a
discovery how the Three Persons in the GODHEAD do concur in this Design; and
what part of man's Salvation is in the Word of God assigned to the distinct
Agency of each Person. Ministerial Fidelity requires a Declaration of the
nature of man's Redemption, the method in which it was impe^rated, and must be
applied. To this end Sinners must be informed in the Doctrine of Christ's
Person, who was true God, and real man; In the Doctrine of his Offices; in the
truth, necessity and perfection of his Satisfaction, and the prevalency of his
Intercession; In the extent and power of his Government; in the light and
wisdom of his Instructions. To this end they must be instructed in the Doctrine
of the Person and Office of the Blessed Spirit: In the nature and necessity of
Regeneration, without which there can be no application of Redemption to
Captive man.

The tenor of the Covenant of Reconciliation must be laid open; the duties it
enjoins, the demands it makes of Sinners, the Blessings it offers; and the
inseparable connection between the duties and promises of this Covenant must be
declared: And the nature, design and import of the Seals of the Covenant,
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, must be unfolded.

In fine, The Servants of Christ must labor to give Sinners a true view of the
UNSEEN WORLD: They must set before them Future Misery in its Reality,
Extremity, and Interminable Duration: And Future Blessedness in its Fullness
and Certainty, Excellency and Eternity. Thus Fidelity requires that Articles of
Faith, and Rules of Life, Promises and Threatenings, be dispensed according to
Divine Revelation: And this gave the Apostle Paul boldness in making his Appeal
to those that had been under his Tuition, and to take his Leave of them with
this solemn address. Ye know -- How I kept back nothing that was profitable
unto you; wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am PURE from the
BLOOD of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the COUNSEL of
God, Acts 20.20. and 26, 27.

4. Fidelity requires that Ministers deliver nothing as the Counsel of God, but
what they are fully persuaded is so. Ministers are Christ's 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors, and the Fidelity of such requires, that they deliver no Message
in their* Masters Name, but what their Commission directs to* and will bear
them out in. And their Commission runs thus. Mat. 28.20. Go teach all Nations
-- to observe all things that I have commanded you. They are Luke 12.41.
Stewards, and as such, must bring forth and dispense nothing but what their
LORD has committed to them. They are Ezekiel. 33.7.
Watchmen, and are bound to receive the Word at CHRIST's mouth, and to warn
Sinners from Him. Hence they cannot be faithful in delivering any thing in the
Name of their Great Master, but what they have received from him. The contrary
would be to abuse his NAME and AUTHORITY; to fix his Royal Stamp upon their own
Wares. They must not therefore be wise in their Administrations above what is
written: but must have all their Doctrines approved by the Law and by the
Testimony. It is a Divine and Apostolic Canon, 1 Pet 4.11. If any man speak,
let him speak, as becomes the Oracles of God; i. e. what is agreeable to the
Form of sound words there laid down; and the Analogy of Faith there delivered
to the Saints. Their Doctrine must contain nothing as Divine, but what can be
proved, either by Express Scripture, or by just and necessary Consequence
therefrom. They must not make more Articles of Faith, nor Rules of Duty, than
the Gospel has made: And what they deliver must be only with the same degree of
Certainty, that they stand in the Oracles of Heaven: Doubtful things must be
delivered only as Doubtful; Certain, as Undoubted: What are doubtfully true, or
undoubtedly false, will but ill become the Mouth of an Ambassador of the God of
Truth. They must not think to refine Gospel Truths; or blend them with their
own mistaken vain Conjectures; which will make a medley no way wholesome to the
Souls of men. And indeed nothing has been more injurious to the Church of
Christ, than for persons of the Sacred Character to publish their own Whims,
the freaks of wild Enthusiasm, and the Rants of an overheated Imagination for
the Unerring Counsels of Heaven. First to form a Module of Notions in their own
heads, and then to strain Scripture to approve their preconceiv'd Schemes, to
torture it to confess truths it is a stranger to; this is every way unworthy
the Character of a Gospel Minister, and is most prejudicial to the Sacred
Interest of the Gospel: Fidelity commands here a Caution; how else can they
come with a, THUS SAYS THE LORD.

5. It requires that they Employ all their Talents in this Work. Our great Lord
has distributed his Talents among his Servants with an admirable variety
according to his Sovereign pleasure: and none has reason of just Complaint; for
he is Lord of his own, and is a debtor to no man. 1 Cor. 12.7.
There are Diversities of Gifts, though the same Spirit. Some enjoy Gifts more
Excellent as to Nature and Kind, more as to Number, and greater as to Degree,
than others. Mat. 25.15.
One Servant has but One Talent, and another two, and a third five. There is a
great difference as to the Natural and Acquired Abilities of Christ's Servants;
and as to Grace as well as Gifts. All the Stars that appear in the Firmament of
the Church, are not of equal Magnitude, nor do they shine with equal
brightness. There is a vast difference as to the Opportunities of Exercising
these different Endowments, which arises from their several Stations, or parts
of the Vineyard they are Set to labor in. There is a great difference also as
to their Name, and repute in the World, and consequently, as to their Interest,
Influence, and Authority over others. Now all these are improveable in their
Masters Service, which they are to Occupy for his Honor, till He come* And
they cannot be Faithful if they do not improve all these, in their just
proportion, to the advancement of the great Work they are Engaged in. For to
whom God has given much, He requires the more. Luke 12.48.
God expects a proportion between men's Receipts and Returns. Hence it is not
sufficient for one Servant to say, he does as much as some others, who are
undoubtedly faithful, whereas he ought to do more Service than they, who have
not equal Ability and Opportunity. He that has but two Talents will be
faithful, if therewith he gains but two; but he that has five will be
unfaithful if he gains not five more. Their Work is so Excellent, and
difficult, that it deserves and needs the greatest Abilities. The most Exalted
Capacities will here find Employ, more than they will be able to go through;
though their Knowledge was as quick and extensive as the Intuitions of Angels.
None of their Talents are to lie by without improvement; none must be imbezled,
or misplaced upon other things, neither upon affairs of State, nor Trade. For
though men may not be able to charge them with neglect of their duty, yet they
will fall under the charge of Christ, who has given them their Abilities.

All the Talents committed to the Ministers of Christ are consecrated to the
Service of Christ in his Church: and what is it less than Sacrilege to
alienate them? They must Employ them in proportion to what they have received,
if they expect the EUGE at last from the Mouth of Blessing: Well done good and
faithful Servants.

6. It requires the greatest Impartiality in all their Administrations.
Partiality is a Crime of unpardonable Guilt in Civil Rulers, but of a much
heavier Imputation in Ecclesiastical. To have respect of Persons argues
Injustice, and infers Unfaithfulness. Ministers should imitate their Lord and
Judge, who is Act. 10* 34.
no Respecter of Persons; before whom the Poor and Rich, the Base and
Honorable stand upon the same Level. Indeed as to the Manner of Application to
Persons of differing Characters, there may, and many times ought to be a
Difference, but not as to the Matter. The High and Low, the Master and Servant
have one and the same Rule of Life: They must enter the same Strait Gate, and
walk in the same Narrow Way, if ever they arrive safe at the Port of
Blessedness. The Gospel has not made that Sin in the Poor, which is not (
Caeteris Paribus) in the Rich. All Souls are of equal price in the Sight of
Christ, and ought to be so in ours. Hence with what Awfulness and Majesty is
that charge given; 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without
preferring One before another; doing nothing by Partiality. They must not be
byast by favor and affection, in their Masters cause; They must search every
Wound to the bottom, and bear witness against the Sins of all in their
Administration of Censures and Reproofs. It will be their honor and duty to
approve themselves the true Sons of Levi; Deuteronomy. 33.9.
who said to his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him; neither did he
acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own Children; that he might observe
God's Word, and keep his Covenant. The practice of the Apostles must be their
Rule. Col. 1.28.
They must Warn every man of his danger, and Teach every man his Duty; that
every man may be presented at last Perfect in Christ.

7. It requires Unwearied Application, and Unstinting Resolution in the
Discharge of the duties of their Post. The Honor of their Lord, the Excellency
of Immortal Souls, that are in the last hazard of Eternal Perdition, the solemn
Charge they are under, and the strict account they must live in expectation of,
do demand, and are pressing arguments to move them to the greatest
watchfulness, diligence and constancy in their work. The necessities of their
Flock do importune and challenge this of them. Without this application they
can have no good prospect that their work will be crowned with success; but
have reason to fear lest their labor should be under the blast of Heaven.
Sloth and negligence is inconsistent with Fidelity. To do the work of the Lord
Negligently, is to do it Deceitfully; and such as are thus guilty, will never
fulfill their Ministry. It has been faithfully observed by Dr. Bates.
a Great Divine, what a vast difference there is between the work of an
Artificer and a Minister: The Statuary with long labor cuts the Marble to form
it into a noble Image, but he leaves his work at his pleasure; and when he
resumes it, the Matter being durable, it is in the same state toward
finishing, as when he left it. But it is not so with the hearts of men, which
Ministers are at work upon. Flesh, World and Devil are joined in a cursed
Concert to ruin their work, and to deface all good impressions that at any
time are made upon the hearts of their People: And their diligence is equal to
their policy and malignity in counter-working Christ's Laborers. Worldly cares
and carnal pleasures easily divert the thoughts of the awakened Soul, and so
damp and stifle the Convictions, with great difficulty and labor wrought
within them: Satan like a Bird of Prey watches the seed of the Word as soon as
sown, and picks it up, that it may not take root; and is ready to sow tares in
the room of good Seed. The greatest diligence and watchfulness is necessary to
prevent his ill designs. By sloth and negligence there is advantage given to
the Evil One: while the Labourer slept, the Enemy sows Tares, Mat. 13.25.
When a Holy Spark is struck into the Soul, either by public or private
addresses; and seems to have taken hold, how soon is it quenched? Good
resolutions are easily dampt; devout desires and affections chilled; and the
Heart that seemed to melt and flow at the Presence of God in an Ordinance, is
often by the next Ordinance grown as hard as the adamant: And thus the work of
Christ's Ministers is often undone, nay, goes backward, rather than forward.
And what resolution and pains are enough to withstand and vanquish this
opposition, and carry on the desired work to success? Sure we may be, that the
work is like to be left undone, unless God's Servants are patient, unwearied,
and faint not in their labors. Hence the Apostle with the greatest solemnity,
and authority lays this charge upon them, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee before
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick and Dead at his Appearance and
Kingdom, Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. This diligence and
application must be exercised in their preparations for their public
Dispensations; without which they cannot well expect to prosper. It was an awful
word spoken Mr. Shepard Camb.
by an Excellent Person, whose praise has been through out these Churches:
viz.;God will curse that man's Labors, who lumbers up and down in the World all
the week; and then on Saturday afternoon goes to his Study.

There must be also the Exercise of an indefatigable Spirit in all their
applications to their Flock, if they would maintain their Fidelity. They must
give way to no discouragements. Want of success and reproach, hopes and fears
must not move them from their duty. No present Evil, or Advantage must prevail
upon them to stand still, and see the Truths of the Gospel undermined, or
adulterated; but must courageously make head against the most popular Errors,
and common Immoralities, in the face of the greatest outward danger. Truths
must not be concealed, nor the strictness of Gospel precept relaxed to gain the
favor of men, of what figure soever; for thus their trust would be betrayed.
The Temper and Resolution of the Apostle will well become every Servant in
Christ's Family. Acts 20.^4. None of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear to my self, so that I may finish my Course with joy, and the Ministry
that I have received of the Lord Jesus. This Resolution and Application to
their work is necessary, that they may stand before Christ's Tribunal Pure from
the Blood of Souls.

(2.) Prudence is another Virtue that is a necessary qualification of the
Stewards over Christ's Household, which must be exercised in the discharge of
every part of their Function. They must be Wise, as well as Faithful: This is a
perfection, by which we not only consider and judge aright of things in their
general nature, and understand Truth and Error, Virtue and Vice; but also it
enables to take a view of things in their various circumstances, and to form a
right judgment of particular cases, and well to determine what is most fit,
proper, and expedient to be done in that variety of Cases, which are to be
expected when we come to practice. When the right end is fixed, Wisdom directs
in the choice of those means that are best adapted to attain the design: And
agreeably, Aquinas.
the Chief among the Schoolmen define Wisdom to be Recta Ratio Agibilium. A
due knowledge how to conduct our selves in the performance of those things
which are incumbent on us; so that our work may succeed. The Wiseman has more
intelligibly described this Virtue to the same purpose: Prove. 14.8.
The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, and Eccl. 10.10.
Wisdom is profitable to direct. Carnal Policy, or Serpentine Subtilty, if not
tempered with a Dove-like innocence, (...) not an Ornament, but a reproach to
an Ambassador of the King of Heaven. There are vile arts of insinuation, which
suit well enough the Character of the Emissaries of Hell, who are cunning to
deceive; which must not be accounted any part of the Character of the Ministers
of Truth, who must be wise to win Souls. They must not only consider what is
duty, but also in what method this may be done to the greatest success.
Prudence includes great Praecaution to obviate difficulties, and evils that may
threaten their work with unsuccessfulness; and Sagacity to espy and improve all
advantages to carry on their laudable designs. It is impossible for me fully to
set forth this virtue in its nature, excellency and power; or in that influence
it ought to have upon this Sacred Order of men, in their faithful discharge of
the duties of their Place. I shall only hint at a few Cardinal points, to which
Ministerial Prudence must always have respect, viz.

1. Ministerial Wisdom must be Exercised in a suitable Care and Caution not to
Expose their Character to Contempt. There is a just Reverence due to the
Character of God's Ambassadors, which cannot be lost without Evident damage to
their Masters Service. Few People are so Metaphysical as to abstract the
Calling from the Person: to contemn the Person of a Minister and yet reverence
his Office. It must be allowed therefore as a standing Maxim of Wisdom, that
Ministers must be careful to Maintain that Reverence, which is due to them for
their Work sake. Indeed many times Vile and Profligate men will load them with
contempt tho they are never so circumspect: Their very Character is enough to
Expose them to the scorn and banter of some, whose Vices have sunk them below
the vilest parts of the Creation, who are lost to all sense of what is
virtuous, good and sacred* But they must be careful not to deserve such rude
treatment. That by their foolish anguarded Conversation, they do not invite the
Profane to ridicule and insult them. And it must be acknowledged that they are
the Criminal Occasions too often of that Contempt and Indignity which is cast
on them. Hence we have that advice given to Titus, and to every Minister in
him, Tit. 2.15. Let no man despise thee. Which Precept must be observed by
avoiding every thing that will make them appear Vile, Mean and Little in the
eye of the World. And this Prudence is to be seen in.

To this End Prudence directs and requires Ministers to avoid Vice and
Immorality. For this will wound the best Reputation, and Expose to Contempt.
And renders these Servants of God in a peculiar manner Vile. Thus Eli's Sons
rendered themselves Vile. This will darken the LIGHTS of the World; and render
the SALT of the Earth insipid; and no Wonder then they are of no Account.

To this End they must take heed of Ignorance. Knowledge is a good Medium to
preseve their Character; but Ignorance will render them contemptible in the
Eyes of Good and Bad. This may sometimes be from want of Natural Abilities; and
the defects of Nature are not to be Exposed, but Pitied. But this defect should
keep them from invading that Office, where Knowledge is necessary; and
Ignorance challenges Contempt, being Exposed to open view. There is good
instruction in that Admonition that dropped from a Witty Pen, If Owls would not
be hooted at, let them keep close within the Tree, and not Perch upon the upper
bows.

Again, To this End Wisdom directs to avoid every thing that will argue a
Servility of Temper: All Sordid Complyances with men of Corrupt Affections.
They must take heed not to use any mean Acts of flattery to insinuate
themselves into the favor of Men. They must not stoop to any thing below the
Dignity of their Station, to gain the Esteem of the World. All Methods of
Dissimulation and Flattery argue a mean and little Spirit, which is the proper
object of Contempt. Thus they must Watch against every thing that is contrary
to true Generosity, or Greatness of Soul* which should appear in their whole
Deportment; and which will make them Venerable in the Eyes of the World. They
must avoid all Actions that will argue them to be under the influence of Narrow
and Stingy Principles. Fear and Cowardice, an immoderate Opinion of, and
Fondness for the Pomp and Grandeur of the World; Too nice a regard to
circumstances, and Shadows, and a disregard of Substantial Realities, will
Tarnish the Glory of the brightest Character, and invite the Contempt due to a
Little and Mean Soul.

To this End they must be careful not to go to the Utmost Limits of what is
Lawful. What others may do without Scandal and Reproach, Ministers many times
may not without Exposing their Character. Thus also all affectation, affected
(...) Modes of Speech, Gesture, etc. And a Spirit of Popularity are to be
shunned, if they would observe the Rules of true Prudence: For all these debase
the High Calling of the Ministry, and destroy that Respect and Reverence, which
is requisite to a succesful discharge of their Office.

2. Prudence must be Exercised in forming a Right Judgment of Things, Persons,
and Seasons, for the more Succesful discharge of the several parts of their
Trust. There is a great variety of Circumstances which may have an aspect upon
each of these, which must be understood in order to our carrying on our Work to
the best advantage.

There must be a right Judgment of Actions and Things. The Apostle lays it
down as a necessary point of true Knowledge and Judgment to Approve the things
that are Excellent, or which differ, Phil. 1.10. There is a vast difference
between things, and without the knowledge hereof we can never make a Wise
choice, which should be made according to the value, and rate that things bear.
Some things are Essential and Fundamental, without which neither Grace here,
nor Glory hereafter can be Expected; other things are Circumstantial: Some
things are Duties by Divine Institution, other things are so only from
Principles of mere Prudence: Some things are the Weightier Matters of the Law,
other things are but as the Tithings of Mint and Cummin: Some are Gnaws, others
Camels* Some are Moats, and others Beams, as our Savior calls them: Some are
indispensibly Necessary, other things are Expedient Pro hic ad nunc. And most
frequently the Moral denomination of Actions, and especially as to their
degree, does depend upon circumstances, which are Variable. Now Wisdom must
discern between these, and the judgment must conclude and determine
accordingly. For things must be pressed, insisted on in proportion to their
necessity and excellency. The want of Prudence to make this judgment, is many
times highly prejudicial to the Work of the Ministry.

Again, there must be a right judgment of Persons. Without this they can never
divide every one his Portion aright. All respect to Persons is not a Criminal
Partiality; but there is a consideration of Persons, and a distinguishing
regard to them, which will argue no common Wisdom in the discharge of their
Pastoral Care. There is a great difference in the Tempers of Persons to be
treated with; nay a great variety is observable in the Frames and Dispositions
of the same Person at different Seasons. That address that may be suitable to
Melt one, may Exasperate another; that, which may be fit to Gain a man at one
time, may have a tendency to Alienate him at another, and to fill him with
prejudice against the Truth. Every man has some Quality, that renders him
Accessable, and capable of persuasion, which if understood and wisely addressed
would afford an happy prospect of Success. And though Religion will not allow
Ministers to gratify the Vicious humors of men, yet Wisdom requires that care
be taken to improve their tempers to the best advantage, to recover them from
the Error of their Ways. Wisdom requires a Distinction to be made between
these that are of a different Growth and Improvement in the School of Christ.
Heb. 5.12.
Some are Children and they must be fed with Milk; Some are Strong Men, and
they can bear Strong Meat. Isa. 4^.11.
Some are Lambs in Christ's Flock, and these must be gathered with our Arms, and
carried in our Bosoms; Some are with Young, and these must be led with great
tenderness, gentleness and compassion* There is a great difference in the
diseases that Christ's Flock may be infected with; which requires a different
application* What is Obstinacy in one, is a Pitiable Infirmity in another; and
the obstinate are to be sharply reproved; and the Weak to be pityed, and by
degrees strengthened.

There is a difference to be observed between the Civil Characters of men,
which Ministerial Wisdom directs to a due care not to make a breach upon in
treating with them. They are not to be soothed up in any Evil ways; Sin must
not be suffered to ly upon these; the Rich and High are to be charged in the
Name of Christ to perform the Duties, and shun the Sins, of their Station;
their Sins are to be reproved* but Prudence directs that all this be done in a
way consistent with that distinction that Providence has made. Nathan in
reproving David has Set Ministers a Pattern to Write after. Superiors must not
be insulted, nor exposed to the Contempt of those that are under them: The
reproofs given them must not be Satyr which will Sting, but such Wise
Remonstrance of their reproveable Actions, as shall at once convince of their
own Error, and the respect and love of him that makes it.

Again, Wisdom requires a right Discerning of Times, and to act according to a
true judgment of them. It is the Character of the Wise man, That his heart
discerns time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5. One season may afford an happy
Conjunction of favorable Circumstances, which may promise Christ's Ministers
greater success in one part of their work, than another season may. Now a Word
spoken in season has its peculiar beauty and advantage. Ministers are not to be
Time-servers to promote their own secular designs; but they must be
Time-servers in suiting their Dispensations to the advantages that every season
may peculiarly afford them to do good to Souls. A word seasonable at one time
may not be so at another. Providence which are various, call for that at one
time, which they do not at another. And Wisdom obliges to a right
Consideration, and Application proper to a day of Adversity, and to what is
proper for a day of Prosperity. There are Truths of the day to be opened and
defended; Errors of the day to be detected and confuted; Sins of the day to be
Witnessed against. And Prudence directs the Servants of God to a regard to
these. There are some Seasons more proper than others to treat with the same
Persons; and these must be watched for, and improved. This point of Wisdom
Abigail critically observed in her treatment with the Churl Nabal. And (...)
the want of this many times Pearls are Exposed before Swine, and Holy things
are thrown to Dogs. In these things therefore Ministers are to Exercise a
discerning judgment: and so approve themselves Wise as well as Faithful.

3. Prudence must temper, regulate and proportion the expressions of their
Zeal. Zeal is a Grace necessary to every Christian; and is required to an
Eminent degree of those that watch for Souls. These are styled Angels, who are
Flames of Fire: They are to be like them in a warm Indignation against Sin, in
a burning love to Christ and Immortal Souls, and in holy ardours in the Service
of God. Lukewarmness and indifferency of spirit in the Cause of Christ, and of
perishing Souls, will be a reproach to their Work, and Master; and tends to
make Sinners indifferent and careless about the great interest of Eternity:
whereas a well regulated zeal in the Advocates for God and Souls, will be a
proper medium to make Sinners in earnest in working out their own Salvation.
But all is not true zeal that men call so; what many times assumes the name is
but a degenerate passion, a fury raised in their own cause, and not in Gods: It
is a fire indeed, but an unhallowed one, not kindled at Gods Altar, that
neither came from Heaven, nor ascends thither. It is therefore requisite that
this affection be under an holy Government; which must be managed by that true
wisdom that comes from Above. Prudence must direct it to a Right Object; for
without that it will be a zeal not according to knowledge: the matter of it
must be good; it must be placed upon true Catholic Christianity; and not on
the Religion of a Party. It must be founded upon right and durable Principles,
which right Reason, and the Holy Word of God will justify; and not built upon
unaccountable Impulses, nor designed to serve the Interests of any particular
party; Prudence here is profitable to direct.

Again, Wisdom will see that it be exercised in ways consistent with Charity
and Christian Compassion; and not with the corrupt ferment of wrath and
bitterness to the persons of any. It must also Regulate the Measure and degree
of this affection. It must take care that it be only in proportion to the value
and importance of the thing, about which zeal is exercised. It must not with
the same heat be exercised about Modes and disputable Rites, as about the
Essentials of our Christian Faith, and Practice. The same degree of zeal is not
due to Tithing Annise, Mint and Cummin, as to Righteousness, Mercy and Peace,
which are the weightier matters of the Law; and the very vitals of and
undefiled Religion. Herein therefore Wisdom teaches them to make a difference
in the expressions of their zeal; and not to pursue every thing with equal
heat, earnestness and passion. And this zeal, thus attemper'd and proportioned
to the weight of objects, and according to these rules directed by Prudence,
will help Christ's Ambassadors to carry on the Treaty of Peace with Sinners to
advantage.

4. Prudence is to direct them in the right management of their addresses to
men. And there is a great degree of Prudence necessary to the right ordering of
the Public Discourses of Christ's Messengers: That they may know what to say,
and what not; to determine in what Order, Method and Manner to treat of Divine
Truths, that they may have the best influence upon their Audience. The
Understanding is the Leading Faculty in the Soul, under the influence of its
Light and Conduct the Will, Affections, and all the executive powers are to be
exercised. Hence Religion must first in order of nature have possession of this
power; and consequently this Faculty must be first informed, and Wisdom will
direct the Servants of God, like wise Master Builders to lay here the
Foundation of true Divine Knowledge.

It will also instruct what things are to be taught in the First Place, and
what Principally to be insisted on, with greatest frequency and inculcation. It
must direct in the Choice of Subjects suitable to the state and necessities of
a People.

Wisdom must teach also in what Manner the Truths and Laws of Heaven are to be
promulgated. That they be dispensed with Gravity, without Affectation; with
Zeal and Courage without Temerity; with Authority without Usurpation; with
Tenderness and Affection without the Weakness of humane Passion. It must direct
in the Dress and Language of their Discourses. This must be Intelligible,
Pertinent, neither too Labored nor too Negligent, most expressive of the
notions to be communicated, and free from that Pomp of Words that will obscure
the Matter discoursed of: this latter must be avoided, left there be reason to
say of a Discourse, as the Philosopher did of a Tragedy: It was a good One, if
a man could have seen it for words. And as to the Language of Discourses, a
difference must be allowed, and is proper on several accounts: One Subject will
allow greater Ornament of Language without any ostentation, than another; an
Address to the Affections will admit that Language which may not be so proper
when the Understanding for its information is immediately applied to; there is
a difference here also to be allowed between one Auditory and another; between
common Discourses, and such as are made on some special Occasion; and there is
a difference between the Natural and Acquired Gifts of Preachers, some being
able to speak with greater Strength, others with more of Ornament and
Politeness. Now Wisdom is to consider these different circumstances, to suit
the Language to the Subject, Occasion, and End.

Again, This must direct to the best method of discoursing: This cannot be
always the same, a variety of Subjects to be treated on, will not allow it. But
Prudence will teach that Discourses be made always in the most easy, natural,
and intelligible method, that the matter will allow. This will be not only
helpful to the Memory in retaining, but to the Understanding in taking a just
view of things.

In all these things the Wisdom of the Heralds of the Everlasting Gospel is to
be displayed, to promote the good Entertainment of their Message.

And thus we have finished the Consideration of their Qualifications. We
proceed to the last thing.

IV. Lastly, We are to Consider that Distinguishing Reward that will be given
them when their work is done. They shall be Blessed. Here two things.

1. They shall obtain the Reward of Blessedness.

2. This their Reward shall be distinguishingly great.

1. The Wise and Faithful Servant shall obtain the Reward of Blessedness. This
reward comprehends in it a perfect freedom from all disquieting Evils, and the
full possession of all Satisfying Good. The Nature and Excellency, of this
reward, we are not able in our present Embodied State, to take a comprehensive
view of. We have not Faculties enlarged to that Capacity, nor refined to that
Purity, and Clearness, nor Exalted to that Strength and Vigor, which are
necessary to Entertain, and bear an Open View of Future Glory. The Object is
too Vast and Bright, and our Understanding too weak, narrow, and earthy. A
Sight of it in its true beauty, brightness and fullness, would dazzle, confound
and overpower the mind; and Mortality must sink under the very sight of that
weight of Glory. God has seen meet in condescension to our Infirmity, to
represent this under the shadow of such Earthly Things which have most of
Profit, Pleasure and Honor in them: But after all, the Reward is Great and
Excellent, beyond thought and expression.

This however we may be sure of is contained in it, viz. That these Blessed
Ones, during their State of Separation from the Body, shall be safely lodged by
their Lord, who has the KEYS of the INVISIBLE WORLD, in the Paradise of God, a
place of inconceivable Refreshment; a Place so bright and serene, as not to
need either Sun or Moon to Enlighten it. Where they shall Enjoy the happy
Society of Angels and Perfected Spirits; nay, of CHRIST himself; with whom they
shall live in the Exercise of the wisest acts of Endearment, and in the highest
Expressions of mutual Love and Friendship. There their Employ will be that of
Angels, every way suited to the Perfection of Glorified Saints. There they
shall be fully freed from all that Sin that here infested them; from all those
sufferings that here grieved them; from all those Labors that here wasted
their Spirits; from all those Enemies that were here shooting their envenomed
arrows to wound their peace. There the Divine Image which was here begun, will
receive its finishing strokes: Their knowledge will be without Error, or faulty
Ignorance; their Holiness without Defect; their Love in its Perfection; and
their Joy in its Fullness: and all their Enjoyments will be agreeable, not to a
State of Trial, which is now over, but to a Life of Rewards.

In the Day of the Final Judgment they shall appear as true CHILDREN OF THE
RESURRECTION: Their Bodies shall be Transfigured according to the Glory, Purity
and Perfection of the Resurrection Body of the Son of God. They shall appear in
all circumstances of Honor before the General Assembly of Hell, Earth and
Heaven* And when the affairs of this Day are finished, they shall ascend with
their Glorified Master, above the visible Heavens; and with Him Enter in
Triumph into the City of God; and shall Sit down with him upon his Throne, and
shall be FOR EVER WITH HIM to behold and Partake in his Glory. But after all,
How small a Portion is Known of it! though more than enough to pronounce them
Blessed.

2. The Reward of Wise and Faithful Ministers shall be Distinguishingly Great.
I am not ignorant that the Doctrine of Degrees of Glory has been holy disputed
in the Schools. The Affirmative seems so agreeable to the Principles of Right
Reason, and so clearly revealed in the infallible Oracles of Truth; that to me
it appears more than Problematical. The Schoolmen indeed and Doctors in the
Church of Rome build this upon a rotten Foundation, viz. The different degrees
of Merit in Good Works. But their Error ought not to shake the true foundation
of this Doctrine; which appears with a clear Light in the Sure Word of
Prophesy. Here we are taught to distinguish between the Reward of a Prophet,
and the Reward of a Righteous Man, Mat. 10.41, 42. The Parable of the Talents
appears to assert and justify different degrees of Glory: Luke 19.16, 17, 18,
19. Where we find every Servant received from his Lord in proportion to his
Improvement of what had been committed to him. And the Truth flows not from a
bare Circumstance of the Parable; but from the Main Scope of it, which was to
Excite Christians to an Improvement of their Talents in proportion to what they
had received; and the Argument to engage to it is that their Reward shall be
Proportionable. He that gains ten Pounds shall be Ruler over ten Cities; and he
that gains five shall Rule over five Cities. This Doctrine also is asserted by
the Apostle as an Argument to engage the Corinthians to abound in Works of
Charity and Liberality, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that Sows Sparingly shall reap
Sparingly; But he that Sows Bountifully, shall reap Bountifully. In which
there would be no force or motive if there be not a Distinction between the
Rewards of the blessed. And this point seems still to be set in a fuller Light,
in the 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. There is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon;
another Glory of the Stars; for one Star differs from another Star in Glory:
So also is the Resurrection of the Dead. Many other places might have been
brought to have given in their Testimony to confirm the Doctrine asserted; but
it seems needless, Scripture appears for it, and has nothing, that I know of,
against it: Nor do any of the pretended Arguments against it seem to be of any
force. This will not infer a real Imperfection in the blessedness of such
Saints as Enjoy a Less Degree of Glory. A Star is as perfect in its order as
the Sun, yet they shine with a different Luster. And I do not at present see
any Absurdity in allowing a different Strength and Capacity in the blessed.
Every Soul shall be full of Glory, but One may be capable to contain more than
another. Saints are not Imperfect when they first Enter upon their Inheritance;
yet a growth and improvement seems reasonable to be allowed them. Knowledge is
an Essential part of their happiness; and in this undoubtedly they will be
always making Advances. The knowledge of Angels to be sure was improved by the
Coming of Christ, and the Gospel Revelation made to the Church, Ephesians. 3.10. And
yet before that, they were perfectly blessed; though this their increase of
knowledge must add to their Glory.

Again, This will not conclude any Imperfection in the Interest that the Least
Saint has in the Merits of Christ, which purchased this Glory, and the highest
Degrees of it. The Graces of Sanctification in this Life are the purchase of
Christ's Righteousness; yet there is not an Equality of these conferred upon
believers here. And Different Degrees of Grace in this Life seem as
inconsistent with an Equal Interest in the Merits of Christ, as Different
Degrees of Glory in the Next. But the Truth appears to me to lie thus. The
Meritorious Obedience and Sufferings of Christ were a Refusable Price in
themselves, which God was at Liberty to accept or refuse, antecedently to his
own Promise: And so was at liberty to accept it for Whom, and to what Degree He
saw meet. By free Compact between the Father and Son it was agreed to be
accepted for the full Pardon, Justification and Happiness of all God's Chosen
and Sanctified, and for the purchase of a greater degree of Glory for some,
that should distinguish themselves in higher degrees of Holiness. And all this
may be and yet an Equality be asserted in their Election, Adoption, and
Justification.

Now, if there be such a gradual difference in the Glory that shall be revealed
in the Saints; Doubtless, those that have been Wise and Faithful Stewards in
Gods House here, will obtain a proportionable Exaltation in the Kingdom of
Glory. Their Lord will distinguish them by Particular Marks of Honor there, as
they have distinguished themselves here in Zeal and Fidelity in his Service.
The Service they are now called to is Honorable, Great, and Difficult; the
Discouragements they meet with, the Temptations they conflict with, the
Self-denial they must Exercise, are all Peculiarly great; if therefore under
all they maintain their Post, are Wise and Faithful, their Reward will be as
Peculiar. They are now placed in a Station of Honor and Dignity, if they are
Faithful to their Trust, Christ will not Degrade them in the other World. And
this distinguishing Glory the Prophet Daniel refers to, Dan. 12.3. And they
that are Wise shall shine as the Bightness of the Firmament; and they that turn
many to Righteousness as the Stars for Ever and Ever.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. This tells us what need Gospel Ministers have of the PRESENCE OF
CHRIST with them. To Rule and Feed Christ's Flock, is a Work, which who is
sufficient for? The dreadful Office of Watching, not only for their own, but
the Souls of others, is enough to make the most Strong and Perfect of mere men
to tremble. And if we add to these the consideration of their own Weakness,
Sins, and Imperfections; the obstinacy of Secure, Proud Sinners, that they have
to do with; the many strong Temptations that continually assault them, and the
many circumstances of discouragement they are under; we must conclude that
without a Superior Influence to Sustain, Encourage, and Strengthen them, they
will infallibly faint in their Work: and resolve with the Prophet to Speak no
more in the Name of the Lord. How rich and sweet must then that Promise of
Christ, made to them, be? Mat. 28.20. Lo! I am with you to the End of the World.

USE. II. This assures us that not the Success, but the Wisdom and Fidelity of
Ministers will be the Measure of their Reward at Last. The Wise and Faithful
shall be blessed, what ever their Success be. The most Wise and Faithful are
not always the most Successful. The Prophets, who were honored with the
brightest Visions, were many times dispatched in judgment, to blind Eyes, and
harden Hearts; to a People of an uncircumcised Ear; and to such as would hear
but not do. Thus Isa. 6.9, 10.
Isaiah, Jer. 6.10.
Jeremiah, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.
Ezekiel. But our Text affords Encouragement: though their Unsuccesfulness may be
for the present an insupportable burden to them, and may fill them with dread
and horror, yet shall not Rob them of the least degree of their Reward. It
assures them that their judgment is with the Lord, and their Work with their
God; and though Israel be not gathered, they shall be glorious in the Eyes of the
Lord. And nothing shall abate the fullness of their Joy.

USE. III. This sets before Christ's Laborers the Strongest Motives to be
diligent in their Masters Vineyard. Ministers ordinarily have little or nothing
on this side Eternity to encourage them, but much on the contrary; there is the
frowardness of some, the wickedness of others, and the difficulty of their work
at the best, which if flesh and blood were consulted with, would make them lay
down their Office: But they have a glorious Prospect beyond the Grave. They
have the Promise of a Reward that will infinitely compensate all they undergo
in their Masters Service. And are assured that the Honor done them at last
will be in proportion to their Diligence and Application to the Work of the
Lord. And surely the Prospect of this is sufficient to inspire them with Zeal,
Courage, Vigor and Unfainting Resolution.

USE IV. This affords both Direction, and Incentive to the People of God, in
Praying for their Ministers.

It directs a People to Pray that God would qualify them for their work, and
assist and prosper them in the discharge of it: That they may find Mercy to be
faithful and wise in Feeding and Ruling Christ's Household: that those Gifts and
Graces may be multiplied upon them; in the faithful improvement whereof they
may Save their own Souls, and the Souls of them that hear them.

It affords also the most Moving Arguments to Engage a People to the constant
Exercise of this duty of Prayer for their Pastors. For if this be their Work,
which has been now laid down; if these the Qualifications necessary to the due
discharge of the duties of their Function; then we may be sure they need much
of the Divine Presence and Blessing, and much of the Prayers of their People,
as a medium to obtain these. The very nature of their work contains in it the
most powerful motives and perswasives hereto. It tells a People that if they
have any tender regard to the honor of Christ, if any Love to his Spirit, if
any true Compassion to their own Souls, and the Souls of others; if any respect
and tenderness for Christ's Messengers, they must with the most pressing
instances, constantly address the Throne of Grace in their behalf.

Let then the consideration of these things move this Assembly before the Lord
this Day, to lift up their Hearts and Eyes with the greatest efforts of Faith,
and ardours of Devotion to God for his Blessing upon all his Servants; and in
especial manner for that Unworthy Person, who now addresses you in the Name of
the Lord. Pray with incessant importunity, that God would give him a Double
Portion of the Spirit, Gifts and Graces of his Ascended Master and Father, who
has lately been snatched from his Head; That he may enjoy the Presence of Christ
with him, to assist and strengthen him to his work; to make him faithful to
Christ, and wise to win Souls; that he may fulfill his Ministry, and give up his
Account with joy to the Great Bishop of Souls. Suffer therefore that address
made by the Apostle, Romans 15.30. Now I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the love of his Spirit, that ye strive together with me,
in your Prayers to God for ME.

USE V. Hence the Death of WISE and FAITHFUL MINISTERS is a great Judgment,
which calls for deep Resentment. These are to be numbered among the First Rate
Blessings of a People. They are the Purchase of the Death, and the Gifts of the
Ascension of our Enthroned Jesus. And in proportion to their value, must the
loss of them be rated. God threatens his People to take away the Prophet, Isai.
3.2.
as one of the highest Expressions of his anger. When therefore he comes and
executes that threatening, he expects it be suitably resented: and it will be
laid to heart by every Soul whose flesh trembles for fear of God, and is
afraid of his Judgments.

THIS necessarily brings me to the SORROWFUL SUBJECT, which has been the
occasion of my present Meditations: To take a view of that Awful Rebuke of
Heaven upon this Whole LAND, and on this CONGREGATION in particular, in the
sudden Departure of that Eminent MAN OF GOD, who has been for so long a time
the Light, Joy and Glory of this Place: By whose Translation God has given us
reason to a great degree to take up that Lamentation; The joy of our heart is
ceased, our Dance is turned into Mourning; The Crown is fallen from our heads;
For THIS our heart is faint, and our eyes are dim.

I must freely confess, I never had any fondness for Funeral Encomiums; unless
when Gifts and Graces have been Eminent and Distinguishing; when the Honor of
Christ the fountain from whence they flowed, Justice to the Dead, and the Good
of the Living, do demand them; and when the Merits of the Departed leave no
room, at least no necessity for the paint of Flattery.

Sure I am, on this present Melancholy Occasion, the just sense I have of my
own Peculiar Share in this Loss, makes it more eligible to take my place in the
Silent Train of Mourners, that nothing might interrupt the Sighs and Tears of a
wounded Spirit; than to appear in this Desk. But the Duties of my Station
require, that at present I chain up my passions, suppress my own sorrows, and
bank up the swelling Tide of Grief; that it may not disturb me, while I am
paying to the Memory of my Translated Father, that Just Tribute, which all, but
the Ignorant and Envious, will acknowledge due by all the Laws of Justice and
Gratitude.

I am deeply sensible how every way Unequal I am to my present Province, to do
his Memory justice; and what danger I am in of slurring his Character by my
unskilful hand. I have neither Art to draw his Picture, nor yet to set it, when
drawn, in a true Light, that it may be seen to advantage. What Livy says of the
Roman Orator, discourages me: That to give Cicero his just Encomium, Cicerone
Laudatore opus est. To give a Great man his just praises, requires the skill of
One as Great. However, Duty to Christ, whose Servant he was, and with whose
Gifts and Graces he was conspicuously adorned; a just honor for the Memory of
a Prophet of no common Figure, a Pastor, Father and Friend, do constrain me to
rise up and Call him Blessed; and command me to Essay his CHARACTER.

His DESCENT was Honorable, from a Sage Patriot in our Israel; whose Wisdom
assigned him a Seat at the Council Board, and his Military Skill, and Martial
Spirit entitled him to the Chief Place in the Field: But in no External regard
could be more Honorable than in being the FATHER of such a SON.

In Him Bountiful Heaven was pleased to cause a Concurrence of all those
Natural and Acquired, Moral and Spiritual Excellencies, which are necessary to
constitute a Great Man, a profound Divine, a very considerable Scholar, and an
Heavenly Christian. In the light and influence of these Perfections he appeared
as a Star of the First Magnitude in the Orb of the Church.

The God of Nature was pleased with a Liberal Hand to bestow on him those
Natural Intellectual Endowments, which laid the Foundation of Great Improvement
in Knowledge. And did from his Youth praesage Uncommon Service for God and his
People, which his Master had designed him for. In Natural Endowments, he
appeared as the Elder Son among many Brethren: In these very few, if any, could
pretend to stand upon a Level with him. The Natural Capacity of his Soul was of
that Distinction, that it seemed an undeniable Confutation of the Doctrine of
the Equality of Souls; and left it no longer Problematical.

His Phansy was Copious, though not Luxuriant, but most Correct, being Obsequious
to the Dictates, and kep't under the Strict Guard of a well poised judgment: By
which it was restrained from those lawless Luxuriances and Extravagances, which
this power is Subject to, when it has broken loose from the Government of a
well-informed Understanding. His Apprehension was quick, his Reason bright, and
his Judgment exact and solid: which made him banish such things as trivial, as
were not capable of Improvement to advance his Soul, either in its Intellectual
or Moral Perfection. His Understanding was of Great Prospect: His mind filled
with bright Images of things; inricht with a vast number of noble Ideas, and
knew well their several Connexions, Relations and Dependencies, how to
separate, and how to unite them in deep searches after Truth. He had a deep
thought, and penetrating Sagacity to make a just Estimate of things on sudden
Emergencies; which made him justly Esteemed One of the Wisest Men, that has
been known, of his Order, in Our Land. His Natural Genius and Spirit seemed
superior to all narrow selfish Interests; not governed by Rules of Carnal
Policy, nor byast by private views; but appeared almost incapable to be under
the commanding influence of any thing, but what appeared Great, Good and
Honorable. He had a Native Modesty, which continued in his advanced years,
seldom known in Conjunction with Gifts of so Conspicuous an Elevation; which
might seem to some to Vail the Brightness of some of his Public Appearances;
though in the Opinion of others was but a Foil to his greater Excellencies.

These Gifts of Nature in him were Advanced and rendered more bright by Great
Improvements of Hard Study, Intimate Acquaintance with Many of the most
Celebrated Authors in the Learned World, by long Experience and Constant
Prayer. He was well Versed in the Principal parts of Substantial Learning;
which furnished him with that Knowledge, which was requisite for a Wise Master
Builder in the House and Temple of the Living God. He always affected that
Learning, which was least for Pomp and Ostentation, and most for Service; the
Knowledge of Things more than of empty Words and Names: And he must be allowed
the Character of an Uncommon Scholar; If the Knowledge of those things, which
perfect the Understanding, may be allowed Worthy of the title of Learning. And
I think it is High Time to reject other Knowledge, which does not Better or
Improve the Mind, which does not Profit, but only Amuse, as Unworthy of the
Specious Title, at least unfit to IMPROPRIATE the Name of Learning.

Divinity was his Favorite Study; and in the pursuit of this most Excellent
and Divine Knowledge, he engaged not only from Duty, but Inclination. And
Excelled to an Eminent degree in the Knowledge of the most Abstruse parts of
Theology. And a Great Divine must of necessity be a Great Clerk.

He was a Judicious Textuary. Like Apollos a Man mighty in the Scripture. His
common Public Discourses were a Demonstration of this; but especially those
Judicious and Elaborate COMMENTARIES, made in the School of the Prophets, upon
several whole Books of the Divine Oracles, remain as a Lasting Monument of this
skill.

His Knowledge in Systematical Divinity was celebrated by all. He had a Body of
Divinity well digested in his head. And was careful to hold fast the Form of
Sound Words. His Knowledge was not like a Light in a Dark Lanthorn: But out of
the Treasury of his Head and Heart was able to communicate to others. He had a
great Dexterity in confirming Truths by Incontestible Arguments, and to Set
them in an Advantageous Light; to Explain them fully, and Apply them with the
greatest Clossness and Pertinency. This was observable in the Discharge of the
Common Duties of his Pastoral Care: But this his Knowledge appeared with a
peculiar Luster in his CATECHETICAL LECTURES, which if Published, would be
found One of the best Bodies of Divinity, that has been known.

In Controversy he was a Champion, a Worthy of the First Stength, Skill, and
Courage. He was qualifyed for it by a clear Head, a cool Thought, and
Inflexible Principles. He was able to weild the Sword of the Spirit to the
Terror of Gainsayers; to their Confutation, though not always to their
Conviction: And has once and again sheathed this Sword of the Spirit in the
Bowels of Triumphant Errors. And was every way fit to be Set for the Defense of
the Gospel.

He was an Excellent Casuist. Where the Perplexed and Scrupulous might have
their difficulties Eased, their doubts resolved with Safety. When any Cases of
Conscience came under his thought, he was wont to handle them with Wise
Caution, and admirable Compassion; He deliberated Maturely on all
circumstances, and laid the Whole by the Unerring Rule, and with great judgment
determined agreeably.

All that knew him, and were Competent judges of his Worth, must do him the
Honor and Justice, to Acknowledge these Gifts were Eminent in him. And these
rendered him as Capable as any man to direct the Sons of the Prophets, and Young
Divines in their Theological Studies; and I believe was as often as any addressed
to on this Head. His DIRECTIONS to the Candidates of the Ministry, left in the
hands of many, are of great Value and Service, and will be a Testimony how Safe
and Skilful a Guide he was.

As he was Excelling in Gifts, so he was no less Eminent in the Graces of
Christ. He had A Sanctified Heart as well as a Well-Regulated, Logical Head;
and was a Scholar of great Proficiency in the School of Christ. His Graces
Consecrated his Gifts, and made them appear with a more observable luster, with
Life as well as Light. All the Virtues of the Divine Nature and Life were
visible in his Holy Walk: Which openly discovered his Soul to be A LIVING
TEMPLE of the LORD JEHOVAH, where his Throne was prepared, his Image set up,
and his Spirit dwelt. With what warm Transports of Affection and Admiration
would he discourse, or hear of the Wonders of Divine Grace Unveiled in the
whole Method of the Redemption of man? How low did he bow in profound Reverence
and Adoration of the Spotless Sovereignty of God in the Mysterious
Dispensations of the Kingdom both of Grace and Providence? How jealous was he
in his whole Conversation of the Honor of Sovereign Grace? How fearful lest
any thing should betray it, or cloud its Glory? How thoughtful also least Grace
should be abused unto Wantonness? And how careful in all his Dispensations to
guard against this Mystery of Iniquity, and to set out the Glory of Divine
Grace, and the Beauty of Holiness in their proper Luster and Admirable Harmony?
His Zeal was what became an Apostle; though flaming in the Cause of Christ, yet
was tempered by Love, and guided by Prudence. No pretense could make him
transgress his own Line; and from the duties of his own Post nothing could move
him. His Spirit was truly Pacifick; and could sacrifice every thing but Duty
for Peace: And accounted nothing too dear, but Truth and Holiness, for the
purchase of it. He was a Lively Example of Self-denial, and separation from the
World, of Patience under the reproaches of men, and Sufferings from God, and of
Resignation to the Absolute Supremacy of Heaven under the Darkest
Dispensations. The most black and sorrowful Providence never caused him to hang
his Harp on the Willows, or so put him out of Tune, as to unfit him to Sing a
Zions Song of Praise: But he could discourse of, nay realize, the Excellency
and Glory, the Majesty, Righteousness and Grace of his Masters Kingdom, even
when Clouds and Darkness were about his Throne.

No man had a deeper sense of the Poverty, Impotency and Depravation of Humane
Nature by the Apostasy; nor any a clearer view of the Fullness of that Provision
made in Christ for the Sinners Righteousness and Salvation. The Body of Sin was
his constant Burden, which he bewailed, groaned under, and expressed his
longing desire to be freed from in some of his latest hours. Meditation, which
gives Life and Power to Grace, was his Exercise and Delight; and to what good
purpose he performed this, may be seen in many SACRAMENTAL MEDITATIONS, penned
for his own Use, which are left behind him. He undoubtedly lived under the View
of the UNSEEN WORLD, which he is now gone to, and is filled with the Glory of.

These Gifts and Graces in Conjunction made him in a great degree Equal to the
Station his Lord had fixed him in. And this was the Stage on which they
appeared with beauty, and acted their Part with Glory. All that has been said,
in describing the Evangelical Pastor under the Doctrine, belong to his
Character: whose Picture therein I was designedly drawing. And his Wisdom and
Fidelity in their most comprehensive sense, in Feeding and Ruling the House of
God, are justly Celebrated through these Churches.

At first in his younger Years, his Master committed to his Pastoral Care a
Flock in a more obscure part of this Wilderness: But so great a Light was soon
observed through the whole Land: And his Lord did not design to bury him in
obscurity, but to place him in a more Eminent Station, which he was qualifyed
for. The Providence that occasioned his Removal to this Place was an Awful
Judgment upon the whole Land; yet was Eventually a Mercy in this respect, that
it made way for the Translation of this Bright Star to a more Conspicuous Orb;
where his Influence was more Extensive and Beneficial; and in this it was a
great Blessing to this Congregation, to this Town, nay, to all New England.

With what Prudence and Faithfulness, Diligence and Impartiality, he discharged
the duties of his Pastoral Office to this Flock, GOD, CHRIST and ANGELS are
Witnesses; and I doubt not but he has received the Testimony hereof from many
in the World of Perfected Spirits, who have been Blessing God for him, as the
Instrument by whom they have been led to Glory: And I trust there are many yet
Living, and now Standing before God, who are the Seals of his Ministry, and
will be his CROWN and JOY in the Day of the Lord. In his whole Ministry he
expressed a true love and zeal for Christ, and tender compassion to Immortal
Souls: There was light, heat and life in all his Addresses to them, which
argued he well understood the worth of Souls, and had a just sense of their
miserable Apostate Circumstances.

His Discourses were all Elaborate, Acute and Judicious; Smelt of the Lamp, and
had nothing Mean in them. His Common Sermons might have been pronounced with
Applause before an Assembly of the Greatest Divines. The Matter of his Public
Discourses was always weighty; His Subjects well Chosen; suited to the State
of his Flock, and every way adapted to make them Wiser and Better. The Articles
of Faith he Opened and Confirmed; The Duties of Holiness he Explained, and
Enforced with the most powerful Arguments; and with an Address suited to melt
the Rocky Heart, to bow the Stubborn Will, to humble the proudest Sinner, and
charm the deafest Adder. The Manner in which he delivered his Discourses was
agreeable to the Matter. In respect of both he Spoke as became the ORACLES of
GOD: With Gravity, Courage, Zeal and Prudence, and with tender Bowels to
perishing Souls. His Language was always good; His Style Masculine, not
Perplexed, but Easy as well as Strong. And when the Matter required it, no man
could speak with a greater Pathos and Pungency.

He applied himself to Wounded Consciences with great Skill, Faithfulness and
Tenderness. He searched their Wounds to the bottom, and made Application of
Terror or Comfort, as their State called for, and as became a Wise, Tender and
Faithful Physician: And he knew how to be a Son of Thunder to the Secure and
Hardened; and a Son of Consolation to the Contrite and Broken in Spirit.

His Public Prayers were always Pertinent and Pathetical, animated with the
Spirit of Devotion; and in them an Uncommon Compass of Thought was observable.
In the Whole of his Work he was Laborious, careful to redeem time, and was
instant in season and out of season in his Masters Service.

His Affection and Tenderness to THIS HIS DEAR FLOCK was singular. He might
have said with the Apostle, that he could have imparted with the GOSPEL his own
SOUL to them.

As a Wise and Faithful Steward over this House of Christ, he gave every man
his Portion in due Season. And might at his Departure have called Heaven and
Earth to Record, That he had not shunned to declare the Whole Counsel of God,
and was Pure from the Blood of all men.

He went before this Flock as a Good Shepherd, Gathering the Lambs with his
Arm, carrying them in his Bosom, and Gently driving those that are With Young:
And is now gone to the GREAT Shepherd of the SHEEP; whose Flock he here Watch't
over, Lead, Fed and Defended.

He took his FAREWELL of us at the TABLE of the LORD; and shall Enjoy no more
such Fellowship with him, till we come to Eat Bread and Drink New Wine with
Him; in our Fathers Presence.

AND how deeply should we resent the hand of God herein Stretched out against
us?

GOD Calls this Whole People to lay it to Heart, and to improve this Awful
Providence to awaken to Repentance.

His Removal is a Great Judgment upon the whole Land. He was a Great Blessing
to it by his Faithful Warnings, Counsels, Prayers and Tears, Life and Doctrine.
He was a Main Pillar in our Building, which is Weakened by his fall; A Main
Stake in our Hedge is plucked up, which has made a wide Gap, and made the whole
Wall about this Vineyard to totter. He was a Great part of the Chariots and
Horsemen of our Israel; A Faithful Watchman, Quick to espy danger, and
Faithful to Sound an Alarm: And has often Warned this People of Evils
Approaching, and against their Sins the procuring Cause of them. He was always
ready to stand in the Gap in times of greatest hazard.

And it ought never to be forgotten, with what Prudence, Courage and Zeal he
appeared for the good of this People, In that Dark and Mysterious Season, when
we were assaulted from the Invisible World. And how Singularly Instrumental he
was in discovering the Cheats and Delusions of Satan, which (...) stained our
Land with Blood, and did threaten to deluge it with all manner of Woes.

It is a Critical Season he is removed in; as dark a Day as ever passed over
this Land; and it is well, if it be not a Praesage of greater darkness; I am
Sure the Setting of so Bright a Star will make it so.

We had scarce dried our Eyes for the loss of One The Reverend Mr. Samuel
Torrey.
SAMUEL, but Providence opens anew the Fountain of our Tears by Afflicting us
with the Death of ANOTHER. It is well if the Conjunction of their Funerals be
not Portentous of further, and greater Calamities: I am sure it will be so if
it be not laid to heart.

It is a Humbling Rebuke to the Whole Ministry. By this Stroke of Heaven a
Considerable part of their Strength, Wisdom, and Beauty is Gone; and a Cloud
drawn over their Glory. Their Union, which is both their Strength and Glory, in
the most Critical Seasons, and Hours of Temptation, is well known in a great
Measure to be owing to his Wisdom, and Temper. And God Grant! That we may not
too soon feel the sad Effects of this blow from Heaven upon that Order. I
cannot but here observe, That the Younger Ministers always repaired to him,
and found him their tender Father, their faithful Counselor, sure Guide, and
Powerful Guardian. These he cherish't under his Wings, and was tender of their
Persons and good Names: And often interposed to put by those Thrusts that were
made to Wound their Reputation; and they have now lost the Best Friend that
Many of them ever had a this side Heaven.

His Removal is a Frown upon the School of the Prophets, which has been for
several years under his Faithful and Prudent Inspection. And God has now come
to the Sons of the Prophets, and taken their MASTER from their Head. And they
have Reason to Lament after him as Elisha did after Elijah; My Father, my
Father, the Chariots of our Israel and the Horsemen thereof.

This Judgment has the Blackest Aspect upon this Congregation, who have long
Lived under, and rejoiced in this Light. But this Light of our Israel is
Quenched, or rather has quitted our World of Darkness, and is fixed in a
Brighter Firmament.

GOD hereby tells us that He is very angry with us; and expects that we should
see to pacify His Displeasure.

GOD's Voice herein is loud to Sinners that have been Deaf to the Charms of
this Wise Charmer; whose hearts have not been wounded by those Arrows of the
Almighty which have been Shot by his Strong and Skilful Hand. And the Language
of it is, that they forthwith Incline their Ears unto the Voice of Wisdom, lest
God withdraw his Spirit, as well as Call Home his Ambassador; for then they
will be Sealed up unto Ruin, and all the Reproofs and Counsels of his Servant
will be heavy Items to Inflame their Reckoning.

GOD calls aloud to Loose Professors, that they Gird up the Loins of their Mind.

And expects that the Best of us now make a just and sorrowful Reflection upon
our Barrenness.

In a word, This Solemn Providence should influence all of us to Search and Try
our Ways and Turn unto the Lord; lest He go on to Smite us in His Wrath, and at
last quite REMOVE OUR CANDLESTICK, AND HIDE THE THINGS OF OUR PEACE FROM OUR
EYES.

USE VI. The Consideration of the Reward reserved for such, sets before us what
should Moderate our Sorrows for the Departure of Christ's Faithful Servants.

The Loss of Such is Great; and we shall be stupid if we do not lay it to
heart. The very thought of parting with them, whom we loved as our own Souls,
is full of Darkness: And their actual Removal cannot but fill a sensible Soul
with bitterness and wormwood.

But we must remember, we must not Weep for them, but for our selves. Our Loss
is their Gain: They have run their Race, finished their Course, and have laid
hold of Eternal Life: They Dyed in the Lord and are Blessed. The thoughts of
what State of Happiness they are gone to, should mix joy with our deepest
grief. Love to them would not allow us, were it possible, to pluck them out of
the Arms of their Redeemer, where they are solacing themselves; to call them
back to this World of Sin and Darkness, which we our selves are groaning for a
Deliverance from.

Let this therefore assuage our griefs for the Death of that Prophet, over
whose Tomb we have been now dropping our Tears.

He is Entered into his Masters Joy, and is possessed of that immarcessable Crown
of Glory, which with patience and agony of Soul he has been contending for. He
is now free from the stains of Sins, and pains of Suffering: He will never more
cry out under the Weight of a Body of Death, nor ever-more be assaulted by the
Grand Adversary of Souls. His Righteous Soul will be no more grieved with the
impure Conversation of the Wicked; nor wounded with his own Infirmities. His
Knowledge of God and Christ, his Love, Holiness and Joy are now in their
Perfection. The Reward he has received is undoubtedly of Great Distinction, in
proportion to his Prudence, Zeal, Diligence and Fidelity in his Masters Service.

And will not this relieve our mournful thoughts? Is it no Consolation, for us
to reflect on that State of Unstained Purity, Perfection, and full Satisfaction
he is advanced to? Is it no Comfort under our Sorrows, to think, with what
Congratulations of Triumphant Joy many of his Spiritual Children did welcome
his safe Arrival to those Bright Realms of Light? And how all Heaven rung with
new Anthems of Praise on this Occasion? To think what Honor was done him at
his Admission into the Heavenly City by his Lord-Redeemer, Ange^^ and the whole
Assembly of the Firstborn? Is it no Joy to us to take a view of that Ocean of
Delight he Swims in? What Bread of Angels he feeds on? How Bright and Massy the
Crown his Master has fixed on his Head? Surely it cannot but please us to
realize, that he that a few days since was with us viewing God and Christ in
the Dark Glass of Ordinances, is now Standing in his Masters Presence, and has
a Satisfying, and Transforming View of his FACE and GLORY. To consider with
what fullness of Desire and Satisfaction his Purified, Strengthened and
Enlarged Powers behold the Glory of God, and drink down full draughts of those
Rivers of Truth, Goodness and Delight, that flow from the LIGHT of his
COUNTENANCE: With what Transports of Soul he flings himself, and lays down his
Crown before the THRONE of GOD and the LAMB; This cannot but afford us some
present Refreshment.

Do we not Rejoice? When we Consider what Society he (...) Associated with, who
are most Knowing and Friendly; What Noble Service he is Employed in: While with
Angels and Crowned Saints, he is Shouting forth HALLILUJAHS to the Honor of
the LAMB that was Slain, who Redeemed him, and Washed him in his Blood, and has
now presented him without SPOT before the Throne of God.

These thoughts should in some measure dry up our Tears; at least should turn
our Grief into the Chanel of Godly Sorrow.

What Remains but that we follow this Servant of God, as he followed Christ:
That we Imitate his Love, his Faith, Holiness and Patience in Well-doing. We
have the Same Master to Serve* the Same Spirit to assist us, and the Same Glory
to Entertain us, if we are faithful to the Death.

Thus let us prepare to follow: And this will give us a Comfortable Prospect,
that when the time of our Dissolution shall come, we shall Go to HIM, nay to
CHRIST, which is infinitely better; And shall have our part in the WORK, and
REWARDS of our Father's Kingdom.

Let us now therefore Comfort our selves and one another with THESE THINGS.

AMEN.
A POEM ON ELIJAHS Translation, Occasioned by the DEATH of the Reverend and
Learned Mr. SAMUEL WILLARD, Late Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in Boston, and
Vice President of Harvard College in Cambridge.

By Mr. COLMAN, V. D. M.

Coelo Musa beat.
Hor. Carm. Lib. 4. Od. 8. -- Nec meus audet
Rem tentare pudor, quam Vires far recusent.
Hor. Ep. 1. Lib. 2. BOSTON: Printed for Benjamin Eliot, 1707.

A POEM, On ELIJAHS Translation, Occasioned by the DEATH of the Reverend and
Learned, Mr. SAMUEL WILLARD.
I Sing the MAN, by Heavens peculiar Grace,
The Prince of Prophets, of the Chosen Race,
Raised and Accomplished for degenerate Times,
To Stem the Ebb with Faith and Zeal Sublime;
TO assert forsaken Truth, to Check the Rage
Of rampant Vice, and cure a Wicked Age.
Such Times need such a Prophet, and in his Death
Is quenched the Light of Israel, and their Breath.
Plain was the Saint, his Soul by Grace refined,
His Girdle mean, but much adorned his Mind:
In Face, as well as Mind, above the Toys
Of this vain World, and all its sensual Joys*
Simple in Diet, negligent of Dress,
Hairy and rough his Robe, 2 Kings i.8. St. Mat. iii.4.
meet to express
One Mortified to things of Time and Sense,
To Truth and things Divine a Love Intense.
Jealous for Israel 1 Kings xix.10.
, and the LORD OF HOSTS,
Disdained to see HIM Rivaled by a Post,
Mourned his forsaken Covenant, and Worship lost.
Courageous, dared Alone to stand the Shock,
Of numerous Priests of Baal xviii.22, 27.
, and to deride their Stock.
Faced feirce Tyrannous Powers, told their Crimes,
And shames deserved, the Judgments of their Times.
His and Truths Triumphs Glorious: Strange to say!
A debaucht Nation Convert in a Day v.39.40.
,
And shamed, enraged Impostures fled away!
A wondrous Saint; Inspired, Employed and Led
By Heavenly Love; by many Wonders fed xvii.6, 9, 16.xix.5, 7.
.
The Care of Heaven, the Darling of his GOD,
Signally Saved, cheered by his Staff and Rod.
Voracious Ravens yield Him up their Prey:
Glad Angels to his Succor wing away:
And Heaven, to show its Empire more, commands
Hopeless Relief from famishing Widows hands.
He Prayed, St. James v.17.
the Sealed Heavens witheld their Rain;
He Prayed, the opened Clouds discharge again.
Provokt, He asked; 2 Kings i 10. St Luk ix 54.
strange blazing showers of Flame
Stream down, and Sodoms Day renewed came.
He struck the Floods, 2 King. ii.8.
the refluent Waves divide*
His Mantles Breath drove back the flowing Tide.
What aild thee, O astonished Sea, to fly?
Jordan! from Joshua's days thy Banks not dry!
Yet Greater Wonders view: He spoke, the Dead 1 Kings xvii.22, 24.

In Sin, or Grave, lift up their fallen Head:
Witness the happy Mother, fully won*
To Heaven as she received her raised Son:
Blessed Work of Grace! the Mercy of the Mean
Illustrious, as the Saving Change, is Seen*
Not less Miraculous the Prophets Fasts,
Labors and Travels 1 Kings xix.8.
gloriously Surpast:
His Strength and Application, as his Trust
Noble and vast, Angelick and August:
In public Toils consumed, of Life profuse,
Exhausted in retired holy Muse,
On the deep things of God, and Mysteries Abstruse.
Such Labors Bounteous Heaven is wont to Crown
With Heavenly Visions, Light and Joys unknown.
So Heavenly Glories dazzled Moses Eyes Exodus xxxiv.6.
,
And Laboring Paul 2 Cor. xii.4.
was caught to Paradise.
No less Elijah to his Savior dear,
No less his Cares and Toils, his Prayers and Tears;
Nor less would Heaven his suffering Soul to cheer.
The GOD of Israel past before the 1 Kings xix.11, 12, 13. Exodus xx 18, 19.
Cave
In Majesty, as 'erst the Law he gave,
And frightened Nature seemed to seek a Grave.
Tempests and Flames, and Earthquakes marched before,
Speaking the Terrors of Almighty Power;
These ushered in the small still Voice of Grace;
His Soul grew Calm, Serene the troubled Place:
Hushed as the Winds were all his boisterous Fears,
The Humble Saint, called forth by God, appears;
With Mantle wrapped about his face he stood,
Afraid to hear, nor wished to see his GOD.
Yet left the Hero as his GOD we show,
Or He 2 Cor. xii 7.
Elate with Visions, vain should grow,
At times his Passions did the Man betray,
That Saints have Sin, and Prophets are but Clay.
Too Timorous midst his Triumphs; 1 Kings xix.3, 9. St James v.17.
left to fly
A Woman's Rage and Threats, and wish to die.
Desponding v 14, 18.
moan'd Christ of his Church bereft,
And not a single Saint in Israel left.
All to hide Pride from Man, to show how Vain Psalm xxxix.5.

We are at Best, and undue Tho'ts restrain.
GOD is the Light 1 John i.5.
, in whom's no Shade at all,
To Him in prostrate Adorations fall.
Created Brightness ever has its Blots,
And even Persia's Idol has its Spots.
Yet Admiration, Reverence and Love
Are due to Saints on Earth, or those Above.
Sure the cursed Spirit that hates is born of Hell,
Nor is less Monster then foul Jezebel:
She Murderous sought his Blood 1 Kings xix.2.
: Ahab his Name
( Dearer than Life) with sland'rous lies defames xviii.17.
:
And both invet'rate Hate, and deadly War proclaim.
Yet Spite of Envy, Spite of Malice cursed,
VIRTUE shall live: see bloated Fiend, and burst!
See the fair Name Immortal in my Verse!
See the Strewn Glories on the Hero's Hearse!
A Name imbalm'd shall be the Just Man's lot,
While Vicious Teeth shall gnash, and Names shall rot.
Return, my Muse, and Sing his faithful Care,
And noblest Trust, in happy 2 Kings ii.2, 3.
Bethels Chair.
Hail, Venerable Seat! from Jacobs days Genesis xxviii.12, 17, 19.

Sacred to Isreal's GOD, and to his Praise!
Blessed evermore with Visions! the Resort
Of Holy Angels! Heavens Inferior Court!
Hail dreadful Place! the Eternals blessed Abode!
The Gate of Heaven, and the House of GOD!
Blessed place of Inspiration! --
Here stood the Spacious College, Isreal's pride:
And here the Illustrious Seer did preside.
Stately the Dome, worthy the Beauteous Train,
Religion pure devoted to Maintain,
And to the Age to come the Laws Divine explain.
Richly Endowed by every pious Zeal,
Studious of Zions Glory and her Weal:
Blessed Tribute! dear to Heaven: A pious Aid
Given to Christ, and liberally repaid
In richer Blessings to the Church and State;
So He returns us what we Consecrate.
Hence Isreal's Chiefs, and hence her Teachers came;
Hence Truth and Grace, hence issued Light and Flame;
Hence Men Renowned, and of Celebrious Fame.
Micaiah one: from foul Illusion free,
Faithful to God, and Ahab true to thee 1 Kings xxii.8, 19, 28.
!
Kings trembled as he Spoke and Homage paid,
Of Truth and the Superior Man afraid.
Elisha too, to greater Glories born,
Was hence: and high exalted is his Horn!
These beauteous Sons were the blessed Prophets pride,
Under his Wing they bloomed, and flourisht by his Side:
Paid him a Reverence profound and true,
To Heavens Election, Isreal's Suffrage due.
Them, as by Office bound, He did Inspect,
Taught heavenly Truth, and Errors did correct:
Cherisht the Good, and formed their Manners well,
But searched out Vice, the Infection to expel.
Meek and Majestic; Affable and Grave,
Lowly and Good; and all that is Great and Brave.
He Overaw'd and Charmed: Base hearts he won,
And perfected where Goodness was begun.
To them His Lectures on the Holy Law,
Sublime they were, new Mysteries they saw:
Like Him with Heavenly Light and Joys Inspired,
Their ravished Minds the Sacred Deeps admired.
They saw the promised MESSIAH's days St John viii.56.
,
And the Glad Schools resounded with his Praise.
They Sang the Baptist Mal. iv.5. Mat. xvii.12, 13. Luke i.17.
in their Prophets Spirit,
And blessed the Saint Elect that should Inherit.
They Sang of the St. Mat. xvii.2, 3. Luke ix.31.
Transfigur'd Saviors Rays,
What Favorite Saints, from Heaven it self, to gaze,
On Glories yet Unknown; and Talk of High
Mysterious Truths; into which Angels Pry,
And pass in Transports Immortality.
They Sang his High Ascent, and Gifts Psalm lxviii.18. Act ii.3, 4. Designed to
resemble the Ascent meditated on, and to represent the Poverty of Number and
Rhyme to express the Unspeakable Gifts.
Ineffable,
The Cloven Tongues of Fire on Pentecost that fell,
And what Great Type should all these Wonders Figure and Foretell.
Thus taught, they waited long the Great Event,
Foresaw the Day, Amazed at the Portent:
Stupendous Grace and Power they viewed, Adored
The Sov'rain GOD, and Pried into his Word.
And now the Saint had his Last Visit made,
His Solemn Charge* and final Blessing said.
His Weeping Sons received his last Adieu,
With eager Eyes their Breath departing View,
And following far behind to Jordans 2 Kings ii.7.
Brink they drew.
Each Emulous to Succeed, but well prepared
To welcome Him whom Heaven had Heir declared*
ELISHA He 1 xix.16, 19.
! The Wisdom of the choice
Applauded with United Hearts and Voice.
Un-envy'd in the Schools, had long out-shone
In Gifts Divine, and Rival there was none.
Glorious the Seers Fidelity was here,
And Heavens Good Conduct Splendid did appear.
Nor Blood, nor Name, his upright Zeal retard,
Gods Choice and Will he simply did regard;
Whom Heaven accomplishes it will reward.
The happy Youth cleav'd to his Fathers feet,
Ministering 2 Kings ^ii.11, 12.
to Him with a Duty meet;
From his Oraculous Lips asked Counsel Sage,
And had the Prayers and Blessings of his Age.
Yet there remained the last and dy'ng Bequest,
And the Wise Son had ready his Request.
" Say, now at Parting, 2 Kings ii* 9.
what I shall bequeath!
Trembling He fell the Prophets feet beneath,
Grieved to part, afraid to speak his Though It,
Conscious how vast the Blessing was he so't:
With Mouth in dust he said, -- "May I inherit
"A double Portion of thy Blessed Spirit!
"O might my last and highest Wish have place,
"An Em'nent Measure of thy Gifts and Grace!
Divine Ambition! to be Wise and Good!
So he his Fame and Interest understood.
Modest his Wish, He only asked a part,
And Heaven gave all, 1 Kings iii.5, 9, 10, 1^.
even an Equal Heart:
Obvious the Truth, from Sacred Record known,
None came so near Elijah as his wondrous Son.
'Twas at high Noon, the Day serene and fair,
Mountains of Lum'nous Clouds rolled in the Air,
When on a sudden, from the radiant Skies,
Superior Light flasht in Elisha's Eyes:
The Heavens were cleft, and from the Imperial Throne
A Stream of Glory, daz'ling Splendour, Shone:
Beams of ten Thousand Suns Shot round about,
The Sun and every blazoned Cloud went out:
Bright Hosts of Angels lined the Heavenly Way,
To guard the Saint up to Eternal Day.
Then down the Steep Descent, a Chariot Bright,
And Steeds of Fire, swift as the Beams of Light.
Winged Seraphs ready stood, bowed low to greet
The Favorite Saint, and hand him to his Seat.
Enthroned he Sat, Transformed with Joys his Mein,
Calm his gay Soul, and like his Face Serene.
His Eye and burning Wishes to his GOD,
Forward he bowed, and on the Triumph rode.
Mr. Standen.
"Saluted, as he past the Heavenly Crowd,
"With Shouts of Joy, and Hallelujahs laud.
"Ten thousand thousand Angel Trumpets Sound,
"And the vast Realms of Heaven all echoed round.
They Sang of Greater Triumphs Acts i.9, 10.
yet to come,
Their next Descent to wait the SAVIOR Home:
And the glad Errand St. Mat. xxiv.31.
of the Final Day,
The raised Dust of Saints to bring away
In equal Triumph, and in like Array.
Thus midst Inspired, Sublime, Prophetic Songs,
(Sweet Melody) the Vision past along.
The Prince of Air Accursed fled swift the Light,
And heavenly Sounds, more grating than the Sight;
Blaspheem'd, and raged and gnasht in furious Spite.
Elisha saw: 2 Kings ii.12.
" My Father, loud he cried,
" My Father! Isreal's Safety! and her Pride!
"More were Thou our Defense and Glory far,
"Then all our Chariots and strong Troops of War*
"Thy Prayers and Power with God did more secure
"Our Tottering State, and naked Coasts immure*
"Than all our Arms. --
He said: Nor more could see: Immense the space!
The Flying Glory now had gained the Place
Of Light never to be seen by Mortal Eye 1 Timothy vi. 1^.
:
Nor longer Acts i.11.
gazed he on the closing Sky.
With Anguish seized 2 Kings ii.12.
his goodly Robes he rent,
Himself, the Church, and Schools did sore lament.
The Prophets Bliss could not his Tears restrain,
He wept their Loss, in His Eternal Gain.
Nor yet in Useless tears staid he to vent
His mighty Griefs, on Greater things Intent:
The Mantle fallen v.13.
with Joy surprising spied,
Laid the dear Pledge close to his panting Side
Sov'rain Receipt! his fainting heart revived.
By it Installed in the blessed Prophets Place!
With it received his Spirit and his Grace!
The Sacred Banner flying in his Hand,
Displayed his Empire, on the distant Strand;
Nature Obsequious, to his dread Command.
Triumphant-wise, the pensive Conqu'ror stood,
The precious Relick waved, and smote the flood:
" Where is the LORD, v.14
Elijahs GOD? He cried.
The Obedient Waves again in haste divide.
He passed: the ravished Prophets saw; confessed
The Miracle of Grace, and thankful blessed
The Eternal SPIRIT, and his Glorious Rest v.15.
.
O'rejoy'd they run the Saint Elect to meet,
And bow v.15.
beneath the bright Successors feet.
They breathe their Prayers and Blessings in his Arms,
Cheer his sad Soul, and their own Passions charm
(...) within 'em glow St. Luke xxiv.32.
, their Graces burn
(...) speak Mysterious Oracles in their turn:
(...) their Mind, Transformed Exodus xxxiv.30.
their very Mein,
(...) Superior Grace and Beauty seen.
(...) Holiness and Truth sweet their Accord,
And Faith their Consolation did afford,
Elijahs more Illustrious Second St. Mark ix.4.
Coming with his LORD.
FINIS.

