THE Duty of Believers to oppose the Growth of the Kingdom of SIN, PRESSED; The
Means and Manner of Managing this Opposition EXPLAINED; The ways whereby men
become guilty of discouraging others from vigorous attempts against the growth
of Vice, and the Carnal Grounds of their so doing DETECTED. IN A SERMON
Preached before the Honorable ARTILLERY COMPANY in Boston, on the Day of their
ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, in the Year 1708.

By Samuel Danforth, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Taunton.

Ezekiel. 20. 44. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with
you for my Names sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your
(...) doings, O ye House of Israel says the Lord God.

II Chron. XV. 2, 7.

Boston: Printed by John Allen, in Pudding-Lane. Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his
Shop under the West End of the Townhouse in Kings-street. 1708.

THE Duty of BELIEVERS to oppose the Growth of the Kingdom of SIN PRESSED, etc.
Hebrews XII. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood striving against SIN.
IN these words is contained a Motive given unto Believers to run with patience
the Race set before them, notwithstanding the sore Trials they met with
therein; as the loss of their Goods, Shame, and the contradiction of Sinners.
Chap. 10. 33, 34. The Motive is taken from this consideration, that the
Sufferings they met with were small, in comparison of those which other
Christians had endured, and which they ought willingly to undergo, if God
should call them thereto. In these words, (1.) Is implied, that in running the
Race Christ has set before us, we are to resist and strive against Sin. Here
we may note.

1. That by Sin, which is here declared to be the Enemy we are to res^ist and
strive against, is meant either,

1. The Sin yet remaining in true Believers themselves; that Sin which dwells
in them. Every true Believer ought to make it his constant work to resist and
strive against Indwelling-sin in himself.

2. Or those Temptations to Sin, which Satan and his Instruments make use of,
whereby they endeavor to draw or drive good men into Sin; The Enemies of our
Souls use both artifice and force, policy and power, flatteries and threatenings
to cause good men to apostatize from Christ. Some by Sin in our Text,
understand Sinners, such who discourage others from Virtue, and encourage
others into Vice. But this Term, Sin; which we are to resist and strive against
as an Enemy to us, may comprehend the whole Kingdom of Sin and Satan; the
Kingdom of Darkness, in all its parts, members, policies and stratagems,
designs and (...).

3. By Sin in this Text, I incline to think, that we ought chiefly to
understand, that which is the Prevailing Sin of the Age and Place in which each
Believer does live: For it is a noncompliance with, and an opposition to the
Prevailing Sins of the Time and Generation wherein Believers have lived, that
has in all Ages occasioned the greatest sufferings unto good men, in their
Names, Estates or Lives: when Idolatry was the Sin which was most in fashion in
the world, (...) holy men by resisting and striving against it, suffered the
loss of their lives.

2. The resisting and striving against this Enemy Sin, is expressed by such
words in the Original Tongue, as import a resisting of it with agony, putting
forth all their force and strength against it; and the making an offensive, as
well as a defensive war against it.

2. The words of our Text teach us this Lesson, that Believers should be
encouraged to continue in the Exercise of patience under all the lesser
sufferings they meet with, on account of their opposition to the prevailing
sins of the Age and Place wherein they live, from this consideration, that God
is as yet sparing them from such hot service, which he has in times past
called some of his Champions unto, against this Enemy Sin, namely, to have
their Blood shed, and to part with their very lives in this War against Sin.

DOCTRINE.
God expects His Own People should resist and strive against Sin, in the
several Ranks and Posts wherein he has placed them; especially against the
most prevailing Sins of the Age, Place and Generation wherein they Live,
putting forth the whole force of their Spiritual Strength, Courage and Wisdom,
in their opposition thereto; being prepared and disposed to part with their
very Lives in this Spiritual War against the Kingdom of Sin, if God should call
them thereunto.

Believers ought to strive against the prevailing Sins of the Times, both
singly and jointly, and in all Conditions, Stations and Capacities wherein they
stand. Unto this Resisting of Sin, Believers are moved, and hold themselves
obliged by such considerations as these.

1. That Sin is the Enemy of Mankind; their worst Enemy, their common Enemy;
and in some sense their only Enemy. More particularly they consider,

1. That each and every single person has no worse Enemy then his own sins;
and among all the sins which he falls into, or is subject of, his worst Enemy
is that which is most properly his own Iniquity. The Enemy within the walls of
our hearts, is more dangerous than the Enemy besieging of us from without:
Indeed we are by Nature unsensible that we carry our worst enemy in our own
bosoms, and shall continue insensible hereof, until God by the power and
efficacy of his Spirit do convince us thereof: We are naturally much concerned
about, and afraid of our supposed enemies without us; but ignorant of the
danger we are in of the real enemy that lodges within us. The sins prevailing
in our hearts, as atheistical and profane thoughts, pride, worldly-mindedness,
hypocrisy, malice, and envy, and similia, do us more hurt, and expose us to
more danger then all the enemies real or supposed that are without us. The
Temptations of Satan, and the snares of the World get victory over us, by
reason of that enemy sin dwelling in us, which takes part with those enemies
from without us. The folly bound up in a man's own heart does expose him to more
danger, than all the policies of all other men can do, who set themselves
against him.

Again; The sins produced in persons by the principle of Corruption dwelling in
them, whether they be sins of omission or commission, do hurt the Sinners
themselves more than they can hurt any one else besides themselves, and more
than any one else can hurt them. It is true not only of the man who is given to
excessive drinking, but of the Adulterer, Thief, dishonest Gainer, the profane
Swearer, Sabbath-breaker, and of him that omits the secret duties of Religion;
such a man is his own worst enemy.

Sin sets God himself against a man; now it were better for any man to have all
the world adversaries to him, then that One Great and Glorious God who made
him, and who can cast both Body and Soul into Hell.

Sin exposes a man to the Curses of the Law, to Death temporal, spiritual and
eternal; and in short, nothing could or would hurt any man, were it not for Sin
in himself, and the guilt of sin lying upon himself; a man should have no other
enemy to conflict with, were it not for Sin adhering to, and inherent in
himself; in which respect Sin may be called Man's only enemy; and it is also his
constant enemy, which at no time does him any good, but at all times is
procuring mischief and misery unto him.

Therefore every man ought, and every Believer does, and will resist and strive
against his own sin, sin in himself; against the whole body of sin in himself,
but chiefly against the leading, ruling, prevailing and most predominant sin in
himself; not only by exercising repentance and godly sorrow for those sins that
have prevailed in him, and applying himself by faith to the Blood of Christ for
pardoning mercy and deliverance from the guilt of sin; but by setting upon the
work of Mortification of sin dwelling in him with all his might; and finding
his own strength (even that of grace received) to be of it self too weak to
encounter with and subdue this enemy in his heart; he does therefore by earnest
prayer call in, and by the due exercise of faith obtain the help of Heaven
against the mighty sins that rise up against him.

A true Believer does also resist and strive against sin in himself by
maintaining a strict watch over his heart, and over his whole man, having
learned not to trust his own deceitful heart.

He does also daily renew the Combat against Sin; confessing unto God the
faults and follies which he discerns in himself, and the daily eruptions of
sin that dwells in him; complaining of himself unto God; O wretched man that
I am! who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? and he makes his
complaint to the right object, the blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who came into
this world to save his people from their sins; unto him he is constantly
crying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me, and deliver me from this my
worst Enemy, my sinful self.

2. Family Sins are the worst enemies of Families, and do bring all those
calamities and distresses upon them which befall them. Sin deprives Families of
that comfort, for the attaining whereof, these first Societies that ever were
erected in the world were appointed. All the Crosses, Losses, Poverty,
Sicknesses, Deaths, Distractions and Disorders that are in Families must be
placed to the account of sin. The reason why some Families flourish not in
their Persons, Estates, or Interests, is not chiefly because their Neighbors
do not love them, but because Sin (like the worm at the root of Jonah's Gourd)
makes them wither and decay. Where Family Prayer is neglected, and God is not
owned, honored, worshipped in a Family, no wonder that Family falls under a
blast. If men resolve to be rich without asking God leave, without begging of
God that his presence may be with them in their employments, and his blessing
may be upon their lawful Endeavors, it is just with God that such should be
disappointed. If the Head of the Family make no conscience daily and duly to
perform Family Prayer, he may thank his own sinful omission of Duty that his
Inferiors prove unto him undutiful, disobedient, unruly, and altogether
discomforts to him. Why should we expect that God should I provide for our
Families their daily Bread, if we refuse to pay to God (our great Landlord) his
daily Rent and Revenue due unto him from us, namely the morning and evening
Sacrifice of Prayer and Praises? Can we expect our Inferiors should show unto
us Reverence and Obedience, while we our selves are disobedient to God, and
undutiful to our Maker and Glorious Redeemer? How can we expect that the
blessed God by his preventing goodness should preserve us and ours from
sicknesses, dangers and deaths, and take a fatherly care of us from day to day,
while we refuse to acknowledge him to be our Father, and the Father of our
Families, by honoring and obeying of him? Mal. 1. 6.

3. The Sins prevailing in greater Societies of men, (as Towns, Churches,
Provinces, Kingdoms and Empires) are the worst Enemies of those Societies or
States. Whence comes general Poverty, Scarcity, Deaths, unseasonable weather,
Losses by Land and Sea? Whence comes War with all the calamities that are the
appendices of it? Whence comes Epidemical Diseases and mortal Distempers? only
from Sin. Sin provokes God, and then he raises up the Heathen and other
Adversaries against us. Our Barrenness under the means of Grace provokes God to
smite the Earth with barrenness, that it shall not yield its increase unto us.
We fall short of the duty that we owe unto God, therefore he cuts us short of
our outward comforts: We delay and procrastinate our repentance for Sin, and
acceptance of Christ offered to us in the Gospel, therefore God delays to hear
our Prayers, and to save us out of our distresses.

Sin is our Common Enemy; an Enemy to all our Communities and Societies; a
public and open Enemy to us, and an Enemy to the public interests of a
People, as well as to the interests of private men. Therefore we ought jointly
to resist and strive against Sin, by uniting our forces and strength against
it; yea we should lay by our smaller differences among our selves, that with
one consent and one heart we may defend our selves against, and endeavor to
subdue this common and implacable Enemy, which seeks the destruction of us all.
The people of God should resist and strive against sin from a principle of
Self-preservation, and from Love to the Public; because sin resists and
opposes all their good and comfort, and tends to their ruin, misery and
destruction.

To such an uniting of their forces against sin, their common Enemy, True
Believers are further excited by considering,

2. That Sin is Gods Enemy as well as theirs. Now all that have sincerely given
up their Souls to Christ, and expect Salvation by him, do take Christ's Friends
to be their Friends, and Christ's Enemies to be their Enemies. A true Christian
is one that has Espoused the Interest of Christ to be his own Interest; yea,
he prefers the Interests of Christ his Redeemer, before any other Interest that
may be called his own: He has sworn allegiance to Christ, and engaged himself
to be his true and faithful Subject, and Listed himself under Christ as his
Captain General, to fight against all Christ's Enemies, and to prosecute and
promote all the designs of Christ. Now the most prevailing sins of the Age and
Place wherein he lives, are those very Enemies of Christ which in a peculiar
manner he accounts himself bound to resist and strive against; he that does not
most vigorously resist those sins which are the prevailing sins of the Time and
Generation wherein he lives, does want one comfortable mark and character that
might evidence the truth and sincerity of Grace in him. Ephesians. 5.8.11. A
Christian dare do no other then resist and strive against sin, both because God
(whom he serves) has obliged and commanded him so to do; and because he has
also deliberately and voluntarily bound and obliged himself by his Covenant
with Christ to strive against and resist this grand Enemy of Christ. And all
true Believers having one and the same* living and true God to be their God;
the same blessed Lord Jesus Chrest to be their 'aviour and Redeemer; therefore
account themselves bound, as they have opportunity in their several stations,
to join their forces together against sin, which is the great enemy of their
common Lord and Savior; knowing that their Lord Jesus Christ hates neutrality
in this common cause, in this War we are to manage against Sin, the common
Enemy of Christ himself as well as of our selves.

3. They consider, that the Sins of other men will hurt them, unless they do
faithfully, as becomes them in their places, resist and strive against them.
Believers see themselves to be in danger of faring the worse for the sins of
other men; they see that they are exposed to suffer in those common Calamities
which the prevailing sins of the times bring on the Public; and Good men know
that the less opposition they make to growing Vice and sin, the greater share
they may expect in the public Calamities, which the prevailing sins of the
Times bring down upon the World; and therefore Godly men can take no better
course to secure themselves against public and destroying Judgments, than
constantly and faithfully to resist and strive against those prevailing sins
which procure the destroying Judgments. Those who partake of other (...) sins,
may expect to partake of their (...): and because for these prevailing sins the
wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience: therefore Good men dare not
be partakers with others in them. Ephesians. 5.5, 6, 7.

4. True Christians are endued from Above with a Public Spirit, which inclines
them to resist and strive against that which hinders the public good, and
brings public Calamities on their People: They do not therefore content
themselves, to seek only after the saving of their own Souls; but do what in
them lies to weaken the Kingdom of Darkness, by Converting others from their
Evil ways; laboring that all persons, whom they are concerned with, and on
whom they may have influence, be made sensible of the danger they are in of
being drawn into a compliance with, and conformiry unto the prevailing Sins of
the Times and Place wherein they live; giving them the best advice they can how
to defend themselves from that danger, by a right use of that Spiritual Armor
which God has provided for them.

5. Believers are encouraged to resist and strive against Sin, especially
against the most public and prevailing sins, from this consideration, that in
so doing they approve themselves unto God, and do that which is well pleasing
in his fight, and shall be accepted of God, and graciously rewarded by the Lord
for their fidelity in this their opposition unto sin: Supposing that what they
do herein, should be ungrateful to carnal men, yet it suffices them to know,
that every Tear they shed before God, because Sin abounds in their times, is
bottled up, as precious in Gods sight; and every Prayer they put up to God, for
the putting a stop to growing Vice, is entered in a Book of Remembrance before
God; and every word they speak for God and against Sin, either in a way of
Lamentation and Complaint unto God, or to their Fellow Christians; or in a way
of counsel and reproof, or by bearing any other way, a becoming Testimony
against prevailing Evils, shall bring back a return of mercy from God upon
themselves; though their labor of love toward others for their reformation,
should prove unacceptable and unsuccessful, yet it is a sufficient Consolation
unto them to remember, that God does not forget what they have done for the
promoting his Interest, and for the weakening and pulling down the Kingdom of
Darkness in the world. Rev. 2.2.

They consider also, that unless they approve themselves faithful Soldiers of
Christ in this War against Sin, while they are in a militant state here on
Earth, they cannot expect to be admitted to a triumphant estate of Glory in
Heaven.

It is needless that I should further enlarge, concerning the Gronnds and
Reasons that oblige and excite true Believers to the Resisting and Striving
against Sin.

But it is time to proceed to Consider,

Secondly, By what means or weapons do Good men resist and strive against the
growing and prevailing sins of the Generation and Places wherein they live:
Namely,

1. By their Good Works. By an Holy Conversation they bear a testimony against
those sins which are contrary to Holiness. A Virtuous Life does practically
reprove and condemn vicious courses. The Light of a sober, righteous and
religions Life discovers and puts to shame the filthiness and foulness of
intemperance, unrighteousness and impiety: Therefore holy men will most
carefully abstain From Vices that are most Predominant and spreading in their
Age, separating themselves from Sins and Sinners, that they may have no
fellowship with them in the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. They
choose rather to suffer Martyrdom, by losing their esteem among carnal men, than
to partake with them in their immoral, dishonest and profane practices; as
Joseph in Egypt suffered Imprisonment for his noncompliance with the
temptation laid before him by his Mistress.

2. By their Words. Christians account it their duty to make an Open Profession
of Religion, that they have Espoused Christ's Interest, that they have Listed
themselves under Christ to be his Soldiers in this great and constant War
which Christ has with the whole Kingdom of Sin in the World.

They esteem their Tongues to be their Glory, so far as they are improved in
giving necessary advice and reproofs with most pathetical exhortations unto
Sinners to reform their evil ways, and in warning them of the danger they are
in of eternal ruin, unless they save themselves from the Degeneracies and
Corruptions of the Times.

Not only Ministers in their Station are thus to do. 1 Timothy 5. 20. But private
Christians also, if they cannot do it with like authority, yet according to
their abilities and opportunities in their more private Capacities, are with
zeal and gravity to argue and dispute against sin, and plead with Sinners to
forsake their evil courses; Thus did righteous Lot; I pray you, brethren, do
not so wickedly, Genesis 19. 7. Yea, in some Cases, it is a duty incumbent on
Christians to inform and complain of such who are habituated to any gross Vice,
that either by Church Censures, or by the penalty of the Law inflicted on them,
their healing and reformation may be endeavored, and the spreading of Vice may
be prevented; which is of an infectious contagious nature, unless curbed and
restrained, and duly born witness against; therefore for the public good it is
needful that Paenal Laws be executed, that others may hear and fear, and do no
more so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13.11.

3. By their Tears. They mourn before God for those sins which prevail in their
Land, which they see no way for the reformation of; all their endeavors for
that end proving unsuccessful. Lots righteous soul was grieved every day to see
the constancy, obstinacy and impudence of the Sodomites in sinning against God.
2 Pet. 2.7, 8. David shed even rivers of tears, because men kept not Gods Law.
Psalm. 119. 136.

4. By the Prayer of Faith, they wrestle with God day and night, that the
growing Vices of the Times may be reformed. This weapon of faith in Prayer they
esteem as most effectual for battering down the Kingdom of Sin and Vice; it
works wonders for the Emendation of the Time and Generation wherein they Live,
and procures success to other means they make use of: Hereby they call in the
help of God; and of Christ to assist and work in a more immediate and
extraordinary way of working for the suppressing of sin; and obtain of God that
the Means of Grace shall have more efficacy than usually they have for the
pulling down the strong holds of sin and Satan in the hearts of men; and that
by the effectual and wonder-working Providence of God some that are
Ringleaders in sin, and most instrumental in causing others to sin, shall
either be Converted, or be removed out of a Place, or out of the World; that so
way may be made for the flourishing of Religion and Virtue among a People; so
that Incorrigible Sinners were in less danger by an Army of ten thousand men
fighting against them, then by ten true sincere Christians praying against
them: By faith in Prayer they obtain from their God, that Satan shall fall down
from his throne with speed, much sooner than they expected, even like Lightning
before them, Luke 10. 18. and that the mountains of impediments and
obstructions that stand in the way of those Zorobabels, whom God improves for
the building up of his Temple in the World, shall become a Plain, Zech. 4. 7.
and that the Work of Christ shall flourish even in the midst of oppositions.
Dan. 9. 25.

Also by the daily renewed exercise of faith in Prayer, Christ's Soldiers
derive; from him new supply of Strength for their maintaining and holding out
in this War against sin. A true Christian is sensible of his own weakness and
insufficiency, that he daily stands in need of new supplies of the Spirit to
furnish him with wisdom, courage and grace; that he stands in need of new
manifestations of the presence of Christ with him every day, to uphold him,
assist him, and succeed him in this War. He endeavors therefore to resist and
strive against sin in Christ's strength, and not in his own: He watches
against all up-risings of self-confidence, and self-sufficiency, (which would
expose him to be overpowred by this Enemy) and gets out of himself unto Christ
to enable him to fight the good fight, and to withstand and overcome this
Enemy, Sin.

5. By their patient continuance in their opposition unto Sin, notwithstanding
all the wounds and scars which they meet with in this War. They expect to meet
with blows and seratches in their striving against, and resisting of growing
Vices; and arm themselves beforehand with holy resolution not to be
discouraged thereby; Do they meet with the contradiction of Sinners? They
consider it is no more than Christ himself met with, and patiently endured;
therefore it becomes the members and followers of Christ to be patient under
such Trials. Do they meet with shame and disgrace? They remember Christ
despised the shame; therefore Christ's followers should not too deeply lay to
heart that shame which is put upon them by the carnal World. Those Sinners them
selves will at the Last Day be filled with everlasting shame and contempt, who
while they were on Earth did hate to be reformed, and persisted in opposing
Virtue, decrying of Religion, and practicing of Vice. If Christians in this
Life be accounted as the offscouring of all things, and be trampled on as Mire
in the Streets, yet they have peace in their own consciences while on Earth,
and the disgrace which they meet with here for well-doing, shall in the next
life be compensated with a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

6. They join readily with others, and call upon others to join with them in
this great work of striving against, and resisting those sins of the Times,
which like a Flood are ready to bear down all before them. Doctor Sibbs in his
Excellent Treatise of the Souls conflict, p. 290. says, It is a course which
will have a blessing attending it, for friends to join in league, one to watch
over another, and observe each others ways. It is an usual course for
Christians to join together in other holy duties, as Hearing, Receiving the
Sacrament, Prayer, etc. But this fruit of holy communion, which arises from a
mutual observing one another, is much wanting. Let me add, for Christians to
improve an hour or two at stated times in such a communion, extending their
thoughts and cares, so far as to consider wherein they might in their Stations,
be instrumental to stop the progress of Vice, and to promote Virtue, might be
of singular use and advantage: Nay, did Christians meet together sometimes,
were it only to mourn before the Lord for the prevalency of sins which they see
no likelihood of any reformation of, it would be more pleasing and acceptable
to God, than the meetings of carnal persons for sinful mirth and jollity, and
only so (...) worldly Interests: But at such times they might strengthen and
encourage each other to do their utmost in striving against sin, and direct
each other wherein they might be most serviceable in their several Posts to
promote Religion, and to save their people and their Generation from Desolating
Judgments. It was an heart sinking discouragement to Elijah, to think that he
was left alone in Israel to strive against, and resist Idolatry; God
condescended to comfort him, by that information, that there were some
thousands besides himself, that were striving against the sins of those Times,
by their prayers and practices, though they had not the courage, or had not the
opportunity, or had not the Office and Extraordinary Call to appear so openly
against it, as Elijah himself did. It is a great Encouragement to those who by
Office are placed in the Front of the Battle against sin, to know that there
are many whose hearts are with them, and their prayers daily put up to God for
their success in their sincere endeavors against the Kingdom of Sin: But if
such as they take to be their Fellow Soldiers, through scar, sloth, or for some
carnal interest will not discover that their hearts are with them, but rather
blame them for their forwardness in opposing Vice, it sinks their spirits, and
makes them send up such a groan to Heaven as Paul did, when no man stood by him
while he pleaded the Cause of Christ and of the Gospel; I pray God lay it not
to their charge, 2 Timothy 4. 16.

More particularly, That Ministers should meet at stated times, either in
lesser Conventions, or more general Assemblies, is a thing very beneficial for
the upholding Religion, preserving the peace and purity of Churches, and
propagating of Religion to other Places and Generations. The Lord by his
Servants assembled in a Synod, Anno 1679. in this Land, set before us both what
the prevailing Sins of New England are (and which therefore it is not needful
for me to Enumerate in this Discourse, being so fully done already) and what is
to be done in order to the Reformation of them: Our thankfulness to God for the
light at that time by those our Eminent Divines held forth unto us, should be
expressed, not only by a reiterated perusal of each Article of their Result;
but by meeting together sometimes, to consult how the directions therein given
us may more effectually in every Church and Plantation be put in practice, and
to watch over each other, and excite each other to a more serious and universal
attendance to the directions therein given us from the Word of God, in order to
the reforming of Evils prevailing among us, and for the Reviving of Religion in
the Land.

But I hasten to another Head: Namely,

Thirdly, To consider, in what manner Good men should resist and strive against
growing Vice and Impiety. Now if we take the words of our Text to be an
allusion to those Conflicts and Combats among the Heathen in old Time; which
were seldom determined without blood, and managed by expert Artists, who
Encountered each other in those Conflicts before many Spectators; we may infer
from this allusion these following directions for a Christian to observe in his
resisting and striving against growing Vice.

1. That this striving against sin is to be managed with Holy Affections:
Particularly;

(1.) With holy zeal, earnestness and fervor of spirit, even with agony of
soul. A Christian is not to act with faint heartedness and fear, when God calls
him to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet against crying Sins; but to be, when
the case so requires, like a Lion in God's Cause, though like a Lamb in his own
Cause; knowing that Lukewarmness in this case is as odious to God, as to sit
still and do nothing.

(2.) With love and pity toward Sinners, and toward the Land, which by
prevailing sins are ripened for ruin, and exposed to destruction. A true
Believer foreseeing a Storm of Divine Wrath and Vengeance coming on a People,
(which he can readily and rationally infer from the growth of Vice and
Profaness) from a compassionate spirit thrusts himself into the Gap (opened for
Judgments to enter in at) endeavoring by his Prayers, Tears, Warnings,
Counsels, etc. to keep off the Judgments which the Sins of a Land expose a
people unto; and is so much the more earnest and vigorous herein, as he sees
the day of wrath approaching and hastening toward them. Heb. 10. 25.

2. This resisting and striving against sin is to be managed with holy
discretion. As a Fencer shows his Skill and Art as well as Courage; so does a
Christian Soldier in his conflicts with prevailing and growing vices. He knows
that zeal without discretion is but wild fire, and disserves that good interest
which he heartily desires to promote. His discretion teaches him, while he is
vigorously active against the Kingdom of Sin, carefully to avoid the sins
forbidden in the Second Table; namely, damnifying his Neighbor in his Honor
and Reputation, in his Estate or Life, or any of his lawful interests.

Again, Discretion teaches him to observe the Times and Seasons wherein he may
strike the greatest blow against the Kingdom of Sin. A wise man's heart
discerns both time and judgment. There are times wherein Sinners are more
capable of an instruction or reproof for their Emendation, than they are at
other times; such opportunity he waits for and improves to the best advantage.
As for instance, when a Sinner is under outward affliction, or inward distress
of mind, at such a time will he endeavor to speak a word in season that may
put him upon it to consider his ways, to repent of his sins, and to set about
the reformation of his life. Thus Christians must watch and wait for
opportunities and seasons when they may have easiest access into men, and
redeem such times for the doing good to the souls of others.

Again, Discretion teaches him to wrap up his needful reproofs and hard
arguments in soft words, expressive of his affection and compassion to the
Sinner himself. If it be needful that any Sinner be laid under punishment by
the Civil Law, or under Censure in the Church for his reformation; yet
tenderness and meekness, grief and pity, expressed toward him are most likely
to affect him with remorse for his sins committed, and resolution to avoid them
for the future; while (e contra) Scoffs and Divisions do but tend to harden
Sinners, and render them the more desperately wicked.

Again, Discretion teaches him to avoid the danger of Sinful Indulgence, of
winking and conniving at sin: the Judgments (...) on the Posterity of Eli for
his fault in that matter, is a standing warning to him to avoid the like.

In all these and such other like instances, he believes that saying of Solomon
to hold as a truth; Discretion shall preserve thee, Prove. 2.11.

3. Though in some places and times (through the great mercy of God) the Christian
Soldier is not exposed to shed his Blood (in a proper sense) by his resisting
and striving against Sin, yet in some sense he may say with the Apostle, that
he is in deaths often, 2 Cor. 11. 23. while he is managing this Combat; though he
find the strength of his body and mind decaying, wasting and consuming in the
hot service he is called unto, of opposing Vice and Profaneness, yet perseveres
therein, and is willing to spend and be spent in this Service against. Christ's
Enemies, and resolves by Gods help to continue fighting the good fight, till
Death in a proper sense, gives him a discharge from this War. Though he find that
to be in good earnest an opposer of sin and vice is not the way to popular
Applause, though he meet with such Trials on that account, which are more
bitter than death it self unto him; yet the righteous man holds on his way, and
grows stronger and stronger (Job 17. 9.) in making resistance to the growth of
the Kingdom of Sin and Satan; the wounds he receives, make him fight with the
greater courage and vigor; and seeing his life must be spent in this Service,
be resolves to do as much execution as possibly he can upon the Enemy, before
Death overtakes him.

4. As those who sought among the Heathen openly before many Spectators, may be
supposed to fight in good earnest, knowing the Blood of one of the Combatants
must be spilt before they left the Stage. So the Christian Soldier in his
striving against Sin acts with intenseness of mind, and integrity of heart.
Christ has in every Age, had some sincere Soldiers, who in the uprightness of
their hearts have resisted and striven against sin. Indeed, many have there
been in former and later Ages, who have pretended and professed themselves to
be of the number of the reformed, and to be forward reformers of others also,
who have soon discovered themselves to have acted only for their own self ends;
for, not obtaining their By-ends thereby, they have laid aside their profession
of Religion, and have turned Enemies to, and Opposers of the interest of
Religion in the power of it.

As there is as much danger of the Banishment of Learning by some that have a
little smattering of it, which only puffs them up to despise those who excel
themselves therein, as there is from those who are more ignorant; and as much
danger of the overthrow of the Civil State by such who (though they are acted
only by self interest) have a little smattering in the Law and in Politics,
which only fills them with self conceitedness, and causes them to despise and
oppose those who are thorow-paced in those Sciences, and are endued with
sincere love to the Public Good* So the work of Reformation is very much
disserved by the formal boasting and self-conceited Professor, whose knowledge
only tends to puff him up, and makes him contemn and oppose whatever is
contrived or acted though with integrity of heart by any other of his
Fellow Soldiers in carrying on this Conflict against the Kingdom of Sin. We
had need therefore to put up such a Petition as David did* Psalm. 25. 21. Let
integrity and uprightness preserve me?

The only USE I shall make of this Doctrine is this: It being our duty to
resist and strive against the whole Kingdom of Sin; it may hence be inferred,
that it is a great sin to discourage good men from endeavoring to suppress
Vice, Immorality and Impiety. Numb. 32. 7, 8, 10. Wherefore discourage ye the
heart of the Children of Israel from going over; thus did your Fathers, and
God's Anger was kindled against them. God's Anger was kindled both against
those who discouraged the hearts of their brethren from going over to fight
against the Canaanites, and against those who were discouraged by them, v. 9,
10. which appears by God's threatening with an Oath, that none of those who came
out of Egypt should see the promised Land, v. 11. which threatening was
fulfilled; for those men who discouraged their brethren dyed of the plague
before the Lord. Numb. 14. 37. and those also who were discouraged by them did
bear their iniquities forty years, in that space were all of them consumed
gradually. Numb. 14. 34, 35.

But on the other hand, Caleb and Joshua, who wholly followed the Lord, Numb.
32. 12. who made an excellent speech to encourage their brethren to go up
against the Canaanites. Numb. 14. 6. 9. and pressed them thereunto with such
zeal and earnestness, that the multitude being provoked, bade stone them with
stones, v. 10. These two were remarkably rescued out of the hands of the
Multitude by an immediate appearance of the Glory of the Lord. Numb. 14. 10.
and were remarkably blessed of God with the preservation of their health and
strength, and with admittance into the promised Land, Josh, 14. 6, 11.

The same Methods which those Spies took to discourage their brethren from
Encountering with the Canaanites, are still in practice in the world, to
discourage any brave attempt against the Kingdom of Sin: For instance.

1. Those Spies raised false Reports of the promised Land: Instead of saying
the truth (as did Caleb and Joshua) that it was a Land of Milk and Honey, they
gave a contrary account, namely, that it was a Land that eat up the Inhabitants
thereof, Numb. 13. 32.

What false Reports and Misrepresentations are there made concerning the work
of Reformation, the instruments of it, and methods of it? True serious
Godliness is misrepresented to be an unpleasant and burdensome life; and that
there is not such need of restraining, curbing and subduing the Kingdom of Sin
as some precise persons imagine; what is acted by Good men with utmost caution,
prudence, affection and moderation is represented to be the effect of pride,
censoriousness and pragmaticalness. Though David were (...) by an heroical faith,
yet his Eldest Brother Elijah could tell him to his face, I know thy pride and
the naughtiness of thy heart, 1 Samuel, 17. 28. The holy Apostles were cried out
against in those Terms, those that have turned the world apside down are come
hither also, Acts. 17. 6. How diminutively will some speak of reformation work,
as if they saw no beauty or glory therein?

And instead of moderating, qualifying and regulating the zeal of good men
(which through the remainders of Corruption in them, sometimes vents it self
unseasonably or intemperately) men are too apt to use methods wholly to
Extinguish zeal against sin in them, and to reduce them either to such a
Lukewarm frame of spirit as themselves are in, or to such a Timerousness of
Spirit, that they dare not express their zeal against Vice any more; or so to
prejudice others against them, as that they shall find themselves thereby
incapacitated from any further successful attempts against the Kingdom of Sin.

2. Those Spies reported that there were insuperable difficulties in their way;
so that there was no hope of making a Conquest of the Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
Whither should we go up? our brethren have discouraged our hearts, saying, The
people are greater and taller than we; the City is great and walled up to
Heaven, and moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakims there.

In like manner, how apt are men to discourage each other from any attempts
against the weakening of the kingdom of sin, and putting a stop to the growth of
profaness? How many Lions are supposed to be in the way? One looks on it as a
thing unattainable and impossible to be effected; that the Gospel in the
Ministry and Ordinances thereof should be set up in such places where
ignorance, Errors and Profaness have had their kingdom. Another Good man is
afraid that purging the Temple, or sweeping some dirt out of it by
Ecclesiastical Censures, will make the Temple it self fall down, or at least
some of the carved work of it.

But a Christian Soldier should consider, that what is impossible to be done
by men or outward means in themselves considered, may with the help, presence
and assistance of God be accomplished; so that in the way of dependence on God
for his presence and blessing, according to the promises made to us thereof,
the Christian Soldier may fall on and move forwards in the path of his duty,
with such an encouraged spirit as Paul had, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things
through Christ strengthening of me. He knows that when God is pleased to work
with mean and weak instruments, then wonders shall be wrought, Mark 16. 20.
Ezekiel. 20.44.

3. Those Spies discouraged Israel from going up against the Canaanites, by
their own backwardness; their bad example set before their brethren,
discouraged them from their duty

When those who should be File-leaders do fall back, and draw off in this War
against Vice and Profaness, it disanimates others from falling on and pressing
forwards against this Enemy? Numb. 32. Moses knew that if the two tribes and
half absented themselves, the Army of Israel would not only be weakened as to
number, but their Spirits and Courage would be weakened also: therefore Moses
placed them in the Front of the Army, to lead on the rest in that Expedition.
When Leading men absent themselves, and will not afford their presence and
company to their brethren, nor contribute their advice to them how they should
proceed in the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, and against the Kingdom of Sin, it
is a very great discouragement unto them.

4. Those Spies who discouraged their brethren from going up against the
Canaanites, were the majority in number. There were only Caleb and Joshua, who
stood on the Lord's side; these two were opposed by the other ten; so that
these two were in imminent danger of being sto^ed by the Mobile; who are
sometimes led more by number of voices, then by weight of arguments. The
Kingdom of Sin and Vice is much upheld by plurality of voices, by noise and
tumults. The Pharisees set the multitude against Christ, to cry out, Let him be
Crucified, which was all the answer Pilot could get to that pertinent question,
What has he done? Mark 15. 14. It Is a rare thing to hear of popular clamours
against popular prevailing Vices and Profaness, but not very rare to hear
tumultuous noise against those who strive against, and resist sin, whereby they
are disheartened, and ready to say, I will speak no more in the name of the
Lord; I will refrain my self even from that which is good, while such and such
are before me.

Furthermore, As those Spies were acted by sinful and carnal principles (and
Moses suspected the two tribes and half whom he treats with, in Numb. 32. to be
acting from like evil principles) so from the same or like principles are men
still acted, who discourage others from making a vigorous opposition to the
Kingdom of Sin in the world. Take a few instances.

1. Those Spies were overcome with carnal fear. Numb. 13. 21. We are not able
to go up against this people, for they are stronger than we; all the people we
saw in the land are men of great stature, we were in their sight as
grasshoppers, etc. And being affrighted themselves, they became ready
instruments to discourage their brethren: So in the Spiritual War against the
Kingdom of Sin, Cowardice does great hurt. The fear of man is a snare, Prove.
29.25. Hence it is that many become partakers of other men's sins, because they
are afraid to offend them by giving them a seasonable reproof, or using proper
means to restrain and reform them; and by such fearfulness and
faint-heartedness they discourage others, who justly expect that men of
Eminency in Gifts, Offices, in Age, and in Grace, should be most forward
Witnesses for Christ against growing vice.

2. The ground of that fear in those Spies was this; They looked on the work
before them with an eye of carnal sense, and not with an eye of faith. The
unbelieving Spies could tell what they saw with their bodily eyes; whereas
believing Caleb and Joshua did put their brethren in mind of God's promise.
Numb. 14.9. that all those people should be bread for Israel, for their defense
is departed from them, and the Lord is with us; and therefore exhorted their
brethren not to fear them: The true reason why that Generation did not enter
into the Land of Rest, was because of their unbelief, Heb. 4.6. The Victory
which the Christian Soldier has over the slavish fear of man is his faith: He
that puts his trust in the Lord, shall be safe, Prove. 29. 25. When faith is
weak, then the hands hang down and the knees grow feeble, and men are unfit to
do any great matter in this combat against sin; and very ready then to weaken
the hands of others that would be active therein; whereas those who have faith
in due exercise in their own hearts will be strengthening others in their
Christian Warfare, as Jonathan did David; he went into the wilderness to him,
and encouraged him, and strengthened his hand in God, 1Sa 23.16.

3. Moses suspected the two Tribes and half to be acted by a slothful flame of
spirit: that they were loath to take the pains to make a further conquest of
Canaan, Numb. 32. that therefore they rather chose to content themselves with
less Land, being already conquered, than to undergo the difficulties of
conquering more.

A slothful frame of spirit, and love of ease makes many sit still and do
nothing for the restraining of Vice, and curbing of it; and such are apt to
discourage others from such attempts wherein they foresee dangers and
difficulties, will encounter them.

4. Moses suspected the two Tribes and half that petitioned for the Land on
this side Jordan for their Inheritance, to be acted by a covetous and earthly
mind; for that was some of the best Land in all Canaan which was then
conquered, therefore they made great haste to put in their Petition for that
Land; and though they purged themselves to Moses at this time, yet some think
their hearts might be too much set upon the Soil granted unto them, and that
therefore they were of the first that were afterward carried into Captivity.

Many having obtained a good portion in this world, will not expose themselves
to any difficulty in resisting the kingdom of sin, not trouble themselves which
of those two Kingdom; prosper most in the world, whether the Kingdom of Heaven,
or the Kingdom of Sin. Such whose Hearts are set on Earthly things, have been
wont to make great opposition to the progress of the Gospel. Acts 19. 24, 29.
So those that love the world better than they love their Souls, are content to
live without a Gospel Ministry and means of Grace, on this account, because
they think it will save charges.

5. Possibly Moses might suspect those two Tribes and half to act from a
principle of direct Rebellion against the positive Command of God. Numb. 32.
10. Thus did your Forefathers, faith Moses: Now their Forefathers were guilty
of plain rebellion against God. Numb. 14. 4. 9. Only rebel not ye against the
Lord. Moses suspected the same rebellious frame of spirit to be in them he now
treated with, which mightly hid under the cloak of their fair and specious
pretenses; He was afraid left there lay rooted in their hearts a principle of
prevailing Enmity against God's positive Commands.

This is one chief cause why men discourage one another from vigorous essays
and attempts to batter down the kingdom of sin, because there is in their
hearts a secret enmity against Religion in the power of it, and against the
ways of Holiness, and a secret love to the ways and works of darkness; when
such enmity appears in the visible and vilest expressions and effects of it, it
deserves such treatment as Paul gave to Elymas, Acts 13. 8, 10. But where if
lies hid and latent, we had need take pains to examine our hearts and find it
out and mortify it; for doubtless we have more sin lurking in our hearts than
we our selves are apt to be aware of.

Let us examine our selves, how far each of us have been guilty of discouraging
others from using their best endeavors to suppress Vice, and to restrain
Immorality and Profaness, Let Us mourn for our own slothfulness, backwardness,
unbelief and earthly-mindedness, and the secret enmity in our hearts against
serious Religion. Let us fear and tremble lest we should be any way guilty for
time to come of discouraging others from a vigorous discharge of their duty:
Let Us think of that awful word which Moses adds, Numb. 32. 15. And ye shall
destroy all this people. One Sinner destroys much good, Eccl. 9. 18. A few
persons who discourage others from walking in ways of Obedience to God's
Commands, may be justly charged by God as the authors of the ruin and
destruction of the whole Generation, whereof they themselves are a part. Though
that whole Generation that were discouraged by those ten Spies were themselves
destroyed in the Wilderness, Numb. 32. 13. yet the ten Spies were made the
peculiar Monuments of Divine Vengeance: So were Korah and his Company, who led
the Congregation into rebellion against God. Numb. 16. So the Sons of Eli, that
were wicked, and were instruments of leading others into sin, and causing the
ways of God's Worship to be abhorred, they were remarkably punished by the
Lord. Let us fear then lest this Indictment should be drawn up against us; ye
have destroyed all this people by discouraging them from a through serious and
effectual opposition to the Kingdom of Sin.

I shall conclude with a very few words to the Honorable GENTLEMEN of the
ARTILLERY COMPANY, who obliged me to appear before them this day.

I doubt not of their Ingenuity to accept of this discourse, as not wholly
disagreeable to the present Occasion; seeing they have been accustomed to have
a Religious Improvement made of the Military Art and Terms on such
Opportunities as this is: and are pleased to preface and season the work of the
day with Hearing the Word of God and Prayer, as an evidence of their being
Christian Soldiers. Their Expertness and Eminency in the Art Military, as well
as their Dignity which by their Offices, in Civil or Military Concerns they do
sustain; in the executing whereof they bear a part of the burden of Directing,
Guiding and Leading the present Generation in the Land, is sufficiently known;
and gives me Ground to say, MUCH HONORED!

It having pleased God now to call your selves to act on the Stage of this
World, and to place you in such Stations and Offices, and to qualify you with
such Gifts, Estates, and Interests, whereby you may very much influence the
present Generation, and lead them forward unto vigorous endeavors for the
promoting and propagating of Religion, and reforming of what is displeasing
unto God in our Land. I would humbly therefore Entreat you to put on Courage
and play the men in this great and necessary War against this our common, open,
constant and irreconciseable Enemy, namely Sin. Particularly,

1. Be Entreated to make good your Leaders ground. There have been men of the
former Generation in this Land, not only Eminent in their skill in the Art
Military, but also Eminent Soldiers of Christ; But they are removed from off
the Stage, very few of the former Generation are now surviving: While they
Lived, they Served not merely their own self-interests, but they served their
Generation; and did with Zeal, Courage, Wisdom and Discretion endeavor, in
their several Posts and Stations to lead that Generation whereof they were a
part) to the Heavenly Canaan. They were true Calebs and Joshua's, who did
wholly follow the Lord.

Your selves are now Risen up in their stead, to be leading and influencing men
in the present Generation, May the God of Heaven, who has the residue of the
Spirit, pour it out abundantly on your selves, that you may by your Works and
Words, and Tears, and Faith, and Prayers, both severally and jointly, with
affection and discretion, with patience and integrity of heart, prosecute the
War of our Lord Messiah against the Kingdom of Sin: That we may still have
reason to bless God, that though the Old Generation of Christian Soldiers are
removed from us, to inherit a Crown of Glory; yet the God of our Forefathers
is still with us and among us, influencing the hearts of our Leading Men of all
Ranks and Orders, to Lead us toward Heaven.

2. Be Entreated to Consider, That the Body of this People in New England being
so remarkably multiplied and increased in number; and most of the aged and
experienced Christians being removed out of the World, who were wont to
Counsel, Exhort, Direct and Steady others into the right path of Holiness:
Unless God be pleased to spirit some younger Christians (and many of them too)
to be forward and zealous in Exhorting others to their duty, and in dehorting
and restraining others from Vice; The present Standing and Rising Generation of
young persons will be in a miserable Condition, for want of help. The Kingdom
of Sin will get head very fast among us, and will overtop Virtue; Ignorance,
Error and Vice will prevail; yea, the very form of Religion will be laid aside,
unless God do spirit some of the younger Christians, and qualify them to stand
in the front of the Battle against Vice; to march forward and put forth
themselves with their utmost force and influence, for the curbing and
restraining of Vice, and encouraging of Virtue and Piety.

3. Consider that God having made a gracious promise that he will yet new form
and reform a Degenerate People for himself, and they shall show forth his
praise, Isa. 43. 21. It will be your Glory and Comfort, to be any way
subservient to the promoting of this great and glorious work; and those that
approve themselves faithful Servants of Christ in their Stations and
Generations, shall not fail of that Crown of Glory which fades not away, which
Christ has prepared for, and promised to those that fight the good fight, and
keep the faith.

And notwithstanding all the discouragements which lie in the way to weaken the
Hearts, the Carriage, the force and activity of Good men in opposing the
Kingdom of Sin; yet we may boldly say to them as Azariah did to Asa, and to all
Judah and Benjamin. 2 Chr. 15. 2, 7. The Lord is with you while you be with
him; (i. e. in pursuing the work of Reformation, which they were then
Enterprising) if ye seek him he will be found of you. Be you strong therefore,
and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded.

FINIS.

