A Remonstrance of the Assembly of Nova Caesaria or New Jersey, To his
Excellency the Lord Viscount Cornbury Capt. General and Governor in Chief of
the said Province.
Delivered by Samuel Jenings, Speaker of the said Assembly, at Burlington the
8th day of May, 1707. May it Please the Governor;
WE her Majestys loyal subjects, the Representatives of the Province of
New Jersey, are heartily sorry, that instead of raising such a Revenue as is by
the Governor (as we suppose by the Queens directions) required of us, we are
obliged to lay before him the unhappy Circumstances of the Province: It is a
Task we undertake not of choice, but necessity, and have therefore reason to
hope, that what we say, may meet with a more favorable reception.

We pray the Governor to be assured, its our misfortunes extorts this
procedure from us, and that we should betray the trust reposed in us by our
Country if we did not endeavor to obtain Relief.

The Governors promises encourages us to hope, he will not be deaf to our
entreaties, nor by his denial render our attempts, for the best ends, fruitless

We may not, perhaps, rightly apprehend all the causes of our sufferings, but
have reason to think some of them are very much owing to the Governors long
absence from this Province* which renders it very difficult to apply to him in
some cases that may need a present help.

It were to be wished, that the affairs of New York would admit the Governor
oftener to attend those of New Jersey, he had not then been unacquainted with
our Grievances, and we are inclined to believe they would not have grown to so
great a number.

His Excellency's Answer to the said Remonstrance, Given to the said Assembly
at Burlington, on Monday the 12th day of said May, 1707.
Gentlemen;
ON Thursday last I received a Paper from you^ which you call a Remonstrance. I
then told you it was of an extraordinary nature, and contained many
particulars, which though they lay open enough to receive an immediate Answer,
yet because I would not put it in your power to say, I had given you a rash
inconsiderate Answer, I would make no return to it till the Saturday following,
at which time I sent you word by the Secretary that I would not expect your
attendance till this day.

I shall not take notice of any thing in your Preamble, but the two last
Clauses of it; In the first of which you say, That you have reason to think
that some of your Sufferings are owing to the Governors long absence from this
Province, which makes it very difficult to apply to him in some cases that may
need a present help.

This is so far from being true, that besides my being in this Province twice
every year, and have never staid less than a Month, sometimes six weeks or
more, the Post goes every week to New York, by which I may easily be informed
of any emergency; moreover, the Lieut Governor, Coll Ingoldsby, resides
constantly in this Province, and would certainly have done right to any persons
that would have complained to him; which makes this Allegation appear very
frivolous.

In the next Clause you say, It were to be wished, that the affairs of New York
would admit the Governor oftener to attend those of New Jersey.

The affairs of New York have never hindered the Governor from attending those
of New Jersey whenever it has been requisite. And I may safely say, that I don't
know of any Grievance this Province labors under, except it be the having a
certain number of People in it, who will never be faithful to nor live quietly
under any Government, nor suffer their neighbors to enjoy any peace, quiet or
happiness, if they can help it.

Remonstrance.
I. It is therefore in the first place humbly represented to the Governor's
consideration, that some persons under sentence of Death for Murder, have not
only remained till this time unexecuted (they being condemned not long after
Lord Cornbury's accession to this Government) but often have been suffered to
go at large. It is possible the Governor has not been informed, that one of
these persons is a Woman who murdered her own Child, another of them a Woman
who poisoned her Husband; the keeping of them so long has been a very great
charge, and how far its a Reflection on the public Administration, to suffer
such Wretches to pass with impunity, we dare not say. But sure the Blood of
those Innocents cries aloud for Vengeance, and just Heaven will not fail to pour
it down upon our already miserable Country, if they are not made to suffer
according to their demerits.

His Excellency's Answer.
Now I begin with your Articles.

1 st. Two Women have been condemned for Murder and have not been executed,
there having appeared most notorious Malice and Revenge in some People who were
zealous in those Prosecutions. The Queen is the fountain of Honor, Justice and
Mercy, and as she is so, she may, when she pleases, exert her Mercy in either
reprieving or pardoning any Criminal, that Power of Pardoning and Reprieving,
after Condemnation, the Subjects of this Province, her Majesty has been pleased
to entrust me with, and I am in no wise accountable to any person or number of
persons whatsoever for what I do in those matters, except to the Queens Majesty
alone.

As for what you say with relation to the apprehensions you have, that just
Heaven will not fail to pour down Vengeance upon your already miserable
Country, if these Criminals are not made to suffer according to their demerits.

I am of opinion, that nothing has hindered the Vengeance of just Heaven from
falling upon this Province long ago, but the infinite Mercy, Goodness,
Long-suffering and Forbearance of Almighty God, who has been abundantly
provoked by the repeated crying sins of a perverse Generation among us, and
more especially by the dangerous and abominable Doctrines, and the wicked Lives
and Practices of a number of People, some of whom under the pretended Name of
Christians, have dared to deny the very essence and being of the Savior of the
World.

Remonstrance.
2 dly. We think it a great hardship that persons accused for any Crime, should
be obliged to pay Court Fees, notwithstanding the grand Jury have not found the
Bill against them: They are men generally chosen out of the Neighborhood, and
should be the most substantial Inhabitants, who cannot well be supposed to be
ignorant of the Character of the Person accused, nor to want as good
Information as may be had; when therefore they do not find the Bill, its very
reasonable to suppose the accused Person innocent, and consequently no Fees due
from him. We pray therefore that the Governor may give his assent to an Act of
Assembly, to prevent the like for the future, otherwise no persons can be safe
from the Practices of designing men, or the wicked effects of a vindictive
Temper.

His Excellency's Answer.
2 dly. It is a strange thing that such an Assembly of Men as the
Representatives of the People of this Province are, or ought to be, should
complain of any thing under the Name of Hardship, before they had informed
themselves whether the thing they had a mind to complain of, were really a
hardship or not. This is plainly your case at this time; for if you had asked
any man that knows any thing of the Practice of the Law in England, you would
have found, that if any Proceedings have been carried on against any Persons
supposed to be guilty, they have always paid the Court Fees, notwithstanding
the grand Jury have not found the Bill. This is so known a Practice, that it is
not to be disputed; but when men will intermeddle with, or pretend to things
which they neither know nor understand, they cannot fail of misguiding
themselves, and mis-leading those that have a mind to be guided by them.

Indeed, if Juries in this Country were as they ought to be, the supposition
might be in some measure allowed, but we find by woeful experience, that there
are many men who have been admitted to serve upon Grand and Petty Juries, who
have convinced the world that they have no regard for the Oaths they take, and
especially a sort of People, who under pretense of Conscience, refuse to take
an Oath, and yet many of them under the cloak of a very solemn Affirmation,
dare commit the greatest Enormities, especially if it be to serve a Friend, as
they call him; and these are the designing Men and the vindictive Tempers, of
which all the Queens good Subjects ought to beware, and be protected from: And
these are the crying sins which will undoubtedly draw down the Vengeance of
just Heaven upon this Province and People, if not timely and seriously repented
of.

Remonstrance.
3 dly. The only Office for Probate of Wills being in Burlington, it must be
very expensive and inconvenient for Persons, who live remote, to attend at it,
especially for the whole Eastern Division. We therefore pray the Governor to
assent to an Act to settle such an Office in every County, or at least in each
Division of this Province, and that the Officers may be men of good Estates and
known Integrity in the said County or Division.

His Excellency's Answer.
3 dly. If I should persuade my self to wonder at any of the Enormities
contained in this Remonstrance (and which I would do, if it came from any other
men) it should be at this, because no reasonable man can easily persuade
himself to believe, that a number of men chosen by their Country to represent
them, would presume to complain of a thing as a Grievance, when the thing
complained of, is, in fact, not true; for the Office of Probate of Wills, is
wherever the Governor is, consequently not at Burlington only. Ever since
the Queen has done me the honor to entrust me with the Government of this
Province, I have never failed of being in the Province twice every year, once
at Burlington and once at Amboy, except the last year, that I had the
unspeakable misfortune of loosing a Wife whom I loved as much as my own Soul,
after a very long tedious Sickness, during which, I am persuaded, no reasonable
man could expect I would leave her for any time; and yet notwithstanding that,
I was twice at Amboy last year, where any body, that had a Will to prove, might
have had it done, if they pleased; besides my being twice every year in the
Province, considering the remoteness of Cape-May County, and the County of
Salem, I did appoint a Surrogate at Burlington, before whom any of the
Inhabitants of either Division, might have had their Wills proved. I did not
think it necessary to appoint one in the Eastern Division, because the
Inhabitants of that Division, who are most remote from New York, are within a
very easy days Journey of my Surrogate at Burlington, and much the major part
of the People of that Division, are within a very small days Journey of
New York, where their private affairs daily calls many of them, and where any
of them may have their Wills proved, without any injury to or incroachment upon
their Properties, Rights or Privileges. This is so certain a truth, that I am
persuaded all judicious and impartial men will look upon this Complaint to be
malicious, scandalous and frivelous, contrived only to amuse poor ignorant
People with notions of Grievances, when, in truth, there is no manner of cause
of Complaint. Besides, what you desire is a direct Invasion of the Queens
Prerogative; for it belongs to her Majesty alone to appoint who shall be
Probate of Wills, and grant Letters of Administration, and that Power the Queen
has been pleased to vest in the Governor; and I am sure that I will never so
far betray the trust her Majesty has honored me with, as to sacrifice her
Prerogative Royal to the humors of any person or persons whatsoever. But of all
the People in the World, the Quakers ought to be the last to complain of the
hardships of traveling a few Miles upon such an occasion, who never repine at
the trouble and charges of traveling several hundreds of Miles to a yearly
Meeting, where it is evidently known, that nothing was ever done for the good
of the Country, but on the contrary, continual Contrivances are carried on for
the undermining the Government both in Church and State.

Remonstrance.
4 thly. That Secretary's Office is not also kept at Amboy, but that all the
Eastern Division are forced to come to Burlington, that have any business at
the said Office, is a Grievance which we hope the Governor will take care to
redress, it seeming inconsistent with the present Constitution of Government
established by the Queen, which does not admit one of the Divisions of this
Province, to enjoy more Privileges and advantages than the other. We therefore
entreat the Governor not to take it amiss, that we desire his assent to an Act
to be past, to oblige the Secretary to keep his Office at both places.

His Excellency's Answer.
4 thly. You have had as little regard to the truth of matters of fact in this
Complaint, as in some of the rest; for it is certain that the Secretary's
Office is kept at Amboy as well as at Burlington, as far as the nature of the
thing requires, and it can admit of; for the Records of the Eastern Division
are kept in the eastern Division, or at least so many of them as the Agent for
the Proprietors of that Division, could hitherto recover from one Thomas
Gordon, into whose hands they were put in the time of the Proprietary
Government, and who has imbezelled several of them, for which he must be
answerable. There is a Supreme Court held once every year at Amboy, there is no
more at Burlington; so that one Division does not enjoy more Privileges and
Advantages than the other: And you have no more reason to desire a Secretary's
Office to be settled at Amboy, than the People of the County of Cumberland
would have to desire a Secretary of State's Office to be settled in their
County, because it is a great way for them to travel to London, when they have
any business in the Secretary's Office. The thing is inconsistent in itself to
have two Secretary's Offices in the same Province, and consequently
unreasonable, and I am pretty well satisfied, without President; besides, I
don't know any body that can claim the right or power of appointing a Secretary
in this Province, but the Queen, and she has been pleased to appoint one under
the great Seal of England, and her Majesty is pleased to think one sufficient,
as undoubtedly it is; but if you had thought, that another had been necessary,
it would have been much more modest to have acquainted me with it, that I might
have humbly represented it to her Majesty, rather than to have Remonstrated
that as a Grievance, which is done in pursuance of the Queens Commands; but
this is of the same nature with the rest of your Complaints, Contrived on
purpose to amuse poor ignorant People with a notion of Grievances, when, in
truth, there is not the least color of Cause of Complaint.

Remonstrance.
5 thly. The granting of Patents to cart goods on the Road from Burlington to
Amboy, for a certain number of years, and prohibiting others, we think to be a
great grievance, that it is contrary to the Statute, 21 Ja. 1. ^n. 3. against
Monopolies, and being so, we doubt not will easily induce the Governor to
assent to an Act, to prevent all such grants for the future, they being
destructive of that Freedom, which Trade and Commerce ought to have.

His Excellency's Answer.
5 thly. I could wish, (since you had a mind to color this Complaint with the
Authority of an Act of Parliament in England) that you had advised with some
Lawyer, to know whether this could be any way brought under that Statute, or
can by any Construction in the world be called a Monopoly; I am apt to believe,
those Gentlemen would have told you, it could not. Nothing can properly be
called a Monopoly, but where a man engrosses a Commodity into his own hands,
and imposes what unreasonable Prices he pleases upon that Commodity; or where a
man is suffered to enjoy any Trade or Occupation, exclusive of others, to the
prejudice of the Public, or particularly to the hindering or burthening of
Trade. The thing now complained of is so far from being of that nature, that it
is directly contrary* for by the Patent now complained of, the Subjects of this
Province have the convenience of sending such Quantities of Goods to and from
Burlington and Amboy, as their private occasions, or the nature of their Trade
may require, it reasonable and certain Rates, and at certain Times, which they
could never do before; for before the settling of this Waggion, if any Person
had occasion to send any Goods to or from either of these places, they were
forced to hire a Waggion, though perhaps they had not the tenth part of a Load,
and were forced to pay such Rates as the owner of the Waggion thought fit to
impose upon them; whereas at present every body is (...) once a Fortnight to
have an opportunity of sending any quantity of Goods, great or small, at
reasonable Rates, without being in danger of being imposed upon at the will of
the owner of the Waggion. And the settling this Waggion is so far from being a
Grievance, or a Monopoly, that by this means, and by no other, a Trade has been
carried on between Philadelphia, Burlington, Amboy and New York, which was
never known before, and in all probability would never have been, had it not
been for this certain convenient way of sending such quantities of Goods, as
People pleased, from place to place. And in all the parts of Europe, the having
public Carriages for Goods, has always been esteemed of absolute necessity,
and the want of them has been looked upon as a hardship. But it seems those
things which in the wisest and best Governments in Europe have not only been
thought convenient, but esteemed of absolute necessity, are found out by some
of our wiser People here, to be Grievances and Monopolies* This being
undoubtedly true, it is plain, the Patent complained of cannot come within the
Statute of the 21 Ja. 1. cap. 3. This, I believe, will be sufficient to
convince all reasonable men, how frivolous and unreasonable this Complaint is.
I shall observe, that when I was first applied to for a Patent for the allowing
this Waggion, which was by one Dell(a man, who, in Coll. Hamilton's time, was
permitted to drive a Waggion for the carrying of Goods, though under no
regulation, either with respect to time of going, or Prices for carrying goods,
and then was no Monopoly) before I would grant it, I did acquaint the Council
with it, and desired them to let me know if they apprehended any inconveniency
in granting such a Patent: Those Gentlemen were all of opinion, there could be
no inconveniency in it, but rather a great convenience; and indeed experience
has proved that Opinion to be true; Nay, Mr. Lewis Morris himself, the chief
promoter of these unreasonable and frivolous Complaints at this time, who had
the honor then to be one of her Majesty's Council, expressed himself very
fully to this purpose; indeed if that Gentleman had ever been consistent with
himself in any two Actions of his (...) I should wonder how he could so soon
alter his Opinion in a case of that nature; but his behavior at all times
having fully convinced the world, that he never was so, makes me cease
wondering.

Remonstrance.
6 thly. Establishing Fees by any other Power or Authority then by the
Governor, Council and Representatives met in General Assembly, we take to be a
great grievance, directly repugnant to Magna Charta, and contrary to the Queens
express directions in the Governors Instructions which says, You are to take
care, that no Man's Life, Member, Freehold or Goods, be taken away or harmed
in our Province under your Government, otherwise then by established and known
Laws, not repugnant to, but as much as may be agreeable to the Laws of England.
We therefore pray that the Governor will assent to an Act to be passed to
settle Fees, without which we think no more can be legally demanded than the
Persons concerned by agreement oblige themselves to pay.

His Excellency's Answer.
6 thly. This Clause of your Remonstrance is, indeed of a more extravagant
Nature than the former; for you presume to call that a great Grievance, and
affirm it to be directly repugnant to Magna Charta and contrary to the Queens
express Directions in the Governors Instructions, which is most certainly
exactly pursuant to, and in obedience of the express words contained in the
Queens Instructions to the Governor. So that you make the Governor's faithful
obedience to the Instructions the Queen has honored him with, to be a great
Grievance; which is no less than accusing her most Sacred Majesty, the best of
Queens, of commanding her Governor to do things which in themselves are great
Grievances. How grateful a return this is to her Majesty, for the repeated
favors she has been pleased to show to this Province and People, let the world
judge. That Clause of my Instructions which you recite in this Article, has no
manner of relation to Fees. Indeed, there is another Clause in my Instructions,
which directs how, and by whom all Fees shall be settled, and the Queens
Commands have been observed. The words of the Clause are these, And you are,
with the advice and consent of our said Council, to take special care to
Regulate all Salaries and Fees belonging to places, or paid upon Emergencies,
that they be within the bounds of Moderation, and that no Exaction be made on
any occasion whatsoever; as also, that Tables of all Fees be publicly hung up
in all places where such Fees are to be paid. And you are to transmit Copies of
all such Tables of Fees to Us, and to our Commissioners for Trade and
Plantations, as aforesaid. And I challenge every one of you, and all Mankind,
to show how, where and when any Man's Life, Member, Freehold or Goods have been
taken away or harmed in this Province since it came under her Majesty's
Government, otherwise than by established and known Laws, not repugnant to, but
as much as may be, agreeable to the Laws of England.

Remonstrance.
7 thly. The Governors putting the former public Records of the Eastern
Division of this Province into the hands of Peter Sonmans, the pretended Agent
of the Proprietors, one that does not reside in the Province, nor has not given
security for the well and true keeping of them, as is by the Queen directed,
and keeps them so that Her Majestys Subjects cannot have recourse to them, and
their being carried out of the said Division, is a great and crying grievance;
they are the only Evidences, that one half of this Province has to prove the
Titles of their Estates; and this House is humbly of opinion, that they ought
to be so kept, that Persons may have recourse to them, and in the hands of such
of whose Fidelity there is no reason to doubt. This being a thing so
reasonable, encourages us to Request the Governor to assent to an Act to be
passed, to put them in proper hands for the future, that the Country may not be
under the same disappointments they now are.

These, Governor, are some of the Grievances this Province complains of, and
which their Representatives desire may be redrest, but there are others of an
higher nature, and attended with worse consequences: They cannot be just to the
Governor, themselves, or their Country, should they conceal them. We did
expect when the Government of the Jerseys was surrendered, to hear of the
benign influences of the Queens mild Government, under Her more immediate
administration, and to be protected in the full enjoyment of our Liberties and
Properties, the last of which we thought our selves something more secure in,
then some of the Neighboring Plantations, and had an entire dependence, that
Her Majesty's Royal Bounty and Goodness would never be wanting to make us easy
and happy, even beyond our Wishes.

It Is our misfortune that we must say, the Success has not answered the
Expectation, and the Queens Subjects here have felt the Reverse of what they
had most reason to hope, That greatest and best of Princes, is, without
peradventure, ignorant of our Pressures, or we had long since had Relief: She
is too good to continue even the deserved Sufferings of the Miserable, and has
more of Heaven in Her than not to hear the Cry of those that groan under
Oppression, and the unkind effects of mistaken Power, to whom we owe our
Miseries; and what they are, the sequal shows.

His Excellency's Answer.
7 thly. When I first read this Clause I could not imagine what it was put in
for, unless it were on purpose to arraign the Queens express Commands to me.
First, Mr. Sonmans is not the pretended Agent, but is lawfully constituted
Agent for the Proprietors of the Eastern Division of this Province, and has
qualified himself according to the Queens Instructions to me, and he does
reside the greatest part of his time in this Province. The Records are not
carried out of the Eastern Division unless it be those which Tho. Cordon has
imbezled; but those that came to the hands of Mr. Sonmans are kept at Amboy,
where any body may have recourse to them, that will desire it, at any
seasonable hour; and the Count^^ is not under any disappointment upon that
account: Besides, the Records of the Eastern Division were put into the hands
of the Proprietors Agent by an order from England, upon a Complaint made in
England, that the Records were not in the hands of the Proprietors Agents.

This is certainly one of the boldest Assertions that ever was made, especially
when there appears no manner of Proof to make it out. When I read these two
Clauses; for there are two before you come to enumerate these Grievances of an
higher Nature, and attended with worse Consequences, I expected to have found
my self, or some other Persons entrusted with me in the Administration of the
Government over her Majesty's Subjects in this Province, not only accused, but
made plainly appear by undeniable manifest Proofs, beyond the possibility of a
Contradiction, to be guilty of the most enormous Crimes. Who can imagine, when
such a Body of Men as the Representatives of a Province, venture to say, That
they did expect when the Government of the Jerseys was surrendered, to feel the
Influences of the Queens mild Government under her more immediate
Administration, and to be protected in the full Enjoyment of their Liberties
and Properties, the last of which they thought themselves something more secure
in, than some of the Neighboring Plantations, and had an entire dependence,
that her Majesty's Royal Bounty and Goodness would never be wanting to make
them easy and happy* even beyond their wishes: Its their misfortune that they
must say, The Success has not answered the Expectation, and the Queens Subjects
here have felt the Reverse of what they had most reason to hope. That greatest
and best of Princes, is, without all peradventure, ignorant of their Pressures,
or they had long since had Relief: She is too good to continue even the
deserved Sufferings of the Miserable, and has more of Hea ven in Her than not
to hear the Cry of those that groan under Oppression, and the unkind Effects of
mistaken Power, to whom they owe their Miseries. Who would not, I say, after
such Assertions, expect to see the Governor proved guilty either of Treason or
betraying the Trust reposed in him by the Queen* by depriving the Subjects of
their Lives, their Estates or Properties, or at least denying them Justice, and
perverting the Laws to the Oppression, instead of administering them for the
Protection and Preservation of the People committed to his Charge. These, or
the like Crimes, manifestly proved, are the only things that can justify Men
in the accusing a Governor of Corrupt Practice, and of shaking the Liberties
and Properties of the People. But if none of these things can be proved, but on
the contrary it does appear plainly, that no one Act of Severity, much less of
Injustice or Oppression, has been done, since the Government of this Province
came under the Queen, but that there has been an impartial, just and equal
Administration of Justice observed throughout the whole Course of my
Government, and that many Acts of Mercy have been extended to Persons, who
deserved to be severely punished; then what sort of Creatures must these bold
Accusers appear to be in the eyes of all impartial and judicious Men? That
these are Truths beyond Contradiction, and which all the People of this
Province know, I do Challenge you, and every of you to prove the contrary. And
though I know very well, that there are several unquiet Spirits in this Province,
who will never be content to live quiet under any Government but their own, and
not long under that neither, as appears by their Methods of Proceeding when the
Government was in the hands of the Proprietors, when many of these very Men who
are now the Remonstrancers, were in Authority, and used the most Arbitrary and
Illegal Methods of Proceeding over their fellow Subjects, that were ever heard
of. Yet I well satisfied, there are very few men in the Province, except
Samuel Jenings and Lewis Morris, Men known to have neither good Principles nor
Morals, who would have ventured to accuse a Governor of such Crimes, without
any Proof to make good their Accusation. But they are capable of any thing but
good.

But that the unreasonableness of these Complaints may appear the plainer, let
us consider what these Enormities of mine are, that have turned the benign
influences of the Queens mild Government into Oppression and the unkind effects
of mistaken Power.

Remonstrance.
IN the First place, the Governor has prohibited the Proprietors Agents,
commonly called the Council of Proprietors, from granting any Warrant for
taking up of Lands in the Western Division of this Province. We cannot see by
what Law or Reason, any man's Property can be disposed of by the Governor,
without his consent. The Proprietors when they surrendered the Government, did
not part with their Soil, and may manage it as they think fit, and are not to
take directions from any Person whatsoever, how and when to do it. If any
Person concerned is agrieved, the Laws are open, by which disputes in Property
are decided, and he, doubtless, will not be left remedyless. We are very sorry
the Governor gives us occasion to say, it is a great Incroachment on the
Proprietors Properties; but we are not surprised at it when a greater
Incroachment on our Liberties led the way to it, and that was the Governors
refusing to swear or attest, three Members of the last Assembly, upon the
groundless suggestion of Thomas Revel and Daniel Leeds, two Members of the
Queens Council, by which means they were kept out of the Assembly. We are too
sensibly touched with that procedure, not to know what must be the unadvoidable
consequences of a Governors refusing to swear, which of the members of an
Assembly he thinks fit, but to take upon himself the Power of judging of the
Qualifications of Assembly Men, and to keep them out of the House, as the
Governor did the aforesaid three Members, nigh eleven Months, till he was
satisfied in that point, after the House had declared them Qualified, is so
great a Violation of the Liberties of the People, so great a Breach of the
Privileges of the House of Representatives, so much an assuming to himself a
Negative Voice to the Freeholders Election of their Representatives, that the
Governor is entreated to pardon us if this is a different Treatment from what
he expected: It is not the effects of passionate Heats, or the Transports of
Vindictive Tempers, but the serious Resentments of a House of Representatives,
for a notorious Violation of the Liberties of the People, to whom they could
not be just, nor answer the trust reposed in them, should they decline letting
the Governor know, they are extremely dissatisfied at so unkind a Treatment,
especially when its Causes and Effects conspire to render it so Disagreeable.

It is notoriously known, that many considerable Sums of Money have been raised
to procure the Dissolution of the first Assembly, to get clear of the
Properties Quit-Rents, and to obtain such Officers as the Contributors should
approve of.

This House has great reason to believe, the Money so gathered was given to
Lord Cornbury, and did Induce him to Dissolve the then Assembly, and by his own
Authority keep three Members out of the next Assembly, and put so many mean and
mercenary Men into Office, by which corrupt Practice, Men of the best Estates
are severely harassed; Her Majestys Good Subjects in this Province so
Impoverished, that they are not able to give that support to her Majestyes
Government as is desired, or as they would otherwise be inclined to do. And we
cannot but be very uneasy when we find by these new methods of Government, our
Liberties and Properties so much shaken, that no Man can say he is Master of
either, but holds them as Tenant by Courtesy, and at Will, and may be stripped of
them at pleasure. Liberty is too valuable a thing to be easily parted with, and
when such mean inducements procure such Violent Endeavors to tear it from us.
We must take leave to say, They have neither Heads, Hearts or Souls, that are
not moved with the Miseries of their Country, and are not forward with their
utmost Power lawfully to Redress them.

We conclude, by advising the Governor what it is that principally engages the
Affections of a People, and he will find no other Artifice needful, then to let
them be unmolested in the enjoyment of what belongs to them of Right; and a
wise Man that despises not his own happiness, will earnestly labor to regain
their love. By Order of the House,

Samuel Jenings, Speaker
A. M. Die Lunae 5 May, 1707.
His Excellency's Answer.
F irst, By the Instructions her most sacred Majesty, the Queen, has honored
me with, I am to allow of all such Agents as the general Proprietors shall
appoint, such Agents qualifying themselves by taking such Oaths as the Queen is
pleased to direct, and no other. No Persons, under the Name of a Council of
Proprietors, have ever tendered themselves to take those Oaths, consequently
they are not capable of acting as Agents; besides, I say, these People who call
themselves A Council of Proprietors, are a parcel of People pretending to act
by a Power derived from certain Persons who have no power to grant. The
Governor has therefore done in this case nothing but his duty, in hindering, as
far as in him lay, that pretended Council of Proprietors from acting illegally,
which they have long done, to the great prejudice of her Majesty's Subjects.
This is a truth I cannot doubt of, because, besides the other reasons I have to
satisfy me in that point, you have voted my putting the Records of the Eastern
Division, into the hands of Peter Sonmans, to be a Grievance, though Mr. Sonmans
has qualified himself long ago; so that the Council of Proprietors not having
qualified themselves at all, is a much greater Grievance.

By the Queens Instructions to me, she is pleased to direct, That no person
shall be capable of being elected a Representative by the Freeholders of
either Division, or afterward sitting in General Assembly, who shall not have
One Thousand Acres of Land of an Estate of Freehold, in his own right, within
the Division for which he shall be chosen: Two Gentlemen of the Council
informed me that three Persons, whose Names they then mentioned, were not
qualified; upon which I refused to take their Attestations (for they were all
Quakers) and in so doing I did my duty. I recommended it to the Assembly, at
that time, to proceed, in the first place, to enquire into that matter, but
they did not think fit to do it, till they had sat about three weeks, and then
they sent me a Message to desire those three Members might be sworn, for they
were satisfied they were qualified. I sent them word, that if they would
communicate to me the Proofs which had satisfied them, I should be ready to
admit them; but that they would not do. In some few days the Assembly was
adjourned to meet at Amboy, where they met at the time appointed, and sent me
the same Message as they had done before; I sent them the same Answer; upon
which they ordered the three Members to produce to me the Proofs of their
Qualifications, which having done, I admitted them immediately, which I could
not do before without breaking the Queens Instructions; so that it was entirely
through their own stubbornness, that they were not admitted sooner, and no
intent or desire of mine to keep them out. If I had had a mind to have kept any
Members out of the House, I could have made Objections which they could never
have answered, but such practices are below me; and it is not true that I have
made any Violation of the Liberties of the People, nor have I assumed to my
self a negative Voice to the Freeholders election of their Representatives, as
this House of Representatives has lately most notoriously done. But of that
more anon. Indeed, the Treatment I have met with from this house of
Representatives is far different from what I and all reasonable men expected
from most of them, thinking them endued with Reason and common Justice to
Mankind; but it is not different from what I expected from Samuel Jenings and
Lewis Morris, two men notoriously known always to have been Disturbers of the
quiet and peace of this Province, Men always possessed with passionate Heats and
the transports of most vindictive Tempers, but never capable of such serious
Resentments as would become a House of Representatives, if there were any
occasion given them to show any. How they have been able to prevail with the
major part of the House to Join with them in destroying, as far as in them lay,
the Reputation of a Gentleman, who has the honor to serve the Queen, as
Governor of this Province, and is so far from deserving such Treatment from
them, that he has always done to the utmost of his power for the good, welfare
and prosperity of this Province and People, and would have done much more, if
the Assembly would have put it into power, by preparing such Bills as the
Governor at the beginning of every Sessions has recommended to them, and the
Condition of the Country required; but that they must answer for to God and
their own Consciences, if they can; and; perhaps, one day to me too.

Whether many considerable Sums of Money have been raised or not, I know not;
and if they were raised, for what intent or purpose they were raised, I know
not; but this I know, that if any Money was raised, it was not given to me, nor
was ever any Money offered to me to procure the Dissolution of the first
Assembly, or to get clear of the Proprietors Quit-Rents, or to obtain such
Officers as the Contributors should approve of, as is falsely alleged. The
Reasons why I dissolved the first Assembly were evident to all Mankind; for it
was plain that House never intended to do any thing for the support of the
Queens Government, nor for the good of the Country; and indeed better could not
be expected from an Assembly so corruptly chosen as that was; for some of the
now Remonstrancers, and some other People, prevailed with Thomas Gordon, than
Sheriff of the County of Middlesex, to refuse a Poll, when demanded; and when
the Persons injured by that Practice, complained to the House of
Representatives, they had a day assigned them to be heard, but were limited to
bring but twenty Witnesses; the People attended at the day appointed, with the
number of Witnesses they were allowed to bring, but were then by that House
refused to be heard, not only by themselves, but by their Council, and their
Witnesses refused to be examined, though at the same time they heard Thomas
Gordon, who was the Person complained against, and did examine some Witnesses
on his behalf; upon which the Petition of the Complainants was dismissed; thereby
supporting the illegal proceeding of the Sheriff. This was a Violation of the
Rights of the People with a Vengeance, and a sufficient Reason (if I had no
other) for the Dissolving that Assembly, that the People might once more have a
true Choice of their Representatives. As for getting clear of the Proprietors
Quit-Rents, that is such an absurdity to mention, that no body could be guilty
of it but Samuel Jenings and Lewis Morris; for it is evident, that at the
beginning of every Sessions, I have recommended it to the Assembly, to prepare
a Bill or Bills for settling the Rights of the Proprietors; which, I suppose,
will be a full Answer to that part. And as I know of no such Men as
Contributors, so I can have had no such Application made to me: I have not,
knowingly, put any mean or mercenary Men into Office; indeed, at my first
coming to the Government of this Province, I desired the Gentlemen of the
Council to recommend Persons to me, fit to put into Offices, Military and
Civil; several of them gave me Lists, and among the rest Mr. Lewis Morris gave
me one, which I have still by me, in which indeed, by experience, I find there
are some mean scandalous men, but I cannot accuse any body else of doing the
like.

Thus much I thought my self obliged to say in answer to your Remonstrance, to
satisfy the world of the falsehood of your Allegations, and the
unreasonableness of your Complaints. I have said the less in answer to the
scandalous Reflections you have cast upon me, because I don't doubt, but upon
my most humble Application to her most sacred Majesty, the Queen, she will be
graciously pleased to allow me to take such measures as may be most proper to
procure me ample satisfaction for the great and extravagant Injuries you have
done me.

As for the Advice you conclude with, I shall only say, That I can never answer
the taking advice from Men who do not know how to govern themselves, and who
have always opposed the Service of the Queen, and the Interest and good of
their Country, which are inseparable.

Now, Gentlemen, I shall take notice to you of some of your last unwarantable
Proceedings in this Assembly, which I cannot pass by without a breach of the
Trust reposed in me by her Majesty: And, first, I shall observe, that at the
opening of the Sessions, I recommended to yon the settling a Revenue, and the
preparing several Bills, which I thought might be useful for the Country; and I
told you, that if you found any thing else necessary to be provided for by a
Law, you should always find me ready to agree to any thing that might be
reasonable; but instead of proceeding upon those things so necessary that they
ought to have employed your first thoughts, you have squandred away your time
in hawking after Imaginary Grievances, for the space of one whole Month,
without making one step toward the Service of the Queen or the Country.

You have presumed to take the Queens Subjects into the Custody of your Serjant
at Arms, who are not Members of your House, which you cannot lawfully do, and
is a notorious Violation of the Liberties of the People.

You have taken upon you to administer an Oath to one of your Members, and have
expelled him from the House for refusing to take an Oath, which you could not
legally administer to him: This is most certainly Robbing that Member of his
Property, and a most notorious assuming to your selves a Negative Voice to the
Freeholders Election of their Representatives; for which there can be no
President found.

You have Arbitrarily taken upon you to command the High Sheriff of this County
to discharge a Prisoner, who was in his Custody at the Suit of one of the
Queens Subjects, and he has been weak enough to do it, for which he lies liable
to be sued for an escape, whenever the Gentleman thinks fit to do it, and from
which you cannot protect him. This is a notorious violation of the Right of the
Subjects, and a manifest interruption of Justice.

You have taken upon you to appoint one of your Members to act as Clerk of the
Commit of the whole House, which you have no power to do, and the Party
officiating is liable to be prosecuted for acting without Lawful Authority, and
without being qualified to act.

These, Gentlemen, are some of the Irregularities you have been guilty of this
Sessions: Some of them are Encroachments upon the Queens Prerogative Royal, the
rest are all notorious Infractions upon the Rights, Liberties and Properties of
the People. I was going to conclude, with giving you some Wholesome Advice, but I
consider, that will be but labor lost; and therefore shall reserve it for
Persons, who, I hope, will make the right use of (...).

FINIS.

