AN ESSAY Tending to Promote Reformation, By a brief SERMON, Preached before
His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL, and Representatives, of
the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in N.E. On May 26, 1708.

Which was the Anniversary Day for ELECTION of Her Majesty's Council for this
Province.

By John Norton, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Hingham.

Jer. xiii.15, 16. Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has
spoken. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause Darkness, and before
your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, and while ye look for Light, he turn
it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross darkness. Jer. iii.1, 7, 12.
Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return unto me says the
Lord, Return thou Backsliding Israel* says the Lord, and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful. Mal. iii.7. Return unto me, and I
will return unto you says the Lord of hosts: but ye said, Wherein shall we
return? Boston: Printed by B. Green. Sold by Benj. Eliot at his Shop under the
Townhouse, 1708

AN ESSAY Tending to Promote Reformation.
Honored, Reverend, much Respected, and Beloved in the Lord,
I Who am of the Least, the most Unable, and Unworthy of all your Servants in
the Lord, am called at this time to Preach before this Great, and Good
Assembly, an Assembly of the Chosen People of the Lord: The Choice, the Best,
the most Wife, the most Able in the Province; an Assembly, which is yet
accounted (notwithstanding a great Declension and Degeneracy) the most truly
Honorable, Venerable, Pious, and Religious, of any in the Western World. This
Land was Sown with good Seed, planted with choice Vines, Men generally
Virtuous, Pious and Religious. Religion was their main interest; it was no
Worldly design, but merely on the account of Religion; they came to these
remote Ends of the Earth, a vast and howling Wilderness: God signally owned,
and blessed them in their great, and dangerous Undertaking, God was with them,
and it was well with them. God was a Wall of fire round about them, and their
glory in the midst of them: No weapons formed against them Prospered; Counsels
were turned to Foolishness. We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have
told us, what God did for them in their days, How He did drive out the Heathen,
and Planted them; they got not the Land in Possession by their own Sword,
neither did their own Arm save them. They were with God, and God was with them:
They Sought and Served God, God Prospered them: They Sought the Kingdom of God
in the first Place; They had the additional Blessings of Heaven, and Earth, Sea
and Land: From Small beginnings, in few years they became a Flourishing, and
considerable Plantation. But since their days, their Posterity, and Successors
have much Degenerated: As we have increased, so we have Sinned, and Provoked
the Lord against us. We have changed our Ways and Interest in great measure;
God has changed his Ways, and dealings toward us. God has Witnessed against
us by variety of Judgments for a long time. We have been Impoverished, brought
Low, Afflicted, many evils and troubles have befallen us; especially the Sword,
a cruel Sword; a Cruel Barbarous Enemy. The Sword God is not wont to draw upon
His People when less Chastisements are effectual. Here has been great
Declension: God has been greatly Provoked; How is our Gold become dim, and our
fine Gold changed? This is matter of Lamentation! and that which is greater, We
are still Declining, notwithstanding all Means used to prevent and to reduce.

I shall therefore endeavor to apply my self in such manner, as I judge most
suitable to a People so circumstanced. Deo annuente, et adjuvante. God needs
no Instruments: He can work with them, or without them, as in pleases Him. The
best can do nothing without God; the weakest can do much with God. God's
Strength is made perfect in Weakness, 1 Cor. 3.7. He that planteth is not any
thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase.

I would not offend any Person, nor offer any thing, but what might be
agreeable to all; yet to please all I account a thing next to impossible; Quot
Capita tot Sensus. Omnes non idem Sapiunt. I desire not the Praise of Men, I
desire to please God above all: I desire God may give me His Grace so to do.
Give what He may accept and accept what He gives.

NOW may it please Your EXCELLENCY, and this Honorable Assembly; the place of
Scripture I have taken for the Subject of our present Discourse, you have in,

Numbers XIV.II. And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this People
provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me? -- THIS Book is called
by the Hebrews, Vajedabber, from the first words: And (the Lord) Said.
Sometimes Bemidbar, that is, In the Wilderness, where these things were acted.
According to the Greek Title, it is called Numbers; so called from the many
Numbrings recorded in the Book. The most remarkable Numbering we have in Numb.
1.1, 2, 3. Where God commands Moses, On the first day of the second Month, in
the second year after they were come cut of the Land of Egypt, to Take the Sum
of all the Congregation of Israel: from twenty year old and upward, that were
able to go forth to War. Except the Levites, v. 47. Twenty years old: [ Heb.] a
Son of twenty, entering into, or beginning to be twenty. The total Sum we have,
v. 46. Six hundred thousand and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty. A
wonderful increase of Seventy Souls in such a time. A reward of Faith, Heb.
11.11, 12. Through faith Sarah received strength to conceive, therefore there
sprang even from one, so many as the Stars of the Sky for multitude, and as
the Sand of the Sea Shore innumerable. Balaam beholds them with admiration,
Numb. 23.10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and number the fourth part of
Israel. It Is of awful consideration, that God consumed this great body of
People (all but two, Caleb and Joshua) in His Wrath. Where Note, That a People
for whom God has done great things, wrought wonders, may after by their
Ingratitude and Disobedience provoke God to Destroy them. Jude v.5. I will put
you in remembrance, how the Lord having saved his People out of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them. The Contents of this Book are partly Doctrinal,
partly Historical: The Doctrinal part contains additions, explanations of
sundry Laws, Moral, Judicial, mostly Ceremonial. The Historical part contains
the most remarkable things, the Children of Israel did, or suffered in the
Desert, by the space of Thirty-nine years: Dangers, Deliverances, Troubles,
Travels, Provocations, Punishments. In the Fourteenth Chapter we have recorded,
a Rebellion that did consummate their Provocation, and complete their Sin, and
procured their utter Destruction. God will bear no longer: He will utterly
consume them; there is no remedy. Verse 28. Say unto them, as I live says the
Lord, their Carcases shall fall in the Wilderness. Verse 35. In the Wilderness
they shall be consumed, and there they shall die. God minds that this is now
the Tenth time, v. 22. They have tempted me now these ten times. God remembers,
though men forget. Ten is sometimes put for many: Numerus certus pro incerto.
But here it may be taken properly, for ten times. 1. At the Red Sea, Exodus
14.11, 12.2. At Marah, Exodus 15.23, 24. Again in the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus
16.2. Then twice about Manna, Exodus 16.20, 27, 28. After at Rephidim, Exodus 17.
Then by the Calf at Horeb, Exodus 32. At Taborah, Numb. 11.1. Again at Kebroth
Hattaavah, Numb. 11.4. Now the tenth time in Pharan. Of this provocation, we
have,

1. The Cause, and Occasion of it; viz. An evil report brought of the Promised
Land by the incredulous Spies, Numb. 13.32. It is a Land that eats up the
Inhabitants thereof, the People we saw in it, are men of great Stature. There
we saw the giants, and the Sons of Anak, that came of giants: we were in our
own sight as grasshoppers, so we were in their sight. We are not able to go up
against the People, for they are stronger than we.

2. The Rebellion. Chap. 14.1. -- 4. (1.) An antecedent, v. 1. All the
Congregation lifted up their voice and cried, and the People wept that night. [
Heb.] in, or through that Night. [ Greek] that whole Night. This Lamentation
was a Bitter fruit of their Unbelief. They believe not GOD that promised the
Land: They believe not Caleb, that tells them otherwise, Numb. 13.30. Let us go
up at once, and possess it, for we are able to overcome. Caleb spoke as was in
his heart, Josh. 14.7. They believe not Joshua and Caleb, Numb. 14.6. -- 9. The
Land is an exceeding good Land: a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Only rebel
ye not against the Lord, neither fear ye the People, for they are bread for us:
Their defense is departed from them, the Lord is with us: fear them not. (2.)
The Rebellion and Provocation. 2, 3, 4. verses. All the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said,
would God we had dyed in Egypt, in the Wilderness. Wherefore has God brought
us into this Land to fall by the Sword. Let us make us a Captain: Let us return
into Egypt. But alas! how should they Live in the barren desert? how should
they get thither? Would God work more Wonders for such Rebels? Verse 10. All
the Congregation had Stone them with Stones. They had almost done the like to
Moses, Exodus 17.4. They after Stoned the Prophets, -- Killed them. Here see
what good Men may meet with from an evil Murmuring People. Think it not Strange
to see it. No wonder they carry themselves so to good Men, that so do to the
good GOD.

3. The Consequents of it, in the following Verses: God is Highly provoked; God
threateneth present destruction. By Moses's intercession they are spared as to
that, v. 13. -- 20. Yet they shall not see the Land, they shall bear their
iniquity till they be consumed. They that brought the evil report died of the
Plague before the Lord. As I Live says the Lord, the Earth shall be filled
with the Glory of the Lord. Another Consequent you have in the Words of the
Text; which are a great complaint God makes to Moses, of the People, they are
also Minatory. In the Text, v. 11. (1.) The party complaining, GOD: the God of
Israel; God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt. (2.) The Object
complained to, Moses. Here God acts with Moses, as a Man in trouble would do
with his Friend; make known his mind and grievances to him. (3.) The Subject
complained of: This People. This People in way of Indignation and Aversation:
not My People, as sometimes. (4.) The Matter of the complaint. 1. They Provoke
Me; they Provoked long: How long will This People Prevoke? Despise, Provoke
contemptuously. 2. They believe not Me; [ Greek] In Me: [Chald.] My Word. This
their Unbelief was the cause of their Rebellion, and so of their ruin and
destruction. For brevity I shall take up but one Doctrinal Conclusion, which is
all I shall make use of.

DOCT. That Unbelief is a Great Evil, and a cause of those Evils, and
Provocations, whereby Persons Provoke the Almighty God to Wrath against them,
to their Destruction.

This we see here. Thus it was with the Children of Israel, in the Wilderness.
This Moses again mentions, Deuteronomy. 1.32. You did not believe the Lord your God:
And the Lord was Wrath, and Swear, saying, There is not one of this evil
Congregation shall see the good Land. The Apostle, Heb. 3.18. To whom Swear be
they should not enter, but to them that believed not. Thus it was with their
Posterity afterward, 2 King. 17.14. God testified against Israel and against
Judah, by all his Prophets, saying, Turn ye from your Evil ways; but they would
not bear, but hardened their Necks like their Fathers that did not believe in
the Lord their God. Therefore the Lord removed them out of his fight, rejected
all the Seed of Israel; delivered them into the hands of Spoilers. Israel was
carried out of their own Land, into the Land of Assyria to this day. Thus with
the Jews, Romans 11.20. Because of Unbelief they were broken off. Thus with the
old World. Unbelief brought the Universal deluge, 1 Pet. 3.19. By which he
Preached to the Spirits in Prison; which were disobedient in the days of Noah.
(...). Unbelieving. Unbelief was the door let in Sin, Death and Sorrow into the
World. Satan himself tempted Eve to Unbelief, Genesis 3.4. Ye shall not surely
dye. Satan was harken'd to. God was not believed, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die. So the transgression was committed; the
forbidden fruit eaten; the Glory departed; Man fallen. All Mankind, all of Man,
every Man. Man is not what he was: was not what he is: He was once glorious:
Crowned with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.5. Now filthy and abominable. Job 15.16.
There is none that does good, no not one, Romans 3.10. etc. Man was once happy,
blessed: Now under Wrath, cursed, miserable. Man was God's Image: Sin is Man's
Image: Misery Sin's Image. Man is God's Creature: Sin is Man's Creature: Misery
Sin's Creature. Unbelief was the door that let in Sin, and Misery into the
World; and it is Unbelief that now Perpetuates it. Unbelief is dishonorable to
God; destructive to Man: Departs from God, leads to Sin, and rebellion
against God: Keeps Men Obstinate in Sin, Perpetuates Sin; and so the bitter
fruits of Sin, Sorrows and Miseries.

But more Particularly,

1. Unbelief departs from God, Duty and Obedience: Faith Obeys, Unbelief
disobeys.

2. Unbelief carries men to Sin, any Sin, all Sin. It is a fruitful Mother of a
World of transgressions. It casts off the fear of God: Where there is no fear
of God, there is no Conscience of Sin. No Conscience of Sin, what Sin is it men
will not commit? The Apostle having set down a Catalogue of Sins, concludes
with this as a cause of all the rest; There is no fear of God before their
Eyes, Romans 3.18. Unbelief defiles the heart, blinds the mind, fears the
Conscience; to Man's Natural, it adds a contracted Hardness, that they become
past feeling, Ephesians. 4.13.

3. It holds men obstinate in Sin, that they will not be reclaimed. (1) It
rendereth the Means used to bring men to repent, and reform; vain, and
ineffectual; Instructions, Directions, Persuasions, Disswasions, Promises,
Threats; The Word, the Rod: The Word profits not without Faith; the Rod
profits not, In vain have I smitten, why should you be smitten any more? (2) It
fills men with Atheism; to conclude, either there is no God, or He is not such
a God as He is declared to be. The fool has said in his heart, There is no
God, Psalm. 14.1. What follows, They are corrupt, they have done abominable
Works, there is none that does good. Unbelief says, God sees not: Job 22.13,
14. Thou say how does God Know, can he judge through the dark cloud. Thick
Clouds are a covering to him, He sees not. Psalm. 94.7. They say, the Lord does
not see, neither does the God of Jacob regard it. Zeph. 1.12. That say in their
heart God will not do good, neither will he do evil. (3) It regards neither Law
nor Gospel. It despises the Promises: derideth the Threats, Isa. 5.19. They say
let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it. Let the Counsel of
the holy one come that we may Know it. They draw iniquity with cords, and Sin
with Cartropes. (4) It abuses the goodness, and long-suffering of God, which
should lead to Repentance; to Harden in Sin, Eccl. 8.11. Because Judgment
against an evil work is not speedily executed: therefore the hearts of the Sons
of men are fully set to do evil. But let such know, that the longer Judgment is
delayed, the Heavier it will be when it comes. Romans 9.22. What if God willing
to show his Wrath, and make his Power known, endured with long-suffering the
Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. It shall come; it has sometime Leaden
feet, but Iron hands. Sin shall not go unpunished. Your Sin shall find you out:
Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished. 1 Timothy 5.24, 25.
Some men's Sins are open before hand, going before to judgment: and some they
follow after. Likewise the good works of some are manifest before hand, and
they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

4. As Unbelief holds men Obstinate in Sin, and Perpetuates Sin; So it
Perpetuateth Miseries, the just Punishment, and bitter fruit of Sin: Temporal
here, and eternal hereafter; everlasting Destruction; Men don't believe,
therefore they don't obey: therefore they shall be punished with an Everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, -- from the Glory of his Power, 2
These. 1.9. A part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is
the Second Death. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and unbelieving and abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, etc. They are Unbelieving, therefore it is
they are Fearful, Abominable, Whore-mongers, Sorcerers, etc. and so have their
part in that Lake. Now some USE and Improvement. USE. I. See the great Evil of
Unbelief. Evil in it is Self: Evil to GOD; Evil to Man; Evil in its fruits. It
is a root of Bitterness, whence the gall and wormwood of Evils both Sinful and
Painful proceed. Men are more ready to be convinced of, and charge themselves
with the guilt of other Sins than with this: yet this is a Mother Sin. The
damning Sin. Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved: he that believes
not shall be damned. He that believes not, shall not see life: the wrath of
God abides on him. He that believes shall be Saved, were his Sins never so
many. He that believes not shall be damned, were his Sins never so few.

USE. II. Examination. Are we guilty of this Sin of Unbelief? If we are, Let us
see it: be convinced of it: Conviction of Unbelief is a step to Faith, and so
to Life, and Salvation; All Salvations, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal.

Let me offer something in way of Trial, and Conviction.

1. Have not we provoked the Lord our God; Provoked him greatly? Read the cause
in the effect. Sin, in the Punishment. Have not Gods Judgments been great? Have
not therefore our Sins been grievous? Would a gracious God, and merciful
Father, who does not willingly afflict, nor grieve the Children of men, Inflict
sore, and heavy Judgments on His People, were not their Sins great and heinous?
We have confessed Guilty: It has been often confessed, and acknowledged, and
that before this Honorable Assembly. I might remind you of many considerable
Testimonies, that have been here given. I shall mention but one, in the year
School. He is a Stranger to the Affairs of New England, and one that considers
not the Operation of God, that knows not this. Who knows not that our Fields
that use to smell as the Fields that God has blessed, Have a long time been
blasted. A fruitful Land been turned into barreness. Instead of Plenty, we have
had Scarcity: of Health, Sickness: of Peace, War. Instead of Divine Favor,
Direction, Protection: we have had Desertions, Frustrations, Rebukes in things
of greatest Importance. Our Degeneracy is too palpable to be denied, too gross
to be excused: It calls rather for Lamentation, than for Proof, and
Demonstration. I may mind you of the Words of an Eminent Divine, in his Epistle
prefixed to a Sermon Preached on a day of Election in the year 1674. they are
as follows. Do not the Ancient men that have seen the first House weep over
this? If we be not sensible of these things, our case is no less desperate than
Ephraim's, when gray Hairs were upon him and he knew it not. That People who
were newly come out of the hands of those that sometimes said to their Souls,
Bow down that we may go over: And whose present Interest was to carry on Temple
Work, when they were arrived to a full enjoyment of Peace and Liberty, soon
forgot their main and true interest, being under the Powerful and Prevailing
interest of a Worldly and Degenerate Spirit: and yet they said, wherein shall
we return. How many are with us of the same Spirit, making the same enquiry? It
is a difficult thing to reclaim an Apostatising, and Backsliding People. Almost
all present would be let alone in the condition wherein they are: and those
that would reform them will be looked upon as troublers.

2. Have we not provoked God long? Many years has God been contending with us:
following of us with variety of Judgments, which we have been bleeding under.
God has been Longsuffering, not willing we should perish.

3. Has not God shown us our Transgressions, and our Sins? As in Isa. 58.1.
Has not God been long Warning, and Calling upon us to turn from our evil ways,
and doings, which have not been good?

4. Has not God been using means with us? Word and Rod, greater and lesser
Judgments, signal Mercies and Deliverances. God has remembered Mercies in the
midst of Judgments: He has been Compassionate: As in Psalm. 78.38. Being full
of Compassion he forgave them their Iniquities, and destroyed them not. Many a
time he turned away his Anger, and did not stir up all his Wrath: for he
remembered they were but flesh.

5. Have not Means been ineffectual? Are not those Sins, God has been
contending for, committed as much, or more than before? Have not our Iniquities
increased over our heads? Sin abounded, love waxed cold. Is there not a great
deal of Atheism, Profaneness, Sensuality, Pride, Oppression, etc. among Some;
Luke-warmness, Formality, Hypocrisy, decays in Faith, Love, Zeal among others.
Many shameless in Sin, as Jer. 6.15. Graceless in Profession: Profess they know
God, but keep not his commands. They love God, but love not their Brethren, but
live in Malice, Envy, Strife, Wrath, Contention. Jam. 3.14, 15. But if there be
bitter envying, and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
Truth. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual and
Devilish. They Profess themselves Religious, but bridle not their Tongues, Jam.
1.26, If any man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, This man's
Religion is vain. They make their boast of the Law, but by breaking the Law
dishonor God; abhor Idols, but commit Sacrilege? Romans 2.23. Are there not
Multitudes of Uncircumcised Unconverted Souls, that hate to be Reformed? God is
angry with them every dayp: God will punish the Circumcised with the
Uncircumcised: Egypt and Judah, Edom and Ammon, Jer. 9.26.

6. Do we not still provoke God? Is not his hand still stretched out? God has
not yet Subdued our Enemies; nor turned his hand against our Adversaries: As
Psalm. 81.13. O that my People had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my
ways, I should soon have subdued their Enemies. A great part of the Land lies
in ruins, and desolate; great Part fear, or are in danger day and night: there
is no Peace, nor Safety to him that goes out, nor to him that comes in: Many
may be said rather to endure Life, than to enjoy Life. What would many give to
enjoy the days they have seen? to go out in Peace, to lie down in Peace, and
none to make them afraid? The way to obtain it, is to make Peace with God; to
have no Peace with Sin; to put away the evil of their doings; to cease to do
evil, to learn to do well. It is in vain to look for Good, or Promise
themselves Peace, while they walk in the imagination of their own hearts. Deuteronomy.
29.19. And it come to pass when he hears the Words of this curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart: The Lord will not spare him, but the anger and
jealousy of the Lord shall Smoke against that man, etc.

7. Does not God yet complain, How long? How long will you Provoke? How long
shall vain thoughts lodge within you? How long ye simple ones will you love
simplicity? Men are ready to complain of God, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not, afflicted our Soul, and thou take no Knowledge.
How long will God hide his face? How long ere God hear, help, arise? But how
long will it be ere they hear; turn to Him that smites? Put away their Idols,
the evil of their doings: Isa. 59.1. Gods Hand is not shortened that he cannot
save, nor his ear heavy that he cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated
between you, and your God, your sins have hid His face from you, that he will
not hear.

8. Is not Unbelief the cause of all this? Must we not confess guilty?

USE. III. We have seen our Malady, viz. Unbelief, That has brought all our
Miseries, and Calamities upon us; and if continued in, will yet bring more,
seven times more: If we will yet provoke, God will still punish. Let us seek a
Remedy: get Unbelief cured, Unbeliving hearts Circumcised: Get Faith. 2 Chronicles.
20.20. Believe in the Lord so shall you be established, believe his Prophets so
shall you prosper. God has warned us by his Prophets. Has not God testified
by all His Prophets? Saying, Turn ye from your evil ways. Have not the former
Prophets given early warning of Sins then present, and prevailing; of Judgments
impending and approaching? Let us believe: Nineveh believed, and they were
spared, Jonah 3.10. God saw their works that they turned from their evil way,
and God repented of the evil he said he would do unto them, and did it not.
Israel believed not, and they are rejected: 2 King. 17.14. -- 20. They
heardened their Necks like their Fathers, that did not believe in the Lord
their God. The Lord rejected them, afflicted them, and delivered them into the
hand of Spoilers. If we will not believe, the means that are for our softening,
will harden us, and we shall Sin more, and provoke more, and at last be
destroyed without remedy. God may bear long, wait long, but not always: Isa.
42.14. I have a long time refrained my self, now will I destroy and devour at
once. Jer. 15.7. -- I will destroy my People, since they turn not from their
ways. Ezekiel. 24.14. I the Lord have spoken it, and it shall come to pass, and I
will do it, I will not go back, I will not spare, I will not repent. God has
so done: He has often done it: He will so do: He is the same God: He is
Unchangeably Just and Holy. God has so done to Shiloh, where the House of God
was continued almost four hundred years. To Jerusalem, once called, The
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole Earth. To the Churches in Asia, once
glorious, planted by the Apostles: These Candlesticks have been removed for a
long time out of their places, not one remaining. To many Thousand Churches in
Africa. Many Churches in Europe, since the Reformation. In Saxony, Bohemia,
Hungaria, Poland, France, and other Places, Unchurched and Dissipated. To the
Churches among the ancient Britains, in the Land of our Fathers Sepulchers.
When other Judgments would not Reform them, God at last brought the Saxons upon
them, who rooted them out of the Land. There is a day of Gods Patience, a set
time, with some longer, some shorter; when that time is once expired, there is
no place for Repentance, either on God's part, or on Man's part. God will not
repent: Ezekiel. 24.24. Man shall not be purged: Ezekiel. 24, 13. Thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any anymore, till I cause my fury to rest upon thee.
It sometimes comes and goes again; but at length it rests and abides, till it
utterly consumes: The things of their Peace are then hid from their eyes, Luke
19.42, 43. Christ wept over the City, Saying, If thou had known, even thou at
least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy Peace, but now they are
hid from thine eyes. They shall not leave one Stone upon another, because thou
knew not the time of thy Visitation. A general Security under, or after
Divine Judgments, and Warnings, is a forerunner of a general and speedy
Destruction, When the Prophets Prophecy Peace, and the People Promise Peace:
When there is a Spirit of deep Sleep poured on them, and their eyes are closed:
Isa. 29.10. Jer. 14.13. Then said I, Ah Lord God, behold the Prophets say unto
them, Ye shall not see the Sword, -- but I will give you assured Peace in the
Land. Thus says the Lord, by the Sword, and Famine shall those Prophets be
consumed. And the People to whom they Prophecy, shall be cast out in the
Streets, and there shall be none to bury them: -- Ezekiel. 13, 10. They have
seduced my People, saying Peace, when there was no Peace. One built up a Wall,
and others daubed it with untempered Mortar. Jer. 5. ult. The Prophets
Prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my People love
to have it so: and what will you do in the end thereof? 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. When they
shall say Peace, and Safety: then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as
travail on a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape.

USE. IV. We have cause to Lament our Degeneracy and Obstinacy therein; to be
humbled under the Divine Rebukes of Heaven, which we have been long under. Yet
let us not forget the many Mercies of God, which call for our Thankfulness, and
due Acknowledgements. We are Subjects of many, and great Sins, and
Provocations. Yet are Subjects of many and great Mercies, undeserved Mercies.
Our Mercies are more, and greater than we deserve. Our evil things, and
afflictions are fewer, and less. Let our Unworthiness turn to Gods Praise, make
us more admire, and magnify Mercy. Let goodness lead to Repentance;
Long-suffering be Salvation. Among many, Let me instance a few.

1. We have seen many a black and dark day. Drank of the Waters of gall and
wormwood, and the wine of astonishment; have seen great ruins, and desolations,
yet God has preserved us from utter Desolation: It Is the Lords Mercy we are
not utterly consumed; though God has visited our iniquities with the Rod, yet
he has not taken his Loving Kindness from us: He has corrected with Judgment,
therefore we are not brought to nothing, Jer. 10.24.

2. That we have had so long a time of quietness, no more disturbance from the
Enemy: Breaking in, and Leading out, cries of Blood and Violence: which next to
God, is, and has been ascribed to the good conduct of Him that Sits at the
Helm of Government; by whose Perspicaciousness, Vigilance, and Activity, the
Frontiers have been preserved above what they have been in former Wars; which
has Been abundantly acknowledged with Thankfulness, to GOD, and the QUEEN.

3. The great blessing of GOD to us, and our Nation, in giving so Gracious a
QUEEN, whose Heart GOD has inclined to Favor His People, to Suppress, and
Punish Vice, and Immorality, to encourage and promote what is good: A good
King, or Queen is a great blessing, and gift of God's Love: I King. 10.9. --
Because the Lord Loved Israel, he made thee King to do Justice, and Judgment.
Kings have a great Influence upon the People. It Is ordinarily, Regis ad
exemplum -- Qualis Rex, talis grex. Like King, like People. So it was with the
Children of Israel; and so it has been with Other Nations.

4. Our Civil Enjoyments. A good Government. A good GOVERNOR, well
accomplished for that Service, especially in our difficult juncture of Affairs.
Good Magistrates; Men Faithful and Religious. We may in good measure see our
Judges as at first, our Counselors as at the beginning. Let us Know when we
are well! Let not frowardness and discontent make a Change for the worse? We
have an able Pilot; it may be dangerous putting the Helm into the hand of one
unexperienced, in a Stormy and Tempestuous Season.

5. Enjoyments Spiritual, which were so Sacred, and dear to, and most highly
valued by Our Predecessors. The glorious Gospel: the Gospel of Salvation: the
Word of Life: Glad Tidings, the best that ever came to the Ears of the Sons of
Men. Ecclesiastical Liberties: The doors of God's house are open; we have his
Word, Worship, Ordinances, in Purity, without any humane Impositions. Take
heed, Unthankfulness, and Unfruitfulness don't deprive us of the best things;
here is our great danger: by slighting and not regarding these things, we shall
either justly forfeit them, or render our selves unworthy the Kingdom, or be
hardened to destruction. We are Privileged as to Spiritual things, above many,
I think as much as any in the World. We dwell in Goshen, a Land of Light; when
the greatest part of Mankind sit in darkness and the shadow of Death. According
to Computation, Christianity taken in the largest Latitude, bears no greater
proportion to the other grossly false Religions, than Five to Twenty-five.

The World divided into Thirty parts: They find of them 19 Possessed by Blind
and gross Idolaters. 6 Possessed by Turks and Saracens. 2 Possessed by Those of
the Greek Church. 3 Possessed by Papists and Protestants.


6. For the Liberties, and Privileges of this day. Though they are not the same
as formerly, and what many of us desired; yet, are they not better than we
deserve? It is yet well with us; and it will be well, if they be continued to
us: It may be, better than, abused Liberty.

ELECTION being the Work of the Day: Give me leave to Speak a Word to the
Gentlemen, the Electors. The Government is in great part Elective by the
People; which if wisely managed, the Representatives will be of the Best: our
Counselors will be of the Best; the most Wise, most Able, most faithful in
the Province. If it be not so, who will be to blame? Gentlemen, Your Wisdom,
Prudence and Fidelity are consided in: You represent the People: You are chosen
by the People; Chosen for the People; Seek their interest and welfare: The
great interest of this People has been, and in good measure, is Religious.
It Is like to fare with us on other accounts, as it goes with Religion: The
Lord is with you while you are with him. If we let Religion, which is our Life,
die, we may not Live long after. You are trusted with the choice of a Council:
Have respect to Piety, and the Fear of God in Election. Such, you may expect
Gods Presence with them; and Blessing upon them; that their Steps shall be
ordered of the Lord, and God will delight in their way. Choose such as are in
the best interest: Choose for God; Such as will take Care of Godliness as well
as Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Such as God may approve, and not complain: As Hosea
8.4. They have set up Kings but not by me, they have made Princes and I knew it
not. They are to be Rulers for God. 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Blessed be the Lord, thy God
which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne to be King for the Lord thy
God. Choose men of David's Character, Acts 13.22. -- A man after mine own heart,
which will fulfill all my Will. [ Greek] Wills. (...). Here are three
Characters, or Evidences of Integrity; a Man after Gods Heart. (1) Universality
in Obedience. [ All] (2) Perseverance; He fulfilleth, he goes on, finisheth.
(3) Sincerity; his Motive is God's Will, because God wills it. Labor to
Choose Such as are like the Children of Issachar, 2 Chronicles. 12.32. Men that had
Understanding in the times to know what Israel ought to do. It would be good to
take men that are advantaged by Liberal Education, by Knowledge of Affairs
abroad, as well as Customs at home; and of the Transactions; and what has
passed in former Ages: without which Knowledge, men will hardly attain to be
great States Men. Qui respicit praterita, Inspicit prasentia, prospicit futura.
He that looks back to Times past, into Times present, may give a conjecture
of Times future. I shall not take upon me to teach, or prescribe the Great and
General Court in their Civil Political Affairs; but am willing to be prescribed
by them; to submit to all their good and wholesome Ordinances, and be at their
Command. I shall not take upon me to Counsel the Great Council, but Pray God to
be their Counselor whose Name is, Wonderful, Counselor; who is God only
Wise, the God of Wisdom, and the giver of Wisdom. I need not mind you to have
regard to the Interest of CHRIST, the Best Interest. God has given this Part
of these Ends of the Earth to His Son for a Possession: You know it is your
Duty to maintain His Possession what you can. God has set you as a Hedge, a
Wall, part of the defense upon the Glory. I need not mind you of Schools of
Learning, to encourage and uphold them: But thankfully acknowledge your Care,
and Provision made for this end. If Learning should utterly fall here, this
Land would be reduced to it is Primitive Darkness, notwithstanding the light
that is in every man that comes into the World. It is matter of thankfulness,
that the COLLEGE is so well Settled with a ResidentPresident, a thing long
desired; a Person so well accomplished, and furnished for that Service, having
been extraordinarily Advantaged thereto. He Succeeds Men eminent in Piety, and
of great Learning. God grant the Blessing to Him, and to the Province; that as
he Succeeds, so he may not fall short, but rather Exceed; Give a double Portion.

I shall not add any thing further, but conclude with a Word of Exhortation.

Let us consider what has been said, and the Lord give us understanding in all
things. I have said nothing, as to the Substance, Quod non ante dictum, that
has not been before said. It has been, and is the general Voice of the
Ministry, and therefore calls for a Serious regard. Let us once at last
Believe, and let us show our Faith by our Works. Let Moses and Aaron, and the
whole Congregation of the Lord, every one according to his Character, endeavor
to revive Godliness, and Virtue, and to Suppress all Vice, and pursue it to the
out-most. Though means used have hitherto been without the desired Success: Yet
give not over, be not discouraged; do not say, there is no Hope! Our case is
bad; yet not desperate: there is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there.
God can Heal us. Lord if thou will, thou can make us clean! Sovereign Mercy
may Save us: Isai. 57.17. I have seen his ways, and will heal him. Implore
Mercy, Convincing, Converting, Healing, Pardoning Mercy, for Mercies Sake,
God's Name Sake, for Christ's Sake, who is Worthy, though we are unworthy. Not
for your sakes do I this, says the Lord, be ashamed and confounded, for your
own ways. Ezekiel. 36.22, 32. Pray with Ephraim, Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God. If God hear us with Ephraim bemoaning our
Selves, He may say to us as he did to Ephraim, Jer. 3I.20. Is Ephraim my dear
Son? is be my pleasant Child: Since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still: My bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have Mercy on
him, says the Lord.

Now to excite here-unto.

1. Consider the Necessity of Reforming. If we are not Reforming, we shall be
Deforming, Sinning; we shall yet be more Sinful, and more Miserable. If the
torrent, or flood of Vice be not Stopped, an overflowing Scourge will follow,
and over-take. Let Her Majesty's Royal PROCLAMATION for Punishing Vice and
Immoralities, be attended, which She so strictly enjoins, as they Tender God's
Honor, Her Favor, their own Welfare. It might be great Advantage, were Her
Majesty's Royal Proclamation followed in New England, as it was in Old-England,
with Reforming Societies. Let the good Laws Enacted be duly Executed. A
Violation of Laws is not so hurtful, as a Non-execution. If we will not be
Warned, when Warnings are given; Reformed, when Reproved; be prevailed with,
when beseeched; Regard, when threatened; be amended, when corrected; be purged,
when God would purge us; What will our End be? Our flesh may tremble! O that my
People were Wise, that they would consider their latter end. O that there were
such a heart in my People, that they would fear me, that it might be well with
them, and their Children after them.

2. The Benefit, and Good of it. How happy might we then be? It would be well
with us notwithstanding all our Provocations; they should be all blotted out,
and remembered no more. The iniquities of Jacob shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the Sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
Pardon them. Could we grieve and mourn for our Sins, our Enemies should not
long Rejoice: God would be grieved for our Miseries, bind our Breaches, repair
our Losses, build up the waste Places; make glad according to the days we have
seen Evil; Remove the evils we feel, Prevent the evils we fear, Bestow the good
things we want. God would be an Enemy to our Enemies; they that devour us,
should be devoured; they that Spoil us, should be a Spoil; and they that Prey
upon us, should be given for a Prey: the Enemies that come against us should be
Smitten before us: they that come out against us One Way should flee before us
Seven Ways; God would give Peace in the Land; we shall dwell in Safety, and
none shall make us afraid: God would keep us Night and Day: He would Water us
every Moment: So our Last days might be our Best; and our Latter End better
than our Beginning. Let those that Love Sion Seek it, say, AMEN.

Let GOD bless us, turn us from our Iniquities heal our Backslidings, save us
from Unbelief, give us to Believe to REFORMATION, and SALVATION. Let God even
our God continue to be the Lord our God, to be with us, as with our Fathers; a
God keeping Covenant and Mercy. Let God continue us to be His People, a People
Keeping Covenant, and Duty, from Generation to Generation throughout all Ages,
AMEN.

FINIS.

