Compassions Called for.

An ESSAY OF Profitable REFLECTIONS On Miserable Spectacles.

To which is added, A Faithful RELATION of Some Late, but Strange Occurrences
that call for an awful and useful Consideration. Especially, The Surprising
Distresses and Deliverances, of a Company lately Shipwrecked on a Desolate
Rock, on the Coast of New England.

Rev. vi. 1. Come and See. Job xxxvii. 14. Stand still, and Consider the
wondrous Works of God. Boston, in N. E. Printed: Sold by Timothy Green, at the
Lower (...) Middle Street. 1711

Preface.
WE read of such a Remarkable Thing once falling out; Psalm. CV. 41. He opened
the Rock, and the Waters gushed out. O Heart of Mankind; What art thou but a
Rock? Harder than the Rock; than the Nether Millstone. The Essay we are now
upon, is to Smite the Rock. Heartbreaking Objects are in this Essay brought
unto the Readers. May the Issue be, that the Smitten Rock, shall break and
flow. Let the Waters of agreeable Tears now Gush out; The Tears of Repentance
for thy own Miscarriages, O Sinful Man; and the Tears of Compassion for the
Miscarriages and Miseries of Other Men. Come, Take a Prospect of Aceldama; make
it become a B^chim.

Profitable Reflections ON Miserable Spectacles. Made at BOSTON. Lecture. 28.
d. 10. m. 1710.
Lam. III. 51. Mine Eye Affects mine Heart.
I Wish, that another Sense may now have the like Operation; That the Ear may
also affect the Heart; That when the Heart-affecting Objects your Eyes may find
in the World about you, do strike upon your Ears in our Enumeration of them,
the Hearers may be Heartily affected with it. My Hearers, You must shut your
Eyes, and stop your Ears, and stupisy all your Affections, if you take not an
Affectionate Notice of the Things, which I am going to set before you. Among
the rest, I intend a very Particular Notice of some Observable Things which
seem to be Evident Judgments quickly overtaking such as have been given up to
more than ordinary Wickedness, both here, and in some other Places.

It was an Ancient Observation; Eccl. VIII. 11. Because Sentence against an
Evil Work is not Executed speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men, is
fully set in them to do Evil. But since we have seen more than once the Wrath
of God Executed Speedily, and so Dreadfully upon some Evil Workers, it may be
Hoped, the Hearts of men will be Affected with it, and the Hearts of some, not
so fully set in them to do Evil, as they use to be.

The Prophet and Poet, who made the Lamentations, that afford our Text unto us,
had at this time a most Heart-affecting sight before his Eyes. The whole BOOK
of Lamentations is written, to tell you what it was. And the Clause that next
follows the Text, more particularly does tell you, It was, Because of all the
Daughters of my City. The Chaldeans had made fearful Ravages upon the Country
Towns, which were the Daughters of the Capital City. Jerusalem was the Mother
of them all. Jerusalem was also expecting the same Lamentable Fate, with her
Daughters. Yea, She had already Drunk very deep of the Cup; she had already
been once Taken, and Plundered, and Spoiled, and miserably Circumstanced. Now,
says he, Mine Eye affects mine Heart! O Servant of God, what was in thine
Eye? He had in his Eye, whole Towns laid in Ashes, by a Barbarous Enemy, a
Bitter and Hasty Nation; though far less Barbarous and Bloody than One at this
Day running amuck among the Nations! He had in his Eye, multitudes of his
Brethren, led away Captives by Cruel Babylonians; Multitudes Massacred and
Murdered, and made a Sacrifice to the Fury of a Terrible Tyrant. He had in his
Eye, the Effects of raging Famine and Sickness; All Order overturned; Universal
Confusion raging every where; the Symptoms of a Total Desolation approaching.
It must be an Heart of Adamant, that would not be affected with the Report,
which an Eye beholding such Spectacles must give unto it.

But the DOCTRINE which I am now to give you is this.

When we have Heart-affecting Spectacles before our Eyes, we should be Heartily
affected with them.

The Eye should affect the Heart, when we see with our Eye, what should not be
seen without an affected Heart.

First. Wonder not at it, That the World is filled with Heart affecting
Spectacles; yea, with Miserable Spectacles.

The First of the Heart affecting Spectacles, is the Worst of them all; that
is, The SIN, the SIN of the world: this it is that has brought in the rest. The
Sum of the Heart-affecting Spectacles in the world, is that; Lam. V. 16. We
unto us, that we have Sinned. First, we see Sin breaking in upon the World; a
Flood of Sin, by our Fall from God* breaking in, and carrying all before it. O
Spectacle full of Horror! O Hard Heart, O Base Heart, that is not Affected with
it! The Death which we see to be the Wages of Sin; the Evil which we see
Pursuing of Sinners; the Wrath of God which we see Overtaking and Overwhelming
the Children of Disobedience; This it is, that makes every Corner of the world,
full of Heart-affecting Spectacles. I am sure, the Redeemer of the World so
accounted of them.

Secondly. How should our Hearts be affected with such Heart-affecting
Spectacles?

Not with Wonder, or Murmur, I have told you. But I answer; Variously.
According to the Various Nature of the Spectacles.

When our Eye shows us a Miserable Spectacle, it must affect our Heart with
Commiseration. We should heartily Commiserate the Miserable; our Heart should
be touched with a Compassion for them. So we read, Job XXX. 25. Did not I weep
for him that was in Trouble? Was not my Soul grieved for the Poor?

If there be Sin joined with Misery in the Spectacle, there must be Anger,
there must be Anguish, joined with the Compassion. We must be angry and not
sin; we must therefore be angry at sin. Our Heart must be Affected with a just
Indignation at every Sin. So we read, 2 Pet. II. 7, 8. Just Lot was Vexed with
the filthy Conversation of the Wicked; That Righteous man dwelling among them,
in Seeing and Hearing, Vexed his Righteous Soul from day to day, with their
unlawful Deeds.

Nor is this all the affection that is now called for. When we see Sin
committed, we should be moved with Fear. Sin does Expose men to the Judgments
of God. When we see Sin, we should Fear, lest the Judgments of God befall the
Sinner; yea, and those that are about him also. Thus we read; Psalm. CXIX. 118,
120. Thou have trodden down all them that Err from thy Statutes; My Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy ^udgments.

But then, methinks we may see occasions for Thankfulness, even in every
Miserable Spectacle. We should have our Hearts Affected with a Thankful
Admiration at the Distinguishing Favors of God unto our selves. Lord, Why am
not I such a Spectacle? Why is not this my Unhappiness? It Is what I have
deserved, as much as any in the world. In the midst of Lamentations, we have
those Acknowledgments; Lam. III. 22. It is of the Lords Mercies that we are not
Consumed: because His Compassions fail not.

The proper affections on such Spectacles are not yet all fully to the Life
Expressed. Something must be produced in the Life. Our Affections must produce
Affectionate Resolutions to Do all the Good that we can. We are affectionately
to Devise Good, for the Relief of the Heart-affecting Spectacles. Or, the
Spectacles are to mind us of some Good that we must Resolve to do for our
Selves, or Others. We must be provoked unto some Holy and Useful Resolutions.
We must fetch some Good out of Evil Spectacles, Think, Wherein must I be the
better, by what I see? Think, What shall I do, that Others may be the Better
for what I see?

To Illustrate this matter, there can be nothing so Suitably, nothing so
Cogently, set before you, as the Example of the admirable JESUS. To introduce
on all Occasions, the mention of His Glories, you know, it is the Spirit, the
Study, the Salt of our Ministry.

Our Amiable and Admirable JESUS, had often before Him, Heart-affecting
Spectacles. How did He Entertain them? We read, He was Grieved. We read, He
Sighed. We read, He Wept. We read, He was moved with Compassion. His Holy Soul
was full of Agony. Oh, How He laid to Heart, the Evil which He saw that the
First Adam had brought upon the World! His Heart broke, and bled upon it! When
He saw any Good, He Cried out, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth! And for the Good He did! He went about, still doing of Good. Yea, the
Sun in the Firmament, it never did the Good, that was done by this Brighter Sun
of Righteousness.

I am now ready to set before your Eyes, O Congregation of the Lord, a Number
of Heart-affecting Spectacles. They are Made already. They need only to be
Shown. It may be, some of you have never taken due Notice of them. I am going
therewithal to show you, How your Hearts are to be Affected with them.

I. Look Inward. The First Counsel, to be always given; Look Inward. Let every
Man, and especially every Unregenerate Man, Look Inward upon the state of his
own SOUL; And, Oh, Let him own it, a most Heart-affecting Spectacle. Man, Cast
an Eye upon thy own Soul! Say, was there ever such a woeful, such a rueful
Spectacle? What a Spectacle is the Leper? Or, the Creature described, Isa. I.
6. From the sole of the Foot, even unto the Head, no soundness; but wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores! Thy Soul, thy Soul, is under such a Leprosy. A
Soul Wounded in all its Faculties. Blind, unable to see Truth; Lame, Unable to
do Right. A Soul, full of Enmity to GOD, and all Goodness. A Soul, Depraved
with most Vicious Inclinations. A Soul, Enslaved unto Satan, and the Powers of
Darkness. A Soul, Born under the Guilt of Original sin, and by the Guilt of
That; and, Oh! what an Enormous Heap of Actual sin! bound over to suffer the
strange Punishment, which the Justice of God assigns to the Workers of
Iniquity. A Perishing SOUL! A Soul every moment in danger of Eternal Perdition!
Verily, An Unregenerate Soul, is the most Lamentable Spectacle in the World!
Imagine a man Deformed in every Limb, Deprived of every Sense; Overrun with
Loathsome Ulcers. Imagine a Poor Man, Starving to Death, or Burning at the
Stake, or Breaking on the Rack; Tragical Spectacles! O Unregenerate, Thy SOUL,
Thy SOUL, is worse than all of This. What a Spectacle is foretold; Deuteronomy.
XXVIII. 67. In the Morning thou shall say, Would God it were Evening: And at
Evening thou shall say, Would God it were Morning: for the Fear of thine Heart,
wherewith thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine Eyes, which thou shall
see. Alas, Alas, Unregenerate; The sight of thine Eyes, which thou may see,
is as Astonishing!

My Friend, This, this is the Spectacle before thine Eyes. How can thou turn
away thine Eyes, from the Beholding of it? The first thing that in the Name of
God, and for the Love of thy Soul, I demand of thee, is, To consider the state
of thy own Soul. Oh! Take Time to do it in secret places.

But then; Shall not Thine Eye affect thine Heart? The Heart of an Unregenerate
sinner, should be Affected, first, with an affrighting Ashonishment at his own
Condition, Sinner, Let thine Eye Affect thine Heart, into that Cry; Romans VII.
24. O wretched One that I am, who shall deliver me? Think; Oh! The Wretchedness
of my present Condition! What, what will become of me, if I Die in this
Condition! Retire for such Thoughts. Devote some Time to these Thoughts. If
this One Thing were obtained from the Hearers, what an Introduction might it
prove, to all manner of Good! Oh! Most Obdurate Heart! If the Condition of thy
SOUL will not Affect it, so much as this comes to; not so much as to make thee
Think upon it.

But then; Secondly; The Heart of such an one, should be Affected into Earnest
Essays, to make Haste out of this Condition. O Heart of stone; Be at last, at
least, so much Affected as to say, I must not continue in this Condition! I
Resolve that I will immediately Cry to the God of all Grace, that He would
bring me out of this Horrible Pit! An Heart suitably Affected with the
Mischiefs and the Dangers of Unregeneracy, will immediately fall down before
the Lord, with a Supplication, the Cry where of shall reach and pierce the very
Heavens; That Supplication; Psalm. CXVI. 4. O Lord, I beseech thee, Deliver my
Soul. A Person whose Heart is Affected with the doleful Chains of Darkness,
which Unregeneracy holds him in, will Immediately fly to the only Savior;
Immediately Plead the Sacrifice of his only Savior, that God may be Reconciled
unto him; Immediately lay hold on the Righteousness of his only Savior, that
he may stand in that with safety before the Judment-seat of God; Immediately
Embrace the Laws of the Holy Lord, as the Rules of his Life; and Enter into
Covenant with God; Comply with all the Articles in the Covenant of Grace; Cry
out, Lord, I am Thine, save me. O Unaffected Heart; How can thou bear, to let
thy Soul remain an Exile from God, a Brand of Hell, a Prey to Devils! Let the
sight which thine Eye gives thee in thy own Soul, have that Issue; Psalm. CXIX.
59, 60. I thought on my ways, and I turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. I made
haste, and I delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

II. Look Abroad. There is a world of SIN committed in the world; This is the
most General, but indeed the most Sorrowful Spectacle, in the world. We read, 1 John V. 19. The whole World lies in wickedness. The World is Drowned in
Ignorance, in Corruption. Satan, the Wicked One, Rules: When he goes to and fro
on the Earth, and walks up and down in it, he does little other than go in
Progress through his own Dominions. Idolatry Reigns Superstition Reigns, Vice
Reigns; Oppression, Fraudulence, Impurity, all manner of Wickedness. Few
Nations have any really or visibly Godly People in them. The Body of Mankind
are in Actual Rebellion against God; Actually up in Arms against the Things
that are Holy and Just and Good. Where any Godly People are to be met withal,
they are but Few; A Little, Little Flock! Their Enemies fill the Countrey's.
The World hates them; They are most Unreasonably Persecuted by the World.

In our Nation, what Abominable Things are done continually! Our late King,
often spoke it unto the Clerk of his Closet; That he found the English Nation a
very wicked Nation. Great Britain, is a very Polluted Island; a Land full of
Bloody Crimes. There goes up a Cry from that Land, in the Ears of the Lord of
Sabbath; Such a Cry that we may stand amazed at the Patience of Heaven, that it
is Reprieved from fearful Desolations; we may tremble to see the Predictions of
our Famous Hooker making such Approaches toward a dreadful Accomplishment.
[See, His Life, in Magnalia Americana, Book III. Page 62, 63.]

There is a Faithful, and Worthy Man, Dr. John Edwards; who has lately obliged
the Public, with a Printed Sermon, on the Heinousness of the Sins of England.
That Servant of God, with a Courage well becoming such an one, has Enumerated
horrendous Instances, wherein the Land has grievously Sinned. I will Recite
some of his words. He says; There has been a shameful Degeneracy from those
Christian Principles, which some brand with the Odious Name (as they accout it)
of Calvinism. But it is plain to any Discerning man, that the Preaching of the
Contrary Doctrines, has given a New Turn to our Manners. It is Evident unto an
impartial Observer, that for these Thirty or Forty Years, (the time they have
been upheld and maintained by the Generality of our Preachers) Profaneness,
Impiety, Skepticism, Debauchery have had an unusual Ascendent over us. He says,
The Country was known in former Times, to be a place of Innocence and
Simplicity. But it may cause Amazement to see, how these Places are changed of
late, and overrun with all manner of Vice; Those Disorders which were, as it
were, proper to Cities, are now come among the Inhabitants of these Parts. He
says; It is true, God may Save us, by His Sovereignty and Prerogative; which
we have no Ground to Rely upon. But if He proceeds according to His usual
Method, and according to the Laws of His Declared Will, we have no Reason to
look for any thing but Ruin and Destruction!

And this Our Land; a Land under such Obligations to be a Land of Uprightness:
what prevailing Iniquities threaten the Ruin of it? The Glorious Gospel of the
Blessed God, we may see, it is very Little, very Little, Hearkened to. We may
see, the Spirit of this World, Eating out, Eating up, the Spirit and Power of
Godliness. We may see a Scandalous Dishonesty in the Dealings of too too many.
We may see Drunkenness likely to Extinguish all Good Order in many places; and
a Flood of Rum and Ruin, Vomited out of the Mouth of the Dragon, likely to
swallow up the Woman fled into the Wilderness. We may see the Crimes of
Unchastity Debauching too too many; yea, the too well known House of the Harlot
resorted to. And we may see many Ungoverned Families, Unnurtured Families; a
scandalous Neglect of Household Piety. O horrid Spectacle! Where, where shall
we look, and not see such a Spectacle!

But, How should our Heart be Affected with what we see?

First; Be sure, Sorrow, Sorrow, is the Affection, which the Spectacle does
call for. The sight of Sin, wherever we see it, should always broach our
Sorrow. Oh! Let the Sinfulness of the World, and particularly, peculiarly, our
part of the World, which lies most nearly before our Eyes, let it affect us at
that rate; Psalm. CXIX. 136, 158. Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because
they keep not thy Law. I beheld the Transgressors and was Grieved, because they
kept not thy Word. No doubt, Here are some, that in their Travels have had a
sight of Bedlam. If they were in a Sober Mind when they saw it, it Grieved them
to see such a Collection of Madmen; the sight is a Grievous One! Sirs, The
Sinful World, is little better than an Entire Bedlam; It Is full of Madmen; All
Sinners are Madmen! With what Affliction, if we have any Love to Mankind, with
what Affliction, must we say of the Foolish and Hurtful Things that we see done
every Day; Poor Creatures, They know not what they do! Oh! To see Mankind
almost every where, acted with nothing but Madness: Every where playing the
parts and pranks of Madmen; It should afflict us wonderfully! If we are the
Children of God, or have any Hope, of His Looking on us, as He uses on them
that Love His Name; it must affect us and afflict us, to see His Name
Dishonored among the Children of men.

But then, I must add, That Abhorrence is another affection, which belongs to
the Spectacle. Our Affection must be an Aversion, for the Sins that we see in
other People. When others make void the Law of our God, Therefore, Therefore,
Let us Love it above Gold, yea, above fine Gold; and Hate every False way. When
we see Ill Things, Vile Things, done by other men, it should so Affect us, as
to make us Avoid those Things, and be able to say with him; Neh. V. 15. But so
did not I, because of the Fear of GOD. I have known some, who have Lived with
Parents or Masters, which took very Bad Courses. The fight of the Sin in those
whom they Lived withal, it looked so Odious to them, it has made them abhor
those Bad Courses. Children, You make an Excellent Improvement of what you see.

This is not all. The sight of the sin in Others, must affect us with a Fear of
our Selves. Be afraid, be afraid at what you see. Think, If the Sovereign GOD
should leave me to my self, I should soon do as Bad, as the worst in the World.
We see no sin any where, but we have in our own Heart, the Seed of that very
Sin. Christian, Thou do not Know thy own Heart, if thou do not Fear thy own
Heart. It is wholesome Advice; 1 Cor. X. 12. Wherefore, let him who thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall.

Finally; Labor to Suppress, to Restrain, to Reform, the provoking Evils that
we see. When we see Sin gaining upon our Neighborhood, it must Affect us, and
Excite us to Do what may be done for the Reformation of these Evils. The sight
must make us Unite in our Endeavors, according to every ones Ability and
Capacity, for a Reformation. Thus, Thus we shall procure a precious Mark from
God upon us; That Mark; Ezekiel. IX. 9. Go through the midst of the City; set a Mark
upon the foreheads of the men that Sigh and Cry for all the abominations done
in the midst thereof.

III. The Calamities of the World, the Destructions of the World; Methinks,
They are Heartbreaking Spectacles. I now make you that Invitation; Psalm. XLVI.
8. Come, Behold the works of the Lord, what Desolations He has made in the
Earth. Look where you will over the face of the whole Earth, you may see the
God of Heaven, Distributing Sorrows in His Anger. The Earth under the Curse of
God for the Sin of Man, brings forth, Oh! what Thorns unto him! That word is
every where fulfilled in the world; Isa. XXIV. 4, 6. The Earth Mourns and
Fades away; The Curse has Devoured the Earth, and they who Dwell therein are
Desolate. The World is every where full of sad Things! What is the World, but a
very Aceldama! In what wretched slavery do most of the Nations Languish? The
Negro's in some Countrey's are a fearful Spectacle. God will consider the
Inhumane way of treating 'em! What a Wolf is one man unto another? What Wars do
Embroil the World? What Wants Distress it? What Woes Confound it? I beseech
you, what are the Relations and Histories of what is done in the World? Let
this be the Running Title of all; A SINFUL WORLD MADE MISERABLE BY THE
VENGEANCE OF GOD.

But, How should our Hearts be affected with what we See? Methinks, A Servant
of God, may proceed at this rate. Sirs, Accompany him. Let it not be a mere
Soliloquy.

Mine Eye affects mine Heart. O my Soul, Tremble, Tremble at the Tremendous
Justice of God, which will not let Sin go Unpunished. Be willing, O my Soul, to
Leave such a World; a World every where Embittered with Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit. Long, O my Soul, Wish and Pray for the Coming of thy Savior; who will
bring Peace unto the World, and make it a Blessed World. This it is to be
right^y Affected.

IV. The Afflicted that are about us in our next Neighborhood; These are
Spectacles that we have near unto us; before our Eyes; Heart affecting
Spectacles. We read, Psalm. XLI. 1. Blessed is he that Considers the Poor. There
are those that Consider, who are the Poor, and Consider, what may be done for
them. If you look about you with a Considerate Eye, you may See some Sick and
Weak; perhaps they are Chastened with Pain, with strong Pain. You may see some
Conflicting with Poverty. I certainly know, that there are some Scores in this
Town, real Objects of Charity, on that one Score of Straitning Poverty. There
are many more, whose Afflictions are heavy. Can there be so many Widows, and so
many Orphans, and not very many under sore afflictions? Many there are, whose
Temptations make them Cry to us, Have Pity on me, O my Friends, Have Pity on
me; You see what an Hand has touched me!

Such Things we may see every Day. But, How should our Hearts be affected with
the fight? Why,

First; Be Thankfully Affected. How Thankful, How Thankful should we be, that
the Afflicted Case, which we may cast our Eye upon, is not our own Case! When
we see any Spectacle of affliction, verily it Preaches to us, the Lessons of
Thankfulness. As it was said; Luke XIII. 2. Suppose ye, that these were
sinners, above the rest, because they suffered such things? I tell you, No.
Thus are we to argue with our selves; Must I suppose, that they who suffer
these things are Greater Sinners, than I that am yet preserved from them? No,
But then, O my God, What shall I render to thee? It Is thy Sovereign Grace that
preserves me from these things! Oh! What shall I render to the Lord?

But then, in the next place, we are to be Charitably Affected, Mercifully
Affected. We read of such a Lovely thing, as that; Prove. XXII. 9. He that has
a Bountiful Eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the Poor. What
is a Bountiful Eye? It Is an Eye that is upon the Look-out for Subjects to Employ
Bounty upon; and an Eye that affects the Heart with Dispositions to bestow the
Bounty. Oh! Be ready to succor all that are under any Difficulties, any
Exercises. Afford them all the Succors imaginable. My Brethren, Suffer this
word of Exhortation. Enquire after such as may need your Help, any sort of Help
that you can give them. Then Help them with all possible Alacrity. Take an
unspeakable pleasure in Helping of them. Let it be the Firstborn of your
Delights, to be Helpful unto such as want your Assistences. To Do Good Offices,
Oh, Fly to it with Rapture. Never be weary of this well-doing. Though you meet
with Monsters of Ingratitude, as I will assure you that you shall, yet be not
Weary; But Overcome Evil with Good.

V. Cannot you See; Oh, fearful Blindness if you cannot See! -- most sensible
Judgments of GOD, arresting many Sinners before your Eyes? These are awful
Spectacles, and Heart-affecting ones. We read; Psalm. IX. 16. The Lord is known,
by the Judgments, which He Executes. There are plain Judgments, ever now and
then Executed among us. There are Sinners, as it were hanged up in Chains, by
the Judgments of God. Formidable Spectacles; But God can make them to be
Profitable Spectacles.

Don't you see Notorious Drunkards, meet with very Disastrous Events? They Live
Sordidly; They Die Wretchedly* The profane Proverb, that says, They get us Harm,
has terrible Confutations.

Don't you see, That Whoremonger and Adulterers God will Judge. Their Estates
have a secret Curse upon them; They fall under Unaccountable Impoverishments.
Their Follies not being wisely Repented, are strangely Detected; Their Names
are incurably Wounded. Their Bodies too anon become very Hospitals of Maladies.
Yea, They Die in Youth, because their Life is among the Unclean.

What becomes of them, wh^ distinguish themselves as the Topping (...) of the
Town, for Pride, Vanity, Luxury? God soon distinguishes them with abasing
Humiliations.

Undutiful Children, Disobedient Children, what becomes of them? Their Days are
not long in the Land.

Mockers at Religion; Railers at the Instruments of promoting Religion; it is
often seen, that when People arrive to this, Then, their Damnation slumbers
not. God smites them; God makes them very Magor-missa^ibs. They go Quickly, and
Roaring out of the world; Roaring for the Prayers and Aids of the very Men,
whom once they Ridiculed.

And, I pray, what has been the Fate of them, who have Got Riches and not by
right? Men who have been False-Dealers; used abundance of Underhand Dealing;
Rapaciously reaching after all that could be got, Right or Wrong; Overreaching
all that they could be too Cunning for; Breaking their Promises; Lying in Debt
unto all men, but not letting any manly in theirs; Defrauding the Hireling of
his Wages; Hating to do an Honest Thing; Scarce ever doing it, but when Forced
unto it. What has become of them? There has been a strange Blast from God upon
them. Lo, I have seen them spreading themselves like a green Bay Tree; Yet they
have passed away, and lo, they are not.

I could add one thing more. There have been Knotts of Young Men, who have been
Bewitched with the Gaming humor. Riots and Revels have been frequent with
them. Anon, some of them have gone to the House, that is the way to Hell, going
down to the Chambers of Death. Of the^^ also I repeat the Question; What has
become of them? God has marvellously Destroyed them. They have marvellously
come to Nothing! Ah, Young People; Will you not yet say, Destruction from God
is a Terror to me?

Such Sights we have had among us. But, How should our Hearts be affected with
them? Truly, so Affected as to be Cautioned. Oh, Beware, Beware of the
Impieties, which you see Punished by God. When Corah was fearfully Swallowed up
with an Earthquake, we read; Numb. XVI. 34. All that were round about them,
fled at the Cry of them; for they said, Lest the Earth swallow us up also.
Verily, the Sinners whom you have seen swallowed up, with the Scattering and
Consuming Judgments of God, and who have Perished from among the Congregation,
make a fearful Cry in our Ears. At this Cry, Oh, Fly from their Impieties, and
say, Lest the Judgments of GOD swallow us up also!

I now look on it, as a seasonable Discharge of a Duty, to take some Notice of
some Astonishing Spectacles, in the Judgments of God upon some, whom Satan
seems to have had an uncommon Possession of.

There is a Report of some things Extraordinary in some Late Judgments of God.
It is likely, there may be various Misrepresentations of many Circumstances
attending that matter. I will not therefore depend upon every thing that may be
Reported. But I suppose, no body doubts, There has been a very High Degree of
Profaneness discovered by some Unhappy Men; and that God presently singled out
some of them, in a manner that much Awakened the Neighborhood. But whether
that matter have so much in it, as has been said, or no, yet you may Remember,
that a little while ago in this Town, A Poor Woman, was very much Discontented
with her own Condition; but she had Recourse unto the Bottel of Rum, to quiet
and allay her Discontent. In that, she drowned her Soul; But with the Rum there
entered Satan into her; Satan took a strange Possession of her; She imagined she
must go where Satan would carry her. Though she were carefully shut up, such was
the Efficacy of Satan, that he helped her out of a Window, it was thought into
the River; but with Circumstances that fill the Neighborhood with
Consternation. Her Carcass was afterward found, where it could scarce have
been imagined!

Several such things have occurred among us; The Judgments of God, making a
Quick Dispatch of Sinners, that have grown Outrageous in the Efforts of their
Impiety.

I think, Our Heart should be affected at this rate, on such Occasions.

First; We ought to Bawail the scarce conceiveable Wickedness, yea, Devilism,
that Mankind may sink into. When we see men Defying their Maker; Deriding all
that is Venerable and Reasonable; Burlesquing Religion and Eternity; Not only
moved by the Instigation of Devils, but even Turned into Devils; How can we do
any other than Mourn, that ever any part of Mankind should fall into such a
Depravation! Alas, That any of our Race ever should be so prodigiously
Depraved! How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Mankind! Thy Throne might have
been Exalted among the Stars of God. Thou art brought down to Hell, to the
sides of the Pit. Hell from beneath is moved for thee; The Devils there come to
meet thee; They Triumph over thee; and their Hoarse Notes upon thee are, Thou
art become like one of us! When the Man of God saw a Spectacle of Profanity,
very short of what we have seen, he rent his Garments; he pulled off his Hair;
He sat astonished; he fell down on his Knees; he Cried out, Ezr. IX. 6. O my
God, I am ashamed, and I blush to lift up my Face to thee, my God. Blessed
Ezra! What would thou have done, if thou had been in our Horrible Times!

Secondly; I am afraid, I am afraid, that the Language of Fiends passes too
much Unpunished. Yea, that most Hellish and Roaring Blasphemies, are too
patiently heard among us. It is to be feared, we are too Chargeable with that
Error; Jer. V. 28. They overpass the deeds of the Wicked; Their nefarious Deeds
are passed over, without any due Punishment inflicted on them. The Swearing,
and Cursing, and Blaspheming, that is grown to Fashionable with some Satanic
People, will never be Suppressed, if it be not Punished. The Magistrate cannot
Punish it, if he be not Informed of it. Be sure, We all justly Expect, That in
his own Presence, he will never Endure it. But men think it hardly Honorable
or Charitable to be Informers against these Offenders. That is to say; If a
Mortal Man or Woman in Authourity shall be Reviled, or have their Authority
Denied, Information ought to be given. But if the Great GOD be Affronted,
Abused, Vilified, and His Authority Spit upon, this must not be worthy of an
Information! Ah, Zeal of Piety, When will thou return to the Earth, which thou
have so much Forsaken! There are Two Parties, into which the World is divided;
God^s Party, and Satan's Party. O Sons of Indifference, which Party do you
belong unto?

But, Sirs; You cast off Charity too! The very Charity pretended for! Did you
Rebuke the Delinquent; And on the Rebuke did he promise Amendment? In some
Delinquencies, this may go a Good way. But if it has not been so, the best
Charity you can show him, is to procure him that Gentle Punishment, which the
Laws have provided for him. It Is Charity, to have him thus Admonished, and
Checked, and Stopped, in his Fatal Career. God Sanctifies the Strokes given by
the Sword of the Magistrate. He is the Minister of God for Good, even unto
Them, when he is a Terror to Evildoers. If you let him go on without Control,
you Murder him; you see him running on to Perdition, and you do nothing to
hinder him. Where Is your Charity?

And, Methinks, Charity to the Public should prevail a little with you. If you
knew of a man, that were going to Fire the Town, or to bring the Plague into
the Town, would you give no Information of it? Verily, These Criminals are
doing so. They do what they can, and it is a Great Deal that they do, to bring
down Desolation from the Incensed Wrath of Heaven upon the Town. The
Desolations are hastened, by their being left Un-chastised. Chastisements on
them, are some of the Sacrifices, which would avert and keep off the impending
Wrath of Heaven. Man, Loath to be called, An Ill Neighbor; Alas, Thou art a
very Bad Neighbor. All the Neighborhood is like to fare the worse for thy
Pusillanimity.

If all other Charity wax Cold, as I doubt it may; Yet, My Friend, A Little
Charity for thy self may move a little. By bearing due Testimony against such
Criminals, a, Liberavi Animam, is obtained; thou deliverest thy own Soul, from
a share in the Guilt of their Transgressions. It is an Easy and a Common Thing,
for men to make the Sins of other men their own, by this; They hear them and
bewray them not. Because they do not what they may, to have them fairly brought
to Light, and Censured, they Contract a Guilty Fellowship in the Unfruitful
works of Darkness. It is to be Suspected, very many, very many among us, have
lying upon us, the Sins of Other Men, deeply to be Repented of.

I have one Proposal more to make; but one that I am not my self the Author of.
There are Beyond Sea, many Societies for the Reformation of Manners. They have
Informed against many Thousands of Swearing, and Cursing and Blaspheming
Wretches; and procured a Legal Animadversion upon them. They Publish many
Discourses and Perswasives, to Encourage men in that Action of Informing. And
one of their Encouragements is; A Charity to the Poor. Very much of the Fines
on the Offenders, is by the Law there, [And so it is here!] assigned unto the
Poor. There is a Charity to the Poor, in Punishing such Offenders, according to
Law. I will take leave then to add this Consideration. This TOWN has in it
abundance of Charity to the Poor; The Town has many Charitably-disposed People
in it. M^ Brethren, I dig open for you a New Spring of Charity. Spring up, O
Well! The Fines which you procure to be laid on some whose demerits do call for
(...) Poor, the Poor will fare the better for them!

Thirdly; When, when will Riotous and Blasphemous Wretches t^ke the Warnings of
God? There is a Loud Voice in the Tragedy's that sometimes are seen among us; A
Voice, to a Drinking and a Damning Generation. It Is that Voice; Psalm. L. 22.
Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you ^n pieces and there be none
to deliver you. You see, O ye hardy Fighters against God, you see what befalls
your Fellow-sinners. Will not your Hearts be now at last affected with what you
see? You see the Fulfillment of that Word; Eccl. VII. 17. Be n^^ overmuch
Wicked, neither be thou Foolish* Why should thou die before thy Time? And will
you not leave off your Wickedness, till it is cut off by your dying before your
Time?

Yea, I am to tell you, That you have seen Two Things in this World, sometimes
happening to some of your Self-murdering Brethren, which may give you awful
Intimations of what you must Expect more dreadfully to suffer in another World.

One thing is. You have seen them Siezed by Evil Spirits; hurried out of their
Lives, by the undoubted Energy and Agitation of Evil Spirits. Into the Hands of
such Evil Spirits will you one day be cast, by the Indignation of God. And Oh!
how horribly will they handle you! Souls, You will be in the Place of Torments,
when you are in the Place of Dragons.

But None, Oh, None in such Danger of having Satan Enter into them, as those
Prodigies, who when they have been Blaspheming of God, and Debauching of
themselves, will a few Hours after Presumpteously come unto the Table of the
Lord. It may be feared, Satan will so Enter into them, that they shall anon be
astonishing Spectacles!

Another thing is this. You have seen the Rage and Force and Fire of a provoked
Conscience in them. When Conscience has been Provoked and Awaked in them, they
have been a Terror unto themselves, and unto all round about them. They have
chosen Strangling rather than Life! If you go on, you must undergo the Tortures
of a Conscience, which will be as a Worm that never dies, a Fire that never
shall be quenched. And such a wounded Spirit, Oh, Who can bear it! Who can bear
it!

Consider these things. Let your Eye affect you Heart! After such Spectacles,
Oh, Hear and Fear, and do no more so Wickedly!

VI. Are we not Surrounded with Unconverted Sinners? O Deplorable Spectacle!
Deplorable Spectacle! Man, Thou art thy self yet Unconverted* if thou art not
Affected with it. How dismal Spectacles was Egypt once filled withal, when
there was not an House in all the Land, wherein there was not One Dead! For
many Ages they kept up an Anniversary Commemoration of it, with very dolorous
Ejulations* Alas, My Friends; It may be feared, there is hardly an House in the
Town, but there is in it One Dead. In many, they are All Dead; All Dead! People
not Converted unto God and Christ and Serious Piety, are, Ephesians. II. 1. Dead in
Trespasses and Sins. Oh! Lay to Heart the Spectacle! If there were Two or Three
Hundred Coffins with Corpses in them, laid in the midst of our Assembly, it
would be a Frightful Spectacle. As many Unconverted Sinners as are now here, so
many Coffins and Corpses there are in the Assembly.

But I must bring the Spectacle a little nearer. PARENTS, Don't you see your
CHILDREN yet Unconverted? Yet alienated from the Life of God? Oh! How can you
bear to Look upon such a Spectacle? A Blind Child would be a sad Spectacle. Thy
Unconverted Child is Blind: It cannot See the things of its Everlasting Peace.
A Deaf Child, would be a sad Spectacle. Thy Unconverted Child is Deaf; It
cannot Hear the calls of Heaven. What a sad Spectacle were a Dumb Child? Thy
Prayerless Child is a Dumb one. A Child Shrieking with the Stone, were a sad
Spectacle; enough to break an Heart of Stone. There is a Stone in the Heart of
thy Child, that will not be persuaded unto Religion. Yea, an Unconverted Child
is one Possessed with the Devil. O Mournful, Mournful Spectacle!

But, how should an Heart be affected with such a Spectacle? How! Be concerned,
Extremely concerned, for the Salvation of the Unconverted ones, and therefore
for their Conversion from the Error of their Way.

I will say this especially for that sort of Unconverted Ones; Our CHILDREN. A
sad Spectacle! Children that, for ought we know, are brought forth for the
Murderer? Oh! What shall we do on their behalf? Parents travailing over again
for them, Speak to them; and Plead with them; and Pray for them; Yea, take them
Alone with you, and cause them to Kneel down by you, and make them the
Witnesses of your Prayers and your Tears for them. Ask for them that
Blessedness; 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 19. Lord, Give to my Child a Perfect Heart; Oh!
Travail, till you see it accomplished.

I no sooner turn my Eye from them, than I see another very sad Spectacle! Our
Unconverted OLD MEN. An Old Man, just Going, but not knowing Whither he is
going. An Old Man, just Entering into Heaven or Hell, but not knowing which of
the Two. A very Melancholy Spectacle! O Men of God, Go to them; Talk with them;
Set before them their true Interest; Make them Wise unto Salvation, if it be
possible; And, Oh, Do all you can, to make these Old People, become New
Creatures, before they dye. It Is to be an Article of your care; Tit. II. 2. That
the Aged Men be Sober, Grave, Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in
Patience.

The Profession of those Children of Death, who have often been so Punished as
our Congregation has heard, brings to my View, one sad Spectacle more; A
Spectacle at which our Bowels ought to be moved Exceedingly. We have it, in our
Unconverted SAILORS. Poor Men; Always Asleep on the Top of a Mast! We have no
Bowels in us, if we are not moved at the Spectacle. SAILORS who ought to be the
Best men in the World, how Bad are very many of them! And it is now generally
said, That though all the World knows they have had cause little enough, they
have in the Last Ten years notoriously grown worse and worse. Ah! Evil Men! One
would have scarce imagined them capable of Degeneracy: yet, they are sensibly
Degenerated. Our Souls must Weep and Blood over them! They that have
Understanding in the Times, apprehend, That (since we now see a Boil on the
Earth, or, a Plague raging in the Inland parts of the Old Roman Empire,) the
next thing in the Prophecies to be Looked for, is, that Second Vial of the
Wrath of God; Rev. XVI. 3. Poured out upon the Sea, and it became as the Blood
of a Dead Man, and every Living Soul died in the Sea. The Seafaring part of
Mankind, as well as the European Territories bordering on, or standing in, the
Sea, may feel the Effects of this Vial. Ah! poor SAILORS; with what a
Stupefaction on them, are they Preparing for it! Can there be nothing done for
them? This may be done. If Religious OWNERS, would compel their Masters to
uphold Religion and Good Orders aboard, and give them their Instructions, and
make them know, that they shall be no longer for their Service, than they see
them Executed; This would go very far, very far, in the Matter. Sirs, Take it
into your Consideration.

VII. I ought not to break off, without Minding my Hearers, That in Comfortable
Spectacles also, their Eye should affect their Heart, as well as in Miserable
Spectacles. If you see Others comfortably circumstanced, Oh! Let it not be with
an Evil Eye, with an Envious Eye. It is a very ill Character, that Some have
not only so little Grace, but so little Wit as to manifest themselves under the
Power of; Psalm. CXII. 9, 10. A Good Man, his Horn shall be Exalted with Honor;
The wicked shall see it and be grieved; he shall gnash with his Teeth and melt
away. But then, Look on your own Enjoyments: What Spectacles have you, in your
Houses filled with Good Things? Your Tables, your Lodgings, your Desirable
Relatives. Oh, Let your Hearts be Affected with what you See. So Affected;
Psalm. CIII. 1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, Bless
His Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and Forget not all His Benefits. Go
on; And Look on your Opportunities to Do Good; your Precious Opportunities. Let
the Sight awaken you to Do all the Good you can for your Lives; to Spend all
your Lives in the Doing of Good. Remember that Word; Prove. XIV. 22. Mercy and
Truth shall be to them that Devise Good. I cannot break off with a Word more
Worthy to be kept in Remembrance with you!

An Appendix. Relating certain Modern, and very Remarkable Occurrences.
The Drinking and the Swearing Atheist Spoken to.
WE have seen among our Selves more than once, the Quick Desolations, with
which the Wretches, who abandon themselves to Debauchery and Profanity have
been overwhelmed. I am willing to fetch over into America, some Ultra-Marine
Exemples of the like Desolations, upon the like Offenders; and such as have
been within our own Memory, and well-attested.

Theodorus Paludanus, a Protestant Minister in Friezland, has given us an
astonishing Relation, of what happened in his Neighborhood, in June, 1681. A
Mason much given to Drunkenness, especially with Strong Liquors, was often in
Vain reproved for it, by the Ministers. He would sometimes Vow a Reformation,
and in his Vows and Pangs, wish that the Devil might Si^^^ upon him, if he
Sinned any more. He Sinn^d on; And, behold, In the midst of a Night, when he
had, with one or two more in the Evening Drank Three Quarts of Wine, he was
found all on a Light Flame; whereof no Account could be given. He was all
Burned from Head to Foot, like an Over-roasted Fowl, and yet the Clothes he had
upon him not Singed at all. The Historian says, God used the Devil, as the
Executioner of His Judgment, to bring the Miserable man's own Curse upon him!

Mr. Bateman assures us, That one Mr. ^^rrington a Great Swearer, not Speeding
in his Hunting, went into the Alehouse at Puckrych, and began to Swear, as he
use to do, By Gods Blood, this is an unlucky day! Presently he fell a Bleeding
at the Nose, and could not stop it. Where-upon he proceeded Raging, and
Swearing Passion, Wounds, Flesh, Nails, Blood and Body. He then fell a Bleeding
at the Ears, Eyes, Wrists, joints of his Body, Navel, and Fundament, in great
Quantity, and with streams of Blood; and he blared out his Tongue in a fearful
manner; which was as black as Pitch. Thus he continued, says my Author, Till
the Devil and Death made an End of him.

Mr. Abbot has Published the awful Story of Mr. William Rogers, an Apothecary;
a Young Gentleman of a very agreeable Temper; but one Extremely given to
Drunkenness and Sabbath-breaking. He despised the Rebukes of his Pastor, till
God Struck him Sick, and he dyed of the Sickness. Before he Dyed, his Horror
was Wonderful. Among other horrible Expressions uttered by him, these were
some; I have been a fearful Drunkard. I would now be glad if I could take the
least of Gods Creatures which I have abused. Oh! that I might burn a long time
in that Fire, [ Pointing to the Fire before him:] So I might not burn in Hell.
Be warned by me to forsake your Wicked ways, lest you go to Hell, as I must do!

The very Acute Pen of Mr. De Foe, Speaking of D. Schombergs Army in Ireland,
has this horrid Story.
Five Regimented Hero's there appear,
Captains of Thousands, Mighty Men of War;
Glutted with Wine, and Drunk with Hellish Rage,
For want of other Foes they Heaven Engage.
Sulphur and ill Extracted Fumes agree
To make each Drop push on their Destiny.
The infernal Draughts in Blasphemies rebound,
And Openly the Devils Health went round.
Nor can our Verse the Latent Crime conceal
How they shook Hands, to meet next day in Hell.
Death Pledged them; Fate the dreadful compact read,
Concurring Justice Spoke, and Four of Five lay Dead.
When men their Makers Vengeance once defy
It Is a certain Sign, that their Destructions nigh.
It Is not amiss, to preserve the Memory of such Things. Nor will it be amiss to
understand this as the Language of them; Psalm. XXXIV. 12, 13 What Man is he
that desires Life, and Loves many Days, that he may see Good? Keep thy
Tongue from Evil.

THE MARINER Called upon.
IN our Search and View of Spectacles for Commiseration, it is very Sensible to
every One that we find (if the Last, yet) none of the Least, in the SEAFARING
TRIBE: I had no sooner Proposed these, but, Behold, what an One I have cast
into my Hands. I will Expose it; and I cannot more Expressively do it, than in
the Words of the Gentleman who was the Commander of the Ship in the Story, from
whose Hands, and in whose Terms, I have thus received it.

A RELATION of a Remarkable Deliverance, after a Shipwreck of Uncommon
Distress, received by Captain John Dean and Company. [Communicated from
himself.]
JOHN DEAN bound from Ireland, in the Ship Notingham Gally, about 120 Tuns,
with 14 Men, laden chiefly with Provisions, for New England; after we had been
out above 9 Weeks we made Land to the Eastward of Piscataqua, about the
beginning of December 1710 and haling something Southerly for the Massachusetts
Bay, betwixt 8 and 9 at Night, on the 11 th. under a hard Gale of Wind at N. E
accompanied with Rain, Hail and Snow, and a very dark Air, we run upon the East
end of a Rock called Bo^n Island; about 4 Leagues to the Eastward of
Piscataqua: after two vehement Thumps upon the Rock, a third Sea hove the Ship
along the side of it; the Sea running very high, and violently beating upon us,
labored the Ship so excessively, that we looked every Moment when she would
fall to pieces; and the Weather so dark, that though we were not above 20 or 30
yards off, yet we could see nothing of the Rock: so that there appeared to us
but a very small possibili^y of escaping with our lives; and we were justly
thrown into a consternation at the sad prospect of immediately perishing in the
Waters.

After we had spent some time in earnestly committing our selves to the Divine
Mercy and Protection, we cut our Main and Foremast by the board, which
Providentially falling to the Rock, I desired some of the Men to try, if by the
help of the Masts they could recover the Shore; and let us know their safety by
their Calls to us: Two or Three of them did so; but the fierceness of the Wind,
and the roaring of the Sea, perfectly drowned their Voices, that we concluded
'em lost: However the Ship bilging, the Decks and Beams opening, and all things
swimming out of the hold, obliged us to make the same attempt they had done
before us, which through the wonderful goodness of God, we did with success; though
much torn and bruised by the violence of the Sea against the Rock. When we had
joyfully met those that left us, we sought for shelter to the Leeward of the
Island, but found it so small, inconsiderable and scraggy a Rock that it would
afford us none; nor indeed room enough to walk, to secure us from the Injuries
of the Wet and Cold.

When the Day appeared, it presented us with a dismal Spectacle, a doleful
little Spot in the Sea, of about an Hundred yards square, with only some ruins
of our last Nights Shipwreck cast up, or dashing against it; and a Miserable
number of us without Food or Shelter; saving some small pieces of Cheese, we
picked from among the Sea-weed, and some old Canvas we spread on the Craggs of
the Rock to stow under at Night: part of our yards came a shore, with our
Cables and some Junk conger'd about them, and our Anchor so Weighed by 'em,
that a send of the Sea would show it above Water; and some part of the Stern,
with several pieces of Plank and Timber.

The next Morning, (13 th) One Martin Downs our Cook dyed; and the best burial
we could give him was to lay him where the Sea would carry him away: The rest
of our Men were generally so ill and bruised, that but 4 or 5 of us were able
to attempt any thing for our safety. This day finding some more Plank and
Canvas sent us a shore, we built a sort of a Tent, where we housed our selves
from the Wind and Weather.

The 14 th. after having Sang a Psalm, and been at Prayers, (which devotion we
observed every Morning and Evening,) we attempted to get Fire, by rubbing the
dryest Sticks of Firr we could get together; which proving ineffectual, we made
a sort of a Drill, whose motion was more violent, but our Wood was so
water-soaken, that we labored in vain: and were extremely pinched with the
Cold for want of it, insomuch that our Feet swelled, and many of them were
nip'd with the Frost: This evening therefore I cut off my Boots, and desired
the Men to get their Shoes off, but so frost-bitten and blister'd were some of
their Legs, that in pulling off their Stockings, they fley'd off skin and all;
and some of the Nails of their Feet: which we wrapped up as warm as we could in
O^um and Canvas. This Day the Sea flowing high came into our Tent, and carried
away part of it; that we were necessitated to remove it to the highest Craggs
of the Rock.

From about this time, (for I cannot remember exactly the Day of every
occurrence) as often as the Weather would permit, we hoisted a Staff and white
Flag upon our Tent, in hopes that some Vessel passing by might discover it. And
now the Mercy of God sent us a shore three small Cheeses, which at the desire
of the Company, I dealt forth daily to every man an equal allowance of.

We began now to build a flat bottomed float of the Plank and Timber, laying
three Plank's width for the bottom, and two up side, with some Canvas like a
wast cloth upon that, to keep the Sea out the better; but so few hands were
able to work, and our Carpenter rarely affording his assistance, because of his
illness, it was about the 20 th. ere we had finished it; and the 21 st. proving
moderate Weather, it was agreed that my Mate, with 4 or 5 of the Men with me,
should endeavor to recover the Main, and send a Vessel for the rest.

Accordingly, with much ado, we got it down to the Water side, having first
Commended our selves and our enterprise to the blessing of God by earnest
Prayer; about Noon we lanched the float, being necessitated to wade deep into
the Water to accomplish it; but the rolling Surff soon threw us along shore,
and over-set us; and it was a great Mercy that we escaped drowning, so feeble
were we and unable to help our selves: The Boat presently stove against the
Rock, and though our enterprise was dashed, and our hopes baulkt, and the loss of
our Ax and Hammer, with the Boat, was great, yet we could not but see the Mercy
of God in the midst of Judgment, for in the afternoon, the Wind sprang up and
blew hard, that had we been at Sea in that imitation of a Boat, in all
probability we had perished; and those we were to have left behind would have
fared no better because unable to help themselves: Thus our Disappointment
(through the goodness of God) proved our Safety.

We were now brought into very Miserable and Melancholy circumstances; the men
extreme Weak, their Feet frozen, with deep Ulcers in their Legs; the very smell
of them offensive to those of us that could go into the Air, and nothing to
dress them with but a piece of linen that was hove up; our small stock of
Cheese spent, and nothing left us to support Nature but a few Mussels, scarce,
and hard to get, and the Sea-weed that grew upon the Rock; we had now the black
prospect of Starving, while our Limbs perished by piece meals; and we were
under the afflicting apprehensions lest the Spring Tide, at the approaching
Full Moon, should be accompanied with a high Wind and quite overflow us;
besides the aggravating Affliction that all the Vessels we saw pass at a
distance, took no notice of our Signal; That we were ready to lie down in
despair, and the most of us not so much as hoped for deliverance: Though I
endeavored to encourage them and my self to put our Trust in God, and
patiently Wait for his Salvation; and I looked upon it as a great favor, in
this Distress, that the Mate struck down a Sea Gull, which we got and
thankfully fed upon.

The last method of safety we could engage in was to make a Raft that would
carry Two Men; but the labor of clearing the Fore yard, of which it was
chiefly to be made, from the Cable and Junk, was so great, and our Hands so few
and weak, that it was about the 24 th. ere we had finished it; which proving a
moderate Day, with a fine Sea-brieze, we got it down to the Water, and after
having made our Supplications to Heaven for Success, two of the men, who were
more especially desirous of venturing, were launched upon it, about two in the
Afternoon; but the swell rolling high over set it, as it had done our Boat; and
though one of the men (an English man that could not swim) refused a second
attempt, yet the other (a Swede, whose Feet were so frozen that he was forced
to crawl upon his hands and knees to the Waterside) continued resolute to
attempt the shore, though he should go alone; another of our men encouraged by
his resolution undertook to bear him company: after they had put off from us,
they desired me to go to Prayer for them and watch what became of them; I did
so; and by that time the evening came on, I though it they might be half way
a-shoar; and the Wind blowing hard about 9 or 10 at night, at S. E. I concluded
they might reach the shore by 2 in the Morning; but it seems they fell in with
some breakers, or the violence of the Sea overset them, and they perished; for
a day or two after, the Raft was found cast up, with one man dead, some
distance from it. We, upon the desolate Island not knowing what ha^ befallen
them, waited daily for deliverance; and ^ur expectations were confirmed by the
smoke we ^aw in the Woods two days after they left us; which was the signal I
desired them to make, if they arrived safe; and we looked upon their delay as
occasioned by not being able to procure a Vessel so soon as we desired. And
this hope under God was all we had to support us.

About the latter end of this Month, the Carpenter, who had been ill ever since
his coming a-shoar, and now having his Feet frozen, an excessive pain in his
back, and such a stiffness in his Neck, that he could not stir his head, and
almost choked with Phlegm, to our apprehension drew near his End; toward
evening we raisied his head, and I Prayed over him; he showed himself Sensible,
but was Speechless; about Midnight I enquired of them that lay next him, who
told me, he was dead.

The next Day presented me with the most Melancholy view of the effects of
Hunger; for our starving Company, who had now been for several Days without any
sustenance, but Sea weed and 2 or 3 Mussels a day, desiring of me that they
might have his Body to support their Lives with: This, of all I had met with,
was the most shocking to me; to see us drove to such necessity as to eat what
seemed to contrary to Nature: I begged of God that He would find out some way
for our support, without feeding upon our Dead Companion; but all other means
failing, and the Men incessantly calling upon me for it, I was forced to give
my consent; and their own feebleness necessitated me, upon their request, to
prepare it for them the best manner I could, that they might not all perish
with hunger. I gave them some of it that Night; and the next day suffered them
to Eat what they would of it; but finding some very ravenous, I was forced to
keep watch over it, and let them have only their daily Portion; least, ere we
obtained our deliverance, this should be spent, and we be obliged to feed upon
the Living.

It having pleased God, in Mercy to us, to put it into the hearts of some
People, where the Raft was cast a shore, to come upon the search; the sight of
a Vessel on the Morning of the 2 d. of January half way from the shore,
standing directly for us, made our hearts leap within us: When they came within
Call, I desired them to vere a Buoy to me, and I would fasten my self to the
End of the Rope, and they should hale me on board; (for the swell would not
suffer them to venture to the Rock) but expecting smoother Water, they hovered
about the Island till Noon; when I told them we were perishing for want of
Fire, which we had been without all this cold season; at length one of the Men
came a-shoar in his small Canoo, and gave us the refreshment of a Fire; I
thought to have gone on board with him, but the rolling Surff over-set the
Canoo, and I was glad to tarry to dry my self; and the Man, after waiting for a
favorable snatch, till near Sun set, was forced to go without me, the Canoo
not being able to carry us both in such a swell.

It was an uncomfortable sight to see the Shallop stand away for the shore
without us: but that Night proving stormy Weather, our Good Friends lost their
Vessel, though they Saved their Lives; but had we been with them, our feebleness
would hardly have suffered us to have escaped: So that still the Goodness of
God is to be seen in our Disappointment.

Upon their arrival, they sent an express to Portsmouth in Piscataqua; but the
next day continuing very bad Weather, was a great addition to our sorrows, and
trial of our Patience. Though we were satisfied the People a-shoar knew of our
miserable Condition, yet our flesh now failing, and no drink all this while but
the brackish Water in the Crags of the Rock, and our Tent rendered uncomfortable
by the blinding Smoke, and the Weather such as we knew none could come to our
assistance while it lasted, made our hearts to fail within us; and the near
prospect we had had of deliverance, gave us but so much the more uneasiness at
the delays of it.

But it pleased God that in the Night the Wind abated, and by Sun rise the 4
th. of January, we had a Shallop come for us, with Captain Long, and Captain
Furbur, who were very brisk in getting us on board, and kind in their treatment
of us. That Night about 8 a clock we arrived at Piscataqua, where we were very
civilly received, and the kind People there made a Collection for the relief of
my men: and though my Boy neglecting to pull off his Shoes, as I ordered, had his
Feet so swollen and black that I never expected he would have the use of them
again, was forced the next day to have half of one of his Feet taken off, yet
through the wonderful Mercy of God, he and all the Men are in a likely way of
recovery: My own Health and Stength by the distinguishing Goodness of God,
having been continued to me the whole of our Twenty four Days Misery, beyond
Expectation.

Boston, N. E. Jan. 26. 1710.
AN Affecting Story! And capable of being improved unto many Purposes of Piety!
MARINERS, You above all men will take it into your Consideration. Of the Men
rescued from the Evil circumstances of Boone-Island, I know, you think* They
ought to be very Thankful unto God for their Preservations! But, I Pray, what
ought You to be for Yours? Though you have not been in Distresses equal unto
Theirs, yet you have seen your Distresses, and your Deliverances. Or, if you
have never been at all Remarkably Distressed, even in this very thing the more
signal your Preservations! When will you sit down and Ponder, What shall I
render to the Lord for all His Benefits? And Resolve, Lord, I owe myself unto
Thee, and I will be Thine for ever more! Were you in favor with God, What a
Friend would you have! A Friend who can rescue you in the Worst and Last
Extremites; A Friend, who can do for you, when all other Help fails you; A
Friend who can turn your very Disasters into Benefits. If you will continue in
ill Terms with Heaven, you run the Danger of being, how dreadfully dealt
withal! Ah Lord, who Knows the Power of thine Anger! The Great GOD, You see,
can Pursue you with His Horrible Tempest. He can Starve you to Death, in a Ship
Laden with Provision! He can Sink the Strongest Vessel in the Ocean. He can
show you the Land of your Desires and yet hold you incapable of reaching it.
Yea, He can Burn you, in the midst of the Water! The Scourges of Sin, the
Arrows of Death, in the Hands of His Vengeance are Numberless; He can make your
Plagues Wonderful. What is worse than all this; He can smite you with Spiritu^^
Plagues, and give you up to such Blindness of Mind, and such Hardness of Heart,
and such a Possession of Satan, that you shall be desperately Impenitent in the
very Jaws of Death, and utter the Language of Fiends in your last Breath, and
just as you are Expiring into the Arms of the Fiends. I can tell of some that
have done so; Perhaps without making much Digressi^^ from what we have been
upon. And unto what yet more amazing Punishments, will many, many find
themselves obnoxious, when the Sea shall give up its Dead! Oh! That upon the
Consideration of these things, our Mariners would come into a Right Mind! And
come into such Purposes as these.

O Great GOD, I Mourn for the Sins of my Heart and Life! Oh; Let thy Grace
cause me to Mourn with a true Repentance. I Pray, That my Sins may be all
Pardoned through the Blood of my Savior; and I now put my self under the Command
and Guidance of that Lovely Savior. I desire, that from this Time, I may hate
and shun every wicked Thing, and that I may every Day call upon thy Name, and
that I may have all my Ways governed by the Rules of Serious Piety. Lord, I am
Thine; Save me, Save me to the Uttermost!

FINIS.

