The Woeful Effects OF Drunkenness.

A SERMON Preached at Bristol, (...) When Two INDIANS, Josias and Joseph, Were
Executed for (...) Occasioned By the Drunkenness both of the Murdering and
Murdered Parties.

By Samuel Danforth, Pastor of the Church of Taunton.

Hosea 3 1. -- They Love flagons of Wine Galat 5 21. -- Murders, Drunkenness.
-- BOSTON in New England: Printed by B Green Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop
near the Old Meeting House, in Corn Hill. 1710

To the HONORABLE COMMISSIONERS, FOR THE Gospellising the Indians in AMERICA.
Much Honored.
IN Testimony of my humble Submission, due Reverence and Gratitude to your
Selves, I have transcribed this Sermon, Preached at the Execution of Josias and
Joseph, Indians; On October. 12. 1709. It is matter of deep Sorrow and
Humiliation, that they should bring themselves to such an untimely Death. The
Lord grant that both English and Indians may be duly affected therewith, so as
to labor after an exact Watchfulness against the Sin of Drunkenness, which
(...) brought these Persons to this Shameful and Woeful End. I have not you
learned that either of these two Indians were constant in Hearing the Word
Preached any where, but have been told, they were disorderly, and took bad
Courses; and very Ignorant: Yet the Care and Pains taken with them since their
Apprehension, and Imprisonment; and especially since their Condemnation; (...)
order to the preparing them for ^eath, by the Reverend Mr. John (...), Pastor
of the Church in Bristol; who did several times Visit them in the Goal, and
discourse with (...) by an Interpreter: Also by (...) an Ordained Pastor (...)
Church, who kept with (...) Goal, for the space of (...) Days before their
Execution, (...) by Order of the Honorable ^amuel Sewall Esqr. Judge of the
Court) are to be Thankfully acknowledged; and the visible Effects thereof were
these, That these Indians were brought to such a sense of the greatness of the
Sin of Murder, they had Committed, as to acknowledge, that their Condemnation
was just; that they were very heartily Sorry they had committed Murder, and
lamented their Drunkenness, which exposed them unto the Commission of that
other horrid Sin: Also they two (with William Symonds) Spent the Saturday Night
preceding their Execution, almost wholly in Prayer, Confessing their Sins to
God, and Crying to Him for Pardon of them for Christ's Sake. They behaved
themselves with a Solid and Grave Deportment, both in the Public Assembly, and
at the Place of Execution. Josias expressed himself to be willing to dye, and
that he was not without some Hopes that God would Pardon him, and Save him: and
after William Symonds had Prayed with him, at his request, he did himself make
a short Prayer in Indian, on the Ladder. Also Joseph having first desired
William Symonds to Pray with him, when on the Ladder, did make a short Speech
in Indian, desiring all the Indians (many of whom were Spectators) to take
Warning by him, and to avoid Drunkenness.

That there may be a Remarkable Divine Blessing attending your Indefatigable
Cares and Endeavors, to bring the Indians to the Knowledge and Practice of the
Christian Religion, and to the Reforming them from all manner of Vice and
Profaneness, is the Sincere Prayer of,

Honorable SIRS, Your very Humble Servant, S. Danforth.
(...) 29^^ (...) 1709.
The Woeful Effects OF Drunkenness.
ISAIAH XXVIII. 1. Woe to the crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim, whose
glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the sat valleys of
them that are overcome with Wine.
IT is a Solemn Occasion, which we now meet together upon* Two Persons stand
here before us, who are Condemned to suffer Death for that horrid Crime of
Murder, which they have been Convicted of. The Lord will have Execution done on
Murderers, Lev. 24. 17. No Satisfaction is to be taken for the Life of a
Murderer; He is guilty of Death; He shall surely be put to death: For the Land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him
that shed it, Numb. 35. 31, 33, 34. Now in order to the Retaining the gracious
Presence of our holy God among us, the Land which we inhabit, ought to be
cleansed from that defilement, which the Voluntary and Unjust taking away the
Lives of men does bring upon it.

The Honorable Judges of Her Majesty's Superior Court of Judicature, have
seen cause to direct me to Preach against the Sin of Drunkenness on this
Occasion; because both the Murderers, and the Persons by them Murdered, were
overtaken with Drink, when the acts of Murder were perpetrated. The effect
leads us to reflect upon the immediate cause and occasion thereof: and did we
carefully avoid the leading occasions unto the Commission of Sin; there would
not be such Abounding of gross Iniquities in the Land, as there is.

That it is no new thing for the Sin of Drunkenness to be followed with Murder;
or at least with the Ruin and Destruction of the Drunkards themselves, and of
others also by their means, may be plainly inferred from the Text we have read
unto you: Wherein we have an occoun^ by way of Prediction and Denunciation, of
the Ruin of Ephraim, (the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes) procured by the Abounding
of this Sin of Drunkenness among them. That the Kingdom of Israel, as well as
Judah, were addicted to this Vice of Drunkenness, is evident from such
Scriptures which charge them with it* As Hos. (...). 5. In the day of our (...)
the Princes have made him sick (...) B^tties of Wine; He stretched (...) his
hand with Scorners. Amos 6. 6. They drink wine in Bowls. And in this Chapter,
Isa. 28. 7. But they also have erred through Wine, and through strong Drink are
out of the way, etc. They befotted themselves with strong Drink, and thereby
fell into many Errors and Miscarriages, both in things Civil and Religious.
Ignorance, Errors and Stupidity were the Companions and Consequents of that
Sin. When a People are given up to Drunkenness, they become liable and prone to
embrace Superstition, Idolatry and Errors. A false Religion will serve a
Drunkards turn best; especially such a Profession, wherein he hopes he shall
not be made uneasy, while he is wallowing in this Sin; by sharp Reproofs,
severe Discipline, or by the frowns of those who are his Mates and Fellows in
the same Profession.

Now the Verse read, with the two following Verses, declare that the Ruin of
that Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, was partly and very considerably occasioned by
the Prevailing of this Vice of Intemperance in Drinking among that People: This
procured, that the glorious Beauty and Greatness of this Crown (or Kingdom) of
Pride, should be a fading flower: That is, should suddenly wither and perish.
These Drunkards who dwelt in Samaria (the Head-City of that Kingdom) as they
suffered themselves to be overcome, broken, over-thrown and knock down with
Wine: So God prepared a mighty strong one, the King of Assyria, which as a
Tempest of Hail, and as a destroying Storm, and as an over flowing Flood of
mighty Waters, should cast down and tread under foot, that glorious State and
Kingdom.

See here an instance of a Whole kingdom destroyed by Drink. The prevailing and
abounding of the Vice of Drunkenness, did pull down Judgments from Heaven upon
them: God was thereby provoked to destroy them by the hand of the Assyrian:

DOCTRINE.
The Abounding of the Vice of Drunkenness among any People (especially among
such a People as are the visible People of God, and do profess the true
Religion) does bring down from Heaven, dreadful Woes, and desolating Judgments
upon them, as a Nation or Body of People, as well as Signal Punishment on Some
particular Drunkards among them.



Here is in the Text, and Verses following, not only a Woe denounced against the
Drunkards of Ephraim, as a particular Rank and Sect of Sinners in Ephraim, that
were appointed to destruction; but also for their sakes, and on their account a
Woe is denounced against the Crown; that is, the whole Kingdom of Ephraim; and
against the Head; that is, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, in the Ruin whereof
all other lesser Towns and Villages circumjacent must needs suffer. The Vice of
Drunkenness when it prevails and spreads among a People, brings down a
destroying Tempest, a Storm, a mighty overflowing Flood of Divine Wrath and
Vengeance, on a Professing People.

The Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not Kill; Or, Thou shall do no Murder; not
only forbids the gross act of Murder, that is, The taking away our Own or our
Neighbors Life unjustly, but also forbids whatsoever tends thereunto:
Therefore Drunkenness may properly be reckoned among the Sins forbidden in and
by the Sixth Commandment; for it is a Transgression of that Command, in that it
tends to the Taking away both of our present Welfare, Outward and Inward; and
to the depriving us of happiness in a Future State; and that both Morally, as
by the Sinfulness of it God is provoked to inflict punishment upon us, and
Naturally and Physically also; as may be briefly hinted at in a few particulars.

I. In respect of our present Condition in this World, both Outward and Inward.

1. The External Welfare of Men is injured, and oftentimes wholly ruined by
their addicting themselves to this Vice. Particularly,

1. The Health of Men is much impaired, and Death hastened on many by their
Excessive Drinking. The greatest part of the Sicknesses among Men may be
ascribed to Intemperance of Body, and the inordinate Passions of the Mind,
which are Concomitants and Consequents of Intemperance. How many Diseases do
Drunkards bring upon themselves! How soon do they come to have their Natural
force and strength abated? to have a Pale, Lean and unhealthy Countenance? Some
of them to be constantly attended with a Cough; others with gouty Pains about
them; or else with a constant gnawing at their Stomachs, which nothing can
remove but Strong Drink! Some in a few years do so Extinguish the Natural Heat
of their Blood, by adding an adventitious Heat thereto, that unless they often
take down a Dr^^, they can^t keep themselves Warm, but labor under such a
Chillyness and Coldness, as unfits them for all business, and renders them dull
and unactive. Some loose the use of their Hands and Limbs, and come to be
beholding to others to lift the Cup to their Mouths for them, having procured a
penal Weakness upon themselves, for their Sinful and Inordinate putting the Cup
to their own Mouths. Have we not seen that Text verifyed upon this sort of
wicked men, in Prove. 2. 22. They are soon cut off, and rooted out of the Earth.
Some Drunkards are made signal Instances of Divine Vengeance, for the Warning
of others. Nabal, the day after he had been Drunk, dyed by Gods own immediate
hand. Belshazzar in the midst of his quaffing, was disquieted by the Appearance
of an Hand Writing on the Wall; and that Night was he slain, Dan. 5.
Drunkenness has occasioned some Indians to be burnt to Death in their little
Houses; other Indians by their being drowned first in Drink, have been exposed
to a second drowning in the Water. Nor are these the first (who now stand in
the midst of this great Assembly) who have committed Murder, when overcome with
Drink, and have been Executed for it.

2. Men by Drunkenness often deprive themselves of that safety, liberty, peace
and quietness, which otherwise they might enjoy. Oh! Wha^ (...) Multitude of
dangers and mischief (...) a D^unken Creature exposed unt^ And a Person in
Drink is not capable for want of the common and ordinary exercise of Reason, to
(...) void, shun or defend himself (...) dangers. A Man in Drink is (...) to be
knocked on the Head (...) Murdered by any that (...) sault him, being in no
capacity (...) himself or get out of (...) way. So it was with the (...)
^^^rives, Murdered by these Malefa^^^ now in our sight. We read (...) A^nons
Adversaries chose to smite him when his heart was merry with Wine, 2 Samuel 13.
28. because then he was likely to make least resistance* Again, What needless
and foolish Contentitions are men inguged in, who give themselves to Excessive
Drinking? They meet with such Brawls, Bablings and Wounds, which when they are
Sober, they are ashamed to own how they come to be exposed unto them. Oh! the
unquiet and uneasy Lives which such Persons lead, both at home and abroad?
Especially when under the height of Intoxication: neither Wife, Children nor
Servants, can then please them, though they endeavor it to the utmost. The
Family Jangles and ^omestick Bowels and Quarrels occasioned by Intemperance in
Drink, are (...) And the consequents o^ such (...) with nearest and (...) and
Relations, are doleful and dismal: Then the Husband is Exposed to Murder the
Wife of his Bosom; and the Neighbor left to rise up and kill his Friend or
Neighbor in the Field: So it was as to the cases of these Persons now
condemned to die. These Effects of following after strong Drink were spoken of
by Solomon, in Proverbs 23. 29. -- 35. which you may read at your leisure.

3. By giving themselves over to Excessive Drinking multitudes do waste their
Estates, and bring wants, streights, and distressing Poverty on themselves, and
their Families. Those who live in this Sinful course of Life, cannot expect to
be blessed in their Stores, in their labors, and in that which they set their
hands unto; and without Gods blessing we may not expect to be rich, Prove. 3.
16. Yea, Wine-bibbers and Drunkards are under a peculiar Threatening, Prove. 23.
20, 21. The God of Truth has said it, That the Drunkard shall come to Poverty.
The visible Blast upon many Orchards of late years, should lead us to consider,
Whether the visible Abuse of the Liquor pressed forth from the fruit of the
Trees in those Orchards, have not procured this Blast, as a judicial Stroke of
Divine Displeasure inflicted upon us.

Moreover, Drunkenness has a Natural tendency to Poverty. Those that follow
after Strong Drink, have not the Art of getting or keeping Estates lawfully.
They cannot be diligent in their Callings, nor careful to improve all fitting
Opportunities of providing for themselves, and for their Families: Nor are they
prudent in Saving what Estates they have in their Possession; they keep not
their Expenses within the bounds of their Income, but run themselves into debt,
to satisfy their innordinate Appetites: thus their Idleness and Prodigality
bring them to a Morsel of Bread, and do cloth them with Rags. Such are
indisposed for the Exercise of diligence or discretion in managing their
affayrs, being inclined to slothfulness, and all manner of Imprudencies.

Let me add, Such Persons do not properly enjoy what they have in their
Possession: in that, they take not such Contentment (as they might) in their
Outward Comforts: They are Envyous at the Prosperity of Others; the little
which they have is not attended with that blessing, of a satisfied and
contented Mind. Also such Persons having given over the lawful Methods of
gaining Estates, and maintaining themselves, and their Families, by industry
and prudence, are tempted to use shifting, sharking, fraudulent ways of
dealing, by which dishonest courses they bring a further Guilt on themselves,
and ripen themselves for Ruin, and mean time become odious, distastful,
burdensome, vexatious and troublesome to their Neighbors. This consideration
leads us to another particular:

Namely,

4. Drunkenness deprives Men of all Honor and Esteem among good Men; Whereby
they might become acceptable and useful to others in their Generation. Such
cannot be numbered among the Excellent in the Earth, Psalm. 10. 3. Nor can they be
esteemed more Excellent than their Neighbors. Shame is the utmost promotion
which such Fools deserve, Prove. 3. 35. A wicked man (such an one is a Drunkard)
is loathsome and comes to shame, Prove. 13. 5. They are nauseous, noisome,
unsavory Creatures unto all that are Sober Men. Those that know them to be
addicted to this Vice, cannot inwardly and in their hearts respect and honor
them; but contemn them as vile Persons. Even a whole Nation and body of People
loose their Reputation, when such Sins as this of Drunkenness abound among
them: Prove. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin proves a Reproach
unto it. Even among Heathens such Persons have been most honored and esteemed,
who excelled in the virtues of Temperance and Sobriety. The filthiness and
nastiness which excessive Drining produces, does expose men to the height of
Contempt, and disrespect from others, Isa. 28. 8. The Law of England made for
Suppressing this Vice, justly terms it, The Loathsome Sin: It makes a Man a
Loathsome Spectacle, a grief and shame to his Family; a scorn to his Enemies,
and a Terror to those about him.

2. The Internal Welfare of Men; the Health and Prosperity of their Souls is
obstructed, and in Multitudes is totally Ruined by this Vice of Drunkenness.
Men wound their precious immortal Souls thereby. This is one of those fleshly
Lusts which War against the Soul.

1. Such impair, weaken and disorder the faculties of their Souls. The
Inferior faculties are not kept in due subordination to the superior; but the
Will and Passions get head above the Reason, and Understanding, Prove. 20. 21.
Hereby the Soul is debased, and immersed into sensuality. Hereby an Impotency,
Darkness and Deformity is brought upon the Mind; so that such are indisposed to
conceive aright of Spiritual Objects and Mysteries: Holy Meditations cannot
dwell in such Minds, though possibly sometimes a good thought may have a
transient passage through them, in such invervals of time, when the Brain is
free from Intoxication. A Man given over to this Lust of the flesh, loses his
Ingenuity, generosity and true liberty of Mind; and Passions grow violent and
impetuous in him; whence proceeds the greatest Trouble and Disquietude of Men's
Lives: Such become mere slaves to their own Anger, Fear, Envy and Malice* they
cannot keep a steady Sail in any condition; they are too much lifted up by
Prosperity, too much dejected under Adversity. Drunkenness is justly termed a
brutish Sin, and a voluntary Madness; Sense and Reason being laid asleep
thereby, nothing remains in exercise, but that part of man wherein he resembles
a Beast, which produces beastly actions and behavior. Drink is said therefore
to swallow a Man up; the effects whereof is erring and stumbling, Isa. 28. 7.
And it takes away a Man's heart from Love to serious Religion, and the Service
of God, Hos. 11. 4. And from any due consideration of Gods Judgments present or
impending, Isa. 5. 11. and 56. 12. And from due consideration of the last
Judgment, and of our last End, and from a due care of our own future Happiness,
Luke 21. 34.

2. Such deprive themselves of true inward Peace, Joy and Confidence. As they
live continually under Guilt, so also under the power of Anxiety, Fears,
Self-Will, Malice, Envy, and the like corrupt dispositions. They are like the
troubled Sea which cannot rest, but being tossed too and fro by contrary Winds,
does still cast forth Mire and Dirt, Isa. 57. 20. An heavy load of guilt lying
on their Consciences, does hinder them from all true Peace and Comfort. The
gnawing Worm Conscience (unless when it is stupifyed by Intoxication, and made
unfit, to discharge its Office) does secretly molest them, and eat out the
comfort which otherwise they might find in their Outward comforts. For want of
Inward Peace, they have nothing to support them under the Afflictions of this
Life, nor have they rational grounds to expect a better condition hereafter. A
secret Dread does always accompany guilt, until men are altogether hardened in
this sinful course and become past feeling of any Remorse, which yet makes
their condition the more remediless and desperate. The horrible mispence of
precious Time, and daily abuse of Drink, which is a good creature of God; as it
wounds their Consciences here, so it will torment them hereafter.

This brings us to the next Head:

II. Drunkenness tends to deprive a Man of Happiness in a future State, in the
next World. Such err and wander out of the way of Salvation* Isa. 28. 7. They
cannot find out nor walk in the narrow path which leads to Glory. This Sin lays
men open, and inclines them to all manner of other Sins, whereby they quickly
fill up the measure of their Sins, and ripen themselves for eternal Damnation.
This Sin disposes men to much ungodliness, and ushers in much wickedness. It
inclines men to filthy Lusts, Prove. 23. 33. To perverse and unclean discourse,
and to become Scorners of all Goodness, and good Men, Psalm. 69. 12. Hos. 7. 12.
Men are hereby let loose to all those Sins to which they are either by Nature
or Custom inclined; or to which Temptations and Opportunities for their
Commission, do lead them. Drunkards are threatened expressly with Exclusion out
of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9. And they ought to be excluded out of the
Societies of the Godly, from the Communion of Saints on Earth, (which is the
Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth) 1 Cor. 3 11. As a Token of their Exclusion out of
the Church Triumphant; unless they repent and reform. But alas, how rare a
thing is it for any to be recovered from this Sin, when once they have been
accustomed and enslaved there-unto. And Oh! what inexpressible Stings will they
have at last, who for their indulging themselves in this Vice are banished from
the gracious presence of God for ever, Prove. 23. 32.

Nextly, We should proceed to Consider the Woes and Ruin brought upon Societies
of Men, upon Towns, Churches, States and Kingdoms, by the prevailing of
Drunkenness among them. GOD sends many s^re Judgments on a People that addict
themselves to Intemperance in Drinking. God is provoked hereby sometimes to
send a Famine on a Land, and to cut short the fruits of the Earth, Joel 1. 5.
Sometimes God sends War on a People, to punish them for this Sin. The King of
Assyria was sent of God to destroy the Crown (or Kingdom of Ephraim, because
this Vice reigned among them; as appears from our Text, and the following
Verses. Sinful and Excessive Drinking seems to have been One of the prevailing
Sins of the Old World, which brought a Deluge of Waters on the whole World,
Mat. 24. 38, 39. They were eating and drinking, until the flood came and took
them all away.

When Church Members and Professors of Religion indulge themselves in this
Vice, it brings a Woeful Blemish not only upon themselves, but upon the
Christian Society whereto they belong; it proves a stumbling block to others;
an obstruction to the Propagation of Religion; and keeps many from a Love and
likeing of the Christian Religion, and of Church Order and Ordinances.

Again, Drunkenness has a natural Tendency to bring Confusion and Disorder
into all Societies that are infected with it. Little or nothing of Religion or
good Order is, or can be upheld in the Families of Drunkards. The Morning and
Evening Sacrifice of Family Prayer is miserably neglected in such Families: and
where the Heads of Families are Intemperate, Disorderly and Brutish; there the
Children and Servants are brought up in Ignorance and Impudence; in Idleness,
Lewdness and Profaneness. When Drunkenness becomes a prevailing Sin in a Land,
it will soon Extinguish Religion and Order. When the Drinking party is so
potent as to prevail over the small Number of Sober Men, that are the Remnant
of Gods People in the Land, then none shall be improved in Offices of trust but
such as Wink at, favor and countenance this Vice; and then the common interest
of a People will soon be incommoded and ruined. Nothing does more unqualify
Persons for Offices of Trust, than this Vice of Drunkenness; no Vice makes men
betray their trust more than this does. And when such are put upon Service and
Employment of any considerable concern and moment, they quickly disgrace
themselves therein, and spoil the work they take in hand; and so disgrace the
Offices they bear, that those Offices become contemptible and despicable,
because such men have sustained them; which are justly esteemed Stations of
Honor and Dignity, when Sober Men discharge them.

Lastly, The Martial Spirits of a Nation or People are abated and enervated by
the prevalency of Drunkenness; so that Courage, Magnamity and Conduct, Vivacity
of Mind, and Activity of Body, and Ability to encounter Hardships* are wanting
when they have most occasion for them; which incourages their Enemies to
assault them as a weak and naked People. Yea, we read of Philip of Macedon,
that when he heard the Persians were great Drinkers, he would not make War upon
them: Saying, That alone would Ruin them.

Shall I in the next Place trespass on your Patience so sat, as to (...) at the
Reasons why God denounces (...) and executes such severe Judgments on
Mankind, for (...) Vice persisted (...)

In a Word, God is ang^^ (...) nothing but Sin: He never denounces a Woe
against (...) Vice and Sin which is the abominable thing which his Soul hates.
Such is the Holiness and Purity of the Divine Nature, that he cannot but hate
Sin; He is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with any delight therein, Hab.
1. 13. Now Drunkenness is a Vice which the Lord both in the Law, and in the
Gospel has strictly prohibited. Luke 21. 34. Take heed lest at any time your
Hearts be overcharged with Drunkenness. Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly as in
the Day, not in Drunkenness and in Strife. Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not Drunk with Wine,
wherein is Excess. It is a Paganish Sin; Such who practice it, walk after the
will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4. 3. and not as becomes those who enjoy the
daylight of the Gospel: It is one of the works of Darkness. Yea, It is
dishonesty, Romans 13. 13. Those who live in it, do not live honestly; they deal
not justly, honestly and honorably by themselves; they neglect the duties
which every Man owes to himself; they are justly styled their own worst
Enemies; and they soon fall into dishonest and unjust dealings with others.
Drunkenness is one of the worst and vilest of the works of the Flesh, and
therefore mentioned in the last place, in the Enumeration of them, in Gal. 5.
21. It is a Complicated Sin; a breach of all the Ten Commandments, in some
sense, as some have undertaken to demonstrate. Be sure, it unfits men to keep
any of Gods Laws: and inclines and disposes them to break them all.

But I hasten to the APPLICATION, in a twofold Use.

USE. I. Hence it follows, that it is a great Sin to inebriate others, and to
do that which may occasion or promote Drunkenness in others. As therefore there
is a Woe denounced against the Drunkards of Ephraim in our Text; so there is
also a Woe denounced unto him, That gives his Neighbor Drink; that puts his
Bottle to him and makes him Drunk, Hab. 2. 15.

Indeed it seems almost in vain to undertake to convince those of the great
Evil they are guilty of, in being instrumental to the Drunkenness of others, by
supplying them with the Fuel whereby the flame of their craving Appetites is
not quenched, but increased: who are ready to repel the force of all Arguments
used for their conviction, with that answer, By this craft we gain our Wealth.
But whether men will hear or not, we must be faithful in bearing a Testimony
against them; who contrary to the wholesome Laws of this Province, for the sake
of a little gain, supply the poor Indians, the Aboriginal Natives of this Land,
with such quantities of Strong Liquors, whereby they are often intoxicated, and
thereby exposed to many dangers and mischiefs; even to the wounding, bruising,
killing and destroying one of the other. Seeing several of these poor Natives
have been Executed in this Country, for Murdo^ committed in their Drink: One
would think it were a sufficient Warning to us all, to use a more than ordinary
Watchfulness and Care over our selves and others, lest any of us should be in
any remote degree occasions of their death. We are not ignorant of their
natural extraordinary craving Appetite after Strong Drink: We are not ignorant
that most of them are very unmeet judges to determine when they have drank
enough. If a Parent takes care to make a judgment for his Infant, when it has
drank enough of any pleasant Strong Liquor, because the Child is no competent
judge of what is best, and most convenient for it self: by the same reason we
should watch over grown Persons, and be as helpful as we can, to prevent them
from harming themselves with Strong Drink; when we know by our observation of
them from time to time, that their Reason has not the Command of their
Appetites. Let Us consider, these Indians are of the same Race of Mankind with
our selves; they are our Brethren by Adam our common Father; and by Noah, the
Father of the Postdiluvian World: yea, they are our Friends and Fellow Subjects
under the same Crown. It was language only befitting a Murderous Cain, to say,
Am I my Brothers Keeper? Who would have imagined that any Man would have made a
Doubt or Scruple of that Nature, whether he were bound in duty to endeavor the
preservation of other men, that were of the same kind of Being, and had the
same humane Nature in common with himself?

Were there no Laws made by Civil Authority, to restrain us from Selling such
Mortal Liquors to the Indians; yet the light of natural (...) might suffice to
restrain us ^^erefrom. Oh! Let us not Person to break all these Bands, and cast
away all these Cords from us (...), those of Humane Civil Laws, of Natural
Reason, of Divine (...) and of Divine Comminations of dreadful Woe, to those who
make (...) Drunk. Let us not (...) but carefully improve this awful Warning now
given us, by the Sentence of Death to be this day (...) these two poor men
before (...) taking away unjustly the (...) two of their own Nation, ((...) and
a Friend) both (...) Murdered being over-taken with Drink, at the times when
these Murders were committed. Woe unto us, if we regard not this Warning now
given to us. Woe unto those who instead of Mourning before the Lord, for the
abounding of this Sin among the Natives, (whereby that Honorable Work of
Gospellizing them is extremely obstructed, and the endeavors and pains taken
therein very much frustrated) and who instead of taking utmost care to prevent
the Intemperance of the Natives, will for the sake of a little Gain, supply
them with these Strong Liquors, which expose them to harm in their Healths,
their Lives, their Bodies, and their Souls; yea to do harm and mischief to
those that are about them. Its the work of Satan to tempt others to Sin: Oh!
let us be persuaded to do Satan's work no longer! Consider also, that we our
selves are partakers in those Sins, which others commit through that
Intemperance, which by our means they fall into. This we are caution^d to
beware of, 1 Timothy 5 22. Ephesians. 5. 11. Hereby we are in danger to participate in
the Woes, Plagues and Punishments, which this Sin of Drunkenness, and the other
Sins which are occasioned there by, do pull down from Heaven upon the People we
belong unto.

Consider also, what a dreadful account we shall have to give unto our Judge,
at the great day of Judgment, if we have been guilty of making any of these
poor Indians ^wofold more the Children of Hell, than they were before, by being
leading occasions of their falling into Drunkenness; a Vice not heard of among
them before the Europeans came into America. Let every Soul of us lament and
mourn before God, that any of the English should be Accessaries, or occasions,
to the growth and prevalency of Drunkenness among the Indians; and so of the
Mischiefs, and of the Murders, that have been the woeful Consequents of their
Intemperance. Persons guilty hereof may possibly ly hid, and remain concealed,
so as to escape punishment from Men, which according to the Law of the Land,
should be inflicted on them, who illegally Trade away Liquors to the Indians:
But God sees and knows them all, and their Sin will find them out: they must
not expect to escape the righteous Judgments of God, except they timously
repent, and reform. God has many Woes to inflict on such Persons: God can
easily, and may justly send a Blast on the Estates of such Persons, who try to
enrich themselves by that which occasions that Intemperance of the Indians:
yea, such are in danger of having a Curse sent upon their Souls, seeing they
show no pity to the Souls of these poor Natives. It Is not much to be wondered at
that such Traders with the Indians, who occasion their Intemperance, are
judicially given up, some of them, to Errors, Ignorance and Profaneness, some
of them to become Drunkards themselves; to the wasting of their own Estates,
and beggaring their Families: some of them to become Scorners and Haters of
Godliness, and of all good, honest, sober and religious Men. No wonder, if some
of them, or of their Posterity, should be suffered by God to be carried into
Captivity, among the wild Salvages of America: or that those wild Indians,
should be Commissioned to destroy them and their Estates. Even an Heathen did
say, It is the same thing, if thou art accessory to the Sin, as if thou did
commit it thy self. The Judgments of God do seize upon, not only those who do
wicked works, but on such also who take pleasure in them that do them, R^m. 1.
22.

USE. II. Of Exhortation.

Let Every one of us in our respective Stations and Capacities put to an
helping (...) to prevent and stop the Growth and Spreading of this Vice of
Drunkenness. (...) we shall manifest o^r Lord (...) and Compassion to the
Public to the whole (...) seeing GOD (...) a Controversy (...) the Whole
Nation or Body (...) whom this (...)

(...) ^^ch of as (...) in (...) of Temperance (...) ab^tin^^ce; (...) by on
(...) we may (...) and Testify against this growing Vice. Oh! Let us be careful
to avoid the very Appearance of this Evil.

Let us also Cry mightily to God with Fervency and Importunity in Prayer, that
God would be pleased to put a stop to this Threatened Flood of Iniquity, both
amongst English and Indians.

Let us take care to avoid Drinkings, as well as Drunkenness; Beware we be not
of that Number who sit and tarry long at the Strong Drink, Isa. 5. 11. It is a
Sin to Eat and Drink with the Drunkards, to accompany them so far and so much
as to countenance encourage, and harden them in their Intemperance, Matthew. 24.
49. Yea, for our own good, let us beware of too great Familiarity wi^h those
who are Strong to beat Strong Drink, and are greedy after (...) and love to be
long at it: for such are infectious Persons. There is little Hope that such
will gain good by the Company of good Men: but there is great danger lest a
good Man gain some infection from them; yea, sometimes a blot and a spot, that
he cannot soon wipe off again.

But Woe to those who tempt, allure, entice others into this Sin, or into such
Places and Companies, where they may probably expect no other, but to meet with
great Temptations to fall into it. Woe to those, who use their Wit and Fancy to
applaud and commend hard and long, and frequent Drinkings, as being Generosity
and Sociableness; and that make a ridicule of those (...) Endeavor to Excel in
Temperance and Sobriety. Consider, It cannot be true love and friendship, to
(...) and betray our Friend into Temptation, and the snare of the Devil.

Lastly, Let us improve the awful Spectacle; the Instances of Divine Vengeance
manifested against this Sin, which are the occasion of this present Solemnity;
let us Argue thus, If this be the Fruit of Immoderate Drinking of Strong
Liquors* to be led thereby and left of GOD to Commit the horrid Sin of Murder,
and so to come to the Gallows; then, By the Grace of GOD helping us, we will
Abhor, Detest and Abominate this Sin and Vice for the future, more than ever
heretofore; and will be more careful to Avoid it our selves, and to Restrain
and Recover Others from (...) than ever we have been in the time past of our
lives. The LORD (...) us so to do!

I shall Conclude with a few Word^ directed to the poor Condemned Malefactors,
in their own Language.

Ogguffunash
Ku^^oonkla^h mashamukupash en kuttummunke Wassumutup nish^hteaeninyeuog,
Josiah, kah Joseph, (...) nehenwonche wuttinontoowaonkauoowout; ut Bristol,
October 12. 1709. ne kesukod adt wussumaonkanoo ussenap.
WOI Keen Josias kah keen Joseph, noo^amook Wuttinnoowaonk God, onk woh
Kukkereahogkonoo pomantamwog: Isai. 55. 3. Yeu momachisheyeue
kuhkootumwehteaonk, ne woh noo^amo^q: Yeu nohkog kukketeahogkonoo mos
kummamo^teanau, Luke 12. 20. Mahtshunk yeu kesukod kukketeahogkonoo pish
appuong micheme asuh ut Kesukqut, asuh ut Chepiokkomukqut. Kuhquttosu, yeu
kesukod mos kenuppumwoo; kah mahche nuppoookq, mat-nuppooe Kukketeahogkonoo mos
nepoog anaquabit mussugken God, wussuttumwaenin.

Natwontamook,

1. Kenau masukkenukeg match^seaeninuog. Nishehteaonk kah Kakesippamooonk
mogkiyeue matcheseo^kash. Kuttohhoowoash wahteauunau kummatcheseonkanoo.
Nuttogketamumun ut Numb. 32. 23. Kusseh, kummatchenehheomwoo Jehovah, kah pahke
wahteoook kummatcheseonkanoo kummishkunkumwoo. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Sunnummatta
koowahteomw^o, matta sampwesegik, matta pish a^tooo^g akkehtohsootumooonk God:
Ahsookuhkommitteahteog, Nanwunn^otsquawacheg, kah Mamossitcheg, kah
Kummootoowacninuog, kah kog^^^^^amwaeninuog, kah (...), kah Kehkemuae^in^og,
kah Mukkookinnuwaeninuog matta pish ohto^oog Wuttahsootumooonk God.
Penuwohteaeninuog unnantamuppaneg onk Nushehteaonk unni Missi Matcheseonk, Act
28. 4 unnittupaneg, Matta kuhshe yeuuh Nushehteaenin, uttohkonogque
uppohquohhomun wutch Kehtahhanit, annootaonk matta w^ttinanumuh pomantamunnat.

2. Natwontamook toh unni uhkpunnaonk kuppattauowoo kuhhogkaoog, Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
Noh kahchequabinit, ummatanumuh God. Rev. 21. 8. Nishehteaeninuog pish ahtoog
wutchippiyeumoo ut Pasohtheganit ne nashqunnag nashpe noohteau kah Brimstone,
ne ^ahhohtoe^ Nuppooonk. Natwontamook, uhquinne^nkquat pinnishonat
wunnitchekonnit pomantamwae God. Heb. 10. 31. Nuttogketamumun ut, Hosea 13 9.
Woi Israel kunnush hohhog: Nashpe kummishe matcheseonkanoo kunnishomwoo
kohhogkaoog kah kukketeahogkonoo. Moocheke moosquantam God wutche kuppanne
usseonkanoo; kah (...) wah^eunk ummoosquantamooe (...) God, Psalm. 90. 11. God
moosquan^ma^ matchetoooh asekesu^o ash, Psalm. 7. 11. Kah netatuppe
mooshquam^^^u God Nushehteaeninneuh, Prove. 28. 17. Howan che^e^^ehtunk
oosqhe^^k howae wos et^mp, pish ussishau Pass^hthega^it, howan (...)

3. Annoosooonkanuoo wutche masukkenukeg Matches^ae^^^uog, onk woh wadohanoog
aiuskoiantamohi^rit, kah wunnamptamohettit ut Christut. W^nnuppooonk Christ
^ummoohhoowomoo manan^teaonk kah ohquantamoatuonk, wutche (...) aiushoi^ntogeg.
Youwaj, woi Samp^^ttahhae aiuskoiantamook, kah peaonook Christ n^shpe
wunnamptamooonk. Natwontamook ^^e wuttinnoowaonk Christ, Isai. 45. 22.
Moninneiekq kah wa^chani^teakq wame kenau w^hqshikish ohke, newutche nen God,
kah matta wonk howan: kah Heb. 7. 25. Tapunum Christ panuppe oowadchanonat nag
paaonocheg Godoh nashpe nagum, newutche micheme pomantam nah
uppeantamwanshonat. Yeuoh mononeteae noowadchanuaeninumun wissin, Joh. 6. 37.
Howan noh payaausit matta nuppogkenoh. Christ wehkumau wame matcheseaeninneuh
uppeaonukqunnaout, wutche wadchanittuonk, Isai. 65. 1, 2, 3. Christ ketoohkou,
Nissip, Moninneiekq moninneiekq en wuttohtimoin ne matta assoowetamukup nashpe
noowesuonk: Nussepakunumup ninnitchegash quinekesukod en chekehtamwe
missinninuut, neg aoncheg may ne matta waneg^innunnook, neanag nehhenwonche
wuttinnantamooonkanoo: Missinninuog moohmoos^hu^queoneg naquahteae, ut
anaq^abeh. Joh. 7. 37. Mushontoowau Christ, Howan kuhkuttoog peyauo^itch kah
w^ttattaj. Rev. 22. 17. Howan annantog, nem^nitch pomantamoe nippe nanawe. Mat.
11. 28. Peyauosekq ^ame sa^^nn^magish kah tahkekoowanaogish, kah
kuttinunumauunumwoo ^nwo^sinooonk.

Yeuwaj,

1. Pahketahkae aiuskoiantamook. Nuttogketamumun papaume Israelitsog, Psalm. 78.
35, 36, 37. ^ut (...) ut w^ttoonoowout; kah upp^^^^wae (...) nashpe w^nannu:
N^wurche wuttahhoo matta sam^wanoo noh w^che. Yeuwaj ahque aiontogkiy^ue qut
sam^wuttahhae sampoowag kummatche^^onkanoo en Godut, kah pean^^mook wutche
monanete^onk, kah wadchanittuonk ut oowesuonkanit Nussontimomun Jesus Christ,
Jer. 3. 22. God wehkummuau, Quishkekq kenan (...) mukki^g, kah pish
nu^netskeh^^^ (...): Woi (...), Kusseh kuppeaonunumun, (...) Jehovah
num-Manit^omun. Neuantamook kah mauook ut anaqua^it God, wutche
kogk^isippamooonk, ^ushehteaonk kah wame onkatogish ^^mmatch^seonkanoo. Matta
ohquompanooh aiuskoiantamuna^ ut we ^uhket ne a^an, Eccl. 9, 10. Yeuyeu
tapinn^atue uttoocheyeuoo, yeuyeu wadchanittae ke^ukod, 2 Cor. 6. 2.

2. Onkq Christut wutche keteahogkone keteaonk: Neane David, Psalm. 25. 2. Woi
(...) kuppa^ah^anumush. Tohshunumook kuskesukoowoash en Jesus Christut noh abit
michemohtae (...) anunumoatnonk, Psalm. 121. 1. Moninneohk Jesus Christ, onk woh
kutt^ttumunumwoo wadehanaonk kukk^tea^^gk^^^^^wuh, 1 Pet. 1. 9. (...) wul^amb^h
God, (...) ummatcheseo^k mutta^^k, Joh. 1. 29. Peantamauoohk ammanumunat kum
matcheseonkane k^suhkotamooonkanoo. and qun^^ppi^umunat kutch^oowoosh
sekinneamunnat kum matchese^nkan^o, kah poonumunat kohhogaout (...) Muttah,
poohkshae mutah, kah tanogki nahshaonk. Mehquantamook n^ wasukwhosik ut, Acts
16. 31. (...) Jesus Christ kah pish (...), kah Joh. 3. 18. Noh (...) matta
awakompuae wussum^n^qut (...) wanomptam^^k (...) newutche matta wun^amptamoo
OOwesuonkanit wunnukq^^tegbeonoh God. Wissin Christ en nish^oh howan wanamptog,
Nuttaioom wunnamptah kummatoheseonkash kuttahquantamonteanash: Math. 9. 2.
Newajeh (neane nuttogketamumun, Romans 5. 1.) S^mpw^ne^hunog nashpe
wunnamptamooonk ^^onahteaonomun God, nashpe Nuppiahq^ttum^omun Jesus Christ.
Romans 8. 1. Matta nag awahkompunnoooog apehtauoneheg Christ Jesus.

Tabattantumohk God, wutche Christ. Us howan nen, onk mananeteaonk ohtag Godut,
kah Christut woh nootihein! Tabattantumohk Mannit, noh wahtauwahhukqueog Lord
Jesus Christoh wutche noowadchanoowaeninumun: noh wahteauwahhuwadt, en
^^t^ummunke Indiansut wunnaun^nummoohkaonk papaume Christ, noh
wunnummuhkitteyeue nont mayeuo^it en michemohtae wunniyeuonka^it. Matthew. 4. 16.
Missinninuog apehpaneg pahk^naiye^^t namog mussi wequai: kah en nag apehpaneg
wuttohket, kah wuttonka^^^tomut nuppooonk wequai uspemoo.

Woi peantamauoohk Wuttoohshum^u annunumwontamunnat kuppannnoowa^tamooonkanoo,
Mark 9. 24. (...) nenawun nuttapunnumoomun (...) nea^onat Christ nashpe
wunnampta^^onk; qut God nashpe wunnohsh^^ittoomoh magoo menehkesuonk, kah (...)
umoadtuonk, kah kesehteo wunnamptamooonk ut wuttahhoowout neg peantogkeg.
Peantamoo^k neane David, Psalm. 51. 14. Po^quahwusseh wutch wishquehheonkane,
kesuhkotamooo^kanit, w^t God, ken wadchanoowae numma^nittoom, kah verse. 1.
Kuttummonteanumeh, woi God, neanag koowumoasue kuttumo^teanitteaunk, neanag
(...) kummonaneteaonkash, cheekhash numm^t^^eusseo^k: V. 2. (...) k^tchissu^eh,
kah pa^kheh wutch nummatcheseonkash; newutche nussampoowam nummatcheseonk; Ken
w^b (...) kah yeu (...) match^seo^k ut an^quabean. verse. 9. Puttogwhush
kushesuk wutch nummatcheseo^k^nit; kah cheskhash wa^te num-matchese^nkash:
verse. 10. K^sehteah pahke Muttah, woi God; kah sampwohtae N^sha^^^k wuske^teah.
verse. 11. A^que p^gkeseh wutch anaquabean; kah a^que amanumah koonet^ppantamwe
nahshaonk.

Kah woi wame onkatogig Indian-s^g! Natwontamo^k God amomau (...) noh howan
ahquehtauunat, kah ^^^kodtumunat wame matcheseonkash, neane wissin ut, Eccl. 7.
1^. Ah^^e ^ussome matcheseaeninyeuish, asuh Mattammag^ooo^kon; toh wutch woh
nupan a^k^kod nuppooan. Psalm. 55. 23. Nishehteaeninuog kah assook^kodteaeninu^g
matta pish pomantamooog pu^she ukkesukodtumoomoowoash. God nahtehteae poonau
yeug kuttumonke wosketompaog ( Josias kah Joseph) wutche uhshuwaonk kah wutche
Amontuonk; yeuwaj, woi wame nootamook kah wabisek, kah ahquehteauook wame
matcheseonkash; nahnaunne ahquehtauook kogkeisippamooonk Nuttogketamumun
unnaumatuonk ut nukkone Testamentut, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21. Nag pish unna^g
Eldersog, yeuuh nunnaumonan kogkeisippamaeninyeuo^; kah wame wosketompaog ne
ootannat pish ukqussukquanatohwhouh qussukquanash kah pish nuppoo, kah pish
kutamaunum machuhk wutch nashaue ken; kah wame Israel pish ^ootamwog kah pish
wabisuog.

UNNEH.

