THE Divine Original AND DIGNITY OF Government Asserted; AND An Advantageous
Prospect of the RULERS Mortality Recommended.

A SERMON Preached before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL,
and Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, May 31.
1710. The Day for the Election of Her MAJESTY'S Council there.

By EBENEZER PEMBERTON Pastor of a Church in Boston, and Fellow of Harvard
College in Camb.

BOSTON in N E. Printed by B Green. Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop in Corn
hill. 1710.

PRINTED by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR, at the Desire of Her
Majesty's Council.

Isaac Addington, Secr.
Boston, Prim^ June 1710.
An Election SERMON.
PSALM LXXXII. 6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of
the most High: But ye shall Die like Men, --
IT is a divine as well as wise and just Remark, made by Monsieur Paschal.
One of the greatest Masters of Thought in the Last Age, that Persons of
Quality and Character ought to have two Sets of thoughts, by which to regulate
their Conduct: by the One they are to view themselves in their State of
distinguishing Elevation, which is not from Nature, but Arbitrary
Establishment; by the Other they are to take a prospect of themselves in their
Natural Condition of Infirmity, and Equality with the rest of Mankind. The
bright Idea of their Dignity and Power must be tempered with the more cloudy
Idea of their Frailty: A Separation of these will lead into gross Illusions,
and betray into Errors fatal to themselves, and their Dependents: But an happy
Union of these will afford light to direct them in the bright tracts of
Substantial Glory; and forcible arguments to engage them to such a management,
as shall be glorious to themselves, and happy to the World. The former prospect
will take them off from the false scent of honor, and inspire them with
inflaming Incentives to the most noble Actions, which will adorn their
Character; without the latter view they will be in the nearest danger of being
dazzled with the Glare of Grandeur, and growing giddy by looking down from their
State of Eminence upon those beneath them: If the Great forget their Dignity
they will under-act the virtues becoming their Figure; if they reflect not
steadily on their Infirmity, they will over-act the powers of their Elevation.
-- Know thy self is the first Lesson in the School of Wisdom, which becomes the
Great and Honorable, as well as others, to learn: and these just Reflections
both on their Excellency, and Frailty, will be found the first Elements of this
Prudence. These will prompt them so to act the part assigned them on the Stage
of Life, that their External Condition may be found in Conjunction with the
more valuable inherent Dignity of a virtuous Mind; that when Death shall shut
up the present scene, a brighter scene of Glory may open upon them; and they
appear with Superior Characters on the Stage of true Glory and Immortality.

And these thoughts are not only proper for Men of Name and Power themselves;
but are instructive to such as are under their Government: These must view
their Superiors in the Excellency of their Station, that they may pay them
those Regards due to the Impressions of Divine Majesty, which they bear; yet
they must behold them but as Gods, whose Dwelling is in flesh, whose breath is
in their Nostrils, and may be soon Stopped; which will give check to a Spirit of
flattery, regulate their Expectations from them, and make them disclaim all
undue confidences in the most dignified Wisdom and Power on Earth.

Now, these two Set of Thoughts are in the most lively colors represented in
the Words of our Text. I have said ye are Gods, etc. but ye shall die like men.
Which, if I mistake not, will afford us Reflections proper to the work of this
Day; and in which every part of this Audience may have their Portion.

I hope there are none so vain as to imagine, that I appear this Day in this
Awful Desk, only to beat the Air, and play the Orator in an Artful Address to
our Rulers, either by way of Unmannerly Satyr, or fulsome Panegyric; This
would not well become the Solemnity of this Place, nor the Gravity of my
Audience; and much less would it Suit my own Character; Nor may it be supposed
that I am called forth to read a Lecture in Politics before our Venerable
Senators; for thus I should go beyond my own Line, and boast of a false Gift. I
desire to keep in Mind what Place I stand in, In whose Name I Speak, what
Critical Inspection I am under, and what an Awful Account I must give in of my
present Performance to our COMMON LORD and JUDGE; and under the commanding Awe
of these thoughts, I shall endeavor to Speak; and must entreat my AUDIENCE,
under the same Awe, to hear.

This Psalm, of which our Text is part, is styled a Psalm of Asaph: Not because
it was directed to Asaph the Levite and Singer, which lived in the days of
David, but as I apprehend because it was penned by Asaph, the Seer, who lived
about the days of Hezekiah: The Rulers of which Day are Stigmatized by the
Prophet Isaiah, Isaiah 1, 10.
as Rulers of Sodom. And this Conjecture is strengthened by the judgment of Dr.
Pa^^ick.
a Great Master of Jewish Learning. The Psalm is a warm Address to those that
filled the Seats of Judgment; and is a loud Cry for Public Justice; that truth
and unbribed Judgment might Establish their Tribunals: Here are administered the
most pungent Rebukes for their Corruption, Male-Administrations, and Criminal
Disorders, whereby the foundations of the State were put out of course; and the
main Pillars of Government sapt; and Rulers are faithfully admonished of the
Duties of their Post, which God and Men expect of them. To render this address
the more forcible it is introduced with the Solemn thoughts of the Presence,
Presidency, and Inspection of the Great God over such, as are Exalted to Place
of Rule over men. v. 1. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty; He
Judges among the Gods: And that the Impression of their Duty might be deep and
durable, the blessed God who is the Only, and Supreme Potentate of Heaven and
Earth, is brought in as representing to them, the beauty, luster and glory of
their Character; so, giving them a dark Prospect of the Land of Darkness to
which they are hastening, in a Solemn Memento of their Mortality, and that State
Consequent hereon, which certainly Expects them. I said ye are Gods, etc. but
ye shall dye like Men. In which we have a Concession, and a serious Correction,
or just Qualification of this Concession.

First, we have a Concession concerning such as are Exalted to Place of Rule
and Power. I have said ye are Gods; and all of you are Children of the Most
High. In which we have two things observable.

1. The Institution, or Divine Ordination of Civil Government: I said ye are
Gods:] I said, i. e. God, who is the FOUNTAIN of all Honor and Power; I, who
am KING of KINGS, the Supreme LORD and MASTER of the World; whose Word is a Law
not to be disputed: I have said, i. e. have ordained, constituted and appointed
by my Sovereign Authority, and in my Supreme Wisdom. Though all men have the same
Original, are of the same Make, and in many Articles stand upon the same level;
yet I have appointed that there shall be some of a Superior Character,
advanced to Place, Power, and Dignity above others; I have made them Gods, and
by my Institution they must be treated as such.

2. We have in this Concession the Glorious Character that God Himself has put
upon Civil Rulers: and their Character carries in it the most Sublime Ideas of
State and Magnificence, Power and Dignity: They are Gods] Not by Nature or
Essence, but by Office; Gods by Deputation, Analogy and Proportion. Elohim,
which is a Name, given not only to the Supreme Governor of the World, GOD over
all Blessed for Ever, but also to Angels, those Ministers that do his Pleasure,
that attend the Throne of Majesty above. -- And all of them Sons of the
Highest:] i.e. As Children bear the Name and Image of their Father; so these
wear the Title and Name, bear the Image and Character of the Great GOD; and so
are Sons of the most High, who has put something of his Majesty upon them, and
by his Constitution raised them to a Condition of Exaltation like to the Angels
of Heaven, those Sons of God, who are the Supreme Ministers of his Kingdom.

Secondly, We have a Correction, or qualification of this Concession. But ye
shall die like Men.] In which we may observe two things.

1. The Correction it self. Ye must Die like Men.] In Power and Order they are
raised above others; they are Petty Deities, but they are Mortal Ones; In a
little time they will be dismantled of all the visible Ensigns of
distinguishing Greatness, and retire off the the Stage of this World in a state
of Equality with the meanest. They die like Men, i. e. like Other men, who are
not thus Exalted: They die like Men, i. e. as Creatures who are Endowed with
Immortal, reasonable Souls, accountable to the GOD that made them; they Die as
Men, and not Perish like the Beasts, whose spirit as well as body goes
downwards; but as Men, whose Spirits at Death return to GOD that gave them; as
Men, i. e. as Beings whose Bodies shall not always ly in the Dust, but shall be
redeemed from Corruption; whose Flesh and Spirit shall be again united in order
to an assignment to an Eternal State, either of Bliss or Misery, by the
Determination of the Judge of the World. So it points us not only to their
Mortality, but also to that Judgment that follows upon Death, and the important
Consequents thereof.

2. We may observe the design of this Correction. Which is to Temper and
Qualify the thoughts of the foregoing Concession. The foregoing Character given
of Rulers, might be well suspected as drawn with Colors too bright, Strokes
too bold, and in a Form too Divine; Now a Prospect of their Mortality and
consequent Darkness is represented, as dark Shades, without which their Picture
would not be full, Just and Natural; nor they represented in their complete
Figure, and native Complexion. This Darkness is as necessary, as the former
Light to take a just View of them.

The very nature and design of this Correction, does intimate the great
Advantage and Propriety of having the Thoughts of the Dignity of Rulers
tempered and qualified with wise Reflections on their Mortality, and it is
important Consequents.

Now agreeably to what has been observed in both parts of our Text, there are
four Significant Articles which demand our Consideration, and shall be the
Heads of my present Discourse. As, I. That the Original of Government among men
is Divine, or from Heaven. II. That GOD has Dignifyed Rulers among men with the
Character and Style of Gods. III. Though they are Gods, yet they are subject to
Mortality, and the Consequents of it. IV. That it will be of Great Advantage to
temper the thoughts of their Dignity, with just Reflections on their Expected
Mortality and it is Consequents.


Of these in their Order.

I. The Original of Government is Divine. It is from GOD, by his Sovereign
Constitution and Appointment. I said, Ye are Gods. It is not barely a
Permission of Divine Providence, but a Divine Institution that there be
Government in the World. It is no difficulty to distinguish between particular
Forms of Government, and Government it self; between the Persons Exalted to
Government, and the several Orders and Degrees of such in a State, and that
Power which is devolved on them: The former are of Humane Determination, and
Appoinment; the latter of Divine Ordination.

The Species and Form of Civil Government in the World is Various: There is a
Democracy, Aristocracy, Monarchy, and there is a mixture of these; where the
Powers of Each are Limited, and brought to an happy Poise; where Power and
Privilege are so twisted together, and inlay'd in the Foundation of the
Constitution, as not to bear a separation without a mutual Destruction; Power
cant be Exercised, but the Privileges of the Ruled must be Maintained; no^
Privilege be Enjoyed, unless the Power of Rulers be Asserted and Supported. Now
it cannot be said that This or the Other particular Species of Government is
Instituted by GOD for this or that People. Nor is it supposeable that there is,
or ever was, any State or Nation, that did inviolably, without some Alteration
Essential, maintain the same Form of Government. To be sure Israel, GOD's
Favorite People, had not always the same Model of Government; nor did GOD, who
was, in a distinguishing Style their King, Ever prescribe them such a Scheme of
Rule, which they might on no terms Vary from. Athens, Sparta, and Rome, which
in their Day appeared fixed in the full Center of Light and Glory, suffered
several Revolutions and Changes in the main Frame of their Administrations: Nor
has the Form of Government in our Nation, been just the same from the
beginning; which all must own that are not Strangers to our English Story. The
Determination of what Particular Form should take place in this or that Nation,
has been left to the Wisdom of the Nations; as long as the General design of
Rule is provided for, and not Subverted. That Form which is most adapted for
one People, may not be for another; Considering the various Customs, Tempers,
Policies, Interests of Nations of Differing Climates.

But this notwithstanding, that there must be Government is not from the bare
Will of men, but from the Most High, who Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and
gives it to whom so ever he will: He has put his Sovereign Sanction upon it;
and made it a fixed Ordinance of Heaven, that there be a Rule over Men; The God
of Israel has said it, and the Rock of Israel has spoken it.

There are Various Degrees and Orders of men Engaged in the Administrations of
Rule; who have differing Styles and Powers under Various Limitations, and Each
Degree have their proper Sphere to move and act in: And the ways of Exalting
men to the Seat of Government, whether Supreme or Subordinate, have been
differing: and none of these have a special immediate Stamp of Divinity upon
them. However it is the Sovereign Pleasure of Heaven that there should be
Order, Superiority and Rule in Civil Society's; and all Rulers of what Degree
soever are Ordained of God.

This truth stands in the strongest Point of Light in the Word of GOD; and will
be Legible after all the attempts of any to Obscure it. The unerring Oracles of
Heaven has laid the Foundation of Civil Government firm in Divine Institution.
What short of this can be intended in many places? Romans 13. 6. The Powers that
be, are Ordained of God. And there is no Power but of God. Has not God said,
Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice? Why are Rulers
called God*s Ministers? Romans 13. 4. Is it not a Command of Heaven? Deuteronomy. 16.
18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates? Nothing surely
short of Divine Ordination could justify those Apostolic Enforcements of
Submission to Rulers, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake; not barely
for Man's, but for the Lord's sake, Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Were not the
Original of Power from GOD, it could never be said, that he that resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of GOD, as, Rom 13. 2.

And this Institution of Government, is founded on Reason; and GOD has done it
in Infinite Wisdom, and in Kindness to men. There would doubtless have been
Order and Civil Subordination among men, had they still walked in the blissful
Shades of Paradise in their Native Light, Purity, and Glory. Sure we may be
since the Apostasy, there is Absolute Necessity of Superiority, and Power in
some, and Inferiority and Submission as to others. He well understood the
Nature of men, and of Humane Societies, that said, Nihil AEqualitate ipsa
inequalius. That nothing is more unequal than Equality. Were there no
Government, all Mankind would be Engaged in an Unnatural State of War. There
could be nothing of Beauty, Proportion, Strength, Unity, Order in Societies:
Liberty and Property would be Exposed to fatal Invasions. The Floodgates of
Lusts would be open, and a Deluge of Sin and Woe would Sweep away all that is
pleasant and desirable in the World. Men would be like Fishes in the Sea, and
as Beasts in the Wilderness, the greater devour the less. Was it not a Terrible
Day with Israel, when that Complaint was moaned out? There was no King in
Israel, but every one did that which was right in his own Eyes. GOD by
appointing Government has consulted the good of the World. Levelism, is
therefore an open Defiance to GOD, his Wisdom and Will, as well as the Reason
of Mankind. Thus we have seen the Divine Original of Government asserted: and
this is no undue Complement to Government for GOD Himself has said it: I said
ye are Gods. And so we come to the Second Article to be considered, viz.

II. We are to consider the Character and Title put upon Rulers. They are Gods
and Children of the Most High: And it is not an Empty Name, but full both of
Dignity and Duty. This Character asserted, and adorned by the virtues it leads
to, will give us the most beautiful view of the Glory of Rulers; which they may
pursue with the greatest Stretch of all their Powers.

And if we would take a view of what of Glory and Duty is included in this
Divine Character and Name, that GOD has put upon them; Let us Consider three
things, which seem Evidently intended, and pointed at in this Title, and under
which the Glory of their Character is comprehended.

1. This Character intends that Rulers are Gods, as they are Gods Vicegerents,
and Deputies, and as they bear his visible Image.

2. It Suggests that the Design of the Institution of Civil Government is, That
Rulers may be Gods to a People, i. e. Public and great Blessings.

3. It Suggests that Rulers can only Assert the Dignity of their Character; and
answer the End of their Institution by Imitating the Blessed GOD, and making
his Government, their Pattern, and Standard. Nothing less I think can be
intended in this Title; and hardly any thing beyond, but what may be reduced
under one or other of these Heads. Which we are now to Consider.

I. Rulers are Gods, as they are GOD's Vicegerents, and bear his Visible Image.
These stand in GOD's Place, represent his Person, and act by his Authority, and
Commission. The Power of the greatest Potentate on Earth is not Inherent in
him, but is a Derivative; and but a faint Beam of that Power which is in GOD in
it is full force and Light, Essentially and Independently: For GOD is the Source
and Original of all Power; there is no Power but what is derived from him,
depends on him, is limited by him, and is subordinate to him, and accountable.
GOD is the Supreme Governor among the Nations; It is his Prerogative to Rule
in the Kingdoms of Men; and has Right, as well as Might, to give them to whom
he Pleases, to Set up, and Spurn down Rulers at Pleasure; and when he pours
Contempt upon Princes, cuts asunder their Spirits, and is terrible to the Kings
of the Earth, none can say to him what do thou? He has both Authority and
Ability to Govern All by himself, without the Mediation of any Second Being;
but he has chosen in wise Condescension to set up Men of the same Make and
Infirmities with our selves, whose Terrors might not overpower us, to Act in
his Name and Stead: All Government belongs Originally to GOD himself, but he
has deputed and delegated Magistrates to act for him, and in Subordination to
him; and to these his Substitutes he has Communicated Power and Judgment: By
GOD Prove. 8 16.
Princes Rule, Nobles, and all the Judges of the Earth. The Throne they are
Seated on is GOD's. 1 Chronicles. 29. 23. Solomon Sat upon the Throne of the LORD,
as King. It is his Sword of Justice that they are Armed with, and must be
Weilded for him, and in his Service. The Judgment is the LORD's. Deuteronomy. 1. 17.

It is vain indeed to pretend that this Power is derived immediately from GOD;
but mediately in various ways according to the diverse Constitutions of
Kingdoms, and States: It may not be asserted that the particular Persons on
whom the Burden of Government is devolved, are of GOD's special Designation and
Nomination: yet they hold under GOD, they are Gods subordinate to him whose
Name is JEHOVAH; His Authority they are vested with, and his Power they Exert
in the discharge of the Duties of their Station. These are the Shields of the
Earth, and as such belong to GOD. Psalm. 47 ult. Their Power and Work is GOD's.
Hence Jehosaphat from this Consideration made his Charge to his Judges the more
Solemn. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. He said to the Judges; take heed what ye do: for ye
Judge not for Man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the Judgment.

Again, Rulers as they are delegated by GOD, so they bear his Image, and the
visible Impress of his Glory and Greatness. There is not only an Invisible and
Spiritual Image of GOD, which consists in Righteousness and all the Graces of
Holiness: But there is an External and Visible Image of GOD, which consists in
the External Characters of Glory, Power and Majesty; which are impressed on
such, as are Exalted to Rule over men. Agreeably, Rulers are Living Images of
the Great LORD of the World, whose Substitutes they are. A visible Divine Glory
is shed upon them; the bright Rays of Divine Greatness, and Power do incircle
them: which Challenge Awe and Reverence from all about them; and the due
apprehension hereof is enough to inspire Rulers with the most Noble Resolves to
act in a becoming subordination to, and as may make an agreeable Representation
of GOD, with whom is Dominion and Fear.

By their Office, Authority and Power they Participate in a Degree of that
Power, which all the Armies of Heaven stoop before; and hereby make
distinguishing approaches to GOD, and bear some faint Resemblance of him, who
sits on the Throne of Majesty; though after all Infinite and Awful is the
Distance. In this respect Rulers are Gods. And when these External Characters
of Power and Greatness are found in Conjunction with the more Noble Characters
of Inward Greatness, their Title will appear with a Diviner Luster, and their
Authority more Awful and Influential. This is the first thing included in the
Title given them.

2. This Title Suggests, the great. Design of the Institution of Government
among men, is that Rulers may be Gods to a People, i. e. Diffusive Blessings to
the Public: When the Great LORD of the World is pleased to style himself the
GOD of a Person or People, it certainly intends that He will Bless them, and
Promote their Happiness; Employ his Wisdom, Power, Justice and Goodness with
his other Perfections, for their Peace and Prosperity, Security, Protection and
Glory. In conformity to this, Rulers are Gods, when they Employ their
Authority, and Influence, act the Virtues and Powers of Government they are
Endowed with, for the Good and Happiness of the People under their Conduct. To
be great Blessings to Men is to be Gods to them. And such have most of
Divinity, true Majesty and Glory, as dispense the most benign and cherishing
Influences upon all about them; and are most useful and serviceable to the true
Interest of the State they stand related to. Power and Knowledge will not alone
constitute a Divine Greatness; These are found to a great degree in the most
Malignant Beings, who are nothing but Opposition to the Nature, and Government
of GOD. It is not a true Divine Greatness and Superiority to have more Power,
Riches and Knowledge than others; but to Employ all these Advantages to do more
Good to the World; and be greater blessings to those under their Inspection.
Now Greatness appears with Advantage; such are like the Great Light of Heaven
which dispenses its Influences far and wide; they are as a Public Fountain,
whose waters flow down to all; and the whole People drink of them, and are
refreshed thereby; and every one will be ready to own the Character they bear,
style them Gods, and Children of the Highest.

And thus this Splended Title, given to Rulers, leads us to the Original design
of their Institution, which is the Public Good. It tells us what the Governing
design of Government ought to be in all acts of Power whether Legislative or
Executive: What Blessings all Rulers ought to be, and Good Ones will be to a
People. Their Power is designed but as Romans 13. 4.
a Ministry under GOD, for the good of Men: That under their shadow they may
have sweet Repose, Lead Quiet and Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty:
They are to be the Guardians of their Religion and Property, their Liberties,
Civil and Sacred: That in their Watchfulness, Care, and many Fatigues, their
People may securely sit under their own Vines and Figtrees, take their Rest,
and enjoy their Lives, Estates, Friends, and innocent Pleasures without
Annoyance. That Rulers are to be the Guardian Angels of the State to Watch
over, and Minister to it: As the Lights of the World to direct, warm and
cherish all under their Influence; to be as the Foundations, and Pillars of a
building; who are to preserve the State from a Dissolution.

The very Nature of things, and the Primary Intention of GOD in the Ordination
of Civil Government, certainly points us to the general Happiness and
Prosperity, which Rulers ought to have in view. The true measure of Government
we have agreeably laid down by the Spirit of GOD, 2 Samuel 23. 3. As a Rule over
Men, which is thus descanted on by Dr. Barnet.
a Masterly hand. It is a Rule, and not an Absolute Dominion, or an Arbitrary
Power, without Laws and Measures; It is a Rule over Men, and not a Power like
that, which we have over Beasts, Rule suited to the Principles of Reason, to
the Nature of Man, and the Ends of Civil Society; it is a Conduct over free and
reasonable Beings, who need indeed to be Governed, but ought not to be Broken
by the force, and weight of Power.

It was never designed either by GOD or Men; that some should be advanced to
Power and Dignity, to raise their particular Glory, either in Opposition to, or
Separation from the happiness of the Public. Rulers have Power, but it is a
limited Authority; limited by the Will of GOD, and Right Reason, by the General
Rules of Government, and the particular Laws Stated in a Land. Government was
never ordained that Some men might have Advantage to be Beasts of Prey, to the
feebler part of Mankind; nor that Others should be under a necessity of
becoming Beasts of Burden; for this would be subversive of the very End of all
Rule. Men enjoy the Name and Power of GOD, not to make themselves Great and
Terrible; to make any tremble but the Evil doer; not that they may have the
Opportunity to satisfy the Ravenous Lusts of Dominion, Pride and Covetousness:
for thus they would bear the Character and Image, not of GOD, but of the Grand
Enemy and Destroyer of Mankind. But the design of all the Power, Greatness, and
Superiority communicated to them from GOD, is that they may approve themselves
Gods to the World, i. e. the Greatest Benefactors. When Rulers answer therefore
this Character, they will have no greater joy than to see their People flourish
in Wealth, Strength and Peace; famous for all those Virtues of Righteousness,
that Exalt a Nation: They will make the true Glory and Prosperity of their
People their Last view in all their Administrations; and Esteem it as their Own
Glory; and with the most sensible refreshment, in the most Noble and Divine
sense, partal^^ of the Public happiness, and of every part, as if the whole
were their own Propriety. Such are Gods, and the Most High will own them his
Children. This is the End of Government, and is the Second thing comprehended
in the Divine Character put on them. We now come to the Third and Last thing
included in this Title.

3. It suggests that Rulers can only Assert the Dignity of their Character, and
Answer the End of their Institution, by Imitating the blessed GOD, and making
his Government their Pattern and Standard. They must be God-like, in their
Personal Endowments and Public Managements. They must be Gods by resembling
the blessed GOD in the Personal Excellencies of their Minds, in those Virtues
and Graces, which are the Image of GOD on the Soul. External Dignity challenges
Inherent Excellency: The greatest Glory, Perfection, Beauty and Nobility, must
consist in a conformity to the Communicable Perfections, and Beauties of the
Divine Nature; and the Participations of these Virtues, and Divine Characters,
which are Propounded for the Reasonable Creatures Imitation in his Manner and
Measure. Without this Resemblance they will foully slurr their Character,
reproach Government, and render it Ridiculous: Folly set in great Dignity will
make but an odd Figure; and afford a spectacle which will be rather hooted at,
than reverenced and obeyed.

And as they are to Imitate GOD in the Sublime qualities of the Mind; so in
their Administrations. Rulers must set GODS Government before them, and
endeavor to Form themselves in their whole Management by this perfect Model.
Their Rule must be a Lively Emblem of the Beauty and Excellency, Perfection and
Advantage of GODS Government.

Here it is necessary to observe, that GOD, though He be Lord Paramount of Heaven
and Earth; and his Sovereignty unaccountable, being Infinite, Absolute and
Independent; yet He always Exercises his Supreme Authority according to the
Rules of the most Consummate Wisdom, Spotless Righteousness, Unblemished
Integrity, and Diffusive Goodness. He governs not by unaccountable Will, or
inconstant humor, which are imperfections his Nature cannot suffer, but by
Stable Measures, as may best suit the Nature and Circumstances of his Subjects,
and the Noble End of his Government.

Hence Rulers, of all Orders, ought to conform to and regulate themselves in
all their Administrations, by this Divine Standard. Their Government should be
a Transcript, and Visible Image of the Divine Rule. And the more Exactly they
conform to this Measure; the nearer they approach in their Rule over Men to the
Divine Pattern; the brighter will be the Characters of Divine Glory reflected
on them; This Imitation of GOD is necessary to Maintain the just honors of
their Station, to answer the End of their Elevation, and the design of
Government it self. And here I shall mention a few Capital Articles, in which
Rulers as Gods, are to Imitate the Glorious GOD: All which will be found
Essential to the Character of Gods, imprinted on them. As,

I. As Gods they must be Wise and Skillful. The Supreme Governor of the World
is the Only Wise GOD: 1 Timothy 6. 17. He is Wisdom in the Abstract: Prove 8. 14.
Counsel is Mine, and Sound Wisdom: I am Understanding. This Attribute appears
with Surprising brightness in the Government of the World. When the Methods of
Providence are most Unsearchable, there is then Reason to cry out; Oh the
depth! both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! He fully understands the
Nature, and Powers of all Creatures; all things in their several Relations and
Dependencies, the fitness of Means to propounded Ends; and hence acts all
things according to the Rules of the most Consummate Wisdom; and has in all
Ages so turned the Wheels of Providence, as might suit the End of Government:
and as became the infallible Conduct of Him, who is Great in Counsel, That is
placed above on the THRONE.

In proprotion, Rulers on Earth are Gods, because they are herein to resemble
the Eternal KING, the only Wise GOD; and must partake of his Wisdom. This
qualification Moses gives of Rulers: Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Take ye Wise and
Understanding Men. The want of Skill and Prudence in Rulers, will bring
Government into Contempt: The End of Rule cannot be attained, nor the Dignity of
their Station supported. Blind Guides, unskilful Pilots are a Solecism in
terms; and threaten no common mischief to those that are under their Conduct.
It is condemned by the wife Socrates, as an Error too common in the World, yet
most fatal to the good of it; that while several years are thought little
enough to be spent in acquiring the skill of any Trade, how Mean and Mechanical
so ever it may be; yet, in case of Public Administrations of Government, which
of all Professions has most of Difficulty and Intricacy, every one is ready to
think himself abundantly qualifyed; and such, as are of very Indifferent
improvements in Knowledge, are too often Exalted, and set in Places of Dignity.
It is a judgment, bigg with many Woes, when Isaiah 3 3. 4.
God takes away the Prudent from a People, and gives them Children to be their
Princes, and Babes to Rule over them. The wise Man Pronounces a Woe upon such a
People: Eccl. 10. 16. Woe unto thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child.

On the contrary, it is an happy Omen upon a Land, when Rulers are like the
Heads of Issachar: 1 Chronicles. 12. 32
Men that had Understanding of the Times, to Know what Israel ought to do. Ubi
Praeses fuerit Philosophus, ibi Civitas Erit faelix*
That City, says a Wise Heathen, is happy, whose Governor is a Philosopher, i.
e. a Man of Wisdom. And a greater Philosopher has assured us, that by a Man of
Understanding the State of a Land is prolonged, Prove. 28. 2. Such Rulers are
singular blessings, which GOD, in love to a People, sometimes blesses them
with. Thus the Queen of Sheba pronounces Israel happy in the Wisdom of solomon:
2 Chronicles. 9. 7. Happy are these thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, which
stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. This will render the
Persons of Rulers Venerable in the Esteem of their People; and their Authority
more forcible and awful. 1 King. 3. 28.
Thus all Israel feared Solomon, for they saw the Wisdom of GOD was in him. All
other Endowments, requisite for Government, will be but of little, and
uncertain use without Prudence. Zeal and Courage without skill to direct their
influences, and temper their heat, will many times do more harm than good; they
will either mistake their object, or exceed in degree; which too often causes
no small confusions. Integrity, and good Intention are not sufficient to secure
Government from contempt, nor the State from Ruin, without a Spirit of
Judgment to direct the choice of proper Means for the Public safety: This
Skill and Prudence gives a luster to other Excellences that qualify Men for
Government, and render them influential to the happiness of a Common Wealth. It
was David's Glory, and Isreal's safety; that he was Wise as an Angel of GOD; and
guided them by the Skilfulness of his hands, as well as according to the
Integrity of his heart, Psalm. 78. 72.

It must be acknowledged, that the same degree of Wisdom, nay the same kind of
Knowledge, is not equally necessary to every Ruler: As there are different
Degrees and Stations in Government; so Wisdom has its several gradations; and
is, as to Sort, and Degree, to be proportioned to the several Characters, and
Offices that are sustained: That Knowledge that may qualify for the Counsel
Board, may not for the Tribunal of Justice: Superior Wisdom is requisite for a
Superior Station in Government: Yet every Order of Rulers must have a due
proportion of it.

Again, The State and Circumstance of a People may be more perplexed,
difficult, and intricate at one Day than an other; either by reason of the
darkness and intricacy of Divine Providence, or the prevalency of evil humors
among a People themselves: and such a day requires greater force and light of
Understanding in Rulers: A Storm requires greater skill than a calm.

Thus the style of Gods requires that Rulers resemble GOD in this Divine
Excellency, that they may maintain their Glory, and answer the End of their
Creation. There must be Wisdom to judge what Laws are proper to be made, and
what Sanctions are proper to enforce them; there must be Wisdom to understand
the Public Powers, and Private Rights and Privileges to be preserved, and the
Laws which are to be Executed: There is an happy Dexterity and Skill in
governing, and administering the affairs of the Public to the best advantage;
which is a rare Talent, which Rulers are allowed to Covet. This comprehends in
it a suitable Knowledge of the complexion and humors of the People committed to
their trust; what Distempers they are most liable to, and what Remedies most
proper for them, and what the right Seasons to make the Applications whether
for Prevention, or after Remedy: There must be skill in the general Maxims of
Government, and Prudence in a pertinent Application of these to Emergent cases,
that by an orderly conduct the great affairs and designs of a State, be carry^d
on to an happy Conclusion: There is to this requisite a Penetrating Sagacity to
foresee Public dangers, and a seasonable Precaution to guard against them: And
for this End Rulers should be men of deep Thought, good Experience, and of
great Presence of Mind; that they may not be shoved beyond their reason by any
unexpected Emergencies; but that they may maintain their temper unshockt, and
well laid designs unbroken, what ever may assault them.

Thus, they that are Gods among Men must labor to partake of Divine Wisdom,
and resemble GOD, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. Thus
God-like was Joseph, and Daniel; an Excellent Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom,
like to GOD, was found in them; On the account of which they were raised to the
first Seat of Government; Joseph in Egypt, and Daniel in the Court of Babylon
and Persia. And when Rulers are destitute of this Excellency, their Dignity
will be degraded, their Duty neglected, and will too well deserve the Character
given of Coniah, not Gods, but despised broken Idols; Vessels, wherein is no
pleasure, Jer. 22. 28.

2. Rulers, as Gods, must be Righteous and Just in all their Administrations.

The Scepter of GODS Throne is a Scepter of Righteousness: Clouds and Darkness
many times incircle the Throne of Heaven, yet RIGHTEOUSNESS and Judgment are
always the Habitation thereof: For he is the Just GOD, and can do no wrong. And
nothing can be more opposite to the Divine Government, than when Iniquity
sits in the Seat of Justice; and Oppression is found in the Place of
Judgment. Jehosophat enforces his charge upon his Judges with the Consideration
of the Divine Righteousness, and Impartiality. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Take heed
what you do, for ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment: Wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you: for there is no
iniquity with the Lord God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts.

Herein Rulers are to approve themselves Gods. It is a Statute of the Great
Lawgiver of the World, that they which Rule over Men be Just, 2 Samuel 23. 3.
Righteousness is the Glory of GOD; and an Imitation of Him herein will be the
honor of Rulers, and the happiness of the Ruled. Knowledge without Justice
will degenerate into Craft and Subtility, which can never be safe for the
Public: where Righteousness is wanting, the deeper the Management, the more
Pernicious the Power.

The Title of Gods, requires, that Rulers be like Job* that Great Man of the
East, Job 29. 14. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me: My judgment was a
Robe and Diadem. This quality has consecrated the Name of Aristides; and he is
justly celebrated by the Plutarch in vita Aristid.
Historian, that when other great Men of the World, had assumed Names that
carried in them Power and Violence; as Thunderers, Conquerors, Destroyers of
Cities, Hawks and Eagles, He assumed the more Kingly and Divine Appellation of
Just. And the Historian, though an Heathen, well descants upon the Divine
Excellency of Justice; and says, Justice makes such as are in Power and
Authority to lead the Life of a God; but the contrary that of a Beast. Herein
therefore the Rule GOD has appointed over Men, should be a fair Transcript of
the Righteousness and Equity of the Divine Administrations. Agreeably the
Wisdom of Heaven has taught us, that the Throne is Established by
Righteousness, Prove. 16. 12. And GOD by the Prophet calls upon Rulers: Amos 5.
24. Let Judgment run down as waters, and Righteousness as a mighty stream.
Judgment run down as waters, Q D. That Rulers are to be Living Fountains of
Justice among men, and Righteousness must flow from them in their
Administrations as naturally, fully, and freely as Streams from a Living
Fountain, with Ease and Plenty, and for Universal use; where all may come and
drink, and be refreshed; Streams that will Water and Cherish all; guard and
secure what ever is good among a People, and make it with their moisture to
thrive and flourish; and Righteousness as a mighty Stream: as an unpassible
River. So the Seventy read it, i. e. Let the Streams of Justice be so deep and
wide that the biggest, boldest and most subtle Transgressors may despair to
leap over, or ford them: But be stopped in their Career, and brought to a stand
by them. As a Land flood, as some others Read it, which rolls down with
irresistible Rapidity, Strength and Violence, and bears away all Opposition
before it: thus the Administrations of Justice must proceed with that Zeal,
Resolution and Force as to overcome all Impediments, Discouragements and
Temptations, that Oppose. This would give a State the Reputation of a City of
Righteousness, and a Faithful City. Hence, this Character of Rulers requires
that Righteousness be the Girdle of their Loins: That they take care that
Righteous Laws be Enacted, none but such, and all such, as are necessary for
the Safety of the Religion and Liberties of a People: Justice must be Exercised
in guarding the Laws with Righteous Penalties, from the Outrages and Insults of
the Sons of Belial: There must be Righteousness in the Execution of the Laws,
both in matters of Civil Justice, and Criminal: Rulers must be Just to GOD in
maintaining His Right; to their own Characters, and to their People; Just to
the Laws, and the Established Constitution they are under; and Subordinate
Rulers must be Just to their Prince, as well as to the whole Community, and
every Member of it: They must take care that they do not Pervert Justice
themselves, nor suffer others under them to Pervert it, and turn Judgment into
Wormwood; that GOD may not complain that He looked for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry.

Hence their Administrations of justice must be with Impartiality; for this is
Divine. This Charge Moses gave to Rulers, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye shall not respect
Persons in Judgment; but you shall hear the Small as well as the Great; You
shall not be afraid of the face of Man, for the Judgment is GOD's. A Criminal
Partiality in Rulers portends Ruin to a State. It becomes Rulers as Gods not
to be swayed by Personal Favor or Prejudice, by Private Advantages, and Views.
Friendship must not bias Rulers; but they must be like Levi know neither
Father nor Mother, Brother nor Sister in the cause of Justice. There is good
Instruction in the Carriage of that Heathen, who upon his Advancement into
Government, took a solemn Farewell of his Friends and Relations; intimating
thereby that they must not expect from him any Regards in the Discharge of his
Office, but what others should have an equal Claim to. And it was a just
Rebuke, that Rutilius a Noble Roman, gave to a particular Friend, who
Reproached him for Breach of Friendship, in denying his Unjust Petition; viz.
that he could with Ease bear the loss of such a Friend, whose Friendship was to
be preserved on such hard Terms, as breaking through the Rules of Justice and
Honor. To accept Persons in Judgment is not good, Prove 24. 25. Rulers must not
be lead out of the way of Just and Right, either by undue Favor to Friends, or
unjust Prejudice against Enemies. There is also a Criminal Tenderness and
Compassion to the Poor, as well as a Faulty Respect to the Rich, which is
equally an Enemy to Justice, and must be avoided: The Small as well as Great
are to be heard; yet the Small no more than Great to be Respected in their
Cause.

Again, Rulers are not to be moved by Fear; they must not fear the Faces of
men. Courage is a necessary Qualification in a Ruler. The Balances of Justice
should be held steadily; but this cannot be where Fear makes the Heart and Hand
to tremble. They that are like Ephraim, Silly Doves, without an Heart, are a
Reproach to Government; and can never maintain the Honor, nor discharge the
Duties of their Character. The Sword of Justice in a Cowards Hand will never
be, either a Protection to the Innocent, or Terror to the Guilty.

Again, As Gods they must not be influenced by Private Advantage: It is
ungodlike for Rulers to Cry, Give, Give. It is inconsistent with the End of
Rule, and will be a deep stain upon Government; when Justice is Bought and
Sold: and Exposes Rulers to the Rebukes of a Righteous GOD; for the Tabernacles
of Bribery peculiarly ly open to the Devouring Flames of Heaven. And how
unbecoming it will be such, who bear the Name of GOD upon them thus to
Prostitute Justice! Thus Impartial ought Rulers to be in their Administrations.
And it is but what the Reason of mankind approves of. And the Admonitions
hereof were given by the Thebans, who were wont to pourtray their Rulers Blind
and without Hands; Blind that they might not respect Persons, and without
Hands, that they might receive no Gifts; which the Wise man tells us will Blind
the Eyes of the Wise.

Again, As Rulers must Administer Justice with Impartiality, so they must
Temper Justice with Lenity; for this is to be like GOD: Lenity to Particular
Persons, sometimes may be a Public Injury: yet sometimes Mercy is Justice; and
not to show it would be an Injury. Extreme Right is often Extreme Wrong. Rulers
may be overmuch Righteous; when Laws are interpreted in their utmost Rigor,
and accordingly Executed, when there is a Latitude in the Law, and the End
might be obtained by taking it in the most Favorable sense; Mercy preserves
the King, and upholds his Throne, Prove. 20. 28. All Laws must not, like Draco's
be writ in Blood. Punishments must be proportioned to the Nature, and degree of
Crimes. There are the Rods as well as Axes of Rulers. Thus it is Divine in
Rulers to temper the severity of Justice with Clemency: It is an Imitation of
GOD; for Judgment is GOD's strange Work; but Mercy is his Delight.

3. As Gods a Fatherly Affection, Tenderness and Compassion to their People
must breathe forth in all their Administrations. This is the Character of GOD's
Government over his People. In all their Affliction he is Afflicted for them:
And when he is constrained to chastize them, it is with a Fathers hand and
bowels.

And this will be the Glory of Gods on Earth, to bear such a Paternal affection
to a People as their Children. Of old the Rulers, among several Nations,
gloryed in the Name of Fathers, as the most honorable Title that could be
given them. Thus every King among the Philistines, upon their advancement
assumed the appellation of Abimelech; the English of which is, the King my
Father. Among the Romans, their Consuls, Generals, and afterward their
Emperors, were most ambitious of the Name of Fathers, as the brightest Title of
Honor. Vide Le Compte's Memoirs.
And the best as well latest accounts of China tell us, that it is a standing
Maxim of that Government, that Kings are properly the Fathers of their People,
and not Masters placed in the Throne to be Served by Slaves: And this Idea of
their Prince is so deeply imprinted in the Minds of all; that when any
Panegyric is made in praise of the Emperor, it is upon this head of his
affection to his People; and form his Character not from his skill in War, and
Politics, but as he has approved himself a Father to them. And this well
becomes the Character of all Rulers, if they would conform themselves to the
Divine. Their conduct must be gentle, suited to the Infirmities of the State.
They must Sympathize with their People in all their difficulties, sorrows; and
sensibly resent all the Evil they groan under; even when they suffer through
their own default, and cannot be persuaded by Rulers from those Measures that
prove fatal to them: They must be tender of them when infected with evil
humors, and the distempers of a perverse Spirit. Their bowels of Compassion
must peculiarly move toward them, when they are under deep Apostacies from
God, and under terrible impressions of his Wrath, both in Temporal Judgments,
and Spiritual Plagues. As the Head in the Natural body feels the uneasy State
of the whole and each Member; so these are to have a most sensible Share, in
all the losses, reproaches, burdens and dangers, that annoy their People; and
their tenderness must be Expressed in taking the best measures for their Relief
and Comfort.

This Paternal Affection appeared in Moses, when GOD's Wrath was breaking in
upon the Camp of Israel. So in David when the destroying Angel had made such
desolations among the Tribes of his People. As Fathers Rulers must be like the
Charitable Samaritan pour Wine and Oil into the Wounds of their People, and
bind them up: If once a Breach be made they must thrust into the Gap; If the
Plague be begun, they must hasten an Atonement: Thus like Job they must Comfort
the Mourners. Thus they will resemble GOD, who is full of Fatherly compassion;
who Delivers the needy, the poor also, and him, that has no helper.

4. As Gods, they must render themselves Worthy the Trust and Confidence of
their People. It is the Prerogative of the EVERLASTING ROCK, GOD ALSUFFICIENT,
to deserve the Absolute dependence, and Entire confidence of the Rational
Creature: And it is his Glory to be Styled the GOD of hope, the Confidence of
the Ends of the Earth; under the Shadow of whose wings men may with Security
trust; on whom they may devolve all their cares.

And both the Glory of Rulers, and the End of Government, require that those
that are appointed Gods on Earth resemble GOD herein. The Roman Orator has
Stated it as the Height of Glory to Merit that Esteem and Reverence of Men, as
to be trusted by them. That a People may with Satisfaction, in Subordination to
GOD, commit their Lives, Liberties, Religion, and Estate to their
Guardian-ship, and Patronage. Now besides the Endowments already mentioned,
there are more peculiarly three Qualifications in Rulers necessary to create,
and conciliate this Esteem and Confidence; in which they are to assert the
Glory of their Character, and Imitate GOD: viz. Truth and Integrity, Diligence
and Activity in their Post; and a Steady Conduct.

There is requisite Truth and Integrity. It is one Essential Character of the
Supreme Being that He is a GOD of Truth, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. And Jethro makes it a
necessary qualification for Magistrates, Exodus 18. 21. That they be Men of
Truth. It was David's commendation, that he led GOD's People according to the
Integrity of his heart, Psalm. 78. ult. Without this, Knowledge, Policy and
Power are not Virtues sufficient to demand this Trust and Confidence. Knowledge
without this Integrity will render men suspected; and power will render them
only formidable; But Truth and Integrity will put a Divine luster upon both. It
is a crocked Maxim in Politics, Qui nescit dissimulate, nescit regnare.
That the Art of Dissimulation is Essential to the skill of Governing. On the
contrary Rulers must have a Sacred regard to the Rules of Truth: There must be
Truth in their Words, Promises, and Oaths; their Deportment without Disguise;
without the little Arts of Simulation or Dissimulation; neither pretending what
is not, nor concealing or disguising what is. Men of falsehood bear the Image
of the Father of Lies. But nothing ought to be more firm than the Truth and
Word of Government. Such only are fit to Execute the Judgment of Truth in the
Gates. This is to be like the Most High, the True GOD; Such only can Expect the
confidence of a People: For falsehood, Hypocrisy and Deceit remove the
foundations of Confidence.

Again, To gain this Trust there is requisite in Rulers Vigilance, Activity,
and an Awakened Application to the duties of their Post. The GOD, and Governor
of Israel does never slumber, nor is He ever weary or faint, but watches over
his People night and day. A Pattern for such, as Rule over Men. A Sluggard, who
keeps his Arms folded, is unfit for Government. It is the Command of Heaven
that Rulers rule with Diligence: and Attend Continually on this very thing:
Romans 12. 8 and 13. 6. To Rule is the Work of GOD, and his Work must not be done
Negligently. It is the saying of the First of the Grecian Poets, Homer* Iliad
(...)
That a Public Counselor may not Sleep a whole night. While others Sleep
Magistrates must Watch; while others are secure in their Cabin, these must be
at the Helm all Weathers. They must be Vigilant to fore see Public dangers,
and Industrious to prevent them; to observe Advantages, and to improve them for
the good of the Commonwealth. They may not be slothful in business if worthy
of the Confidence of a People. Sloth, Ease and Negligence in Rulers will as
infallibly ruin a State, as evil designs. Slothful Rulers will give a loose to
the Reins of Government; the Sword of Justice will rust in the Scabbard, and be
neither a Terror to Evildoers, not an Encouragement to them that do well.
Hence a drousy and languishing Age not the fittest for Public business: But
that Age that is best for address and dispatch in Execution, and vigor as well
as Sedateness in Counsel.

Again, A Steady Conduct in all their Administrations is necessary to create a
Confidence. They must govern themselves by unalterable principles, and fixed
Rules, and not by unaccountable humors, or arbitrary will, which is liable to
the greatest levity and inconstancy. Rulers must not be Trimmers, or
Time-servers; and vary according to the humors of the Giddy Populace, which
are as variable as the Weather Glass. They are Foundations of a State, and
therefore must be fixed, and not totter and shake: They are Pillars, and
Pillars must not bend like the Osyer, but stand unshaken like the aged Oak;
They are Lights that are set on High, and must approve themselves fixed in
their Orb, and move like the Sun, who as a Giant runs his race, and nothing can
turn him aside. These must suffer nothing to disconcert them, or break their
well digested measures: Neither fraud nor violence, neither flattery nor
calumny must be able to warp them. That a People may know what to trust to, and
expect; and this is Divine; for GOD governs by fixed Rule.

Thus Rulers are by their Zeal for Truth, their Activity, Vigilance, and
Steadiness to create a Confidence in them; and their People will find their
Persons, and Interests safe under their Administration, and can securely repose
themselves under their Shadow.

5. As Gods, they must have the same Noble Designs and Purposes in View, that
GOD has. They are by Office GOD's Ministers, and it becomes the Eyes of
Servants to be on the hand of their Masters. And ought to carry on the same
designs that GOD does in (...) Government; and study to form their
Administrations hereto. GOD's Government tends to the good of the World; and is
especially designed for the good of his Children, and therein the Exaltation of
His Own Name. He has laid this Government on the Shoulders of His ONLY SON,
who is the MAN upon the Throne above the Firmament, according to whose
direction the Wheels and Living Creatures move below: Now GOD has made him Head
over all things for the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. He Rules Devils, that they may be
restrained from Effecting their Malicious designs against the Church; He Sways
the Empire over Good Angels, that they may Minister to his chosen Inheritance.
Civil Rulers are to act under Christ, and Ultimately to aim at the same design,
for which He has received All Power in Heaven and Earth: Their Government must
be subordinated, and subservient to his. It is the Wisdom of Kings to fear,
serve, and submit to the Son: To carry on Cross designs will incur the guilt of
setting themselves, and taking counsel against the LORD, and H^^ CHRIST. [
Psalm. 2.] Hence Rulers must have an Inviolable regard to the Laws of GOD; and
Employ all their Power to advance His Kingdom; to guard Religion from the
assaults, and open Defiances of the Immoral, and Profane. They should maintain
the just Honors GOD has put upon His Day, His Institutions, and the Stewards
of His House. To neglect these designs is to betray them; and to betray them
will be resented as Treason and Rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven. And
hence the Fear of GOD is a necessary qualification for those that are called to
Rule over Men, 2 Samuel 23.3. This Fear of GOD is not to be only a Swaying Motive
to their duty, but this Fear must be made the Rule of their Government, as well
as Principle that acts them. And when they are possessed of these Divine
Principles, and Designs, and accordingly regulate the Exercise of their Power,
they are God-like, and act as those that Rule for GOD.

6. As Gods, they must set their People Good Examples. The Blessed GOD is the
Pattern and Standard of all Perfection, in Conformity to whom the Perfection
and Glory of Man his Subject does consist: Hence we have these Precepts, To be
Holy as He is Holy; to be Merciful as GOD is Merciful; and to be Followers, or
Imitators of GOD as dear Children. Herein Rulers must maintain their Character,
and approve themselves Gods among men. They must be Conspicuous Examples of
Piety, Justice, Sobriety; of Zeal for the Glory of GOD, His Day, House and
Ordinances. Good Manners must not only be legible in their Laws, but also in
their Lives. A Ruler is sometimes called by GOD a Seal or Signet, and possibly
one reason may be, because what ever is engraven on them will leave its
impression on their People: and therefore Rulers had need take care that they
bear the Signature of undissembled Holiness, that the Impression on those under
them may be holy. Superiors by their Example give Laws to men; Their virtuous
Actions may do more to Reform a vicious Age, than all other Methods. The good
Lives of such carry Soverignty and Authority in them; they give Life, Light and
Heat to Precept; they afford Motive and Incentive to the Virtuous; but reproach
and upbraid the Vicious. Virtue in the Lives of men of Figure and Power appears
with peculiar charms, and beauty: There is a lovely, attractive representation
of Religion when it shines in the Conversation of the Great. It now appears
with beams of Greatness; and becomes more Visible and Conspicuous, and has a
direct tendency to make lasting impressions on others. This will strengthen the
Authority of Rulers, and render their Administrations influential to all good
designs. And the Honor of Government, the design of its Institution can never
be secure, unless they thus resemble GOD.

On the other side, the Evil Examples of Rulers weaken the hands of Government,
and spread a deadly Infection, which wastes at noon day. These make Vice
reputable, and charming; give authority to it, take off the restraint of fear
and shame, and render all Endeavors to suppress it feeble; and so harden the
vile in their Evil ways. The Evil Lives of men of Name and Figure are a
Public Invitation to others to follow them; and are as Authentic Pasports to
all manner of Iniquity; and a professed Patronage of Vice and Immorality. For
as Obsequij quoddam Genus Regis vitia imitari. La^tan.
One of the Fathers observes, Subjects account it a proper part of their
Submission and Deference to Rulers to imitate their Vices: Hence we shall
always find among the Israelites that Religion flourished, or languish't
according to the Disposition and Practice of their Kings. And it is not to be
wondered, if Magistrates are Rulers of Sodom, that those under their Conduct be
the People of Gomorrah. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his Servants are
wicked, Prove. 29. 12. Thus if Rulers be virtuous, they are as the Lights of the
World, they will direct their People into the paths of Virtue and Glory; but if
Vicious, they are like Baleful Comets, that spread Plague and Desolations through
a Land by their Malignant Influences. Upon the whole, we must conclude that
such as have the style of Gods, ought, as GOD does, to set their People good
Examples: Otherwise they will corrupt the beauty, stain the Honor, which GOD
has put on them; and render themselves unworthy of the Name of Gods.

Thus we have taken a view of what is included and pointed at in the Divine
Title, that GOD has Characterized Civil Rulers by; which was the Second thing
observed in the Text. We may proceed to the Third.

III. That though Rulers are Gods, yet they are liable to Mortality, and the
necessary Consequents thereof, as Men. This truth is no Secret, but lies open
to the Observation of all; that to Essay an Elaborate Confirmation of it is
needless: However, it cannot be improper by a few hints to Endeavor to awaken a
lively sense hereof, that may affect the heart and life.

The Greatest Men are but Spirits in Flesh: They are of the same Make and
Constitution with others; That Decree of Heaven, Heb. 9. 27. has the same
aspect upon them, as upon the meanest, and may not be disanulled. They are born
under the guilt of Sin, and the sentence of Death; and they bring into the
World with them the Seeds of Mortality; which will in a little time burst a
sunder the bands by which the Soul and Body are held in Vit^l Union. They are
obnoxious to the same Diseases, Violences, and Casualties, as Inferiors are;
and the least of these are sufficient to stop their breath, and turn them to
dust. What Prerogatives they may lay claim to on other accounts; yet here they
stand upon a Level. No External Quality, nor Personal Endowment can be any
Security from the Arrests of the King of Terrors.

Their Power cannot overawe, nor their Riches bribe Death. Where are all those
Sons of Fame, the Mighty, Rich and Honorable, we read of in Story! The Kings,
and Princes that filled their houses with Gold and Silver, and the Counselors
of the Earth! Are they not gone to Sleep in those desolate Places they built
for themselves! Are not all the Bright Stars of the Morning covered with the
dark Cloud of Corruption! Where are those Children of Pride and Oppression, who
made the Earth to tremble, shook Kingdoms, made the World as a Wilderness, and
destroyed the Cities thereof! How are they fallen, their pomp brought down to
the Grave, and become as weak as the meanest of their Vassals! The Worm is
spread under them, and the Worm covers them. Again, Wisdom and Policy cannot
protect them from Mortality; for the Wise die as well as the Fool. Courage will
not; for Death cannot be Conquered but by that Prince of Life, who has
triumphed over Death, and is the Life and the Resurrection: So that after all
their breath must go forth, and they return to Corruption.

As they are liable to Death, so as Men they are liable to the Consequents of
Mortality. Their Bodies will undergo the same Mortifying Changes and Corruption
in the Land of Darkness, which the Bodies of others undergo. As Men, their
Spirits when separated from their Bodies, will not drop into a State of
inactivity, insensibility; nor shall be arrested with a Mortal Lethargy; but
their Separate Souls, will pass into the Unseen World of Unbodyed Spirits, and
be subject to the Laws and Government, to the Work and Rewards of that World:
They will during that State of Separation be either United to the Society of
Angels and happy Souls, or be herded with the degraded Angels, and unhappy
Spirits of dead men: they will, during this State of Death, either tremble at
the foresight of their reunion to their Ancient Bodies; or wait and long in
this State of Expectancy for the Redemption of their Bodies. As Men, they are
Accountable, as well as Mortal; and must appear before the Tribunal of GOD, who
Respects not the Persons of Princes: A State either of Immortal bless, or
misery Expects them after Death: So that as Men they are to dye, and have
something to fear, or hope for, beyond the Grave.

Thus Death and the inevitable Consequents of it, have an equal Aspect upon
Rulers and Ruled. And what a terrible Rebuke is this to the present Pride and
Grandeur of Gods on Earth? And what happy Influence might the just
Contemplation hereof have to implant and nourish those Seeds of Virtue, which
may give them a blessed Prospect of more Substantial, Weighty and Enduring
Glories in that State, where there shall be no more Death! And this naturally
leads us to the Fourth and last thing observed in our Text.

IV. That it will be of great Advantage to Temper and Qualify the thoughts of
their Dignity, with just Reflections on their Expected Mortality, and its
Consequents.

Now the Advantage of these Reflections may be Considered both as to Rulers and
Ruled.

I. It may be of great Advantage to Rulers; To Temper the thoughts of their
Dignity with just Reflections on their Mortality, and its Consequents. I shall
mention here three Important Points.

As,

(1.) These Reflections will teach Rulers not to over-rate and value their
present Advantages of Honor, and Power over Men. It is of the last Consequence
to them that they do not Place too great a Price upon their present
Circumstances of Superiority: Now these thoughts will read them wise Lessons of
the Vanity of these things; and bring them under a full Conviction of the truth
of the Psalmists Conclusion: Psalm. 39 5. Surely every Man at his best Estate is
altogether Vanity. That cannot be very valuable to Immortal Beings, which is not
durable; but in a little time will be lost. And this is the case of the present
Advantages which men Enjoy above others. Death causes all titles of Honor to
burst into Air and nothing as Empty bubbles. It disarms the Great of all their
Power, and they go naked into the other World. After all their Pomp and Parade
on the stage of Life, they drop into their Graves, and nothing of all their
Glory descends after them. Death wrests the Scepter out of the Monarchs hand,
plucks the Crown from off his head, and turns his Glory into noisome
Putrefaction: and the very forethought of it will stain the Pride of all their
Glory. Hence Right Reflections on their Mortality will suggest to such as Sit
at the upper End of the World, wiser thoughts of their present State of
Exaltation; and will teach them that there can be no true Greatness, but what
is found in Conjunction with Immortalizing Goodness; and that without this
inherent Greatness of Soul, their external advantages of Honor, Power, and
Superiority will signify nothing; unless when abused, and prided in, to make
their Account more terrible; and their Infamy and Shame more deep and
insufferable, when they shall be fixed in the Congregation of GOD's conquered
Enemies.

(2.) These Thoughts will be a Powerful Antidote against the Infection of those
Temptations, that threaten them in their Exalted Stations. Rulers have the same
Lusts within them, as other men; and are beset with much stronger Temptations
to provoke and inflame these Lusts. Satan will be most busy with such to
corrupt and pervert them; and their falls will give the Wrath and Malice of
Hell a distinguishing Triumph. The World with its highest charms, and greatest
advantage to bewitch them: And as they have greater advantages than Others to
pursue the most guilty gratifications; so they have fewer restraints, and less
of obstruction in their way. They have enough to shock and try the most
Established virtue. How many ways are they tempted! And in danger of sullying
their Divine Character, by being lead to Pride and Vanity, Sloth and Luxury,
Covetousness and Oppression. They need to keep the strictest guard, and lay the
severest restraints upon themselves, to secure them from their Spiritual
dangers.

Now just Reflections on Death and its Consequents will awaken in them such
thoughts, as will tend to check, and rein in those lusts, that the charms of
Greatness do excite. If they remember they must dye, how can they grow giddy,
or be unreasonably transported with the glittering Images of their present
honors? Will not this thought damp the force of Temptations to Luxury and
Sensuality; and cool them in the hot pursuit of forbidden pleasures? What
Appetite had Belshazzar, when he saw and understood the hand writing on the
Wall, to carry on the Revel, and complete the debauch? This prospect will pall
the unhallowed Appetite of Dominion, and Gain; and will make them think what
agonies and corvulsions the remembrance of gain gotten by Injustice and
Oppression, will cause in a dying hour; and what inflaming Items, the charge of
Power, Riches, and Honor abused, and perverted, will be at that Impartial
Tribunal they must stand before. Thus these Reflections will be of mighty force
to abate the Edge of Temptation; and they will give them a juster view of
things, as they stand in the Light of the other World: Instructing them, that
if they must dye, and be judged like men, then they may not live like
Creatures, either of Prey or Pleasure. And were these thoughts more frequently
Entertained and Realized by the Superior part of the World, what a mighty
protection would they be from those threatening Evils, which if indulged, will
debase their Character, cloud their Serenity of Conscience, and lay their Souls
waste and desolate.

(3.) These Thoughts of Mortality and its Consequents will be most forcible
Arguments and Motives to engage Rulers so to improve the Advantages of Honor
and Power, as may give them the best prospect of a State of Immortality.
Authority, Riches and Power are great Advantages for Service, and infer the
strongest Obligations hereto, to honor GOD, and do good to the World. Those of
the highest Order in Government are but GOD's Stewards; their Power, Honor and
Influence are Talents committed to them to Occupy, for their Great LORD, till
HE come, when they must account for their improvement: They have not the
Dominion but only the Dispensation of these, as their Masters Goods. And these
well improved will give them a joyous prospect into the Eternal World; and will
secure to them an Euge from their Lord and Judge. Now these Reflections on
Death and its Consequents tend to engage them to a Wise and Faithful
improvement of these Talents committed to them: They will incite them to study
such a Management in their Places, as shall in the Review not Torment but
Comfort them, when the Shadows of Death stretch over them. This Prospect will
make them value their state of Distinction and Superiority, not by its present
glittering Appearance, but by their greater Capacity for Service for GOD, his
Kingdom and People. This will constrain them to think, what good they have
Opportunity to do, that they may not neglect it; but get it done before Death
periods their Seasons of Improvement: It will inspire them with the most noble
purposes; that they may fill up their Places, and be Gods to the World while
they live. In this way their Deathbeds will be Places of Inconceiveable
refreshment; and have confidence in their Appearance before the Son of Man:
Their fidelity will fill all their Powers with the warmest Transports of joy in
that Terrible day of the Lord: while at the same time the Kings of the Earth,
the Great Men, the Rich, and Mighty Men, that have abused and not improved
their Talents, shall stand Trembling before the Supreme bar of CHRIST,
over-powred with the Terrors of the LORD, from whose Wrath Rocks and Mountains
can give no Protection. Oh! that they were thus Wise, that they understood
this, that they would now consider their latter End!

2. These Reflections may be of Service and Advantage to Such as are under
Government. And there are Two Lessons of Wisdom, which the Prospect of Rulers
Mortality will teach a People, more especially. As,

(1.) These Reflections on their Mortality will teach a People to make all
favorable Allowances for the Infirmities, and Defects of their Rulers. And
were this lesson well learnt by a People it would be of no common advantage to
them.

And are they Gods that must dye, surely then we are not to Expect from them
that perfection of Wisdom and Virtue in their Conduct, as if they were Immortal
GOD's; Nor that freedom from Error and Mismanagement as if they were Angels
whose dwellings are not in flesh, those Sons of GOD, who are the Excellency of
Divine Dignity, and the Excellency of Power, who always stand in the Presence
of GOD, and in his Light see Light: nor yet as if they were Unbody'd Spirits,
who have left their Moral Infirmities with their Mortal Bodies here below. A
State of Mortality bespeaks a State of Sin, and Moral Infirmity: for Death is
the punishment of Sin; and were all the Seeds of Sin purged out, Death would
have no power over them. If then they must die as other men; they have the same
principles of Moral as well as Natural Corruption in them, as other men, no
wonder then we many times see these sprout forth in their present State of
Mortality, and obscure the Glory of their Conduct. It is not to be Expected
that they should move in their Sphere with that vigor, activity and
regularity, as if they had put on Immortality, and their Bodies were Endowed
with that Purity, Power and Spirituality, which is to be Expected in the
Resurrection State. It is no wonder they are no more vigilant, steady and
diligent in their work, since they are not Pure Spirits, nor Raised Saints, but
are clogged with Bodies, endowed with Animal Appetites, Inclinations, and
Wants, which are essential to their State of Mortality.

These Thoughts should dispose us to cover the Infirmities of Rulers with a
veil of Charity, and not like Cham discover their Nakedness: they will suggest
that we must not rudely comment and criticize upon their Errors; but make all
the favorable Allowances for the Imperfections, and the force of Temptations,
that they are liable to in their present state; and not blaspheme their
Character, should they not in every Article be proof against them: For then
they must be more than Men, that must dye.

(2.) These Thoughts will teach those under Government, not to place undue
Confidences in the best Rulers. We must not have that dependence on them, or
expectations from them, which are due only to the Eternal, and Immutable GOD.
What is man, whose breath is in his Nostrils! Man who must dye, to be accounted
of! Men of highest degree are not to be trusted to, for their Mortality tells
us they are but a Lie. GOD Himself has given us that Admonition, Psalm. 146. 3,
4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no
help; his breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish. Let them be never so excelling in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
never so full of good and great designs, yet Death comes, and puts an End to
all; and then they can afford no help: when Death comes they can no longer
cover us with their Shadow; no longer be Eyes to the blind, Feet to the lame,
or Fathers to the Widow and Fatherless; for they are become weak as other men.
This Consideration should make us renounce all undue Confidences in those
Rulers, that best deserve the Character of Gods; lest we place them in the
Place of that GOD, who can never Change or Dye: And happy only are such, as
have the Immovable Munition of Rocks for the place of their Defense; and have
the Eternal GOD for their Refuge.

APPLICATION.

USE I. This teaches us the vast Difficulty of the Rulers Province. The most
only fix their Eyes on their outward Splendors and Honors, and dream of
nothing but Ease and Pleasure, Grandeur in all its gay shows; but never think
of that Duty, Work and Business of Government, which is attended with
Difficulties as Great as their Dignity. Their Station is high, and no common
supplies of Grace are necessary for the discharge of the Duties that belong to
their Sphere. They are to act for GOD, in his Name, and so to Represent him as
all that observe them may have more Worthy and Honorable thoughts of GOD, and
his Government; and who is sufficient for this! Especially if it be considered
how many things there are to weaken their hands, and render the burden of
Government more insupportable. There are their own Infirmities, and the ill
Humors of their People; Murmurings, Jealousies, Reproaches, and Discontents:
These made Moses openly Protest before Israel that he was not not able to bear
their Cumbrance, their Burden, and Strife. Deuteronomy. 1. 12. Sometimes a People are
so out of frame that nothing, which is right can please them and how difficult
is the Rulers Province, when there is reason to say, as one among the Heathen
of old, when he refused the place of a Magistrate, viz. That if he Ruled ill he
should offend the Gods; but if well the People. Under the best Circumstances
their Station is attended with uncommon Temptations from within, and without;
that Faithfully to discharge the Duties thereof requires great degrees of
Self-denial, Patience, Humility; that they may act above the Corrupt influences
of present Hopes and Fears; and under all act like GOD; as those that bear his
Image, and approve themselves to be Gods to the world; and go on steady in that
way maugre all Opposition. Hic Labor, hoc Opus est Under a just view of the
Importance, Weight and Difficulty of this work of Government, it may not be
wondered at, if the Olive Tree refuses to leave her Fatness; and the Fig Tree
her Sweetness, to Rule over the Trees of the Wood. Who would choose to quit
their own sweet Tranquillity, and Ease for the restless Cares, and uneasy
Fatigues of Government? Rulers may well be tempted to say, as Isa. 3. 7. I will
not be an Healer to this People; or as Moses, Send, O Lord, I pray thee by the
hand of him whom thou will send, Exodus 4. 13. Their Station is so full of
Duties and Difficulties, that Rulers are the proper Objects of our Prayers and
Pity, and not our Envy.

USE II. Are Rulers Gods, then they must take care not to live below the
Dignity of Men. It will be an indelible Reproach on those that wear the
Character of Gods, to degrade themselves to the state of Beasts. And yet how
patiently is this degradation undergone by many! Gods must not give a loose to
their Lusts; gratify their Criminal Appetites, and Inclinations; Luxury,
Drunkenness and Wantonness must not be indulged, for these are Brutish, and
transform them into Beasts. And hence they must be avoided by Rulers; Gods by
Office may not be less than Men. And when Luxury and Drunkenness are growing
among a People; it would be well if Rulers would avoid, all approaches to it,
and the least appearances of it. It was a wholesome Admonition that Lemuels
Mother gave him, Prove. 31.4,5. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, to drink Wine;
nor for Princes Strong Drink; lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert
Judgment. When Rulers are made Sick with Bottles of Wine; they will stretch out
the hands with Scorners; Hos. 7.5.
and it bodes ill to a Land. Eccl. 10. 16, 17.
But Happy is that LAND, whose Rulers Eat and Drink in Season, for Strength,
and not for Drunkenness.

USE III. This tells us it is an awful Judgment upon a People, when they want
such, as are fit to Support the Character and Dignity of Gods; or when those
that are best Qualified are through Prejudice laid aside. This is too often the
melancholy State of a People. Sometimes though strict search be made for men to
make up the Hedge round a People, and to stand in the Gap, none can be found:
They have no strong Rods for a Scepter to Rule them, Sometimes those that are
best qualified by inward Ability's, and outward Circumstances, are through a
spirit of Prejudice and Partiality overlookt; and Voted unfit to Serve a
People. The Rule of Elections many times is not, Merit, Capacity, and
Integrity, but some other Considerations, that rather argue Persons unfit than
qualified for Service. Such, as have too much the Command of the Public Voice,
will have this Man preferred because he is of the Right Party, as they call it,
will Espouse this or the other Interest, and oppose some others in Place, who
right or wrong must be Opposed: such an one is Voted of the right stamp; and is
wonderfully accomplished for Rule, though wholly destitute of Wisdom, Probity,
and a true Genius for Government. On the other side, This and That Man must be
laid aside as Unqualify'd, only because either his Brains were not cast in the
same Mould, and has not just the same set of Thoughts with some others, who
would fain set up for the first Ministers of State, and Masters of Policy:
these despair to carry on their own Private, Dark Designs by them; they cannot
make them their Tools, speak through them, and act by them. And by this means it
comes to pass the most Worthy are rejected, and not improved; while the
Unworthy, the Weak, the Halt and Blind are exalted; who are more fit to
resemble the Dumb, Deaf, and Blind Idols of the Heathen, which are Empty
within, and are fit only to fill up an Empty space; though Adored by the People,
yet are incapable of being Gods to them; than to resemble the Li^ing JEHOVAH.
These can never assert the Honor of their Place, answer the End of the
Ordination of Rule over men: and a People under the Management of such, must
without a miracle, be mean and despicable; the very Tail among the Nations
round about. When therefore this is the case of a Land, it calls for the
deepest Lamentation. The Disease of such a People is next to Incurable.

USE IV. Hence, It it is a great Blessing to Enjoy Rulers that in a good
measure do maintain the Dignity, and discharge the Duties, which become their
Character; and a People thus Privileged ought to be Thankful to GOD. Good
Rulers are the most lively Emblems of GOD on Earth: They are the BREATH of a
Peoples Nostrils; the whole Common Wealth is as it were Breathing in them; and
they as necessary to the Life and Well-being of the State; as Breath for the
Continuance of Natural Life. These are as David the Light of Israel, which
cannot be quenched without bringing Darkness upon a whole Land: Such are the
Glory of a Land; It is because GOD loves a People, that he sets such in
Authority over them. The Spirit of GOD has given us the most Lively
Representation of such Rulers, 2 Samuel 23. 4. He shall be as the Light of the
Morning, when the Sun rises; even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender
Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear Shining after Rain. These are the
Glory of Humane Race: and the Ear that hears them, shall bless them; and the
Eye that sees them, shall bear a Testimony to them. When the Righteous are
Exalted the City Rejoices, Prove. 11.10.

What Reason then have the British Kingdoms and Dominions to Triumph in the
Divine Favor! That GOD has Exalted to the Throne a QUEEN, who is the Refuge of
the Distressed both at HOME and Abroad; the Powerful Assertor not only of the
Liberties Civil and Sacred of Her own People, but also of the Common Rights of
Mankind in generous Compassion to Oppressed Neighbors; under whose Shadow our
Nations at Home securely Sit, and Enjoy their most Valuable Blessings; and we
in these Distant Provinces most sensibly Feel, and are Cherished with the
Benign Influences of Her Light, Favor and Conduct. The Glory of Her Reign has
been indeed Shaded by the Dark Lines of a Bloody War, Engaged in not from
Choice, but Necessity both of Justice and Mercy, yet has been to a Miracle
Brightened with the Smiles of Heaven, in a Series of Victories, and Triumphs,
as will be scarce Credible to Posterity. Let Her Greatness, and Glory Increase;
Let the Secrecy of the Divine Presence be always Her Pavilion; Let Her Person,
and Government be Preserved by Tutelar Angels from Dark Practices, and Open
Violences; Let the Crown long Flourish on Her Sacred Head, to the Terror of Her
Enemies; and to the Security, Joy, and Triumph of all the Friends of Zion; And
be late Translated to that Throne above that will not Totter, and that Crown
that shall never Fade away.

May I not add without suspicion of Flattery? that the present Government which
is immediately over us in this Province, ought to be esteemed as a Favor of
Heaven, which challenges a Tribute of Gratitude, and Praise? Is it not a great
Favor to a People to have such in Rule over them, as they have reason to
believe, notwithstanding all their Infirmities, mainly to desire, aim at, and
endeavor the Public Good; and to approve themselves God's to them? Is it not
a Rich Blessing that we do not see men of infamous Lusts, whose Lives are the
last Defiance to all that is Sacred, and Divine, to Religion, Common Honesty
and Sobriety, openly wallowing in the grossest Pollutions of Sensuality: Is it
not a Valuable Blessing, that we do not see such Madness and Folly set in great
Dignity over us, which would make Vice Reputable? Is it not a Privilege, that
our Zion has some of her own Sons to take her by the Hand, who cannot but have
a peculiar Tenderness for her? And of such we see this Day the first Chair of
Government, the Council Table, and the Seats of Judgment filled: May GOD long
continue the Blessing. And if any, either through Stupidity, or Malignity, will
not see, or not acknowledge the Smiles of Divine Providence on these accounts;
I wish they be never made to feel by doleful Experience, the vast Difference of
being Protected and Refreshed under the Shadow of the spreading Vine, and being
Scratcht and Torn by the Bramble.

USE V. This teaches us the Duty of a People to their Rulers; viz. To treat
them according to the Dignity of that Character and Title, that GOD has
dignified them with.

A Tribute of Honor, Reverence, and Dutiful Regards is their undoubted due
from their People. Regard them as GOD's Deligates, and Viceroys; as Armed with
his Power, and Engaged in his Service for your Good; as Living Images of the
Immortal KING of Glory. Honor them for GOD Himself has put Honor upon them.
Do all you can properly to Support their Dignity, and Maintain their Character:
For it can never go well with a People, when Government is brought into
Contempt. Government has something too Divine in it to be insulted, and rudely
treated. You cannot despise their Authority, but you must despise GOD himself;
and spit on his Image; which He will certainly resent. And it becomes a People
to remember that they are Mortal, and Accountable as well as their Rulers. Let
your regards therefore to Rulers be answerable to that Condition GOD has placed
them in; and as may agree with those Beams of Divinity, with which they shine.
Do all that you may to Encourage them in their Work which is Difficult and most
Important. Own GOD's Name, Image, and Superscription, that they bear, and do
nothing to Deface them.

Hence, All Murmurings, Discontents, Evil Surmisings and Jealousies, all Seeds
of Faction and Sedition must be suppressed with the greatest care among a
People. If Rulers are Gods, they are not to be Reviled, Blasphemed, Arraigned
and Condemned by every Haughty, Insolent, and Discontented Spirit. To be
Murmurers, and to speak Evil of Dignities, are Evils of a black Character in
the Word of GOD; and may not be Played with. And yet how common are these
Evils! And how many Corrupt Principles are too frequently found among a People,
which lead to these! Some are prompted to foment Jealousies of Rulers, that
they may be Popular, or that they may be thought Persons of a deeper Reach, and
quicker Sight than others; and therefore pretend to see evil Designs at the
bottom of Public Administrations, that their Blind Neighbors are not aware
of. Sometimes they deny Government it is just Honors, because, they imagine,
they are not regarded, as their Merit calls for: Some are so full of
themselves, and so giddy with the Contemplation of their own supposed
Excellencies, that they think they have a Right to impose their Schemes as
Perfect Models of Prudence, and that their Phansy's ought to be Entertained as
infallible Oracles, and that it will never be well with State and Church till
it be so. Their actions declare their sense that they are the Men, and that
Wisdom will Dye with them; and that with their Bolt too soon shot, they can
out-shoot all about them. Hence if their Thoughts are not Entertained with a
deep Silence, profound Reverence, and be not made the Public Rule; they Vote
themselves Despised, and Affronted, and the Public Betrayed and Ruined. And
hence arise Discontents, Jealousies, and hard Censuring of Rulers: Hence the
Errors of Government are needlessly Exposed, and unkindly Descanted on, and
oftentimes Errors only supposed are Bruited about as real and certain: Nay
their Laudable actions insideously represented to their disadvantage. Thus the
Gods are too often Reviled, and evilly Entreated. Brethren, these things ought
not to be so: Our Religion will not allow it. GOD was angry with Aaron and
Miriam, though Persons of Character themselves, for speaking against his Servant
Moses.

Again, If Rulers are Gods, then their Character demands Submission and
Obedience from a People. The Dignity and Authority of their Station calls for
it; and both Law and Gospel require it as their due. Rebellion and Disobedience
against GOD's Vicegerents in the Lawful Execution of their Office is Rebellion
against GOD himself in the last result. And agreeably we are to be Obedient to
Civil Government, not only for Wrath but for Conscience sake.

I am not Ignorant to what an extravagant height the Doctrine of Submission to
Rulers has been carried by some; and I wish I could see no danger of the
Contrary Extreme of depressing it to a mere Nullity. Extremes on both hands are
to be avoided; for both are dangerous to a State. The One may Expose a People
to the Oppressions of Sullen Tyranny; the Other to the Confusions of Lawless
Anarchy: The One Subjects a State to the rigorous Impositions of a Despotick
Power, Paramount to all Law, Reason and Conscience, the Other lays it open to
the Wild Humors of an Ungoverned Multitude; to the Fury, Madness and Noise of
the People.

Doubtless GOD has not left a State without a Regular Remedy to Save it self,
when the Fundamental Constitution of a People is Overturned; their Laws and
Liberties, Religion and Properties are openly Invaded, and ready to be made a
Public Sacrifice. But on the other side, it is beyond me to imagine that the
GOD of Order has ever invested any men of a Private Station, who can with a
Nodd inflame and raise the Multitude, with a Lawful Power, on pretense of
Public Mismanagements, to Embroyl the State, and Overturn the Foundations of
Government.

I am neither Afraid, nor Ashamed to say, I should be glad to see the Doctrine
of Submission to Rulers, in it is Just and Undoubted Measures, better Stated and
Qualified on all sides, than ever yet I have seen it: and when ever that shall
be done, sure I am, that these following Admonitions, and Precepts will not be
found Apocryphal, but Apostolical and Divine; Romans 12. 1, 2. Let every Soul be
subject to the Higher Powers, etc. Who ever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of GOD, etc. Be Subject not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake, Ver.
5. So, 1 Pet. 2. 13,14,15. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for
the LORD's sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by Him, for a Punishment to Evil doers, and for the
Praise of them that do Well. For so is the Will of GOD. And, Mat. 22. 21.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. And it is made part of the
Charge of a Gospel Minister to put their Flock in mind to be Subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to Obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. These are
Christian Duties, and men had need to see their Obligation to them Cancelled,
before they are made matter of Banter and Ridicule. Without Dispute, through a
forgetfulness of these Precepts, many dark Intreagues against a well formed
Government are frequently carried on by men of Secret and Ill Designs: Of which
I shall only say, O my Soul! Enter thou not into their Secrets, unto their
Assembly mine Honor be thou not United.

USE VI. Our Text gives Divine Counsel to such as have the Liberty and Power of
Nominating and Electing Persons to Place of Rule over men. And the Advice is
that there be a due regard had to such as are best Qualified to Support the
Character of Gods, and to Resemble the Blessed GOD in their Administrations.
This Rule is to be observed in Communicating Power of any kind or degree, and
in what ever way it is derived to others. Commissions of Peace, and War are not
to be given of Course, or made matters of pure Complement; but an Eye is to be
had to the Qualifications of men to be Authorized; that they be such as will
improve aright the Power committed to them; and be as Gods in their Station.

But I shall only Consider this Rule as it may be Serviceable to direct the
Elections of this Day. The Liberty and Privilege of the present Election is
very great, if rightly used; and I Pray GOD we may never be Taught the Value of
it, by its Loss.

Let those that are immediately concerned in the Electing Persons this Day to
be of Her MAJESTY'S Council in this Province to consider the Character that has
been opened before them. You are, Honorable Gentlemen, highly Entrusted by GOD
with a great Opportunity to Serve HIM, your QUEEN and Country; You are under
the accurate Observation of GOD, and this People, how you use your present
Power; and it is well worthy your though it, that it is a Talent you must account
for, when you become Instances of Mortality. Here is a safe Rule before you, by
which you may proceed with Honor and Safety. And the Rule is, that your Voices
be given to such, as shall be most fit to Assert their Dignity, Support their
Character, and Promote the End of Government, the Good of the People: To such,
as are of the best Port, Influence, Life and Activity, Courage and Resolution,
Knowledge and Justice, and of known Piety to GOD, and approved Loyalty to the
QUEEN. For these will be most fit to act the part assigned them to the Honor
of Government, and the Public Good. Elections must not be made by Personal
Favor. None must be Chosen, nor Overlook^, barely because cause they are
Friends to these, or Enemies to those. Be not led in your Choice by secret
suggestions in a Corner, where one man may be Canonized, and a better
Reprobated: But be governed by the Known Characters of men, that are generally
approved of. This was the ancient Rule, (...)
Take men known among your Tribes. Take men, not of License, but of
indisputable Virtue; who seem to Live in all their Relations under a realizing
View of Death and the Eternal Judgment: Men who best understand the Religious
and Civil Interests of their People; who are Governed not by Narrow and Selfish
Principles, but by a Public Generous Spirit; who know how to deserve the
Public Applause, and how to despise it, and can be content to bear the ill
Will of a People, if they may but do them Good. In a word, they must be men
sensible of the Sufferings, Mourning over the Degeneracies of this People, and
their Flesh and Heart trembling at the Tokens of Divine Wrath upon them. These
will be best Qualified for the Dignity, and Faithful to the Duty of Government:
Most likely to be Images of GOD, whose Name is imprinted on them. These GOD
will approve of; will be an Honor to their Place, and a Glory to the Land. It
this Rule be observed, we shall this Day have an happy Presage that GOD has not
withdrawn his Presence nor Glory from us.

USE VII. The Consideration of our Text will suggest Divine Counsel to all
Orders and Degrees of Men in Government, by which to Regulate their Conduct in
their Public Capacity. Since the Great LORD of the World has Honored you with
his Style, Name and some Rays of his Power, by all the Rules of Equity,
Decency and Honor, you are obliged to Act up to the Dignity of your Character,
Form your selves in your Administrations after the Example of the Divine Rule,
and so approve your selves Gods. Your Country has a just Claim to all that
Care, Tenderness Protection, and Comfort, which may render them Safe under your
Wings, and you truly Venerable in their Eyes. Your Title calls for a
Superiority in all that is Good and Virtuous, in proportion to your Superiority
in Name and Power; and it is vain for any to expect to Maintain the Honor of
their State of Exaltation, without that Real Majesty, and Excellency displayed
in their Managements, which will command the Reverence, Love and Esteem of all
about them. GOD, who has to an observable degree Clothed you with his own
Honor, expects that on no terms you Betray it, but Assert it, by a GOD-like
Discharge of that great Trust committed to you. The admonition given to Titus,
a Ruler in the Church of GOD; is with equal Force applicable to Rulers in the
State, Tit. 2. 15. Let no man Despise thee. Thus if you will answer your
Character, you must let no man Despise you: i. e. Do nothing that shall deserve
Contempt, that shall slur your Names, and prostitute your Honor; nothing that
shall weaken your Authority, destroy that Reverence that is due to the Dignity
of your Place, or that may make others Entertain Mean and Despicable thoughts
of you. For otherwise you will invite Floods of Contempt, and Open Indignities,
which will be to GOD's Dishonor as well as yours. But on the Contrary, let
those Divine Virtues shine in your Conduct, that shall render your Persons
Venerable and Amiable, Command Reverence and Awe, and make the Glory of your
Name appear with untarnished Luster. This is the Counsel of Heaven. And to
render it more influential, it may be more Particularly directed,

I. In the first Place, Let this Counsel of Heaven be Addressed with all
Dutiful Submission to YOUR EXCELLENCY, whom GOD, and our Gracious QUEEN, has
Seated at the Head of our Gods, in the first Chair of Dignity and Power over
this Province. Your Excellency's Commands together with the Desires of your
Honorable Council, have Ordered me into this awful Desk at this time. And will
you suffer me, SIR, In the Name of that GOD, whose Character you bear, as to
Assert the Dignity of your Station, and demand your Right to the Honor and
Duty of this People, and the Tribute of their Prayers and Thanksgivings; so
with all Humility to Suggest, that GOD's Honor is greatly concerned, and bound
up with yours, and by Maintaining your Real Excellency and Dignity as the Chief
among our Gods, you will do great Honor and Service to that GOD whose
Representative you are; that by your Wise, Just, Impartial, and Compassionate
Administrations, you will give us a Lively Picture of the Divine Government:
That in your Example, we may see what a Beautiful Figure the Powers of
Government, when found in Conjunction with the Virtues of a distinguishing
Prudence and Integrity, will make; and may be forced to acknowledge that the
Glory of such a Rule over Men may be viewed not barely in a Lifeless Picture
and Abstracted Idea, but in Reality and Life being Exemplified in your Conduct.
Thus you will approve your Self, in a qualified sense, a God, i. e. a Diffusive
Blessing to your People; and your Name will be as a Precious Ointment, the
Perfume whereof will reach far and wide; and will be transmitted with bright
Characters of Honor to Late Posterity. What are Statues and Triumphal Arches,
when compared with these Superior Marks of Honor but Despicable Baubles?

GOD has called you, SIR, to the Heim in the most Stormy and Dark Day that ever
past over this Province: When we never more needed a Person of uncommon
Sagacity, Address, Application and Dispatch, to Steer us safe through the many
Perplexities and Involvements of a Long and Bloody War. And we trust it was in
Love to our Zion, that GOD has appointed One of her own Sons at such a time to
take her by the Hand, and Comfort her. The State of this Afflicted and Sinful
People you are Placed over must needs render your Difficulties Many and Great,
and your Burden Heavy: We sympathize with you, and out Prayers are Night and
Day besieging the Throne of Grace on your account. It is the Work of GOD you
are Engaged in; be Encouraged in it, and let not your Heart Faint what ever
Hardships you may Encounter; GOD will observe all the Patience, Self-denial
that shall be Exercised for his Service and his Peoples Good; He will be with
you in your Faithful Administrations, and your Labors will not be found in
Vain.

And may you always be under Heaven's Propitious Conduct, to Direct and Succeed
your Administrations: May the Blessings of the Celebrated Joseph descend upon
you; Your Bow abide in Strength, the Arms of your Hands be strengthened by the
Hands of the Mighty GOD of Jacob; Even by the GOD of thy Father who shall Help
thee, and by the Almighty, who shall Bless thee: May you be Honored with more
Enlarged Measures of His SPIRIT, that you may Shine in your Exalted Orb with
Brighter and Brighter Beams of Divine Grace, Excellency and Glory; that when
Mortality shall overtake you, which you have daily Admonitions of in your
Bodily Infirmities, you may have an Euge from the SON of GOD, Your Master and
Judge; and may join the Bright Throng of Elohim, Angels and the Spirits of Just
Men, that incircle the Throne of GOD and the LAMB with Prostration and Praise.

II. Let this word of Counsel from GOD be Addressed to the whole GENERAL
ASSEMBLY: The Blessed GOD, who is a GREAT KING, and whose Name is Dreadful,
does Expect and Require that you Study to show your selves Worthy of that Name,
with which you are dignified. As you are Gods by Office, labor to be Gods by
Analogy, reaching after the nearest conformity to GOD, and the exactest
imitation of Him, in your Public Capacities; by which alone you will be able
to secure and illustrate the Glory of your Title, and approve your selves not
only in Name, but in Truth Gods on Earth. GOD Himself has called you Gods; but
those that are not skilful, thoughtful, vigilant and active to promote the
Public Safety and Happiness, are not Gods, but dead Idols. The Name inscribed
on you is to give Rules and Measures, Life and Force to your Consultations for
the Public Weal. And there never was a day, that called for a more full
Exercise of your Wisdom, Righteousness, Vigilance and Courage in their highest
improvements, than this, in which you are called to be the Saviors of this
People. The bleeding State of this Land, languishing under Sin and Judgment
cannot but stir up your Paternal bowels, and quicken your Counsels and
Endeavors for its Safety. Be then humbly entreated by your just regards for
your own Honor, and GOD's Glory; by your Love and Tenderness for your People,
to approve your selves Ministers of GOD for our Good.

And there are two comprehensive Articles, in which you may approve your selves
Worthy of the Character of our Gods.

(1.) You will Assert your Dignity by Exerting your Powers to free the Land
from those Sins, which are the Reproach of a People. It is beyond question that
there are many gross Sins found among us, by which Heaven is Defied and the
Land Polluted. Not only Spiritual Iniquities, as Pride, Hatred, Malice,
Envyings, Unbelief, and the Spirit of the World; but also open Abominations,
and gross Immoralities, which do by a natural Causality, as well as moral
Influence, cause the Crown to fall from our heads. Christ's Ambassadors can do
little to restrain many of these bold Transgressors. They may cry aloud and not
spare, but these stop their Ears like the deaf Adder. They are too much of an
Adamantine temper and make to be h^wen by the Prophets. They are like the
Leviathan, proof against all the Arrows taken out of the quiver of GOD's Word;
the Sword of the Spirit cannot pierce through their Scales. We may warn them from
GOD, and Set the Terrors of the Eternal Judgment before them, but these are at
present invisible and distant things, which their Infidel Senses have no
resentment of. There is but little hope to reform such, unless you can make the
Sword of Justice to reach them. And possibly though they fear not the Wrath of
the Invisible GOD, yet they may be made to fear the Wrath of our Visible Gods,
when like a Roaring Lion it threatens to devour them. This therefore calls for
your Care, and Courage.

Is not our Land deluged with Intemperance and Drunkness? And is not the
Contagion of this Sin spread far and wide in Spite of all Remedies hitherto
applied, and as the Destruction, not only walks in darkness, but wastes at
Noon day? Is there not too just a Complaint through our Towns, That the
Assemblings of the People whether for Civil Transactions, Military Exercises,
nay for Religion on Lecture days, End in Intemperate Drinking and Debauchery?
And what will be the End of these things?

Again, Are not the Cries of Injustice, and Dishonesty in our dealings, Evils
most Scandalous to our Profession, yet loud in the Ears of GOD, and of all that
tremble at his Anger? Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there?
Why then is not the health of this People recovered? Have there not been proper
Bills, brought forward once and again, by the Motion and Encouragement of his
Excellency our Governor, which have hitherto been strangled in the birth? And
can any good Account be given of them? May there not be many things done by
this Honorable Court to Save us from these destroying Evils? May not Laws be
brought forward which are further necessary; and care taken for their
Execution, that their Edge may on no pretense be rebated, that Iniquity may be
forced to sneak and hide its guilty head, if not fully reformed? This Work
belongs to you, Our Fathers; be wise and resolute herein, and GOD will be with
you.

Suffer me here to add, That it is Obvious that the Province is in great Danger
by those Frauds and Forgeries committed upon out Bills of Public Credit: And
may it not be worthy your Consideration, whether some more terrible Punishment,
than our Laws have yet provided, may not be Established to Restrain such
insolent Sons of Fraud and Violence? What Policy will allow of I may not
determine; but I am well satisfied that the Crime is of so deep a Malignity,
that Conscience and Religion will not forbid the Last and Heaviest Punishment.

(2.) You will Assert your Dignity, by doing what you can to maintain the
Honor and Glory of CHRIST's Kingdom among us. You are appointed by GOD as
Guardians of the Religion, as well as Civil Liberties of his People. Your
Character obliges you to Exert your Power for the Protection, Preservation, and
Glory of his Kingdom.

Allow me Liberty to hint at a few things necessary to this End.

It is requisite to the Glory of CHRIST's Kingdom, that Schools for Liberal
Education be Supported and Cherished. Without this we may Expect the Revolution
of the Barbarous Age. We have good Laws in Force for this Design; but are they
not Openly Eluded and Played with!

The Honor of CHRIST's Kingdom requires that the Ministry be honorably
Supported: But by a criminal neglect hereof how are they brought into contempt?
their gifts dampt, and under little growth and improvement, being forced to
sp^^^ too much of that time in the Field to get their bread, which is due to
their Studies? Are not their Allowances generally Insufficient; and these too
often unjustly withheld? And may you not find a Remedy for this Grievance?

Again, if CHRIST's Kingdom be kept up in its Glory, our Pulpits must be
guarded from the Ignorant, and Dissolute; the confident Boaster, and the heady
Impostor. And this is to be despaired of unless a due Trial of the Candidates
of the Ministry be Established by your Authority.

The Last hint shall be, that our Church Government must be Strengthened, if
the Kingdom of CHRIST be preserved in it is Visible Glory. This Government is
much Enfeebled; and one cause is because there is not a more Public Regular
and Close Union between Particular Churches. Something to remedy this has been
by a Venerable Synod Propounded under the Head of the Consociation of Churches
in a Vicinity: And some Proposals have Lately been made, to bring that
Synodical Determination into Practice, by the Body of our Ministers; but
nothing has been Effected through Weakness of our Church State: the Proposals
themselves have been misrepresented, and Profanely descanted on, and the Body
of our Ministers insulted, and Blasphemed by some of the Sons of Corah.

Let me here take Liberty to Offer to the Consideration of our Fathers in
Government, whether the Convening a Synod by your Authority at this Day to
Consider what Remedy's may be Applied to these and other Distempers which our
Church State is Enfeebled by, may not be more than a Prudential, a Present
Duty. The Use and Necessity of SYNODS for Reformation, has been Asserted
through all Ages of the Church. Can there be a more Favorable Opportunity for
Calling a Synod Expected, than under the Present Administration, and before
some of our most Ancient Worthy's in the Ministry are Translated to a Better
World? If a Synod be not a sufficient Remedy for the Evils our Churches Labor
of; or the Remedy be thought as Dangerous as the Disease; what Darkness,
Confusion, and Disorder may we not Fear will soon overtake us?

If you are resolved to appears as Gods for us, you have Power to do much for
this People on these accounts: You have now an Opportunity in your Hands. And
if GOD spirit you for your Work, and make you Instrumental to Lengthen out our
Tranquillity; Uncommon Honors will be decreed you in Both Worlds. Though you must
Die like Men, yet you shall Rise and Live like the Angels of GOD. You are now
styled Gods, and if you Maintain the Glory of your Character, and Resemble GOD,
you shall not be Degraded in the Next Life; You shall be found Worthy to stand
before the SON OF MAN at his Appearance and Kingdom; Worthy of that World and
the Resurrection.

To Conclude, Let the Whole Body of this People be persuaded to approve
themselves Worthy of such Rulers, by aspiring after an holy Conformity to, and
Imitation of GOD. What remains! But that we lift up our hearts to GOD in
Heaven, that He would give us such Rulers to go in and out before us. And if
GOD will Answer us, and make our Rulers, and this People to be GOD like, we
shall be a happy People. The Mountains will bring forth Peace, and the little
Hills Righteousness: Our Land shall not be called Desolate, nor Forsaken; for
the Glory of the LORD shall arise upon it. GOD Himself will arise and Save us:
And we shall have Reason to send our Praises on high, and Sing with the Church;
As, Psalm. 72. 18, 19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does
Wondrous Things: And Blessed be His Glorious Name for Ever; and let the whole
Earth be filled with His Glory. AMEN, and AMEN.

FINIS.

