ELIZABETH in her Holy Retirement.

An ESSAY To Prepare a Pious WOMAN FOR HER Lying in. OR, MAXIMS and METHODS of
PIETY, To Direct and Support an HANDMAID OF THE LORD, Who Expects a Time of
Travail.

On Genesis III. 16. Luthers [and Mankinds.] Exclamation. O most Miserable Misery!

The Divine Relief; I. Tim. II. 16. Notwithstanding, she shall be Saved in
Child bearing.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Nicholas Boon, at his Shop in Corn
Hill. 1710

The PREFACE.
THe Occasion and Intention of the ESSAY now before us, is to be declared. The
Writer thought it One part of Pastoral Diligence and Vigilance, to allow a
Proportion of Seasonable Visits, unto Such of his Flock, as he was informed
from time to time, were near their Lying in; and therein to Address them with
such Admonitions of Piety as were most suited unto their present Condition, and
such as their Pregnant Condition must Reasonably Awaken them to hearken to. It
was part of Timothies charge; To entreat such, with all Purity. He remembered,
who they were whom David followed, when he was a Shepherd; and whom the
Glorious LORD will Gently Lead, when He feeds His Flock. He Pondered the
Tenderness, which the Great GOD our Savior, has Expressed for Women with
Child, in many other Passages of His Bible, besides the XXI Chapter of Exodus.
He was in Pain, to think, that a Sudden Destruction, and a fearful and endless
One, should come as Travail upon a Woman with Child, upon any who draw near a
Time of Travail. He found his Addresses Acceptable and Serviceable. At length,
he resolved upon a further Method, of more Effectually coming at many, whom he
cannot have Opportunities Personally to Speak unto. He reads, Exodus I. 21. The
MIDWIVES ^eared God. It is to be hoped, They generally do so. He therefore
Publishes this ESSAY, and furnishes the Pious Midwives with Some Numbers
thereof, that they may ^end or Give, the Little BOOK, unto those, by whom they
know an Hour of Travail and Trouble to be Expected. Certainly the Handmaids of
the Lord, will receive this as a Messenger from HIM unto them! When the Holy
ELIZABETH Retired for so many Months, into the Hilly Country, you may ^^stly
conceive, that she was Employed in Exercises of the same Tenor and Tendency
with ^^ch as are here Prescribed. None but Filthy and Hard. Scoffers, will cast
Contempt on the ^^er of Prescriptions, that are so adapted unto ^^e of the most
Frequent, and yet One of ^^e most Solemn, Occasions in the World.

THE Duties and the Supports OF One Expecting an Hour of Travail.
AN Address is now to be made unto an Handmaid of the LORD, who Expect^ e're
long the arrival of a Time, when her Loins will be filled with Pain, Pangs will
take hold of her, the Pangs of a Woman, which travaileth. It Is New, Sure, if
ever, a Time, wherein it may be Expected, that she will hearken to the Counsils
of God* This, if any, is the Time, wherein the Methods and Motions of Divine
Grace, will find her; And if ever you will hear the Voice of God at all, To Day
you will hear His Voice.

The Hazards and Hardships undergone by the Travailing Daughters of Eve, make a
Considerable Article of the Curse, which the Transgression where-into she was
Deceived, has brought upon the mi^erable World. But our Great Redeemer has
procured this Grace from God, into the Daughters of Zion, that the Curse ^
turned into a Blessing. The Approach of their Travails, proves to them an
Occasion and an Excitement for those Exercises of Piety, that Secure to them,
and prepare them for, Eternal Blessedness; and they may Say, It Is Good for me
that I have been Afflicted. Unto this it is very such owing, that though through
the Evident providence of God watching over Humane Affairs, there is pretty
near an equal Number of Males and Females born, at the Number of the Males who
are apparently Pious, and partakers of a New ^^rth, is not so great as that of
the Females. Indeed, it will argue a wonderful Stupidity of Soul, and Obstinacy
in ^in, if the Dangers and Sorrows where^^ you are now obnoxious, do not ^ake
you Serious, and cause you Seriously to Consider on your Condition, and bring
you to a Considerate, Sollicitous, Effectual Preparation for Eternity: if you
are not now ready to hear the Admonitions of God your Savior. You are now
Addressed, with some Advice from Heaven, in hopes, that This is the Time, for
you to be more than eve^ Made Wise unto Salvation.

And the first thing, to be propounded unto you, is; That you do not indulge an
indecent Impatience or Discontent, at the State, which you find ordered for
you. It will be a very blameable Indecency and Indiscretion in you, to be
Dissatisfyed at your State of Pregnancy. Froward Pangs of Dissatisfaction,
harbored, and humoured, in you, because you See that in Sorrow you are to
bring forth Children, may displease Heaven, and bring yet more Sorrow upon you.
It will indeed look too Unnatural in you, to complain of a State, whereinto the
Laws of Nature established by God, have brought you. The will of the Great God,
has been declared in these Terms, 1 Timothy V. 14. I will that the Younger Women,
Marry, bear Children. When you find that a Conception has brought you unto
Childbearing circumstances, Let your Submission to the Will of God therein, be
full of Satisfaction, and Resignation. Let this Thought now carry you
Cheerfully through all the Uneasiness, which is now become Unavoidable: Great
GOD; I am thine; And I am willing to be, all that thou will have me to be!
Indeed, it is to be esteemed a Mercy of God, that One principal End of
Marriage, is thus ^ar in an Honorable way of being answered with you. It was
acknowledged as ^ Mercy, in the Old Time, by the Holy Women, who trusted in
God. They Looked on themselves as Mercifully Visited of God, when they had
conceived. It was entertained, as a Gracious Promise of God unto His People,
That they should have an Offspring. It was esteemed, The taking away of a
Reproach. Barrenness was Threatened, and Bewailed, as a Calamity: A Punishment
for a Michol. The Saints made it a frequent Petition in their Prayers, That God
would bestow Children upon them. I shall Speak but in a Language which your Sex
of Old would have allowed of, if I now tell you; That God has Looked upon His
Handmaid, and Remembered her, and not forgotten her, but given her to Conceive.
For I must go on to tell you, That upon your giving up your self unto the Lord,
Your Children become the Children of God. They are my Children, Says your God:
It is a Child of God, that you have now within you: What a Consolation! It Is a
Subject and a Servant of a Glorious CHRIST, whose Bones are now growing in the
Womb, of her that is with Child; It is, a Member of His Mystical Body, which is
now Shaping in Secret, and Curiously to be wrought. An Excellent Gentlewoman,
who had a Strong presage, which proved a True One, of her Dying by her Travail,
yet you read in her Legacy Written for her unborn Child, her Desire of God,
that she might be a Mother to One of His Children. I add, You are to bring
forth a Creature of Excellent Faculties; and One from whom the Lord will have
glory for Eternal Ages. You don't know, what an Instrument of Good this Child
may prove in the World. As mean a Mother as you, has brought forth an Hero. Nor
do you know, what a Possession, what an Enjoyment, this Child may prove unto
You particularly. Who can foresee, how far, This Same shall comfort you! This
is the first Lessen of Piety, to be urged upon you: Whatever Sickness you now
labor under, be not Sick of your present State. Rebuke, Repress, Restrain, all
Disquiet of Mind; Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope in God! It is all for the best. O Builder up of the
Church of God in the World; Say, and Pray, O my God, Help me always to like the
State, wherein thou performest the thing, that is appointed for me.

But now, the Next thing to be propounded, is; That you hasten into a State of
Safety for Eternity: Yea, This is the very First Thing that you have to do,
upon your being Sensible of a Conception. For ought you know, your Death has
entered into you, and you may have conceived That which determines but about
Nine Months more at the most, for you to Live in the World. Preparation for
Death is that Most Reasonable and Most Seasonable thing to which you must now
Apply your self. It will do you no Hurt. You will Die not One Minute the Sooner
for it. And being Fit to Die, you will be but the more Fit to Live.

Daughter of Sorrows; Will you give a Great and Just Attention? Set your Heart
unto these things; They are not Vain Things; Your Everlasting Life is concerned
in them.

You must in the first Place be very sensible, That Except you are Born again,
it had been Good for you that you had never been born; Except you have
Experience of a true Conversion to God, you unavoidably Perish. The Sorrows of
Childbirth, will be to you, but the Beginning of Sorrows, and of such as know
no End. Think with your self, If the Pains of my Travail, which I hope, will be
quickly over, were to last a thousand years, how wretched, Oh! how wretched
were I! And yet, if my Peace be not made with the Holy God, I may fear to be
more terribly dealt withal! Oh! It Is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the Living God! Some Women that have been in Horror of Conscience, have
declared, that all the Anguish of bringing more than Seven Children into the
World has been much more tolerable, than that horrible Anguish of their Mind.
How Intolerable then, Oh! how Insupportable, will be the Anguish, in the
Conscience of a Sinner, banished from God, fearfully Scorched and Tortured with
Impressions from the Wrath of God; and cast into a Place of Torments, into the
Place of Dragons! Let the Thought of this, mightily Quicken and Hasten your
Flight from the Wrath to come. In this Flight you must first, Acknowledge; O
Holy Lord, I am not Able to Turn unto thee. You must also Acknowledge; O Holy
Lord, I am not Worthy, that thou should help me to Turn. Without this
Humiliation, you will never Turn. But then, go on with proper Acknowledgments
of Sovereign Grace, to beg of the Gracious Lord; O Glorious One, Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned. Proceed now, and Ponder, on your Sinful and Woeful
circumstances before the Lord; Ponder, and Confess; O Great God, I have Sinned,
and Perverted that which is Right! I have Sinned, and I have done very
foolishly! Examine your past Life; Reflect on all the Errors and Follies of
your Life. Look back with Bitterness of Soul, upon every Sin, that you can
charge your self withal; Every Violation of the Ten Commandments, on each of
which you should make a Pause; Every Miscarriage, in every Condition, in every
Relation, in every Employment. Be as much afraid of Leaving any Sin
unconfessed, as you would be of having the Afterbirth left in you, after your
Travail. And because you have not Observed, and have not Remembered Thousands of
your Sins, bewail this Inadvertency also, as not the least of your Sins. With
Astonishment cry out, O Holy God, I am a most Polluted Creature! My Life has
been a very course of Sin. Innumerable Evils compass me about; My Sins, my Sins
are Numberless. My Heart fails me, when I think upon them! At the same time, Go
up as far as the Original Sin, which is the Fountain of all your Sins. The
Terrors of Childbearing which are now upon you, do very properly lead you to
bewail your Share in the Sin of your First Parents; and to bewail with Bitter
Tears, that Corrupt Nature, which by a Derivation from your Next Parents you
brought into the World with you. Think, Lord, I was conceived in Sin; I was
born a Leper; and my poor Child will be so too! But herewithal, you must very
deeply affect your self, with the horrid and heinous Evil, which there is in
every Sin. Afflict yourself, with it; What have I done? O Great God, How
wickedly have I Denied thee, and Defied thee, and Despised the Blood of my
Savior, and Hearkened unto Satan before my Savior, and chose Earth and Hell,
before the Joys of Heaven, as often as I have Sinned against thee! I have been
a Fool that have made Light of Sin. This, This has been an heavy Aggravation of
all my Sin. Go on then to an amazing View of the Deplorable State into which
you are fallen by your Sin. Think with Amazement; Woe is unto me, that I have
Sinned! The Infinite God is angry with me; And who knows the Power of His
Anger! The Devil demands me as his Captive; I am a Prey to the Terrible one.
Sin Tyrannizes over me; I am held in chains of Darkness. If I die, as I am, what
will become of me! Who can dwell in those Everlasting Burnings, which will be
the Doom of those who die unpardoned! O Wretched one that I am; who shall
deliver me! Being brought into the Contrition of this Distress; NOW, Behold the
admirable SAVIOR provided for you; The JESUS, who is God Manifest in Flesh,
God and Man in One Person: The Savior, who is Able to Save you unto the
Uttermost; the Savior who bids you Look unto Him and be Saved. Oh! Take the
Encouragement of that Sweet Word, Joh. VI. 37. Him that comes unto me I will in
no Wise cast out. Cry to Him, O my dear Savior, Draw me to thee; Oh! make me
thine, and Save me. Let no Apprehension of your own Vileness make you despair
to find Acceptance with Him; Nor let any Good in your selves Embolden your Hope
and Plea, that you may be Accepted. Come under no Recommendation, but that of
your own dreadful Necessity, and Confusion, and the Triumphs of Grace, which
arise from the Salvation of such a Loathsome Sinner!

NOW Behold the Sacrifice of your Savior, and Plead, O Great God, let the
Blood of thy Son, cleanse me from all my Sin. Be Reconciled unto me, because my
JESUS has been my Sacrifice! Behold the Righteousness of your Savior, and
Plead, O Great God, Thy Son has answered thy Law, as a Surety for me. My
Advocate Shows His Righteousness for me; therefore deliver me from going down
to the Pit. That this your Precious Faith in the Sacrifice and Righteousness of
your Savior may be Justified with a Good Evidence to the Sincerity of it,
Resign your self up to the Holy Spirit of your Savior; Consent that the Spirit
of Holiness take Possession of you. Yield the consent of a Conquered Soul; O
Spirit of the Holy One; I am willing, Oh! do thou make me willing, that thou
come and Renew me in the Spirit of my Mind; make me a New Creature; Produce the
Holy and Lovely Image of God upon me. Embitter all my Sin to me; Enable me to
bear every Cross thou appointest for me. Wean me from this World; Reign in my
Heart; Oh! Dwell there, as in thy Temple. Guide me by thy Counsil; Bring me to
thy Glory. So in the Promised Strength of Heaven, take up Resolutions of
Universal and Perpetual Piety. Come to that Piety; Psalm. CXIX. 57. Thou art my
Portion, O Lord; I have said, That I would keep thy Words. Thus the New birth
is carried on! Thus you have gone through the Work, that will disarm Death of
all its Terror; that may Enable you to Sing, O Death, where is thy sting! If
you should now be Teeming with your Death, yet you may keep Rejoicing in the
Hope of the Glory of God. When the Handmaid of the Lord, had the Proposals of
Heaven made unto her, She complied; Luke I. 38. Beheld, The Handmaid of the
Lord; but it unto me according to thy Word; and she became in a Transcendent
Sense owner of a CHRIST immediately. O Handmaid of the Lord, The Great Savior,
who condescended once to make a Virgin, The Tabernacle of God, proposes this to
you; Shall I be thy Savior; and Heal thee, and Lead thee, and ^ule thee for
ever more? Let your Answer ^e, Behold, the Handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy Word. In an Agreeable sense you became owner of a CHRIST
immediately. Now, if you Die, To Die will be gain!

You would have the Great Savior hear your Calls unto Him for His Help, when
in your Travail you have Sorrow, because your Hour is come. You will then, with
Agony Cry out, Oh! my God, Help me! And will be in a Sad case, if He turn a
Deaf Ear upon your cry. There is all possible Reason, that you should Now hear
His Calls to you; and by Obedience to His Gospel, prevent the Execution of that
Threatening; As He cried, and they would not Hear, so they cried, and I would
not Hear, says the Lord of Hasts. He calls, Abhor thy Sins; Let your Answer
be, Lord, I Abhor them! He calls, Renounce all Trust in thy own Worth or
Strength; Let your Answer be, Lord, I Renounce it! He calls, Embrace thy
offered Redeemer in all His Offices! Let your Answer be, Lord, I Embrace Him. O
Effectually called One, say now, Mic. VII. 7. I will wait for the God of my
Salvation; my God will hear me!

Were the Event of your Travail, much less uncertain than it is, yet the main
Provision which you have to make against your Lying in, should be, That in the
Day of Judgment your Account may be made with Joy, and not with Grief. In order
to this, you must then be capable of saying, O my Glorious Judge, The Sacrifice
and the Righteousness which is my Plea for Everlasting Life, is in the
Judgment Seat. Lord Thou art it. My Judge is my Advocate. Lord, I did, by a
Faith of thy Direction, Engage thee to be So. That this Faith may not then be
Rejected as a Counterfeit, you must then be capable of Saying: Lord, Thou have
infused a principle into my Soul, which tells me, That all Sin must be Repented
of. I could not come to my Redeemer, without such a Principle. But I have
heartily, and Earnest-Repented of all my Sins; yea, as far as I could find them
out, I have particularly done so. And now, in order to that, it were desirable
for you, to take a Catalogue of things Forbidden and Required in the Ten
Commandments of the Two Tables; and pass a Judgment on your selves according to
the Discoveries which that Glass will give you of your self. That word is of a
Vast Importance; 1 Cor. XI. 31. If we would Judge our selves, we should not be
Judged. But it must then be found that this your Faith was not only Sorry for
your Evil Works, but also, which will necessarily follow, Zealous of Good
Works. O Anticipate the awful Transaction. Place your selves now as before the
Judgment Seat of God. Think, When He Visits, what shall I answer Him!

Thus you have managed your Grand Concern. What is to be next Propounded unto
you, is, in the Words of the Apostle; ^ Tim. II. 15. She shall be Saved in
Childbearing, if they continue, in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness, with
Sobriety.

You see Holiness is a point of Great Consequence for the Childbearing Woman.
And what is Holiness, but a Dedication unto God? May God assist you now to
Dedicate your self unto Him. Study, and contrive, How to be the Lords; In what
methods you may Employ all your Powers to Glorify the Lord. Come into the
Covenant of God; and Kneeling before the Lord, thus Declare unto Him; O Great
God, Thou shall be my God, and Portion. Heavenly Father, make me One of thy
Children. O Son of God, Thou shall be my Shepherd; O Spirit of God, Thou shall
be my Quickner. Lord, I Resolve to be thy Servant. I will Enquire after my
Duty, and persist in thy Service all my Days. If the Breach of the Old Covenant
be that which has brought the Difficult^ (...) your Travail, with all other
misch^ (...) upon you, what can you do better, (...) get as far as you can
under the Wings of the New Covenant? But then when you bring your selves under
this Consecration unto the Lord, you must bring your Children into it with you.

It Is particularly to be done, even for the Unborn Child. When it is become
Sensible to you, that you have conceived* you will do well, without any Delay,
to carry even this Embryo unto the Lord, and in some such manner as this Devote
it unto Him. O God of the Spirits of all Flesh; I bring to thee, even my Hoped
Offspring. Oh! Let thy Holy Spirit now take an Early Possession of it. Oh, Form
it, and Fill it, and make it an Everlasting Instrument of thy Praises in the
World.

But you must Remember, that a Detestation of all Sin, is a thing wherein your
Holiness is to shine, with a very convictive Splendour. Holiness is that which
cannot Look upon Iniquity. The Griefs which you are now Suffering in your Body,
are the Fruit (...) Sin. Let your Griefs for all your Sin (...) ^^cited and
Sharpened by them. I (...) is One of your frequent Indispo^ (...): May you
become disposed thereby to a greater Loathing of Sin, than you have yet had
raised in you. This is, to be Chastened, and made Partaker of Holiness. Think
on that Word; Jam. I. 15. When Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin, and
Sin when it is finished, brings forth Death. And say, O my Soul, Do not that
abominable thing, which the Soul of God abominates: Let me choose rather to Die,
than to Sin against the Holy One!

It Is to be further Noted, That Meditations, assiduous and affectuous
Meditations, on a Glorious CHRIST, are both Instances and Incentives of True
Holiness It is the most astonishing thing that ever was in the World; Gal. IV.
4. God sent forth His Son, made of a Woman. Oh, Meditate much on it, and with
much Astonishment. O Great Savior, O Bright Emmanuel; How gloriously did
those Humble thy self! Was there a Sinless Man conceived in a Virgin! Did the
Son of God vouchsafe to Assume and Unite this Man, into His own (...) ^ond
Person! Is there now lying (...) ^osom of the Eternal Son of God, (...), who
was once an Infant in the Womb of a Virgin! A Man born of a Woman, who is more
than a Man! God manifest in Flesh. A Man bred, and born, and nursed by a Woman;
but this Man-Child caught up unto God, and His Throne; and become the Lord of
Angels, and of Worlds, and the Judge to whom all must give an Account. We are
Saved through that Illustrious Childbearing! O the Dignity put upon our poor
Sex, in the Birth of such a Redeemer! O the Assurance which the Distressed
Handmaids of the Lord have to find Help with such a Redeemer in their Time of
Need! Yea, you may improve this Consolation, in your Supplication for a Safe
Deliverance, in the Hour that is coming upon you. Plead, O Good God, The
Humiliation of my Savior in the circumstances o^ His Nativity, has purchased
this for me that I should be Saved in Childbearing; Oh, Save me graciously! O
my Savior, (...) thou wast born of a Woman, certa^^ (...) Child bearing Women,
may cry (...) for thy Protection, thy Assistence. I hope in thee for it; such
Salvation belongs unto thee, O Lord!

You shall note this One thing more. It Is a Description of Holiness; Gal. IV.
19. Little Children, Of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be formed
in you. You have a Child formed in you. But, Oh! That you might have a CHRIST
formed in you! Now, if you take up Right Thoughts of a Glorious CHRIST; if you
have such a Mind as in a Christ you may see a Pattern of; if your Walk be such
as a Christ has left you a Pattern of: Or, if you Love what a CHRIST Loves, and
Hate what a CHRIST hates, and bear Afflictions and Abasements, with a
CHRIST-like Patience, and are Crucified unto the World, in which a CHRIST was
Crucified; Then you have a CHRIST formed in you. A CHRIST will be gloriously
concerned for the welfare of such Holy Women.

But Sobriety must accompany this your Holiness. Indeed, the Unborn Infant will
be Naturally and Powerfully and Profitably affected, by the Sobriety of an Holy
Mother. The Passions, or the Surfeits of the Mother, make a strange Impression
on the Infant; yea, on the Soul of it. Be Temperate in all Things. Keep your
Mind in all the undisturbed Serenity that is possible. In your Meats, Drinks,
Rest, use enough; but, Nothing too much. This Temperance, will dispose you to
Wait upon God, in a due Frame for His Favors, and your Offspring will Enjoy
the good Effects of it. Let the Conscience of the Sixth Commandment, make you
Tender of your Health. If such Counsil had not been of some Consequence for the
Infant also, the Angel would not have Counseled the Wife of Manoah, as you
remember he did. If also the Intemperate Longings of Women, are (as the Learned
say) some unhappy Signatures of the Woman's First Sin, ^eft upon their Sex, this
ought to render you as cautious as may be, of admitting them.

I said but now, To Wait upon God. And this you are to do, by pouring out your
incessant Prayers unto Him. It is to be hoped, that you have been used unto
Prayers all your Days. But certainly your Pregnant Time, should be above all a
Praying Time. If you have never yet Prayed Earnestly, it is now a Time to do so;
NOW a Time to have it said, Behold she Prays! -- and to Lament it Penitently
before the Lord, that you have been so hardly brought unto it. You will now
Retire to Daily and Frequent and Fervent Prayers, for all the Blessings of
Goodness Your Prayers, must be Cries; For thy Names sake, O Lord, Pardon my
Iniquity, for it is great! And, O Lord, order my Steps in thy Word, and let not
any Iniquity have Dominion over me. And, O Show me thy Mavelous Kindness in
thy Strong City* and the Goodness thou have laid up for them that Fear thee!
With the Pangs and Throws of a Distressed Soul, in your Prayers, you will Cry
for such things* and Lift up your Voice for such things. But then you will more
particularly Employ your Prayers, for an Happy and an Ea^^^ Delivery, in your
Approaching Trav^^^ In your Prayers for this Mercy, [a Mercy, which is Big with
a Thousand Mercies!] you will Plead the Power of God Think on the Word Spoken
to the Hand maid of the Lord; Luke I. 37. With God nothing shall be unpossible.
Plead the Mercy of God. Think on the word wherewith she of Old comforted her
Soul; Lam. II. 25. The Lord is Good unto them that was for Him, to the Soul
that Seeks Him. Remember, that the Name of God is, ^ Thou that hear Prayer.
You know how to turn these things into Prayer; how to make them the Plea's of
your Praye^ But, Oh! Don't Forget now to Plead the Mediation of the Savior,
who was pleased to be, and Sometimes to call Him self, The Son of the Handmaid
of the Lord Let such as these be your Groans before the Lord. O most Powerful
God, I know, Thou can do every thing. There is nothing that can stand before
the Power of thy Almighty Arm. Lord, If thou will, thou can, give me a Good
Time, in the Time of Trouble, that is before me. According to the Greatness of
thy Power, preserve One, that is appointed to die, if thou do not powerfully
Step in to uphold and Stengthen her. O Father of Mercies, Deal Mercifully with
thy Distressed Handmaid; Look Mercifully, and with Pity, on the Miseries,
which the Sin of the World has entailed upon me. God be Merciful to me a
Sinner. Oh! Behold thy Beloved JESUS, who was made a Curse, that so we might
either not feel the Curse, or else get Good out of the Curse. For the Sake of
thy JESUS, the Son of Man, who is the Son of God, and whom thou Love above
all the Works of thy Hands, and for the Sake of whom thou Love all that sly
unto Him; Oh! be Favorable to me!

Let your Prayers be those, Psalm. XXXVIII. 21, 22. Forsake me not, O Lord; O my
God, be not far from me. Make Haste to help me, O Lord my Salvation. Or those;
Psalm. XXII. 11. Be not far from me for Trouble is near; and there is none to
Help.

In these your Prayers, it would be of admirable Advantage, for you, to Search
and find out the Precious Promises of God that may most of all Suit your
Condition Present those Promises before the Lord as containing and engaging of
Blessings which the Blood of the Lamb of God ha^ bought for you. And Say,
Therefore has thy Handmaid found in her Heart to Pray this Prayer unto thee: O
Lord God, Thou art that God, and these b^ thy Words, and thy Words be true, and
thou have Promised this Goodness unto thy Handmaid; Therefore now (...) it
please thee to Bless the House of the Handmaid; For thou, O Lord God have
Spoken it.

Behold, Some of the Promises and Cordials, that you have to Live upon.

Psalm. XXXIV. 22. None of them who trust in the Lord shall ^ Desolate.

Psalm. LV. 22. Cast thy Burden on the Lord, and He shall Sustain thee.

Psalm. LVI. 3. At what time I am afraid, I will Trust in thee.

Isa. XLI. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; Be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will Strengthen thee; yea, I will uph^ld thee, by the Right Hand of my
Righteousness.

Heb. XIII. 5, 6. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So
that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper.

Isa. LXVI. 9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, says
the Lord!

Job V. 19. He shall Deliver thee in Six Troubles, yea, in Seven there shall no
Evil touch thee.

And now, Having these Promises, go Plead them with God; and let your
Experience, be that which is related concerning an Handmaid of the Lord,
Praying for a Child; I Sam. I. 19, 15, 18. ^he said, I am a Woman of a
Sorrowful Spirit, but have poured out my Soul before the Lord. -- So the Woman
went her way, and her Uneasiness continued no longer.

That you may be the better furnished and quickened for your Prayers, you will
do well to Read the Scriptures: It Is your Duty, to Search the Scriptures. In the
Scriptures, you may especially Single out the Book of Psalms, for your
Companion and Counselor and Comforter. Luther Religious Wife, Said, That she
had new known the meaning of many Passages ^ the Psalms, if Afflictions had not
Expounded them unto her. Your Afflictive a^ Anxious condition, will make many
passages in the Psalms, exceeding Relisha^^ and Agreeable. The Pious Author ^
the Book Entitled, A Present for Them Women, propounds to you, That you should
Sing the Psalms considerately al^^ by your self; because you will find, ^ Voice
quicken your Heart-affecting Meditation on the Matter; and he adds, ^ sides, it
is most unquestionably Pleasant ^ those Good Angels, who are Ministering ^ rit^
to attend you for Good. According then, for the Songs, by which you ^ Harmonize
with Heaven, and call in the Help thereof I commend unto you, Multitudes of
Passages, which ly Scattered all over the Psalter; especially in the III Psalm;
the IV the XVIII. the XXIII. the XXV; the XXVII; the XXXI; the XXXIX; the
XLIII; the LI; the LXXI; the LXXXVI; the XCI; the CXVI; the CXVIII; the CXIX;
the the CXXVII; the CXXX; the CXXXVIII; the CXLII. To which you may add, the
Prayer of Jonah the ^ong of Hannah; and the Song of Mary. Nor are Psalms only,
but Alms also, to accompany your Prayers. The XLI Psalm, ^ill tell you, what
you are to think of them. Our Savior, how frequently, ^ow earnestly does He
insist upon them! ^y, Thy Merits, O my Savior; are my only (...); I shall
never imagine my Alms to have ^y; But thy Commands, O my Savior, ^^ve directed
them; therefore by my Alms I will prepare for thy Mercies. This is Pure
^^^igion. The Prayers have a distinguishing ^^^^cacy, when it may be said, Thy
Prayers (...) thy Alms are come up as a Memorial be^ God. You are taught, That
the Merciful shall obtain Mercy. It is a Sweet Word; Psalm. XVIII. 25. With the
Merciful, thou will show thy self Merciful. Especially, when you Set apart your
Whole Days for Prayer (which you will sometimes do, as you shall be able to
bear it,) you will on these Days dispense your Alms, with a particular
Liberality. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, Says the Lord? And what
if in the Dispensation of your Alms, you should have a Special Eye, to Poor
Childbearing Women, if you can hear of any Such, in Wants, and Straits, and
grievous Necessities? You will have yet a more Special Eye, to such Poor as can
Pray for you; and you will engage them to do it, with a Daily Remembrance of
you.

What remains, is, for you to Enquire, Whether you have Omitted no Duty, the
Omission whereof may be uneasy to you in a Dying Hour. Such a Duty often, is
that of Joining to a Particular Church, an^ So, coming to the Table of the
Lord, and there Laying Hold on His Covenant. I^ you have hitherto Delayed this
Duty, it is n^w High Time to do it. Wherefore No^ first Secretly and Sincerely
come into the Covenant of Life, by an Hearty Consent unto every Article of it.
And then proceed Openly to Seal your Act and Deed in this way of God. Be
Heartily Willing to be Delivered from all the Maladies and Miseries of your
Soul; which is the first Mark of the Regenerate State: and then, Look on the
House of the Lord, as an Hospital for a Sin Sick Soul; Give not way to
Discouragements, by the Sight of what is Amiss, but not Allowed, in your Heart
and Life; but approach the Table of the Lord, with a Soul Hungring and
Thirsting after the Righteousness that will be the Cure of it. Make sure of
this Qualification, That you have given up your self to the Lord, as well as
you can; and that you Desire to be His and glorify Him; and that you Resolve
always to Pursue this Blessedness. Then come; Come, out of Obedience to the
Lord, who says, Do This; Come, and be not Afraid. Be able to Say, Ah, Lord, I
would come to thy Table with all the Grace, that may assure me of thy Love; I
desire to Fear thy Name. But, if I cannot come With it, I will come For it; Oh!
Take Pity on me!

If any thing else be necessary to Settle the Good State, either of your Soul,
or of your House, Do with your might what your Hand finds to do.

And now, Your FAITH! You Read, Heb. XI. 11. Through Faith, Sarah was delivered
of a Child. In the Renewed, and often Repeted Exercise, of a Lively Faith, keep
Looking for the Mercy of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, unto Life, both Temporal and
Eternal. By Faith, keep continually committing your self, into His Glorious
Hands; who said unto a Godly Woman when her Faith began to fail her; Joh. XI.
40. Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the
Glory of God? Were your Husband able to give you an Happy Travail, how willing
would he be to do it! Yea, (were there any Goodness in him!) though it were to be
by bearing your Trouble for you, as a rare Sympathy has caused Some to do! But
by Faith you make Sure of your Savior to be your Husband. The Voice of your
Faith is, O my Savior, I am thine; Do thou Possess me; And by thee let me
bring forth Fruit unto God! And now, by Faith depend on your most Mighty, and
most Gracious Husband. Say to Him, Cry to Him; O my Savior, How can thou
cast me off! Hope in Him, to see the Fulfillment of a Word that once dropped
from Him; Joh. XVI. 21. A Woman when she is in Travail, has Sorrow, because
her Hour is come; but as soon as she is Delivered of the Child, she remembers
no more Anguish; for Joy that a Man is born into the World.

Yet by Faith Submit unto His Holy Will. We read of Rachel; Genesis XXXV. 16, 18.
She Travailed, and she had hard Labor; Her Soul departed, and she died. We
read of another; I. Sam IV. 19, 20. She was with Child, near to cry out; She
travailed, her Pains came upon her; it was the Time of her Death. Suppose this
may, by the Sovereign Lord of Life, be the Portion appointed for you: yet by
Faith triumph over the Fear of Death; By Faith Resign your self into the Hands
of the Glorious Lord; Lord Jesus, Receive my Spirit! And so, Rejoice in the
Hope of the Glory of God. When your Time arrives, meet it with an honorable
Courage; bear it with an honorable Patience. But in the Minutes of your
Anguish, Let your Cry be of that importance; Psalm. XXVI. 11. Oh! Redeem me, and
be Merciful unto me. Or, Psalm. XXX. 10. Hear me, O Lord; Have Mercy upon me;
Lord, Be thou my Helper. Your Omnipotent Redeemer, is One who Commands
Deliverances, for them who Weep and Make Supplication; That is, He Commands His
Good Angels, to bring and work Deliverances; Deliverances come as the Effects
of His Commands unto His Ministers. No Mid-wives can do, what the Angels can!

While you are in a Doubtful Expectation of your Travail, you will do well to
avoid all Rash Vows; which usually prove the Snares of Souls: But yet
Entertain some Holy Resolutions, of a more Exact, a more Watchful, a more
Fruitful Walk with God, when He shall have Delivered you. And being Delivered,
your Next Work will be, to consider, What you shall render to the Lord. Oh!
Think, as in Ezr. 9.13, 14. Seeing thou, O my God, have given me such a
Deliverance as this* Should* again break thy Commandments, would thou not be
Angry with me, till thou have consume^ me? But then, Go on to think, What you
will do, that you may maintain more Communion with God, in the Religion of the
Closet: Think, What you will do, that you may be a greater Blessing in your
Family, and to your several Relatives: Think, What you will do in Abating of
your Superfluities, that you may Employ the more upon Pious Uses; Perhaps, to
Clothe poor Widows, like another Darcas. Beg the Help of the Divine Grace, that
you may Do such Things; and Glorify your Savior, with a Reasonable Service.

One of the First Things to be done, is to Give up your Newborn Child unto the
Lord, in His Holy Baptism. Thus rescue the Child, from the Great Red Dragon,
who is watching to Devour it. Let the Child be either Male or Female, this is a
matter to be left entirely unto the Wisdom of the Glorious GOD. Either of them,
if it be a Perfect Child, brings ten Thousand Mercies with it. And, if it may
be a Child of God the Father, a Subject of God the Son, a Temple of God the
Spirit, think, This is enough; Lord, I have brought One of thy Children into
the World.

As a Declaration of this Intention in you, Send the Child abroad, unto the
Congregation of the Faithful, where it shall be Washed, and Blessed in the Name
of the Glorious One, and laid under Everlasting Bonds to be the Lords. But at
the same time, Look on your self as laid under Bonds, to bring up the Child for
Him; and in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

You will Suckle your Infant your Self if you can; Be not such an Ostrich as to
Decline it, merely because you would be One of the Careless Women, Living at
Ease. Of such we read, They are Dead while they Live. But if you have the
Calamity of Dry Breasts; or your Health will not permit you to Give Suck;
Entertain it with Submission to the will of God; but as a Calamity.

Finally; Being well Recovered, you will Rejoice in your Fresh Opportunities to
Repair unto the Worship of God in His Congregations. Thither you will now
Repair with such Dispositions as those; [Psal. CXVI. 16, 17, 18.] O Lord, Truly
I am thy Handmaid, I am thy Handmaid; Thou have Loosed my Bonds. I will offer
to thee, the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and I will call upon the Name of the
Lord. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, now in the Presence of all His People.

FINIS.
Given to be Lent, when and where it may be seasonable.


