Theopolis Americana.

AN ESSAY ON THE Golden STREET Of the Holy City: Publishing, A TESTIMONY
against the CORRUPTIONS of the Marketplace.

With Some Good HOPES of Better Things to be yet seen in the AMERICAN World.

In a SERMON, To the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Massachusett-Province in
NEW ENGLAND. 3 d. 9 m. 1709.

COULAEI Vatis de America vaticinium.
Ingenium, Pietas, Arts, ac Bellica Virtus,
Huc Profugae venient, et Regna Illustria condent;
Et Domina his Virtus erit, et Fortuna Ministra.
Plantar l 5. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop.
1710.

To the HONORABLE Judge SEWALL.
SIR,
DEDICATIONS use to be Adulations. Flattery has, for the most part, so depraved
them, that they are become a trifling and an useless Formality. Yea, the
Epistle sometimes is, A Troubled Fountain, and a corrupt Spring.

I address you with a SERMON; but my Address will not have the least Alloy, of
that Common Evil in it.

I mention your Name on this Occasi^^^* It Is for Two Reasons; And if I were on
the Rack, I should confess no more.

First; I am sure, You are willing to appear with me, in a TESTIMONY against
all those Ways of INIQUITY, against which my SERMON has Testified. And if this
Faithfulness Procure any Obloquy, You will Rejoice to Share with me in That, as
well as in the Consolation.

Secondly. My Prayers and Hopes for America, are Yours; and I must Acknowledge,
that you first gave me some of the Hints, which my SERMON brings for the
Grounds of them.

Though our, Fe del Christiano, and our, Religion Pura, cannot yet have its
Operation in the Spanish Indies, nor our, Vrai Patron des Saines Paroles, in
the French; yet let us Bait and Wait; and in the mean time do all we can for,
the English; and Scatter into all Parts of it, Instruments of Piety, by which
the State of Religion therein may be from time to (...) ^ccommodated. May H^
that Kn^^^ your Works, graciously Accept of them. I am,

SIR, Your hearty Servant, Cotton Mather.

Pure Gold IN THE MARKETPLACE.
3 d. 9 m. 1709. Boston.
REV. XXI. 21. The STREET of the City was Pure GOLD.
GLORIOUS Things are Spoken of (...) O thou City of God (...) STREET be in
(...) O NEW ENGLAND; The Interpretation of it, be unto you, O American Colonies.

The Invitation, sounds Angelically; But my Hearers must have it now given
them; Come hither, and I will show you, an admirable Spectacle! It Is an
Heavenly CITY, descending out of Heaven, from GOD. There is an Heavenly CITY,
which the Great GOD, has Prepared for them, to whom He will be a God: A CITY to
be inhabited by an Innumerable Company of Angels, and by the Spirits of Just
Men made Perfect by a Resurrection from the Dead, with JESUS the Mediator of
the New Covenant shining upon them: A CITY; where God shall dwell with men, God
Himself shall be with them, and we shall Inherit all things. There will be a
Time, when that Holy City, will be nearer to this Earth, than it is at this
Day; and the Saved Nations of the Earth shall after a wonderful manner Walk in
the Light thereof. The Thoughts of the Primitive Christians and Chiliasts,
represented by (...) Martyr, concer^^^g that City, (...) very Remar^^^^^
Passages about it, more partic^^^^ in Tertullian, are known to them that have
Studied the Mystery of God. This is not a Time and Place to offer them. And, I
Suppose, a great part of the Auditory, are not yet come to the Thoughts, into
which I am compelled, on this Noble and Sublime Subject of c^^templation; and
into which, it is o^^ervable, that Men of Thoughts upon (...), now more
generally come, As the (...) ^ppro^ches. I must say, and so say (...) more, and
yet many more will say, with him, whom God made a ^^eat Instrument of reviving
the true Doctrine of the Chiliad in the former Century; Postquam alia omnia
frustra t^^tassem, tandem Rei ipsius Clarit^di^^ perstri^tus, paradox^ succ^^u^.

But shall we not imagine, that ther^ will be then to be seen on the Eart^*
some sweet Reflections of the Light, which the City of Glorified Saints will
sh^d down upon it? Yes; It Is not ill done by those Interpreters [ Provided
alw^^^* they do not Exclude the (...)* which they are (...)] I say, It Is (...)
Ill done ^y (...) who in the Vision that is now (...) us, look ^o find the
State of t^^ Church (...) Earth, after the Approa^hing Fall of Antichrist. We
have a world of Reason to Believe, That the Second Woe is past away; and that we
are entering into the Sev^^th Day of the Romish Jericho, and that b^^ck, [ But,
Oh! Let i^ be Brief!] Time, wh^^ the Uials of the Wrath of God, (...) the most
Woeful Plagues that ever (...) heard of, are to be poured out (...) the
Antichristian World. When (...) fearful Dispensation is over, then* th^^ comes
on that State of the Church on Earth, which will answer the Description, that
is here given us, of a New Ier^s^l^m. There has been a Time, when the City of
R^me, so extended her Pri iledges and her Obligations that -- Orbis erat;
People all over the World, were the Fre^-men of that mighty City. There will b^
a Time, when I^rus^lem shall be Literally Rebuilt, and People all over the
(...) shall be under the (...) of (...) Holy City. -- Orbis erit. (...) CHURCH
(...) God, all over the (...) s^all in some sort be the City.

One incompara^^^ Glory (...) City, is now singl^^ out for our present
Meditation. The Street o^ the City is Pure Gold. I concur with Peganius, and
conceive, That the Street here means, and so it m^^ be translated, The
^^rket-^^^ce; the Pl^ce where the Affairs o^ ^^ade bring tog^th^r a Co^cou^se
(...) ^^ople. The meaning is, The (...) ^f the CITY, shall be managed by (...)
Golden Rule. The Things that (...) to be done in (...) M^rket-Place, (...)
without C^^ruption. T^^re s^^ll be no Base D^^ling in it. (...) is added, It is
as it were Transp^r^nt Gl^^^. That is, The Dealing (...) be so (...), that it
shall be^r to be L^^k'd into* it shall be so Sincere, that men shall be willing
to have their very Hearts Look'^ into. There shall be no False-De^ling: All
shall be done with all possible I^tegrity. And though Grotius b^ the last m^n I
would advise ^^thal, upon the Prophesies of the Ap^cal^pse, (...) will here
take in a Gloss of his (...) it is a very Good one; V^ve^t (...) ^t in Dei
Co^spectu; M^n shall (...) Live and Act, as Remembering, that the Great GOD
looks upon them.

O Happy CITY! O (...)* no where, no where to be (...) but in a City o^ God

(...) Thing which I a^ to O^s^rve is, That in a CITY of GOD, the Street will
be Pure Go^^. The Bus^ness transacted in the Marketplace of an Holy City, will
ha^^ a Golden, that is to say, a Gra^i^^^ Character upon it. Golden
Proc^^^ings, that is to say, Godly ones, will (...) found in the Marketplace
of ^ CITY, which the Son of God, has ^ favor for.

My Doctrine is Written on the Conscience of all People, as with a (...) of
Iron. I Preach no other Doctrine, than what will be defended by many more than
a Thousand Preachers at this Instant in the Congregation. The Conscience in
every one of the Hearers, will Oblige him to Consent unto it. CONSCIENCE, Do
thou thine Office; Run thou to and fro, through the S^reet of our City, and make
men to (...), If Judgment and Truth do not (...) the Marketplace, the Holy SON
of GOD, will not Favor it, or Pardon it! If ^ Scripture must be quoted on the
occasion, take that One instead of a Thousand; Jer. 31.23. They (...) use this
speech in the Land of Iud^h, (...) in the Cities th^r^o^, The Lord Bless thee,
O Habitation of Righteousness, and Mountain of Holiness. The Blessed CITY, is
that, in the Street whereof, Righ^^^^sness and Holiness has an Habitation; ^
Marketplace of Righteousness, a ^ountain of Holiness. Oh! May such a Speech be
used in this our Land! Grant it, Oh! Grant it, Thou God of our Salvation! --
But the Lord calls upon us; Get thee up! Do thy part, that it may be so.

The Thing which I am then to Enquire, is; What is to be done, that the Street
of our City, may be Pur^ Gold? And, What have we to do in our Marketplace,
that so our Great SAVIOR, may Espouse us for, A City of God, and become our
Savior?

The Enquiry shall be answered with Faithful Sayings. Oh! Let the^ fin^ All
Acceptance.

I. Oh! That the Street may b^ f^ll of Good Men! Full of Righteous and Holy
Ones. It is but an Easy Metonymie, to make the Street, signify the Men that
fill the Street. Our Street will be Pure Gold, when they that walk in it, are
those (...) may be called, The Precious Sons of Zio^* Comparable to fine Gold.
There is* a Work of GRACE, which is wrought by the Holy Spirit of God, in the
Minds of His Chosen People. It Is in one word, the Glorious Image of God revived
in the Soul. A Good (...) in the S^ul, is the Name, which the Sacred Oracles
put upon it. This Grace of God is called, Rev. 3.18. Gold tried in the Fire.
Yea, Grace is better than Gold. My Friend, It is the very First Essay of Grace,
to esteem it so. Oh! take up that Esteem of it; The Gain thereof is better than
fine Gold; All the things I can desire, are not to be compared unto it. Of a
very Valuable man, we Proverbially say, He is a man w^rth his weight in Gold.
It may be said so of every man, that has a Work of Grace upon him. Yea, He is a
man more Precious than the Golden wedge of Ophir. In the mean time, you know
what you Read; Psalm. 119.119. Thou put away all the Wicked of the Earth
like Dr^ss; therefore I love thy Testimonies. Oh! will you therefore Love that
Work of GRACE, to the Glory whereof, you have in the Word of God, so many
Testimonies!

I will briefly Describe the WORK: Let my Hearers accompany the Description,
with a strong Attention to it; a strong Affection for it!

It is a Work, which disposes a man, to see the Worth of a CHRIST, and feel his
Want of a CHRIST, and fly to Him for all His Great Salvation, and Live by the
Faith of the Son of God. A Work, which disposes a man, to Hate and Loathe all
Sin, to Abhor that which is Evil; to Mourn for Sin, to Turn from Sin, as the
very Worst of Evils. A Work, which disposes a man, to delight in Se^^ing of
GOD, and Employ his All as a mere Steward, and ^ Good one, in the Service of
GOD; and make the Command of GOD the Rule of his Life, and Prize the Favor of
GOD, as better than Life. A Work, which disposes a man, to Submit unto the Will
of GOD in all things; and have his own Will Entirely swallowed up in the Will
of GOD; and bear Afflictions from the H^nd of GOD, with Patience, with
Humility, with Resi^nation. A Work, which dispos^s a man to carry it well in
all Relatio^s* to Do Good unto all, with Alacrity, with Assiduity; to Forgive
Injuries* and Overcome Evil with Good. A Work, finally, which disposes a man,
to Despise this World, and be above the Flatteries, above the Enchantments, of
it; and expect his Chief Blessedness in another, and a better World; in the
Heavenly World.

O Lovely Work! O Matchless Work! A Work, which for ever changes into Gold, the
Metal which it is wro't upon! There are some, who often Examine themselves,
Whether such a Work be produced in them. Oh! Let every one of us do so! My
Friend, Thou art yet a Stranger to the Work, if thou do it not. But the Issue
and Re^^lt of the Examination sometimes is tha^; Job. 23.10. When He has Tried
me, I shall come forth as Gold.

And now; the Street of the CITY, is Pure Gold, when the Street i^ filled with
Regener^^eChristi^^s; with men that have the Grace of GOD, shi^ing in them. O
Golden City; where the Angels of God may look down on the Marketplace, and
say, There is a Glori^us W^rk of GOD on the Souls of the People that are
walking there. The Ne^politan Poet sings of his Beautiful City N pl^s, It was
doubtless dropped down from He^ven* The Inclinations of the Citizens, in so near
a Neighborhood of the ^laming Vesuvio too; would make one fear, lest it ere
long drop down into Hell! But how much rather may the Elegy of an He^v^^l^
Original be ascri^ed, where the Citizens are generally Bound for Heaven! Oh*
H^ly SPIRIT of God and of Grace; M^^e thy S^nctifying Work very fr^quent among
us* Thou, Thou art He, who Leadest into a Land of Rec^itude! Oh! Let our People
ge^^rally breathe after this Work; Do so (...) it; Get it; O all ye People
(...) one of you!

But* if a Work of GOD, and of Grace, be desirable in ^ll ^he P^^ple, it is
mo^^ of all to be desir^d in those that are to Act for All the P^^^le A man of
Bright Piety is a man of Goo^ Metal: He will study to be a Bl^ssing to his
People; It Is very much to be hoped, that God will make him a Blessing:
Especially when he is called for^h into any Public Station. Sometime^ the
Government of a Place, is Assembled in the Marketplace of the City. Oh! Most
Privileged People, those Affairs are managed* by Religious men, whom a Work of
Grace has Ennobled, and made Partakers of the Divine Nature! Nothing so
Desirable! I say unto you, Nothing, Nothing so Nece^^ary! If I were in a Church
full of Kings, I would say what I do!

II. The Street must have no Dirty Ways of Dishonesty in it. I beseech you,
Sirs; Let there be none but Just and Fair Dealings in the Marketplace. Let all
the Actions of the Marketplace be carried on with a G^lden Equity and Honesty
regulating of them.

I should be very unworthy to stand here* if I should be Afraid of Dealing
Plainly with you. God and Men d^mand, that Plain Dealing be used, when
Fair-Dealing is to be insisted on.

Sirs, NEW ENGLAND is a Country, that has made a more than ordinary Profession
of Religion. Our Profession is Weighed in the Balances of GOD. If there be any
thing Defective, in the Honesty of our Dealing with one another, our Profession
will have a woeful MEAN TEKEL Written upon it. Let a man be never such a
Professor and Pretender of Religion, if he be not a Fair-Dealer That Man's
Religion is Uain. A Noise about Faith and Repentance, among them that forget
Moral Honesty, it is but an Empty Noise. The men are utter Strangers to Faith and
Repentance; God will Reject all their Confidences, of their being, The People
of God, and they shall not Prosper in them. I have a Commission that Ennables
me, and Emboldens me, to say among you; Woe, Woe, Woe, to you Professors, and
Hypocrites, who can make a Show of this and that Piety and Purity; but can
Cheat, and Cosen, and Oppress, and Wrong other People in your Dealing with
them!

It is true, ^ must believe, that New England is not worse than other Places;
There is more Ill-Dealing, I believe, (...) most other Places. Men will say so,
that speak Unpassionately and Impartially, and that knows this Wicked World.
But, O NEW ENGLAND; There are a Thousand Reasons, why thou should be Better
than Other Places; A more Glorious Land of Uprightness! And it must be
Acknowledged, That there have been Instances of Ill-D^aling among us, which
have given horrid Scandal; Never, Never can the (...) People make a Reparation
to their Country, for the Sc^ndel and Censure and Reproach they have brought
(...) it. O All you Lovers of Truth; (...) with me this Day, in a Detesta^^^^
of their Evil Doings; And as the (...) of God, rent his G^rments, and (...) to
his Knees, and s^read out his (...) the Lord his God, when (...) of some Evil
Doings among (...) with him; Ezra 9.6. (...) am ashamed, and I blush, to lift
up my Fac^ unto thee, my G^d. If any ^rofessors of Religion have done I^^
Things, yet RELIGION* What has that done? RELIGION shall wash her ^air Hands,
and Abhor your Doings. ^e it Proclaimed unto All the World* ^ll-Dealings are
not at all Countenanced; no, they are vehemently Disallowed, by the Religion of
NEW ENGLAND. We do PROTES^ against them, with a transporting Vehemence, and
behold with Agony the Blood, and the Grace, of our Great SAVIOR, abused in
them, with most aggravated Violatio^s.

But I have certain MOTIONS to make; and I assure my self, that al^ the Good
Men in the Country will concur to the making of them.

The First Thing, for which I move, is, That the Golden Rule of Charity may
Operat^, in ^ll the Dealings of the Marketplace* Then will the Street (...)
when every thing is done in it* (...) an Ey^ to the Gold^n Rule o^ (...)* I am
not versed in the (...) Myst^ries of the Market-Pla^e. B^t I am acquainted with
a Golden Rule, which, I am sure, would migh^ily Rectify all our Dealings there.
It Is that; Mat. 7.12 All things whatsoev^r (...) would, that men should do to
you, do ^e ev^n s^ to them. A Rule owned among Pagans as well as Christians; A
Rule, by Nature Engraven on the mind of Man, and as readily confessed as any
Principle of the M^th^m^ticks: A Rule, which well attended, would soon turn
this forlorn World, from an Aceldama into a Paradise. Chri^^ians, It Is a Rule
for you in all your D^alings, To think, Should my Neig^bour de^l with me as I
now de^l with him, would I not think my self hardly dealt withal. Don't slight
this Rule; Don't throw it by as an Useless one; You forfeit the Name of,
Christians, if you do. I can tell the Name of a Roman Emperor, who would on
such a Provocation have ordered* that you should not be called, Christians, any
more.

That this Rule may have its Perfect work of Charity, Remember that Application
of it; 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man se^k (only) his own, but every man ^^other^
Weal^^. Cha^itably aim at the Benefit of Other m^n* as well as Your own, in
your D^alings with them. Sir, Be willing that your N^ighbour should be
Benefited, and Encouraged, as well as Your self. Yea, Desire that he may;
Con^rive that he may. I am certain* they will do so in the Street of the CITY
of GOD!

I will state the Rule with one rare Circumstance. Be willing that your
Dealings ever should be Transparent-Glass. Keep always a^ive such a sense as
this; The Righteous God, who Loves Righteous^ess, looks into all my Dealings.
Great GOD, Thou art acquainted with all my Ways. And let your Dealings be such,
that if they should be laid open to all your Neighborhood, you need not be
Ashamed of them; Such, that they will bear the Touchstone, of the Judgment
which all men of Honor and Virtue and Probity, would pass upon them.

This were Pure Gold! Were this Golden Rule generally regarded, there would
need no Laws to force men to be Honest; the Courts would have but few Causes
brought unto them. The Chris^ians which often, often Reflect upon this RULE,
and always Conform unto it, verily, They are Golden Ones; God increase the
Number of them.

The Second Thing for which I move, is, That all Frauds in our Dealings of all
sorts, may be the Abomination of all that have any thing to do in the
Marketplace. All such Things as by the Irregular and Inordinate Love of Gold,
men are too often betrayed into! Of the various Method^, wherein men Deal
Dishonest^y with one another, in the Marketplace, and particularly, False
Weights and Measures, we read, Deuteronomy. 25.16. All that do such things, and all
that do Unrighteously, are an abomination unto the Lord thy God. May they
Likewise, and Therefore, be an Abomination unto you, O People of the LORD.

As now;

For men to Lie to one another, in Dealing with one another; It Is an
Abomi^ation! It was required; Lev. 19.11. Ye shall not Steal, neith^r d^a^
Fal^^^, neither Lie to one another.

For men to put off Adulterated or Co^nterfei^ed Wares; or, for men to work up
their Wares Deceitfully; When the Fi^^ is naught; the Car has undu^ mixtures;
there is Dirt and Stone instead of Turpentine; there are thick La^^s of Salt
instead of other things that should be there; the C^^ese is not made as it is
affirmed to be; the Liquor is not for Quantity or Quality such as was agreed
for* the Wood is not of the Dimensions that are promised unto the Purchaser; or
perhaps, there was a Trespass in the place of Cutting it; the Hay does no^ hold
out Weight by abundance; the Lum^er has a false Number upon it* or, the Bundles
are not as Good Wit^in as they are Without; It Is ^n Abomination!

For men to Over-r^ach others, bec^^se they ^^nd them Ignorant, or Scrue
grievously upon them, only because they are Poor and Low, and in great
Ne^essiti^s; to keep up the Necessaries of H^mane Life, (I say, the
Necessaries* which I always distinguish from the S^perfluities,) at an
I^m^derate Pri^^, merely because other People want them, when we can more
easily spare them; It Is an Abomination!

For men to Employ others, and not Reward them according to Contract; [A Crime,
not at all the less, because the Minister is not seldom the Sufferer from it!]
Or, to withold from the Labourer his Wages, till his Cry reach up to Heaven;
or break their Faith with their Creditors, and keep them out o^ their Dues! It Is
an Abomination!

To Rob the Public Treasury, by False Musters, or any other Articles of Charge
falsely given in; or, to Abett the Robbers, by any Assistence or Connivance at
such things in Auditing their Accounts; This also is a thing to be Repented of,
where any have been Guilty of it.

I hope, I speak to none, but those that can say; These are Abominable things*
the Soul of the Lord hates th^^; And, O my Soul, Do thou also ^ate them. ^
wish, All my People had such a sense of some Other things, which I am now going
to mention.

But in my way to those Other Things, methinks, I am stopped by something like
a Dead Amasa, lying in the midst of the Highway before me.

I hope, the Merchant, uses all possible Caution, as well as the Lesser
Dealers, to keep clear of that Blemish, Hos. 12.7. He is a Merchant, the
Balances of Deceit are in his hand, he Loves to Oppress.

And so well, Sirs, do I wish to your Voyages, that I would Entreat you, that
for the Man^ing of your Vessels in this Evil Time, there may be no such Unfair
Methods used, as may Entail Disasters upon them.

There is one sort of Trade also, about which my way of Addressing you, shall
be by Reciting the words of the Excellent BAXTER. They are these; [His
Christian Directory. Part II. Chap. 14*]

To go as Pirates, and Catch up poor N^groes, or People of another Land, that
have never forfeited Life, or Liberty, and to make them Slaves, and Sell them,
is One of the worst kinds of Thievery in the World; and such Persons are to be
taken for the common Enemies of Mankind; and they that buy them, and use them
as Beasts, for their mere Commodity, and betray, or destroy, or ^eglect their
Souls, are fitter to be called, Incarnate Devils, than Christians, though they be
no Christians whom they so Abuse.

I will go on to say; When we have Slaves in our Houses, we are to treat them
with Humanity; we are so to treat them that their Slavery may really be their
Happiness; Yea, in our treating of them, there must be nothing but wh^t the Law
of CHRIST will Justify. Above all, we are to do all we can ^o Christianize
the^. I will again give you the Words of my Honored BAXTER.

So use them, as to preserve Christ's Right and Interes^ in them. Those that
k^ep their Negro's and Slaves, from Hearing of Gods Word, and from becoming
Christians, because, they shall then lose part of their Service, do openly
profess Rebellion against God, and contempt of Christ the Redeemer of Souls,
and a contempt of the Souls of Men, and indeed, they declare, that their
Worldly profit, is their Treasure and their God.

Fidelity to the cause of Righteousness, obliges me, to take Notice of One
thing more.

If there be any English People, who are concerned with our Christianized
Indians, but then take advantage of their Ignorance, or their Indigence, or
their unchristian Love of the Bottel, to decoy them into their Debt; and then
use Indirect and Oppressive ways, to Exact an Unreasonable Satisfaction from
them, and Sell them for Servants, or Send them out of their own Country; This
Trade, will be a Reproach to our Christianity, and I am sure, it will be
Bitterness in the Latter End. Certainly, our Justices will concern themselves
to Rebuke and Prevent such Doings, lest the Guilt become so Public, as to
provoke the Justice of Heaven to Revenge it, by Indian Depredations.

The Third Thing for which I move, is; That there may not be so much as my
Tendency to any thing Oppressive or Injurious, in the De^l^^gs of the
Marketplace. The Thing for which I bring a very pressing Exhortation, is that;
1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all Appearance of Evil. If any thing Approac^ to a
thing, that App^ars an Evil; Sirs, Beware of it! There are Some Ill Things, too
frequently done among those who would count themselves greatly Wronged, if they
be not thought Good People. But they are things which anon, I am sure, prove a
notorious Wrong to many others, that really are Go^d People.

I will be free with you. There are Crooked Things that cannot be Numbr^^; I
wish, they could be Streightn^d.

I conceive, There are some of them, in certain Extortions, used by some of
them, who let out M^ney upon Interest. I mean, when they make People pay
In^erest, for a Sum, that really never was in their Hands; As it is, when the
Usurer immediately takes into his own, the whole first years In^erest, ^t ^he
Instant of his Letting out the Money.

I will go on ^o say. It Is a Thing of an Evil Te^dency, for People to Live
^eyond t^emselves, or to take it for gr^nted, that they must brave (...) out
with such a Tabl^, or with such an ^^bit, though they have not wherewithal to
bear the Expenses of it; They will not take in a R^ef of their Sails, though they
are on the point of Suffering Ship-wreck; though they must borrow, and defr^ud,
and Whi^^le, and ^^rt other People, to Support their Vanity. How contrary, How
^ontr^ry, is thi^, to that Poverty of Spirit, which must be found in all, that
wo^ld have a claim to a part in the Gold^n City!

It Is a thing of ^n Evil T^^de^cy, f^r People to Run into Debt, when they know,
they cannot Run ou^ ^f it, as w^ll and as fast, a^ they Run into it; so they
Spend what is no^e of th^^^ Own; They Forget that Precept, Owe nothing to an^
m^n, but to Love one anot^er.

It Is a thing of an E^il T^^d^ncy, for People to go from year to year, without
Settling the^r Acc^^^t^; to Jog on in a blind Conf^sion, and not know how much
they may be gone back-ward, or wh^the^ they have any thing, they may call,
Their Ow^, or no If they wo^ld have done like Honest Men, their I^^olvency
should have been ingenuo^sly Confessed some year; ago!

And then, sometimes People that Bre^k, deal not so fairly, so tr^ly, so justly
with their Inj^^ed Credat^^s, as they ought to do. Perhaps there are ^ndirect
Wa^es taken, to Cover from other Men, what j^stly belongs unto them.

No man that understands the Gospel, will Justify such things. The Street is
not Pure Gold, where such things are Practiced. On the behalf of our Holy
RELIGION, I do this day Testify against them! Yo^ tha^ F^ar GOD, will do so
too; and w^^l come forth of them all.

I m^^t make a ^ourth Motion. It Is, That the^ who ^ave Command ^f the Street,
would look upon t^emselves, (...) concerned Above other^ ^o ke^^ ^ll Dishon^^^y
(...) of it.

I^ is ^he Actio^ of a JUDGE; Job (...). I ^^epared my (...) in the Str^e^.
(...) May your S^at alway^ b^ upon Pur^ Gold: But then, your Hand, a Stranger
to it!

We are to Pray for our H^nourable RULERS. We should make that Pr^yer, That
they may be always, Ab^e Men, such as F^ar God, M^n of Tr^th, and hating of
Covetousn^ss. -- It was once the Unhappiness of Israel; Hos. 4.18. Her Rulers
with Shame do Love, Give ye. --

NEW ENGLAND is now blessed with Judges in our C^ur^s of Iudic (...), of whom
there is nothing Suspected, that may Exp^se th^^ Tabernacle^ to be Consumed by
the Fire of the Divine Indignation. But, My FATHERS, while we Bless God for His
Grace to You, in that thing, We will make it our Prayer, That a mavelous
Pr^dence, and Patience, and zeal for nothing but a God-like ^us^ice and
Goo^ness, and a particular Tenderness f^r the W^do^ and the Orp^an, and for
them that h^ve ^o H^lp^r* may always be int^rwoven, into all your
Administrations* that you man have a (...) always clothing of you* But (...)
ca^e be taken, that all Officers und^^ you, may be Restrained from the
Iniqui^y, which your Souls would so much abominate: and which will Plunge their
Souls into a ^rime for which there can be no Rep^nt^^ce accepted, without
Restitution, and therefore* it is rarely, rarely Repented of! You must give me
leave to t^ll you, There may be danger, lest that Iniquity grow upon us; and
lest the Sinners do multiply, whereof every man that L^ves his own Soul, will
cry out, Oh! Let not my Soul be gathered with them! No care, I say, No care can
be too much, to p^ocure that Felicit^; Isa. 60 17. For Brass I will bring Gold;
I will also make thy Officers Peace, and ^hine Exactors Righteousness.

Our Marketplace has now sitting in it a GENERAL ASSEMBLY, to whom I must bear
an Honorable Testimony.

It ha^ been asserted, That although our Public Difficu^^^es and Perplexities
have been Wonderful, yet there is no Plantation in the World, more careful to
make Honest Payments from the Public Tre^sury. If they have not always been
Great, yet you have been careful, as well a^ could b^, ^o make them (...). I
Believe the Asser^^on, and therefore I Publish ^t. The Street is thus far Pure
Gold, by your Laudable Fideli^y.

There is One thing more, that I may take notice of. In two or three too
Memorable Days of Temptation that have been upon us, there have been Errors
committed. You are always ready to Declare unto all the World, That you
Disapprove those Err^rs. You are willing to inform all* Mankind with your
DECLARATIONS;

That no man may be Persecuted, because he is Conscienciously not of the same
Religious Opinions, with those that are uppermost.

And; That Persons are not to be judged Confederates with Evil Spirits, merely
because the Evil Spirits do make Possessed People cry out upon them.

Could any thing be Proposed further, by way of Reparation, [Besides the
General Day of Humiliati^n, which was appointed and observed through the
Province, to bewayl the Errors of our Dark time, some years ago:] You would be
willing to hearken to it.

I have only this to add. You have Enacted Excellent Laws against the ways of
Dishonesty. A COMMITTEE of Wise Men, would soon make a Report, wherether there
needs any more Legal Provision against them; and whether any further ACTS be
needful, to Burnish the Golden Street of the City. And this One thing more. Oh!
Let not the Laws for Schools be Shamm'd; and the justice of a Good Educa^ion be
witheld from the next Generat^on!

The Glorious LORD grant you H^s Direction! Sirs, If I had not thought that the
Impoverishing Judgments of God upon us, had this Loud Voice i^ them, Learn
Righteousne^^! Lear^ Righteousness! as much as any thing in the World, I could
no^ have prevailed with my self, to have uttered such things in the Street of
the City, as I now treat you withal. Yo^ will see, how I am led into these
things, when you have Read; Isa. 1.25, 26. I will t^rn my hand upon thee, and
Pure^y Purge (...) thy Dross, and tak^ away al^ the (...) I will Restore thy
Judges (...) the (...), and thy Counsel^ors as at (...) B^ginning.

B^t now I have begun, I must balk n^^hing. There is a Third Thing to b^
^arn^stly insisted on.

III. Sirs, There is a Branch of the Ri^^r of Death, which must not Run in the
Street. Ah, How will the Golden City ^eas^ to be such, and become a very Babel;
except that Flood of Iniquity be dried up! A Flood, which the Dr^gon has ca^^
out of his Mouth, to devour the Church in the Wilderness! A River, the Streams
whereof do debauch, do de^^le, do destroy the City of our God. Oh! If the
Street of the CITY be Pur^ Gold, there will be no R^eling there; no Spewing,
upon all the Glory. The Bottel must not be the Grand M^rchandise of the
Marketplace. We r^ad con^erning the City of God; Rev. 22.1, 2. There is a Pure
River of Water of Life, -- in the midst of the Street of it. But, Oh! Let there
not be in the midst of our Street, a River that shall carry People down into
the Dead Sea, dow^ into the Lake of Sodom.

In the Wall of the Holy Cit^, we find ^ Stone, called, An Amethyst. The St^^e,
does in the Signification of the Na^^, decry Drun^e^ness. Give me leave (...)
do the part of an Amethyst, or l^^ ^he (...) ^ut of the W^ll. Yea, Ti^ the
Voice of the Lord that Cries to (...) Oh! Let no Tendency to Dr^^ke^^^ss be
seen among us! Let not (...) Drink make us to Perish!

You a^e not at a loss, What is the ma^t^r, about which I make such ^ Cr^; Such
a Rep^^^d Cry; and will (...) give over doing so* I am with all possible
Solemnity to tell you; suc^ Prodigious ^uantities of (...), to b^ co^s^med
among a People of our Eng^g^^^nt^ ^o be the most So^^r People in the World, I
must s^y, It Is an h^^rible T^ing! I request so^e capable ^erson, to compute the
Quan^ities, an^ th^^ ma^e the most Proper and Ob^ious Inferences; I am sur^,
they must all say, It Is an H^rrible T^ing!

The Golden-mouthed Father often inv^igh'd against the Sottish Vice of
Swearing: His Hearers asked him, When ^e would have done with his Invectives;
He answered, When you have done Swearing. In my Importunities for a Street of
Pure Gold, if I am asked, When I will have done with my Blows upon the Bottel!
My Answer is, When I see it broken; When I see, it is universally counted a
Shameful thing to be too free with it; When I see People take it, only When,
and As, it may be useful to them.

I don't move, to have the Use of it Banished; but the Abuse and Excess of it.
And I most importunately move, That all Sober People throughout the Land, would
set themselves to think, What may be done, to have Rum used with more of
Moderation?

The French and the Indians have sorely Scourged us; but let it not be thought
a Paradox, That one of the Sorest Punishments, which ever did or ever can
befall this poor Country, is the Great Esteem, which this Liquor has among us.
It makes us Poor; It keeps us Poor; whole Families may curse the Day, that ever
the Bottel came into them. It will soon make us a D^spicable Country. All our
Strength will be departed from us. Ah, NEW ENGLAND; Thy Street will not be Pure
Gold; No, 'twill be a filthy Puddle, a nasty Kennel. Yea, the Wild-beasts of
the Desert will dwell here; thy Houses will be full of doleful Creatu^^^^.

Instead of Propounding Laws, to retrench a Mischief, not easy to come at* My
Proposal is; That this One Observation may be Spread through the Country, and
awfully considered of. Though this Liquor may be Useful, at some time, and in
some things, yet no Man that uses it constantly will ever be Good for very
much. It will infallibly Stunt his Abilities; He will discharge no Office, as
he ought to do; It will Besot him, or, at least very much Flatten him, and make
him very little better, than a mere Good for nothing. Take him from the Bottel,
for the STATE, or for the CHURCH, or for the FIELD, (...) be a Poor Tool; God
will do little by him; he will never be Excellent. When a man stands a Candidate
for any Preferment, I move, That it may be known, whether he be a Friend of the
Bottel, or no? That which adds to the Horror, is; It Is very Seldom known, that
any one Habituated unto the use of the Bottel, ever is Recovered from it; The
Depraved Stomach will crave and ^ave after it, insatiably!

Could I make my Voice heard beyond the Herald of the Temple, I would say;
Sirs, Why should you be willing to have, your Estates Evaporated, your Bodies
Carbonado'd, your Families wretchedly Educated: Ah, Foolish NEW-ENGLANDERS, Has
the Bottel so b^witched you? Why, why should you Expose your Souls, to the
hazard of that Lak^, from whence the Smoke of the Torment shall ^scend for ever
and ever? All for a Bottel! A Goodly Price are they valued at!

There was a Street in the old City of R^me, named, ^icus Sobrius, The Sober
Street. The Reason of the Name was, because there was not one ^rinking House in
the Street Ah, my dear Country; shall we not see a ^olden Street of Ierus^l^m
in thee? But, then it must be a Sober St^^et.

You must not wonder, to see the Flame, in which I ^all upon you. The dreadful,
the dreadful Dispensations of God, have brought us into fearful Apprehensions,
How far this Country may come to be ravaged by Po^ish Idolaters. It Is with a
trembling Soul, that I must Speak, what is now to be Spoken; If once this
become a Country of Drunken Protestants* we can have little to plead with the
Holy Son of God, why it should not be so; little to plead, why we should not
fall before Popish Id^laters; little to plead, why the Laodicean Fate should
not come upon us. But, --

Gr^ci^us LORD, we put our Trust in (...), that it shall never, nev^r come to
That*

IV. There is a Fourth matter of Caution, which I am to leave with you; and
then I ^il^ make an End.

In the CHURCHES of the Lord, (...) the Markets of Truth. (...) make our
Supplicati^ns to the (...) of our Churches, That (...), things man go well.

We (...) ^LDERS ^f the Churc^e^, R^^ 4.4. T^^y (...) ^^eir Heads Crowns of
Gold. ELDERS of Shining S^nct^ty, ^o^n'd with rich Abilities and
Accomplishments; Prayerf^l and Pai^ful Men; Zealo^s Lovers of CHRIST and of
Soul^; Real Men of God; are such: They have Cr^wns of Gold; though on Temporal
Accounts they may say with him, W^o was al^o (...) Elder; Silver and Gold I
^ave N^ne. I must say, None but such are Worthy to walk in a Street of ^ure
Gold. In the Primitive Ti^es* the Churches often kept their Days of
Supplications, to obtain from the Glorious LORD, Holy Pastors, that should be
Men after His ow^ Hear^. Let us a^k our As^ended LORD, That He would Bestow
such G^^ts upon us. And, Pr^ise the L^^d, O NEW ENGLAND, P^^ise (...) God, O
Americ^n Z^n, in that H^ has Bestowed so ma^^ such Gif^^ upon th^^. For indeed*
how many MINISTERS are s^ill to be see^ in ou^ Church^^ (...), Yo^^g Minister^*
(...) ^on^inually (...) in th^i^ (...)* and S^udy that they man make
Improv^me^t^ that shall (...) unto all men: W^o work their S^rm^^s into their
own Hearts, and Fetch them ou^ from thence, before they Preach them unto
Others; Who Mind the St^t^ ^f Religi^^ in their Fl^cks, and S^it (...), with
all agreeable Admonitions; Who with Wisdom and Courage Rebuke all growi^g Evils
among their People, and warn them and arm them against the Snares of the Wicked
one; W^o set themselves to Encourage Pi^t^ among their People, es^^cial^y E^rly
Pi^ty, and such Societies as use ^o b^ the I^ce^tives and Preservatives of it;
W^o, bear their Distr^ssing and A^asing circumstances with admir^bl^
S^lf-d^nial, and und^^ all their Temp^ati^^s, comfort themselves, with the
Th^ughts of their precious Opportu^ities to Glorify CHRIST in this Worl^, and
^^gment the Recompe^ces of the World to come* Our Great Savior can make many
more!

But then, the Street where these Offi^^^s of Wisdom, are to Procla^e the
m^xims of ^isd^m, the Dict^tes and E^icts ^f Heaven; We are to Supplicat^
Heaven, That as ^t has ^een hitherto, (...) still there may be, no D ct^i^es
Preac^ed there, but what shall be, Gold ^^ilt upon the Foundation. Let me Sp^ak
(...), for your Comfort and Hon^ur; Th^re is not a Street of more ^ure Gold
upon the Face of the Earth at t^is day, for the GOSPEL generally Preached in
the true Purity of it, than ^he Churches of NEW ENGLAND. ^e Awakened, O ye
CHURCHES ^f (...) LORD, Be Inquisitive, whether in ^his Day of common
Degeneracies, ^here be no Vergencies to Another ^ospel: Whether the Doctrines
of Gr^c^* as delivered in our Confession of Faith, are not in any hazard of not
being duly adhered unto. If any Persons ^nash their Teeth with Indignation* at
the Watchmen, who advise you to be Sollicitous for the Preservation of this
Great Interest; I must faithf^lly tell you, Those (...) will giv^ you (...)
Cause to be Iea^ous of them.

I* must add thi^; As far as the Street of the CI^Y, has b^^n Scriptu^^lly laid
out amon^ us in r^^ard of the Order of the Gos^el* it will ^e (...) Ill to
attempt the Alteration of (...)* Where we have a Platform le^t us, that is
according to the Word of our Glori^us LORD, and the (...) in the M^unt, we
shall be great Enemies to our Selves, if we do not keep to it. As far as the
Golden Street h^s been measur^^ by the Golden Reed, Let it not be put ^ut of a
Right ^hape; nor let a c^arse and vile Rubbish, be laid in the Pa^ement, which
ought to have none in it, but the S^^nes of the (...)* God keep us from ever
being any part* or so much as a By-l^ne, of the Street of the Great Cit^, where
His Witness^^ are to be hardly dealt withal!

I happen this very Day, among c^^tain Papers in my Study, to take up a c^py ^f
a Le^ter sent from ^ Wor^hy Person here, to one in (...), abo^t Seventy years
ago; in which Le^ter t^ere is this rema^kable P^ssage; Her^ is a T^mpl^ built,
mo^^ glo^^ou^ ^^an Solomon's; Not of D^ad (...) for the Rhetoric of the
Passage; and yet say, The Golden Work of God in these His Churches, if we may
Mend any p^^t, in which we should go on to more of the Ki^gdo^ of Heaven, let
us Humbly do it. But, Sirs, Do not Spoil it. Oh! Destroy it ^ot; There i^ a
Bless^ng i^ it.

PEOPLE of GOD; May these be your C^res. Then there will be fulfill^d unto us,
that Word* Isa. 1.26. T^^^ ^^alt be called, The City of Righte^us^^^^, The
Faithful Cit^. A CITY of such a Golden Street, will be ^ Strong City; God will
appoint Salvation f^r Walls, and b^lwarks unto it; while non^ but a Righteou^
N^ti^n, which keeps the Truth, inhabit^ it. O NEW ENGLAND, Keep such a Street;
and Swe^p it, where it wants to be better kept. Th^n, there will be no br^^king
in or going o^t; there will be n^ C^^plai^ing in ^ur Str^^t. No, we shall b^ ^n
Happ^ Pe^^le, I say, an Happ^ People; for the LORD will be OUR GOD. I will say
unto you; Joel 2.21. Fear not, O Land, be glad, and rejo^ce, f^^ the LORD will
do great things. God will make our En^mies to be fou^^ Liars and Los^rs; Our
Coast will be under His Protection; There will none dare go up against the Land
of Unwall^d Villages. Our God will incline the Government of our Nation also,
to Remember what a Loyal People we have always approved our selves, and to
cheri^h these Colonies, as D^ughters to be highly accounted of. Yea, O Holy
City; Thou shall Lay up Gold (...) Dust, and the Gold of Potosi as the (...) of
the Brooks: The Almighty shall be thy Defense, and thou shall have a Plenty of
all that thou desire.

I have been Surprised at the Reading of a Passage in a Pagan Writer, who
flourished more than Fifteen Hundred years ago. It Is AElian, a Grecian Writer,
who says, That in Times long preceding his, there was a Tradition, that Europe
and Asia and Africa, were encompassed by the Oce^^; But without and beyond the
Ocean, there was a great Island, as big as They. And in that Other World, there
was an huge CITY, called, (...), The Godly City. In that City, Says h^, they
enjoy all Possible Pe^ce and (...), and Plenty: And, ^e S^yes, T^^y ^r^ without
Controversy a very Righteo^s People; So Righteous, that they have God
marvellously coming down among them. I know not what well to (...) of a
Tradition so very Ancie^^, and yet having Such an American Face upon it. All I
will say, is thu^ much. There are many Arguments to persuade us, That our
Glorious LORD, will have an Holy City in AMERICA; a City, the Street whereof
will be Pure Gold. [W^ cannot imagine, that the brave Countries and Gardens
which fill the American Hemisphere, were made for nothing b^t a Place for
Dragons. We may not imagine, That when the Ki^gd^m of God is come, and His Will
(...) d^^e on Earth as it is done in Heaven, which w^ had never been taught to
Pray for, if it must not one day be accomplished, a ^allanci^g ^alf of t^^
Globe, shall rem^in in the Hands of the Devil, who is then to be Ch^in^^ up
from decei^i^g the Nations. Has it not been promised unto our Great Savior?
Psalm. 2.8. I will give th^e the uttermost parts of t^^ Earth for thy
Possession. And, Psalm. 86.^. A^l Nations whom thou have made, (...) come and
worship before thee, O Lord, (...) ^^all glorify thy Name. And, has it n^^ been
pro^ised? Mal. 1.11. Fr^^ t^^ Rising of the Sun even unto the goin^ (...) the
some, my Name shall be great (...) ^he ^entiles. AMERICA is Le^ibl^ in these
Promises. But if it be not here plainly enough expressed, that ^an be more
plain, than the Proph^^^* c^ncerning the Kingdom of our S^^iour* Dan. 2.44. I^
shall break i^ (...), an^ consu^e ^ll these Kingdoms, and i^ shall stand for
ever. The Kingdom of our Savior becoming a Great Mountain* that must fill the
WHOLE EARTH, does particularly fill, and Change, and Bless those Countries,
^hic^ belong to the Ten Kingdo^s of (...) Roman Empir^, in the Papal and Fi^al
Edition (...). Now, the Americ^n ^ountries* do ^elong to some of thos^ (...)
become a conside^^^le ^art o^ ^h^ir Dominions* And ^^erefore* ^is m^st cer^ain,
he Glori^^^ (...) ^ome of ^ ^^and in these Countries, as well as in the
European. There have been Martyrs of CHRIST in America. The Blood of the
Martyrs here, is an Omen that the Tr^ths for which they Suffered are to Rise,
and Live, and carry all before them, in the Land that has been so M^rked for
the Lord. Such men as they will doubtless have some Glorious Power over the
Nations, where they have been Such Overcomers; They that are to Shine ^s the
Stars, will t^rn many unto Righte^^sness; bring many to believe on the Sun of
Righteous^ess, in these Goings down of the Sun. Though Austin knew nothing of
America, yet no American could have made a better Descant, on the Mystery of
our Lords G^rments, made of Four Parts, to every Soldier a Part, than his;
Quadripartit^ Vestis Domini Jesus, q^adripartitam figuravit Ejus Ecclesiam, tot^
Scilicet, qui quatu^r partibus constat, terratum Orb diffusam. The World,
says he, which does c^nsist of ^our Parts, will have the Ch^^ch of our Lord
JESUS, in every Part. But O AMERICA, will no Share of the Lords Garments* and
Glories, and the R^g^te^usn^ss of the Saint^, fall to thee, who a^t a Part of
the World singly almost as great as the O^^er T^r^e? Yea, the Day is at hand,
when that Voice will be heard concerning th^^, P^t on thy beautiful Garments, O
Am^rica, ^he H^ly City! Certainly, It wa^ never intended, that the Church of
our Lord, should be confined always within the Dimensions of S^rabo^s Clo^k;
and that, All the World, should always be no more, than it was, when Augustus
taxed it We are Sorry, w^ are Troubled, Tha^ the G^od Seed of the WORD, falling
on the other Three Soyls, has brought forth so little Good Fruit, and for so
little a while. But our Glorious LORD, will order that Good Seed ere long, to
be cast, upon the Fertile Regions of America, and it shall here find a Good
Ground, where it shall bring forth Fruit unto Astonishments; and unto
Perpetuity! When our Lord uttered the Parable, ^o which I have now alluded, we
read, He w^nt into a Ship, and from thence in^^ructed the Multitude that stood
on the ^h^re. I will believe, that in this ver^ A^tion, there was a P^rable an^
a Prophesy. By Na^igatio^, there will be brought the Word of a Glo^ious CHRIST,
unto a Multitude afar off; and as the Ships cover the Sea, the E^rth, and thou,
AMERICA, too, Shall be filled with the knowledge of the Glorious Lord. The Fall
of Old Pagan Babylon, was brought about, by the Diversion of her Euphrates from
her. The Fall of the New Popish Babylon, will be accompanied with the Loss of
her American Interest: But when it is diverted from her, certainly it will then
serve the City of God. I will add this; When w^ critically Examine, the
Accomplishment of the Prophecies, in the Judgments of the Seven Trumpets,
whereof Six have done Sounding, we shall find, that by the Sea, was meant,
Portugal, and Spain, and France, with the adjoining Islands, from the Rhine and
the Rhos^^, to the Western Ocean, and the Peninsula of Italy; all which are
almost wholly Encompassed with the Sea, and mighty Rivers. I conceive, we are
now entering into the Dispensation of the Seven Vials; One of the Fir^^ whereof,
is Poured out upon the Sea, (...) it becomes as the Blood of a Dead Man, and
^very Living S^ul dies in the Se^. The most Obvious Application o^ it, is to be
trembled at! -- But it is easy to draw Some American co^s^quences. I wave them;
and only say, It Is thought by Some, that (...) might be intended, as a Plac^
where the Wo^shippers of the Gloriou^ JESUS, may be S^eltered, while fearful
Things are doing in the Eur^pea^ World, and, [as '^is foretold it shall b^!]
The L^nd shall be fearfu^ly Emptie^ an^ Spoiled; The Curse will devo^^ ^he
E^rth, and they that dwell therein will be desplace; the Inhabitants of the
Earth will be ^urned, and few men w^ll be lef^, [See the XXIV. of Isaiah.]
Whether it shall be so, or no; we are sure, ^her^ is a Day at hand, When the
Lord of H^sts will Reign among His Ancient P^^ple Glori^usly. In that Day, it
will be impossible, for the Hol^ People, and the Teachers and Rulers of the
Reformed World in the other Hemisphere, to leave America unvisited. It will be
impossible for a People, so inspired from Heaven* for the Propagation of true
Christianity as will then be the Stars of that Hemisphere, to be unconcerned
about America, and all the Ends of the W^^ld that are to tur^ unto the Lord;
all the Kindreds of the Nations that are to Wors^ip before Him. It will be
impossi^^e, that the Effect of the Essays used, by Men f^lled with the SPIRIT
of CHRIST, and able to do more than all that was done in the Primitive Times,
[For, When He gi^es the Wo^d, Great wi^^ be the Army of them that s^ ^^blish
it!] Should not be, a conquest of America, ten thousand times more glorious,
than all that ever any Cor^ez pretended unto; The Ki^gdo^ here will be the
L^rds, and the Lord will be Governor among the Nations. When the Holy SPIRIT
of God, that River, the Streams whereof are t^ M^ke glad the City of God,
shall, as He will, Run down into, and thorough the Worl and make the World
become a Watere^ Gard^n, and an Even for the Lord from Hea^^^, and ^od shall
dwell with me^* by His Holy spirit m^rvellously Poss^^sing, and Purifying, and
Enlightening of them; can you think, that America, shall be nothing but M^ery
Places and Marshes, given to Salt? By no means. O wide Atlantic, Thou ^^alt
not stand in the way as any Hindranc^ of those Communications!]

Verily, Our Glorious LORD will ba^e Dominion from Sea to Sea. In thos^ Days
will the Righteous flourish. Then they who dwell in the Wildernes^, and even in
this also, Shall vow before Him. They that are of the City, shall have
something to do here for Him. O NEW ENGLAND, There is Room to hope, That thou
also shall belong to the CITY. Thou have already made a Seisin of America, on
behalf of thy Glorious LORD. It is in some sort His Primier Seisi^* The Seisin
in Fact, which the Son of GOD, has taken of these America^ Territories, is, we
hope, a Seisin in La^ for all the rest. And certainly, Thou shall not be c^st
off, when He comes into the Actual Possession of all the rest. Thy Name shall
then be, Jehovah Sh^mmah, THE LORD IS THERE. And, As ^e have heard, so shall we
see, in the C^ty of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of our ^od: GOD will
^stablish it for ever more*

The Design of my SERMON, is, To bespeak, all possible Anticipations of this
Felicity!

FINIS.
Appendix.
IN^^much as we are now doubtless arrived un^o that Point of Time, in which we
may be under a daily Exp^ctation, that the SE^ENTH TRUMPET of the Revolutions
^oretold in the most sure Word of Prophesy will ^egin to Sound, and the Great
Trumpet shall be ^lown, in the Joyful Sound whereof, AMERICA may hope for a
Share; it may prove an agreeable Entertainment unto Some Good Men, to have a
V^cant P^ge or two, here filled with a brief Re^^pitulation of the Things that
ar^ ^hortl^ to come to p^s^.

I. The Seven l^st Plagues, of the VIALS, ar^ to be Poured out, upon the Papal
Empire, These are the very N^xt Things to be looked for; and very Sad Things
they will b^ to the Unreformed World. The First of them, falls upon the E^rth,
or Inland parts of Europe* Especially, those lying between the Danube and the
Adriatic. It will b^ a Neiso^ and Gri^^ous Sore. Q^ere, Whether not a Raging
and Mortal Prestilence. The Second falls upon the Se^; or the Maritim parts of
E^rope; Especially* Port^g^l, Spain* France* and the adjacent Islan^^* The
Event will be; ^t becomes as ^he blood of ^ Dead man, and every Living Soul ^y
d in the (...). The I^terpretation, if I am going to (...) must br^ak off;
O^st^pui, Steteruutque Comae, ^t vo^ fau^ibu^* h^sit.

II Now comes the E^d of the Tyr^n^y, or Power of the T^n H^rns, the Several
Idolatrou^ Kingdoms, in the Divided Roman Empir^. The Conclusion of the Forty
two M^^ths, in which the Ten Kingdoms, have Power of making W^r with the
Saints, and over coming them.

III. Now comes the End of the Tyr^nny of the Little Horn, or E^clesiastical
Hierarch^ of which the Pope is the Head* The Conclusion of the Time, Times, and
a Part, wher^in the Little Horn, was to Speak great Words against the most
High, and to wear out (...) Saints of the most High.

IV. Now is the Sanctuary to be cleansed, and the San^tuary and the Host, to be
no long^r trodden under foot. The Conclusion of the Forty two Months, w^erein
the Gentiles are allowed to tread under foot, the out^r Court of the Templ^, or
the H^ly City.

V. Now the Persecuted Stat^ of the Church ^om^s to an End. The Conclusion of
the Tim^, Tim^s, and Half a Time, or Twelve hundred and Sixty years, wherein
the Wom^n is to be no^rished in the Wilderness.

VI. Now the poor Vaudois, and the Wit^^sses of the Lord, com^ to the End of
their ^fflicted condition The Conclusion of the Twelve h^ndred and Sixty Day^^*
in which the Two Wit^esses were to Prophecy in Sackcloth; and they must now
he^r a ^reat V^i^e from Heaven, S^ying, unto them, Come up b^^^er; and they
Asce^d in the Sight of their ^nemies.

VII Now there must b^ a Great E^rthqua^e, in which the Tenth (probably France)
of the City, is to f^ll: with such ^ffrighting ^^^^umst^nc^^, that the Rem^ant
shall give G^ory t^ the God of Heaven. Soon after follows, the Restoratio^ of
the Israelitish Nation; and this not only of the Tw^ Tribes, (mixed with many
who are the Off^pring of the T^n,) who are dispers^d ^very where, but ^lso the
T^n Tribes, whereof w^ find Romans, to this Day Existing, in the v^ry Pl^c^s
whither Salman^ssar so long ag^ tra^sported them.

Upon the Wars of Europe.
SEVALLUS. (...) fluctus CHRISTO moderante super^o^.
Euphrates cedit; Roma relicta c^dit.
While CHRIST Commands the mighty Waves
of the tempestuous Main,
Euphrates turns, and l^^aves old Rome
to court Recruits in vain.

MATHERUS. Splendida jam S^lymae dejectae maenia surgent;
Et Regio Seeds nostra Sionis erit.
GOD will our Salem's glorious Walls repair;
And in it is ^^ght our Land shall have a share.


