Dust and Ashes. An ESSAY upon Repentance to the Last.

Advising a WATCHFUL CHRISTIAN, Upon that CASE; How to keep Alive the Daily
Exercise of REPENTANCE, to the End of his Life?

Job xlii. 6. I REPENT in Dust and Ashes.

O (...), de Te Novi (...) Omnia Ligata tu Solvis; Omnia (...); Omnia adversa
tu mitigas, Omnia (...) sanas, Omnia con^u^a tu lucida^. Omnia desperata tu
animas.

Cypr. de Laud.Paenit. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green for Timothy Green,
at his Shop at the North (...) of the Town in Middle Street 1710.

Amici, quum Libellum Legisset, Optio.
GO, Little Book, and tell the Best of Saints,
They alter must, their matters of Complaints.
Most now Complain of Wars, and Wants and Fears;
But Saints must more bewayl their Sins with Tears.
Their Daily Sins do call for Daily Groans;
And Former Sins require yet Farther Moans;
Their Sin Within, the Source of all their Sin,
And with their Own, the Sin of Other Men;
All things cry, Keep up the Repenting Sirain!
Who Once have done it, must Repent Again.
Were Sin more Bitter, CHRIST would Sweeter be;
And Better Times we should then Sweetn'd see.
Shower down this Grace Good GOD, the World to Mend!
Live, O Repentance, till our Life shall End.
N. C.

Billij Anthologia.
Quum Sceleris, noxaeque Gravis, been Paeniter, illi
Perpetuus Lacrymis obruit ora dolor
N^m qui post Lacrymas (...) ^^nania gaudia sese
Tra^stulit, Ex Lacrymi^^ ^^^dia nulla tulit.
Repentance to the Last.
ISAIAH VI. 5. Then said I, Woe is me, because I am a Man of Unclean Lips.


THEN! It Was after He had been taken up into the Heavenly World! He was a true
Minister of the Gospel who uttered that Wish I wish; that if I Die in the
Pulpit, I may Die Preaching of Repentance; and that if I Die out of the pulpit, I
may Die practicing of it. I would most heartily come into the Wish. In the mean
(...) of Repentance man promote the Practicing of it.

O the admirable Discord, the melodious Discord, which must carry on the Life
of Christianity. A Conversation with a Glorious CHRIST in Heaven; must carry us
up to Heaven. The Life of a Christian is then upon its true Notes, when he is
as full of CHRIST and HEAVEN, as is in this Life attainable. Heavenly
Contemplations on the Blessed JESUS, Heavenly Consecrations to the Blessed
JESUS, Lovely Imitations of Heaven and of JESUS, O Heaven-born Souls, why do
you make no greater Improvements in them! And yet I shall do my Candidate of
the Heavenly Life, no manner of wrong, if I fetch him down from the Suburbs of
Heaven, and lay him Groaning and Weeping in the lower parts of the Earth. No,
There is a most incomparable Agreement, between a Conversation with CHRIST, and
HEAVEN, and a Conversation that has a continual strain of Repentance abasing of
it; They assist each other wonderfully! You shall give me leave, without a
Censure of Levity in the expression, to say; The shortest way to Heaven is by
Water. The Expression was of old used in the Church of God. And you are
apprised of what it means; It means, the Tears of a Repenting Soul, which must
keep running from our Eyes, till Death has closed them.

I will then this day put on the Character, Oh! For the Spirit and Power, of a
John Baptist, among you! A Preacher of Repentance. Repentance, Repentance, yea,
a Life of Repentance, is that Grand Article of Piety, whereof I propose the
Inculcation. But unto whom? Unto the Sinners that are yet perishing in their
Unregeneracy, and Impenitency! Ah, poor Creatures; It Is very sure, You must
Repent, or else you Perish, you Perish miserably. But my Errand is unto those,
who have already Repented a thousand times over; It Is unto those who are daily
mounting up toward Heaven, with the Wings of Eagles, in the most Heavenly
Flights of Manly Christianity. It Is unto them that are apace Ripening for
Heaven, and just ready to step into it. Sirs, Of you the Demand is, That you
keep Repenting to the Last, and Lead a Life of Repentance as long as you Live.

If any one might have pretended an Excuse from the Exercise of Repentance, one
might have thought, it would have been the Propher Isaiah, when he was favored
with the a Vision of our Holy Lord, and a Rapture into the Heavenly World.
What? A man flying and shining among the Angels of God, and yet Repenting in
Dust and Ashes before the Lord, and Lamenting his own Impurities! Oh,
Wonderful! Wonderful! I dispute not, whether the Man of God were now in the
Temple of Jerusalem, or whether he were not rather, (which, with Peganius, I
incline to think, he was) taken up to a View of its Original Pattern, that
stupendous TEMPLE of God, which there is in the Heavenly World. But, beholding
the Majesty of the Lord, the Spirit of Repentance immediately and marvellously
falls upon him. O thou Man of God. Why do thou not now fall into Songs of
Triumph, and make thy Boast unto the bright Angels before thine Eyes; Ye
Seraphims, I am come in for a Room among you. Admit a Favorite of Heaven to
take a place among you* No, No The Eyes which thus have the Monarch, and the
Glory of Heaven, dazzling of them, have the Tears of Repentance presently
filling of them. He Cries out, Woe is me, I am a man of Unclean Lips, The Vulgar
Latin renders it, I have held my Peace. The meaning may be, Non Libere satis
reprehendi Regis ali^umque peccata. Q. D Alas, Alas, I have not so faithfully
discharged my Ministry, and spoken up for God and for Truth, as I should have
done. Lord, I am so Vile a Sinner, I am unworthy to have my Lips ever Employed
in any Message, or Service for thee. He could not be at Rest, until one of the
Seraphims, under the Symbol of, Touching his Lips, with a Red Hot Stone taken
from amidst the Pire on the Altar, assured him, That God had Pardoned him. The
Right Stroke of Repentance! Never to be at Rest, without Assurance of a Pardon.
These things spoke Esaias, when he saw the Glory of our Savior.

Oh! Could I with Lips thus touched, bring you the Doctrine, which I intend
you. It Is,

That a Servant of God should fall into the Exercise of Repentance, on every
occasion afforded for it.

The very Life of a Christian must be a Life of Repentance. It is not enough,
that a man Repent once in his Life, The Dispositions of Repentance must Always
be kept Alive, in a man, as long as he Lives. A Good man must over and over
again Repent of his Evil-doing, and hold on Repenting all his Days. Thus the
Great Austin caused the Penitential Psalms to be written in GreatLetters,
within the Curtains of his Deathbed; [The Psalms are, the VI, the XXV, the
XXXII, the XXXVIII the LI, the CXXX the CXLIII.]
that he might even give up the Ghost, in the midst of Penitential
Ejaculations. Truly, the Best of Men, have no cause to Leave off Repentance.
Yea, the Better any man is, and the nearer to Heaven, the more will the Spirit
of Repentance actuate him. The Motto of a Christian, methinks, it should be
that of the Ancient, Nulli rei natus, nisi Penitentiae; Born to be in the
Repenting Strain continually; Never, Never to be out of it!

The First Thing to be now done, is, to Enquire,

What is that Repentance, which we are to keep in continual Exercise?

I will briefly state the Operations of that Repentance.

First; In Repentance, it is to be supposed, we are Apprehensive, That we have
Sinned; That we have been or done, that which is to be Repented of. An
Apprehension of our Sinfulness is necessary. A Repenting Sinner, is a Convinced
Sinner. The Language of Repentance, is that; 2 Samuel 24.10. I have Sinned
greatly in that I have done, I have done very Foolishly. It Is implied, That we
are acquainted with the Law of our GOD; That we have an Acquaintance with what
the Exceeding Broad Law Enjoins upon us. We must see the Law of GOD Violated,
in what we have been, or done; A Law to be for ever Magnified and made
Honorable. The First Thing said by a Repenting Sinner, is that, Luke 15.17. I
have Sinned against Heaven. But if we would not sinfully Intermit our due
Repentance, we must see our selves thus Chargeable with Sin, in all that we do;
Sinful in all Undertakings; in all Conditions; in all Relations; Defiled with
Sin, in all that we meddle withal. In this our Sight of our Sin, it is not only
our Actual Sin, that is to be set before our Eyes. Our Sight must penetrate as
far as our Original Sin. This must be seen, as the Original of all our Sin. We
must Look in, Look down, upon that Fountain of Wickedness, which we have in an
Heart, that is Deceitful above all things, and desperately Wicked. 'O wretched
One, that I am! What a Leper am I! What a Viper am I! What a Seed of all Sin
have I Lodging in me!

Secondly; It Is necessary to Repentance, that we Know and Think, what we have
done, when we have Sinned. The Voice of Repentance is that; Job 33.27. I have
Sinned, and Perverted that which is Right, and it Profited me not. To make
Light of Sin, this is inconsistent with Repentance. We don't Repent, until we
reckon Sin, the worst Evil in the world.

Because I would Chastise the most frequent and most fatal Folly in the world,
I will somewhat Expressively tell you, what a man does, when he Sins. My
Hearers, Attend unto me!

A Sinner does Deny, Disown, cast off the Authority of the God that made him.
He sets up Himself in the Throne of his Maker. He Reproaches the Wisdom and
Justice of GOD, in His Laws; the Wise and Just Rules that GOD has given us. He
Questions the Goodness of GOD, and counts it better to be under his own
Government, than that a Good GOD, should Govern him. He throws Contempt on the
Holiness of GOD, and represents Him as an Unholy Approver of Sin. He defies the
Power of GOD; and Challenges all the Thunderbolts of the All-powerful One. He
despises the Promises of GOD; He despises the Threatenings of GOD; He believes
not His Faithfulness in them. He makes a Vile Use of the Benefits, he has
received from GOD; a Vile Use of the Corrections which GOD has Employed upon
him; a Vile Use of the Punishments which he has seen GOD inflict upon other
Offenders. He tramples on the Blood of the Blessed JESUS, which has been shed,
that men might be Redeemed from all Iniquity. He turns a Deaf Ear upon the
motions of the Holy SPIRIT, who Cries unto him, O Do not this abominable thing!
The Dictates and Warnings of his own Conscience, the Deputy of GOD, are nothing
with him. The Excellent Pattern of a CHRIST, and of the Saints, the Excellent
in the Earth, who have been the Followers of that Good One, is derided by him.
He disturbs the sweet Harmony whereto the world is tuned, by a Great Creator
and Preserver. He Obeys the Devil, he Follows the Devil; and makes himself
worse than the Beasts that Perish. He wrongs the Faculties of his own Soul; and
Exposes himself to Wounds from the Wrath of GOD upon All his Interests. He
prefers his Flesh above his Immortal Spirit. He prefers Temporal Enjoyments on
Earth, before Eternal Enjoyments in Heaven. He incurs the unknown, but fearful
Miseries in the World to come; and all but for a momentany Delight in this
World.

O Fearful! What? All of this Venom in every Sin! Such an Horror of Sin; Such
an horrid and hideous Idaea of Sin, we ought always to be possessed of.

Thirdly; An Abhorrence of Sin, and of Our selves for our Sin; This must be an
Ingredient of the Repentance to be always in motion with us.

We must be greatly Grieved, because we have Sinned; Our Grief on the account
of our Sin, must be incomparable. Repentance is a Mourning for Sin. Sorrow for
Sin does Pierce the Heart, and Break the Heart, in Repentance. The Repenting
Soul Cries out, I am sorry for my Sin! His Picture, I Will show it you; It Is in
Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard him be moaning himself, -- I am ashamed, yea,
even confounded, beause I bear the Reproach of my Youth. His Dwelling is at
Bochim. He looks on his Falls, with such Eyes as Peter had; with Weeping Eyes.
He Weeps Bitterly. He is Greatly Troubled; He never counts, he can be Troubled
enough. He Mourns, because he Mourns no more. And Sin being Loathsome to him,
he Loathes himself because of it. He Cries out with him; Job 42.6. I Abhor
myself, and Repent. He Loads himself with Shame. He is Ashamed of what he is
and does. He looks upon Sin as a Shameful Folly. He calls himself, A Fool; and
he is heartily willing, that the rest of the world should call him so. Hence, a
Penitent Confession of Sin, will proceed from him. He does with Sincerity and
Ingenuity. Confess his Foolishness. He comes to that; Psalm. 32.5. I Acknowledge
my Sin unto thee, and my Iniquity I have not hid; I said, I will Confess my
Transgressions unto the Lord. He will Confess unto GOD; and he is very ready to
Confess unto Man also, if he be called unto it. Finally; He Judges himself; he
Humbles himself. He submits to all the Humiliation that God shall order for
him. He is a Self-Condemned Sinner. He joins with the Holiness and
Righteousness of GOD against himself; and he Cries out, Lord, I am worthy of
all thy Judgments! If God visit him with Plagues, he owns he has deserved all
these Plagues; and he says, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I
have Sinned against Him. Yea, and if Men treat him Contemptuously, he is
Patient under the Contempt; he bears the Contempt with Patience; he sees
himself so Sinful, that he says, Contempt belongs to me! Calcate me! -- I am
Unsavory Salt; O Trample on me.

Having passed through these Points of Repentance, there is in it, Lastly, A
Returning to GOD in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. So we read; Hos. 6.1. Come, Let us
Return unto the Lord.

The Repenting Sinner, first, flies to the Pardoning Mercy of God in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Repentance is accompanied with Hope; An Hope of Pardoning Mercy;
and with an Hopeful Prayer for a Pardon. An Hopeless Repentance, is a
Repentance for none but a Judas, none but a Devil. The Repenting Sinner, is not
a Despairing Sinner. He is upheld with that Persuasion; Psalm 130.4. There is
Forgiveness with thee, that thou moist be Feared.

Now, it is a Glorious CHRIST, who is his Hope. The Repenting Sinner flies to
that Hope, as his only Refuge, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of JESUS CHRIST the Son of
God, Cleanses us from all Sin. A Repenting Soul, is a Believing Soul. His Cry
is; Lord, Let my Sin be Pardoned, because a Glorious CHRIST is my Sacrifice and
my Advocate. Lord. My whole Dependence is on a Glorious CHRIST, that I may find
Mercy and Pardon with thee!

And then, the Repenting Sinner comes to New Resolutions. He Resolves with the
Help of Grace, to Glorify GOD, with a New, and more Exact Obedience. It Is with
him, as we read, Job 34.31, 32. I will not Offend any more; If I have done
Iniquity, I will do it no more. He Forsakes every Sin. He Wishes, Oh! That I
might not Sin any more! He Chooses the Blessed GOD for his God. He Resolves to
Obey Him. His Desires are; Oh! That my Life may be a Walk with God! Lord, I am
Thine; I Resolve, with thy Help, to Acknowledge thee in all my Ways! If an
Austin were here, he would say unto you, Inanis est Paenitentia, quam sequens
Culpa coinquinat. Repenting will be in vain, if Relapsing be not mightily
watched against.

THIS, This is Repentance; the Repentance to be for ever breathing in us, as
long as we have a Breath to draw in the World. The Soul of a Christian should
be, strongly Turned this Way; always Tending this Way. To be Repenting at this
rate, must be the Daily Study and Labor of a Good Man. Essays of such
Repentance, must be Livelily carried on, as long as we Live.

Wherefore, The Second Thing to be now done, is to Enquire,

What are the Occasions, which to keep Repentance in a Continual Erercise, we
are to Lay Hold upon?

I am going to set before you a Mystery of Practical Godliness, which rarely
has been fully spoken to. I am going to Show you an Excellent Way, for a Good
Man to be always Repenting the Errors of his Life as long as he Lives. A
Serious, Watchful, Self-abasing Mind, may lay hold on Thousands of Occasions,
to Cry out; Woe is me, I am Unclean: Lord, I Repent before thee, and I Entreat a
Pardon, through the Blood of the Lamb of God.

First, There are Solemn Acts of Repentance, to be frequently Performed,
frequently Repeted.

My Intention is This. We are frequently to Set a part a Time, on purpose to go
through a Process of Repentance, in all the Parts of it, and all the Acts of it.
This Time is to be thus divided. Having first implored the Assistance of
Heaven, then, O Servant of God, Go on to take a view of thy Original Sin; thy
wretched, forlorn, filthy circumstances, by reason of Original Sin.
There-withal set before thee an, Exposition of the Ten Commandments; what is
Forbidden, what is Required, in them. Examine the Faults of thy Life by this
Glass. Acknowledge the Faults, with Bitterness of Soul before the Lord. Glorify
GOD in the Bitterest Chastisements, which thou have felt, or can feel, for
thy offenses. Weep to the Lord, for a Pardon, through the Propitiation of the
Lovely JESUS. Lay Hold on the Pardoning Mercy of God. Here-upon, take up
agreeable Purposes, of Living more Carefully, more Fruitfully, more Holily.
Record your Purposes. Make and Keep a Record of them. Afterward, Fail not of
Execution.

Sirs, A Time should be now and then Devoted unto this Intention. Especially,
when we Prepare to Approach the Table of the Lord; This, This is to be One
considerable Stroke of our Preparation. Yea, sometimes a Servant of God, should
set apart, a Whole Day upon this Intention; A Day of Humiliation. And, why not
in Secret Places before the Lord! Methinks, I hear the Glorious Lord saying
unto us; Isa. 58.6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? To loose the Bands
of Wickedness. Verily, such Days of Repentance must be frequent with us; Even
to the End of our Days. But,

Secondly. Methinks, every New and Gross Fall into Sin, Oh! it affords us a
deplorable occasion! It should immediately put us on a New and Fresh Act of the
most Explicit Repentance. When a Peter has Fallen, what is to be done
Immediately? What, but That; Matt, 26.75. He went out, and wept bitterly. If
Temptation has gained at any time upon on us, and has drawn us into any
Miscarriage, for which our Hearts Condemn us; Now is a Time for us immediately
to Retire and Repent before the Lord, and Weep Bitterly. Now, Now, Let US,
Without any Delay, Go alone, and Lament our Foolishness, and Beg of the
Glorious LORD, That He would Forgive our Iniquity, and preserve, us from ever
falling again into the like Iniquity. My Friend; Thy Soul should be in as much
pain as a Bone out of joint, until this Repentance has Restored thee.

I design a particular pungency in it, that I now refer to this Head, what I
might have made a distinct One. Our Well-doing as well as our Ill-doing affords
us an occasion of Repentance. When we have done any Service for God; appeared
as Witnesses for Him; done Good Offices for His People; or perhaps been
Scattering our Alms like the Showers of Heaven; Instead of being Lifted up, now
full down before the Lord; Lord, I am ashamed, I am ashamed that my Service,
has been so poorly and meanly performed: Lord, The Iniquity of my Holy Things
abases me Exceedingly! I incorporate our Ill-doing, and our Well-doing, into
one Paragraph of my Discourse, because, God knows, we do in our Practice too
much incorporate them.

There is a Third Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance, which the Evening of
Every day brings unto us. Every Evening, before we go to our Lodging, we should
go to our Closet. There call to mind, as, what Special Mercies of the Day past
we have to be Thankful for, so what Special Evils of the Day past, we have to
be Humbled for Child of God, How can thou Sleep comfortably, without some
such Exercise. Look back on the Day past, and on thy Knees before the Lord,
mention those Errors, which thou, Can understand in thy Conduct? Lord, My
Unfruitfulness this Day! Lord, my want of Zeal in the Duties of Religion! Lord,
my Indiscreet Behavior, in such and such Company! Oh, Pardon it, for the sake
of the only Sacrifice, and Assist me, that I may no more, so sin against thee!
Now Fall Asleep, with that Song of Zion; Psalm. 48. I will both lay me down in
(...), and Sleep; for thou, Lord, only make me dwell in safey.

My Neighbors, If you have passed any One Day without making Work for
Repentance, you shall be Excused from the Task now laid upon you!

You will find a Fourth Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance, in Every
Errand that you go to Heaven upon. We can Request nothing of the Holy GOD, but
we may Repent of something, which this thing may lead us to Think upon. A
Prayer for a Mercy, must be all upon the Base; and the Note must be That; Luke
18.13. God be Merciful to me a Sinner. Suppliant, When ever thou do make any
Supplication to GOD for a Mercy, not only Bewayl the Sins, which render thee
unworthy of all Mercy, but also more Distinctly Seek for, and Find out, and
Bewayl the Sins that render thee more notoriously unworthy of that Mercy Make a
Distinct Recognition, That for Such a Sin, and for Such a Sin, thou Deservest,
that the Petition thou art now Prosecuting, should be Rejected of Heaven. This
Repentance, Oh! what an agreeable Introduction to the Favors of the Lord!

I will mind you of a Fifth Occasion, for the Exercise of Repentance; but it is
a very Comprehensive One, a very Accumulative One. It shall be, whenever any
Truths of GOD, and of His Gospel, are Conversed withal. Whenever you see any
thing more of GOD and CHRIST, say, as Job did, upon such an Invitation; Lord,
Now I abhor my self, and Repent. We read, of such a thing as that; Mark 1.14,
15. Preaching the Gospel, and Saying, Repent and Believe the Gospel. There are
no Truths of the Gospel, but what contain Admonitions to Repentance in them.
When you hear a Virtue commended, Certainly you may say, Lord, I am Sorry, that
I have so little of this Virtue in me! When you hear a Duty propounded,
certainly, you may say, Lord, I am Sorry, that I have been so defective in
doing this Duty. When you hear any Sin Rebuked, certainly, you will see cause
to say, Lord, I Mourn for a Degree of that Sin found upon me. My Hearers, when
did you Hear a Sermon, which might not put you in mind of Something to be
Repented of! When you have been Meditating on any Truths of the Gospel, the
Meditation should Expire with Something of this importance; What can I now find
in my self to be Repented of? Especially, if the Glory, the wondrous Glory, of
GOD and CHRIST, be at any time set before you, Oh! the Self-abhorance, which
you ought hereupon to be cast into! Have you seen the, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of
Hosts and of Times? Cry out with Repentance and Amazement, Ah, Woe is me! I am
an Unholy Creature, a Polluted Creature. How unlike the Holy One! How unfit to
hold Communion with Him! You see, Our Excellent Esaias did so.

Will the Ministers of the Gospel, permit the meanest of their Number, to let
fall a Word to the Wise, as we go along! Before we Preach a Sermon, Sirs, we
have something to do in our Studies, And this is One Thing. When we are
Studying a Sermon, we should make a Pause on every Paragraph, to bring about an
Impression thereof on our own Souls, [The most significant way of having our
Sermons by Heart!] We should Examine our own Miscarriages, relating to the
Truths, which we are going to Deliver unto our People. We should on our Knees,
humble our selves before the Lord for our own Miscarriages, and implore the
Pardon of them through the Blood of the only Sacrifice. In our going forth to
Preach a Sermon, we should also first of all, in Secret, Acknowledge before the
Lord, our great Unworthiness, to be Employed by Him in Holy Ministrations,
among His People. The greater the Service is that we have before us, the more
we should lay our selves in the Dust, with Repenting Self-Annihilations. Now,
Now we shall Preach with Lips touched by a Coal from the Altar; Now our God
will make us as His Mouth unto our Auditories. But yet, after our Work in the
Public is over, we should Lament before the Lord, all the Sloth, all the
Pride, all the Indifference of Soul, and Want of Compassion to the Souls of
others, and whatever Discomposure of mind has attended us: All our Negligence
in doing the Work of the Lord.

You shall take notice of a Sixth Occasion, for the Exercise of Repentance. You
shall see it, in the Administration of the Sacraments. what is Baptism? We
read, Mark 1.4. The Baptism of Repentance. As often as you see any person
Baptized, so often think; I see, I see, that we all bring into the World with
us Sinful Nature, deeply to be Repented of. And so often, O ye Baptized ones,
Call to mind your own Forgetfulness of your own Baptismal Vows; A Forgetfulness
that cannot be too often, or too sadly, Repented of. Every Baptism among us,
would be a Sermon, if' it were thus improved, for the promoting of our own
Repentance. But then, O Communicant at the Table of the Lord; Remember, Thou
have before thee, an Ordinance which belongs to none but Repenting Souls. Do
not venture to come, without some Solemn Renewal of Repentance, every time you
come. And when There you see Him, whom you have Pierced by your Sins, Will you
not Mourn; and shall not the Wounds of your own Souls Bleed afresh? When you
have Evidently set forth before your Eyes, a CHRIST Crucified for your Sins,
will not you bring your Sins to the Cross of the Lord, that they may be there
Crucified and Mortified? The Death of thy Savior, Exhibited at His Table, my
Friend, it must give a New Life to thy Repentance for thy Sin; a New Blow
toward the Death of thy Sin.

Yea; There is a Seventh Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance; and it may be
called, a Sevenfold Occasion, a Many-fold Occasion. I will sum it up in one
Term. You have it in every Dispensation of God, whether it be a Comfortable
Dispensation, or whether it be a Calamitous Dispensation, there is a Call in
it; REPENT, REPENT; That is the Call.

First; You have your Enjoyments. But, what Use are you to make of them? You
are advised; Romans 2.4. The Goodness of God Leads thee to Repentance. Oh! Let
your Enjoyments cause you to think; What, Oh! how much, have I been and done,
to Forfeit such Enjoyments! How Gloriously does the Sovereign Grace of Heaven,
triumph over an Ill-deserving Sinner, in such Enjoyments! Think thus upon every
one of them, as far as you can. Have Days of Thanksgiving for it. Man, Does GOD
Smile upon thee? O Repent, and Wonder, because thou do not Perish! Every
Morsel of Meat on thy Table, may be Eaten, with Wonder, that it is bestowed
upon such an Ill-deserving Sinner. Eat thy Morsel, with the Bitter Herbs of
Repentance: It will be the Sweeter for it.

And then; You have your Afflictions. But what should they drive you to? To
Repentance. This is the Advice of Heaven; Job 34.31. Surely, It is meet to be
said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not Offend any more. Let your
Afflictions cause you to think, What, What are the Iniquities, that have
procured me those Afflictions? Wherein have I rendered my self worthy of such
Afflictions' Do thus upon every one of them. Child, Let not so much as a Fit of
the Tooth-ake take thee, without some such Reflections. It is a dreadful Brand
upon any man; In the Time of his Distress, he Sins yet more against the Lord;
And, He Repents not of the Sin for which God is now smiting of him.

Oh, Let both Prosperity and Adversity, bring us down into the Dust and Ashes
of Repentance before the Lord.

I will go on, and make an Eighth Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance. It Is,
when a man is Reproved by his Neighbor; yea, I will add, And when a man is
Reproached by his Neighbor. My Friend, Has a Kind and a Just Reproof been
given to thee? Receive it with Repentance. Repent, and Reform, what is Amiss.
Don't Have Reproof: God calls that man, a Bruit, who will do so. But if a
Reproof be entertained with Repentance, it will appear in this; It will be
Entertained with a suitable Thankfulness. Reproved Christian, say with him;
Psalm 141.5. Let the Righteous Smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him
Reprove me, it shall be an Excellent Oil. Oh, Love and Thank thy Reprover;
Thankfully Address him, with a, Blessed be thou of the Lord, and Blessed be the
Lord that has sent thee to me But, perhaps you are Defamed, Abused,
Reproached. The World is full of Reproaches. Well, But by Repentance, a
Reproached Child of God, may not only Shake off a Viper, but also fetch a
Treacle out of a Viper. When you have to do with a Calumnious Man, you, have
also to do with a Righteous God. You may say, as he, 2 Samuel 16.11. The Lord
has bidden him. Now, my Brethren, Your Business is to Search out, Why the Lord
has bidden him, and Repent of the Sin, which has provoked your Father, to
Employ the Scourge of the Tongue, or the Pen, upon you. Though the Thing spoken
of you be a Cursed Falsehood and Slander, yet you shall thus turn into a
Blessing, Let it set you a thinking, How far am I to blame, in that thing for
which I am Evil spoken of? However, I may be sure, I am to blame for something.
What, what it is that the Glorious One sees Blameworthy in me, for which He
permits me to be buffeted with such Reproaches? Don't Leave off, till the Lies
of Ill-minded People, awaken you to discover something that is truly to be
(...) of. Oh! how much may we advance in Repentance, and in All Good-ness by
being Evil-spoken of! It may be an Advantage unto a Lazarus, to have a (...)
Licking his Ulcers. Yea, and if we attempt our own just Vindication, Let it be
managed with Much Humility. Let the Spirit of Repentance, Dictate, and Mollify,
and Lenify all that we say, when we vindicate our selves. Old Ambrose was in
the Right of it; Qui Paenitentiam agit, paratus debet esse ad opprobria
perferenda, injuriasque subeundas.

I will Suggest a Ninth Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance. It Is, when we
see the Actions of other Men. Do you see ary Laudable Actions, done by there
men? Blush, Blush, O Christian of slow Pace, to think; How much do I lag behind
that Excellent, Lively, Fruitful Servant of God! But you may see Criminal
Actions done by other men. What is now to be done, but That? Psalm. 119.158. I
beheld the Transgressor, and was grieved. We may be Grieved, because Their
Transgressons may mind us of Our Own. When we See or Hear a Wicked Thing done
by any man, Think; Was I never my self Guilty of Such a thing? If Guilty, Oh
Repent over again. Be that as it is, what ever Wickedres we know committed in
the World, it should cause us to lay to Heart, our own Wicked, Corrupt, Vicious
Nature. It should cause us Smite our Heart and say, Alas Alas, I should soon
fall into that wickedness, if Left unto my self. To Think so, is to Repent in
one signal way of doing it.

With a Tenth Occasion for the Exercise of Repentance, I will shut up all. It Is,
in the Judgments of God, upon a Sinsul World. If we see any Dismal Thing befall
any One Person, Oh! Let it Quicken us to Think. Wherein have I deserved such a
dismal Fate! And, Repent, Repent, Lest it prove also our Dismal Fate. So, when
a Sad Accident befell some unhappy People, our Savior made that Application of
it; Luke 13.3. Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. But then, in a
time of General Judgments on the World, and on the place where we live; How
Penitently should we think; What share has my Sin had, in Pulling down these
Judgments? What have I done, to increase the Heap of Wrath, which overwhelms
the World? What are the Epidemical Sins, which provoke the Displeasure of
Heaven; and how far have I Sinfully conformed unto them?

It is Observable, That our Admirable Esaias cries out upon himself, I dwell in
the midst of a people of Unclean Lips. Our Incomparable Witsins has an Holy
Note upon it; Notatu dignum est, quod Semetipsos Sancti Prophetae, uti partem
Populi consideraverint, sic ut sibi quodammodo attribuerent Crimina quae
Populus Perpetraverat; neque minus de ijs Erubuerint, quam si al quam in eorum
communione partem habuissent. In Short; It is worth Noting, that the Holy men
of God, so considered themselves for a Part of the People, as to condemn
themselves for the Sins committed among the People; They took Shame to
themselves, for the common Sins, as if they had themselves taken Part in them,
and held Communion with them.

I have bespoke it, that we Live Repenting. You understand my Intention also,
To Die so. One of the Best of Men, that very Aged and very Useful Servant of
God, Francis Tallents, when he lay a dying, and was become able to Speak but
little, Then said, Here I ly Endeavoring to Renew my Repentance for all my
Sins, from the Beginning to this Day. Oh! I would not think, that my weakness
and illness may Excuse me from the Exercise of Repentance.

I have done. I am sensible, It Were Easy to find more Occasions for the
Exercise of Repentance. But, my Hearers, If you will Improve These, it will soon
be Natural for you, to fall upon many more.

To demonstrate this, I will only mention one passage, which I have some-where
met withal

I would carry on the Matter, to so much of watchfulness, in my apprehending
Opportunities for Thoughts of Repentance, that the Provocations which may
happen to be given unto my Bodily Senses at any time, shall provoke Such
Thoughts in my Scul. If I Smell any thing that is not Grateful, or Taste any
thing that is Bitter, My Soul shall fly away to some Thoughts on the
Lothsomeness and Bitterness of Sin immediately. A Fresh Abhorrence of Sin shall
be awakened it me. If I happen to Lodge, where any Vermin, and Insect,
assaults me, it shall Humble me. I will think; I have been One among the
Enemies of God in the World These uneasy Creatures are part of the Armies which
the Lord of Hosts Employes, and with some Contempt, against his Enemies.

From so Minute a Passage, you may take an Hint, how Surprisingly the
Excitations of Repentance, in a Religious and Ingenious Mind, will Increase and
Multiply!

My Friends;These are some of those Methods, by which a Life of Repentance is
to be carried on. Oh! come into these Methods. I know, you cannot but Approve
them! You do so, if you Approve ths things that are Excellent!

If you do, I know you cannot but abhor the Proud Spirit of Quakerism, We have
heard of the Pride of the Quaker, (he is very Proud)even, of his haughtiness,
and his Pride, and his Wrath; But his Lies shall not persuade us, that he is
attained unto the Perfection, in which he pretends to be got beyond Occasions
for the Daily Exercise of Repentance. There needs no more to render Quakerism
abominable to every sensible Christian; It Extinguishes the Spirit of
Repentance. There is nothing Plainer, My Friends, than the Diametrical
Opposition, between the Spirit of Quakerism, and the Spirit of Repentance. A
Poor, and Proud Creature, being. Ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and of
His Commandment, which is Exceeding Broad, lays his conscience Asleep. His
Conscience wickedly forbears to Convict him of Numberless Offenses, into which
he falls, wherever he comes every day that comes over his Head. Now. he
fancies himself to have arrived unto Perfection, he has done with Repentance;
he derides those that Confess themselves, Miserable Sinners; he looks upon them
with a Supercilious Disdain, and says, Come not near to me, for I am Holier
than thou! Of such Pretenders does the Holy Lord say, These are a Smoke in my
Nose. a Fire that burns all the Day, that is, My Anger shall Smoke and burn
against them everlastingly. To these Deluded Neighbors, I cannot but apply
those Words; Prove 30.12 There is a Generation that are Pure in their own Eyes,
and yet is not washed from their Filthiness. and unto the rest of the
Neighbors, I say, For These Meetings which pretend the Worship of God, but
never Pray for the Pardon of Sin, be cautious, how you come into them. Soul,
Dishonor not thy self, by being United unto such Assemblies!

But, O my Brethren, Hold on, Repenting Every day, and often in a Day, and as
long as you Live. Yea, Let it not come as a Shocking Paradox upon you, if I
tell you, There will something of Repentance remain with us, after we come to
Heaven. After we are in the Sinless and Joyful Glory of the Heavenly World, we
shall blame our Old Sins, more than ever we did in our Lives; and keep
wondering* wondering, at the Grace that has brought such Unworthy Sinners to such
a Glory

In the mean time, I must assure you; Though a Life Of Repentance here may seem
an Austere one, a Severe one; yet even here it is a joyful one GOD will dwell
with the Repenting, Soul; with that Humble and Contrite one, A Soul full of God
will be a Soul full of Light And how Joyful will the Issue be? How Joyful the
Harvest of all! I Conclude with that, which will be the Conclusion of all;
Psalm. 126.5 They that Sow in Tears shall Reap in Joy.

FINIS.

