AN APPEAL TO THE LEARNED BEING A Vindication of the Right of Visible Saints to
the LORDS SUPPER, Though they be destitute of a Saving Work of GOD's Spirit on
their Hearts: Against the Exceptions of Mr. Increase Mather.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12.4.
BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips at the Brick Shop. 1709.

Imprimatur, J. DUDLEY.

The Preface,
IN Managing Controversies in Religion, there be two usual Artifices that
frequently prove traps to catch the Injudicious Multitude, and sway more with
unthinking Men than a Demonstration; one is to insinuate that the impleaded
Opinion is contrary to Purity and Holiness; a way to corrupt the Churches and
usher in degeneracy: hereby many men of tender Consciences are startled, as if
there were a Snake in the Grass; the other is a magnifying of such Authors, as
do discountenance, or seem to discountenance that Opinion, as if they were but
one degree beneath the Apostles, they have men's Persons in Admiration because
of Advantage, which proves like a Charm to many Readers, being ready to swallow
all with an implicit Faith. How far Mr. M. has acted his part in these two
Methods, is obvious to any that observe: the latter of them especially is his
proper Element. But these are but flourishes, that may raise men's Spirits, but
convey no light into their Understandings: they may serve to garnish and adorn
either Truth or Error, but strengthen neither of them. Let him but prove his
Doctrine to be true, and we will believe it to be a preservative of the Purity
of the Church; let him but confirm his Doctrine from Divine Authority, and we
will receive it, whether his Authors, do deserve their high Character or not.

It is no offense to me that Mr. M. has undertaken to answer me; if he could
have proved my Assertion to be a mistake, it would have been a kindness to me.
I heartily desire to be led into the knowledge of the Truth; and would be as
forward as any to bear a testimony against that doctrine, could I be convinced
of any error in it. But I hope his insufficiency to accomplish his design, will
prove an advantage to the cause of God, and be a means further to Establish
such as were wavering: his Arguments though propounded in a plausible manner,
and set off with fair glosses, are too weak to bear a touch, and will appear
upon Examination to have in them more of Ornament than of Evidence.

Mr. Mather all along intermingles Passionate Lamentations with his Arguments;
if his Arguments had been stronger, they would have been a Vindication of those
complaints; and he had done his business effectually, if there had been more
reason and less affection in his Book. Those Lamentations serve to swell the
Book, and make it more in bulk, but not in weight.

It is my endeavor to keep my heart as far from prejudice and bias as I can,
that I may be prepared to give entertainment to the Truth: which is indeed
worthy of entertainment, however our interests be crossed thereby, we are
directed to buy the Truth though sometimes it costs us dear. On the one hand, I
consider that it would be a doleful thing to Propagate an Error, and lay a
Foundation of the Corruption of the Land; to spread and diffuse Poison that may
have a malignant influence from Generation to Generation, it were better to
make Retractation upon Retractation, than to be obstinate in such a way. On the
other hand, I consider that it is a Service to God and his People, to clear up
a Truth that has not been received, whereby a door is opened for the revival of
Religion, and light held forth to deliver the People of God from such mistakes,
as are a means to turn many away from fearing the Lord, and it would be very
blameworthy to suffer my self to be basled, with trivial Arguments, great
Words and angry Faces; it will quit cost to suffer reproach in the cause of
God. I shall not trouble my self to answer reflections or to retort them, but
to apply my self to remove such things as are offered to darken the Truth,
accounting that the Vindication of the Truth is a Vindication of my self.

He seems to intimate as if I pretended to be a Prophet. I am far from
pretending to any Prophetical Revelations; I am no Enthusiast: I neither
pretend to Revelations my self, nor depend on the Sentiments of other men, as
if they were Oracles: but this I profess before the World, that God has taught
me the Doctrine that I have laid down; partly by giving me a great discovery of
his Wisdom, in bringing Nations into a Church Estate, and in that way
communicating Saving Grace to his Elect; partly by opening my Eyes to
understand the Scriptures, whereby I am abundantly satisfied that it is the
cause of God that I have pleaded, and accordingly, I am bound in Spirit to
pursue it, and am contented to Sacrifice my own Name for his sake, knowing that
though my Assertion be Offensive to some beloved Brethren, yet it is acceptable
to God and Jesus Christ, and pleasing to Angels and Saints in Heaven.

An Appeal TO THE LEARNED.
The First BOOK. The Question Stated, and Mr. Mather's Arguments answered.
THE Laws of disputation do require a fair and exact Stating of the
controversy, that nothing be made matter of dispute, that is not plainly
affirmed, or by genuine consequence deduced from the Assertions of the
adversary: when men do otherwise, they are guilty of casting unjust
imputations, on those whom they oppose, they labor in vain, abuse their
Readers, and manifest an affectation of vain glory, from a victory, where there
was no contest. Mr. Mather has greatly failed in this particular. He says, p.
3. The Question is whether God requires Unsanctified Persons, while such, to
come to his Table, and consequently whether the Church may admit into their
holy Communion in special Ordinance such as are not in the judgment of rational
Charity true Believers.

The first of these Questions is not fairly laid down, my Position is, That
Sanctifying Grace is not necessary to the lawful attending the Ordinance of the
Lords Supper. He says the Question is, Whether God requires Unsanctifyed
Persons, while such, to come to his Table. Insinuating as if I did affirm, that
God required all Unsanctifyed Persons to come to his Table. We use to say in
disputations, Add Signum. He should have added the sign, and either said some
unsanctifyed persons, which I own, or all unsanctifyed persons which (as he
knows) I utterly deny.

He adds, that consequently, the Question is, whether the Church may admit to
their holy Communion in special Ordinances, such as are net in the judgment of
rational Charity true Believers. But I have no controversy with him upon that
account. My business was to answer a case of Conscience, and direct those that
might have Scruples about Participation of the Lord's Supper, because they had
not a work of Saving Conversion, not at all to direct the Churches, to admit
any that were not to rational Charity true Believers; so that he blots a great
deal of Paper to no Purpose, beats the air, and fights against a shadow of his
own making.

Mr. Mather's first Argument.
ASsertions that are contrary to many Scriptures, ought not to be received by
the Churches; but the impleaded Assertions are contrary to many Scriptures.

The first Scripture alleged is Matt. 22.11, 12. And when the King come in to
see the Guest, he saw there a man that had not on a wedding Garment; and he
says unto him, friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
Garment? And he was speechless. He says upon it, That it is evident, that they
who come to the Lords Table without a Wedding Garment are Guests more hold than
welcome.

Answ. The thing to be enquired into is. What is this Feast that the guests
were invited to? Mr. M. supposes it to be the Lords Supper: that is easier a
great deal then to prove it. It is abundantly manifest that Christ Jesus, and
Pardon and Salvation are the Feast, that they were invited to, and not the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: the Messengers of God are sent to invite men to
this Feast: and I think he will not say, that the great errand of the Ministry
is to invite men to the Lords Supper: besides this is a Feast that the Jews
were invited to from Generation to Generation, long before the Lord's Supper was
Instituted. The Jews were those that were bidden: v. 3. He sent forth his
Servants to those that were bidden, to the Wedding, and they would not come:
One set of Servants after another were sent unto them: v. 4. Again he sent
other Servants: First he sent the Prophets and then the Apostles, after this
the Gentiles were invited to the same Feast, v. 9. Go ye into the high ways,
and as many as ye shall find, bid unto the Marriage. Besides this man that had
not the Wedding Garment was not suffered to partake of this Feast, but such
persons are suffered to partake of the Lords Supper; besides this person that
was objected against for not having a Wedding Garment, was a Reprobate, v. 14.
Many are called, but few are chosen: but Mr. M. don't think that every one that
ventures to partake of the Lords Supper without Grace, is a Reprobate. By this
it does appear that here is a representation of the Day of Judgment, and that
such Persons as come for Salvation without a Wedding Garment shall be rejected
in that day. So that here being nothing spoken about the Lords Supper, all
arguing from this Scripture falls to the ground. See Pools Anot. in Locum.

Another Scripture that he urges is, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29. Whosoever shall, eat
this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks
Damnation, (or Judgment) to himself: Hence he argues, That if the unworthiness
of a particular act in respect of the manner of doing it, may make a man
guilty: how much more the unworthiness of his person. This is as if he should
argue that an unworthy manner of Hearing, makes a man guilty, therefore much
more the unworthiness of his person, and therefore graceless persons should
refrain from hearing.

But this Scripture being a stumbling block to many, it is meet it should be
more fully considered. Mind therefore.

1. It does not follow that if they eat and drink Judgment to themselves that
they should forbear. Natural men Sin when they Pray, when they Hear, so they
did of old when they offered Sacrifice; and they expose themselves to the
Judgment of God; but it don't follow that they must forbear.

2. That true Believers may eat and drink unworthily. The Apostle does not
speak of unworthy Communicants, but unworty Communicating. He supposes the
Church of Corinth to consist of such as were Believers, yet he supposes that
some of them did eat and drink unworthily: v. 30. He says, For this cause many
among you are weak and sickly: yet it does not follow that they must forbear.

3. Natural men may eat and drink without that unworthiness or unmeetness that
the Apostle speaks of (1) Because the Apostle does express this unworthiness to
lie in not discerning the Lords body. v. 29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself: not ^^scerning the Lords
body. That is, not disferencing that bread from common bread. (1) Because the
worthiness or unworthiness here intended is that which may be known before
hand. Therefore he advises them, to Examine themselves, v. 28. But no man can
tell by any previous Examination whether he shall eat and drink in says or
not. A Godly man if he find the Exercise of faith the night before, or that
Morning, may yet in his attending on the Lord's Supper be left unto a Spirit of
unbelief; and a Natural man if he finds the Night before that he never had
faith, may yet partake in faith. I knew one recommended to our Communion from
another Church, as an eminent Saint, who was afterward fully convinced of
being in a State of Nature, and at the Sacrament wought on, and enabled to
believe in Christ. (3) Because the Apostle speaks these words, not to restrain
any of the Church of Corinth from coming to the Lord's Supper, but to direct
them to come in a right manner, not in that rude and unchristian way that they
were wont to come: which he had told them of; v. 20, 21.

The Reverend Author adds, that the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man
Examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: are
contrary to my new doctrine. Two things he insists upon from this Scripture:
the first is, that the Examination here required is, whether he has grace in
his Soul; and would prove it thus. Says he, Does not the Apostle himself
plainly tell us, what he means by this self-Examination: 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine
your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves, know you not
your own selves, how that Christ is in you, except you be reprobates; that is
persons nor approved. But what force is there in this Argument, does it follow,
because by self Examination, in one place he intends their Examining whether
they be in a State of grace, that therefore when ever he speaks of Self
Examination, the thing to be Examined is the truth of grace: it is granted on
all hands, that the truth of grace is to be Examined, but this does not prove
that that is the thing called for and intended, in 1 Cor. 11.28. Yea it is most
evident, that this is not the Examination that they are stirred up unto: if we
look to the foregoing verses where he blames them for Communicating in a rude
manner, or if we look to the subsequent words, where he finds fault with those
that don't discern the Lords body, it plainly appears that the Examination he
called for is, whether they understood the nature of the Ordinance, that so
they may solemly consider what they have to do when they wait upon God in it.
The thing to be Examined is not the worthiness of their persons, but the
worthiness of their participation. A second thing that he insists upon, though
not in this Book, yet in another that he put forth some years since, upon the
like occasion, is, that the Greek word rendered Examine, does import an
Examination to Approbation: surely he is too critical therein, for though the
Word does sometimes import so, yet not always: the same word is used, 2 Cor.
13.5. and rendered Prove: where the Apostle said Prove your own selves. For that
was not the duty of all of them to prove themselves to Approbation. It was in
the Church of Corinth as in other Churches, some were sincere, and some were
hypocrites, and it is as much the duty of hypocrites to discover their
hypocrisy, as of Saints to discover their Sincerity: it is their duty to
Exaamine themselves to disapprobation. Besides if Communicants must Examine
their says to approbation, I would inquire whether by that approbation, he
means Assurance or a probable hope. If he intends Assurance, then none but
those that have Assurance may come to the LordsTable. If he intends a probable
hope: then such persons may come as are not sincere, and then Sanctifying grace
is not necessary in order to a lawful attending the Lord's Supper.

A third Scripture that he brings to make good his Argument is, Ezekiel. 44.7, 9.
You have brought into my Sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and
uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my Sanctuary to pallute it, even my house:
when you offer my Bread, the Fat, and the Blood, and they have broken my
Covenant. -- Thus says the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised in beart, shall
enter into my Sanctuary.

I Answer, 1. That this Scripture has no particular reference to the
Lord's Supper. If he had blamed them for suffering such persons as were
uncircumcised in heart and flesh to come to the Passover, which was a Sacrament
of confirmation as the Lords Supper is, he might have pleaded that it had a
particular reference to the Lords Supper, but the fault was that they brought
strangers into the Sanctuary: but the Passover was eaten in their own houses.

2. The fault is charged on the Priests, that they brought in such as were
uncircumcised in flesh and in heart: therefore it must necessarily be
understood of such as were visibly uncircumcised in heart; for the Priests were
not to blame for letting in such as were visibly circumcised in heart, though
not really so: for they were bound by Gods Ordinance to do it. Yea Mr. M. goes
a great deal further than I dare go, for he says, That Adulterers, Thieves,
Liars, Slanderers and Perjured Persons might celebrate the Passover, p. 75, 76.
How to reconcile such practices with heart circumcision is quite beyond me.

Here our Reverend Author informs us, That the Jewish Masters tell us, that
their Fathers were very strict in admitting of Proselytes, they say they
admitted no Proselytes in David's time, least they should join themselves to his
People out of fear; nor in Solomon's time, least they should come because of the
great Prosperity that Israel then had.

To which I may Answer in the Apostles words, 1 Timothy 1.4. Neither give beed to
fables. If it were really so it was utterly cross to the institution of God:
Exodus 12.47, 48. but undoubtedly the thing is utterly false: David mentions the
Proselytes in his time, as a great body of People: Psalm. 115.12, 13. He will
bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron, be will bless them
that fear the Lord. By them that fear the Lord, we are to understand the
Proselytes. So Psalm. 135.19, 20. Bless the Lord O house of Israel, bless the
Lord O house of Aaron, bless the Lord O house of Levi: Ye that fear the Lord,
bless the Lord. Proselytes in the Old Testament are called Fearers of God, in
the New Testament, they are called Worshippers of God: Act. 16.14. And Solomon
in his Prayer, 1 King. 8.41, 42. Says, That the stranger shall come from afar
Country, for Gods Name sake, hearing of his Great Name, and his Strong Hand.

The next Scripture that he urges is, Lev. 7.20. The soul that eats of the
flesh of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings that partain unto the Lord, having
his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from his People. To which
he adds, That such as were unclean might not eat the Passover: and says, Does
not this typifie, that they who are unclean, either in course of Life, or in
State should not come to (...) Lords Supper. He does not ask me, for he knows
that I affirm, that the Ordinances of the Old Testament, were not Types of the
Ordinances of the New Testament.

Answ. I stand to my former Answer: notwithstanding any thing he says to the
contrary: he brings Dr. Whitaker and Dr. Goodwin against my Assertion; but
indeed there has been such variety of Opinions in the World, that men may bring
humane authority, yea the Testimony of deserving men for almost any mistake.
The word (...) is equivocal: so Adam is said to be a Figure or Type, the word
is, of him that was to come. So we read, Act. 7.43. They took up the Tabernacle
of Moloch, and the Star of your God Remphan, figures or types which you made.
So 1 Cor. 10, 11. All things are said to happen to them for Ensamples or Types:
but a Type properly is some instituted resemblance of some Gospel Truth; and
the Ordinances of the Jewish Church were not instituted to be resemblances of
the Ordinances of the New Testament: they did not instruct the Church of the
Jews in Gospel Ordinances. Was Circumcision instituted to instruct the Church
of the Jews for above two thousand years, that Baptism should be appointed in
the Christian Church, and that it must be administered with such and such
circumstances? The like I may say of the Passover and the Sacrifices, etc.
neither were they instituted to teach us Gospel Ordinances; we may receive some
Edification from them: but we are under better Ordinances, and a more glorious
dispensation. Those Ordinances were appointed of old to teach the Ancient
Church, the way of Salvation by Christ. Col. 2.17. They were a shadow of good
things to come, but the body is of Christ.

Baptismus saccessit circumcisioni, caena Dominica Paschati. Non tamen
successerunt ut corpus umbra, signatum signo, sed ut ritas novi, ritibus
veteribus, ut figurae clariores, de re praeterita, figuris obscurioribus de
eadem adbut futura, Ali^quin Sacramenta V. Test. non foederis, sed
Sacramentorum N.T. sigilla fuissent: Et Sacramenta N. Test. (...) duplicem
sustinerent, alteram signi ad Christum, alteram signati ad Veteris Test.
Sacramenta: quod est contra Scripturam. Genesis 17.11. 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 10.16.
Alting Loc. Com. Pars 1. Page 96.

The Rd. Author says, That I pretend that unclean persons were not allowed to
come to the Passover, to signify that those who are spiritually unclean shall
be excluded out of heaven. But he objects, That Erastus the most corrupt writer
about Church discipline said so long before me. But what then, E'rastus did not
always lie. Mr. Gillespy, one of his Oracles, owns the thing, when he says,
That shutting out of Heaven is not the only thing thereby signified, though the
reason that he gives to show that it is not the only thing signified thereby is
very frivolous, for similitudes are not wont to run on all four.

He concludes this Chapter with telling us, That the light of nature dictates,
that unholy Persons should not meddle with holy things. Then it seems to be
contrary to the light of nature that Unregenerate men should be Circumcised,
come to the Passover, Sacrifice, Pray, etc.

Mr. Mather's Second Argument.
THey that are not duly qualifyed to be Members of particular Gospel Church,
are not fit to be admitted to the Lords Supper, but Unsanctifyed persons are
not fit to be admitted Members in particular Churches.

The major is granted. There is no need to take notice of his discourse upon
it, because it is a digression, and concerns not the matter in controversy.

But the minor is utterly denied: Some Unsanctifyed persons are fit to be
admitted Members in particular Churches, they that are fit matter for Church
Membership, are to be admitted: but visible Saints though they are hypocrites,
are fit matter for Church Membership: they that are to be admitted according to
the Ordinance of God are fit to be admitted. Such as must be admitted or else
God will be greatly offended, are fit to be admitted: Such as being admitted
may not be cast out, are fit to be admitted. But thus it is with visible
Saints: though they have not a through work of Conversion; such persons as God
himself did admit into the Church of Israel, are fit to be admitted into Gospel
Churches: such persons as the Apostles did admit into Gospel Churches are fit
to be admitted into them, but they admitted many that had not a through work of
Regeneration. Indeed by the rule that God has given for admissions, if it be
carefully attended, more Unconverted persons will be admitted than Converted.
Mr. Cotton says, let Ministers use as much diligence and vigilance as well
they may, yet such is the dimness of discerning in humane frailty, and such is
the subtilty of many hypocrites, that it may be Ninety nine hypocrites may
creep into the Church to one simple sheep of Christ. Hol. of Chapter M. p. 67. and
Preached it in Boston, That it would be well if at the day of judgment ten men
in a Church were saved.

Mr. Mather that he may strengthen his Opinion heaps up many Scriptures to
show, that Church Members should be visible Saints; he has no need to trouble
himself to prove that which I never denied, all the titles that are given them
don't make them more, and I never desired to make them less than visible
Saints, the members of the Christian Church are visible Saints, and the members
of the Jewish Church were visible Saints, as they are called, Dan. 12.7. So
Deuteronomy. 33.3. Yea he loved the people, all his Saint's are in thy hand. It was
needless for him to prove it, and unfair by taking so much pains to prove it,
to leave a jealousy upon some ignorant people, as if I did deny it.

He says, Hypocrites were brought in unawars, and that they crept in unawares:
but neither of these places that he refers to do intimate that all hypocrites
do come in unaware: that Gal. 2.4. Speaks of some Jews that pretended
themselves to be Christians but were not, but came in upon a wicked design.
Surely he does not think so hardly of all that fall short of a work of
Regeneration. Those words Jude 4. are spoken of heretical persons: if they did
take any in, that they feared had not Saving Faith, yet surely none that they
judged to be Heriticks. He contends with me for saying, that Saints by Calling
are to be accepted of the Church, whether they be Converted or no: speaks of it
as a Strange expression and a contradiction in adjecto: but what need is there
of so much anger. Visible Saints are Saints by Calling. The Members of the
Church of Corinth, were called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. There is an external
Call and an external Answer, as well as an internal Call and an internal
Answer: If visible Saints may be Saints by Calling, and visible Saints may be
Unconverted, then some that are Saints by Calling may be Unconverted.

He says, That when their hypocrisy is discovered by any fundamental Error in
judgment, or scandal, or in Conversation, they ought to be cast out of the
Church. But he mistakes the matter very much: the discovery of their hypocrisy
is not the reason of their being cast out: When men are cast out of the Church
we don't know that they are hypocrites or not: the reason of their rejection is
because they are obstinate in Scandal. And Godly men are to be rejected in that
case, as well as hypocrites.

He says, That Mr. Cotton argues, that such as are destructive to the State of
the Church, are not fit Materials for the building of the Church. And adds,
That this is true of hypocrites. Mr. Cottons position is good, but Mr. Mather's
addition will not stand: For hypocrites so long as they carry well, are not
destructive to the State of the Church: but on the contrary do great Service to
the Church, they help to maintain the Church and Ordinances of God, they do
desend the Church, they do encourage the Church, they are Serviceable by their
gifts, by their authority, by their prudence and zeal, by their Estates; and it
would be exceeding difficult for the Church to subsist without them. When he
says that they are destructive to the State of the Church, does it not reflect
on the Wisdom of God in binding and commanding his Church to admit such
Members? That constitution of the Church that God has appointed, is such as
makes for the safety and well being of the Church: and God has appointed that
visible Saints shall be accepted as Members of the Church, though they be not
Regenerate; and the Apostles themselves accepted such.

Mr. Mather's Third Argument.
IF men meddle with that which they have no right unto, they have not a divine
allowance for their doing so: But when Unsanctifyed Persons come, they meddle
with that, which they have no right unto.

Answ. The minor is denied. In the prosecution of it there is a great deal of
confusedness and obscurity: Sometimes he speaks of them that are Unregenerate
and have no right before God, though they have before men: sometimes he speaks
of them to whom we cannot in charitable judgment say. The blood of Christ has
obtained for you the remission of your Sins: and of giving the Sacrament to
those who are not so far as men can judge in a Regenerate Estate: and he says,
that this is to set the Lords Seal to a blank. But I will labor to answer the
intent of this argument, so far as I am able to reach it.

That which I am to show is, That some Unsanctifyed men have a right before God
to the Lords Supper. Surely the Children of Israel had a right before God to
the Passover; when God commanded them to celebrate it; and they had a right to
Circumcision, when God commanded Joshua to circumcise them. And those that are
the Covenant People of God have a right to keep the Covenant; we are commanded
to teach such as are baptized to observe all things that Christ has commanded,
Mat. 28.19, 20. The second Command requires men to observe and keep pure and
entire all such Religious Worship and Ordinances as God requires in his word.

If I may gather up what he aims at, I would reduce it to these two heads.

1. That Unregenerate men are not in Covenant with God. This is a great
mistake, though Unregenerate men are not in the internal, they have not performed
any act of Saving Faith, which is the condition of the Covenant, and God is not
bound to give Saving Blessings of the Covenant to them: yet they are in the
external Covenant. Moses says, the Lord our God made a Covenant with us in
Horeb, Deuteronomy. 5.2. And when he renews his Covenant, he is said to betroth them
to himself, Hos. 2.19, 20. And therefore the Adoption is said to belong to
them, Romans 9.4. They are his People, his Sons and Daughters, his Spouse, and he
becomes their God, he makes promises unto them upon condition of Obedience, and
they promise Obedience unto him. Hence they become capable of breaking
Covenant; they have broken the everlasting Covenant, Isai. 24.5. Neither were
they steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78.37.

2. That because they have no right to the blessings of the New Covenant,
therefore they have no right to the Seal. That the Sacrament may not be given
to them because their Sins are not pardoned: they have no right to Salvation,
therefore not to the Seal of Salvation, if the Seal be given to them, it is the
setting of the Lords Seal to a blank: Sealing a Pardon to those whom the Lord
has not pardoned.

Answ. To this I make answer in three particulars,

1. That though Unregenerate men have no right to pardon of Sin and Salvation,
yet they may have a right before God unto the Seals of the Covenant; they had a
right to Circumcision: Josh. 5.2. yet that was a Seal of the righteousness of
Christ, Romans 4.11. So they had right to the Passover, and so they have to
Baptism. It is unreasonable to think that all Baptized Children are Regenerate:
and so they may have a right to the Lords Supper.

2. That Unregenerate men may have in conjunction with other, a right to some
of the blessings of the Covenant. The Sacraments are Seals of the whole
Covenant, not only those promises that are made to particular Believers, but
the promises of outward prosperity that are made to the visible Church: and men
that are Unregenerate in Conjunction with others, have a right as part of the
body Corporate to those blessings, and may receive the Seal thereof.

3. That the Sacraments do not Seal up Pardon and Salvation to all that receive
them, but they are Seals to the truth of the Covenant. It does not Seal men's
having of faith, neither does it Seal the Salvation of the Communicants; they
miserably deceive themselves, if they understand it so: but it is a Seal to the
Covenant. God offers Pardon and Salvation through faith in Christ, men are
ready to doubt of the truth of this; but God Seals this Covenant in the
Sacraments. This is that which is intended when it is said, That Circumcision
was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. Whether we understand by
the righteousness of faith, Faith it self, which is our Evangelical
righteousness, or the righteousness of Christ, which is Faith apprehended by
Christ, it comes to one and the same: and circumcision Seals the efficacy of
this unto Salvation; that the promise that he has made shall in this way be
fulfilled: and this is a great encouragement to draw forth the Exercise of
Faith.

Mr. Mather's Fourth Argument.
IF the Sacrament were a Converting Ordinance, and that therefore Unregenerate
Persons should come to it in order to their being Converted, there would
doubtless be some promise or some example recorded in the Scripture of person^
so Converted for the encouragement of others. But there is neither Promise nor
Example.

Answ. Both parts of this argument are to be denied. And there is very little
said for the proof of either.

1. I deny the Consequence. It may be a Converting Ordinance, though there be
neither promise nor example. I may argue as well, that if there be no promise
in the word of the Edification of Saints annexed to it, nor any Example of
Saints edifyed thereby, then it is no Ordinance for the Edification of Saints.
Yea I may as well argue that there is no promise of converting Grace, annexed
to circumcision, nor any Example of Persons Converted by it, therefore that was
no Ordinance for Conversion. But there be other things that do show it to be a
converting Ordinance, as the command given to the Church, which does consist
partly of men Converted, partly of men Unconverted, to attend this Ordinance. 1
Cor. 11.24, 25. This do in remembrance of me, etc.

2. I deny the Minor also. There be general promises that do reach the case:
Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates,
waiting at the posts of my doors: This being one of the ways of Gods
appointment, this promise is an encouragement to wait upon God in this way.
Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded, and lo I
am with you always even to the end of the world; this is one of Christ commands.
Romans 10.14. Faith comes by hearing. In this Ordinance the Gospel is proclaimed;
and Pardon is offered to Sinners by Jesus Christ: Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the
Lord is perfect converting the Soul. This is one of Gods laws.

This Ordinance has a proper tendency in its own nature to Convert men. Herein
men may learn the necessity and sufficiency of the Death of Christ in order to
Pardon. Here is an affecting offer of Christ crucified; here is a Sealing of
the Covenant, that if men come to Christ, they shall be Saved, which is a great
means to convince of safety in coming to Christ.

All Ordinances are for the Saving good of those that they are to be
administered unto. This Ordinance is according to Institution to be applied to
visible Saints, though Unconverted, therefore it is for their Saving good, and
consequently for their Conversion.

Mr. Mather's Fifth Argument.
THis Argument is thus presaced, That it is a clear confutation of what Mr. S.
affirms: we will see it. If the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance than
profane Persons ought to be admitted to partake of it: but such are not to be
admitted to the Lords Supper. He says Mr. S. himself confesses thus much. And
it is very true, I wish I could say, that Mr. Mather did confess, that profane
Persons might not be admitted to the Passover.

I utterly deny his Consequence. His reason for it is, That we may not withold
from the prophanest person in the world, that which is appointed to be the
means of his Conversion. But his consequence is as strong as a rope of Sand:
May we not as well argue that if Baptism be a Converting Ordinance, we should
Baptize the Indians, and other Heathens, as John Hircanus did compel the
Edomites to be circumcised.

My answer was and is, that the Lords Supper is a Converting Ordinance, only
for Church Members and not for other men. He has three objections against my
answer. One is, that it is an odd one. I hope it is not criminal to give an odd
answer, and if so, let it go for an odd one. The second is, that it is new of
mine own invention. It is no sufficient ground to reject his notions because
they are other men's, or to reject mine because they are my own: it is for God
to reveal his mind to any whom he pleases: but the main objection is, That I do
not prove it.

I shall now further vindicate that answer, that it is for the Conversion of
orderly Church Members, by laying down three Propositions, which Mr. M. himself
will own.

1. The efficacy of the Lords Supper does depend upon the blessing of God. What
ever tendency Ordinances have in their own nature to be Serviceable to men, yet
they will not prevail any further than God does bless them. The weapons of our
warfare are mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. It is God that teaches men to
profit, and makes them profitable and serviceable to men's Souls.

2. There is reason to hope for adivine blessing on the Lords Supper, when it
is administered to those that it ought to be administered unto. Gods blessing is
to be expected in Gods way: if men act according to their own humors and
phansies, and don't keep in a way of Obedience, it is presumption to expect
Gods blessing. Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men: but when they are admitted to the Lords Supper that God
would have to be admitted, there is ground to hope that he will make it
profitable.

3. That it is Gods will that such as are in the judgment of rational Charity
Believers, be admitted to the Lords Supper, though they be Unregenerate: God
allows his Church to accept of such Unregenerate men as carry themselves so,
that there is reason to look upon them to be Saints, he would not have his
Church to admit those that are profane, that would be a great offense to him;
but the Apostles did receive those that were to Charity Believers, and Churches
now ought to receive such, whatever they be in reality. From these things it
is most apparent that the Lords Supper may be looked on a Converting Ordinance,
for Church Members that carry orderly, yet not for profane Persons.

Mr Mather argues that if the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance, then it
should be administered to profane. Persons, may he not with as good reason
argue, that if it be an Ordinance for the strengthening of Grace, it should be
administered to such Godly men as have fallen into Scandalous transgressions,
for they need to have their Grace strengthened.

I had said in my Sermon, that the Lords Supper was a converting Ordinance,
only to such Church Members as walked orderly, when any carry scandalously
there are other Ordinances, viz. Censures for their Conversion, in case they be
Unconverted. Mr. M. in answer to this says, Disputatur non concessis, he takes
it for granted that the person is not Converted: and so runs out into a long
discourse that the incestuous Corinthian might be a godly man.

Answ. I take it for granted that some Persons censured may be Unconverted, not
that all of them are, nor that the Corinthian was: and his discourse is wholly
impertinent, and although he glories in the conclusion of the Chapter, that my
new devised distinction is neither Solid nor Scriptural, yet his answer has
nothing of an answer in it, as equal judges when they compare things together
will readily determine.

Mr. Mather's Sixth Argument.
THat Opinion which is contrary to the Prefession and Practice of the Churches
in the Primitive and Purest times of Christianity, and to the judgment of the
most eminent Reformers in these latter Ages, and which agress with Papists, and
a looser sort of Protestants; ought not to be received among the Churches in
New England. But all this is true of Mr. Stoddard's Opinion now impleaded.

Ans. Though this Argument be a three sold cord; yet it is easily broken to
pieces. He don't count it a demonstration. It consists of three parts: I shall
consider them severally.

1. He faith that this Opinion is contrary to the Profession and Practice of
the Primitive Churches. This he labors to prove from Justin Martyr, Origin,
Tertullian, Cyprian: and he faith, That for about four or five hundred years of
the Christian Era, there was great strictness in admitting to Sacraments. The
like is asserted by him in an Epistle to Mr Quick; and he grants that there was
too much rigidity among them. And here he faith, That Chamior, Chemnitius, and
Gerhard, commend the strictness of the Primitive times.

I Answer, Here is a great deal of shadow and little substance. The practice in
the Primitive Church about the time of Austin, was full of Vanity and
Superstition. They took in their Members at Easter time, or Pentecost, they
required Susceptores or god fathers, though the persons were men grown, they
used to Exorcise them, they made them to renounce the Devil as if he were
present. When they entered into the Portel of the house of Baptism, they were
ordered standing toward the West, with their hand stretched out as if Satan
were present, to renounce him, saying, I renounce thee Satan and all thy works,
and all thy pomps: sometimes they added, and his Worship and his Angels, and
his Inventions, and all under him. And after-ward they made a Profession,
reciting the Creed by heart; which is called a pronouncing of the true Faith,
Praeclara f^ducia, or else answering to Questions. It was their manner also to
use the sign of the Cross, as is evident from Chamier in his 15. and 16. chapter de
Baptismo. This practice of theirs is such a piece of Pageantry, as is more fit
for the Church of Rome to imitate, than these Churches. I admire we should be
directed to follow the pattern of these ancient Churches under a notion of
strictness and purity.

In his other Book made upon the like occasion against me, viz. his Epistle to
Mr. Quick, Alcuinus is brought in saying, Fiunt scutinia, ut saepius
explorentur, an post renunciationem Satanae, Sacra verba datae fidei, radicibus
cord defixerint. Scrutinies were made, that they might be often Examined, to
see whether the Sacred words of the Faith, which they professed, were thoroughly
fixed in their hearts. A New England man reading this, would be ready to think,
that our practice were but the reviving of the practice of the Primitive
Church, but if we search what this Scrutiny was, we may gather it partly from
the words of Austin, ipsis diebus, quibus catechezantur, exorcizantur,
scrutantur: and the words of Leo both reported by Chamier in the same place, In
Baptizandis electis, qui secundum Apostolicam regulam, and exorcismis
scrutandi, and jejuniis Sanctificandi, and frequentibus sunt praedicationibus
imbuendi. By this it appears that this Scrutiny was made by Exorcisms, not by
inquiring into the works of Gods Spirit on their hearts, but by adjuring of
them to Speak true; though there was another way of Exorcising in use at this
time, viz. an adjuring of the Devil to forsake them, by this Examination, it
may easily be perceived, how we may be led into notable mistakes by the
quotations of ancient Authors.

2. He faith this Opinion is contrary to the judgment of the most eminent
Reformers in these latter Ages. Some are mentioned by him.

A. 1. That the generality of the Reformed Churches are larger than I desire to
be, in their practices, and the practice of the Church of Scotland is every
whit as large.

2. As to the judgment of particular Divines: I say,

1. That some of them intend no more, than that those who are admitted to the
Lords Supper, be to the judgment of Charity Believers; as is obvious to those
that are conversant in their Books; and I am of the same judgment with them.

2. Some of these Divines have been guilty of great mistakes in other things,
and it is not piacular to suspect them in this. If they be out of the way in
this particular, that adds but one error more to those which they have
published.

3. Many Divines have abundance of work before them, and have not opportunity
to search narrowly into the points of controversy; but take some things for
granted, from their Education, and are zealous in them without accurate and
impartial Examination.

4. Many Divines both ancient and modern are strangly to seek about the
Doctrine of Regeneration, which might easily lead them into this mistake.

Dr. Davenant, and Dr. Ward, in vind. gr. Sacramentalis, teach, 1. That
Sacraments do always give Grace as moral instrumental canses to those that
don't put a bar in the way. 2. Consequently that by Baptism, Grace or
Regeneration is conveyed to all Infants Elected or not Elected, which
Regeneration they call Baptismal, and the first Grace. 3. The first Effect of
this Grace is the Remission of Original Sin, by the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ: upon which depends the inhabitation of the HolyGhost; the first
Regeneration, Justification, Adoption. 4. By this Grace is bestowed upon
Infants a State of Salvation while they are in the condition of Infancy, but
not when Adult. 5. That this first Grace and Baptismal Regeneration, has not an
infallible connection with Salvation, because in their Adult age a bar may be
put to the second Regeneration.

Dr. Burges de Bapt. Regeneratione Elect. Infant: distinguishes Regeneration
into initial, which he calls Seminal and Potential, which consists in a
participation of the Spirit of Christ, which is the principle of Spiritual
life; and actual Regeneration, which consists in a spiritual Essence, produced
in a Christian by the renewing Spirit, that initial Regeneration he makes to be
after Baptism, and binds it up to that as the cause, sine qua non, or moral
instrument, upon which it follows; to prove this he brings not only the
Fathers, and the authority of the Church of England, but also Calvin, Chamier,
Buc^r, Musculus, Junius, Zanchy, Vossius, Jewel, Whitaker, Ames and Davenant.

Many Reformed Divines hold the Essicacy of Baptism to consist in Sealing
Regeneration, which was produced before Baptism.

Voetius faith, That Elect Infants that have foederal Holiness, have at the
same time the internal Grace of Regeneration; and instances in Paul, Manasseh,
and the Thief on the Cross, who, he faith, were Regenerate from their Infancy.
This Regeneration in Infancy is a spiritual quality or faculty in the mind and
will, out of which as out of a certain Seed and material power, actual
dispositions and habits by the impression and infusion of the Holy Ghost are in
time raised. Dest. Elect.

Some Divines don't distinguish between Regenerate men, and Professors of good
Conversation. Whereas it is evident that men may be very conscientious, and
have considerable operations of the Spirit of God upon their hearts, that are
not Savingly Converted. Indeed the World has had but little distinct
understanding about the work of Conversion, until some latter Divines at
Boston: Norton, Hooker, Shephard, and some others have held forth light; there
was great darkness about the way of Conversion. By this discourse it may appear
how little dependence, we can have on the judgments of Learned and good men;
and in our reading must carefully distinguish between the chaff and the wheat.

5. Many Divines are of the same opinion with my self. I mentioned Wendeline in
my Sermon; and whereas Mr. Mather faith, there is one Calvinist of my mind, he
may see if he have the Book by him, that Wendeline does not only affirm, That
the Sacraments of confirmation may organically begin Faith: but adds, That this
is the Orthodox Opinion, he Means, the Opinion of the Calvinists. Exer. 81.
page 1311. and 12. Mr. Blake has written at large also for this, and has
answered Mr. Gillespy's twenty arguments. Mr. John Humphry Minister of Froome,
has written three Books in defense of this Opinion. Mr. John Timson also: he
was no Minister, but his Book gave good satisfaction to many Ministers in
Glocestershire, as Mr. Humphry reports. Beza D. Presh. and Excom. p. 23. lays
down these two rules. 1. That the Supper is instituted for Disciples. 2. That
all such as profess Christ though hypocrites are disciples. So Mr. Th. Hooker in
his Survey. p. 41, 42.

6. I was informed by a Minister of good account in these Churches, that Mr.
Mather told him, That if a Church Member should be convinced that be bad not a
Saving work of Conversion, be would advise him to come to the Lord's Supper. It
is none of my business to reconcile those expressions, with what he has written.

3. He says, This Opinien agrees with Papists and a looser sort of Protestants.

Answ. He would have argued better if he had said that my Opinion was worse
than the opinion of the Papists: for according to his principles that would
have been true: but as he frames his argument, it is a great mistake, though he
is to be somewhat excused, because I think he has received this notion by an
implicit Faith from Mr. Gillespy. But to make good his opinion, he says, That
Estius declares that the Catholics maintain, that Sacraments work Grace in
those that do not Obicem ponere, or withstand their operation. And he says,
that Brockmond, a bitter Lutheran, mentions it as a Calvinian error, that
Sacraments are not instituted to be means of conferring Grace. But what of all
this, does it follow from hence, that they hold that the Lords Supper is a
converting Ordinance. They never teach that the first Grace is communicated by
the Lords Supper, but suppose that to be wrought by Baptism, before ever
Persons partake of the Lords Supper. The Council of Trent does require a
proving of themselves before they come to the Lords Supper; and they curse
those that say, That Faith alone is sufficient preparation for the Lords
Supper. Hist. Conc. Tri. p. 274, 275. And I challenge Mr M. to bring one Popish
Author, that does assert the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be a converting
Ordinance: nay himself does mention two Popish Authors, Albastineus and
Duravdus, p. 40. to show that those who were not holy should not come to the
Table of the Lord. Such arguing is a great abuse.

Mr. Mather's Seventh Argument.
IF it be impossible for Unregenerate Persons whilst such, to be worthy
Communicints at the Lords Table, then they have no command or allowance from
God to be there whilst in their Sins. But it is impossible for them to be
worthy Communicants.

Answ. I deny the minor.

1. If we take communicating worthily in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 11.29. For
discerning the Lords body, it is not impossible for them to communicate
worthily; they may understand the nature of the Ordinance very well, and be
able to instruct others in it.

2. If we take communicating worthily in his sense, for exercising Faith and
other Graces, at the time of participation, it is not impossible for those that
came to the Ordinance in an Unregenerate condition to partake worthily. God may
give them Grace at that time. Mr. Timson who was bred up under Mr. Robert
Bolton, and wrote two Books judiciously upon this Subject, to the good
acceptance of many Godly and Learned men, received the first impression of Gods
Grace at this Ordinance. As Mr. John Humphry gives the Account. And indeed all
men when they come to the Lords Supper, depend upon the help of God for
communicating in Faith; if God don't assist Godly men, it is impossible for
them to do it; and if God do not change the hearts of natural men, it is
impossible for them to do it. But one and the other must ly in Gods way and so
wait upon him for his Grace.

Mr. Mather blames me for saying, That it is not to be imagined, that all that
were Baptized by John were Regenerate; or judged by him to be so: and says, I
do not confirm my Assertion with any reason. p. 65. I shall give him a reason
now: that they were not all Regenerate appears from, Joh. 5.35. John was a
burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
light. That John did not think them to be so, appears because, he knew that
many were called and few were chosen: and that the Kingdom of God is like a
net, that was cast into the Sea and gathered of every kind, as Christ teaches
us, Math. 13.47.

He takes notice, that I say, If Unregenerate persons might not be Baptized,
the Pharisees would not have been blamed for neglecting Baptism. And says,
that Mr. S. implies that John would have Baptized them, but that they refused
to be Baptized by him. Whereas the truth is other-wise, they would have been
Baptized but John refused to Baptize them. And he brings several Authors to
confirm it. p. 66, 67.

Answ. What they say is no ways contradictory to what I say. It is very proper
to say, that John would have Baptized them, if he were willing to do it upon
such conditions as they were able to perform: he required of them to bring
forth fruits meet for repentance, Mat. 3.8. that is to behave themselves as
Saints; this they might have done, though Unregenerate. And it is very proper to
say, that they refused to be Baptized, because they did refuse it upon those
terms that John proposed. He that has a mind to a Commodity, but will not go to
the price of it, does refuse it. If they had renounced their Errors and
Superstitions and reformed their lives, John would not have refused them, though
there had been no Saving change in their hearts, but their neglecting those
things, was a refusing of Baptism.

The Second BOOK. The Arguments of Mr. Vines, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Charnock,
Answered.
MR. Vine's first Argument. No Effects can be ascribed to this Sacrament of the
Supper, that fall not under the signification of it: One thing is not signified
and another wrought. But the Conversion of a Sinner is not signified by this
Sacrament of the Supper.

I premise, that this Argument is as strong against the Passover, being a
converting Ordinance, whereas we know that by institution that was to be
attended by Unconverted men.

Ans. I deny the minor. Eating and Drinking at the Sacrament does signify
feeding upon Christ; when men do act faith upon Christ, they are said to feed
upon the body and blood of Christ. Joh. 6.53, 54. Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whosoever eats my
flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life. And the first act of faith or
feeding on Christ, which is actual Conversion is signified as well (...) after
acts of Faith.

2. Argument, That Sacrament that by the institution of it presupposes those
that reep the benefits of it to be Converts, is no Conventing Ordinance: But
this Sacrament of the Supper presupposes by the Institution, those that reap
the benefits of it to be Converts.

Answ. I deny the minor. The Sacrament by the Institution of it supposes them
to be such as the Church is bound to admit. viz. Visible Saints. If God have
appointed his Church to admit visible Saints, whether they be real Saints or
not; we cannot say that they are by Institution supposed to be real Saints: Men
may suppose what they will, but by Institution they are supposed to be visible
Saints.

3. Argument, The word is the only Instrument to beget Faith.

Answ. If he intends the Preaching of the Word, both parts will fall under
condemnation.

1. The Consequence is denied. Because there is the Preaching the word in the
Lords Supper: there the Gospel is Published, that Christ's blood is shed for the
remission of Sins: there is an offer of Christ crucified: Christ may be
Preached, though there is not a discourse of an hour upon a Text.

2. The minor is denied. Miracles are a means to beget faith. 1 Cor. 14.22.
Tongues are for a sign to them that believe not. Prayer is a means, Joh. 4.^0.
Thou would have asked him and he would have given thee living waters. So is
Meditation, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O daughter, and consider, for sake thine own
People, and thy Fathers house. So Circumcision, the Passover and Baptism.

Mr. Baxter's Arguments follow.

1. Arg. If no man is commanded or warranted to receive the Sacrament without
the Profession of true Faith, then not without faith it self: But no man is
warranted to receive the Sacrament, without the Profession of true faith.

A. 1. If he means that no man is warranted to receive the Sacrament, unless he
affirms that he has Saving Faith. I deny the minor: For then no man might come,
but he that has Assurance. And a great many gracious men must be excluded from
the Sacrament.

2. If he means that no man is warranted to receive the Sacrament, unless he
professes real faith. I deny the Consequence: He would prove his consequence,
because no man is bound to make a false: Profession. (...) Answer it is the
duty of a man that is rationally convinced of the truth of the Gospel to affirm
that he believes it, though he does not believe it with a Saving faith. They were
blamed for not doing of it: Joh. 12.42, 43. Among the chief Rulers many
believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of men more
then the praise of God. When such profess faith, they make a true Profession,
they profess that which they do indeed believe, though their profession be not
graciously sincere, and men are bound to speak the truth, though they only do
it with a moral, and not with a gracious sincerity.

2. Arg. If no Commandments that are produced in the Scripture will warrant men
to receive the Sacrament without Saving faith, then no man may receive the
Sacrament without Saving Faith: but none are produced in the Scripture.

Ans. The minor is denied. He proves it two ways. 1. They were not Commanded to
be circumcised, whether they did consent to the Covenant or not. Ans. That is a
great mistake, Children were not capable to consent. 2. The Parent confessed an
hearty consent to the Covenant, and an hearty consent to it, is Faith. Ans. If
an hearty consent to the Covenant be says, yet the profession of an hearty
consent to it, is not faith.

In the next place he reherses a popular discourse of Mr. Charnocks; wherein
there is such a loose way of arguing, that it is hardly worth the while to put
Pen to Paper to answer the arguments.

Mr. Charnocks arguments are of two sorts; the first sort are to prove that
Unregenerate Persons may not come to the Lords Supper.

1. Arg. The Lords Supper is Childrens bread. Ans. If so then it does belong to
the visible People of God, whether they be Regenerate or no. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Ye
were the Children of the Lord your God. Isa. 1.2. I have brought up Children.
Jer. 3.14. Turn O backsliding Children.

2. Arg. For Unregenerate Persons to come to the Lords Supper is a mocking of
God. Ans. It is no more a mocking of God than for such Persons to pray; by this
argument they may not Pray.

3. Arg. An Unregenerate man is not in Covenant with God, because he has no
faith, which is the condition of the Covenant, therefore has no right to the
Seal of the Covenant. Answ. ^. By this argument Ishmael had no right to the
Seal of the Covenant, nor many of those that God commanded to be circumcised,
Josn. 5.2. 2. That many Unregenerate men are in external Covenant. Deuteronomy. 5.2
The Lord our God made a Covenant with us in (...) therefore they have a right
to the (...) of the Covenant. 3. Many Unregenerate men have a right to the
offer of the internal Covenant, and so they may have a right to the Seal of it,
which does Seal the truth of the Covenant, and also Seals the Spiritual and
Eternal blessings of the Covenant, not absolutely, but conditionally.

4. Arg. An Unregenerate man is dead: what has a dead man to do with a feast?
Ans. Those that are Spiritually dead are called upon to believe, which is a
feeding upon Christ. So that they have to do with a Feast.

5. Arg. The Sacrament is an Ordinance of inward Communion with Christ. Ans. So
was the Passover, yet Unregenerate men might partake of that; and Unregenerate
men when they come to the Lords Supper are capable of believing, and so having
communion with Christ.

6. Arg. Freemen only have a right to the Privileges of the city: and true
Christians to the Privileges of the Church. Ans. The Church of Ephesus, and
other Gentile Churches, Were fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. When he says fellow citizens with the Saints; he
means fellow citizens with the Jaws: but neither all the professing Gentiles,
nor all the Jews were Regenerate men.

The second sort of Arguments are to prove, that the Lords Supper is not a
Converting Ordinance.

1. Arg. Baptism is not a Converting Ordinance, much less this of the Supper.
Ans. Baptism is a Converting Ordinance two ways. 1. God gives Grace to the
Children in this way. Some in their Infancy: thus we hope for some that dye in
Childhood; some afterward. 2. The consideration of their being Baptized, is a
means to help forward their Conversion, by convincing, awakning and encouraging
of them. He would prove, that Baptism is not a Converting Ordinance, because
Circumcision was to Abraham a Seal of the Righteousness of faith, which he had
when he was Uncircumcised, Romans 4.11. But though Abraham had faith before he was
Circumcised, yet it don't follow that Ishmael had, that all his Male Servants
had; and others in future times.

2. Arg. Bread and Wine are not to enloven a Dead man, but to nourish a living
man, Christ is offered here as Spiritual food, and spiritual food supposes a
new birth. Ans. The consequence is to be denied: for these three reasons. 1.
Because this Argument lies as strong against the Passover's being a Converting
Ordinance as the Lords Supper. 2. Because Christ being offered as spiritual
food, is a special encouragement unto the first act of faith, which is actual
Conversion, if Christ offers to nourish us up to eternal life, that draws us to
accept of him. 3. The Lords Supper represents Christ as the bread of Life, as
he is; and then it is a Converting Ordinance. The reason is, because he is not
only, a life supporting, strengthening, nourishing and increasing bread, but a
life giving bread. Joh. 6.48.53. I am that bread of life, except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. And life
is given in Conversion.

3. Arg. Pre-examination implies that it is no Converting Ordinance. Ans. It
implies no such thing, because this Examination is about discerning the nature
of the Ordinance: about discerning the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.29.

4. Arg. The nature of Excommunication shows it to be no Converting Ordinance.
If it were a Converting Ordinance, the Incestuous Corinthian, should rather
have been kept in the Church then cast out. Ans. 1. Though it be a Converting
Ordinance, yet only to orderly Members; the censures are for the Conversion of
disorderly ones, in case they be Unconverted. 2. The Argument is as strong
against its being a strengthing Ordinance. The Corinthian if he were a godly
man, as Mr. Mather supposes, had then need to be kept in the Church that his
Grace might be strengthened.

The Third BOOK. Arguments to prove that Sanctifying Grace is not necessary, in
order to a lawful partaking of the Lords Supper, with a Vindication of them
from the Exceptions of Mr. Mather.
1. ARgument. If Unsanctifyed Persons might lawfully come to the Passover, then
they may lawfully partake of the Lords Supper: But they might lawfully come to
the Passover.

This is evident, because the whole Congregation of Israel were to keep it, and
such Strangers among them as did subject themselves to Circumcision, Exodus
12.47, 48. And God threatens such Persons as neglect it, except they were
Unclean or in a Journey. The man that is clean and not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the same Soul shall be cut off from his
People, Numb. 19.13. The want of Sanctification never was alleged by any man,
as a reason for forbearing the Passover. Unsanctifyed Jews did sin when they
attended the Passover, because they did it not in a gracious manner: so they
did when they attended any other duty of Worship, but the attending of this
Ordinance was no Sin, nor ever charged on them as Sin in the Scripture: it
would have been a great transgression if they had neglected it. There were many
times, when there were very few godly men among them. Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord for
the godly man cease, the faithful fail, from among the children of men. Isai
53.1. Who birth believed our report and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed. Yet the Passover was to be attended by the whole Congregation of
Israel: there was no restriction laid upon them in Hezekiah's time, or Josiah's
time, and their practice is spoken of as matter of commendation.

The consequence is likewise good. If the want of Sanctification, did not make
it unlawful for men to come to the Passover: Then it don't make it unlawful for
men to come to the Lords Supper. The Passover is a Sacrament as well as the
Lords Supper, therefore Christ is called our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our
Passover is Sacrificed or us. In the Passover Christ is represented, and it is
as well as Circumcision a Seal of the righteousness of faith. If it be unlawful
for Unsanctifyed persons to partake of the Lords Supper, because that is a sign
of Christ Crucified, it would on the same account have been unlawful to have
partook of the Passover, for that likewise was a sign of Christ Crucified. If
it were unlawful, because it is an holy Ordinance; then they might not have
come to the Passover, for that was an holy Ordinance also. If it be unlawful
because therein Saints have communion with Christ, it would upon the same
account have been unlawful to have come to the Passover; for Saints therein had
communion with Christ. If it were unlawful, because the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is a Sacrament of confirmation, then it would have been unlawful to have
pertook of the Passover, on the same account: the Passover and the Lords Supper
are like figures, one of Christ to come, the other of Christ already come: and
when Christ abolished one, he instituted the other in the room thereof. It
seems to me that many Persons do make an idol of the Lords Supper; crying it up
above all Ordinances both of the Old and New Testament, as if it were as
peculiar to Saints as heavenly glory, and to be attended with more reverence
than all other Ordinances. It may be this is some of the relics of Popish
Idolatry, in making the Bread and Wine to be the natural Body and Blood of
Christ. They do by the Lords Supper as some men do by the Name of Jesus, they
bow to that, but not to the Name of Christ, or God, or the Holy Ghost. So these
Persons have a greater reverence for this than any other holy Ordinance. It
concerns them to see that there be no Superstition in it.

Mr. Mather makes three exceptions against this Argument.

1. Exception. That the Church of the Jews was National: and the Church now is
Congregational: and he depends on Dr. Goodwin to make it good.

Ans. There is no opposition between the Churches being National and yet
Congregational. The whole Nation may be a National Church, and the several
Congregations may be Congregational Churches, as the several Synagogues of the
Jews were.

The reason why we have no account of any National Church among the Gentiles,
is because there was no Nation Converted to the Christian says, during that
time; which we have the History of, in the New Testament: there were a few in
one City and a few in another that did receive the Christian faith: but the
bulk of the several Nations lay in their heathenism.

At the Jews were a National Church of old, so when they return, they will be a
National Church again, and as they will be a National Church, so Gentile
Nations that profess the true Religion, are National Churches. His objection
that then there must be an High Priest is frivolous. If he had argued that then
there must be a National Church Government, he had argued right; because Israel
was a National Church they had an Ecclesiastical Sane^rim, but they had an
High Priest on another account, viz to typify Christ as the High Priest of our
Profession.

A Nation that is in Covenant with God is a National Church, a Nation that are
in Covenant with God are the People of God, bound jointly and severally to keep
Covenant with him. God is one party in the Covenant, and they are the other,
and being bound together to keep Covenant, the whole must have power over the
parts, to rectify all Mal-administrations, and to see the Covenant kept: it
need not seem strange to any to hear of a National Church in the time of the
New Testament, considering how it was foretold by Isaiah: Isai. 19.24, 25. In
that day Israel shall be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, whom the, Lord
of hosts shall bless, saying, blessed be Egypt my People, Assyria the work of
my hands, and Israel my inheritance. And how it was foretold by Christ: Matt.
13.33. The kingdom of Heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in
three measures of Meal till the whole was leavened. Though few entertain the
Gospel at first, yet the whole Country in a while are brought to entertain it.
What is a National Church but a Professing Nation jointly bound to keep
Covenant with God.

2. Exception. Though Gospel mysteries were typifyed by the Possover, yet it
was instituted in special, to be a commemoration of the deliverance out of
Egypt, and so the whole Nation were to partake of it.

Answ. If when he says, it was in special to be a commemoration of the
deliverance out of Egypt, he intends no more. 1. Then this, that beside its
typifying Gospel mysteries, it had a particular respect to the deliverance out
of Egypt; there is no force at all in the exception, if it had some respect to
that, that hindered not the Sacredness of the Ordinance, neither could it be a
reason why Unsanctifyed persons should come to that Ordinance, more than to any
now in the time of the New Testament; the respect is had to the deliverance out
of Egypt, does not destroy the respect it had to the Redemption by Christ: its
being a Memorial of the deliverance from Egypt, don't hinder it from being a
Seal of the righteousness of faith, nor make it fit to be attended by such as
may not attend the Lords Supper. 2. If when he says, it was in special to be a
commemoration of the deliverance from Egypt, he means that it was especially,
or principally instituted for that end, to be a Memorial of that deliverance
from Egypt; surely he did not Write those words in cold blood: the deliverance
out of Egypt was a great Mercy, but small in comparison of the deliverance by
Christ: if the great thing was to be a Memorial of the deliverance from Egypt,
why was there not such another Ordinance instituted, when they were delivered
from Babylon; if that were the great thing why was it abolished after Christ's
suffering? can it enter into any man's heart, to think that the typifying the
Redemption by Christ was only a thing by the by in this institution? is that
deliverance from Egpyt the principal thing intended in the preface to the ten
Commandments? Exodus 20.2.

3. Exception. That Scandalous Persons might come to the Passover but not to
the Lords Supper. He says, Adulterers, Thieves, Liars, Slanderers, Perjured
persons, might come to the Passover, and I must admit such Scandalous persons
to the Lords Supper, or let go my argument from the Passover.

And he teaches me what to answer, viz. That more positive fruits of
Regeneration are required in the Church Members of the New Testament than the
Old. But I dare not give that answer, because of the absurdity of it: for the
persons, that he speaks of wanted the Negative fruits of Regeneration, and were
not able to say, as the Pharisee: Luke 18.11. God I thank thee I am not as
other men are Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican.

But this I answer, that he does greatly reproach the Church of Israel: he
pretends to endeavor the purity of Gospel Churches, but obtrudes that upon us
which is crude and indigested, as if all sorts of vile persons might according
to divine Institution, live in communion with the Jewish Church: as if the
Church of Israel were like Babylon a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. I
know there were great corruptions many times among them, but surely visible
Saints were always de jure, the matter of Church Members: So Israel are often
called: Deuteronomy. 33.3. All his Saints are in his hands: So David calls them: Psalm.
111.1. I will praise thee in the Assembly of the Upright and in the
Congregation. And he teaches us, That holiness becomes Gods House for ever,
Psalm. 93.5. And not only as Mr. Mather says, in the time of the New Testament.

God appointed in the Church of Israel a way for the removal of Scandals. For,

1. Men were required in case of Sin to offer up their Sacrifices: as is
abundantly evident from the Law of Moses. Lev. 6.6, 7. He shall bring his
trespass offering unto the Lord, and the Priest shall make atonement for him
before the Lord, and it shall be forgiven him. This offering of Sacrifice was
to be attended with confession. Lev. 5.5. He shall confess that he has sinned
in that thing, and he shall bring his trepass offering unto the Lord for his
sin. Numb. 5.6, 7. When a man or woman commit any sin, that men commit, then
they shall confess their sin that they have done. Hereby the Scandal was
removed: there were to be visible signs of Repentance, as now are required
among us.

2. In case of obstinacy they had their way to purge the Church: they had their
Ecclesiastical censures, according to divine Institution. Which as Dr. Owen
calls them, were an authoritative Exclusion of them, from the Society of the
Church and the Members of it. The Jews do distinguish these censures into three
degree, the first they call Niddui, the second Cherem, the third Shammatha. The
Jews in Christ's time did agree, that if any confessed Christ, they would put
him out of the Synagogue, Joh. 9.22. This was executed on the blind man, v 24.
And it is very probable that when it is said in the Old Testament, that
obstinate offenders shall be cut off from among their People, that this is at
least sometimes intended by it.

3. When Persons were under the second censure, which they call Cherem, they
were not to eat the Passover, they did allow them that were under the first to
come into the Temple, though at a distinct gate, which they called the gate of
Mourners, but in the second they were excluded: they agreed in Ezra's time,
That those that did not assemble within three days, should be separated from
the Congregation, Ezra 10.8. Then they were looked on as Heathens, according to
that, Math. 18.17. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a Publican: which was no new rule appropriated to the Gospel
Church, which was not in being, when Christ spoke these words, but Christ did
herein revive an old rule that had been always in force.

2. Argument. If no Unsanctifyed Person may come to the Lords Supper, than no
man may come, but be that knows himself to be Sanctified: But persons may come,
that do not know themselves to be Sanctified.

The minor is granted. Mr. M. grants that there is no necessity of Assurance:
and that if Persons search and have a probable hope that they are Converted,
they may come. p. 84.

The consequence is plain: because upon that supposition, That Sanctified
persons only must come; he that don't know his Sanctification, does not know
that he has any right to come: and so he cannot eat in faith, and therefore
Sins in coming. Thus the Apostle determines the case about eating of flesh:
that those that doubted whether God allowed them to do it and yet did it, were
guilty: Romans 14.23. He that doubts is damned if he eat: because he eats not
of faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. He that does not know that he
is Sanctified, does not by that doctrine know that he has any right to come:
he is ignorant that he has any warrant to come: if he comes, he comes upon his
peril of eating and drinking damnation to himself: if he comes he takes a
liberty to do that, that he does not know, that God gives him a liberty to do:
it is horrible presumption for him to come; if all unsanctifyed persons are
forbidden, then he does not know but that it is forbidden fruit to him, and
that he rebels in coming: he that does that, which he does not know he may
lawfully do, will not be accepted in it: Conscience may say to him, What right
have you to it, Who gave you leave, What Warrant have you to do it? If Churches
are to censure only Scandalous persons, then they must know they are Scandalous
before they do censure them; it is not enough for them to say they don't know
but that they are, or they think that they are. If a man has a liberty to Sell
only his own Horse, and not another man's, then he must know it to be his own
and not another man's; and it is not enough for him to say, He did not know but
it was his own, or he thought it was his own. If a Minister has a liberty to
Preach nothing but the truth, then he must know it to be the truth before he
Preaches it; it is not enough for him to say, he did not know but it was, or
that he hoped it was. Thus it is in this case. If only Sanctification gives him
a real right to the Lords Supper, then nothing short of the knowledge of
Sanctification can give him a known right to it: until he knows his
Sanctification he is ignorant of his right: if Sanctification only gives him a
right, then if he does not know his Sanctification, he does not know, that he
has a right. Probable hopes wont Warrant him to come: for they don't give him
a right, it is only Sanctification does that, neither do they evidence that he
has a right.

But though the truth of this Argument be as evident as the light of the Sun at
Noon day, yet it would be strange if Mr. Mather should have no answer to give.
He tells us if after serious Examination, be cannot but hope there is a good
work begun in his Soul, be ought to come, though his hopes be not Assurance.

But I say, he ought not to come unless he has a right to come; ought he to
come if he have this hope, whether he be Regenerate or not? he may have these
hopes, and yet be unsanctifyed, then it is not Sanctification that gives him
the right but the hopes of it: he ought to come, Mr. M. says: yet he ought to
stay away because he is unsanctifyed: he is charged to come because of his
hopes, and condemned for coming because he is unsanctifyed.

But Mr. Mather labors to give relief to Wounded Consciences by a comparison,
he tells, If a Jew after he had searched for leaven in the house, found none,
be was to eat the Passover; so if Christians after self Examination, cannot
find that they are in a state of Hypocrisy, which is leaven, they ought to come
to the Lords Table. Here is a shadow without substance, a comparison without a
similitude. The Jew searches for leaven, he finds bread and is at a loss
whether it be leavened or no; may he eat the Passover without removing that
bread; so the Christian searches his heart, and finds a great deal of
hypocrisy, but is at a loss whether it be reigning hypocrisy or no: ought he in
this case to run the venture and come to the Lords Table?

The case with these men that don't know their Saint-ship, is like the case of
the Priests that could not find their Register, Ezra 2.62, 63. They were put
from the Priest-bood as Polluted, that they should not eat of the holy things,
till there stood up a Priest with Urim and Thummim. So these that cannot find
their Saint-ship must forbear eating at the Lords Table, till they can make it
out, if it be Sanctification that gives a right to the Lords Supper.

There is a strange inconsistency in his doctrine, sometimes he teaches that
Regeneration gives the right to come, and that unsanctifyed persons may not
come; sometimes that if they hope after Examination that they are godly, then
they may come. But if it be grace only that gives them a right, then
preponderating hopes of Grace will not give them a right; besides if an hope
that they are godly gives them a right, then that which is very sinful will
give them a right: for such are the hopes of many men, founded in Pride and
Ignorance: There is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet are not
cleansed from their filthiness, Prove. 30.12. Again, if a probable hope gives
men a right, then when ever they have a preponderating fear that they are not
godly, they must forbear, and so neglect the means of their consolation. Again,
if a preponderating hope gives them a right: then some have a right to the
Lords Supper, that are worse than some that know themselves to be Unconverted:
some conceited senceless men nourish such an hope: and some that are very near
to the Kingdom of God, being humbled and prepared for Christ know themselves to
the Unconverted.

3. Argument. Those that are Members of the Church and neither ignorant nor
scandalous may lawfully come to the Lords Supper, but some Unsanctifred persons
are Members of the Church and neither ignorant nor scandalous.

The major does appear, from the institution of Christ, this is his command to
his Church. When Christ instituted the Supper, he appointed it to be an
Ordinance for Disciples to the end of the World, when he said, This do in
remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. It does not only intend the duty of the Apostles
at that time, but that they and their successors should attend that Service in
all Generations. Therefore this command is enforced on the Church of Corinth by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. This is one special way wherein the Church does
give a testimony unto Christ, celebrate the Memory of his death, and show it
forth: As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show forth the
Lords death till he come.

This is also evident from the practice of the Apostles, and primitive Church,
those that were added to the Church continued in this practice. Acts 2.42. So
the Disciples came together on the Lords day to break bread, Acts 20.7. This
was the manner also of the Church of Corinth: there were not a Number of them
that neglected, because unsanctifyed, but they all partook. 1 Cor. 10 17. We
being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread: 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit.

The minor is also evident. That some Unsanctifyed men are Members of the
Church. The foolish Virgins did belong unto the Kingdom of God, as well as the
wise, Mat. 25.1, 2. The Kingdom of heaven shall be likened to ten Virgins which
took their Lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom, and five of them were
wise, and five were foolish. Multitudes that are in fellowship with Churches
are destitute of Saving Grace. Among the many that are called sew are chosen,
Math. 20.16. Our Reverend Author does acknowledge this, but he faith, They are
not duly qualifyed to be Members of Churches. But this is utterly inconsistent
with what he faith in other places. For he does again and again acknowledge
that the Churches ought to admit those that are Saints to rational Charity,
though they be Unregenerate; and likewise he does acknowledge, that if after
(...) Examination, a person cannot but (...) that there is a good Work begun in
his Soul, he ought to come. And by these two rules many that are destitute of
Grace ought to be admitted into Churches, God does appoint them to come and God
does appoint Churches to accept of them; so that according to divine
institution they are Members of Churches, and qualifyed according to Gods
Ordinance for it.

For the further clearing that some Unsanctifyed persons are Members of the
Church. Let it be considered, that many of these persons were born in the
Church, and therefore Baptized in their Infancy, and have been all their days
bred up in the Church, and never gave any just occasion to be cast out of the
Church: so that they have their standing there, and are regular Members of the
Church.

I foresee that Mr. Mather will object against this, from his digression, p.
20, 21. viz. That these persons do belong to the visible Catholic, but not to
any particular instituted Church, and he has Dr. Owen for his voucher.

But this will not bear Examination; it is as if he should say, That the
Children of the Town, were Members of Mankind, and Members of the Common
Wealth, but not Members of the Town where they dwell: Is it agreeable to reason
to think that the Church stands in relation to them, and is bound to see to
their Education, and that they stand in no relation to the Church? How
unreasonable is it to think, that a Multitude of men should be reckoned of the
Common Wealth of Israel, and have some Privileges for themselves and Children,
and yet be under no Ecclesiastical Government? is not this quite contrary to
the practice of these Churches, who have been wont to call many to account for
their Misdemenours, who were the Children of the Church?

What do these men want to make them Members of particular Churches? he will
say, They want to be in Covenant with particular Churches; but there is neither
Precept nor PRecedent for it in the Scripture. He faith in another Book, That I
call the Church a body corporate; but there is no forming of a body corporate
without a Covenant; but therein he lies under a great mistake; bodies corporate
may be made by Law, and they may be made by Charter.

There is a covenant indeed between God and every professing Nation. God
brought his people of old into a Church Estate by making a covenant with them,
which covenant was several times renewed, Deuteronomy. 29.10-13. And all Proselytes
among the Jews were to take hold of this covenant: Isai. 56.4. But there is no
necessity of any covenant between the Members of a particular Congregation
among themselves, though God makes Promises to a National Church, it does not
follow, that the Members of a Congregation must make Promises among themselves.
There was a covenant between God and the Church of Israel: but the Members of
each Synagogue did not make a covenant between themselves: Particular Churches
may be bounded either by civil Authority, or Ecclesiastical, or by Argument:
and it is ordinarily the duty of every one that is a Member of the Catholic
Church, to carry on the Worship of God in conjunction with the particular
Church where he dwells: and he is bound by his profession of Religion so to do,
and the Church likewise does stand bound to accept of him, if he carries well.

4. Argument If the Lords Supper be instituted for Conversion of Sinners as
well as for the Edification of Saints, then Sanctifying Grace is not necessary
to men's attending of it: But it as Instituted for the Conversion of Sinners:
not for the Conversion of Heathens to the Christian Religion, but for the
Saving Conversion of Professing men.

The minor which is only in question, may be confirmed by these considerations.

1. This Ordinance has a proper tendency to promote men's Conversion. Conversion
taken largly, as it comprehends preparatory Work, consists of three parts, and
this Ordinance is serviceable to them all.

1. Conviction. Men must be convinced of the anger of God because of their
Sins, and the necessity of being at Peace with him: and this Ordinance is a
means to settle this conviction on the heart: for here is a discovery of the
terrible anger of God for sin, by the inflicting of the curse upon Christ, when
sin was but imputed unto him; a man may well reason thus, If this be done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry?

2. Humiliation. Or the bringing of the Sinner off from his own Righteousness:
for in this Ordinance God teaches men, the necessity of Christ's righteousness,
that their own is but husks, and will not nourish them up unto eternal Life.

3. Faith. Christ is here offered to men, and the call makes way for the answer
of the Soul; here is an affecting representation of the dying love of Christ,
which serves to remove many discouragements, and of the accursed death of
Christ, wherein the Sinner may see Satisfaction made for sin. In this Ordinance
the truth of the covenant is Sealed, which is a great means to beget in the
Soul a persuasion of the cruth of it. And if the man be but convinced of these
things he is gained: those that understand any thing of the working of Gods
Spirit on the heart, must be sensible that it has a great tendency to advance
Conversion; and why has God given it such a tendency to promote Conversion, if
it were not appointed for that end.

2. Some that are Unsanctifyed ought to offer themselves to communion in the
Lords Supper, and that on a double account; 1st. Because they are in covenant
with God, and therefore being neither ignorant nor of bad conversation, the
Seal of the covenant does belong to them. Many of them were born in covenant
and have actually renewed the covenant, and therefore ought to tender
themselves to communion, they ought to receive Gods confirmation of his
covenant, and to use the means to stir them up to keep covenant. 2ly. Because
it is a scandal if they do not, and the Church may call them to an account for
their neglect. It is a visible contempt cast upon the Ordinance, it is a denial
of the Gospel, and a refusal to show forth the death of Christ.

3. The Church by the Ordinance of God is bound to admit many Unconverted
persons to the Lord's Supper, they are Ecclesiastically qualifyed having
knowledge and a good conversation; they are Saints to a judgment of Charity,
walking orderly; and therefore the Church is to accept them into their
communion; the Church is to act upon what is visible, so that according to the
Ordinance of God they are to be received to communion.

4. The Lords Supper is for the Spiritual good of all that are regularly to be
admitted thereunto. All Ordinances attended according to institution, are for
that end, that the Spirit may be Saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, and so
this Ordinance. This is the Work of the Ministry in all their administrations,
by all means to save some. This Ordinance may have a contrary effect, and be an
occasion of the ruin of softie: but the direct end of it is Salvation, and so
the direct end of it is Conversion, when the Subject that it is administered
unto stands in need of Conversion: there is no reason to confine the benefit of
it unto Saints.

Mr. Mather argues, That Faith comes by Hearing, Romans 14. Why does he not argue
that the Subsequent acts of faith come by hearing as well as the first, and
that therefore the Lords Supper is not for the strengthening of Faith. Put
indeed there is Hearing, as well as Seeing, and Touching and Smelling and
Tasting, in the Sacrament of the Supper, there is a gracious offer of Christ,
and all his benefits, which has a proper tendency to beget faith.

5. Argument. If the Lords Supper be only for Converted men, then God would
have given some certain rule in the attending of which it might be restrained
to Converted men: but he has given no such rule in attending of which it may
be restrained to Converted men.

The major is evident, because if it be appointed only for Converted men, and
no rule given whereby it may be restrained to them, then his Law would be
impracticable. The law would be a mere snare, and men would be under a
necessity to profane his Ordinance: it is a reflection on the Wisdom and
Holiness of God to impute such a thing to him. God don't bind his Church to
impossibilities, if he had made any such Ordinance, he would give gifts to his
Church to distinguish Sincere men from Hypocrites, whereby the Ordinance might
have been attended.

The minor is also evident: He has given no such rule to his Church, whereby it
may be restrained to converted Men. This appears because by the rule, that they
are to go by, they are allowed to give the Lords Supper to many Unconverted
men: for all visible Signs are common to men converted and unconverted. If they
go by profession of the truth, that is common to both; if by a good
Conversation, that is common to both; if by zeal in Religion, that is common to
both; if by suffering in the cause of God, that is common to both; if by
knowledge, that is common to both; if by a relation of Experiences, that is
common to both.

Obj There is a certain rule given whereby godly men may knew their godliness,
and that they are Warranted to come to the Lords Supper.

Answ. Mr. Mather will not stand by that rule: for he says, That if after
serious self Examination, a man cannot but hope that he is a godly man, he may
come though be has not Assurance: And if he goes by Mr. Mather's rule, that
will not restrain the Sacrament to converted men. Mr. Mather pretends to give a
solution of this argument, by propounding another Objection for me to answer.
He says, That I maintain that only Orthodox Christians may come to the Lords
Supper; and then there must be a certain rule to know the inward Sentiments of
men's hearts: but he mistakes the matter very much; I only hold that men must be
Orthodox in their Profession. Churches are to judge concerning visible
Saint-ship, when they go higher they go beyond their Sphere.

He says, why should we not believe that men that give us an account of their
Conversion, and whose Conversations are outwardly blameless and holy, are
really according as they seem to be. I will give him a reason, and that is
because it may be false; Many persons that have given a fair account and
carried well in the eye of the World for several years, have not proved well at
last: and God obliges no man to believe that which may be false.

6. Argument. If Unsanctifyed men may attend all other Ordinances or Duties of
Worship, then they may lawfully attend the Lords Supper: But they may attend
all other Ordinances or Duties of Worship.

The minor will be generally acknowledged: And indeed there was not any duty of
Worship required since the foundation of the World, that they might not attend.
But Mr. Mather does object: he grants that an Unconverted man may Preach: for
he may have great gifts which he may and ought to improve to the glory of God,
and the good of men. But he thinks he may not administer the Lords Supper; he
says, The argument from Natural to Instituted Worship will not hold. But he
strangly forgets himself; might not the Priests of old though unregenerate
attend other duties of their Office as well as Preach the word; Sacrificing was
Instituted Worship as well as administering the Lords Supper, so was offering of
Incense: but where were they forbidden to do those Services, in case they were
Unregenerate? the blessing of administrations in the house of God does not
depend upon the Piety of the Minister. The Officiating as Priests of old did
depend upon Natural Generation, and not upon Regeneration: Unregeneracy did not
give them a discharge from the work of their Office.

The consequence may be made evident from hence, because there can be no reason
assigned, why Unsanctifyed persons may attend all other duties of Worship and
not the Lords Supper. If there be the like reason for them to forbear other
duties of Worship as to forbear this, and the like reason to attend this act of
Worship as others, then the lawfulness of attending them, shows the lawfulness
of attending this: if it were made out to be Gods pleasure that it should be so
that is reason enough: but there is no reason can be assigned for such a
disference.

Particularly: It can be no reason for Unregenerate men to forbear the Lords
Supper because it is an holy Ordinance: For all the Ordinances of God are holy.
Circumcision was so, and the Passover, so is Baptism: these Ordinances were
appointed for the advancing of Holiness, there was Religion in them, they were
to be attended in an holy manner, and it was great Wickedness to use them in a
profane way; they were designed for the honor of God, yet that was no
sufficient reason for Unregenerate men to forbear attending of them: and
therefore that can be no sufficient reason to forbear attending the Lords
Supper.

2. The Lords Supper being a Sacrament or Seal of the Covenant can be no
reason. Two of Mr. Gillespy's arguments are built upon that foundation; but if
that arguing were good, Unregenerate persons must be forbidden all Sacraments.
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. Yet God
commanded Joshua at Gilgal to Circumcise all the Males who were born in the
Wilderness: who were several hundred thousands, Josh. 5.2.

3. Its being a Sacrament of confirmation can be no sufficient reason. For the
Passover was so as well as the Lords Supper; Circumcision was the initiating
Sacrament to the Jews, and the Passover the Sacrament of confirmation: but
Unregenerate men might lawfully celebrate the Passover, when God first
appointed it, multitudes of them were Unregenerate, as appears by their
carriage in the Wilderness. As this Sacrament does represent Christ as food for
the Soul, so did the Passover: As in this Ordinance, Saints have communion with
Christ, so they had in the Passover.

4. It is no sufficient reason, because the Minister is to say at the
administration of the Lords Supper, That this is Christ's body which is given
for you, and this is his blood which is shed for you: according to the Pattern:
Luke 22.19,20. For these words may be spoken to Unregenerate men. As Ministers
often do in their Sermons, when they call on Sinners to come to Christ, and
when they reprove for sin, and urge them to duties of Obedience: those
expressions do not intend that Christ did dye designedly for them, but that his
death and satisfaction is offered to them, and shall be made over to them if
they accept of Him.

5. Gods not allowing Scandalous persons to come to this Ordinance is no
reason. Some Scandalous persons indeed may be far better than Unregenerate
persons, yet there may be great reason for the former to be prohibited and not
the latter: Scandalous persons are forbidden, partly to bring them in that way
to a sight of their evil practices, partly for the Vindication of Gods Name,
which has been dishonored by them.

6. The Apostles commanding men to Examine themselves as a preparation for
coming to the Lords Supper, can be no reason. If he had said, Let men Examine
themselves and so let them fast, we should not have thought that to be a
sufficient reason for Unregenerate men to abstain from fasting. And if he had
said, That he that Prays unworthily, and Hears the word unworthily, exposes
himself to Damnation or Judgment, we should not have looked upon that a
sufficient reason for Unregenerate men to refrain from Praying, and Hearing of
the Word.

Were I a Papist, and did I believe the doctrine of Transubstantiation, that
the Bread and Wine were the natural body and blood of Christ, I might think
that to be a sufficient reason for Unregenerate men's not coming to the Lords
Supper, and though I do not imagine any such apprehensions in those Brethren
that differ from me, yet I doubt that opinion has laid the foundation of their
doctrine, and likewise of recieving the Sacrament kneeling.

7. Argument. They that are in external Covenant with God, and neither Ignerant
nor Scandalous may lawfully come to the Lords Supper, but some Unsanctifyed
persons are in external Covenant with God.

The minor cannot be denied. God made a Covenant with the whole People of
Israel: Deuteronomy. 5.2. They and their Posterity after them were the Covenant People
of God: God stood in relation to them as their God, they stood in relation to
him as his People. And so the Professing People of God now are in Covenant with
him, and so are their Children, and therefore they are baptized.

The consequence is evident from hence. Because it is lawful for them to keep
the external Covenant: as they have a natural so they have a legal power to
keep the external Covenant. The attending of the Lords Supper is one of the
external duties of the Covenant: Circumcision is said to be the Covenant: Genesis
17.10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed
after thee, every man Child among you, shall be circumcised. And v. 14. The
neglect of this is called, A breaking of the Covenant. So the Lords Supper is
part of the Covenant, and a token of the Covenant: and if any Professing People
do neglect it, be it under what notion it will, it will be a grievous breach of
Covenant.

If God does command them to attend Covenant duties, then he don't forbid them;
God does not require and prohibit the same thing, there is a consistency in
Gods commands: He does not lay a tie upon men's Consciences to come, and lay a
tie upon their Consciences to forbear; God makes them promise to keep his
Covenant; and will he make it criminal to attend those duties of the Covenant,
which he has made them promise to keep? they cannot keep the Covenant if they
don't come to the Lords Supper, therefore it must be lawful for them to come.

Obj. It is a Covenant duty but it must not be attended by Unqualifyed Persons;
though it be a Covenant duty, yet not for Ignorant Persons, nor Scandalous
Persons, nor Unsanctifyed Persons: if Persons be not duly qualified it is no
immediate duty for them; the Ignorant must get knowledge, Scandalous persons
must repent of their transgressions, and Natural men must get into a Converted
condition, and so come to the Lords Supper.

Answ. It is very reasonable to say that God requires Ignorant persons to come,
and yet for bids them to come before they have knowledge; and that he requires
Scandalous persons to come, and yet forbids their coming until they have made
Satisfaction: because they are able to qualify themselves, they may truly be
said to have liberty and legal power to come, because they have a natural power
to qualify themselves; it is their duty to amend their fauls and so to come.

But it is unreasonable to say that natural men are commanded to come, and yet
that they are forbidden to come till they are Sanctified: for their
Sanctification is a thing out of their power: the visible people of God are
able to keep the external Covenant: It cannot be said to be lawful for them to
keep the external Covenant, if it does depend upon their Conversion which is
indeed out of their power. But indeed there is no part of the external
Covenant, that is beyond men's natural power, or their legal power.

8. Argument. Either some Unsanctifyed Persons may lawfully come to the Lords
Supper, or it is not lawful for them to carry themselves as Saints: But it is
not unlawful for them to carry themselves as Soints.

The minor does appear: Because Professors are commanded to carry as becomes
Saints: Phil. 1.27. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
Such as make a Profession of the Gospel, ought not to carry so as to give men
occasion to sear that they are not Saints: they may not live in such a way as
is unlawful for Saints to live in, in such a way as is contrary to the Spirits
of Saints: it is unlawful for them to bring a reproach upon their Profession;
to live in such a way as is inconsistent with the living exercise of Grace.

The truth of the disjunction does appear; because when Professors do neglect
the Lords Supper, they do not carry themselves as Saints; for they do neglect
that Ordinance that Saints are bound to attend; and they neglect that Ordinance
that the Souls of Saints do crave, they do visibly deny the Gospel, they
withold their Testimony from Jesus Christ, and do not show forth the Lords
death. This neglect of theirs is an unholy carriage, not according to their
Profession; they carry like visible Unbelievers they are called visible Saints
and challenge Baptism for their Children as visible Saints, and yet in this
particular they carry themselves as Unbelieves, and not as visible Saints.

9. Argument. If Sanctifying Grace be necessary unto the lawful attending of
the Lords Supper, then none but those that have a Saving work of Conversion,
may attend it: but that is not true doctrine.

The minor is evident from hence: That doctrine that has a direct tendency to
discourage many godly Men from doing their duty, and the means of their
comfort, and to make their attending of their duty to be a torment to them, is
not according to the Scripture. For one great design in the Scripture is to
encourage godly men to do their duty: but this doctrine has quite another
tendency.

There be many godly men, that are not assured of their Conversion: but are
exercised with many fears about their Sincerity: though Grace be visible, yet
several Persons that have it do not certainly know it. Grace may be so
counterfeited, and false hearts may go so far in Religion, that many godly men
are held down with great Suspicions that they are not godly, especially at
times. Hence godly men are advised to give all diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And this doctrine has two bad effects upon them.

1. It makes them neglect the Lords Supper. It is their duty to attend it: it
is one of the holy appointments of Jesus Christ; and we owe this Service to
Christ to show forth his Death, and give our testimony before the world, to the
virtue of his blood, which is an honor and glory to him; and this Service is
of great consequence to our selves to draw forth the actings of faith, to
strengthen our comfort and to quicken us in a way of Obedience: but several as
choice Persons for godliness as any, so far as men can judge, have been so
discouraged by this doctrine, that they have neglected the Lords Supper; and
continued at least for some time in the Omission of this Ordinance.

2. It makes some of them to attend it with guilt and torment. They have been
urged to attend it by a fear least they should offend God, and by the
persuasions of men, and by considering that it would be an occasion of
reproach: and an offense to the Church, if they should not do it. Yet because
of this doctrine, they have been far from Satisfaction in what they have been
doing: Conscience has forbidden them, threatened them and condemned them for
doing of it; they have set upon thorns, and had a great deal of fear and
disquietment of Spirit: hereby they have been hindered from attending of it in
an holy manner; Conscience has forbidden them to meddle with it, their thoughts
has been taken up at the time, not about the virtue of Christ's Death, but about
their own dreadful venture in coming thither: the fears of their hypocrisy have
been increased by their daring to participate; that that should have been a
means to comfort them, has proved an occasion of torment to them.

If these persons be told that this Ordinance be only for Converted persons,
yet if they after Serious Examination have hopes that they are Converted, they
may and ought to come; That will not satisfy their tender Consciences: they
will say, We may have such hopes and yet not be Converted: the hopes of
Multitudes of men are delusions, and if our hopes should be such, they will not
warrant us to come, we don't find in the Scriptures, that God gives allowance
to men because they have hopes; we cannot find that God says we should come, if
we have such hopes: the men say: We don't know but that we eat and drink
Damnation to our selves: the thing that is required is Conversion, not hopes of
Conversion. If God should demand of us, What makes us so bold to come, He will
not accept of that for an answer, That we hoped we were Converted, if we be not
indeed so, we profane Gods Ordinance, and eat forbidden fruit. Fears that they
are not Converted is a stronger argument to make them stay away, than hopes
that they are Converted is to make them come: Tender Consciences will not be
bafled with such answers.

10. Argument. They who do convey to their Children a right to the Sacrament of
Baptism, have a right themselves to the Lords Supper, provided they carry
inoffensively: But some Unsanctifyed persons do convey unto their Children a
right to the Sacrament of Baptism.

The minor is evident from these two things.

1. That the Children of some Unsanctifyed persons have a right to Baptism. For
the Children of all visible Believers have a right to Baptism, and among them,
there be several Unsanctifyed Persons: and it has been determined by a Synod in
New England, That the Children of those who are born in the Church, and
understand the Principles of Religion, and own the Covenant, are to be
Baptized. And the generality of the Churches in New England do practice
accordingly.

2. That the Parents though Unsanctifyed, do convey this right unto their
Children. The Children have a right to Baptism, because they are the Children
of visible Believers: the Children are Ecclesiastically holy because one at
least of their Parents are visible Believers: 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving
Husband is Sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by
the Husband, else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.

The consequence is evident, because this shows that they are in Covanant with
God. If they were not in Covenant with God, their Children would not be in
Covenant, neither would they have any right to Baptism; but they are in
Covenant, God has made Promises to them, and they are under Covenant
engagements to him; and because they are in Covenant, and inoffensive in their
Conversation, the Seal of the Covenant does belong to them.

11. Argument. If the Invisible Church Catholic is not the prime and principal
Subject of the Seal of the Covenant, then some Unsanctifyed persons may
lawfully partake of the Lord's Supper: But the Invisible Church Catholic is not
the prime and principal Subject, of the Seals of the Covenant.

The minor is laid down as a conclusion by Mr. Thomas Hooker, in his Survey: p.
41. which he proves by several arguments against Mr. Ruterford.

Particularly he argues, Such as were graceless and without any interest in
Christ, and so none of his invisible Members, have Gods command to enjoin, and
his word to warrant them, to receive the Seals; as Ishmael, Esau, and all the
Males were enjoined to be Circumcised. All the Families of the Jews were
commanded to eat the Passover, many whereof were without all question, not
invisible and believing Members of Christ. He adds, That the visible Church is
the Olive spoken of, Romans 11.17. The Seals are part of that fullness that
appertains thereunto: and therefore the visible Church is the prime subject of
them. And he brings in Mr. Ruterford confessing that if any after they are
received, shall be found Unregenerate, they are not to be cast out for that.
And says upon it. Then I suppose you will not deny them the Seals. p. 43.

I mention this Testimony of Mr. Hookers, to show how injuriously Mr. Mather
deals with me, when he calls my Opinion, a new, upstart and singular Opinion;
and the vanity of his admiration, That a Minister of New England, should
Publish such doctrine; whereas its no other than what has been Printed by one
of the Pillars of the Churches of New England, Sixty years before.

Had Mr. Hooker spoken half so much in the Vindication of Mr. Mather's Opinion,
in probability he would have spent good part of a Page in an Encomium of him,
and in urging the irrefragableness of his discourse.

Before I conclude, I shall take notice of two failings further in Mr. Mather's
Book; one is, That he recites some sentences of mine, where I Paraphrase on and
illustrate my Position about the LordsSupper: as if they were the arguments
that I brought to prove my Opinion; and then says, Is not all this weak
arguing. p. 76. He has now my arguments, and his liberty to show the weakness
of them.

The other is, That he says, My doctrine has been condemned by an whole Synod
of Elders and Messengers of Churches: who met in Boston in the year 1679.

The words of the Synod are these, It is requisite that Persons be not admitted
unto Communion in the Lords Supper, without making a Personal and Public
Profession of their Faith and Repentance, either Orally or in some other way,
to the just Satisfaction of the Church, and that therefore both Elders and
Churches be duly watchful and circumspect in this matter.

I shall give the World an Account how the matter was acted. Some of the Elders
in the Synod had drawn up a Conclusion, That persons should make a Relation of
the work of Gods Spirit upon their hearts, in order to coming into full
Communion. Some others of the Elders objected against it, and after some
discourse it was agreed to have a dispute on that question, Whether those
Professors of Religion as are of good Conversation, are not to be admitted to
full Communion, provided that they are able to Examine themselves, and discern
the Lords body. Mr. Mather held the Negative; I labored to make good the
Affirmative: The result was, That they blotted out that clause of Making a
Relation of the work of Gods Spirit, and put in the room of it, The Making a
Profession of their Faith and Repentance; and so I Voted with the Rest, and am
of the same judgment still; yet this Vote is mentioned as condemning my Opinion.

What can we suppose to be the reason, that Divines in reckoning up those
benefits that flow from Effectual Calling, take no notice of a right to the
Lords Supper, they reckon Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Peace of
Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Assurance of Gods Love, etc. But I meet with
none that reckon a right to the Lord's Supper among those benefits: I can give
no other reason than this, That it is not accounted of by them a peculiar
Privilege of those that are Effectually Called; but the Privilege of visible
Believers: neither would Pastors of Churches satisfy their Consciences, to
forbear warning of such as were convinced that they were in a Natural Estate,
to refrain coming to the Lords Supper, if they did judge it to be a Sinful and
Dangerous thing for them to come.

If these things which I have Written be impartially considered, it will appear
that Mr. Mather has not proved any mistake in the Sermon, that he has showed so
much zeal against; indeed Mr. Mather has in a manner given the case. (1.) By
owning that the Church ought to receive Unregenerate men, provided they are
Godly to rational Charity. (2.) That it is the duty of persons to come to the
Lord's Supper, if after Examination they cannot but hope, that there is a good
work begun in them.

I will conclude this defense, of my Self, and my Sermon against which Mr.
Mather has Written, with my assurance of my Brethren in the Ministry, and all
good Men, That I differ from none of them in a strict Opinion of the
Straightness of the Gate, and Narrowness of the Way that leads to Life; nor of
the Necessity of Sincere Repentance, true Faith and Obedience, to all the
Commandments of the Gospel, in all such as Expect Salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ, of which the Participation in the Sacraments of the New Testament of
themselves, give no Assurance, as is evident from our Saviors answer at the
Great Day to such as challenge, to have Eaten and Drank in his Presence; yet am
well assured, they are the Ordinances and path of Life, in which every
Christian ought to walk; and I dare not my self, as one of the Stewards in Gods
House, refuse his Bread to such as regularly demand it, upon the Terms
mentioned in this small Tract, in which I am well confirmed by the Practice of
so many Protestant Churches; nor am I at all Startled by any man's Opinion to
the contrary. All Protestants agree that there is no Infalibility at Rome; and
I know no body pretends to any else since the Apostles days; nor do I fear the
Athenian accusation of Novelty any more than the great Apostle, and because we
must all answer for our selves to our Great Master, I am contented, and hope I
live daily in a Preparation for that Account. In the mean time, I will carry it
as I ought to all good men of another Opinion, least I be found beginning to
beat my Fellow Servants, when my Lord shall come; being well assured, That if a
strict discipline be maintained in the Churches of Christ, all Unworthy
Communicants will be far more easily convinced and reformed, than if I should
refuse them what is their just due, and thereby Scandalize them, to their
Offense, and it may be to their Ruin.

The first Reformers of the Church from Popery proceeded well, but we stayed
not with Luther, since which the Protestant Churches have gone further; and I
hope New England, has done something more than most: but I should be very vain
to think there must be nothing left for us of this Generation, and am very
fearful least the Neglect of a good Government of all Gods People, born within
the Pale of the Church, should bring these Churches to a great defection; the
means to prevent which, is not to deny them their right at the Lords Table, but
to give them that, and a good and strict Watch over their Lives and Manners,
together with it; which I Pray to God may be never wanting in New England.

FINIS.

