Jethro's Advice Recommended TO THE Inhabitants of Boston, IN NEW ENGLAND, Viz.

To Choose Well-qualified Men, and Haters of COVETOUSNESS, FOR Town Officers.

In a LECTURE on EXODUS 18. 21. 9th 1st Month 1709. 10

By THOMAS BRIDGE, Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

Luke 12. 15. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness BOSTON: Printed by John
Allen, for and Sold by Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill.
1710.

The Time for Choosing Town-Officers drawing near, I shall express my regard to
the good of the Town, by a brief Discourse on that Advice of JETHRO, viz.
Exodus 18. 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the People, Able men,
such as fear God, men of Truth, Hating Covetousness; and place such over them,
to be Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and
Rulers of Tens.
WE Read, Exodus 2. 18. That Moses fled from Pharaoh into the Land of Midian,
and Married Zipporah, Daughter of Jethro, the Priest or Prince of Midian. The
reason why he is thus styled, I conceive may be gathered, by considering the
Character that is given of Job. Job is supposed to be descended from Abraham,
and that he lived in the time between Abraham and Moses; he was the Greatest
Man of the East, not only as to Riches and Estate, but also in Majesty, and
Authority; For, When he went out to the Gate through the City, when he prepared
his Seat in the Street. The Young men saw him, and hid themselves, and the Aged
arose, and stood up. The Princes refrained talking, and laid their hands on
their mouth. The Nobles held their peace; ^e dwelt as King in the Army. Job 29.
7, 8, 9, 10, 25. Yet this Prince offered Burnt-Offerings; Job 1. 5. Yea, his
three Friends were directed to go to him with their Burnt-offering, and he was
to Pray for them, which he did, and the Lord accepted him, Job 42. 8, 9, 10.
Being thus consecrated by God, he might be styled Priest, or Prince.

Jethro was descended from Midian, the fourth Son of Abraham, by his Wife
Keturah, Genesis 25. 2. and was Priest, or Prince of Midian.

Melchizedeck King of Salem, was Priest of the Most High God. Jethro owned, and
worshipped the True God, Exodus- 18. 12.

Moses by express Command from God, departed from Midian to go into Egypt,
taking his Wife and two Sons with him. Exodus 4. 20. But after God manifested
his displeasure against him, for neglecting to Circumcise his Son; he sent his
Wife and Children back unto Jethro, who remained with him until the happy
Congress mentioned in this Chapter.

It is conceived that this part of the History is transposed; because it
appears that this meeting was after the giving of the Law: when Moses sat as
Judge; both to explain the Mind and Will of God to the People, and to determine
matters in Controversy according to the Law. That it should therefore in point
of time have been mentioned after the 10th verse of the 10th of Numbers.

Jethro had in his own Land, a general account of the wonderful deliverance God
had granted his People Israel, from the Land of Egypt, under the Conduct of his
Son-in-law Moses; and therefore moves toward him, with his Wife and Children;
Moses went out to meet him; and after the joyful Congratulation, and they were
come into the Tent, Moses gives him a more particular account of the merciful
and wonderful dispensations of Divine Providence toward Israel, since he left
him in Midian.

This filled the heart of the Good old man with joy, which he expressed, by
acknowledging the transcendent Glory, and excellency of the God of Israel; by
offering of Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, and feasting with Aaron, and the
Elders of Israel before God, Exo. 18. 12. so joining with the Church of Israel,
in the Solemn Worship of God.

The day following, Moses sat to judge the people, who stood before him from
morning to evening; which his wise Father-in-law observing, testified his
dislike of, as a method that would be very prejudicial both to himself, and
also to the people: to prevent the inconvenience, he proposes an expedient;
yet, as a good, as well as a wise man, submits to the determination of God
himself, v. 23. If thou shall do this thing, and God command thee so, thou
shall be able to endure, and all this people shall go to their place in peace.
His advice was to provide out of all the people, a certain number of Officers,
who might bear the burden with Moses.

Moses was sensible of the necessity of complying with this advice, and
acknowledged before the Congregation, that he was not able by himself alone, to
bear their cumbrance, their burden and their strife. Deuteronomy. 1. 12. The people
therefore, having by his direction, Chosen a sufficient number of persons for
diverse Offices; Mose^ made them Heads over Israel in several Districts, with a
most solemn Charge; saving to them, Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and
judge righteously between every man, and his brother, and the Stranger that is
with him; ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but you shall hear the
small, as well as the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for
the judgment is Gods; and the Cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me,
and I will hear it. Deuteronomy. 1* 16, 17.

The Divine Approbation of this advice, is manifest by that standing Law, Deuteronomy.
16. 18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the
Lord thy God gives thee, throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the
people with just judgment, thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not
respect persons, neither take a gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous; that which is altogether just
(Justice, Justice) shall thou follow.

Accordingly that great Reformer, King Jehoshaphat set Judges in the Land,
throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City* with the like solemn
Charge, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7. He said to the Judges, Take heed what you do, for
ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment;
wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of Gifts.

In the words of the Text, Jethro manifests both his Wisdom, and his Piety, in
directing not only to a suitable number of Officers; but to those
qualifications which were necessary for the discharge of their duty, in their
several Stations.

Jethro mentions four qualifications; Able men, such as fear God, men of Truth,
hating Covetousness: Moses mentions three more, Wise men, and Understanding,
and known among your Tribes, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Under these seven, all other good
Qualities and Virtues being comprehended; I shall briefly explain, and
distinguish them.

1. Wise men, men of Sagacity, of an acumen or sharpness of understanding,
easily, and speedily to penetrate into the nature and qualities of things; men
of large Capacities; in a degree answering the Character of Solomon* to whom
God gave largeness of heart, even as the Sand on the Sea shore, 1 King. 4. 29.
Men who have right Ideas, notions and conceptions, and that in great abundance;
men that can discern the true sense of the Law; and distinguish between things
that differ: between plea and plea; and not be imposed on by the Sophistry of
those who would pervert Justice and Judgment, for filthy lucres sake.

2. Men of Understanding, h. e. of prudence and discretion; for wisdom dwells
with prudence, and finds out knowledge of witty inventions, Prove. 8. 12. men
that know how to dispose things into a due method and order, in the proper time
and season; that matters may appear in a clear light, and that Justice may not
be deferred, or delayed; delays often proving more pernicious than a wrong
Judgment.

3. Men known among your tribes, not obscure men, who hide their Talents in a
Napkin; but who have appeared to be of a Public Spirit, and have given proof
of their ability, and fidelity; men of experience, and who deserve a good
repute among their Neighbors; as Persons fit for Public Service.

4. Able men, strong men, men of Fortitude, Courage and Resolution, that will
not be diverted from their duty by frowns, nor smiles; men that have an
antipathy against Flatterers, and Flattery; men that will dare to do Justice,
though there are difficulties and dangers in the way.

5. Fearing God; not Atheists, nor Deists, but who know and own the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; Men who have a principle of Holy Fear
in their hearts; consider themselves as placed in their Stations by Divine
Providence, to act therein for God, to whom they are accountable; Men that dare
do nothing contrary to the Mind of God, because they fear him: that dare do all
that God Commands, because they fear him, relying on his protection for their
defense and security.

6. Men of Truth, or, True men; not men of a double heart, nor double tongue;
not Hypocrites, lest the people be ensnared, Job 34. 30. Men that love Truth,
study Truth, speak Truth, and will plead for Truth; Men of Faith, whose words
and promises may be relied on; Men who will keep Faith with the Public; and be
very careful to maintain, and preserve the Public Faith.

7. Men hating Covetousness; as an Evil most destructive to Humane Society; no
man's Life, Estate or Interest is secure, where Covetousness reigns. Naboth
found it so; because he would not part with his Fathers Inheritance, to
satisfy the covetous desire of Ahab, a method was found to destroy his Life,
that his Vineyard might be possessed by that Ahab, who though a King, made
himself a Slave, Selling himself to work evil in the sight of the Lord, 1 King.
21. 20. Therefore in Choosing Public Officers, be sure to avoid Covetous men;
let them be men Hating Covetousness.

The Doctrine to be insisted on, is only this*

DOCTRINE. In Choosing Persons for Public Offices, and Employments, there ought
to be special care that they are men, Hating Covetousness.

For the clearing and proving of this Doctrine, I shall insist on two
Propositions.

Proposition I. In Choosing of Persons for Public Offices and Employments,
respect ought to be had to their Qualifications for such Offices and
Employments.

This is so evident to the light of nature, that no rational man will Choose a
Servant, or a Slave that is not fit for the work he designs him.

Here Consider,

1. Choice is a free, deliberate and distinguishing act of the Mind. In this
case, it is supposed that diverse persons stand as Candidates for such an Office
or Employment. Every Elector has a determining Vote, as far as it respects
himself, which of the two is best qualified for such a Station, and by his
Choice testifyeth a peculiar respect to the person he thinks most worthy.

2. As there are different Offices and Employments* so there are different
Gifts which adapt, or fit for such Offices; and different measures and degrees
of those Gifts. The Father of lights; from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, does distribute common (...) for the good and benefit of Humane Society*
as well as Spiritual Gifts, for the benefit of the Church; distributing to
every one severally as he will; all are adapted to some use or service: The
greatest Prince cannot say to the meanest Peasant, I have no need of thee* for
the King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5. 9. not only by the produce
of the field, but by the labor of the Husbandman that works in the Field.
Now Choice ought to have respect to Divine Providence; considering who is it
that the Supreme Governor of the World does indigitate; or point me to, as
fitted for such a Station, by the qualifications he has bestowed upon him?
Election of Officers ought to be attended unto with seriousness, looking up to
God for direction, his Glory is concerned in their management; the judgment is
Gods; and they ought to act in his name and fear, for his Glory.

3. To have a liberty for Choice, and not to respect qualifications, is to
trifle in a matter of greatest importance; it is to slight a privilege, which
some Heathens would sooner part with their Lives, then their Children should be
deprived of: It is to imitate the Sin and Folly of Esau, who for a morsel of
meat fold his birthright. Oh! how often do men suffer themselves to be imposed
on by those who seek their own Interest, by their neglect or credulity* little
Emissaries are often employed, by falss representations to divert from the
Choice of the most Useful and Virtuous, and to engage a party to serve the
Covetous. Oh! how often have flourishing Cities and Countries been lost, ruined
and spoiled of all their Glory, by ungrateful 80 perfidious Hypocrites, who
were Chosen to serve the Public Interest. It is therefore of the last
importance, in choosing persons to Public Offices, to have respect to their
Qualifications, That they be wise, understanding, known among the tribes, able
men, fearing God, men of Truth, Hating Covetousness. Which leads to the second
Proposition.

Proposition II. In Choosing persons to be Public Officers, there ought to be
special care, that they be men hating Covetousness. The holy Apostle Paul in
giving the qualifications for Bishops and Deacons, does in a very particular
manner warn against the Covetous. A Bishop must be blameless, etc. not greedy
of filthy lucre, not covetous; likewise the Deacons must be grave, etc. not
greedy of filthy lucre. 1 Timothy 3. 3, 8. Tit. 1. 7. not given to filthy lucre.
As Covetous Bishops and Deacons are a pest to the Church, so are Covetous
Officers to the State.

In clearing this Proposition, I shall answer three Questions.

Quest. 1. What is Covetousness?

Quest. 2. Who may be said to be men hating Covetousness?

Quest. 3. Why ought there be special care that persons chosen to public
Offices, should be men hating Covetousness?

Quest. 1. What is Covetousness?

A. G. I intend only to explain the nature of the evil, in general; and not to
discourse of the various ways and methods wherein this Sin does appear.

A. 1. Covetousness is sometimes used as a term that comprehends all irregular
and inordinate inclinations, and motions of the Soul toward forbidden Objects;
the first motions of depraved nature toward sin; the first Issues of
Indwelling sin, are termed Coveting, or Lusting. Romans 7. 7. I had not known
lust, or concupiscence, except the law had said, thou shall not Covet; but sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence.
Thus, every man is tempted when be is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed;
then when lust* has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death. Jam. 1. 14, 15. Thus, every imagination of the
thoughts of man's heart, are only evil continually. Genesis 6. 5. And the
employment of the Unregenerate is to fulfill the wills or desires of the flesh
and of the mind* all their labor and toil, their risques and hazards, are only
to this end; to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans
13. 1^.

A. 2. Covetousness is commonly taken in a more limited or restrained sense,
for a peculiar sort or kind of lust, distinguished from other lusts by a
particular Object. The holy Apostle distinguishes the several sorts of lusts
that are in the world, into three heads. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life. Covetousness is a lust of the eyes, having Riches
for the Object; The holy Apostle says, The love of money is the root of all
evil. Covetousness is the first expression of that love, which is predominant
in them that will be rich.

Covetousness is a distemper of the Soul, which manifests itself in a constant,
greedy, insatiable desire after Riches, and employeth the whole man in various
methods to gratify that desire. More particularly,

1. It is a distemper of the Soul seeking after Riches; a Covetous man is one
that will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Riches, Mammon, is their chiefest good, and
last end, their Idol, and they are termed Idolaters, Ephesians. 5. 5. I term it a
distemper of the Soul, on a double account. (1.) To show that it is seated in,
and proceeds from a Soul that has lost its Original Rectitude. It proceeds
from the heart of man as depraved with Original Sin, Mat. 7. 22. Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. Covetousness. Man being made after the Image
of God, and for the enjoyment of God as his chiefest good, and last end; while
he remained in his Integrity, there was a blessed calm and serenity in his
mind; a Harmony; all his motions were regular, he fought his happiness in the
way God had appointed, improving all the Creatures to load him unto his rest in
God. But having (...) that happiness, he is a restless Creature* seeking it
where he can, under the conduct of an erroneous, and vain mind, preferring mere
trifles before the most substantial good; some seek a happiness in sensual
pleasures, running into excess and riot; others seeking after Honors, and
Preferments* But the Covetous man (who esteems himself the wisest of the
three) says, money answers all things; if I can but get enough of that, I can
purchase Honors and Pleasures; therefore laying aside all other designs, but
what are subservient to his main end, he says, he will be rich. (2.)
Covetousness is termed a distemper, to distinguish it from a lawful, limited
desire after a competent portion of the good things of this life, for the
support of our selves, and those under our Charge, according to our several
Stations. Our Heavenly Father knows that we have need of these things; and
requires us in the diligent use of proper means, to manifest our dependence on
him for such a competency; hence we are directed to pray for our daily bread;
that God would feed us with food convenient for us; that which is a competency
for a single person, is not for a Family; and that which is a competency for an
Husbandman, is not for a Prince. That God who has ordained Public Offices,
Sacred and Civil, and calls persons whom he qualifieth for such Stations,
therein to abide with him, attending on the duty of their Callings; allows
them a suitable support. There is an accursed Levelling Spirit in the World,
which I cannot testify against with a sufficient indignation; It will starve
Religion and Learning out of a Land; those of this temper would hardly allow so
much to Civil or Ecclesiastical Officers as to the meanest Artificer, or Day
Labourer. This is contrary to distributive Justice, and the Rule thereof. The
holy Apostle, who says, Rulers are the Ministers of God for good: h. e. to
those under their Government; requires, for this cause to pay tribute also, for
they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing; Render
therefore to all their dues* Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom is due, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. And due it is, on the
same account the people said to David, Thou art worth Ten Thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 3. So in proportion, the Service which Righteous, Wise and Faithful
Officers do for the Public, is vastly more than what many Laborers can do by
their Industry. Thus an Ingenious man often by a single proposal, does save
more to the Public Treasury; or directs to a method for gaining more than a
Laboring man can procure by his Industry in many years; the Use and Service of
such men is beyond what the Vulgar can discern: If their Service then be more
in proportion, so ought their Support to be; but Covetousness is a distemper
that will not allow Tribute, to whom Tribute is due.

2. Covetousness is a continual, greedy and insatiable desire after Riches.
(1.) It is a constant, continual desire, they covet all be day long: these are
of the daughters of the (...), crying, Give, give* These Covetous desires are
as the pulse of their Souls, never ceasing so long as life lasts: Give, give,
is their const^^t Tone. The holy Prophet describing the Covetous Rulers of
Israel, says, Hos. 4. 18. Her Rulers with shame love Give ye. Or her Shields
love Give ye, which is a shame; h. e. Her Rulers, who should be as Shields, and
called Shields, Psalm. 47. ^. Whose business it is to protect and defend those
who are under their Rule, from the dangers to which they are exposed; these
love GIVE ye^ When the Oppressed, Distressed, and Exposed, do with all humility
represent their difficulties and dangers, with importunate desires of defense*
the answer is, GIVE ye: I shall be deaf to all your petitions, unless you
answer this first, GIVE, GIVE: I must have a Gratification; this is their
constant cry. (2.) It is a greedy desire after wealth* they are greedy of
filthy lucre: This denotes the eagerness and vehemence of the desire.
Covetousness is that in Morals, which Physicians in Naturals, term a Canine
Appetite; they eat with greediness like Dogs. Thus the holy Prophet describes
the Watchmen of Israel: Watchmen were either Ecclesiastical, or Civil Rulers;
of such he says, Isa. 56. 10. Her Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant,
they are all dumb dogs that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber; yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they are
Shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their own ways, every one to
his gain from his quarter, Come ye say they, I will fetch wine, and we will
fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundantly. Or, we read their greedy appetite described, Zeph. 3. 3. Her
Princes within her, are roaring Lions; her Judges are evening wolves, they gnaw
not the bones till the morning. They are so greedy, they leave nothing to be
eaten on the morrow they devour all presently: yet some of them are so
considerate, they tear in pieces for their Whelps; the small morsels they rend
and tear from the poor and needy, must satisfy the Lions Whelps, they strangle
for their Lionesses; their Queens and their Concubines must have whole
Carcases, the plunder of Cities and Towns to prey upon; they fill their dens
with Ravin, their Stately Palaces are furnished and adorned, their Magazines
stored with the Spoils of Kingdoms. (3.) Covetousness is an unsatiable desire
after Riches, they never say they have enough. It was observed of old, that the
love of Money increases with the enjoyment, and the Scripture confirms it; for
it is written, Eccl. 5. 10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase. It is part of the Curse of
God on man for his Apostasy: It is just, that those who forsake their own
mercy* should be left to observe, and pursue after Lying Vanities, Jonah 2. 8.
It is just, that those who forsake the fountain of living waters, should be
left to the toy I and expense of hewing out cisterns, broken cisterns that can
hold no water. Sometimes persons do project to fill the desires of the Covetous
at once; hoping thereby to have some rest from their demands, that they will
cease from their old cry, Give, give; but alas! they may as well think to
quench the fire with Oil; they do but put them into a capacity to do them the
more mischief: at first with more modesty they say* Give ye, but in a little
time they will say, you shall Give; they lay out what you give, to purchase the
opportunity, and to prepare, and shape the tools to force open your locked
treasures. They enlarge their desire as Hell and as death, they cannot be
satisfied. Hab. 2. 5. never, never say, it is enough. (4.) This greedy and
unsatiable desire issues in a sullen discontent if they are disappointed: They
wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they are not satisfied. Psalm. 59.
15. they are like that Ahab, that covetous Ahab, who went to his house heavy
and displeased, lying down on his bed, turning away his face, and would eat no
bread; because Naboth denied him his Vineyard. 1 Kin. 21.

Or, they are like those false Prophets, mentioned, Mic. 3. 5. if any put not
into their mouths, they (...) prepare war against them. They are full of
Cursing, and bitterness; and will employ all their little Emissaries to defame,
hurt and destroy those who obstruct their unjust gain: if they once get them
into their clutches, they will deal with them like those Pirates mentioned,
Prove. 1. 12. Swallow them up alive like the grave, and whole, as those that go
down to the Pit.

3. Covetousness employeth the whole man, and all his interests, to obtain
their desires. The Golden Ball is before them, they will stretch forth, press
forward, run swiftly, and expose themselves to utmost perils, to obtain it.
(1.) It employeth their minds; Covetous men have their hearts exercised with
covetous practices, I Pet. 2. 14. They are intent on getting gain; they have
many subtle artifices and devi^^^ to manage; sometimes they are contriving, to
remove obstructions; sometimes to prevent discovery, that they may act with
secrecy, that they may not be mistrusted; sometimes in supplanting their
Rivals; sometimes in finding out, and shaping tools to be used in their
Service; and when all things are ready, to know the best methods, and fittest
seasons for accomplishment. They spend many waking ho^^^ in imagining mischief
upon their b^ds: as the abundance of the rich will not suffer them to sleep; so
the hungry, greedy appetite of the Covetous, (gnawing with anxious cares) will
not permit them to sleep; they must resolve these Questions: What shall I eat?
What shall; I drink? Wherewith shall I be clothed? Or, how shall I increase my
treasures? before they can give sleep to their eyes, or slumber to their
eyelids. Thus are their minds employed. (2.) Their buisy minds call them no to
action; they must rise up early, and set up late, and eat the bread of sorrows,
bereaving themselves of the common comforts of life, that they may perform
their enterprise. The holy Prophet thus describes their industry. That they may
do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince asks, and the Judge asks for
a reward, and the Great man he utters his mischievous device; and so they
wrap it up, or twist it together; taking as much pains as those who twist
Cables of the largest dimensions; they will spare no pains to effect their
purposes. (3.) Covetousness does not only employ their Persons, but their (...)
their Friends, and their Purses to get more gain. They mistake, who think
Covetous persons are always niggardly, they will make very expensive Feasts,
when they know how to make others pay the Reckoning. They employ their
Children, their Servants, their Neighbors, their Tenants, their Friends, with
all others who come under their influence, to Serve in several Stations, and by
various methods; some Tools they shape by flattery and fawning; some by frowns
and threats; some must serve them by admiring, and praising them; some by their
Pens, and some by their Purses; and to them Gain is sweet, out of whatever it
be extracted.

Quest. 2. Who may be termed men hating Covetousness?

A. 1. These who studying the holy Scriptures, have the same thoughts and
resentment of this sin, and of those who are under the dominion of it, the
Scripture does require. It is the advice of the Blessed Jesus; Take heed and
beware of Covetousness; and all his true Disciples observe that caution.
Covetous men are sometimes by their Flatterers, termed thrifty, frugal,
sparing, good Husbands; they are men of fine parts, and great abilities, only a
little too selfish; too much set upon the World: But what says the Scripture?
It says, Ephesians. 5. 3. Covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as
becomes Saints: g. d. Covetousness is an evil so hateful to God, so directly
opposite to the whole tenor of the Gospel, to the terms, the precepts; and to
the blessed pattern and example of the Holy Jesus; that you ought to abstain
from the very appearance of it; that there may not, from the least degree of it
in you, be any occasion to mention it; and never speak of it without
abhorrence. But consider further, (1.) When the Holy Scriptures give the
Characters of those who are excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven; the covetous
are numbered among them. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; be not decerved, nor thieves, nor Covetous* no^
Whoremonger, nor Covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Ephesians. 5. 5. (2.) Covetous men are numbered among
those scandalous sinners who are not meet for Christian Communion. Society, or
Converse; but to be shunned as if infected with the Plague; If any man that is
called a brother, be a Fornicator or (...) etc. (...) such an one no not to
eat. (3.) When the holy Apostle mentions (with tears) the Enemies of the Cross
(...); the Covetous are among them* who glory in their shame, who mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. (4.) When the Evils are mentioned that shall abound in
the latter days, and render the times perilous (...) the Covetous are in the
front. Men shall be levers of themselves, Covetous. (5.) Yea, they are numbered
with those who are given up to a Reprobate mind; (...) men filling up the
measure of their sins, whose judgment now of a long time lingreth, not, and
their damnation slumbreth not; men the nearest to Hell of any on this side of
it, being filled with all unrighteousness, ^i^^^cation, wickedness,
Covetousness, Romans 1. 29. Those then I term men Ha^ing (...), who upon all
suitable occasion, do testify their abhorrence of this evil, as hateful to
God, destructive to the Interest of Christianity, and pernicious to Humane
Society: These will not have (...) persons in admiration because of advantage.
But beholding their face in the glass of the Word; look on them as the most
deformed monsters pretending to Christianity.

2. By men hating Covetousness, I intend those who are of a free, generous,
noble, Princely Spirit, resembling the Children of a King, yea, the King of
Kings* those Heaven-born Souls, who bear the Image of their Heavenly Father,
who makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; and sends Rain on the
just, and on the unjust, Mat. 5. 4^. Men that are Good, that devise good, and
do good. Men known in the Gates to be men of a Public Spirit; men who scorn to
Lackquoy after the sordid Humors of the Covetous, though Clothed with purple,
and Riding in Chariots. Men who Love their country, value their privileges
above Gold. Men who deserve Mordecai's Character, accepted of the multitude of
his brethren, seeking then wealth of his people, speaking peace to all his
seed. Esth. 10. 3.

Q. 3. Why ought there to be so much care to Choose men hating Covetousness, for
Public Officers?

A. 1. Covetous men will do no good to the Public. h. e. they have no real,
direct intentions to serve the Public Interest: they often by accident, and by
serving their own interest, do some good; but this is not their design. You may
as well expect the Stream will rise above the Fountain, as think that Covetous
men will act above the principle of self-love; this is the first spring of
action, and this their center; here their thoughts, designs, cares and
endeavors terminates I will be Rich.

A. 2. Covetous men will hinder others from doing good; they hate those who are
of a Public Spirit: they know their proposals will interfere with their
private interest; therefore they will what they can, blast their reputation,
find fault with their Schemes for the Public Service; they will to the utmost
of their power, by themselves and Agents, stop, clog, hinder, obstruct; and if
possible, subvert and overthrow whatever may thwart their private Interests.

A. 3. Covetous men will do much hurt to the Public. For, (1.) Their
predominant principle influenceth them thereto; for the love of money is the
root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Many foolish and hurtful lusts spring from this
root, such as Lying, Fraud, Cheating, Bribery, Usury, etc. besides, it inclines
to all other sins that may subserve this great design of getting money. What
will a Covetous man stick at to accomplish his design? They are Time-servers,
and Men-pleasers, and will turn with every wind: They often prostitute
themselves to the greatest abominations in compliance with the lusts of men, in
order to obtain their end. It will make Princes the companion of Thieves. Isa.
1. 23. (2.) There is nothing will obstruct, or hinder them, they will break all
bonds, both Sacred and Civil, rather than be restrained from getting Money.
Indeed they will seem to be Religious, it may be boast of their Conversion to
God, and their assurance of an Heavenly Inheritance; and appear devout in the
Temple, grave and sober in their deportment. when there are seven abominations
in their hearts, Prove. 26. 25. They lie unto God with their lips, they flatter
him with their tongue, they come before him with images of Jealousy in their
hearts; Mammon is the God they worship, and their hearts go after their
Covetousness; and therefore depart from the faith, and turn aside from the Holy
Commandment, when in pursuit after Riches and Honor. No Oaths will hold them,
they will swear to do Justice, and yet take a (...) to pervert Judgment. They
will swear Allegiance to their Prince, and correspond with their Enemies. Oh!
how many Cities, and Strong Holds have been delivered up! how many Freeborn
Subjects have been bought and sold like Slaves, to satisfy the greedy appetite
of the Covetous. No principles of Honor will oblige them, they will not spare
their nearest Relations, they will be cruel to their own flesh; they will speak
you fair, and flatter with their lips, when war is in their hearts: they will
pretend to kiss, when they design to smite under the fifth rib, 1 Samuel 20. 10.
There can be no true friendship with a Covetous man, he will betray his most
intimate friend for a little money. Covetous men will do much hurt to the
Public. (1.) By their Example; Covetousness is a very spreading evil: when men
see others thrive, prosper, succeed in the world, grow rich and abound; they
enquire into their Methods, hoping for the like success; and so they teach the
wicked ones their ways, Jer. 2. 33. (2.) By their Influence; according to the
extent thereof; Covetous men will make a prey of the careless, foolish and
ignorant; but will make use of the crafty, as tools to serve their* design;
they therefore enquire after such as are subtle, but indigent; these must be
disposed into several Under-Offices, in diverse Stations; now these poor
Cretuers are often under cruel Bondage; they have their Debts to pay, their
Families to maintain, and a proportion to pay unto their Employers. What course
must they take? To complain of their hard Terms, is to lose their Livelihood;
to disclose the Intreague, is the way to ruin; the only way is to grind the
faces of the poor, to use artifices to filch from the Public; and by such
methods, Poverty comes on a people like an armed man; they hardly know whence
the mischief does arise; only they find themselves in a deep Consumption, past
cure. So pernicious, hurtful and destructive are Covetous men to the Public
Interest.

Inasmuch as my design in treating on this Subject, was in a peculiar manner,
for the Service of this Town. I shall in the Application humbly offer my Advice
in three particulars.

1. Let us be very thankful for the Privileges we Enjoy.

2. Let us highly prize and value them.

3. Manifest that value, by Choosing men hating Covetousness, to the several
Offices at your dispose.

Adv. 1. Let this Town be very thankful for the Mercies and Privileges it does
yet enjoy, through the favor of our Gracious God. When we consider the many
provoking Evils that have been, and still are in it; we must acknowledge, that
it is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed. This Town is a monument of
the patience, forbearance and longsuffering of God: it had been consumed and
laid in Ashes, had not the tender mercies of God prevented; Many a time may we
now say, had not God been on our side, the Enemy would have swallowed us up
quick; the proud waters had gone over our Soul; but blessed be God, who has
not given us as a prey to their teeth: Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the
snare of the fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in
the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and earth, Psalm. 124. Let us consider,
very many Towns, Cities and Strong Holds (the Masterpieces of Art) have been
shattered, beaten down, consumed by fire, plundered and ravaged, during the
long War; and yet this Town preserved; no Gally with Oars, nor Gallant Ship
has shot a Bullet, nor Bomb against it; this is the doing of the Lord, and it
ought to be mavelous in our eyes; we ought to call upon our Souls, and all
within us to sing praises to God, sing praises, for he has done great things
for us, whereof we are glad, and Blessed be his glorious name. But we are not
only preserved; we enjoy many mercies, we are daily laden with benefits, we
have a great measure of health, peace and plenty, while others are consumed by
the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence; the Lord deals bountifully with us. To all
this. (1.) We enjoy our Sacred Privileges; we have liberty to Worship God on
his Holy Day, in the ways of his own Appointment, and none make us afraid. We
have faithful Ministers, instructing us in the great Mysteries of the Gospel,
in the things that concern our peace; Watchmen upon our walls, to warn us of
our danger, and calling us to Repentance and Reformation: Watchmen that Pray
for our Welfare, saying as Isa. 122. 7. Peace be within thy walls, prosperity
within thy palaces; for my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, peace
be within thee; because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.
Let us consider, the many famous Churches, which have been broken and
dispersed, there is none to break the Bread of Life to them, there is a Famine,
not of Bread, but of hearing the Word of the Lord; they wander from Sea to Sea,
and from the North even to the East, they run to and fro to seek the Word of
the Lord, and cannot find it, Amos 8. There are many of the precious Sons of
Zion murdered in the most barbarous manner? Many in Dungeons and Gallys; and
many dispersed into the several Quarters of the Earth, and their Children
brought up in Popish Idolatry; and we have a full Enjoyment of precious
advantages, though so barren and unfruitful under them: It is from rich and
glorious Grace; let us remember whence we are fallen, repent and do our first
works. We have large Civil Liberties. It is a great favor, that there are so
many of the Children of the Town (as well as others) who seek the Good thereof,
and that are well-qualified for Public Service in diverse Stations; and that
the Town has liberty to Choose such into Office. Let us consider many there are
who once had very great privileges of this sort* but they have been wrested
out of their hands by force, or stolen from them by cunning artifices; they
are now but Vassals, daily exposed as a prey to hungry, greedy, savage
Officers, who oppress them in all their Interests; all Liberty and Property is
taken away; or at least is so precarious; that they can hardly say a Foot of
Land, or any of their Goods are their own. But blessed be the Lord our God, who
has freed us from such Oppressors. And let us not forget to be thankful for
the QUEENS most Excellent Majesty, daily Praying for Her long Life and
Prosperity, under whose Influence we Enjoy such precious advantages.

Adv. 2. Let us prize and value our Privileges, and not at a low rate, but as
a rich Inheritance. As the Constitution of the English Government, is justly
esteemed the most excellent in the Earth; the Privileges of English men the
greatest; so it has cost much Blood and Treasure to secure them from
Generation to Generation. The Glorious God has marvellously preserved them;
and shall we disregard them? What home-born Slaves shall we deserve to be, if
we do not value them. They ought to be treated with indignation, who would
persuade poor people they are little worth: they intend to make their market of
them, and are like those crafty Traders mentioned, Prove. 20. 14. It is naught,
it is naught says the Buyer, but when he is gone his way, then he boasts;
and so will these triumph over those whom they impose upon.

Adv. 2. Manifest your value for your Privileges* by Choosing men hating
Covetousness into all such Public Offices and Stations as are at your dispose.
Consider, (1.) There is no security for any Privilege or Trust committed to a
Covetous man: They are usually timorous and fearful, they are Flatterers and
Time servers; and their greediness after Riches, will influence them to accept
a good profer when presented by them that know how to make the advantage. It is
impossible to conceive the mischiefs done by the Covetous. How many Cities,
Towns, and Countries have been bought and sold by the Covetous. Whence had the
French their Glory? but by Pensioners in the several Neighboring Countries,
who exposed Privileges to Sale whereby he had the opportunity to seize the
Effects? And is not this one great end of this long and expensive War, (which
has cost many millions (...) measure; and hundreds of thousand Lives) to make
him ^efund which he purchased so clandestinely? (2.) Men hating Covetousness
will do much Service: I intend not this Qualification* exclusive of others, but
in conjunction; even able men, men fearing God, men of Truth, hating
Covetousness; this Generous principle, will dispose them to employ all their
Talents St. Interests to Serve the Public. They will have a watchful eye over
the Covetous, they know their narrow selfish souls are always contriving by
subtle artifices to gull the Public; and therefore will endeavor to prevent
them. Whereas the Public Good lying near the hearts of these, they will be
always projecting and contriving something to promote it, viz. To reform the
Manners of the Town; To prevent Nusances, and Inconveniences; to strengthen
and defend it* to regulate, and increase the Trade of it; to relieve and supply
the poor; and to punish the disorderly, as far as their power extends. And
besides all this, will be examples of a ready, cheerful Contribution of their
proportion to the Public Charge. (3.) Men hating Covetousness will not only do
most Service for the Public, but with least expense. Here we may observe, (1.)
There are indeed diverse Offices in the Town, which Qualified men ought to
attend out of pure regard to the public Good; as Members of the Body Politic;
without expecting a Salary: Men hating Covetousness will serve the Town in such
Capacities, readily, cheerfully and impartially; and ought to be treated with
Respect, loved and valued for their Fidelity. It is lamentable to consider what
ill-usage such have sometimes met with. (2.) There are other Officers in the
Town, who justly expect a Support suitable to their Stations and Work. I advise
to Choose men hating Covetousness into such Stations and Employments; On this
Account, that they will do most good, with least Charge; which will appear, if
we consider, (1.) That those who Choose Persons into Public Offices, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, ought to provide for their Subsistence to such a
degree, that they may diligently and cheerfully attend on that Service to which
they call them; this is their due by the Lams of God as I Man; to deny or
withold it, is to contradict one of the first dictates of the Law of Nature;
therefore such may and ought to expect it, and depend upon it. (2.) Men hating
Covetousness will be content with a competency; there is a bound and limit to
their desires in this respect: As they pray, that God would feed them with food
convenient, so they expect no more from man, but what is suitable to their
Station, and Circumstance. But here I must observe, that for this their temper,
they are often horribly abused, and neglected; for which God will judge. (3.)
But then Consider, If covetous, greedy men be put into such Stations, what will
follow: They will thus argue, There is a suitable supply for the support of me
and mine, due to me by all Laws, Divine and Humane; If I provide (...) for my
own, especially for those of my own house, I deny the faith, h. e. The
Christian Faith, and an (...) than an Infidel. I have no other way to subsist
while I live, nor Leave to mine when I Die. These people deny me what is just
and equal; it is not for want, they have enough, they have plenty: I see it in
their costly and extravagant Garbs, their stately Fabrics, their rich
Furniture; in their Shops, Ships, in their Fields and Barns: Therefore having
an opportunity in my hand, I will improve it, and employ all the Methods and
Agents I can, to get that which they unjustly detain from me. And thus
oftentimes Covetous men squeese more Treasure from them, than would support
many others; and they have no remedy; but may set down bewailing their folly,
in withholding more than was meet. I beseech you to consider what mischief
Covetous men may do in their several Offices and Stations; some by false
Entries, defacing, or altering of Records; by wasting of Treasure; by unjust
Rates, and cruel Exactions, by denying to Vote, or selling of Votes; and by
innumerable methods, and subtle devices; and you will perceive they are
dangerous men, and to be avoided; they are often (as we term them) sober men,
and nothing to be objected, save only in the matter of Covetousness* they will
pretend to save Charges, but are on all men most profuse and lavish, will lose
opportunities for doing of Service, and part with rich advantages for the
Public, rather than stay a few hours from their own Interest. I Conclude with
one Consideration more, which would afford matter for a long Discourse* Viz. To
show what mischief Covetous men do in Churches. Where Church Officers are
greedy of filthy lucre, and the Body of the Community Levened with the same
evil; there is nothing secure where Covetousness reigns. If Church-Rulers are
Covetous, they will fawn, flatter,* and comply with the lusts of men; having
their persons in admiration for an advantage, etc. If the People are Covetous,
they will expose the Officers to innumerable difficulties and temptations;
divert them from their Duty, or so clog them; that as dispirited and
discouraged men will do little or no Service! It is so contrary to the Gospel,
that those who are under the power of it, are excluded from the Privileges of
it. If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him: Such
Professors are Spots and Blemishes; they grieve the Holy, Spirit of God, quench
his motions, and cause him to depart from that people; and provoke the Holy One
to give them up to strong delusions.

Having been thus helped to leave a plain Testimony against Covetousness;
through Grace I will abide thereby; leaving it to the Blessing of God; and
recommend the Advice of our Lord Jesus; Luke 12. 15. Take heed, and beware of
Covetousness.

THE END.

