Burnings BEWAILED: IN A SERMON, Occasioned by the Lamentable FIRE Which was in
BOSTON, October. 2. 1711. In which the Sins which Provoke the LORD to Kindle
Fires, are Enquired into.

By Increase Mather,D.D.

Psalm. LXXVIII 21. The Lord heard this, and was Wroth: So a Fire was Kindled
against Jacob; and Anger also came up against Israel. Luke XIII. 4. 5. These
Eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, think you that they
were Sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay, but except
you Repent, you shall all likewise perish. Boston Printed: Sold by Timothy
Green, 1711.

The Preface.
IT has been Reported, that two Men Traveling in Germany; and observing the
Doleful Ruins there: One of them said, Hic suit Hostilitas; Enemies have been
here, and have Burned these Towns: The other replied well; Nay, Hic fuit
Iniquitas; Sin has been here, and has made these Desolations. We may thank our
Sins for all our Sorrows. The Lord said of His People, As they are Increased,
so they Sinned against me; therefore I will turn your Glory into Shame. May it
not be said thus of and to New England? Many are Departed and Degenerated from
those Holy Principles, which in our First and Purest Times, NEW ENGLAND was
distinguished by. And then if there is a great Practical Apostasy as to the
Conversations of men, it is not to be wondered at. If the Reins of Discipline in
our Churches are let go, how can it be otherwise? Neglect of Discipline in the
Churches in Asia, was attended with the Corruption of Manners; until at last
they were made Desolate, because of their Sins. Has not New England cause to
fear what the LORD may yet do with us? Is not that worse than Brutish Sin of
Drunkenness, become a prevailing Iniquity all over the Country? How has Wine
and Cider, but most of all Rum, Debauched multitudes of People, young and Old?
Considering the late Lamentable Fire was Occasioned by Drunkenness, (as is
believed) has not the Lord written His Displeasure against that Sin in a
Peculiar manner, in Fiery Characters? Other Evils besides that, and those
mentioned in the Sermon Emitted herewith, are found among us. There was a Synod
Convened in Boston, to Enquire into Provoking Evils, and Expedients for
Reformation. May what is there Offered be duly put in Practice, we may hope
that GOD will yet appear for us; and be Seen in this Mount of Danger and
Distress, which His Holy Providence has brought us into. But if otherwise, can
we think that the LORD will not be as Good as His Word? Who has said, If you
will not be Reformed by these things, I will Punish you yet Seven Times for
your Sins.

Burnings BEWAILED
Lev. VI. 10. -- Let your Brethren, the whole House of Israel, Bewail the
Burning which the LORD has Kindled.


IN the first Verses in this Chapter, we have a sad account of the Tragical
Death of Nadab and Abibu, two of Aarons Sons, who were burnt to Death. There is
mentioned both their Sin and their Punishment.

(1.) Their Sin: They offered Incense with Strange Fire. They ought to have
taken that Fire from the Altar, which the Lord had sent from Heaven; but they
would take other Fire, which He commanded them not. In Religious Worship, it is
not enough to say, This is not expressly Forbidden, but we must be able to say,
This the Lord has Commanded, else it is strange Fire; strange to such an use
and purpose.

(2.) Here is noted the Punishment of these rash Young men, which was suitable
to their Sin. They sinned by Fire, and were punished with fire. They contemned
the Fire which came down from Heaven, and Fire from Heaven devoured them; a
strange punishment for a strange offense: They were struck dead with miraculous
Lightning. Lightning will burn a man to death, and yet it may be his Clothes
not so much as singed. Thus it was with Nadab and Abihu, notwithstanding they
had Linen Garments on, those were not burnt, but the Young Priests that wore
them were killed.

In this Verse we have,

1. A Prohibition to Aaron and his two surviving Sons, Eleazer and Ithamar;they
were forbid to uncover their heads, they might not put off their Priestly Habit
to put on Mourning Apparel, nor rend their Clothes. They were engaged in Holy
Ministrations, which should be performed cheerfully, and which they might not
desert to attend Funeral Solemnities. Thus were they to Testify their
submission to the will of God, and to acknowledge that he had justly punished
their near Relations for their sin. Nevertheless,

2. Here is a Commandment that all the People should Bewail this Judgment.
Nadab and Abibu were public Persons, and in smiting them all the People were
smitten; and the Terrible Wrath of God was discovered in this Judgment which
was awfully circumstanced. These Priests were Young men, and might have lived a
long time to have been Serviceable among the Lord's People: This was the first
day of their Entering on their Public Ministry. They were taken out of the
World by the immediate Hand of God, and that Suddenly in the very act of
Sinning, before they had time to consider and repent of what they had done,
which things argued the Burning Displeasure of God, and therefore was a loud
Call to all the House of Israel to bewail such an astonishing Dispensation of
His Providence.

The Doctrine which may be insisted on for our present Instruction, is,

That when the Lord Kindles a Fire, and some are Burned, He expects that all
His People should lay it to Heart.

Two Propositions are contained in the Doctrine before us.

PROP. 1. When there is a Fire kindled among a People, it is the Lord that has
kindled it. The Burning which the Lord has kindled. Whether we speak of
Metaphorical Fires, that is to say, Consuming Judgments; or of Fires in a
Literal Sense, it is the Lord that kindles them. Of both these does the Prophet
speak, Ezekiel. 20. 47, 48. Thus says the Lord God, Behold I will kindle a Fire,
the flaming Flame shall not be quenched, and all Flesh shall see that I the
LORD have kindled it. This may be confirmed in two particulars.

1. All things whatsoever, are ordered by the Providence of God; nothing
happens in the World, but what is according to his holy Decree and Providence:
Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He in Heaven, and in Earth,
in the Seas, and in all deep Places Nothing comes to pass in any place, be it
Heaven, Earth, Seas or Rivers, but the Lord has done it. His Providence Governs
the World; and is not restrained to things in Heaven only, but orders things on
the Earth; and not great things only which happen on the Earth, but the
smallest minutest things that can be. We see this in what Christ said to the
Disciples, Mat. 10. 29, 30. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? And one
of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father: i. e. Without his
Providence. We may be sure then that an house does not fall to the ground; much
less does a Fire consume many Houses; but the holy Hand of Heaven is in it.
Christ moreover said, The very hairs of your head are all (...). Not only your
Lives (as the Lives of Sparrows) but the least thing in which you are
concerned, are under the care and guidance of your heavenly Father. Things
which are Accidental are ordered by Providence: Sometimes a Fire breaks forth
Accidentally; it may be by the carelessness of a Servant; nevertheless the Lord
has ordered it how it should happen, when, where, and whose Houses shall be
Consumed by it The most Casual things are under the guidance of Providence.
Suppose a man kills his Neighbor unawares and involuntarily; suppose him to be
cutting Wood on a Tree (it is a supposal in the Scripture) and the helve of his
Ax happens to fall and wound his Neighbor to Death, that sad Casualty was
ordered by the holy Providence of God, Exodus 21. 13. God delivered him into his
hand. What is there more casual or fortuitous than the chance of a Lot?
Nevertheless it is said, Prove. 16. 33. The Lot is cast into the lap; but the
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. And as for Instruments, they are all
overruled by a Divine Providence: They can do nothing without God. I know that
the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks, to direct his
steps. Nebuchadnezzar designed to come with an Army, and burn Jerusalem down to
the ground, but he had never accomplished his purpose, if a dreadful hand of
Heaven had not ordered it to be done; therefore is it said, Lam. 3. 37. Who is
he that says and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not?

2. As all things which happen in the World, so in a special manner, Afflictive
Dispensations are ordered by his Providence, Amos 3. 6. Shall there be Evil in
a City, and the Lord has not done it? There is a world of sinful Evil in a
City, which it would beBlasphemy to say that the Lord has done it. It is
impossible that He who is infinite Holiness, should be the Author of Sin. Let
no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted
with Evil. But Penal Evil, though not Moral Evil is from Him. The Judgments of
God are all righteous acts,and all Righteousness is from Him. There is no
righteous thing done in the World, but the Lord has done it. If a sore Judgment
comes on a particular Person, Family, Town, or Land, the Lord has done it.
Sickness, Epidemical Diseases especially; and most of all Pestilential ones,
are a sad Judgment; but from the Lord, Amos 4.10. I have sent among you the
Pestilence. The terrible Famine is a sore Judgment, but the Lord sends it,
verse.6. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and want of
bread in all your places. The Sword is a dreadful Judgment, but from the holy
Lord, Lev. 26. 25. I will bring a Sword upon you, which shall avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant. And (to keep to the Subject in hand) Desolating Fires
are an awful Judgment, but of the Lords kindling. When the Children of Israel
were encamped in the Wilderness, the Fire of the Lord burnt among them, and
consumed them that were in the utmost parts of the Camp; Moses called the name
of that place TABERAH, (which signifies BURNING,) because the Fire of the Lord
burnt among them, Numb. 11. 1, 3. A considerable number of those concerned in
Corab's Rebellion, were killed with Fire, like as Nadab and Abibu had been; and
it was the Lord that kindled that Fire. Numb 16.35. There came out fire from
the Lord, and consumed two hundred and fifty men that offered Incense. This
awful Burning is commemorated by the Psalmist, Psalm. 106. 18. A Fire was
kindled in their Company, a flame burnt up the wicked. When those who came
against the Prophet Elijah were burned to death by fifty in a Company, Heaven
kindled that fire, 1 King. 1. 12. Elijah said, If I be a man of God, let fire
come down from Heaven, amp; consume thee and thy fifty; and the fire of God
came down from Heaven, and consumed him and his fifty. The Lord has threatened
to punish Sinners with Fire: Thus has He threatened the world, and will e're
long do it after such a tremendous manner, as the like never was since the
world began. For behold the Lord will come with Fire, to render his Anger with
fury, and his rebukes with flames of Fire, for by fire and by his sword, that
is to say, by his sword of fire will the Lord plead with all Flesh, and the
slain of the Lord shall be many, Isa. 66. 15, 16. Yea, and the Lord has menaced
his own People with this Judgment, in case they shall by their Degeneracies
kindle his Indignation against them: Deuteronomy. 22. 32. A Fire is kindled in mine
anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell; A Fire that consumes all a man's
Estate, and leaves him nothing, is said to burn to the lowest Hell: and set on
fire the Foundations of the Mountains. When Jerusalem which was founded on the
Holy Mountains was burnt down to the Ground, that Threatening was awfully
fulfilled.

Quest. But why does the Lord thus Punish His People?

Answ. If there were nothing to be mentioned besides the Absolute Sovereignty
of God, that is enough to make all Flesh silent before Him. GOD is greater than
Man; and is not bound to give any account of His Matters. He does according to
His Will: None can stay His Hand; nor may any say to Him, What do thou?
Nevertheless, He does not deal with men only in a way of Absolute Sovereignty;
but as a Righteous Judge.

Wherefore;

(1) It is to Chastise them for their Sins, when the Lord brings such smarting
Judgments on His People: Isa. 42. 24. Who gave Jacob for a Spoil, and Israel to
the Robbers? Did not the Lord, He, against whom we have Sinned? If we had never
Sinned, no Fire would ever have been Kindled against us. Sometimes it is for
one particular Sin, which has been a special Provocation that the Lord Kindles
a Fire. So in the Examples which we have mentioned. When a Fire devoured Nadab
and Abthu, it was for that particular Sin of their offering strange Fire. When
Two Hundred and Fifty of Corab's Rebels were Consumed with Fire, it was for
their presuming to Offer Incense which they had no Authority from God to do.
When a Fire destroyed a Number in the Camp; among the Children of Israel, it
was to Punish them for that Sin of Murmuring. When the Lord heard this, He was
wroth; so a Fire was kindled against Jacob, and Anger came up against Israel,
Psalm. 78. 21. But commonly it is for more Sins than one, that God does Visit
with Burning Judgments: Amos 2. 4, 5. Thus says the Lord, for Three
Transgressions of Judah, and for Four, (h. e. for many Transgressions) I will
not turn away the Punishment thereof; but I will send a Fire upon Judah, and it
shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem.

(2.) The Lord sees that His People Need such Afflictions. They are in
Heaviness if Need be; and not until the Lord sees that on one account or
other, such Dispensations are Needful for them, 1 Pet. 1. 6. It may be it is
needful, that so the Grace which He has wrought in their Souls may be Tried; or
in order to their Purgation they are brought into the Fire. By this shall the
Iniquity of Jacob be Purged, and this is all the Fruit to take away his Sin. It
was said concerning the Lord's People, that some of them should fall by Flame,
as well as by other Judgments; to Try them, and to Purge and make them White,
Dan.11. 33, 35. As Metals are Refined and Purified by being brought into the
Fire, so are the Lord's Servants: Zec. 12.9. I will bring the third part
through the Fire; and will Refine them as Silver is Refined; and will Try them
as Gold is Tried. Such Afflictions are sometimes needful for the Lord's
Servants, that so they may grow in Grace, and be made more Holy and Heavenly.
If the Lord takes away from any Servant of His, any part of his Estate; but
gives him more Grace instead of it, he has no cause to complain. He takes away
lesser Mercies from His Servants, that He may prepare them for greater. They
would not have been so fit for the Mercy, which is in the Lord's Heart to
bestow on them, had not some Fiery Trial qualified them for it.

(3.) God deals thus with His People sometimes, as a Solemn Warning to the
World. If this be done to the Green Tree, what shall be done to the Dry, which
is fit for Burning? Such Judgments are Omens, and Prognostics of Terrible
things to come on the Earth. The Prophet speaks of Fire and Pillars of Smoke;
the Sun turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before the Great and
Terrible Day of the Lord come, Joel 2* 30, 31. When a great Town is on Fire*
Pillars of Smoke darken the Sun,and make the Moon look like Blood; this is
sometimes a Sign that a Terrible Day of the Lord is not far off: Especially
when such things happen among the Lord's People. If they that have a more Pure
Religion than others have; and that not only as to Profession, but Practice too
shall be Visited with Fiery Judgments; what mav the wicked World expect e're
long? 1 Pet. 4. 17. The time is come, that Judgment must begin at the House of
God; and if it first Begin at us, what shall be the End of them that Obey not
the Gospel of God?

PROP. II. Such Awful Dispensations ought to be laid to Heart. If the Lord
Kindles a Fire, All His People ought to Bewail the Burning which the Lord has
Kindled. For,

1. The Displeasure of GOD ought to be laid to Heart. Should not Children be
affected with their Fathers Displeasure? It was said of Miriam, If her Father
had spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed Seven Days? Numb. 12. 14. How
much more should we be Ashamed, and Humbled, and Fear and Mourn, if our
Heavenly Father should spit in our Faces? When Moses brought word to the
Children of Israel, that God was much Offended with them, so as to Threaten a
Departure from them, when the People heard these Evil Tidirgs, they Mourned;
and no man did put on his Ornaments, Exodus 33. 4. Now Fiery Judgments are a
Sign of God's Anger. If He kindles a Fire, we may justly fear that His Anger is
kindled. You heard but now, that when the Lord was wroth, he kindled a fire
against Jacob. If a fire is kindled against Jacob, it is a sign that the Lord is
wroth, that he has a Controversy which he pleads with fire, Amos 7. 4. Behold
the Lord God called to contend by Fire. It is sad when the Lord God writes His
Displeasure in fiery Characters; we should bewail it, and duly lay it to heart.

2. To do so is the way to prevent further and greater Judgment. There is a
gracious Promise, in Lev. 26. 41, 42. If their uncircumcised heart be humbled,
and they accept of the punishment of their Iniquity, then will I remember my
Covenant. When Sin is confessed, and lamented, and God is acknowledged to be
righteous in manifesting His displeasure by punishing iniquity, then He
remembers His Covenant: He forgives the Sin of His People, and does not proceed
against them in a way of Judgment. When Rehoboam and the Princes humbled
themselves, and said the Lord is righteous. He would not go on to pour out his
wrath upon them, 2 Chronicles.12. 6, 7. When the Fire of the Lord had burnt among
the Murmuring Israelites, they cried to Moses to pray for them, which argued
that they were made sensible of their Sin, and penitent under the awful Hand of
God upon them; and then the Lord gave a stop to the Fire. Moses Prayed to the
Lord, and the fire was quenched, Numb. 11.2. Therefore ought we to bewail the
Burning which the Lord has kindled.

3. Insensibility of the Lords Hand in such awful Dispensations, has no little
evil in it: Great is the Atheism, which reigns in the hearts of such men. When
an heavy Judgment was on the Philistines, they had some suspicion that God had
sent it upon them; yet they were willing to persuade themselves, that it was
not His hand that smote them, but a chance that happened to them, 1 Samuel.6. 9.
Such Atheists were they. And such stupidity under the Hand of God, argues
desperate hardness of heart. Isa. 42. 25. He has poured out on him the fury of
his anger, and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. A sad sign of being given up to
Judicial obduration of heart. When such a light fire is kindled by the hand of
the Lord, and yet men see not his hand therein, it is a dismal sign that He has
shut their eyes in a Judicial way; And what then can be expected but greater
Burnings? Mal.2.2. If you will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my Name,
faith the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you, and I will curse
your Blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to
heart. Great Judgments are come upon you already, but far greater will shortly
be upon you, if you do not lay it to heart. Nay, Awful Judgments on a few
particular Persons, are sometimes ominous of general Calamity, if not duly
considered and laid to heart. Those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell
and slew them; think you that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
Jerusalem? I tell you, nay, but exeept you repent, you shall all likewise
perish, Luke 13. 45.

We Proceed to Apply the Doctrine which has been thus Confirmed.

USE 1. Patience becomes those on whom a Fire has been kindled. There are some
belonging to this Congregation, and more in all the other Assemblies in this
place, on whom a Fire has been kindled the Last Week. This Consideration that
notwithstanding there have been blameable Causes of this Calamity, the Lord has
kindled it, should make us patient under His Holy Hand. This thought made David
to be so, when under great Affliction of another kind. Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb,
I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Job had part of his Estate taken
from him by Fire, Job 1. 16. but he knew that the Hand of God was in it, he
said, the Lord has taken away; and when he well considered that, he was a
mirror of Patience. Let me speak a few things to those who have been Sufferers
by the late Fire. I shall only mention three Considerations, which may help to
quiet and compose your Spirits under your present Affliction.

Consider 1. Nothing has befallen you but what many other Servants of the Lord
have had experience of the like. Why should we think to fare better in this
evil world, than many others who have been dear to God? Not to speak of things
done in Ancient times, or in Places where we have not been concerned: Let me
put you in mind of what has been done in our days, and in our own Nation. The
Famous Town of Northampton was not only burnt by the cruel Danes, in former
Ages, and Rebuilt; but no longer since than September 3. 1675. A Fire broke
forth and buried the whole Town in Ashes in an hours time. The like Desolation
came upon Wem, a Market Town in Shropshire. Many of us can remember, and all of
us have heard, of the Fire that happened in London on the Lord's Day, September
2. 1666. which continued burning four days, and was not extinguished before it
had burnt down above thirteen thousand Houses; the Cathedral of St. Paul's, 87
Churches, 6 Chapels, the Royal Exchange, Custom-House, GuildHall, the
Magnificent Hall's of Companies, In those Fires many good men were great
Sufferers. Nor is that which happened four days since, the only Lamentable Fire
which has been in Boston. Five and thirty years ago, viz. on Novem. 27 1676. A
Fire by means of a careless sleepy Servant broke forth, by which fourscore
Families were burnt out of doors, and the Public Meeting. House here, in which
we worshipped God every Sabbathday was consumed in those flames. Not full three
years after that, viz. On August 8. 1679 Another Fire burnt down eighty Houses,
and seventy Warehouses, when much Substance was lost in those, devouring
Flames. Wherefore, Let not those who are now Sufferers, be impatient or
dejected because of the Losses which they have sustained.

Consider 2. If you belong to God, He has given you, and will give you that
which is better than any thing which He has taken from you: Has He taken your
House from you? But there is an infinitely better House which shall never be
taken from you; As House* Eternal in the Heavens. Are your Goods, is your
Household Furniture Consumed? There is a betterand more enduring Substance in
Heaven: You have an Everlasting Covenant to live upon, which is ordered in all
things well. You have God to be your Portion, and then you have enough, if you
have nothing else. It was David's comfort when Ziklag was burnt, and all his
Substance fallen in the hands of the Amalakites, 1 Samuel 30. 6. David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God. When his Estate was clear gone, and (which was a
worse Calamity) all his Friends forsook him, his comfort was, that still he had
a Faithful and an Alsufficient God to depend upon, and therefore
notwithstanding all his Losses, he had Infinite Riches still. It has been
reported, that when there was a Civil War, Soldiers coming into an House, took
away what they pleased; The Mistress of the House being a pious Woman, when
they laid their hands on several choice things, would say, I have God still to
provide for me; and so did she often say: at last they took away something that
her heart was too much set upon, which when she observed, she fell into Tears:
She had a little Child who remembered what her Mother had often expressed; and
said, Mother, why do you Cry* Is your God gone now, have these Plunderers taken
your God away? Which words of the little Infant made the Mother recollect her
self, and bear her Losses cheerfully. Shall I say to you, that if you are true
Believers on Christ, you have lost nothing: Because of the Infinite Good which
you still have, and shall have for ever, you have lost nothing. A Godly man may
stand on the Ruins of the whole world and say, I have lost nothing: You have
all things in having Christ: He is All and in all that do believe. What is the
Believers Jointure? The Apostle tells us what it is, 1 Cor. 3. 21. All things
are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: Therefore never fear wanting as
long as you are in this world. If God has given you Christ, you may be sure
that He will not with hold any thing from you, which shall be good for you to
enjoy, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, how shall he not with Him
freely give us all things?

Consider 3. All your Afflictions and Bereavements will End Happily. How do you
know, but that the Gracious Lord may by such Dispensations, be preparing you
for some Signal Mercy? If you are Patient under them, it may be you will find
it so. Jam. 5.11. Behold, we count them Happy which Endure. You have heard of
the Patience of Job; and have seen the End of the Lord. How did Job's
Afflictions End? Job 42.12. The Lord Blessed the Latter End of Job, more than
his Beginning. He gave him twice as much Estate as he had before all was taken
from him. He will do so by you, if in His Infinite Wisdom He shall see that
will be good for you But if not so in case you bear your Afflictions with that
Patience and Humility that becomes Christians, you shall be Richer in Grace and
Brighter in Glory, when in the Heavenly World, because of your Afflictions in
this Evil World. Oh! then be very Patient and Submissive under the Hand of GOD;
and the rather because you have by your Sins Deserved this, and a great deal
more. Say then with the Lords People; Mic. 7. 9. I will hear the Indignation of
the Lord, because I have Sinned against Him.

USE. II. This should put us upon enquiring what the Sins are which provoke the
Lord to kindle Fires, and whether those Sins are not found among us.

Quest. What Sins are they for which Burnings come as a Punishment for them?

Answ. I shall not mention all, only single out some of them.

1. Pride is one of them. A Fire was kindled upon Sodom it was in a special
manner for Pride among other Sins: Behold, this was the Iniquity of Sodom,
Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her, Ezekiel 61 49. We
see Pride was the first firebrand that burnt Sodom. If the Lord will thus
punish Heathen People for this Sin, much more may His own People expect the
like Judgment, if this Iniquity is notoriously indulged among them. This Sin
set Jerusalem on fire as well as Sodom, and in special the Pride and Vanity of
the Female Sex appearing in their Garb and Gate, brought Burning upon them. It
was because the Daughters of Sion were haughty, Isa. 3.16. They would walk with
stretched forth Necks, walking and mincing as they go. They had Chains and
Bracelets, and Rings, and Jewels, and changeable Suits of Apparel, of which
they were not a little proud; wherefore the Lord threatens that he would take
away the bravery of their Ornaments, and give them burning. The Word of God
allows those who are Men of Estates, and such as are in Place and Dignity above
others, to be distinguished by the Costliness of their Apparel. If they who
(...) Kings Houses are Clothed in soft raiment, if they wear Silk, and
Sattens, and Velvet, and Purple, and Silver and Gold, there is no offense to
Heaven in it; but for Poor People to do so, is insufferable Pride: Pride is
also discovered in the wearing of Strange Apparel. They that will be the first
in taking up a new Vain Fashion, are to be numbered among the Proud. Nor does
the Holy God approve of this vanity in any persons whatsoever. If any might be
allowed in it, Courtiers and Princes might; but hear what God says, Zeph. 1.8.
I will punish the Princes, and the Kings Children, and all such as are clothed
with strange Apparel. As for the Kings Children, their Fathers House was burnt,
and the Houses of all the Princes were burnt with fire, Jer. 52. 13. This was
partly for their pride, in wearing Strange Apparel: New things are strange; so
are new fashions at first strange Apparel, It is lawful for men to comply with
any fashion, which does not carry Immodesty with it, nor is contrary to any
Moral Precept; when once it is become the custom of the place where they live;
and there are some Old Fashions which now would be new and strange and
ridiculous, and it would be a sin to follow them, although an hundred years ago
being customary, they were decent; but movelty and singularity in fashions are
the badge of a vain mind. And I doubt not but that a man who has lost his Hair
by Sickness or by Age, or if his Health require it, may as lawfully make use of
a modest Wig or Border, as of a Cap, or Hat. I never said or thought otherwise;
but I have said, and do say, That such Monstrous Periwigs, as some; Nay, as
some Church Members indulge themselves in the wearing of, which make them
resemble the Locusts that come out of the bottomless Pit; whose Faces were as
the Faces of Men, and they had Hair as the Hair of Women, Rev.9.7.8. are a
Badge of Pride, and (as an Eminent Divine calls them) Horried Bushes of Vanity;
and that such Strange Apparel is contrary to the Light of Nature, and to
Express Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. But are not many among us guilty of this
(as well as of other sorts of) Pride? And they regard neither God nor man that
testifies against them. And none more guilty than the poorer and meaner sort of
people all the Country over. They will go above their Quality, above their
Parentage,and above their Estates. When they have scarce Bread to eat, yet they
will be fine and fashionable, and appear in their Silks and Braveries, as if
they were the best in the Land. I declare unto you, that such Pride is enough
to provoke the Lord to kindle Fires in all the Towns in the Country, where this
Iniquity does abound.

2. The Profanation of the Sabbath day* is a Sin that is often Punished with
Fiery Judgments. Did not the Lord Threaten Jerusalem, that if they would not
Hallow the Sabbath Day, and bear no Burden on the Sabbath Day, He would Kindle
a Fire, that would Devour the Palaces thereof, Jer. 17 27. So has the Lord
done. Jerusalem (as some have observed) was twice Taken and Burnt on the
Sabbath Day, for their Profaning of it, as well as for other Transgressions.
And the like has been done among Christians, for their Profaning of the Lord's
Day. The Protestants in Germany, were great Sabbath Breakers. A Learned Man
complained of them, That if one were to Judge whose Day that was by their
manner of Keeping it, he must take it to be, Non Dies Dominicus, sed Dies
Daemoniacus; a Day set apart not to Serve CHRIST, but the Devil: for it was
spent in Drunkenness, Gaming, Revelling, and all manner of Profanity. And what
Fires has the Lord Kindled there? What Desolations have been made? How many
whole Towns have been Burnt down to the Ground? Prague (the Capital City in
Bohemia) fell into the Hands of Merciless Enemies on the Sabbath Day. And there
have been sad Instances of Fiery Judgments in our own Nation, on Places which
have been Notorious for Profaning the Sabbath. A Considerable Town in
Devonshire [Tiverton] was often Warned by a Faithful Minister of God, then
among them, that for this Sin they might expect that a Desolating Judgment was
near them. Presently after the Death of that Minister, a Fire broke out, and
laid the whole Town in Ashes. I could mention to you, Particular Persons who
have been Killed (as Nadab and A^^^u were,) with Lightning from Heaven on the
Lord's Day, when they were Profaning of it. But has not God's Holy Day been
Profaned in New England? Has it not been so in Boston this Last Summer, more
than ever since there was a Christian here? Have not Burdens been Carried through
the Streets on the Sabbath Day? Nay, have not Bakers, Carpenters, and other
Tradesmen been Employed in Servile Works, on the Sabbath Day? When I saw this,
My Heart said, A Rebuke from Heaven will surely attend the Canada Expedition,
because of this Transgression. My Heart said, will not the Lord for this Kindle
a Fire in Boston? If to hasten an Affair we will make Bold with GOD, and
Violate His Rest; we have reason to fear, that we shall make more Have than
good Speed; as in our Late Expedition we have done. Have we not Exposed our
Religion to Scorn? Have not Ungodly Scoffers said. They did not think that
Presbyterians would have gone to Work in the Sabbath Day, until they saw it in
Boston? For Men to Work hard on the Sabbath. pretending a Necessity; and then
to Loiters next Day is such a Mocking of GOD, as He will never bear with in
New England, let who will Countenance (...) it.

But say some, May not Servile Works be done on the Sabbath Day, in case of
Necessity?

I say Yes, without doubt; if it is a Present and (...) Necessity; and not
otherwise. If an House is on Fire on the Sabbath Day, all Hands may go to work
to Quench it, because the Necessity is Present and Certain. If Enemies break in
upon us on the Sabbath, it is Lawful to take up Arms against them. It was
Superstition in those Jews, who in the Days of the Maccabees made a Scruple of
it. But if the Necessity is Uncertain, then to bear a Burden, or do any Servile
Work on the Lord's Holy Day, is a Profanation. Thus for a Husband man to
pretend that within two Days, Rain may come and Damage his Corn; to prevent
which he will Gather it in on the Sabbath Day, is a Transgression of the Fourth
Commandment. The like is to be said, when Mariners plead that they have a Fair
Wind on the Lord's Day, which it may be they shall not have the next Day; and
therefore they will Hurry away, and Disturb the Rest of the Sabbath; which
ought to be Sacred and Inviolable. I wish that they whose Hand has been Chief
in this Trespass, would Consider as in the Fear of God, how Governor Nehemiah
Contended with the Nobles of Judah and said unto them, What Evil thing is this
that you do, and Profane the Sabbath Day? Did not your Fathers do thus, and
did not our God bring all this Evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet you bring
more Wrath upon Israel, by Profaning the Sabbath, Neh. 13. 17, 18. If they who
ought to approve themselves Witnesses for GOD, shall all be Silent, and not
Testify against this Iniquity; I am persuaded, that there is more Wrath to come
upon Boston: which I Earnestly Pray the LORD to Avert; and Mercifully to take
me out of the World before it comes.

3. Inordinate Love to the World, and the Things of the World, is another Evil
which Kindles Fire. When men will use Unlawful Means, when they will Sin to get
the World; no man can think, but that their Hearts are Inordinately set upon
it. Achan would be guilty of Sacrilege, that so he might get a Wedge of Gold,
and a goodly Babylonish Garment; but did not God say, that he should be Burned
for it? Josh. 7.1s. The Prophet Zechary saw a Flying Roll, the Length thereof
was Twenty Cubits, and the Breadth thereof Ten Cubits: Those were the
Dimensions of the Porch of the Te1mple; it is said this Roll full of Curses
should Enter into the House of the Thief, and into the House of him that
Swears Falsely; and shall Consume it with the Timber thereof, and the Stones
thereof. It seems there were some Covetous Wretches, who having been Entrusted
with Money to be laid out on the Temple, Sacrilegiously perverted it to their
own Use; an I when called to an Account, would by Perjury Clear themselves: For
this wicked Covetousness, their Houses were Consumed, Zec. 5. 2, 3, 4. They
that give the Preference to Earthly things, with the Neglect of Spiritual and
Heavenly Blessings, have an Inordinate Love to a Vain and Perishing World. Thus
did the Jews: When Christ and all the Riches of Heaven with Him was freely
Offered to them, they made Light of it, and went their ways, One to his Farm,
and another to his Merchandise. But what followed? The King was wroth, and sent
forth his Armies, and Burnt up their City. The Romans came with an Army and set
Jerusalem on Fire, Mat. 22 7. When men pretend to Serve GOD, and yet Serve
Mammon with their whole Hearts, the Lord either by Water or Fire takes away
their Mammon. When the World is become an Idol, He casts it into the Fire. When
an House and Furniture is Idolized, by Men or Women, the Jealousy of GOD
Kindles a Fire on it. Remember Lot's Wise: Her heart was Idolatrously set upon
what she had in Sodom; and you know what befell her. Yea, remember Lot himself:
Notwithstanding he was a Righteous man, the World had too much of his Heart.
And did not God Fire him out of all his Estate? Now then say, Is not this Sin
found in New England? And is it not attended with much Sacrilege? Through out
the whole Land, men withold from God more than is meet; and it tends to
Poverty. Ab! New England, what Lamentation shall I take up for thee? Thou have
changed thy Interest. Thy Interest was Pure Religion; which is more than can be
said of any other Plantation in the whole World. Our Fathers came not into this
Land to get Estates, but to Build Houses for GOD, and set up the Kingdom of
CHRIST in the Spiritual Glory of it, where His Name had not been known. They
went after Him in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not Sown: They sought the
Kingdom of God and His Righteousness in the First place; and He was pleased to
add other things to them, beyond their Expectation. But how is it as this Day?
Men do not now come to New England for the sake of Religion; but of the World,
to get Riches if they can. And what is the Interest pursued by this Generation?
Is it Godliness? Or is it not the Farm and the Merchandise?

USE III. Let us be Careful now the Lord has Kindled a Fire in the midst of us,
in the heart of Boston, to Approve our selves as He expects from us.

1. We should be deeply Sensible of the Holy Hand of the Lord, in what has
Befallen us. Oh! Bewail the Burning which the Lord has Kindled. It is in
respect of some Circumstances attending it, the most Awful Stroke from God that
ever came upon Boston, or upon New England. Many Houses are in Ashes; and more
than an Hundred Families Burnt out of Doors. An House set apart for Solemnizing
the Worship of God, is laid in Ruins. Our Church has greater cause to be
Affected with that Providence, than any other Church; excepting that which used
to Assemble there. For when our Church did Sixty One Years ago ( viz. June 4.
1650.) Combine and Form themselves into a Particular Church, by an Holy
Covenant engaging to walk with God, and with one another in observing all
Divine Institutions; in that House now Burnt with Fire, that most Solemn
Transaction was Performed. It is a sorrowful Complaint of the Lord's People,
Isa. 64. 11. The House where our Fathers Praised thee, is Burnt up with Fire.
That House in which our Fathers Praised the Lord for near upon Seventy Years is
now Burnt up with Fire. We of this Congregation have the greater cause to
Sympathise with our Brethren, for that we our selves had Thirty Five Years ago,
experience of the same Calamity; as before was noted. In this dismal Night the
Townhouse also, in which our General Assemblies, Councils, and Courts of
Judicature were wont to Meet, and in which Two Synods have Sat, was Consumed
with the Fire; and in that there is an Awful Voice from Heaven speaking to the
whole Province. And this comes upon us immediately on the Back of another
Judgment; as to present Appearance Seven times greater than any that ever befell
New England: I intend the Blast of God which has been on the Late Expedition
against our Canadian Enemies. Men are imputing the Disappointment to such and
such Persons. I am no Judge in those Affairs. But sure I am, that the Lord has
destroyed those Vessels and Lives which Perished on the Fatal Rocks; and if the
Anger of the Lord had not been Kindled, it would not have been as it is. How
may it astonish us, to see the Holy LORD seeming to take part with His and our
Enemies, who are Idolaters, and have been Murderers; and His Anger to Smoke
against the Prayers of His People? We had appointed a Public Fast to be
attended this Week, (and the Lord prepare us for it) to Humble our selves under
the Mighty Hand of GOD gone out against us, in the miscarriage of that
Undertaking, in which the Peace and Prosperity of all these Colonies was
greatly concerned; but before the Fast comes, behold another Humbling Stroke.
Surely the Lord says, The People of New England have cause to be Humbled and
Humbled; and Woe to New England, if after all these things it shall be said of
us, as 'twas of the Obstinate Jews,Jer. 44. 10. They are not Humbled even to
this Day; neither have they Feared. There is another Particular which makes a
peculiar Accent of Sorrow in this Burning, viz. That many Lives have been
Tragically Lost; the like (as to Number) has not been in former Fires amongst
us. We know not how many there are who have thus Perished. It Is supposed Eight
Persons at least, some think many more. One sorrowful Instance I cannot but
take Notice of: An Hopeful Young Man, and a Dutiful Son to his Mother, who is a
Pious Widow, belonging to this Church; as he was Industriously and Charitably
Helping his distressed Neighbors, lost his Life in the Fire. Oh! The
tremendous Wrath of God, which such Awful Providence are a Manifestation of!
Moreover, At this very time, other Judgments are upon us. The Lord threatened
His People Israel that He would appoint over them the Burning Ague, Lev. 26.
16. So has He dealt with us this Year. Very many (in some Towns especially)
have been brought Low by the Burning Ague, which the Lord has Afflicted them
with. And at this very Day, God has called for a Drought on the Land. Shall all
these Evils come upon us, and we not deeply Sensible of His Holy Hand in all?
Oh! Let there not be cause to take up the Prophets Complaint, Dan.9.13. All
this Evil is come upon us, yet made we not our Prayer before the Lord our God,
that we might turn from our Iniquity, and understand thy Truth.

2. Let all our Hearts be affected with the Mercy of God. In Wrath He has
remembered Mercy. We have cause to Sing of Mercy, as well as to Lament under
Judgment: Sparing Mercy in that the Town has stood so long: It is almost a
Miracle, that such a Timber Town has stood for so many years, considering how
many prodigious Sinners there are who rejoice at such Calamities, hoping (...)
opportunity to Steal their (...) Goods: And how many careless Servants, and how
many Drunken Wretches there are in the Town: The Fire we now Bewail this day,
is supposed to be occasioned by a wicked drunken Woman. And let those who have
their Houses taken from them, be Thankful that it was not done sooner. When
many years since a considerable part of a Street in Boston was Consumed with
Fire; and among others, Reverend Mr. Wilson, (the Famous Pastor of the only
Organized Church then in Boston) had his House burnt, himself not being at that
time in the Town; as soon as Tidings was bro't to him of it, the first word
which his holy heart prompted him to say, was, Blessed be the Lord who has
taken away, and blessed be the Lord who let me enjoy my House so long. We ought
to be affected with the Mercy of God in that the whole Town was not consumed.
If the Wind (which the Lord holds in His fist) had then been so high as since
that fatal night it has been, few Houses would have been left standing in
Boston. We in this North End of the Town, have great cause to acknowledge the
Mercy of God in sparing as at this time: For indeed we were in eminent danger,
flakes of fire falling upon the Houses hereabouts, and but few of the Dwellers
in this part of the Town remained in their Houses to secure them, in case any
of them should have taken fire; from which a gracious Providence, (but not our
Prudence) has preserved them. Let me advise you, if ever the like occasion
should happen, (which Mercy forbid) not to leave your own Habitations, without
a sufficient Number to defend them.

2. Let us (...) after hearts more weaned from the World, and more set upon
Heaven. The Fashion of this World passes away; therefore we should moderate
our Affections to things here below. They that buy should be as though they
possessed not; they should not place any part of their Felicity in their
Purchases or Possessions: We should set loss in our Affections from these
Earthly Enjoyments, and then if they are taken from us, we shall not be
dejected in our Spirits. We see these things are not to be depended on, and
therefore not to be the chief Object of our Desires. The Wise man gives wise
Counsel, Prove. 23. 4, 5. Labor not to be rich. Will thou set thine eyes upon
that which is not? Riches certainly make themseves wings, they fly away as an
Eagle toward Heaven. They fly away swifter than an Eagle. When a man has been
Laboring many Years to get an House,and then filled it with good Things, in a
Quarter of an Hour, all is flown away. Let us then set our Hearts on Heavenly
and Eternal Things. An Estate in Heaven is secure from Fire, as well as from
Thieves. Let us make the things which are Above, our Treasure. If we place our
Happiness in Heavenly Enjoyments* then they are our Treasure; accordingly will
our Hearts be carried out after them: Mat.6.22 For where your Treasure is,
there will your Hearts be also. When the Persecuting (...) laid waste a
Populous Town, coming into the House of (...) holy Man, they first laid hands
on the rich Furniture, when they had taken away that, they set his House (which
was a Stately Building) on Fire; the good Man with his Hand pointing toward
Heaven, said, There Is my Treasure: All that I had on Earth is gone; but I have
Treasure enough in Heaven, which no Arian, no Enemy can take from me. Why
should Christians set their Hearts on this Perishing World, which is reserved
unto Fire? The Day is coming when there shall be a Fire that will not leave one
House standing on the Face of the whole Earth. Some Ecclesiastical writers
Report that Nero Commanded that the Apostle Paul should be put to Death; in
special because he Affirmed that this World shall at last be Burnt up in an
Universal Conflagration. There is no Christian but will say, he believes it;
yet how few are there, who Live as if they had any belief of it, since they
mind no other World but this? Oh! then let our Hearts be all upon Heaven; and
that chiefly, because JESUS CHRIST is there. I Conclude with that Scripture,
which I have lately and largely Discoursed on; Col. 3. 1, 2. Seek those things
which are Above, where Christ Sits at the Right Hand of God. Set your Affection
on things Above; not on things on the Earth. Amen.

Preached at Boston, October. 7. 1711.
FINIS

