The Blackness of Sins against Light.

OR, Men's offering Violence To their Knowledge, AND Forcibly Breaking through
all the interposing Flames of it, to work Iniquity, Considered in its
CRIMINALNESS, and as no small Aggravation of their vile Transgression.

By JOHN DANFORTH.

He who Knows his LORDS Will, and Obeys it not, shall be Beaten with MANY
STRIPES.

Boston in N. E. Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, in Middle-Street. 1710

TO THE READER.
HAVING been Requested to Peruse the Sermon Emitted herewith, I have done it
with Satisfaction and Delight; ^^nding it to be Solid, Savoury, Serious and
Convincing: I hope it will be Effectual unto the End designed by the worthy
Author, in permitting the Publication of it; at the desire of some Piously
disposed Persons who (I understand) importuned it from him.

Now that I am hastening out of the world, it is a Joy to me that my (many
Years since) Intimate Friend, Mr. Samuel Danforth, formerly an Eminent Pastor
of the Church in Roxbury, has such a Son (and another like him) Preaching the
Gospel among the Churches of CHRIST in New England; and Faithful to His Holy
Interest therein: And that Reverend and Renowned Mr. Wilson, has such
Grandchildren; and that my Father has such a Successor in the Church of
Dorchester.

I Pray the LORD, that the Ministry of the Third Generation in New England, may
Excel those of the Second; and in special him that writes this, who is now come
to the Close of his Days on Earth; And that GOD will Bless the Labors of this
His Servant, for the Good of many.

Increase Mather.
Boston December 13th. 1709.
The Blackness OF SINS AGAINST Light.
Romans I. 21. Because when They KNEW GOD, They Glorified Him not, as GOD. --


THIS Text presents us with a Grand Article in the Black Bill of Indictment
against Atheistical Sinners. Wherein we may Remark;

1. THEIR Endowment, A Rich Talent was bestowed upon 'em; viz. the Knowledge of
GOD, and the Knowledge how they ought to Glorify Him as GOD, in a manner
agreeable to His Known Perfections. When Rational Men considered the mavelous
Fabric of Heaven and Earth, the Exquisite Artifice, and Order of the whole
Frame of Nature, and how the Discordant Elements are tuned to an Harmonious
Consent, and what a Line of Goodness, Usefulness, and mutual Respect runs through
the Universe of Beings; And that all this could not come to pass by a
fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, nor be produced by it self, nor have been from
Eternity; For Men could not beget Men from Eternity; there must needs be a
going back to some First Man, who could not beget himself; And if Arts had been
advancing in Infinite Ages before us, the Exquisitely Rare Inventions of these
Latter Days would have been made long before; And the Short Hystory we have of
the most Ancient Records of the World is utterly inconsistent with the
Supposition of the Precedaneous Eternity of the World: I say when Rational Men
considered these things, they could not but Conclude, that there is a Being of
Supreme Wisdom and Power and Goodness, the Creator and Governor of the World,
which is GOD; for the Glory of the Work showed them the Super-eminent Glory of
the Artificer, as you find it in the Verse before the Text. Thus they were
Endowed with the Knowledge of GOD; and consequently of their Duty, wherein they
reasonably stood Bound to their Creator.

2. THEIR Iniquity; They did not Glorify the LORD as GOD, but the contrary; and
in this their Iniquity they were without Excuse; because of their Knowledge:
[See the Reference of the Text, to the immediate Context.] The bright Flames of
their Light and Knowledge, stood in the way to Oppose and Hinder them, But they
violently and very wickedly Broke through those Flames of Light, to commit
Iniquity; And hereby their Iniquity was Aggravated, and became so much the more
Heinous; and Meritorious of the greater and more terrible Punishment.

DOCTRINE. The Offering of Violence to Light and Knowledge, by Running directly
against 'em, to the Committing of Evil, is in it self a woeful Crime, which
being Added to the Evil that is Committed, does greatly multiply Guilt, and
Debars the Sinner of Excuse.

Consider Here;

I. THAT since Sin Entered into the World and Spiritual Death by it, Mankind do
Naturally Run to the Commiting of Evil. Evil is the contrary of Good. Good is
that which is agreeable to Man's Primitive Constitution, when he was made after
the Image of the Glorious GOD, the Infinite GOODNESS. This Good, in our Text is
called the Glorifying of GOD as GOD. To Glorify GOD is not to add Splendour and
Excellency to Him; for who can add to what is Infinite? But to let the Divine
Glories shine upon us, and within us, and through us, and to be Sacred Glasses
to Reflect those Glories upon Others. The Volumn of the Works of Creation and
Providence, and the Book of the Little World, MAN, especially his Soul, and the
Concreated Wise and Virtuous Ideas, and the Holy Habits and Propensions of it,
whereby Man became a Living Law unto Himself, were the first Bible that GOD
ever Wrote; Exhibiting the Glories of GOD, His Omnipresence, Alsufficiency,
Omnisciency, Righteousness, Holiness, Goodness, Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness,
as the most Consummate Objects, which it is our Duty, and Blessedness, to
Converse withal, and to be United unto; which our Ravished Minds should be ever
Viewing of; and whereunto we ought to be Sacrificing the highest Admirations,
the Low, but most Loyal Submissions, the most Obediential Resolutions, and the
Absolute, Superlative, and most fervent and enlarged Desires, Love, Trust,
Hopes, Delights and Joys, together with Awful Reverential Fear, even all the
Best Affections of our Souls; Not making out after or Doting upon any Creatures
whatsoever, as our Last End or Chief Good; Nor setting up Our Selves and Wills
and Carnal Interests above GOD, or Equal with GOD, Or setting our selves off
from GOD in any wise; But Choosing GOD in CHRIST as our Portion and to be All in
all unto us, for Time and Eternity; And endeavoring to Reflect and Manifest
the Glories of GOD, His Purity, Equity, Veracity, Fidelity, Compassion,
Condescension Beneficence, Clemency, and Long suffering Not only b^ O^l
Expressions and Celebrations thereof, but also by Imitation; By Conformity to
'em, in habit and disposition, and in Action and Conversation; to the utmost of
our creaturely Capacity. That when it is observed what Useful, Amiable and
Excellent Creatures we are, it may be thence inferred and concluded, How much
more (Infinitely more) Good and Excellent and Glorious that GOD is, who gave us
to be what we are. Thus it is our Natural Duty to set up an High Throne for the
Glory of GOD in our Hearts and Lives, Living on GOD, and Living unto Him; which
Duty we Read in Gods first Bible forementioned; And This is agreeable to Man's.
Primitive Constitution; Thus he Reaches to the End of his Creation; This
therefore is Good: Now the contrary to this, and whatsoever Prevaricates from
this is Evil; To Gaze on, and to be Enchanted with the Excellencies of
Creatures, to be taken up with them, and supreamly to Admire, Love, Seek,
Trust, and Rejoice in them; to Refuse or Neglect to be Returned into the Peace,
Favor and Communion, and Imitation of God, By the Revealed Mediator; and to
act in a way of Disconformity to the Divine Example, not aiming nor striving in
all things to show forth Gods Glory; Offering Lame Service to GOD, that men
would not offer to a Mortal King; Putting off His Service from Day to Day, as
they dare not do their Earthly Matters; Doing that in H. Sight and Presence
that they dare not do in the sight of a Child, much less dare they do it in the
presence of a Judge; This is Contrary unto men's Glorifying of GOD as God, and
Disagreeable unto their Primitive Constitution, and sets them off from their
Last and Chief End, that they were made for, and adapted unto; and therefore
This is Evil.

And This Evil is called Sin; and is Prohibited and Condemned by the Law of
Nature, and by the Law written in the Holy Scriptures.

II. THIS Evil in its whole Nature, is the worst Kind of Evil; It Is a very vile
and guilty and ruining Evil; Of all Evils, that ever entered into the World,
this Sin is the First and the Worst: The Worst, because it is the Cause of all
other Evils; The Flaming Aetna that out of its Dreadful Paunch has Vomited on
the World fiery Rivers of Deluging; Tormenting, and Destroying Calamities. The
Worst Evil, because it is the Sting and Poison that Invenoms all other Evils; 1
Cor. 15.56. This makes 'em Paenal, Vindictive, Direful, and most Anguishing.
Other Evils, and even Natural Death, (the most Terrible of all Terribles to the
Philosopher,) when the Guilt of Sin is abolished by Pardoning Mercy, through the
Expiating Blood of CHRIST, become Harmless, Useful, and sometimes Desirable.
Isa. 33.24. The Worst Evil, because this Evil only makes a separation between
the Creature, and Him who is his Last End and Chief Good; between Man and GOD;
In this Regard it is the only absolute Evil, taking away the Main Good of
Humane Being; Destroying the Goodness of the Creature, which is its aptitude to
its End; and its happiness which flows from its Obtainment and Fruition of its
End. So that all other Evils are but Pictures of Evil (or as Shadows that
follow the Substance) in Comparison of This Evil, that alienates Men from the
Life of GOD, and from the GOD, in whom Life is bound up. The Worst Evil,
because it is the Prime, Absolute, Superlative Object of the Irreconcilable
Hatred of GOD, an Evil the whole Nature whereof is wholly Evil, and can never
be made Good; whence it is Emphatically called, THE EVIL; [To Poneron,] and no
other Evils but this Evil of Sin will cause the Almighty to Love a man a whit
the less; and no Executions of Revenge from Heaven are done on any, but because
of This most Abominable and Provoking Evil. Yea, it is such an Evil as all the
Good that men can do on Earth cannot make Reparation of, or Atonement for; and
as all the Judgments and Torments on Sinners in Earth and in Hell cannot
possibly make any Satisfaction for, or Expiation of. It Is Therefore surely a
very Heinous Evil; and the Worst Kind of Evil.

III. FOR Men to Run directly against Their Light and Knowledge to the
Committing of this Evil of Sin, is in it self a Woeful Crime; Which being Added
to the Evil that is Committed, does greatly Increase and Multiply Guilt, and
Debars the Sinner from Excuse. As there are Degrees of Torment in Hell, and
'twill be more Tolerable for Sodom than for Capernaum, so there are Degrees of
Guilt and Heinousness in Sins, though the Least Sin deserves Everlasting
Punishment. Though all Guilt is extremely to be Trembled at, yet especially the
Guilt of Sins against Light.

To Demonstrate that Sins against Knowledge are Much Viler and More Heinous
than Sins of Unavoidable Ignorance, and more Inexcusable, We will offer these
Arguments.

I. THAT Sin that is Chosen and Loved and Acted, As it is Sin, as it is a
Transgression of Gods Law, and is Preferred before the Will of GOD carries a
greater heinousness, than that sinful Action that is not Acted, Eo Nomine, as
it is Sinful; because the Sinfulness of it is not known when it is committed; To
fight against GOD and His Law Directly, To consider such a Thing as Forbidden
of God, and yet to Choose it, and therein to prefer a man's own wisdom before
GOD's Wisdom, and a man's own will and lust before GOD's Will, and a man's own
Self-love before GOD's Love to Him; to do this Deliberately and Resolvedly, is
more contrary to the Glorifying of GOD as GOD than to do an ill thing
indirectly and indeliberately, and therefore it is the more Heinous; now the
Ignorant sinner does this or that, which he reckons may conduce to his Temporal
Wealth, Ease, or Honor, not knowing that he transgresses against the Lord;
But he that sins against his Light Knows that in what he does, he Transgresses
and Violateth the Law and Will of GOD, yet being swayed by some Outward
Considerations which Preponderate with him, he counts it Good, yea Best for him
for the time being to Venture to Transgress; He directly and deliberately
chooses to Act contrary to GOD in those matters, Preferring his own wisdom and
will to GOD's Wisdom and Will; thus he embraces Sin, as Sin, considering it to
be forbidden Fruit, which the Ignorant Sinner does not; Therefore the Knowing
Sinner is far more Guilty than the Other.

Sometimes also the Vicious Appetite of some Wretches makes out after some
Things, merely Because GOD has forbidden them; and if the LORD had not
forbidden them, They would not have been Desired at all: But so desperately to
Love Sin, as Sin, is most Prodigiously Heinous and Vile. Such have no Plea of
Ignorance, and Unwitting Mistake for their EXCUSE, as some others have, 1 Cor.
2.8.

II. THOSE Sins are more Heinous in the sight of God than others, that have in
them a more Powerful Enmity unto GOD, and His Law, and Glory, than others have;
Now that sins against Knowledge have such a Powerful Enmity is Evident,
forasmuch as the Enlightened Consciences of men who commit Them, Interrupt them,
Contest against them, Oppose them, Condemn them; Terrible Flames of Light stand
in their Way; Yet these Knowing sinners Powerfully break through all, to Commit
sin; so strong and great is their Disaffection to the Commandments of God; so
mighty is their Enmity to Holiness. Their sin therefore is the more heinous.
Moreover, GOD principally looks at the Heart; and the more of the Heart and
Will there is in any Sin, the more heinous is it in the sight of GOD: The less
Will the less Sin; The more Will the more Sin: Now surely there is Abundance of
the Heart, Will, and Affections in sinning when the will to sin, like a mighty
River, rises up and breaks over all Banks of Opposition; Vanquisheth the Force
of Light, Law, and Conscience; and carries all before it. Even thus it is when
Men sin against their Knowledge, and therefore their sin is the more heinous.
Such men have no Pleas of Mere Infirmity, and Involuntary Weakness for their
EXCUSE.

III. THE more Ingratitude there is in any Sins, the more Vile and Heinous they
are. Every Benefit is a new Obligation; so that there is a Base Perfidiousness
in Ingratitude; To render Evil for Good is Diabolical, Now the Knowledge of GOD
and CHRIST, and Divine Things, and the Knowledge of Duty etc. are singular
Favors and Benefits, Rich Talents and Blessings; Men are greatly beholden to
Heaven for 'em; The Intellectual World and the Souls of Men can no more subsist
without Knowledge, than the Natural and Corporeal World can subsist without the
Light of the Sun: Now Knowledge is given to show men the Strait Way to Life
Eternal, and to prevent Transgression. Wherefore it is not Good that the Soul
be without Knowledge. The most Gracious GOD may say now to Sinners, 'I put the
Bright and Flaming Sword into the Hands of your Consciences to keep you from
the Broad Way of Iniquity, that leads to Destruction, and I gave you the Pillar
of Fire, the Manifestations of My Glories, to guide you into the Strait Path
that leads to Eternal Life; and yet you do wickedly Transgress; why will you
thus Abuse my Kindness? Your Iniquity is Heinous. You cannot say, that you had
no Means afforded you to Prevent and Reclaim you from sin; You have no such
Plea for your EXCUSE.

IV. THOSE Sins that make a wider separation from GOD than other sins do, and
that Provoke Fiercer Wrath than other sins and give more terrible Stabs to men's
Consciences than other sins do, and make men more Obdurate, and harder to be
wrought upon by the Means of Grace than other sins do, and make men's Cases more
Desperate, and Irrecoverable than other sins do, and which if followed in men's
Course, do Evidence them to be Christless, and Graceless, more than other sins
do, and which will cost a Bitterer Repentance, if ever men be Recovered and
Saved, than other sins are like to do, are doubtless more Heinous than other
sins; But sins against Light and Knowledge are those Sins that will so do.
Therefore they are more Heinous. Sins of Ignorance have less of Malignity, and
therefore don't Divide men's Souls so much and so far from GOD, as sins of
Knowledge. To sin without Knowledge, unwittingly, does expose and lay open
Sinners to far less Wrath and Punishment, than to sin with Knowledge, and to
sin against Knowledge; Less is Deserved, and less is Threatened, even fewer
Stripes, Luke 12.48. GOD has much more to say against men and to Charge men
with (and so have their own Consciences also) when their Vice and Lust are too
hard for their Light, and when with open Eyes and open Violence they in an
hostile manner, do break in upon His Declarative Glory, than when involuntarily
they happen to interfere and justle with it in the Dark, Jer. 5.5.6, 7, 23.
Verily he that is Born of GOD, that is, a New Creature sins not, so as to
hold a Course of Known Sins, without Repentance. But has in him a Powerful
Principle that holds a Course of Watchfulness and Warfare against all Known
sins, 1 Job. 5.4, 18. Romans 8.13. No man that has the SPIRIT of CHRIST can make
a Trade of Known Sins. In this Regard, Known sins are more Heinous and Deadly
than sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, The Latter not being so Exclusive of a
state of Grace and Salvation as the Former are, if made a Practice. Moreover,
By a Course of Sinning against their Knowledge and Consciences, men harden
their Hearts exceedingly and are not easily to be Recovered. If their Knowledge
and Light have not had Power sufficient to prevent and withold them from their
Iniquities, How can we imagine that it should have Ability to Recover 'em to
Repentance! If the more Ignorant Sinners might have such Light, There were
greater hopes of their Recovery by it, than of such as have forcibly broke
through the opposing Dictates of their Enlightened Consciences, Having Armed and
Strengthened themselves against them, with great Resolution and Panoply of
Sophisms, wherewith they suppress their Light and keep it under, lest it should
powerfully affect 'em with its Influences. Mat. 11.21. So there was more Hope
that the Light of the Day of Christ should Recover the Dark sinners of Tire and
Sidon, than the sinners of Chorazin and Bethsaida that were wonted to, and
hardened in their Rebellions against the Light. Furthermore, For many sins of
Ignorance. (And of many Evils that men may have done they may be ignorant as
long as they Live; for what man can know and understand his own Errors? Psalm.
19 12) GOD may take up with a General Repentance, of him who believes in CHRIST
JESUS the Redeemer; But a General Repentance will not suffice for sins against
Knowledge, Lev. 5.5. So that sinners against light and knowledge make sad work
for a bitter and very Particular and Manifold Repentance. It Is handed down to us
from the Ancients, that after Peter had Denied his LORD against his Light, he
could never Hear the Cock-crowing, without Penitent Reflections, as long as he
Lived. Mr. Perkins says, "The Greater simple Ignorance is, the Lesser is the
Sin; For GOD requires a Particular Repentance for Known sins, but accepts a
General Repentance for Unknown. And Mr. Cholmly says, "Renouncing of Evil is
Virtual and Actual: Virtual Renouncing of Evil is when in a Preparedness of
Mind, a man is Ready to Renounce it, so soon as it shall appear to him to be
Sinful and Damnable; Actual Renunciation of Evil is when a man does both in
Word and Practice separate himself: This Actual Renouncing of it Necessary to
Salvation as soon as a man shall Know and be Convinced of the Evil; But the
Virtual is Sufficient in Case of Non-conviction of the Evil, and Error; and is
Included in General Repentance. But to Close this Fourth Argument, It may be
sufficient to Infer and Aver that men now cannot Plead in EXCUSE for their
Committing of Iniquities against their Light and Knowledge, that those
Iniquities do not strike 'em off from God in a dreadful manner, or that they do
not Provoke His Fiercer Wrath; or that they do not deeply stab there own
Consciences; or that they do not woefully Harden them; or that they do not
mightily Obstruct, Prevent and Praeclude the Efficacy of the Light and Means of
Grace for their Recovery; or that it is possible that men should be in a state of
Salvation, Living in an Allowed Course of 'em; or that it will not Cost men a
very particular pungent and soaking Repentance, if ever they be Saved from
them. So that sins against Knowledge are the more Heinous, Vile, and
Inexcusable sort of Iniquities.

BUT we proceed to the USES.

And,

I. WE hence INFER that KNOWLEDGE, (especially) of GOD, of His Alsufficiency
and Glories, of our Way to Him by CHRIST JESUS, and of our Duty before Him is
an Excellent Thing, a Rich Talent, a Worthy Divine Gift; Else it were not so
Heinous and Criminal to Sin against it. It Is to be Chosen above Gold; Prove 8 10
One of its Excellencies is that (if well improved) it Gives Life to him that
has it Eccl. 7.12. Paul counted all to be Loss, in comparison of the Gainful
Knowledge of CHRIST, Phil. 3.8. GOD gives us All things, through the Knowledge
of CHRIST, 2 Pet. 1.3* It is not Good that the Soul be without Knowledge, Prove.
19.2. None but Fools hate it, Prove. 1.22. Wise men lay it up, as a Choice
Treasure, Prove. 10.14. It Is the great Duty of Christians to grow it Grace and
Knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.18. Woe to them that Die without Knowledge; Job 36.12.
'Twill be an happy time, when the Whole Earth shall be full of the Saving
Knowledge of the LORD, as the Sea with Waters, Isa. 11.9. They that know the
Lords Name duly, will put their Trust in Him, Psalm 9.10. Those that Know not
the LORD will not Obey the LORD, nor let their Lusts go, Exodus 5.2. Knowledge
is a Distinguishing Mercy, it is not vouchsafed to all Nations alike, Psalm.
147.20. Those that have more knowledge than others, are more beholden to GOD;
they have also the more to Answer for; where more is given, GOD will require
the more, Luke 12.48. Oh! How greatly should we Bless GOD for the Holy
Scriptures, that are Profitable for Instruction, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. And, Oh! how
kindly are They to be treated, and spoken Comfortably unto who Teach the Good
Knowledge of the LORD, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. And, Oh! how carefully should this
Precious Talent of Knowledge be Improved by us?

II. We HENCE further Infer, that 'twould be a very foolish and wicked thing to
cast off Knowledge, on account of its being an occasional Aggravation of men's
Sins. Is our Vice and Lust too hard for our Light and Knowledge, it is a sign
that our Knowledge is too Small, and Feeble, and Unsanctified; and it does
admonish us to Labor and Pray for more, and stronger, and better Knowledge,
that may be able to overpower our Corruptions and Lusts: And if any man lack
Wisdom, or Sanctified Knowledge, (and greater Degrees of it,) let him Ask it of
GOD, who gives Liberally, and Upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. If ever we overcome
Sin, and escape the Pollutions of the World, it must be by and through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 19.20 All Treasures of
Wisdom are stored up in CHRIST, Col. 2.3. And exhibited in the Holy Scripture,
and dispensed by the HOLY SPIRIT, Job. 16.14, 15. If we Perish for want of 'em,
it is our own fault. Surely our Necessity should put us upon Diligence and
Importunity.

'Twere an horrible Abuse of the Doctrine to say, If Knowing Sinners be the
most Guilty, then let us know less, that we may be less Guilty. Verily, When
Light may be had, it is an heinous Iniquity to go without it, and it aggravates a
man's other Transgressions, which he commits for want of Knowledge, that he was
willingly and wilfully Ignorant. Who so palpably culpably Blind as he that will
not see? -- Its an Evidence that men do superlatively love their sins, when
they Refuse, Reject, and shut their Eyes hard against the Light, that might
hinder them from committing 'em. This is THE CONDEMNATION that Light is come
and men reject it, and love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are
Evil, Joh. 3.19 Though simple unavoidable Ignorance Diminishes Guilt, yet
willing, wilful, affected and obstinate Ignorance does greatly aggravate and
increase it, and render men's sins most Inexcusable, 2 Pet. 3.5. Prove. 15.32.
Hos. 4.6 So that if men cast off Knowledge on pretense of its Aggravating of
Sin, They will save nothing by it; But if they shall get greater Degrees and
Strength of Sanctified Knowledge, twill prevent the Danger of their turning
their knowledge unto the increase of their Guilt and Condemnation. Lament we
then over Erroneous Persons, and other Transgressors in this Land of Light;
whom it will nothing avail in the Day of Judgment to pretend that they went
according to their Light and to their Consciences, and that they did not know
that such Opinions were Errors, and that such Actions were Irregular and
Naught; since they might and ought to have known the same, but they had no mind
to it, and 'twas against their wills; They were Resolved in their notions and
ways; and could not bear to think of admitting any Light, or Convictions, that
might Alter them. Most Dreadful is their Danger: The Good LORD Deliver them.

III. Hence we Infer, that the Condition of Unwilling Ignorance in humble and
teachable Souls is not so dreadful as that of Knowing Presumption is, since
their simple Ignorance does greatly Extenuate their Transgressions, which they
would never have Committed and Continued had they had Knowledge. Their sins are
Sins, and Expose them to be beaten with Stripes; Luke 12.48. And need the Blood
of the Great Sacrifice to Expiate them; Numb. 15.27, 28 But they are not such
great Sins, In Them, being Committed Ignorantly, as they would be in Others
that had More Knowledge. Such sins of Unavoidable Ignorance may be found in
Gracious and Godly Persons, who allow themselves in no known Sins, and would
not allow themselves in these if they knew 'em. Does the Divine Charity allow
them to Escape with a general Repentance, why should Ours Exclude them from our
Pity and Prayers and Friendship and Fellowship, as if they were to be Excluded
from Heaven? Surely we ought to have Charity for the Saints of old, that lived
in sinful Polygamy, not knowing it to be Sinful; as Christ had for those who
followed Him not, yet were not without some true sparks of Faith and Godliness
in their Souls, Mark 9.38. Luke 9 49.

The Merciful GOD, may take men to Heaven at last; although to Chastize them for
keeping Company with the Erroneous, and for Reading their Books, and
Frequenting their Assemblies, or for other Faults, and to afflict and punish
the Church by them, He may Refuse to Deliver them from some of their Darkness
and Ignorance and Errors so long as they Live. The Sophistry of some Books may
so Cloud the Truth, and inchant the Unwary and Unskilful Reader, though a Pious
Person, as that notwithstanding all the Light of the Holy Scriptures, he may be
in a Doubting Condition, in some lesser Points, all his days. But it must be
thankfully acknowledged as a Choice undeserved Favor of Heaven, when by the
SPIRIT of GOD we are not only Savingly Illuminated in the Fundamental Truths
and Ways of GOD and of CHRIST, But also have Eyes to discern and behold the
Other Verities; since else though we may have Sound Vitals; Yet we may have
Feeble Feet, Weak Hands, and Faltering Tongue, little to our own benefit or the
Comfort of others. Well, The Doctrinal Inference bespeaks our Charity to Erring
Saints in the Cases wherein they are Unwillingly Ignorant, and commit Faults
through mere Ignorance; Both does not Encourage us to follow the Example of
their Error. To Swear by the Life of Pharaoh was a sin of Infirmity and
Ignorance perhaps in Joseph; but to Swear by the Life of our Sovereign would be
a sin of Iniquity in us, for we have More and Greater Light than Joseph then
had. Some men follow the Erring Examples of the Saints, hoping to 'scape as
easily and well as they did, and suppose themselves to have as little Guilt
upon them as They had: But little do they Consider that an Evil Act, may be
Infirmity in One Man, and Iniquity in Another Man: The one sinning therein,
Ignorantly, and the other, sinning Knowingly and Presumptously; The one, not at
all Violating his ConConscience in the Doing of it; and the other Person
horribly sinning against his Conscience.

IV. We hence Infer that the Glorious Judge of all the Earth is to be Justified
in all His Judgments upon New England. Our sins are of a scarlet Die and
intolerable Heinousness. New England Sinners have known the Way of the Lord,
and the Judgments of their GOD; but they have Revolting, Rebellious Hearts;
their Transgressions are Many, and their Backslidings Strong; Many of 'em have
altogether Broken the Yoke that GOD has put upon 'em, and Burst the
Covenant-Bonds; God's and Theirs; How shall the LORD Pardon them? Jer. 5 5, 6,
7, 23. They have Known GOD's Works, and His Alsufficiency, and have Sung His
Praises, as Israel by the Red Sea, yet will not Believe Him, nor Believe in
Him, nor Venture on His Promises; but run to Broken Reeds, and Empty Cisterns;
Their Hearts are not Right with Him, nor Steadfast in His Covenant; Psalm. 106
12, 14 They have Sinned Knowingly. GOD's Judgments have been among them in the
Land, and they have Known His Terrors, as King Belshazzer knew what judgment
had been inflicted on Nebuchadnezzar, Dan 5.21, 22. Yet they Fear not His
Wrath, but are Bold to sin against Him, and to Run violently on the terrible
Point of His Brandished Sword.

Their Sins, and ways of sinning have been set in Order before their Eyes, and
Particularly Testified against by the Prophets of the Lord, and by a Synod; and
as for their Iniquities they Know them, Isa 59.12. Yet although They Know These
Evils in themselves and one another, -- (as Eli in his Sons) They Reform them
not. 1 Samuel 2.13 Their Sins are therefore of a Deep and Dangerous Guilt.

Had men a right sense of the weight of the Guilt and Heinousness of their sins
against Gospel Light, (for they weigh very Heavy in the Balances of the
Sanctuary) they would Cry out of the same as most Intolerable; as a Burden too
heavy for 'em to Bear* and Ponderous enough to sink 'em into the Lowest Depths
of Hell They could not be so merry and jolly as they are; nor so active and
diligent to lay on more weight.

But Dreadful Plagues are upon there Hearts, and they are long kept under
Judgment, and in Extremest Danger of Eternal Destruction; Some Hundreds (or
may I say, Thousands?) have spent the Flower of their Age in sinning against
Knowledge and Conscience; they have followed after Vanity, regardless of inward
Religion and of the Fear of the Lord; Many sweet Influences and Motions of the
Blessed and Eternal SPIRIT they have put by, and neglected, and Disobeyed: And
now the Preaching of the Word from Year to Year operates nothing to their
Conversion, Prosperity, Adversity Operate nothing; Many Years roll over their
Heads, yet they remain as much Unconverted as ever, and Unreformed as ever
There Is the Judicial Hand of GOD upon 'em. And the LORD is most Righteous, though
this began Early* and continued Long; for, while Children in Age they grew
strong Men in Sin, and stout Opposers of Light and Conscience, and most heinous
Provokers of the Lord. Hard and Drossy Metal! The Founder melts 'em in vain;
They are in a most Dangerous Condition. Jer. 6.29 Adore we the holy Justice and
Jealousy of GOD, and the LORD JESUS on many such sinners; who have been made
the Monuments of His Wrath, and not suffered to Live out half their Days.

V. We hence Infer that we have no Reason to be Puffed up with Pride because of
our Light; But great Cause to be Humbled, because of our Guilt. We are a very
Knowing People, and very Knowing Sinners. Have we sinned against our Knowledge,
with Peter; Let us go with Peter, and Weep Bitterly. Slight Apprehensions of
the Known sins, that we have Lived in, and a slight Humiliation for 'em, will
not serve the Turn. How can we prove the sincerity of our Repentance, if we do
not Loathe them as heartily, as we have Loved 'em heinously? And if we don't
walk as humbly with our GOD, as we have walked haughtily and presumptuously in
our Known sins? Let us most humbly Dread and Deprecate and Watch against the
Commission of Known sins, which are of an Unknown Heinousness Known sins lived
in, make Bleeding and Roaring Consciences in the End. If we be not deeply
humbled for 'em, we shall be dreadfully Ruined by 'em. If we don't cast them
out, GOD will cast us off, and that for ever.

VI. We hence Infer, that its the Great Interest of Men to Abandon and Abstain
from all Known Sins, and to Forbear doing any thing that they know to be Evil
and Provoking to GOD, for otherwise men will heap up Guilt, and treasure up
Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment
of GOD.

Men know it is a sin to set their Affections inordinately on Things Below;
Riches, Honor, Power, Friends, Pleasures, Col. 3.1, 2. Men know their Vanity,
Emptiness, Insufficiency, Unsatisfactoriness to their Souls, ( Eccl. 5.10.)
their fluctuating Inconstancy and miserable Uncertainty, (1 Timothy 6.17.) How
prejudicial they have been to them that have had the most of 'em; How
Insnaring; how Defiling, like Pitch; How full of Stings; it is their Wisdom then
to remove their Hearts from them.

Men Know that Coldness, Laziness, Neglects and Delays in matters of Religion
are Sinful and Provoking; surely to Add a Knowing Presumption by Continuing in
such Iniquity will be against their Interest; and then it is their Wisdom to
forbear it.

Men Know that to lie in an Unconverted, Carnal, Prayerless, Unbelieving,
Christless, Impenitent State is a Wicked and Damnable thing: It Is their interest
now to See and Know these and as other Sins, as Sea-Marks, so as to avoid them
and turn from 'em, that they may Escape Destruction. It Is wicked and wilful
Self-Murder and Soul-Murder knowingly to rush into those Evils and to persevere
is them, that a man is assured will bring Damnation. Oh! that men would See and
Ponder their own Interest!

VII. And Lastly; From the Prodigious Heinousness of Sinning, against Light and
Knowledge, We Infer the Transcendency, Alsufficiency, Infiniteness of the MERCY
of GOD, which by the Precious Blood of CHRIST has Quenched and by a Plenary
Pardon has quite Extinguished, in Many, (and can Quench and Extinguish in
Others also) the Flaming Guilt of Sins committed Knowingly and Presumptuously,
though most Heinous; having first Powerfully Conferred the Gifts and Graces of
Faith and Repentance. Even a most Wicked Manasseh was Pardoned and Recovered. 2 Chronicles. 33.2, -- 12, 13. The Blood of CHRIST Cleanses from all Sin. 1 John ^.7.

Are you thoroughly Convinced of the greatness of your Guilt and Desperateness
of your Case, then flee to CHRIST, and to the Throne of Mercy, and be most
humble and importunate; Peradventure the LORD may Give you Repentance and
Forgiveness: For with GOD all things are Possible, Mat. 19.26.

Now the Divine Grace and Blessing of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and of God the
FATHER, and of God the HOLY SPIRIT, be with you all. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

