A DISCOURSE Concerning the DEATH of the Righteous.

Occasioned by the DEATH of the Honorable, John Foster Esqr. Who dyed at
Boston in New England Feb. 9 th. 1710, 11. And of his Pious Consort, Mrs.
Abigail Foster.

Who departed soon after him, viz. on the 5 th. of March.

By I. Mather, D. D.

Rev. XIV.13 Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea
says the Spirit that they may rest from their Labors, and their works do
follow them.

Boston: Printed by B. Green. 1711.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the DEATH of the Righteous.
ISAIAH. LVII.1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart: and
Merciful men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away
from the Evil to come.


IN the two first Verses of this Chapter the Prophet Comforts good Men against
the fear of Death: In this verse by showing what they are taken from; It is
from Evil. In the next verse by declaring what they are taken unto. They are no
sooner gone out of this World, but they Enter into Peace; so they do as to
their Souls. The Hebrews under the Name of Peace, intend all manner of
happiness. Their bodies sleep in the Grave: There they Rest as in a Bed until
the Resurrection of the Just: but before ever their bodies are laid in the
Grave, their Immortal Spirits are received into Peace and perfect blessedness.

In the preceding Chapter there is a Prediction of Evil to come. That
Prediction is confirmed in this Verse, by mentioning that which is often a Sign
and Prognostic of Evil to come, viz. The Death of Righteous and Merciful Men,
and this was attended with a very unhappy Ominous circumstance, it was not
considered and laid to heart as it should have been. What that Evil to come,
was, is not expressed. A formidable Enemy was to come with a Mighty Army to
make great devastations throughout the Land, this was an Evil to come indeed.
Their insensibility of the hand of God in removing his Faithful Servants from
them was an uncomfortable sign of it. I shall only speak a few words briefly to
this Doctrine.

DOCT. That when Righteous and Merciful Men are taken away by Death, in case it
is not duly Considered and Laid to heart, it is a sad sign of great Evil to
come.

The Doctrine may be opened in several Propositions.

PROP. I. Righteous Men are Merciful Men.
These are here used as Synonomous terms, words importing the same Persons.
Righteousness makes men to resemble the blessed God, who is the Righteous Lord;
the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness. So does Mercifulness make men resemble
him: Luke 6.36. Be ye Merciful as your Father is Merciful. The Scripture makes
the same Promises unto, and pronounces the same blessings upon the Merciful
man that it does on the Righteous. Mercifulness discovers it self in two things
especially.

1. In a readiness to forgive injuries and offenses. The Divine Mercy is seen
in that He is a Sin-pardoning God. He is the Lord Merciful and Gracious,
abundant in Goodness, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. That Is His
Name, that is His Nature, Exodus 34.6, 7. There is in Righteous Men the like
disposition which discovers them to be the Children of God. The Scripture says,
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
Children, Ephesians. 5.1. Nor is there any one thing that makes a clearer and greater
discovery of a Man's Spiritual State, whether he is in a justified or an
unjustifyed Estate, than this which I am now speaking of. An implacable
revengful Spirit is an infallible Character of an Unrighteous man. But when a
Christian considers with himself, God has forgiven me all the wrongs that I
have done to Him, therefore will I forgive those who have been most injurious
to me, this argues a Justified, a Righteous Man. Wherefore Christ has said, If
you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you,
but if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
(...). Math 6. 14, 15.

2. Mercifulness discovers it self in Bounty and Charity toward them that need
relief. The Hebrew words for Merciful men, are, Anshe Chesed, The Men of
Goodness, or kindness. Bountifulness is called Goodness. The Apostle speaking
of the fruits of the Spirit mentions Gentleness and Goodness, Gal. 5.22.
Gentleness notes a readiness to forgive; Goodness, a willingness to communicate
good things to them that are in want. The special object of Mercy is such as
are in Misery, and in that respect need relief, as it is with those who are
oppressed with Poverty. 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this worlds goods and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells
the love of God in him? A brother that is in want is an object of bowels of
Compassion. Charity toward the poor and needy is Mercifulness. The Greeks (as
some of you know) call Alms deeds, Eleemosunas from Eleos which signifies
Mercy. And these also are called Righteousness. Psalm. 112.9. He has dispersed,
he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever. A Covetous Miser
is apt to think, that that part of his Estate which is given to the Poor is
lost, whenas the truth is, that that is the only part of his Estate which will
abide with him to Eternity. That Righteousness in respect of the fruits and
blessed reward of it Endures for ever. The Apostle prays for the Corinthians
that the Lord would increase the fruits of their Righteousness, 2 Cor. 9.10.
They had been charitable and bountiful to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, this he
calls their Righteousness, and prays that as a little Seed produces a great
deal of fruit, so that their Charity might have an abundant recompense. We see
then that Righteous Men and Merciful Men are the same. But then we must
remember that there is a Natural and a Spiritual Mercifulness.

(1.) A Natural Mercifulness. This some Moral men though Strangers unto true
Saving Grace have excelled in. Some Natural men have a Nobleness of temper and
disposition. They hate such cruelty as men of base and ignoble tempers have
delighted in. The Servants of Benhadad said, We have heard that the Kings of
Israel are Merciful Kings, 1 King. 20 31. Yet not one of those Kings ( viz. of
the ten Tribes) was a Godly man: but such cruelty and barbarity as the Heathen
Princes used to Exercise toward those that fell into their hands, the Kings of
Israel did not practice. And yet there have been some Heathen of Heroic and
Generous tempers. It is reported concerning the Emperor Vespasian, that he was
never known to rejoice at the calamity of his Enemies, and that when he was
necessitated to sign a Warrant for the Execution of a Malefactor, he would sigh
and sometimes shed tears for it. Such was the tenterness of his Natural
disposition. Alexander the great would be liberal and bountiful to an excess,
and when his Enemies fell into his hands, he would treat them with great
Civility and Kindness.

But therefore,

(2.) There is a Spiritual Mercifulness which is peculiar to those that belong
to God, having his Image and received of his Spirit. Col. 3.12. Put on as the
Elect of God, holy and beloved bowels of Mercies, kindness, etc. There is a
Mercifulness which is a Supernatural work of the Spirit of God, which some who
are naturally of very bad tempers have had their hearts so changed as to excel
in it. A Mercifulness which argues an Heaven-born Soul. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom
which is from above is full of Mercy, --. This differs from that which is only
Natural in that it has respect to the Will and Glory of God. It will cause a
Man to show Mercy without any sinister respect of gaining ought to himself. It
proceeds from Spiritual Principles, from Faith in Christ and Love to God. It is
Exercised chiefly about Spiritual objects. It appears in Compassion to the
Souls of men. Our Savior Christ was moved with compassion when he saw a
Multitude of men as Sheep without a Shepherd. He pitied their perishing Souls.
The Spiritually Merciful man, such as belong to God are the chief object of his
charity. Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity let us do good to all men,
especially to them who are of the household of Faith.

PROP. II. Righteous and good Men are Subject unto Death as well as others.
What man is he that lives and shall not see Death! Shall he deliver his Soul
from the hand of the Grave? All mankind is involved in the guilt of Adams sin,
and therefore they must all die. 1 Cor. 15.22. In Adam all die. His sin has
killed them all: His eating the forbidden fruit has proved a Mortal poison to
all his Children. That sin of his is by a righteous Imputation the sin of every
man in the world. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for all have sinned. It is appointed for
men once to die, Heb. 9.27. Statutum est: There is a Statute law for it. We may
see the Original Statute, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely dye: and in chap. 3.19. To dust thou shall return. Faith in Christ will
Save from the Second death, but not from the first death, i. e. as to the being
of it, though from the Curse of it the Believer is Saved, the day of his Death
will be better to him than the day of his birth. It is said of the holy
Patriarcks, all these dyed in the Faith, Heb. 11.13. Notwithstanding they had
Faith, they all dyed. It is said in the Text before us, Merciful men are taken
away. The Original word is Neesaphim, i. e. they are gathered. The word is a
Metaphor taken from Husbandmen who when they see a Storm a coming, they take
away their Corn out of the field and gather it into the barn. So does the Lord
sometimes take his Wheat out of the World, and gather it into his heavenly
barn, to Save it out of a Storm. When their bodies are lodged in the Grave, and
their Souls are in Heaven no Storm in the World can hurt them. It is here also
said, That the Righteous perish. There is a Perishing of the Soul in respect of
Eternal death. So no righteous Person shall ever perish. Whosoever believes on
the Son of God shall not perish. Christ has said concerning his Sheep, I give
unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish. But then there is a
Perishing of the Body in respect of a Temporal death. That consumes in the
rotting Grave. The Earth is the common Mother of all men, out of whose Womb
they came, and to whose belly they must return, as Job speaks; the dust shall
return to the Earth as it was, so does it Perish. They that are dead are in the
Eye of the World perished. They are as if they were not. They go hence and be
no more. Rachel wept for her dead Children because they were not. Thus
righteous men as well as others perish. No Eminency of Place can prevent the
Stroke of death. The greatest Kings are Mortal as well as the meanest of their
Subjects, and some of them have commanded their Servants to put them in Mind of
it. There is a King whose blaspheming flatterers call him, The Immortal Man,
but it was said to the Prince of Tyrus, Will thou yet say before him that
slays thee, I am God! but thou shall be a Man, and no God in the hand of him
that slays thee. No Eminency of Wisdom can Save from death. David who was
wise as an Angel of God: Solomon who was wiser than all men, is dead. No
Eminency of Grace can Save from death. The Holiest men that ever lived on the
Earth in all former Generations, are dead. No Eminency in respect of
Serviceableness can Save from death. Was there ever a Man in the World more
Serviceable to God and to his People than Moses? Nevertheless, the Lord said of
him, Moses my Servant is dead, Josh. 1.2. The holy Prophets were very
Serviceable and useful Men in their Generation. But did your Fathers live for
ever, and the Prophets where are they! Zech. 1.5. It is well for good men that
they may die, and that they must die, that so they may be happy. For blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord. It is a great Mercy not to be kept over long in
this present Evil World. It is true, that long Life is a very great blessing: A
good Old Age is a singular favor of God. Nevertheless, for a Man to live long
an Unserviceable Life and to be only a burden to himself and others is a
Judgment. The good Lord (if it be his Will) in Mercy grant that that may never
be my Portion; I had much rather die this very day. It is related concerning Mr.
Bolton, that when he was sick of the Sickness whereof he dyed, one asking
whether he was not willing to live longer, he replied, I acknowledge that Long
Life is a great Mercy, and I will use means for the Preservation of my Life and
Health, and I submit to the will of God, as to the continuance of my Life:
Nevertheless, if I might have my choice, I had infinitely rather die now, than
continue longer in this sinful World: God has filled my Soul with Christ, and I
long to be with Him.

PROP. III. The Death of Righteous Men may be so circumstanced as to be a Sign
of Evil to come.
When Parents put their Children to bed, it is because a dark Night is at hand.
When God puts his Children to bed in the Grave, it is many Times Protentous of
a dark and dismal Night approaching. There are two Reasons why the Lord takes
away his faithful and dear Servants.

1. He does it in Mercy to themselves. He that has determined in Heaven that
Evil shall come, has also determined that his Servants whose Death is precious
in his sight, shall be taken out of the way before that Evil comes. So it is
sometimes as to particular Families. If some Tragical thing is to befall the
Children, their good Father must be taken away first. As for the man that is
dead and gone to another World, his Sons are brought low and he perceives it
not of them, Job 14.21. Ecclesiastes says, that the Dead know not any thing.
They know not any thing of our particular Affairs in this World, and therefore
if Affliction befalls us they are not grieved or at all concerned for it. Thus
also, when there are Public Calamities hastening on the World, God takes away
his Servants before those Evils come. We have an instance for this in Josiah:
The Lord said to him, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be
gathered to thy Grave in Peace, neither shall thy Eyes see all the Evil that I
will bring on this Place, and upon the Inhabitants of the same, 2 Chronicles. 34.28.
Notwithstanding Josiah dyed in War, yet was he gathered to his Grave in Peace,
for not only did he die in Peace with God, and his Soul entered into Everlasting
Peace, but there was Public Peace and Tranquillity in the Kingdom until his
death. But had Josiah lived so long as according to the ordinary course of
Nature he might have done, had he lived to have been but a little above
Threescore years, what doleful things must his Eyes have seen? He must have
seen Jerusalem destroyed, the Temple burnt, his Kingdom ruined, one of his Sons
brought to an Ignominious death, who notwithstanding he was a King, and a Kings
Son had the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem; he must have seen another of his Sons fallen into the hands of a
barbarous Enemy, who caused his Eyes to be put out, and bound him in chains,
and carried him into Captivity, and kept him in Prison to the day of his death:
He must have seen his Grandchildren slain in the presence of their Father,
before his Eyes were put out. All these Evils came in little more than Twenty
years after Iosiah's death: Therefore he must be taken away that so he might
not behold them, nor any of them.

2. The Lord takes away the Righteous in Judgment to the World, as well as in
Mercy to themselves. That so way may be made for Evil to come on the Place and
People among whom they once lived. They are sometimes very instrumental in
preventing the Evil, that it should not come in their days. Hence are they said
to Stand in the Gap. A few courageous Gapmen, nay, it may be One may Save a
whole Town from destruction. Wherefore the Lord said, I sought for a Man among
them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me, for the
Land that I should not destroy it, Ezekiel. 22.30. One Moses did so, and Saved a
whole Nation by it. Psalm. 106.23. He said he would destroy them had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them. When there is a breach made in the Wall of a City,
courageous men will venture to stand in the Gap, and so keep out the Enemy.
Thus do the Righteous keep off and turn back impending Judgments: Wherefore
when there is an holy determination that Evil shall break in, the Lord removes
those out of the way that would hinder. It Is said in Psalm. 78.50. He made a way
to his Anger. This the Lord often does by taking away the Righteous, then the
current of Judgment will run smoothly, there will be nothing to obstruct. Sodom
could not be destroyed before righteous Lot was taken out of it, and got safe
to Zoar. The Angel said, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing until thou
be come thither, Genesis 19.22.

It may be Enquired, But what Righteous are they whose Death is a sign of Evil
to come? And when is it so?

Quest. 1. What Righteous Men are they whose death is a sign of Evil to come?

Answ. This is especially true of such Righteous Men as are Eminent Ones. The
Hebrew word here used is Hatzaddik, noting such as are Emphatically, The
Righteous. We cannot say, that the Death of every Righteous man is Ominous, but
of Some it is. Judicious Interpreters conceive, that the Prophet Isaiah
Preached the Sermon wherein my Text is, presently on the death of Hezekiah. He
was an Eminently righteous man, So that after him was none like unto him among
all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him. And his death made way
for a Miserable change in the Nation. Prodigious Apostasy and Prodigious
Calamity quickly followed. In the days of his Successor a formidable Army of
Assyrians came and made dreadful havoc in the Land. The King endeavored to
hide himself in thickets, but the Assyrians took him there, put him into
Fetters and carried him into Babylon, and what distress was the whole Kingdom
in then? 2 Chronicles 33 11. Hezekiah's death made way for all that evil. There are
some Righteous men who are Eminent in respect of the Station which God has set
them in. They are in a Public Capacity and Eminently qualified with Gifts and
Grace for the discharge of the duty incumbent on them. The death of such
Righteous Ones is oftimes Portentous of Evil to come. It is mentioned as such
in the third Chapter of Isaiah, when the Lord threatens that He would take
away the Judge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, and the
Honorable Man, and the Counselor. The Righteous Man whom the Lord has lately
taken away from us, was an Honorable Man, and a Counselor, a Judge and a
Prudent One, as we all know. Such Men are Pillars, and therefore the removal of
them is many times Ominous to the building, lest that should be weakened and
fall. Psalm. 75.3. The Earth and all the Inhabitants of it are dissolved, I bear
up the Pillars of it. By the Male Administration of Saul and his Counselors,
the Nation was brought into an ill Condition. Saul would grant Commissions to
Ungodly men like himself, and make them to be Magistrates: but David took care
to have good sound Pillars, that is Pious and Faithful Magistrates to be in
Place; These were Pillars, they had their Commission from David. So did he bear
up the Pillars of the Earth, and Save all from ruin. A few Righteous Men in a
Public Capacity may prevent much Evil: they may avert impending Judgment. Jer.
5.1. Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, see if you can find a
Man, that does execute Judgment, and I will pardon it. When Righteous Rulers
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, if they are Men that have a great swaying
Interest and Influence are removed, it many times makes way for great and swift
Apostasy, and consequently for sore Judgments to follow. Sometimes the
occasional removal of such Righteous ones, though but for a few Weeks has been
attended with a great defection among their People. When Moses was gone from
the Children of Israel but Forty days, how suddenly did they corrupt
themselves? The Lord said to Moses in the Mount, They have turned aside quickly
out of the way which I commanded them, Exodus 32.7, 8. When Nehemiah (a Public
Spirited and self denying Governor) was but for a while absent from Jerusalem,
Sabbath-breaking, and other Corruptions broke forth among them: He said, but in
all this Time was not I at Jerusalem, Neh. 13.6. intimating that if he had been
there, his presence would have prevented those Evils. Much more are People in
danger of Apostasy when the Lords Eminent Servants are taken away from them by
death. It is noted concerning the Children of Israel, that when the Judge was
dead they corrupted themselves, Judge. 2.19. As long as that Eminent Minister of
God, who had done good in Israel, viz. good old Iohojada was living, both Ioash
and the People did that which was right, but after the death of Iehojada, they
left the house of God, and Served Groves and Idols, and wrath came upon Judah
and Jerusalem for this their Trespass, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18. Again, there are
Some Righteous Men who are Eminent for their great Piety, who it may be are
not, nor will the iniquity of the Times suffer them to be in any Public
Station* Men who live much in Heaven, and are admitted to a great intimacy and
familiarity with the blessed God. There was a Man in Scotland whose Name was
Hugh Kennedy, who made no great Figure in the World, this Man when dying could
say, If the Walls of this house could speak, they would tell how many sweet
days I have had in Secret fellowship with God, and how familiar He has been
with my Soul. An Eminent Minister said of him, Happy is that Town, yea Happy is
that Nation which has an Hugh Kennedy in it. There are mean Persons in the Eye
of the World, it may be they go in Leather Clothes, who nevertheless are
common blessings to the World, and keep off destroying Judgments. The World
does not deserve that such men should be in it. Thus does the Scripture speak
of men who have wandered about in sheeps skins and goats skins, of whom the
world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37, 38. Such Men may do much by their Prayers for
the preventing of Evils that otherwise ^ould come. (...). 5.16. The effectual
fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much. Therefore when such are taken
away it is a bad Symptom. It is reported of Ierom, that if he came to this or
that place, and was informed of an Eminent Pious Person lately dead, he would
Weep at the hearing of it, because (he said) it does portend some sad Evil or
other likely to come on that Place.

Quest. 2. But when is the Death of such Righteous Ones a Sign of Evil to come?

Answ. We cannot say that it is always so. But in two cases especially*

1. In case Successors shall not be like their Godly Predecessors. Not
Spirited, not Principled, not Holy, like them. Moses was (as you heard) a most
Eminent Servant of the Lord, and yet no extraordinary Judgment followed upon
his death. Why? There was a Joshua to be his Successor who had much of his
Master Moses Spirit and Grace in him. Notwithstanding David's death, Israel saw
happy days. There was a Solomon to Succeed him; but it was otherwise after
Solomon's death. His Successor Rehoboam was not like his Father, nor his
Grandfather; and in his days there was a Civil War, and a fatal Schism which
was never healed. Hezekiah's Successor was not like him: Nor was Iosiah's, and
their death was Ominous of Evil to come.

2. If the Death of Righteous Men is not laid to heart as it ought to be, it is a
bad Omen. Thus in the Text before us, The Righteous perish and no man lays it
to heart: That truly is a sign that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil
to come. When there is an insensibility under such rebukes of God, when the
anger of the Lord is kindled upon men, but they know it not, it burns them, but
they lay it not to heart* it is to be feared that greater Evils are to come. If
the Lord takes from Children their Parents, but they lay it not to heart, it is
an evil Symptom on such Children. And so it is when Public Parents are taken
away by Death, but their People do not consider it with that sense and
seriousness which would become them. When men in a Public Capacity are taken
away, especially if their Death's are sudden and awfully circumstanced, God
expects that the whole house of Israel should bewail the burning which the Lord
has kindled.

USE.
All that I shall say by way of APPLICATION, is only this Word, Let us lay to
heart the Deaths which have occasioned our being here this day. The Righteous
and the Merciful are lately taken from us. A Merciful Handmaid of the Lord is
removed by Death, unto Peace and Rest with the Lord. One that was Exemplary as
for her Piety toward GOD, so for her Mercy and Charity toward His Poor. Thus
She was both Living and Dying. In her last Will and Testament She has
considered the Poor: As indeed God expects that They who have considerable
Estates (especially if they have no Children) should devote Part of them to His
Poor, and to Promote the Interest of true Religion in the World. Alas! that
there have been some among us, unto whom God gave Riches, but they have not
Willed so much as one Penny to the Poor, or to any Pious use. It would have been
more for their Honor, and for the Honor of Religion, if they had done as this
Handmaid of the Lord has done; and as another among our selves some years ago
did, Major John Richards.
for which his Name deserves to be had in Everlasting Remembrance with us. But
of this Mother in Israel whose Death we Lament, I shall not say more. My work
is not to Praise the Dead, but to Instruct the Living. It Is said, Prove. 12.21.
He that has Mercy on the Poor, happy is he. She had Mercy on the Poor, and now
happy is She.

And a Righteous Man is taken from us: One who was Righteous in his Dealings
and Commerce: And Righteous in his Public Capacity as a Judge. He was a Man
rightly Principled, and faithful to the light of his Conscience. He was true to
the Liberties and Civil Interests of the Country, being an hearty Revolutioner.
And he was a friend to the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Zealous for
that Holy Order of the Gospel which has been Professed and Practiced among
them. The Land in general, and the Churches have a loss by his Death. The
Courts will miss him, considering what his Integrity and his accomplishments
were. Should an Enemy to the Churches, or to the Holy Ways of the Lord which
they have walked in, happen to be his Successor, it would be an unhappy Omen
for New England. We in this Congregation have singular cause to be sensible of
this Stroke upon us, for that it is on some accounts a finishing Stroke.
Eighteen years ago, the Governor of the Province, and Four of the Council were
Members belonging to this Church: Now there is none remaining; They are all
taken away from us.

But the Children of this Family in a most singular manner, have cause to lay
these Deaths to heart: To have a Father and a Mother both taken from you, and
such a Father, and such a Mother, and this so soon (within less than a Month)
after one another, is a Solemn Providence. And do the Children of this bereaved
Family say to me, Do you apprehend that there is any signal Evil to come upon
us because of these Deaths? My Children! I hope there is not: for it is Evident
that you lay to heart what has befallen you: Else why have you desired us who
are here this day, to Lament with you, and Pray with you and for you? One Word
of Counsil I shall leave with you, which if you hearken to it, and Practice
accordingly, (and I am persuaded that you will do so;) then I know that God has
blessings in store for you. The Word which I would leave with you is only this,
Follow the holy Example of your Pious Parents. Walk in the steps of their Faith
and good Works. Imitate their Righteousness, and their Charity: So shall you be
known to be the Children whom the Lord has blessed: The GOD of your Father, and
the GOD of your Mother will be your GOD also. There are three Comfortable
Scriptures which you, My Children, may do well to think on, and let me Exhort
you to be often thinking on them. One is that which was insisted on in the
former part of this day: Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me,
then the Lord will take me up. Parents use to take up their little Children and
set them on their knees, and when they are grieved will wipe away Tears from
their Eyes. So does God (speaking after the manner of men) do by His Children.
It Is said concerning some of Joseph's Great Grandchildren, That they were
brought up upon Joseph's knees. Joseph would take his little Grandchildren and
in his Paternal kindness dandle them on his knees. If the Lord will be your
Father, the loss of no other Father can make you Miserable. If Jesus Christ
will own you as His Children* although your Father and your Mother forsake you,
this is Comfort enough, you have an Everlasting Father who will never leave nor
forsake you. A second Scripture which I recommend to your Meditation, is that
in Genesis 25.11. Where it is said, That after the Death of Abraham, God blessed his
Son Isaac. He was blessed before the Death of his Father, but after that much
more, both with Temporal and Spiritual blessings, which was in part doubtless
the fruit of his good Fathers Prayers whilst living. Who knows but that it may
be so with you? The third Scripture which I leave with you, is Prove. 20.7. The
Just Man walks in his Integrity, his Children are blessed after him. After he
is dead and gone to a better World, God blesses his Children There are
gracious Promises in the Covenant with respect to the Posterity of the
Righteous* The Generation of the Upright shall be blessed.


