NEHEMIAH.

A Brief ESSAY on Divine Consolations, How GREAT they are; AND How GREAT the
Regards to be Paid unto them, WITH AN APPLICATION thereof to Some frequent
CASES; Especially, The Death of RELATIVES.

Offered, at the LECTURE in BOSTON. 30 d. 9. m. 1710.

By COTTON MATHER, D. D.

JOHNSTONI Scoti Paraphr. in Psalm. XCIV. 19. Me mihi restituis, curis cum mill
fatigor,
Et recreas radijs Pectora moesta tuis.
BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND. Printed by Bartholomew Green. 1710.

To the Honorable Judge SEWALL.
THE ESSAY now before you, was made, because you have been Exercised with some
Funerals in your Family; and especially One of a Daughter, falling Suddenly
into the Arms of Death, a few Days after she had comforted you with the Birth
of her Firstborn Infant.

Austin makes it his comfortable Observation, That when Good Men are in
Mourning, or under any Calamity, they have Good Men at hand with Consolations.
Ad sunt Boni Homines, qui flere cum flentibus norunt; and so, Leniuntur Aspera,
relevantur Gravia, et Superantur Adversa. T'wil be a Favor to me, if I may be
found among those Boni Homines, who do the part of your Friends on such
occasions. I shall, if a most hearty Affection to you and yours, and Weeping
with you and them, can declare me so.

It was notably Proposed by Tully to his Atticus; Consolationum multae sunt
viae; sed illa rectissima, Impetret Ratio quod Dies impetratura est. This his
Proposal, That Reason, without an Higher Principle, should Immediately do that
in a way of Consolation, which Length of Time uses to do, with a longer and
more tedious Procedure, is, To wash an Ethiopian. And it is related by Plutarch
accordingly, concerning this Pretender to Reason, That when his Daughter
Tulliola died, Mortem indignissime tulit.

You are furnished with the Higher Principle of RELIGION; and you are
acquainted with the Great Consolations of GOD, which you know how to apply on
the proper occasions. These will do.

As the Chemists tell us, That Nature by Length of Time changes one Metal into
another; but their Skill and Boast is to Accelerate the Endeavors of Nature,
and Hasten at Once the Effect, which else would have been a very long while
producing. Thus, Religion will with much more certainty at Once bring about
that Victory over Sorrow, and fix the Mind in that Golden Temper, which else
would not be so soon accomplished.

For your Assistence in that Work of Christianity, You have called for a Copy
of my Essay; which now wears a Name, that may signify, The Consolations of GOD;
and it was my Duty to let it wait upon you.

I Remember Two Passages in an Epistle Consolatory, of the Great Grotius unto
the Baron Maurier, on the Death of a Relative, which I thought not unworthy to
be Remembered, and now Repeted.

The One is; Confer now with the Dead, and Peruse BOOKS with greater Diligence
than ever. BOOKS will not only give you a Safe Retreat from the Fury of your
Enemy, but will arm you also against the Enemy.

The Other is, I am assured, there can be no better Remedy applied unto Sorrow,
than that which the Great Physician of Souls, among the infinite Treasures of
Saving Wisdom, has brought down from Heaven.

Behold, a Little Book, which presents you with these best of Remedies.

It was the Custom of my Memorable Grandfather COTTON, to Read Something of
his most valuable and venerable CALVIN, in his Evening Studies; for which he
would say, I love to sweeten my Mouth, with a piece of CALVIN, before I go to
Sleep. I know, you love your Incomparable CALVIN, as much as the Papists, and
Pelagians, and High fliers, do Hate him; and you are a Great Reader of him. To
such a Calvinist, it will not be Ungrateful for me, (who am one too) to recite
these two Passages, from a Sermon of his, upon that Paragraph in Job, from
whence the Text of mine is taken.

The first, this. Sedulo notemus, nobis Perplexis et Anxijs nihil Superesse,
quo Tranquillitatem Consequamur, nisi ut Deus nos Pacatos, et Contentos reddat;
quod Beneficium, Pluris facere quam caetera omnia, debemus. Deus Sese modo
ostendat, et statim Turbae omnes discutientur.

The second, this. Hoc autem in Praxi magis quam in verbis consistit; Nam qui
ad Deum confugiunt, norunt quanti sint Consolationes, et quantum ad nos
Pacandos valiant. With this Piece of CALVIN, I take leave; and Subscribe,

SIR, Your Sincere Servant, COTTON MATHER.

NEHEMIAH. OR, THE GREAT Consolations of GOD.
JOB XV. 11. Are the Consolations of GOD, Small with thee?


IT is a Smart Question! And it is a Matter of no Small Sorrow, no Small
Horror, that we generally afford so Great Reason, to be rebuked with such a
Question. The Rebuke may be more justly given to us, than it was to Job, the
Upright and Patient Servant of the Lord. A man enough to have made any Arabia
the Happy, by his Illuminating of it; and yet a Man greatly Misconstrued,
Censured, Reproached. We have the Story of him in a Poem, which had an
Historical Foundation; whether Moses wrote the Poem or no, for the comfort of
his Countrymen, while he was yet among the Midianites, cannot be determined. It
may, that Senault says true, No Book in the World, is nobler in Expressions,
richer in Descriptions, more generous in Conceptions, or more natural in
Comparisons. The Friends of this rare man, too Angry and Froward ones! had been
counselling of him, to Turn from the Impiety and Hypocrisy, whereof they would
needs, upon cause little enough, suspect him to be Guilty. They had been
comforting of him also with Hopes to find Favor with God upon his Turn. He
endeavors his own Vindication from the Suspicion of his Friends: His just
Vindication, does but add unto the Irritation. So it is, when men Resolve, that
nothing shall satisfy them! They misinterpret him, as if he had Rejected the
Encouragements of Returning to GOD, which they had set before him. The
Expostulation on this occasion (made, as Mercer thinks, with State enough!) is
this; Are the Consolations of God Small with thee? The Intention of it, is well
expressed by the Incomparable Calvin; Si quid tale aliquis committerit, merito
haberetur superbus, et Dei Gratiae contemptor non ferendus. In short,
Intolerable the Pride and Ingratitude of doing so. Whatever mistake there might
be in their Application to the censured Servant of God, I will see, that there
shall be no mistake in my Application of the Words, unto the purpose of the
DOCTRINE, which I am going to take into my Hands.

It Is this, Very Great are the Provocations of Men unto GOD, when the
Consolations of GOD are but Small unto them.

If the Consolations of GOD appear Little to us, our Indiscretion is more than
a Little; our Iniquity more than a Little. When the Consolations of GOD are of
Small Account with men, or make Little Impression on them, have Little Efficacy
on them, it is a Sign and a Cause of no Small Evil in them; of more than a Little
Folly and Evil in them.

There are Three Assertions to be advanced and maintained. When we have
Established our Three Assertions, we shall be ready to bring on a very forcible
Expostulation, with some Right words, wherein it will be well, if we don't find
our selves all concerned.

I. There are Consolations of GOD, belonging unto all the People of God;
offered unto all the Children of Men. Comfortable things are to be Enjoyed by
all Good Men; The Enjoyment of those Comfortable Things is tendered unto all
men.

I will presently tell you What these Consolations are. But I cannot well come
to thee until we first of all take Notice Whose they are.

Take Notice then, in the first Place, That all True Consolations are the
Consolations of GOD. We read, 2 Cor. I. 3. He is the God of all Comfort. There
are Comfortable Creatures; Comforts in Creatures: But they are no further so,
than GOD shall please to make them so. All Creatures otherwise at the best, are
but Miserable Comforters. The Great GOD has more Sublime, Celestial, Rapturous
Consolations for us, than any of this World; Consolations of a Finer
Composition, than any this World can afford Matter for. Indeed some
Interpreters as old as the Vulgar Latin, thus carry the Sense of the clause, I
am now Preaching upon; q. d. Is it not an easy thing with God to Comfort thee?
And if we do find any Consolations in any Entertainments, which this World may
afford unto us, they still are Gifts of GOD; the Things which GOD has
graciously given to His Servant! They are Consolations, which GOD has provided;
and they would not have the least Relish of Consolations in them, if GOD should
not enable us to relish them. We read, Job XXXIV. 29. When He gives Quietness,
who then can make Trouble? And when He hides His Face, who then can behold Him?
I will say, If GOD withold Consolations, who is there that can Pretend to
Comfort? Indeed the Best Things in the World, without GOD, are but as Luther
Elegantly called them, Consolatiunculae creaturulae: Very Diminutive
Consolations! Abundance of Duty, will immediately arise unto us from this
Acknowledgment.

Would we be made Partakers of any Consolations? Go to GOD for them. Trust in
GOD for them. Keep in Good Terms with GOD. O all you, who Desire Comfort; Do
not Offend GOD, if you would have Him to Comfort you. All Comfort is lost and
gone and Confiscated, when we ly under the Anger of GOD. Are we made Partakers
of any Consolations? O Comforted Ones; Own them to be the Consolations of GOD.
Give GOD the Glory of them; Glorify GOD, as the Author and Giver of them.

I am now ready to Proceed on my Essay, to declare, What are the Consolations
of GOD?

Inexpressible Consolations! All that we can Express of them, is only in some
General Heads, whereof we have been advised from the Lively Oracles.

First; There are Consolations of GOD, in the PROMISES, which the Covenant of
GOD, has made unto the Godly. The Lord gave that order of old; Comfort ye,
comfort ye my People, says your God; Speak ye comfortably to them! Ah, Lord,
Thou have thy self in thy Word, most graciously, and marvellously done so! The
Covenant of GOD and of Grace, is made up of Consolations. The Words of GOD in
this Covenant, are those whereof we may say, as in Zech. I. 13. They are good
Words, and comfortable Words. It is in the Sacred Scriptures, that we have this
comfortable Covenant; and we are informed, Romans XV. 4. Of, The comfort of the
Scriptures. There are Very Great and Precious Promises in the Word of GOD. The
Fear of GOD gives a Man, a claim to these Promises; Promises both for the Life
that now is, and for the Life that is to come. These Promises are so many
Breasts of Consolation. Can it be any other than a Consolation, to understand,
That we have an Alsufficient CHRIST, for our Healer, and Helper and Refuge?
This Consolation of GOD is given unto them that have the Fear of GOD. We read,
Mal. IV. 2. Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise
with Healing in His Wings. What a Consolation must it be to understand, That
the ANGELS of Heaven, shall always be Watching and Working for our Good? The
Fear of God will Entitle us to this Consolation of GOD. We read; Psalm. XXXIV.
7. The Angel of the Lord Encampeth round about them that fear Him, to deliver
them. Is it not a Consolation, to understand, That we shall want no Good Thing?
They that Fear God have this Consolation of GOD. We read; Psalm. XXXIV. 9, 10. O
Fear the Lord, Ye His Saints, for there is no want to them that fear Him. --
They that Seek the Lord, shall not want any Good Thing. -- But, what shall we
say? The Promises of GOD, are Big with all the Consolations Imaginable; with
Consolations beyond all Imagination. They that are the Heirs of the Promises,
Verily, they are the Heirs of Consolations. Take the Sum of the Consolations;
the Sum of all Consolations; Psalm. LXXXIV. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and a
Shield; the Lord will give Grace and Glory; no Good thing will He withold from
them that walk uprightly. O COVENANT of GOD! What an Inexhaustible Mine of
Consolations art thou!

Secondly. There are Consolations of GOD, in the PLEASURES of PIETY; the
Comforts which naturally result from a Pious Life. We read concerning the
Wisdom of Piety, Prove. III. 17. Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all
her paths are peace. It is most certain; The ways of Piety, are ways of
Pleasancy. Ah, my Young People; when you have thought, that the ways of
Religion, were Severe, Austere, Morose, and Melancholy ways; That you must
never See a cheerful Minute more, after you become Seriously Religious; It was
a Lying Devil which told you so: Believe him not; His lies are full of
Abominations. True PIETY, I tell you truly, it is attended with the most Enviable
Consolations! We read; Psalm. CXXXVIII. 5. They shall Sing in the ways of the
Lord. If we might envy the Consolations of any man Living, it should be the man
who Exercises himself to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward Man. There is a Continual Feast in such a Conscience. No wicked man
ever knows any Delights comparable to those, wherein that man is continually
bathing himself, who daily Delights himself in God. Innocence is accompanied
with Serenity. Sirs, would you arrive to matchless Consolations? Hate all Sin;
Shun all Sin; Mourn for it, when overtaken with it; Converse with GOD; Be full
of Zeal to improve in the Knowledge of God, and the Image of God; and be
always at Work for God. Be filled with Benevolence, and Beneficence toward
MEN: Have compassion on all the Afflicted; Scatter your Alms like the Showers
of Heaven; Be Serviceable to every one on all occasions; with unspeakable
Raptures of Goodness, watch for all occasions. This Walk with God, will be a
Pleasant Walk; No Eden has any that equals it. There is a certain Symphony and
Harmony with Heaven in such a Walk. The Consolations of it, are Wonderful!
Wonderful! They that keep close to the ways of God, are Children of Light.
There is a Light of God shining upon their ways, and into their Minds. No words
can paint out the Consolations of this Light! Blind Sinner, I cannot make thee
apprehend this Light. Oh! That thou would Come and See!

Thirdly. There are Consolations of GOD, in the ASSURANCES, with which the
Sealed Souls of Believers are sometimes Comforted of God. I know, this will be
derided as Enthusiasm, with the Sons of Profaneness* But it is very sure; The
SPIRIT of GOD is the COMFORTER of them who belong unto Him. There is upon the
Hearts of the Faithful a Work of that Holy Spirit, which is called, A Sealing
Work. Of that work we read; Ephesians. IV. 30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are Sealed unto the Day of Redemption. Oh! the Refined Consolations
of a Soul Sealed by the Holy Spirit of God! The Spirit of God first imprints
upon the Mind of a Christian, the infallible Marks, of Regeneration, and
Reconciliation, and of an Heirship to a Crown of Life. He then gives the
Believer a Sight of these Marks; and fills him with the Consolations which
belong to a Regenerate and Reconciled State; fills him with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. No Tongue is able to utter the Consolations of a Mind, whom the
Holy Spirit of GOD Irradiates with a Persuasion and Assurance, of an Interest
in the Special Favor of God. The Holy SPIRIT of God, often assures the
Penitent Sinner of His Mercy to him; and says, as in Math. IX. 2. Child, Be of
Good cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee. Oh! the Consolations of a Pardoned
Penitent! The Electing, the Redeeming, the Pardoning Love of God, is often
Powerfully brought home, unto those who are Watchful, Fruitful, Holy in all
manner of Conversation. The Holy SPIRIT, with a Powerful Satisfaction tells
him, Thou art a Child of God! God has loved thee with an Everlasting love; and
as a Token of it, He has enkindled in thy Heart a vehement Flame of Love to
Him. He tells him; Thou have made choice of God for thy Portion; But God first
chose thee for One of His People. He tells him; Thou have given thy self unto
thy Redeemer; But God the Father first gave thee unto Him. He tells him; Thy
Sins are all become lothesome to thee; The Death of thy Sins, is to thy Soul, a
Blessing better than Life it self. It Is a Token from God, that thy Sins are all
Forgiven thee. Can any Consolations be equal unto these? Methinks, one so
Comforted of God, cannot but fall into Ecstasies! The Consolations of God, will
make him to sing; Isa. XII. 1. O Lord, I will Praise thee; Though thou wast Angry
with me, thine Anger is turned away, and thou do comfort me. One
overpowered, and even overwhelmed with such Consolations, must be dissolved
into Tears of Joy, and cry out, Oh! What will my Glorious Father Please to do
with me! Lord, I am Thine! Lord, Thou art Mine! My Father will never leave off
to do me Good: He will guide me by Counsil, and bring me to Glory. Oh! my
Father, and my Savior; what shall I render to thee?

There is one Remark to be made on the Special Season in which there uses to be
a Grant of such Consolations. The Sovereign Lord of all, dispenses the
Consolations when He Pleases. But yet; Are we Raised unto some Exercise of
Grace, in an uncommon Elevation? A Victory over Hideous Temptations? A
Forgiveness unto cruel Enemies? A Resignation to the will of God in Grievous
Events? Are we Patient under heavy Trials? Are we Pleased with Sufferings for
the Cause, the Word, the Day of God? Are we Glad, Glad of any Conformity to our
Savior, though in the most Abasing Circumstances? NOW is a Special Season; for
the SPIRIT of the Holy One, to come in upon His Faithful Servants, with more
than ordinary Consolations. Now, Rejoice and be Exceeding Glad, says our
Savior. This has been in all Ages, the Experience of the Faithful; 2 Cor. I.
5. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds
by Christ. Hence, The Consolations of the Martyrs, these are become a Proverb
in Israel!

Is it possible to ascend any Higher, in the Consolations of GOD? Yes; From an
Earnest and Foretaste of Heaven, we may ascend into Heaven it self. Wherefore,

Fourthly, and Lastly; There are Consolations of GOD, most Blessed
Consolations, reserved for us in the Heavenly BLESSEDNESS. HEAVEN, it is
Consolation in the Consummation of it. The Departed Spirit of a Good Man, is
transported into the Paradise of GOD. When he is in that Paradise, we read;
Luke 16.25. He is Comforted. Ere long the Dead Children of God, arrive to a
Resurrection from the Dead. The Resurrection was, in the ancient Language of
the Orient, called, The Consolation. In the Resurrection we are furnished with
Consolations; we are advised; 1. These. IV. 18. Comfort one another with these
Words. But, Oh! what Consolations of God shall we receive, when we Enter into
the Holy City, the Heaven of Heavens! In that City, there is Fullness of Joy.
The Joy of a full Harvest, of all our Tears, all our Devotions, all our
Bounties, and all our Troubles! The Consolations of having a Sight of GOD in
His CHRIST, and of being made like unto Him! The Consolations of a Society,
with the Innumerable Company of Holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just men made
Perfect! The Consolations of that CITY! I remember what we read, 1. Cor. II. 9.
It has not Gone up, [(...)] in the Heart of man to conceive. The word is
Emphatical; to intimate, that they who have the most Lofty Conceptions, the
most Raised Affections, yet cannot comprehend in their Thoughts, their Wishes,
their Desires, the Consolations which God has prepared for them that Love Him!

There are provided such Consolations to Encourage us in the Service of God.

II. The Consolations of the Great GOD, Really are no Small Consolations. No;
as we read; Psalm. XXXI. 19. O how Great is thy Goodness, which thou have laid
up for them that fear thee! So we may say; O how Great are the Consolations,
which the Great Goodness of God has laid up, to Invite and Reward our Fear of
His Name! They must be Great Consolations, that such a Great GOD, has to bestow
upon those whom He will have to be Comforted. None teaches like Him; and none
Comforts like Him! Indeed, the Putting of the Name of GOD upon them, (as upon
Men, upon Trees, upon Hills, and the like, in the Scripture often,) may do the
part of an Hebraism, to signify the Greatness of them.

First. The Consolations of GOD are GREAT for the NUMBER of them. Truly, in the
Consolations of God, we have a Remedy for every Malady. We read, Psalm. XCIV. 19
In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul. Though
we have a Multitude of Griefs, a Multitude of Cares, a Multitude of Wants; God
has suited them all, with a Multitude of Consolations; Adapted Consolations
for every One of them all. There are the Consolations of God agreeable to all
our Conditions; Consolations in Temporals, and Consolations in Spirituals;
Consolations from the Dew of Heaven, and Consolations from the Fat of the
Earth. I must say, as the Apostle in another case, The Time would fail me to
mention them. I call to mind, how Jerome of old Essayed the Sum of them;
Paupertatem times; sed Bonos Pauperes Christus appellat. Labor terreris; Nemo
Athleta sine sudoribus coronatur. De cibo cogitas; sed Fides Famem non timet.
Deus ipse omnium Rector ac Dominus, cum omni Angelorum militia certamen tuum
expectat; Tibi contra Diabolum dimicanti parat aeternitatis coronam. -- Say,
That Christ Calls the Poor happy; Say, That all our Labors will have Rewards
agreeable; Say, That Faith, fears no Famine? Say, That the Angels of God are
our Guardians; and that our Warfare is their pleasant Spectacle; and our
Conflict will issue in a Crown of Glory. Still, The One half has not been told
unto us. How Precious are thy Consolations, O God; How Great is the Sum of
them, if I should count them, they are more in Number than the Sand. At last,
the Consolation amounts unto that Computation; Rev. XXI. 7. He that
over-cometh, shall Inherit all things.

I will now deal with my Hearers, as Abraham was dealt withal; Genesis XV. 5. And
He brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the
Stars, if thou be Able to Number them. And He said, so shall thy Seed be. [I
will not stand now to Enquire, how far this Passage might contribute unto the
ancient and famous Tradition which the Pagans had, of our Patriarchs being an
Astronomer; but,] I will say, even so; O Child of God; can thou tell the
Number of the Stars? The Stars visible to the unassisted Eye indeed, we may
tell the Number of them; No man ever yet saw without Glasses Two Thousand of
them; The latest and largest Globes have but Nineteen Hundred. There are many,
many more, which are not commonly seen; The Number of them was never yet known
to men upon Earth. It shall not be said, So shall thy Consolations be! No, but
greater, still greater, much greater, is the Number of thy Consolations:
Innumerable Consolations!

Secondly. The Consolations of God are GREAT for the NATURE of them.
Consolations, the Quality whereof is Excellent, and Exquisite; the Excellency
Invaluable, Incomprehensible. We have a Notable Term for them; Heb. VI. 18.
Strong Consolations. The Consolations of the Faithful, they have sometimes been
such, that they have been too Strong for them; they have not been able to bear
them; they have been forced to cry out; Lord, stay thy Hand; thy frail Servant
can bear no more. Yea, the Consolations of the Faithful, what are they less
than Infinite? It is the Infinite GOD Himself, in whom they have their
Consolations. They are Consolations of GOD, and they are Consolations IN God.
The Infinite GOD, said unto the Father of the Faithful; Genesis XV. 1. I am thy
Exceeding Great Reward. The same GOD, the same Infinite and Almighty GOD, says
unto all the Faithful; I am thy Exceeding Great Comfort. Great, Great must it
indeed be, if THOU, O Lord, art It! The Great GOD Himself, is the Joy of His
People; How can it be any other than a very Great JOY; we read, Psalm. XLIII. 4.
I will go unto GOD, my Exceeding Joy. The Consolations of the Faithful, are of
no lower a strain than this; The Great GOD is my God, and He will surely do me
Good: He will never leave me nor forsake me. The Power of God will ever supply
my wants; the Wisdom of God will ever Direct my ways; the Goodness of God will
open the Treasures of Mercy for me. God the Father is my Father; God the Son is
my Savior; God the Spirit is my Leader. O Peerless Consolations! Boundless
Consolations! Immortal Soul, what can thou in thy most Extended and
Insatiable Appetites, desire beyond these Consolations!

I now wonder no longer, at the words of that Renowned (and then Retired)
Statesman, Count Oxistern, to the Excellent Lord Whitlock. I do assure you I
have found more comfort in my Retreat, than in all my Greatness. I recommend
unto you, the Holy Scripture without you, and the Holy Spirit within you; which
will be sure to Entertain you with the most Solid Consolations, and bring you
an Everlasting Felicity. I wonder not at the words of that Illustrious
Emperor, Charles V. after his Abdication of the Empire; True Piety has those
admirable Consolations, which the Courts of Princes are Strangers to!

Thirdly. The Consolations of God are GREAT for the DURATION of them. Eternal
Consolations, and, Pleasures for evermore. The Consolations proffered by Satan
to us, as they can be all shown in a Moment of Time, they were so to our
Savior; so they will hold but a Moment of Time. O Sin, what are thy
Consolations? They are Pleasures but for a Season; and a very, very short
Season too. They are but as the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot; A short Noise,
a short Blaze, and they are Gone. But now, the Consolations of God, these are
Durable Riches. We read, 2 These. II. 16. God has given us Everlasting
Consolation. The Consolations of God, they will Stay with us; They are a Joy
that none can take from us; They are an Eternal Glory. The Heavens as well as
the Earth, shall Perish; But, O Heavenly Consolations; You shall Endure. They
shall wax old like a Garment, and they shall be changed; But you are the same,
and your Years will have no End! Endless Consolations; and therefore no Little
Consolations!

III Every one will now grant me a Third Assertion. The Great Consolations of
GOD, if they are SMALL with us, Great is our Ignorance, Great is our
Corruption; we are Greatly to be blamed for it. It cannot but be a Great Error,
a Great Evil, in men, to set but a Little Esteem, on the Great Consolations of
GOD.

This is now so plain, it calls for no further Demonstration. Perhaps it will
do well to Enquire, When may it be said of a Man, That the Consolations of God
are Small unto him? The Enquiry, shall be answered at once. The Consolations of
God, are Small with a Man, when the man who has no Title to them, can do well
Enough without it, or does not think it worth his while to Look after it. And,
The Consolations of God are Small with a man, when a man, who has a Title to
them, is not Contented with it, or thinks it not Enough to yield Contentment
unto him.

I am now fairly arrived unto the Expostulation, in which these Assertions are
to terminate.

But how many, how many, are to be now addressed with a most Pungent
Expostulation! Certainly, There are very many among us, of whom it may be
feared, The Consolations of God are Small unto them. Their Transgression says
within my Heart, that the Consolations of God are but Little in their Eyes. To
be more particular.

First. How SMALL are the Consolations of God, with such as are the Despisers
of a Glorious CHRIST, who is, The Consolation of Israel! The Name of the
Messiah of old, was, The Consolation. Because the Messiah did not yet appear to
Save His People; there were those Lamentations; Lam. I. 16. Mine Eye runs down
with Tears, because the Comforter that should Relieve my Soul, is far from me.
The Jewish Rabbi's, putting that Question, What shall be the Name of the
Messiah? do cite this very Text, for to prove, that His Name shall be,
Menachem, or, The Comforter. But are there no Christless ones, of whom it may
be said; The Comforter that should Relieve their Souls, is far from them; The
Savior, and His Great Salvation, is far from the wicked ones; They have no
Acquaintance with a Glorious CHRIST, no Union with Him, no Fellowship with Him;
And yet their Eye never dropped so much as one Tear, on this deplorable occasion!
Ah, Christless Unbeliever! The Consolations of God are Small with thee. If
there be any Consolations, they are such as an Interest in a Glorious CHRIST is
accompanied withal. We read, Phil. II. 1. Of, Consolation in Christ. Our
CHRIST, our CHRIST is the true Noah, of whom we may say, This same shall
comfort us. O under-valuer of the most Glorious Comforter, If thou have any
Regard unto the Greatest of Consolations, come to the CHRIST, who calls thee to
come unto Him. Come, and put thy self into His Hands; cast thy self upon His
Mediation; Sit down under the shadow of the Tree of Life with Delight. It is
Good Tidings of Great Joy, That we may have a Glorious CHRIST for our Savior:
What would it be, if He should say, I will be thy Savior! If once the CHRIST
of GOD become thy CHRIST, thou shall find Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Redemption laid up in Him for thee. Oh! The Consolations to be
found in such Benefits of such a Savior, and a Great One! How Comfortable, how
Comfortable, must it be, to think; My Sin is all Pardoned through the Blood of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, which cleanses from all Sin! I stand before God in
a Righteousness better and brighter, than what the brightest Angels in Heaven
could have helped me to! My JESUS is my Advocate, and Pleads continually that I
may not miss of Happiness! He will most certainly show me the Path of Life; He
will most certainly Save me from every Path of the Destroyer: He will most
certainly bestow upon me an Eternal Mansion in His Fathers House. His Father is
my Father; His God is my God. O Consolations that Surpass all Contemplations!
My Friend, All these Consolations will be thine, upon thy falling down before a
Glorious CHRIST, and sincerely saying; Lord, I am Thine, Save me! Consent,
Comply, Be willing to be the Lords. Then thou have all His Consolations. Why,
why are the Consolations of God so Small with thee, that a Glorious CHRIST with
His Consolations, it seems, are not worth Acceptance with thee? O Sinner,
Foolish and Unwise! Thy madness is not Small; else these Consolations of God,
would not be so Small.

Secondly. How SMALL are the Consolations of God, with such as Delay their
CONVERSION to God, and will not be moved by all the Consolations, which will
undoubtedly follow upon Obedience to Him? Upon Conversion to GOD, the Sinner
comes to vast Consolations. We are so called upon; Act. III. 19. Repent and be
Converted, that so the Times of Refreshing may come. Indeed, the Hebrew word,
Nacham, the Root of our word here for, Consolations; it signifies, first of all
to Repent, and then to Comfort; Because to the Penitent there belongs
Consolation. But then, how surprisingly must the Consolations go on, and
Increase and Multiply! Oh! the Blessednesses and the Consolations of the man,
whose Transgression is Forgiven! The man who is become an Heir of God, and a
Joint-Heir with the Son of God! The man, whom the Spirit of God, makes a Temple
of God, and chooses to Dwell there for ever as a Comforter! No Boethius is
Master of a Pen, that can Soar high enough, to describe the Consolations. We
are told, There is Joy in Heaven, it gives a Consolation unto the Angels in
Heaven, when a Sinner is brought unto Repentance. O Repenting Sinner, certainly
then thy Soul, has a claim to a most Heavenly Consolation! As it was of old
said, Seems it a light matter unto you, to be the Son in Law of a King! I
will say, O Sinner loath to turn unto God; Seems it a light matter unto thee,
to become a Child of God! A Light matter, to be a Favorite of Heaven! A Light
matter, to be a Candidate of a Crown that Fades not away! What? Such
Consolations of God, are they so Small with thee, that the filthy and fulsome
Gratifications of the Flesh, are to be preferred before them! Has the Devil
more Desirable Things for thee, than these Consolations of God? This, This
indeed is the cursed Language of thy continuance in thy Sins. Oh! Talk no more
so exceeding Vainly, so exceeding Vilely; and let such Blasphemy be no more
uttered in thy Unconverted Procrastinations. With a Subdued Soul, from this
Time, Oh! Fall down before the Lord, and say, O Great GOD, Thou shall be my
Father, and the Guide of my Life!

Thirdly. Sinner, Despairing of Mercy and Pardon, Thy DESPAIR does declare,
That the Consolations of God are too SMALL with thee, to conquer it. There are
Sinners who See themselves, and perhaps have cause to own themselves, The chief
of Sinners. The sight of their Sins exceedingly Terrifies them. And indeed they
are a very Terrible sight! But yet, Oh, Despair not. Before the Awakened
Sinner, I will now set the Consolations of God. Ah, Discouraged Soul, Be thy
Sins never so Many, never so Heinous, there is a Pardon to be had! I bring to
the most criminal among you all, that Advice from Heaven: Isa. LV. 7. Let him
return unto the Lord, and He will have Mercy upon him; and unto our God, for He
will abundantly Pardon. I bring you that Advice; Matthew. XII. 31. All manner of
Sin shall be Forgiven unto men. I bring you that Advice; 1. Joh. I. 7. The
Blood of JESUS CHRIST, the Son of God, cleanses from all Sin. O Lively
Consolations! O Wondrous Consolations! O Consolations of God! The Day of Grace
is not yet over with you. Behold, O Sinners, willing to Confess and Bewayl and
Abhor all your Sins; O Sinners, willing to have all your Sins Forgiven and your
Lusts Mortified, through the Sacrifice of the most Holy JESUS; The Servants of
God have a Commission to stand among you, and make this Proclamation; A Pardon!
A Pardon! O Perishing Souls, A Pardon is Ready for you. Do but Humble your
selves before the Glorious GOD, and humbly plead the Blood of your Savior,
that God may Forgive your Sins, and cleanse you from all Unrighteousness; and
you shall find Him, Ready to Pardon. Let Rebels, let the most monstrous Giants
in Rebellion, know, That a Sin-Pardoning Lord, even Waits to be Gracious unto
them. To You, even to You, there is now made, the astonishing offer of a Pardon
after all. To them that have been the Greatest Monsters of Sin, there is now
Proclaimed this Consolation of God! What an Heart-melting word is that? Mic.
VII. 19. He will Subdue our Iniquities. Man, There stands a mighty Army of
Iniquities in the way of thy Happiness. How must thy Heart fail thee, when the
Holy God Sets them in Order before thine Eyes! But now, Be sorry for thy
Iniquities; with Remorse lay down the Arms of thy Rebellion; lay Hold on the
Tenders, and Merits of thy Savior: Then the Pardoning Mercy of God, will
Subdue this mighty Army of Iniquities. None of them shall hinder His Favor to
thee; They shall be Cast into the depths of the Sea; the Red Sea of thy
Saviors Blood shall drown this Army. The Number or the Blackness of thy Sins
must not be thy Discouragement. There is a Fountain Set Open for the most
Unclean Sinner among us all to repair unto! And upon thy Washing in that
Fountain, O Sinner, All thy Sin will be, as if it had never been at all. Thy
past Scarlet and Crimson Abominations will not hinder a bright Complexion of
Snow and Wool from Succeeding in thy Purified Soul. Is any of you distressed
with an Apprehension of having Sinned Unpardonably; of having fallen into the
Unpardonable Sin? To that Soul, I must bring this Consolation of God; Soul, Thy
Distressing Fear of that, is a Proof that there is no Cause to Fear it. I will
add; Art thou Desirous of a Pardon? Would a Pardon be to thee a Pearl of Great
Price? Have thou any value for the Blood of thy Savior, which is the Price of
thy Pardon? It Is very certain, Thou have never yet fallen into the Sin that
cannot be Pardoned. Oh! Let this Consolation of God mightily Quicken you, to
Repent, and Believe, and make sure of the Attainable Pardon!

Fourthly. And, I Pray, What are the Consolations of God; How SMALL! unto them
who are unconcerned about Preparing for, and Approaching to, the SPECIAL
ORDINANCES, where those Consolations are to be met withal? Concerning the
Ordinances of the Gospel, we read, Isa. XII. 3. With Joy shall ye Draw Water
out of the Wells of Salvation. Of one who had been Baptized, we read, He went
on his way Rejoicing. By Reflecting on, and Improving of our Baptism, we may
come to the Still Waters, where we shall find Rivers of Consolation. Alas, what
a Rarity is this in the Christian World! How do we Forget our Baptism, and
Remember it as waters that pass away! We read again, that there was Great Joy
in Jerusalem of old, at the celebration of the Passover. Oh! the Great Joy, of
the Consolation, which we might find in celebrating the Gospel-Passover at the
Table of the Lord! Yet, alas, how do the Ways of Zion Mourn, because there is
no more careful walking in them! In the Ordinances of our Savior, we may look
for the Consolations of God. They are the Statutes of the Lord, which Rejoice
the Heart. I shall be sorry, if none of my Hearers are able to testify so much,
from what they have this very Day met withal. But more especially, in Special
Ordinances. What less to be looked for, in the House of God, at the Gate of
Heaven!

Oh! why no more Sollicitous to come with Ready Souls, unto the most
Comfortable Ordinances of the Lord! Ah, Slothful Soul! It Is a Sad thing, that
the Consolations of God are so Small with thee! What some have done through
Pettishness, may be said to be done by those through Slothfulness; Psalm. LXXVII.
2. My Soul refused to be comforted.

Fifthly. Methinks, The Consolations of God are too SMALL unto the People of
God themselves, when under their AFFLICTIONS, they take not up with those
Consolations, but their Souls Refuse to be Comforted. There are some, who have
a part in the Consolations of God; And yet, when they are Afflicted, when in
their Afflictions they are bereaved of some Earthly Consolations, they are like
her, of whom we read, Mat. II. 18. She would not be Comforted. Length of Time,
alas, is the only Solace known by many Afflicted People, who would yet be
Esteemed the People of God. When they are Afflicted, nothing will compose them;
They will continue to Rage, or to Pine, until -- Longa Dies sedavit Vulnera
mentis. But, O Disconsolate People of God, Hearken a little to me. What a vast
Bundle of Consolations have you, in that One word! Romans VIII. 28. We know, all
things work together for Good, unto them that Love God. Oh! Let it not be Small
with you! One thing more: You lose Earth, but you have Heaven left you. And is
this a Small thing in your Eyes?

I will first Speak a very awful Word. It is this; If the Consolations of God
are so Small with you, that they will do nothing to Quiet you, When you meet
with Losses and Crosses in an Evil World, it may be questioned, Whether you
have a part in those Consolations. I will add this; You will anon find, That
nothing else will do to Quiet you; you will find a Wretched Vanity and
Vexation, in all other Consolations: The Consolations of This World will fail
your Expectations, and be Physicians of no value.

It was a Sweet Passage of the Poet; Taedia quem mundi teneant, reperire Quietem
Si velit, in Solo Numine quaerat eam.


I must English it.

Soul, whom the Worlds Fatigues do make to groan,
Seek all thy Comfort in thy GOD alone.
You shall allow me to Propose one thing more, in Pursuance of the Design I am
going upon. It was an Excellent Proposal made in the Church of God Eleven
Hundred years ago; Facilius erit Consolatio, si inter Flagella quae Patimur,
quae fecimus ad memoriam Delicta revocamus. Let us in all our Afflictions, be
Mindful of our Miscarriages, be Mournful for our Iniquities; Humbly Adore the
Justice of God in all our Afflictive Cases: We are by such Humiliations
prepared for the Consolations of God. Now we may go on.

I will now make the Experiment, what the Consolations of God will Signify, in
Two or three Cases, that are of a frequent Occurrence among us. The Ancient has
taught me, Dolentem non Potest Consolari, qui non concordat Dolori.

First. There are Some who are grievously annoyed, fearfully disturbed, with
the FIERY DARTS which the Wicked One Shoots into their Minds. They cry out of
the Injections, wherewith Satan troubles them; and affrights them: Suggestions
full of Atheism, full of Blasphemy, full of Hellish Malignity, are injected by
Satan into their Souls. The vexation is insupportable; it renders them even
weary of their Lives. Hideous Thoughts are thrown into them, and such as make
them afraid the dreadful Wrath of God must overtake them Immediately,
Irremediably. A very Pityable case! But can there be any Consolations of God
for One so horribly Tempted of the Devil? Yes; And very Great Ones. There is
that Consolation; 1 Cor. X. 13. There has no Temptation taken you, but such as
is Common to Man; Yea, Common to Good Men. It Is rather a Good, than a Bad, Sign
to be thus Buffeted by the Devil. O Soul Mourning because of the Oppression of
the Enemy; If the Devil did not Look upon thee, as upon one who made Conscience
of Sinning in thy Thoughts, it is probable, he would not choose to persecute
thee with such Sinful Thoughts. Take this Consolation also; Go on to Bewayl
these Thoughts, to Abhor these Thoughts, to Renounce these Thoughts, and God
will never lay them to thy Charge; No, they shall be charged upon thy
Adversary, who Provokes thee sore; it is he that is the Father of them. And, then
take likewise this Consolation. By an unwearied Contradiction of these
Thoughts, or making these Thoughts an Incentive as often as they recur, to
raise Thoughts that shall be directly contradictory to them, and filled with
devout Acknowledgments of God and His Christ; this will soon weary out thy
Adversary; It Is but Resisting the Devil thus a little while, and he will flee
from thee!

Secondly. Are there any STRAITS upon us? Perhaps, we are Straightened with Poor
and Low Circumstances; The Times grow hard; we are afraid we shall be hardly or
but meanly provided for.

In this case, there are some Great Consolations of God which I can Lead you
to. There is that Consolation; Jam. II 5. Has not God chosen the Poor of this
World, Rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom? There is that Consolation;
Psalm. XXXVII. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do Good, and verily thou shall be fed.
My Friend, Have thou not a CHRIST? In Him thou have Unsearchable Riches. In Him
will thy God Supply all thy Wants from His Glorious Riches. And if HE be thine,
He will help thee, to all that can be Needful for thee. Thou have a Father and
a Feeder, that Knows all that thou Need. I must say, Have ye forgotten the
Consolation, that that Speaks to you, as unto Children?

If any of you meet with Impoverishing Disasters, what will you say to that
Word? 2 Chronicles. XXV. 9 The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. Truly,
Sir, If God gives you more Grace, than you had before; If you are made more
Prayerful, more Watchful, more Weaned from this World; Or, if God have given
you the Grace to bear your Impoverishments with Resignation; He has given you
much more than all that has been taken from you. Is there nothing in these
Consolations?

Lastly. Have we our Desirable RELATIVES taken from us? But in this case also,
we have at hand, the Great Consolations of God.

Are the Relatives at a Distance from us in other Countries? Be Comforted; God
Knows where they are. His Kind Eye is upon them there; His Kind Hand can reach
them. If they are in Captivity, yet, Jer. XXXI. 16. Thus says the Lord,
Refrain thy Voice from Weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears; for thy Work shall
be Rewarded, and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy.

Has DEATH taken away the Relatives? Be Comforted; God Lives. And if a CHRIST
be yours, you have the Good Part that cannot be taken away. Should not that
Widow be Comforted, who can say, My Maker is my Husband? Or, that Widower; who
can say, God has Meant all unto Good?

But the PARENTS who have buried their Children, have they no Consolations of
God? We read of such a thing as that, at the Funerals of old; Jer. XVI. 7. The
Cup of Consolations. It Is there provided for the Funerals of Parents. Parents
also have it provided for the Funerals of their Children. Parents, I have one
of Gods providing for you. O Drink of the wine, which I have mingled for you,
says the Lord. The Consolations of Men, such as Horace offers to his Friend
Valgius on the Death of his dear Mysta; and such as you have in the Writings of
Seneca, and the other Stoic Philosophers, or the rest, are very Small Ones:
very mean truly. Yea, They Themselves upon great occasions do confess them so.
Such was that famous One, in Stobaeus, to one who had Buried his Child; Before
that Child came into the World, thou had no Grief about it. Why should
thou grieve, now it is gone out of the World? Have we no Higher Notes? Yes; If
the Parents are themselves the Children of God, then they have a Name far
better than that of Sons and of Daughters. If the Son of God be theirs, then
they have One, who should be Better to them than Ten Sons or Daughters.

It may be, the Children had Comfortable Symptoms upon them, in their Sober,
Modest, Virtuous Behavior. To hope, that it is well with them, is an
unspeakable Consolation. Then, as it was said unto the Ruler, on the Death of
his Daughter; She is not Dead, but Sleeps. Even the Pagan could give it as a
Direction; Be not Sorrowful for the Dead; since there is a Necessity of dying;
But spend thy Sorrow, (...), upon such as Die wretchedly, and woefully.

Luther, when his Daughter Magdalene was Expiring, he read unto her, from the
XXVI. Chapter of Isaiah; and concluded thus; My Daughter, Enter thou into thy
Chamber, with Peace, I shall ere long be with thee. On this, he wept
Plentifully; but in Public attended the Horse without a Tear.

Diverse of the old Poets observed, That if Tears would fetch back the Dead,
(...). We would gladly change Gold for Tears; Tears would be better than Gold.
But since Tears are of so little use, we need go no further, in filling our
Lacrymatories, for our Dead Children. We are in the midst of the Consolations
which may be most Reasonable Spunges to the Eyes that are a Fountain of Tears.
Grotius did well to deride it as a foolish saying of Solon, I weep the more,
because I can do no Good by Weeping.

It may be, they were Children who have left Children, and have Enlarged the
Kingdom of Heaven.

It may be, what is buried in One Child, may be richly made up in Another; in
the more than Doubled Comfort from the hopeful Character and Carriage of
Another.

And, what a World, what a Troublesome, what a Dangerous what an Horrible
World, are your Children taken from? O Saint of God, I know, thou say, This
is none of my World? The Great Baxter, in a Noble Treatise, Of Obedient
Patience in particular Cases, has a Passage, which I cannot help taking some
Notice of. Says he; When I see, what a miserable World it is, that we are in,
even like the Suburbs of Hell, I have never grieved, that I never had a Child;
And why then should I mourn, if I had One, and God had quickly taken him away!

After all; If God will not have your House to grow, yet you have a Standing in
His House. You have also a Title to a Covenant full of Sure Mercies; a Covenant
Ordered for all things and Sure; a Covenant whereof you joyfully say, This is
all my Salvation and all my Desire.

And truly, Sir, if GOD call you to Sacrifices, even to Successive Sacrifices;
to Sacrifice One Lamb after another: Now, to go on after an Holy manner with
them, it is an Evidence of your Share in an Holy Priesthood. It is an Argument
and an Evidence, that after you have passed through all your Tribulation, you
shall appear in your Washed Robes among the Priests of God, and receive the
Accomplishment of that Word; Rev. VII. 15, 17. They are before the Throne of
God, and Serve Him day and night in His Temple, and God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes.

I Leave with you these Consolations of God; I beseech you to take them; to
Feed and Live upon them.

My NEHEMIAH, [for since you know that Name Signifies, The Consolation of the
Lord, you will give my Sermon leave to Wear that Name:] has not yet, as I find
upon a Review, dispensed all the Consolations that yet may be comprised within
the Limits of my Designed Brevity.

There is a SPECTACLE, that is Extremely uneasy to us; a very Mournful and
Frightful Spectacle! The Spectacle of, A whole World Lying in Wickedness; and
by the just wrath of GOD rendered therefore an Entire Aceldama; Wickedness
raging and reigning at a Strange rate; The Sons of Wickedness carrying all
before them; Good Men Oppressed; and the more Good they do, the more Exposed
unto Oppression; unto the Contradiction of Sinners, and all the Persecution
which the Tongue, or Pen, or Fist of Wickedness, can assault them withal; The
VIALS of the Divine Indignation, Pouring out, under a THIRD WOE begun upon a
Wicked and Woeful World; The Curse devouring the Earth, with Numberless and
Horrible Desolations.

But have we any Consolations under so grievous a Spectacle? Yes, and very
Great Ones too. Very particularly That; 2 Pet. III. 13. According to His
Promise, we Look for New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness. In the mean time, That; 2 Pet. II. 9. The Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of Temptations. Briefly, Another and a better State of
the World, is coming on. It was a Remarkable Passage, which lately fell from
the very Learned, and Holy, and Famous Dr. Spener: That brave Man, when he lay
a dying, Ordered that when he was Dead, there should not be so much as one
Thread of Black used about his Coffin; for, said he, I have been a Sorrowful
Mourner for the Afflictions and Corruptions of the Church Militant all my days;
but I am now Entering into the Joy of the Church Triumphant; and therefore I
will not now have the Least Mark of Sorrow upon me. And Let this Desire of
Mine, be a Token to you, of my Faith, O my Friends, that our Great Savior has
Glorious Things to do shortly for His Church upon that Earth, where I leave my
Ashes among you.

I will bestow a Little Illustration upon this Matter, and so Conclude it.

There was a very Surprising Tradition among the ancient Pagans, recited by
Plutarch, in his Treatise of Isis, and Osiris. About the Origin of Evil, (...),
there was much Enquiry among the Ancients. They conceived, that there were Two
Gods; One the Original of Good; the other, of Evil. According to Zoroaster, the
Name of the former was Oromazes, the Name of the latter, Arimanius. Oromazes
was resembled unto Light, Arimanius unto Darkness. There is a War between
Oromazes, and Arimanius Oromazes Lodged the World in an Egg; but Arimanius
Perforated it. Hence there is every where a Perpetual Mixture of Good and Evil,
And from the Enmity between them, what Works are done by One, are Spoilt by the
other. But a Time Decreed by Fate will come, when Arimanius must be totally
destroyed by Oromazes, Then the Earth being brought into an admirably Smooth
Condition, men shall all be Universally Blessed, and Inhabit as it were One
City, and have One way of Living, and Speak One Language; and enjoy a Wonderful
Happiness Plutarch says, This was (...), A very Ancient Opinion, and that it
had obtained a Firm and Indelible Belief. Now, this Mavelous Tradition,
contains in it, no contemptible Relics of Glorious Truth; GOD, the Maker of
the World; whose Name is Light; And, Satan, the Fountain of Evil; whose Name
is, The Prince of Darkness. It is indeed a Broken Remembrance of our
Protevangeleum, in the Third Chapter of Genesis.

And what I go on to Remark, is, That although the Sacred Oracles, every where
Conspire to advise us, of a Day at hand, in which the Creation shall be
Delivered from the Vanity which it is now Groaning under, and an Holy and
Righteous and Peaceable Kingdom of God, shall take Place in the World, yet they
are all but Commentaries upon that Protevangelium; we have in That, the
Original Text, as I may call it, and a Sure Foundation for our Hopes, That the
World will not always be so bad as now it is. Maresius, having written a
Disputation full of Bitter Zeal against the Chiliasts; the incomparable
Comenius, when he was about Fourscore years of Age, wrote a Treatise on that
occasion, with all the Learning, and Vigor and Style, which could have been
Expected from a Literator, in the very Meridian of all his Glory. The Beginning
of his Treatise runs upon this Argument. The Birth of Chiliasm was in Paradise.
It was born to us in the Protevangelium given there. There we find foretold, a
Perpetual War between the Serpent and our Savior. There is foretold, the final
Issue of the War, in the Destruction of the Serpent, and an Illustrious and
Everlasting Victory of our Savior. Well; But where is the Field of these
Transactions? This is Evidently the EARTH. All the World Knows and Feels, that
this our Earth, is the Field of the War. We desire then to Know, Whether after
all, the Conqueror must Leave the Field unto his vanquished Enemy? Whether the
Conqueror do not always Chase the Enemy out of the Field, and he himself keep
the Possession of it. Pelli Solet Hostis in ultima usque antra Sua, Captivusque
in Carcerem mitti. So then, there is a Day at hand, when Satan, with all his
Power and Party must be Chased off the Face of the Earth; and the Earth be
Entirely in the Possession of our Admirable Savior. Let this be our
Conclusion; This our Consolation. -- But, How Long, O Lord, Holy and True; How
Long, How Long!

August. Pereat Contristatio, ubi tanta est Consolatio.

FINIS.

