A Discourse Concerning the GRACE of Courage, WHEREIN The Nature,
Beneficialness, and Necessity of that Virtue for all Christians, is described.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached at Boston in New England. June 5 th. 1710.

By INCREASE MATHER, D.D.

1. Cor. xvi. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be
strong. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop in
Corn hill. 1710.

TO THE READER.
THE SERMON Emitted herewith, was Preached at the desire of the Gentlemen
belonging to the Artillery Society in Boston, which has been for more than
Threescore Years a famous Company. And at their Request, it is in this way
Published to the World.

It is mentioned as a singular favor of GOD to His People, That out of them
should be the Corner Stone, and the nail; That is to say, Rulers of their own
to keep all in frame; and the battel-bom, i. e. Men fit for Military Service:
Zech. 10. 4. And thus has the Lord favored His People in New England.

The design of this Discourse is not only to Encourage Military Men, but all
Christians who are engaged in a Spiritual Warfare, to acquit themselves as
becomes Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ.

The Reader must not Expect any thing that is Curious or Critical, but
Scripture Truths plainly delivered. So let the blessing of Heaven go along with
it for the Edification of such as shall peruse what is Written.

Be very COURAGEOUS.
JOSHUA. I. 7. Only be thou Strong, and very Courageous, --


THESE Words were spoken by God to Joshua. Joshua was a famous Captain. One
whom the Lord Himself chose to be the Leader of His People. He was an Eminent
Type of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain of our Salvation. He was so in
respect of his Name. Joshua and Jesus are one and the same Name: Only the
latter is the Greek, and the former the Hebrew word, noting the same Person,
Heb. 4. 8. After the Jews were in Babylon, they according to the manner of the
Chaldees called Joshua, Joshua, Ezra 2. 2. Thence is Jesus, which Name
signifies a Savior* Joshua was a Temporal, Christ is an Eternal Savior. The
Children of Israel were not brought into the Promised Land by Moses, but by
Joshua; this signifying that Heaven is not to be obtained by the Works of the
Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ. One of those Books which contain the Oracles
of God is distinguished by the Name of Joshua. Probably the greatest part of it
was Written by him: If so he followed the Example of his Predecessor, and
Master Moses. In it there are recorded the most Memorable passages of
Providence toward the Children of Israel for the space of about Seventeen
years from the Death of Moses.

In this Chapter we have both the Commission, and the Instructions which God
gave to Joshua: He was Commissioned to undertake a great Service for God and
for his People, unto which the Lord Encouraged him with a Promise of Success,
by means of that divine Protection and Assistance which should be vouchsafed to
him. But then he was to observe his Instructions. The first of which is in the
Words now before us. The Original Words are very Emphatical. Be thou Strong.
Heb. Chazak, denotes a great fortitude of Mind: such a degree of strength as
will be Victorious. There is a further Expression of the same importance, Be
very Courageous. The Hebrew words, Amatz Meod, which some translate Corrobora
te valde, denote an exceeding measure of Courage. Joshua was a very Courageous
man, nevertheless, the Lord knew that such an Instruction as this was proper
for him, and nothing but what he needed.

The Doctrinal Truth which may be insisted on from the Words, is,

That the Servants of GOD (some of them especially) stand in need of a great
measure of Fortitude and Courage.

The Doctrine may be opened and confirmed in several Propositions.

PROP. I. Fortitude or Courage is that Virtue whereby a Man is inclined to
perform his Duty, and that because it is Duty, notwithstanding difficulties and
dangers in his way.

1. The Courage I am to discourse of is a Virtue. It is a Special Supernatural
Grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God. In that it is distinguished
from that Courage which is only Natural. There are Men who have a Natural
undauntedness and greatness of Spirit, who never had any thing of the Virtue or
Grace of Courage in them; Such as Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, and other great
Heroes, admired by the World. There is a Courage which is no more than brutal.
A Lion scorns to turn his back on any Creature Living. Prove. 30. 30. A Lion
which is the strongest among beasts, turns not away from any. Writers say if he
is pursued he will never run for it, but will walk slowly and with a majestic
pace. Thus also there is a mavelous fortitude in the War Horse: It is
Rhetorically set forth in the 39. Chapter of Job. Have thou given the horse
strength, have thou clothed his neck with thunder? Can thou make him afraid
as the grasshopper? He goes on to meet the armed men, he mocks at fear, and is
not affrighted, neither turns he back from the Sword, the quiver rattles
against him, the glittering spear and the shield. He smells the battle afar
off, the thunder of the Captains and the shouting. It is also said of the
Leviathan, that he is made without fear. Thus men may be of fearless Tempers,
and yet not have that fortitude which I am speaking of, since it is a
Supernatural Grace. Hence some who are naturally of a timorous disposition, yet
have excelled in Courage. The Martyr Books tell us of Women and Children who
notwithstanding their being naturally of a fearful heart, have been adorned
with a Divine and Heroic Courage. All the threatenings and tortures inflicted
on them by cruel persecutors have not been able in the least to daunt them.

2. This Grace will make those in whom it is, to surmount difficulties and
dangers. It is a Virtue contrary to despair, and despondency of Spirit. When
great difficulties appear, men are apt to think they shall never be able to
conquer them, so do they grow faint hearted, and lie down under
discouragements. But the Grace of Courage will surmount all difficulties. This
we see in the Spies who were sent to search the Land of Canaan. The Cowards
among them said, the People are strong that dwell in the Land, we be not able
to go up against them, they are stronger than we. They are men of great
stature, they are Giants, the Sons of Anak. Thus did they despond and despair,
and would not go forward when they had an express promise from God that they
should conquer if they would have obeyed his Command in the Season of it. But
Courageous Caleb, (who was like his Name, Caleb signifies All heart) said, Let
us go up and possess the Land for we are well able to overcome it: fear ye not
the People of the Land, they are bread for us; Their defense is departed from
them. Here was the Grace of Courage. It is a Grace contrary to all sinful fear
as well as despair. It bears up the heart against sinful Unbelieving fears:
Josh 10. 25. Fear not nor be dismayed, be strong and of good Courage. Danger
causes fear: but the Grace of Courage makes a man to be above the fear of
danger. Hezekiah manifested this Grace to be in him, when he encouraged his
Captains and Soldiers notwithstanding the danger they were in from a
formidable Enemy beleaguring them, with a numerous Army, 2 Chronicles. 32. 6, 7. He
set Captains of War over the People, and spoke comfortably to them, saying, be
strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of (...), nor
(...) all the multitude that is with him.

3. A Courageous man is resolute and undaunted in the way of Duty, and that
because it is his duty. The Command of God makes him to act Courageously, Josh.
^. 9. Have not I Commanded thee, be strong, and of a good Courage. That Is a
good Courage when Conscience of the Command does animate a man unto his duty.
Desperate Resolutions in an evil design are not the Virtue of Courage, but most
opposite thereunto. Absalom had Russians for his Servants, who would venture on
any wicked attempt though never so hazardous, which their Master would put them
upon. He said to them, when I say to you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not,
be Courageous and Valiant, 2 Samuel 13. 28. To kill one of the Kings Sons was a
bold undertaking: They might well think that David the King would be avenged on
them for it: but their venturing on so dangerous an action was not as Absalom
called it Courage and Valor, because what they did was wicked, and although
according to the Command of their revengeful Master, most contrary to the holy
Commandment of God. There is a Boldness which is not the Grace of Fortitude, or
true Magnanimity, but Madness rather. So it is when men fight against God. When
they are bold and desparate in the ways of Sin. Eliphaz says of the wicked man,
That he stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against
the Almighty, he runs upon the thick bosses of his buckler, Job 15. 25, 26.
Moreover, The Grace of Courage does not only incline a man to do his duty, but
therefore to do it notwithstanding difficulties in his way, because it is his
duty. Suppose a man does what his duty obliges him unto, and runs through
great dangers in the performance of it; if he is animated with carnal Motives
only, we cannot say that he has the Grace of Courage, nor indeed any Grace at
all. When Jehu executed Judgment on the house of Ahab, he did what God
Commanded him, but he aimed at getting a Crown for himself, and that spoiled
all. Ecclesiastical Writers inform us of men that would Murder themselves out
of vain glory, hoping that they should on that account be Esteemed and Honored
as Martyrs. This was not their duty, nor was Conscience of duty that which
emboldened them so to act. Thus we see what is implied in the Grace of
Fortitude and Courage.

PROP. II. The Servants of GOD stand in need of, and should endeavor after a
good Measure of this Grace.

A small measure of it is not enough for them, they need more. The Apostle says
to the Hebrews, You have need of Patience, Heb. 10. 36. Christians need more
than a little Patience that so they may do and suffer the will of God after a
becoming manner. Great Patience argues great Courage. They that have the
greatest measure of this Grace need more. For they have it not in a perfect
degree. Consider the most Eminent Saint on Earth in that Grace in which he does
most excel, yet is he defective therein. The most Courageous Christian is too
Subject unto sinful fear and faintings. Abraham excelled in Faith, and
consequently in Courage. And yet when he was in Gerar he wanted Courage. The
fear of man brought him into a dangerous snare. Moses was a man of
Extraordinary Courage, yet he fainted under the burden of the Government which
he complained was too heavy for him, and thence begged that God would kill him
out of hand rather than prolong his days under such a burden, Numb. 11. 15.
David was a man of great Courage and Resolution: One of Saul's Servants gave him
that Character, That he was a Mighty Valiant Man and a Man of War, 1 Samuel 16.
18 But his Courage failed him when he was in Gath, when he did that which was
very unbecoming such a Captain and Commander as he had been. The Apostle Peter
was a man of great Resolution: Nevertheless, under the surprise of a Temptation
he had not the Courage to own himself to be a Disciple of Christ. These
Examples show that the most Courageous Servants of the Lord need more of this
Grace. And God would have his People to be very Courageous. We often hear him
in his word calling on his Servants to Exercise and to Manifest this Grace:
Psalm. 31. 24. Be of good Courage and he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye
that hope in the Lord. q. d. don't give way to despondencies of Spirits, pluck
up your Spirits, and God will give you fresh supplies. The Lord by the Prophet
Haggai excites all his People, and all Ranks and Orders of Persons among them
unto an holy fortitude. Be strong O Zerubbab^l, be strong O Joshua the high
Priest, be strong all ye People of the Land, says the Lord, Hag. 2. 4. To the
like purpose does the Apostle Exhort Christians, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Quit your
selves like men: be strong. Several things may be mentioned for the further
confirmation of the Truth before us, showing that the Servants of God ought not
to be dismayed, but to be very Courageous, and that they have reason to be so.
For,

1. They have many and great Enemies. Therefore they have need of a great
measure of Courage that so they may bear up against them. The World is their
Enemy. They meet with great Temptations in the way of Obedience from the things
of the World, and in truth those which are called the good things of the World,
the Profits, Pleasures, Preferments of it are the greatest Temptation. Some who
have stood out Courageously against the Evil things of the World, that Prisons
and Cruel Punishments could not move them from their Holy Profession, when they
have been Tempted with the Riches, and Honors of the World, they have fallen
Lamentably and Shamefully, to their Eternal ruin. There is need of much Grace
that so they may be able to Resist and Conquer all Temptations of that nature.
But then the Men of the World are Enemies to the Faithful Servants of God.
Ungodly men, are and ever have been, and ever will be haters of the Godly. The
old Enmity between the Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman remains
still, and will do so to the end of the World. He that is upright in his way,
is an abomination to the wicked. Nor is this to be marvelled at, 1 John 3. 13.
Marvel not my Brethren if the World hate you. For the Servants of God and of
the World are of very differing both Principles and Practices. The Laws by
which they are governed are not the same. It was an old complaint against the
People of God, Esther 3. 8. Their Laws are diverse from all People. They do by
a contrary Profession and Practice condemn the world, (as Noah did) and that
exposes them to the worlds hatred and rage. Christ said to some of his natural
Relations, who were carnal and worldly men: Joh. 7. 7. The World cannot hate
you, but me it hates because I testify of it, that the Works thereof are Evil.
So it is with Christians who are Christians indeed. They must be always
swimming against the stream: Always rowing against the wind and tide.
Therefore they have need of Strength: They have need of Courage that so they
may be able to bear up bravely against all the storms of wrath and rage which
the worlds hatred will raise against them. Nor is the world their greatest
Enemy. They have more potent Enemies than the greatest men, or than all the men
in the world, whom they must fight with, and either overcome them or be killed
by them: Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, h. e. not against
weak frail Enemies, not with them only or chiefly: but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against
Spiritual Wickedness in High Places. Christians must Fight with a Great and
Bloody Dragon: They must Fight with a Hungry Roaring Lion. Has not a man that
must Encounter Lions, need of Strength and Courage? Such Courage there was in
the Martyr Ignatius: When he was Condemned to be Devoured with Lions, he was so
far from being at all appalled or dismayed at it, as that he said, He would
provoke the Lions to fall on him; and (said he) when the Lions Teeth have
Ground me, I shall become such Bread as the Lord will be pleased with. Here was
Courage. But it is another kind of Lion, that Christians are Endangered by: It
is the Infernal Lion who seeks to Devour them; whom they must Resist being
steadfast in their Profession of the Faith; and how shall they do that without
an Holy Fortitude and Courage? But then there is one Enemy more to be Overcome
by them, viz. Death: And that is to Nature, the most Formidable Enemy. Some of
you know that the Philosopher said of it, That it is (...). Of all Terrible the
most Terrible. It is in Job called, The King of Terrors, Job 18. 14. And this
is an Enemy which every man must Encounter with. There is no avoiding of it,
Eccles. 8. 8. There is no discharge in that War. It is a great point of
Christian Fortitude and Courage, to be able to look Death in the Face without
any Dread of it: To be so far above the Fear of Death, as to Live in a longing
Expectation of it; and through Faith in Christ, to Triumph over that Enemy: To
be no more afraid of Death, than a man would be of a Serpent, that has no Sting
or Poison. Thus the Holy Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O
Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God who gives us the Victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Servants of God have difficult Duties before them; and therefore they
had need of Courage, that so they may hold out in the way of Duty. They have a
long Journey to go, and the Way which they must go in is Difficult and
Dangerous: It is like the Wilderness which the Children of Israel passed through
when they were going to the good Land, it was a terrible Wilderness, in which
was fiery Serpents and Scorpions and Drought. And it may be the Lord to
Exercise the Patience and Courage of his Servants, will keep them a long Time
in this woeful Wilderness; in which they must Encounter with distressing
Difficulties. The Children of Israel were detained Forty Years in the
Wilderness of Arabia; and what Difficulties did they meet with in that Forty
Years Temptation* Sometimes they were ready to give out, resolving to go no
further; but to return to Egypt again: Such Faultring and Fainting is for want
of a due measure of Courage. Wherefore the Scripture says, Let us not be weary
in Well-doing; for in due season we shall Reap, if we Faint not, Gal. 6. 9. A
Weak man will soon be weary, and faint; but a Strong man will hold out. A man
that has a great measure of Fortitude and Strength of Soul, will be so far from
being deterred from his Duty, as that his Spirit will rise with Opposition and
Difficulty in his way; as David's did when he was derided for his Zeal: I will
yet be more Vile, said he, 2 Samuel 6. 22.

3. The Servants of God are many times Exercised with very Great Sufferings in
this present evil World. They must wade through a Sea of Troubles, as the
Children of Israel passed through the Red Sea in their way to Canaan: Act. 14.
22. We must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. Then we have
need of much Fortitude and Courage, that so our Spirits may not sink under our
Burdens; which if we have but a small measure of this Grace we shall be apt to
do: Prove. 24. 10. If thou Faint in the Day of Adversity thy Strength is small.
So if thy Strength is small, thou will Faint in the Day of Adversity. Very
great Afflictions are oftentimes the Portion of very good Men. David says, Thou
have showed me great and sore Troubles, Psalm. 71, 20. And in Psalm. 119. 107. I
am Afflicted very much. How shall such an one bear up without much Strength and
Courage? The Servants of God are subject unto all sorts of Afflictions: They
may suffer from the more immediate Hand of God: They may be under Divine
Desertion: The Comforter which should relieve their Souls may be far from them.
Satan may be let loose upon them with his fiery Darts. Horrid Injections,
Blasphemous Thoughts: Temptations to Atheism and Infidelity. Terribilia de Deo,
Horribilia de Fide; as an experienced Divine speaks. Satan (if God shall see
cause to permit him) will shoot Poisoned Arrows, which will fet the Soul on
Fire. And which is the saddest Affliction in the world, Iniquities may prevail
against them, the Corruptions of their own Hearts may be let loose upon them,
and that will make them weary of their Life. No Affliction in the world is like
that to an holy man. One of the Ancients says truly, Difficilius est Luctari
cum Libidine quam cum Cruce: It is a sadder Affliction than to be Crucified:
worse than any Cross. They are also subject unto sufferings from Men:
Persecuted they shall be; 2 Timothy 3. 12. All that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer Persecution. At least they shall suffer the Persecution of
the Tongue: Men will Revile them, and speak all manner of Evil of them. The
better a man is, and the more good he does in the world, the more shall he be
Reviled, and Evil spoken of by the Enemies of Truth and Holiness. It may be
their Liberties, their Livelihood, yea, and Life it self will be taken from
them on the account of their Religion. Then they need a mighty Courage. Add to
your Faith Virtue, (that is Courage) says the Scripture. When Christians
suffer Courageously for their Faith in Christ, then do they add to their Faith
Virtue. And thus it has been with the Martyrs of Jesus. When they knew they
should Die for it, they have freely and openly Declared their Faith in Christ;
in nothing terrified by their Adversaries, or by the tortures inflicted on
them. This could not be without a great measure of Christian Fortitude: God had
given them not a Spirit of Fear, but of Power.

4. The Servants of God have no sufficient cause to be Dismayed. Why should
they be Dismayed, considering who is with them to Protect, Support and Save
them? When the Town where the Prophet Elisha had his abode was surrounded with
an Army of Syrian Enemies, his Servant being afraid, the Prophet said to him,
Fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be with them, 2
King. 6. 16. How was that? Ver. 17. Behold the Mountain was full of Horses, and
Chariots of Fire round about Elisha. There was an Army of Angels ready to
Defend them against the Army of Syrians. Yea, GOD Himself is with his Faithful
Servants. This consideration made David Courageous; Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is
on my side, I will not Fear. What can man do unto me? From this also did
Hezekiah hearten his Subjects, when their Capital Town was beleagured with a
mighty Army; 2 Chronicles. 32, 7, 8. Be not Dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor
for all the Multitude that is with him: For there be more with us than with
him. With him is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us,
and to fight our Battles. One GOD is infinitely more than an Army of more than
Two hundred Thousand Men. They that have the God of Armies on their side, need
not fear any thing. We will not Fear (say the Lords People) the Lord of Hosts
is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. All the Hosts of Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, are under his Command: He can make which of them he pleases
to Fight for his Servants, and against his and their Enemies. When the Children
of Israel had a miraculous Victory over their Enemies, it is said, Judge. 5. 29.
They Fought from Heaven; the Stars in their Courses Fought against Sisera. The
Jewish Historian relates, That when that memorable Battle was Fought, there
happened a Prodigious Storm of Rain with Hail; and that the Wind was on the Backs
of the Israelites, but in the Faces of the Canaanites, which took away their
light, and made their weapons of War unserviceable to them. Thus did the Lord
of Hosts make the Stars to Fight in their Courses; their Influences causing the
Tempest, which proved Fatal to his Enemies. The Spanish Armada, which threatened
England with an Invasion, was in part disappointed by the Stars Fighting
against them in their Courses, in respect of Winds and Storms which proved
destructive unto them, when the Spanish General in a blasphemous rage, said,
That on that day God Almighty was a Lutheran, and made the four Elements to be
Lutherans. They that have God to be with them, have no cause to be dismayed,
since they are from thence assured not only of safety but of Success. It was
promised to Joshua, That the Lord would be with him, and that he should make
his way prosperous, and have good Success. To be Courageous is the way to
obtain the gracious presence of God. It was said to the Judges in Israel, Deal
Courageously, and the Lord shall be with the Good. When good men deal
Courageously the Lord will be with them. The Angel said to Gideon, The Lord is
with thee, thou mighty man of valor, Josh. 6. 12. When his Servants show
themselves mighty men of valor, the Lord is with them.

PROP. III. There are some Servants of God who above others stand in need of
Christian Fortitude and Courage.

All Christians stand in need of this Grace on the account of that Spiritual
Warfare which they are called unto, but some in a more especial manner as being
called unto greater Services and greater Sufferings than others are.

More Particularly,

1. Faithful Rulers need much of this Grace. When Solomon was entering on his
Government, his Father David said to him, Be they strong, and show thy self a
man: 1 King. 2. 2. q. d. Now thou art to be the Ruler of a great People, thou will meet with strong Temptations, and have need of a Manly Courage and
Fortitude to Conquer them. Rulers are in a Difficult and Labourious Station. A
famous Divine among the Reformers, was wont to say, That there are three
Labors grievous to be endured: Regentis, Docentis, et Parturienti^. If a Ruler
will do well, he must expect to hear ill: It will be impossible to please the
Multitude in every thing. And if things do not go as they would have them, it
is natural for them to blame their Rulers, be they never so Faithful and
Laborious in the Station God has set them in. Was there ever a better Ruler
than Moses? And yet how often did the Children of Israel Murmur against him;
and lay the blame of all their Miseries at his Door? Which forced him to Cry to
God against them: Exodus 17. 4. Moses Cried to the Lord, saying, What shall I do
to this People? They be almost ready to Stone me. Moses was Heir apparent to
the Crown of Egypt, but he refused that to serve his own People; which he did
with great Fidelity, and they were ready to requite him with Stones; as the
Jews did Christ for the Good Works He did among them. We have a most amazing
instance of this Murmuring Spirit against their Faithful Rulers, in Numb.
16.41. All the Congregation Murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, You have
Killed the People of the Lord. But the day before they spoke this, they had
seen Miraculous Judgments of God Executed on Murmurers. Some of them were
destroyed by Earthquakes; and went down alive into Hell,and others of them were
consumed by Fire from Heaven: The very next day they fall to Murmuring again;
and call those wicked Rebels whom God had made Examples of his Vengeance, The
Lords People; and Charge their Rulers with being the Authors of their Death.
Was not Samuel a good Governor? He never took a Bribe in his Life, of any man.
An Ungrateful People could not but acknowledge that he had been a good
Governor: No man could accuse him of any Maladministration: For all that
they Rejected him, and Longed for another, until God sent them a Tyrannical
one, whom He gave in his Anger and took away in his Wrath. Was not David a good
Commander? And yet when a Fatal Accident happened at Ziklag, the People began to
speak of Stoning him. Rulers, especially such as are Chief in Government, are
sometimes called unto a work in which they will meet with great Opposition: So
it is when they are set over a Degenerate People; whose Reformation their
Office obliges them to Endeavor. Then they need a great Courage. Thus when
Asa was King, the People were greatly Corrupted with Idolatry; and some of the
greatest Persons in the Kingdom were Enemies to Reformation; in special the
Queens Mother was so. Wherefore God sent a Prophet, who said to the King and
People; Be you Strong, and let not your Hearts be Weak; for your work shall be
Rewarded. What work? Their Endeavors to Reform Corruptions and Abuses, both as
to Worship and Manners: when Asa heard this, it is said, He took Courage, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7, 8. Moreover, It is the Duty of Magistrates to cause Evil Doers to
be Punished, according to their Demerits: which they cannot do without Exposing
themselves to the Hatred and Obloquy of it may be not a few; and that will
terrify them from the Discharge of their Duty in Punishing Offenders, if they
have not Courage. Job was a Faithful and Courageous Magistrate: wherefore he
speaks as in Job 31. 34. Did I fear a great Multitude, or did the Contempt of
Families terrify me? He knew that a Multitude of evil men would be Enraged at
him; especially that the Families which were Related to the Malefactors, whom
he ordered to be Punished for their wickedness, would be displeased; but that
could not terrify him from the discharge of his Duty. There are Judges who if
Great Criminals are Great Men, they will say nothing; but keep themselves at
Home, when they should be on the Seats of Judicature. Job was no such
Timerous*Man-pleasing Judge; therefore he adds, that he was not so terrified as
to keep Silence, and not go out of Doors. Judges must be Able Men, Exodus 18.
21. The Hebrew phrase there, is, Aushe Chaijl, Men of Might; not in respect of
Strength of Body, but of Greatness of Soul. A man of a Little Soul will be
easily Corrupted with a Bribe; or out of Fear be Partial in his Judgments: But
he that has a Mighty Courageous Soul, will not be so. A Famous Judge said, that
the Life of a Judge was, Militia qu^dam si non Martyrium; in both which Courage
is requisite: He will meet with many Temptations to Partiality by the
importunity of Friends; which will assuredly Overcome him, if he has not the
Virtue of Courage: And a Martyr he must be in bearing Patiently the
Provocations, Censures, Reproaches which the displeased Party (and one Party
will be displeased) shall cast upon him.

2. The Ministers of Christ, need a good measure of Courage. They must deliver
the Messages of God with freedom and boldness. The Apostles prayed that they
might do so. Act. 4. 29. Grant unto thy Servants that with all boldness they
may speak thy word. And Paul desired the Christian Ephesians to pray for him
that he might Speak boldly as he ought to speak, Ephesians. 6. 20. It belongs to them
as well as unto Civil Rulers to Endeavor to Reform the World. When there was
great Corruptions and Immoralities in the Jewish Church, and a Reformation of
those abuses was discoursed of, it was said to Ezra the Minister of God, this
Matter belongs to thee, be of good Courage, and do it, Ezr. 10. 4. When a Storm
of Persecution rises it falls chiefly upon them. They are (as Uriah was) Set
in the Forefront of the hottest battle. The Malignity of the old Serpent and
of his Seed aims at them especially, because they are Eminently instrumental in
pulling down Satan's Kingdom,and in advancing the Interest and Kingdom of Christ
in the World. One of the Kings in Persia caused all the Ministers of Christ
throughout his Dominions to be Martyred when their Flocks escaped his fury. He
thought that if the Shepherds were all destroyed, their Flocks would soon be
scattered and come to nothing. They are the Lords Witnesses who are a torment
to them that dwell on the Earth. They are by their Office Reprovers. And
therefore must Reprove the Sins of men impartially, without sparing any who are
Guilty, be they Great or Small. This Charge did the Lord lay upon his Prophet;
Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my
People their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins. Sometimes they
are called to Oppose and Reprove the Generality of their People. Aaron should
have done so; but he wanted Courage: It seems he was afraid the People would
then do him a mischief, Exodus 32. 22. Some of the Jewish Writers say, (how
truly I know not, the Scripture mentions nothing of it) that Hur one of the
Princes in Israel Opposed their Idolatry in the Wilderness; at which they were
so enraged, as to Kill him; and that Aaron was afraid that the Ungoverned
Multitude would serve him after the same manner. To be sure, he was more afraid
than he ought to have been; and that Fear was very unbecoming his Character.
Sometimes the Ministers of God are called to Reprove Great Men: Jer. 5. 5. I
will get me to the Great men, and will speak to them. How shall they do this
without a great Fortitude of spirit? When King Uzziah would presume to go into
that part of the Temple, which none but the Priests might enter into; and offer
Incense there: It is said, that Azariah the Priest went in after him; and with
him Four-score Priests of the Lord, who were Valiant men: And they withstood
Uzziah the King. How did they withstand him? Not by offering any Violence to
his Person: but by faithful Admonitions and Reproofs. They said to him, Thou
have Trespassed; neither shall it be for thine Honor, from the Lord God:
Meaning, that God would leave a mark of Infamy upon him, for that his Trespass:
And so it came to pass, for he was immediately smitten with an incurable
Leprosy. He Died a Leper, which was not for his Honor, 2 Chronicles. 26. 17, 18,
19. A Courage not altogether unlike to this, there was in Ambrose: For when the
Emperor Theodosius had in his Passion caused many innocent men to be Slain,
among some who were guilty of a Treasonable Offense; Ambrose refused to
Administer the Sacrament to him, until he had manifested a very deep Penitence
and Repentance for his Error. The Ministers of God may well be Courageous in
the discharge of their Duty, considering whom they Represent; and whose Name
they come in, when they deliver the Messages of God. When David was to
Encounter with Goliath; that which made him so Courageous, was that he could
say, I come to thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel 17. 45. As a
Message from God ought to be received with great respect, although it comes by
the hand of an inferior Person. When Ehud said to a Prince, I have a Message
from God unto you; he arose out of his Seat to hear it. When Balaam was sent
with a Message from God to Balak the King of Moab; he said to him, Rise up and
hear, Numb. 23. 18. So that Consideration is sufficient to inspire the
Messenger with Courage.

It has been reported, that a Minister Preaching to the Earl of Stratford, then
Lord Deputy in Ireland; he faithfully Reproved some Corruptions which that
Governor was known to be guilty of; at which he was displeased; and the next
day in a great Passion sends for the Minister beginning his Discourse thus;
Yesterday, when you were before me, you said such and such things. The Minister
replied to him, You are mistaken, Sir, I was not before you Yesterday: I
confess I am before your Excellency to Day; but you were before me Yesterday.
You Represent the King: but Yesterday I was made the Representative of the
Almighty GOD, who is infinitely above the Greatest Kings on Earth. Upon that
the Earl was so affected, as to dismiss the Minister, without saying any more
to him.

Of all men in the World, the Ministers of CHRIST may not be Spiritual Cowards.
It was a great and desired Character, which was given of that Super-eminent
Minister and great Reformer in Scotland, Mr. Knox. One standing by his Grave
said, Here lies one who in the Cause of God, never knew what it was to be
afraid of the Face of a Man.

3. Military Men above others need a great Fortitude and Courage. For if they
are called to actual Service against the Enemy, they Expose their Lives to
danger, which without Courage they will be loath to do. (...) said concerning
his Father Gideon, Judge. 9. 17. My Father fought for you, and adventured his
life far. He Exposed himself to the greatest dangers: for him with but Three
hundred to engage in battle with more than an hundred thousand, was Courage and
Mighty Valor, as the Angel said of him: but since the word for the battle to
begin, was, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon! the Sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon! that put Courage into him. If there had been only the Sword of Gideon,
he might have despaired, but he knew that the Sword of the Lord was engaged
with him, and that made him fear no danger. It is also said of the people of
Zebulon and Naphtali, That they Jeoparded their Lives unto death in the high
places of the field, Judge. 5. 18. First they Expected their Enemies to come to
them on Mount Tabor, where they put themselves in battle array, so did they
Jeopard their Lives in the high places of the field, but they not coming, they
went down to meet their Enemies, choosing rather an honorable Death in the
Service of their Country, than to live Slaves under such a Tyrant as Jabin was.
They had more Courage and Grace than to be for Non Resistance and Passive
Obedience, when God called them to make a Revolution. Nothing is more
unbecoming a Soldier than Cowardice. The old Romans were very severe in their
discipline toward such. If a battle were fought and any man saved his Life by
flying, they would not suffer him to come home again, they would banish him out
of his Country. We find in Scripture that God would not suffer a faint-hearted
Soldier to be employed in the Armies of Israel when they were to go out to
battle against their Enemies, left one Coward should make many. Dent 20. 8. The
Officers shall speak unto the People, and they shall say, what man is there
that is fearful and faint hearted? Let him go, and return to his house, lest
his brethrens heart faint as well as his heart. It becomes a Soldier to be
Valiant. Especially Fortitude and Courage is necessary for Commanders who have
Soldiers under them. Joab who was the General of David's Army, although we cannot
say that he was endowed with the Grace of Courage, nevertheless, he was
qualified with an Heroic gift in respect of Fortitude of Mind. A Learned
Historian thinks that Joab was the bravest Captain General that ever drew a
Sword. He spoke like an Hero, and like a man of Religion too, when seeing the
Enemy neady to fall upon him in the Front, and in the Rear, he said to his
brother Abishai, Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our People,
and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good, 2 Samuel
10. 13. This was admirably spoken. Courage in a Commander, puts Courage in
those who are under his Command. It has been said by some, and it is a Truth,
That an Army of Hearts who are timorous Creatures, being led by a Lion for their
Captain, will do more Execution, than an Army of Lions would do, having an Heart
to be their Leader.

We proceed now to the APPLICATION of the Doctrine which has been insisted on.

USE. I. This may put us upon Examination, whether we have theGrace of Courage?
You have heard that men may have a Natural Courage, and be adorned with an
Heroic gift of Fortitude, and yet not have the Christian Grace of Courage,
which is most Excellent, and more to be desired than the other. And yet this,
they who are naturally Weak and Timorous, may (...) have a great measure of it.

Let me then mention to you some Characters of one that has this Grace.

1. He is one that will bear a Faithful Testimony to the Truth, and against the
Errors and Corruptions of the Time and Place in which the Divine Providence has
disposed of him. There are some Truths which are the special Truths of the day.
These the Scripture calls, The present Truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12. The great Truth of
the Time in the Apostles days, was, That the Promised Messiah is come, and that
Jesus of Nazareth is He. If a man did own that Truth, his Estate, Liberty, and
Life was in danger to be taken from him. It argued a noble Courage to be in
those that would profess their belief of it. And therefore in those days for a
man to speak those few words, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
was as great and a greater evidence of a true Conversion, than any Relation of
a work of Grace, is in these days. 1 John 4. 15. Whosoever shall confess that
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. So far as men could
Judge it was so. In after ages to assert the Godhead of our Savior was the
Truth of the Times. After that to appear for the Truths relating to the
Prophetical Office of Christ in opposition to the Traditions of men. And after
that truths relating to the Priestly Office of Christ, that He is the alone
Priest of the New Testament, who has made a full Atonement for the Sins of his
People by the Sacrifice of Himself, on whose Merit we must depend, and not on
any Works or Righteousness of our own; these have been the special Truths of
the Times, which many Martyrs have been Sealing with their blood in opposition
to Popery. In these Latter Ages truths which respect the Kingly Office of
Christ as he is the only Head of his Church, have been and are the Truth of the
Times which we ought Courageously to bear our Testimony unto.

There are also Errors which are Errores Secuti, the Errors of the Age which
the Servants of God have been wont faithfully and courageously to witness
against them. The Prophet Complains of such as were not so, Jer. 9. 3. They are
not Valiant for the Truth. Among the Children of Israel, Idolatry was the great
Sin which People were then guilty of: Therefore did the holy Prophets in a
Singular manner set themselves to Testify against that iniquity. There was a
Time when Arianisme was the prevailing Error of the Christian World. When an
Arian was got into the Imperial throne, on a sudden the World was become an
Arian. Then did Athanasius acquit himself like a Champion of the Lord, not
ceasing to bear his Testimony against the grand Error of that Time; for which
he suffered Banishment more than once, and at last Died an Exile. Then was unus
Athanasius contra t^tum Mundum.

There is Corruption in Manners as well as in Doctrine, which the Lords
Servants should show their Courage in bearing a due Testimony against it. Thus
it was with the Jews after their Return from Captivity in Babylon; they did not
Apostatize to an Idolatrous Worship; but there were great Immoralities found
among them, Sabbath-breaking, Unlawful Marriages, Oppression of the Poor, and
Scandalous Covetousness; against all which Ezra and Nehemiah were Faithful and
Zealous Witnesses. Some of the Lords Servants have lost their Lives, and been
Martyred for their Faithfulness in Testifying against the Ungodliness of
Profane men. John Baptist would venture to Reprove Herod for his Scandalous
Life, though he lost his Head for it. Ecclesiastical Writers inform us, that
the Evengelist Timothy, when he saw the Multitude in the Streets with Clubs,
and with Masks on, abominably Rude and Profane, in an Holy Zeal he Reproved
them for their Evil Manners; at which they were so enraged, as that they fell
upon him and Murdered him.

2. Another Character of one that has the Grace of Courage, is, That when he
sees his Call Clear, he will Venture, let the Event be what it may be. He Will
discharge his Duty, and leave Events with God. Nothing can move him out of the
way of Duty. He stands like a Rock: Putting his Trust in God, he is like a
Mountain that cannot be removed. Although if he persist in what he is called
unto, probably it will be prejudicial to his Worldly Interest; he may be a
great Loses by it, that will not move him out of his way, when he is in the way
where the Lord calls him to be, and to abide therein. There are men who will be
for Christ's Interest so far as will Comport with their own carnal Interest,
but no further. Like that Prince of Navar, who favored the Protestant cause,
but when Beza advised him to venture himself and to fall in with that Religion,
being the only true Religion, He replied, He Would venture out in that Sea so far
as he might be sure to come safe ashore, but no further: Thus it is with many.
But where is the Grace of Courage now! He that has that Grace in Exercise no
dangers can affright him out of the way of duty. Did not Pharaoh threaten
Moses? but what says the Scripture: Heb. 11. 27. By faith he forsook Egypt,
that was when he conducted the Children of Israel as their Leader out of Egypt,
no more to return thither, Not fearing the wrath of the King, who had threatened
to be his death: He Endured: He persevered in the way of his duty. The Greek
word Ekarterese, implies Fortitude of Mind, a Courageous undaunted Spirit! As
seeing him who is invisible. The fear of God makes a Christian to be above the
fear of man. When the Empress Eudoxa (like Jezabel to the Prophet Elijah) sent
a threatening Message to Chrysostom; What should be done to him, Go (said he)
tell the Empress that I am afraid of nothing, but of Sinning against God. When
there was to be a great Convention in the City of Worms in Germany, and the
Emperor sent to Luther, that he should appear there, his friends dissuaded him,
because he had many Enemies in that City: He replied, these disswasions are
from Satan: I may do a great Service for Christ by bearing witness to his Truth
in that august Assembly, and therefore if all the Tyles on the houses in that
great City were so many Devils to oppose me, in the the Name of the Lord I will
go. This was Courageous and Magnanimous. Therefore,

3. He that has the Grace of Courage will choose rather to Suffer than to Sin.
Joseph was Exposed to great Sufferings rather than he would Sin; Genesis 39. 9.
How shall I do this wickedness and Sin against God? The like holy Resolution we
see in Moses: He chose (and it was a choice in which his Courage appeared)
rather to Suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
of Sin, Heb. 11. 25. He knew that he could not enjoy those pleasures which the
Egyptian Courtiers indulged themselves in, but he must then Sin against God. He
chose rather to suffer the loss of all the honor and riches of a Kingdom. The
Three Worthies in Daniel chose rather to Suffer than to Sin, yea, rather to be
burnt alive than to Sin against God: with an undaunted Courage they told the
greatest Emperor and Tyrant in the World to his face, that he might do his
worst, they would never Join with him in his Idolatrous Worship, Dan. 3. 18.
The Prophet Daniel when he knew the Emperor had Published an Edict against it,
he would let the World see that he worshipped the true God and him only, and
would venture to be thrown into the den of Lions rather than be guilty of a Sin
of Omission. It is noted concerning the Hebrew Martyrs, That they were tortured
not accepting deliverance, Heb. 11. 35. Antiochus the King of Syria (an eminent
Type of Antichrist) promised those Martyrs that their Lives should be spared if
they would eat one Mouthful of Swines flesh, which under the Ceremonial Law, it
was not Lawful for them who were Jews to do; Therefore they chose rather to be
tortured to Death than to do it. The Martyrelogies have many Examples of
Christians who have chosen the greatest Sufferings rather than to Sin against
their Consciences in the least. To do thus is to be Strong and very Courageous.

USE. II. What shall be thought of Spiritual Cowards? That Live so, and Die so.
This we must think of them, that they are not true Christians: For the Grace of
Courage is inseparable from real Christianity. Christ has said, Whoever does
not bear his Cross cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 27. And again, v. 33.
Whosoever be (...) that forsakes not all that he has cannot be my Disciple.
This no man will consent unto which has not the Grace of Courage in his Soul.
Without Courage the Cross cannot be endured. If a man will be a Christian he
must fight Manfully under Christ's banner to the last gasp, and not desert his
Cause when it comes to a battle. A Christian is a Martyr in Voto, willing to
part with what he has, Life and all if Christ shall call for it. Act 21. 13. I
am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus.
And who are Spiritual Cowards?

1. Such as having given their Names to Christ, when Persecution comes they
prove Deserters. They have lifted themselves among the Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and by their Baptism Sworn Fidelity to him, yet when Tribulation or
Persecution arises because of the word, by and by they are offended, and turn
Apostates from the Truth. Such there were in the Apostles days. There were
some among the Galatians who urged Christians to be Circumcised as the Jews
were, Only lest they should suffer Persecution, Gal. 6. 12. In those days the
Jewish Religion was tolerated in the Provinces of the Roman Empire, when the
Christian Religion was not. All the Circumcised were looked upon as Jews. Hence
some nominal Christians would be so, that they might escape Persecution. In
after Ages very many Christians would fall away from the Truth as a new Storm
of Persecution arose. And some would hide their Religion: they were convinced
in their Consciences that the Gospel was the Truth, and they afraid to disown
it lest they should provoke God, and yet afraid to own it left they should be
exposed to Persecution and Death. These men would bribe Corrupt Officers to
sign a Libel testifying that they had Sacrificed to Idols, although they never
did so, by that means they escaped the Storm which proved fatal to better
Christians. These were called Libellatici. The Churches in those days cast
them out of their Communion as unworthy of the Name of Christians. How many in
these latter Times, yea, in our Days, have Apostatized from the Truth because
of a cruel Persecution? Are there not Millions of them in one unhappy Kingdom
at this day? Has not the French dragon boasted that he has dragooned Twenty
hundred thousand Protestants (whom he calls Heretics) into a Compliance with
Popish Idolatry?

2. Time Servers are Spiritual Cowards. There have been men in the World whose
principle (however their practice) has been to be of that Religion which is
uppermost: They will be of the State Religion be it what it will. The Mullitude
is apt to be of the Kings Religion. When Jeroboam set up his Superstitious
Worship, the generality of the Nation conformed: They went willingly after the
Commandment, Hos. 5* 11. And when Rehoboam who was King over Judah, forsook the
Law of the Lord, it is observed that all Israel did so with him, 2 Chronicles. 12.
1. There was a man whose Name was P^rn, who in the Reign of King Henry VIII.
was of his Religion, and in the Reign of King Edward VI. he professed himself a
Protestant. In the Reign of Queen Mary he turned Papist again. In the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, he would be a Protestant again. Whence if a man was notorious
for his Time-serving, it became Proverbial to say, He did Pernare. Such an
Infamy has his Temporizing left on his Name. Many will be of that Religion
which is the way to preferment. They will Sin against their light rather then
loose a place of profit or honor. (...) may be for such a trifling honor as a
Commission to be a Captain or a Major, or a Justice of Peace, the man will tack
about and change his party. Such a Coward (especially if he has been an
Hypocritical Pretender to Religion) deserves to be an abhorring of all men:
What would such a man do, if it should come to Fire and Faggot? And what will
such Temporizing Cowards gain by their base Compliances? Most certainly they
will find themselves loosers at last, however they may please themselves at
present. Christ says, He that will save his life shall loose it, Mat. 16. 24.
By saving a Temporal Life loose an Eternal Life which is infinitely better. And
oftentimes such Time-servers miss of that Temporal happiness which they
promised themselves. Our English Martyrologist gives a remarkable account of a
Man who in Queen Maryes days turned a Papist: One Expostulating with him about
it, and demanding the reason of his deserting the Truth, I know (said he) that
the Protestant Religion is the true Religion, but I cannot burn for it. Within
a while this man's house happened to be on fire, and he himself was burnt to Death
in it. He that would not burn for his Testimony to the Truth, must burn in and
for his Apostasy from it. It is an awful thought that the first of those shall
be punished with the Second Death are, The Fearful: These are set in the Front,
Rev. 21. 8.

USE. III. I finish my discourse with a word of EXHORTATION. And let it be in
the words of the Text before us, which are the words of God, Be you Strong and
very Courageous. I would particularly and especially direct this Exhortation to
Military Men: As to the Gentlemen who have occasioned this Solemnity, so to all
others who are or may be called to Soldiery and War. I am sensible that I have
Exceeded the Time: But forgive me this once. It is this very day five and
forty years since I spoke in this Place on the like occasion; and you may be
sure, that I shall never trouble you again on the like occasion after this day.
Let me then desire your Patience and Attention unto a few words of
Encouragement.

1. The Calling of a Soldier is a Lawful Calling. Otherwise that which is the
Christian virtue of Courage could not be manifested in the Exercise of it. It
is said that the Righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. If there is not
Righteousness in the Foundation, boldness in the Action, is not a virtue. This
may embolden Soldiers, their Calling is a Lawful Calling. They are not like
those that live by Robbery, or Pyracy, or by being Actors in Stage plays, or
any other unlawful Calling. When the Soldiers demanded of John Baptist,
saying, What shall we do? He did not tell them that they should cease to be
Soldiers, which if the Calling had been unlawful he would undoubtedly have
done, but he bid themdo Violence to no man, and be Content with their Wages,
Luk 3* 14. which implies that they ought to do the work of Soldiers. They
might not take Wages for an unlawful Work. Was not one of the first Christian
Gentiles a Soldier and a Captain? Captain, or rather Colonel Cornelius by
Name, Commander of an Italian band, was among the first Gentiles that were
baptized into the Name of Christ, Act. 10. 1. with Chap. 15. 7. Chronologers
suppose, that the Lord Treasurer belonging to the Queen of Ethiopia was
baptized two years before Cornelius; but he was in respect of his Religion a
Jew incorporated into that Church which Cornelius was not, being only a
Proselyte of that Gate, and not of Righteousness, as the Jews distinguish. But
to proceed, All Wars are not unlawful. For God Himself is the Author of some
Wars, but He is not, nor can he be the Author of that which is absolutely
Sinful. Nor would he then be Styled a Man of War, as He is, Exodus 15. 3. And
the God of Armies, Psalm* 46. 7. The Scripture speaks of, The Wars of the Lord,
Numb. 21. 14. Such as He approves of and requires. He commanded the Children of
Israel to Contend in battle with the Amorites, Deuteronomy. 2. 24. Battles fought with
the Enemies of God are called, The Lords battles, 1 Samuel 18. 17. There are Just
Wars which the Lord Himself calls men to engage in. The light of Nature directs
men unto a Defensive War. God has put a principle of self preservation into his
Creatures. And in some cases men may be called to engage in an Offensive War.
This may be Lawful when their Liberties, Properties and Possessions are
invaded. Thus when the Ammonites made War against Israel, thinking to
dispossess them of those Lands which they had a right unto, and been in the
possession of Three hundred years: Jephtha said to the King of the Ammonites,
Thou do me wrong to War against me, Judge 11. 27. Therefore the Children of
Israel fought against them and slew them with a great Slaughter: This was just.
When the Philistines came against Keilah, and Robbed their Threshing floors,
David and his men did by Gods appointment fight the Philistines, and delivered
Keilah, 1 Samuel 23. 4, 5. The like he did to the Amalekites when they had
Plundered and burned Ziklag. Or, if Enemies fall upon those who are in
Consideracy, or in Alliance with us, that may be a just ground of War. Of this
the Scripture gives us an Example in Abraham, who when his Confederates were
attacked, headed a small Army, and rescued them, Genesis 14. 13, 16. Thus also the
Children of Israel armed themselves to rescue their brethren in Jabesh Gilead,
when Nabash with his Ammonites encamped against them, 1 Samuel 11. 1. Only it is
to be remembered that an Offensive War is not to be undertaken but with the
Consent and Authority of the Magistrates. The reason is because War is an act
of Vindictive Justice, and therefore must have the Countenance of those who are
by their Office Revengers to Execute wrath on them that do Evil. It is not for
private persons to revenge without direction from God or his Vicegerents.

2. It is possible for a Man to be a Military Man, and a very Pious Man. One
may be a good Soldier and a good Christian. Although generally it is otherwise.
The old verse has been too generally true, Nulla fides Pietasque viris qui
castra sequnntur; Nevertherless, an Eminency in the Carnal Warfare, and in the
Spiritual Warfare, are not incompatible to the same Person. Some of the most
Pious Men we read of in the Scripture were Soldiers. Abraham the Father of the
Faithful had Trained Bands, well disciplined Soldiers under him. Joshua the
best Man in the World in his Time, was a Captain General. David a Man after
Gods own heart, was a Man of War, as Hushai said of him, 2 Samuel 18. 17. and a
Soldier from his Youth. In Saul's Time, he was a Colond, and after that a King,
and a Renowned and Successful General. One of the most Eminent Believers spoken
of in the New Testament was a Soldier. There was a Captain, who said, I have
Soldiers under me, If I say to this man go, he goes, and to another, come,
and he comes. Thus (says he) If Christ will but speak the word, my sick
Servant will be healed. When Jesus heard this he marvelled, and said, I have
not found so great Faith no not in Israel, Math. 8. 10.

I might speak of Military Men in these Latter days, who have been Mirrors of
Piety. The most Learned Professor of Theology in the University of Utrick, has
given the World an account of a Soldier whom he knew, a Young Scotch
Gentleman, a Captain in the Low Countries of whom he says, that but few Divines
were in respect of Devotion, and the Practice of Piety equal to him, that was a
Soldier: He was a diligent Hearer of the Word not only on the Lords day, but
on Week days. He was profitable in Conversation: He spent much Time in reading
the Scripture, and in Prayer: Would often spend whole days alone with God in
his Closet. He kept a constant daily Watch over his heart and thoughts, as well
as over his words and actions, until at last being called to engage in a battle
with the Spaniards, he fought Valiantly, and obtained a notable Victory, but he
was himself slain in the battle. An Army filled with such Captains and
Commanders, would surely be Victorious: God would be with them, and no Enemy
would be able to stand before them.

3. It is now a Time in which there is occasion to Learn and to Practice the
Art of War. There is a tumultuous noise of the Kingdoms and Nations gathered
together. The Lord of Hosts is Mustering the host of the battle. Do we not hear
the rushing of the Nations, that make a noise like the noise of the Sea? Peace
is taken from the Earth. In what part of the earth is there Peace at this day!
The cry from one End of the World to another, is, Arm! Arm! Stand to your Arms.
And how long shall we hear the sound of the Trumpet, and the alarm of War! who
can say how long! It is true that there will a time come when there shall be an
Universal Peace all over the World. The Kingdoms of the World shall become the
Kingdoms of Christ, and then there will be Peace throughout the Earth. So has
the Oracle assured us. Isa. 2. 4. Nation shall not lift up Sword against
Nation, neither shall they Learn War any more. But that Time is not yet come.
We know from the Scripture that there are Wars of the Lord yet to come. There
is the great battle of Armageddon, besides other battles to be fought.
Antichrist and his Adherents to their own ruin, will make War against the Lamb
and his Followers. It will be in part by the Sword, that Antichristian
Persecutors of the Church of God shall be destroyed. That Enemy who has killed
so many with the Sword, Must be killed with the Sword,Rev. 13. 10. How many has
he killed among the Waldenses? Not less than Eleven hundred thousand. How many
in Bohemia? How many in Germany? How many in France? How many in the
Netherlands? How many in Ireland? Not to mention other Places: The Lord will
give them blood to drink for they are Worthy.

4. If the Lord shall Call any of you to engage in a War against his Enemies,
in case you act therein from a right principle and for a right End, your work
shall be rewarded. It was said to David, that the Lord would certainly make him
a sure house, that is Establish the Kingdom in his Family, because he fought
the battles of the Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 28. If the Lord will punish men for
neglecting to go to War against his Enemies when he calls them to it* so has He
threatened: Jer. 48. 10. Cursed is (...) does the work of the Lord deceitfully.
Warring against the Moabites, is called the Work of the Lord. And Cursed is be
that keeps back his Sword from blood; then He will reward those that venture
their Lives in his cause.

Let us be sure that the War which we engage in is the War of the Lord, that
which He approves of and calls us unto, and then if we have a sincere respect
to his Glory, in case we should loose our Lives in the battle, that will make
us Martyrs: And we may then Expect the Crown of Martyrdom among those who for
the sake of Christ have not Loved their Lives unto the Death. That Renowned
Reformer Zuinglius, who lost his Life in a fatal battle between the Protestants
and Papists in Switzerland, is to be reckoned a Martyr. The like is to be said
of that famous Minister in France the Learned Chamier, who was killed with a
Canon bullet when there was War in that Kingdom between Protestants and Papists.

Such Considerations as these ought to be an encouragement to those who are or
may be called to Military Service. Wherefore be not faint-hearted, nor backward
to any Expedition which the Providence of God shall call you unto. Play the Men
for your People, and for the Cities of your God. If he shall make you or any of
you instrumental Saviors to your Country* that a Mercy and what an Honor will
it be. Wherefore, I Conclude with the words of King Jehoshaphat
beforementioned, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. Deal Courageously, and the Lord shall be
with the Good.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 25 line 8. for desired, read, deserved.


