THE Alsufficient Physician Tendering to Heal the Political and Spiritual
Wounds and Sicknesses OF A Distressed PROVINCE.

As it was Discoursed in a SERMON Preached before His Excellency the GOVERNOR,
the Honorable COUNCIL and Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, on May 30. 1711.

Which was the Day for Election of Her Majesty's Council for that Province.

By PETER THACHER, A. M. And Pastor of the Church in Milton.

Hos. 6.1, 2. Come and let us return unto the Lord* for he has torn, and he
will heal us, etc. Jer. 17.14. Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed: save me,
and I shall be saved. Exodus 15.26. I am the LORD that heals thee. Boston:
Printed by B Green, for Eleazer Phillips, at his Shop on the South side of the
Townhouse 1711.

Boston, May, 31st. 1711.
PRinted at the des;ire of the House of Representatives.

John Burrell Speaker.

Sovereign Divine Healing.
ISAIAH. LVII.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him
also, and restore Comforts unto him, and to his Mourners.
IT was a sad and awful Expostulation uttered by the holy Prophet, in Jer.
14.19 Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy Soul loathed Zion? Why have
thou smitten us and there is no healing for us? We looked for Peace and there
is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble; Hence the same
Prophet gives vent to his pent up grief, by saying, When I would comfort my
self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me; the Harvest is past, the Summer
is ended, and we are not healed; for the hurt of the Daughter of my People, I
am hurt, I am black, Astonisment has taken hold upon me: Is there no Balm in
Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Jer. 8.18, 20, 21, 22. Our Text presents a
rich and royal Cordial that may revive the drooping Spirits of God's Children
when his backslidden People among whom they live, are by their own Sins, and
God's judgments sunk into the greatest depth of distress; in that it gives us
God's Free and Sovereign Engagement in way of Prerogative Mercy, To be a Healer
to this Sin-sick and Self-destroying People: Wherein the great God presents
himself under the Notion of an Alsufficient Physician,

1. Graciously Visiting this Sick Patient, [ I have seen] I who am the High and
Lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, the holy One of Israel his Savior and
Physician, I am come, not as a Judge, to punish, but as a compassionate
Physician, to visit and take notice of the Malady; in order to the Application
of a suitable rememy.

2. This most Excellent and Skilful Physician has a perfect knowledge of the
Nature and Malignity of the Disease; I have seen his ways, o^ I do see his way,
so some render it, i. e. his complicated distress, his chronical disease, the
ways of the heart, lip, and life of the Jews my Professing People; I have seen
the Iniquity of his Covetousness, I have seen him go on frowardly in the way of
his heart: in the 17. verse. of this Chapter. The disease has had many remedies
applied without Success; many Means and Methods of healing have been improved;
and when Means have been used to Cure the disease that was most visible; some
other disease has appeared, whose Symptoms were more awfully threatening, and
obstructive to the Cure: so that this complicated distemper has sadly and
signally advanced upon the languishing Patient, in so much that it is now
deeply rooted and is grown Malignant and Immedicable, yea altogether incurable,
by any Physician, but the Almighty Physician himself who can heal and help in
an incontroulable way. Vidi quo abierit, (says Musculus) quo tandem miser ac
calamitosus pervenerit, quem finem viaram suarum sorytitus sit, quibus sese
plagis involverit ac confecerit: quare mis^ricordia motus sanabo eum, curabo
illius vulnera. I have seen how far he has gone away (says Musculus) whether
at length this Miserable and Calamitous Patient hath' rambled, what is like to
be the Miserable end of his sinful ways, by how many Plagues he has entangled
and destroyed himself; wherefore being moved with Mercy, I will Heal him and I
will cure his Wounds.

3. Now in this Article of Extremity in this Juncture of Distress, the Bowels
of this Good and Great Physician are troubled for this perishing Patient, I
will surely have Mercy upon him, faith the Lord: Jer. 31.20, I will Heal him.
Vul nera illius curabo ac lig^bo, I will bind up and cure his ulcerated Wounds,
nisi enim hoc ag^m, prersus, intereat necesse est; for unless I do this, he
must at length inevitably perish; therefore this his Extremity shall be my
Opportunity to display my Sovereign Mercy and Divine Clemency toward him, I
now say to him as I said to my People of old, I am the LORD that bealeth thee,
Exodus 15.26. Insanabiles autem sunt morbi nostri, nisi nos ^^ser; cordia sua
Dominus praeveniat. Calvin, Our Diseases are Immedicable and altogether
Incurable (says Calvin) unless Sovereign Mercy speedily step in for our help.

I will lead him also] Reduxi eum ab exilio, in patriam: I have returned him
from Captivity into his Native Country; so some render it: requiescere faciam
eum, (says Musculus) a lab^ribus videlicet, molest is and aerumnis Babylonicae
servitue is. I will make him to rest, (says Musculus) from his labor, viz.
from the troubles and distresses of his Babylonical servitude. This leading
(say others) respects their weakness by sin; God will lead them and cause them
to go. Isa. 48.I7. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to Profit, which
leads thee by the way that thou should go. There is a ( Manutenentiu Dei)
an invisible Hand-holding of God, by which the whole visible Creation is
Supported and Conducted; without which no Creature could hold on in the way of
Nature; much more is there an invisible Hand-holding of God, by which the
Spiritual creation is Supported and Conducted; and without which the new
Creature cannot hold on in the ways of Grace. It Is the hold which Christ the
Physician has of this Patient; and the rooting which he has in Christ, by which
he is confirmed and led.

4. The Effect of it, is comfort to him and to his Mourners. It implys the
removal of the anguish and sorrow following Sin; and the conferring comfort and
consolation upon them and their Mourners; that is, such as Mourn over the sin,
rebellion and obstinacy of this froward People, and sympathize with them in
their deep distress. God has some Mourners in the worst of times, that are
faithful with God, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. These God will take care of in time of general
judgment, to comfort these Mourners; to appoint unto them that Mourn in Zion,
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of Joy for Mourning, the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called trees of
righteousness the Planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified, Isai. 61.2, 3.

The DOCTRINE from the words is this.

DOCT. When God has a design of Love to a Person or Province, He will Observe
their Ways in order to their healing, He will lead them also, and restore
Comforts to them and to their Mourners.

When there is a Patient dangerously Sick, under a purpose of Gods Love, God
Himself will be his Physician. Thus it was with Israel in Jeremiah's time, when
God said to her why cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable,
for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have
done these things unto thee. I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal
thee of thy wounds, faith the Lord, because they call thee an outcast, saying,
This is Zion, whom no man seeks after* As if God had said, true indeed your
case is in it self desperate, but for this cause I will undertake thy Cure, I
have a remedy for the worst of thy Maladies; Here we have God's Cure of Zion,
when incurably Wounded; Now God will apply a Sanative Cataplasm, a Healing
Plaster: This is Repentance, and Restitution, Jer. 30.15, 17. [Thus Excellent
Mr. Norton discants upon these words in his Election Sermon.] So, Isai. 43.25.
I even I am he that bloteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. To whom is this promise made? See 22, 23. verses. They
were such as had either neglected or corrupted the Service of God and Divine
Worship, and were refractory in it; yet God brings in this promise, I that am
thus slighted, thus provoked, Will blot out your iniquities, Isai. 30.17, 18.

For the clearing up of the Doctrine, take two Propositions.

PROP. I. GOD sees and observes the ways of his professing Declining People to
whom He has a design of Love.

Take two Positions here.

Pos. 1. The ways of a People are either Internal or External. The Internal
ways of a People are the ways of their heart, as in our Context, Isa. 57.I7, He
went on frowardly in the way of his heart. And these ways of the heart, their
inward ways, are, their Thoughts, what they imagine and conceive: Their
Affections, what they love, and what they hate, what they rejoice in, and what
they Mourn for, declare the way of their heart. The ways of their heart are
their purposes, resolutions, and intentions what to do. Yea, the ways of their
heart are their designs or aims, what they drive at, or propose as their end in
all that they do. These Internal ways of a People are seen and observed by God:
Joh. 2.25. He needed not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was
in man. And God sees and observes the External ways of a People. Yea if we take
the ways of a People as differenced in their kinds, as they are either good or
evil; the Eyes of the Lord are upon both. They are (says Solomon Prove. 15.3.)
in every place, beholding the evil and the good. Hence what ever is done in the
World, falls under the notice and cognizance of God, He that looks to the
ends of the earth, and sees under the whole heaven, cannot but take notice of
all that is done, or comes to pass all the world over, Job 28.24. The Lord
beholds all things distinctly; not in gross only or in a lump; He beholds the
least as well as the greatest; He looks upon every parcel, and opens the whole
pack and bundle of humane affairs; Personal, Domestic, Civil, Sacred,
Military. He beholds every thing, and Person, People and Province perfectly,
fully, quite through; He that is All Eye sees all at once, all as one. Acts
15.18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. He is
Omniscient, and Omnipresent, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, I0, 11, 12. This
Thought should repress all tumultuatings of Spirit in Gods Children in the
greatest Worldly tumults and vicissitudes, Psalm 46.10. Be still and know that I
am God. Men are not GOD, they cannot see what to do; nor do what they see. But
I who am GOD can see under the whole heaven what is doing, and what to do; and
I can do whatsoever I see needful to be done. Therefore be still, be not ye
hurried either with discontents at what is doing, nor with fear of what may be
done; for, know I am GOD, I look to the ends of the earth, and what I say must
be done; and what is just for all men, and best for you who are my People,
shall be done. Here Is the true ground of courage, and of quietness: Psalm. 46.1,
2 God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble, therefore
will not we fear, though the earth be moved, etc, They that fear God, have no
reason either to be afraid, or to be discontended. He, that looks to the ends
of the earth and sees their ways, and the ways of all the Children of men; is
their Friend and their Father; therefore he will look to them, and see that all
shall go well with them, or end well for them.

Pos 2. Here God's seeing and observing the Ways this Prosessing declining
People to whom he has a design of love; implies the perfect knowledge which
this Alsufficient Physician has of the Nature and Malignity of the Distemper,
which Threatens ruin to the Sick Patient

Here then we are to consider the Disease, which is twofold.

1. The first Disease is Covetousness. Isa 57.17. For the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth, and smote him. Alii Cupid^tatis, alii Avaritiae
vertunt. For the iniquity of his Concupiscence, or Covetousness, I was wroth
and smote him. It is a Synecdoche of the Species for the G^nus, we may
understand it (says Calvin) for all Concupiscence, because the Jews at this
time were guilty of many and various Vices, therefore God was wroth and smote
them, He inflicted great and grievous punishments upon them. This Disease was
Epidemical, Hoc morbo eximie labo^arunt, as we may see. Jer. 6.13. For from the
least of them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
Covetousness: Jer.8.10. Isa. 56.11. Yea they are greedy dogs which can never
have enough; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his
quarter. Indeed, Covetousness knows no bounds. As it has been said of Envy, so
we may say of Covetousness, Covetousnes, whether will thou? whether will thou
lead, or rather hurry and force worldly men? Covetousness carries those who are
under the power of it, no man knows whether: who can tell where he shall stop
or stay when he is once under the power of the Spirit of Covetousness? A
Covetous man is an unsatiable gulf, he always dreams of dearths, and suspects
the earth will be barren: with these fears he pines, yea Martyrs himself, and
is not at all enriched with all his riches. There is no Sin so heinous, none so
base, and for did, but Covetousness may be both the Mother and Nurse of it.
When the Spirit of a Man is once embased by Covetousness, he is ready to do any
base thing. Hence the Apostle concludes (1 Timothy 6.10) That the love of Money
(which is Covetousness) is the root of all evil; that is, any evil of Sin may
grow up from that root; It will, as occasion serves, lead forth to all
wickedness; To Idolatry, Heresy, Witchcraft, 2 Pet. 2.14, This will move men to
rob God in tithes, and offerings; Profane Gods Name, Pollute Gods Sanctuary,
break his Sabbath's, dishonor Father and Mother, Steal, Kill, commit
Filthyness bear false Witness, break the whole Law, and Violate the Gospel;
Sell and Betray, as Judas did, their very Savior, and dearest Interest, for
the World: Oh how full is the Womb of this Sin, of all Abomination?
Covetousness is Idolatry, and the Covetous man is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5, 6.
Origin, faith well, when he says, Thou Christian must not only circumcise thy
heart from Worshipping Idols, as thou did at first; but farther you must be
circumcised from Covetousness, which is a more Subtle kind of Idolatry.
Indeed, Covetousness carries in it a double Idolatry.

(1) In respect of the Object of Worship appointed in the first Commandment: It
sets up Mammon before Jehovah, 1 John 2.15. If any man love the World the love
of the Father is not in him. The Covetous man does make gold his hope, he faith
to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. His wealth is his strong
City, Prove. 10.15.

(2) Covetousness carries in it Idolatry in respect of the Means of Worship
enjoined in the second Commandment, which requires that we should Worship God
in Means of his own Appointment; but the Covetous account gain Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5. Job 21.15. What is the Almighty, that we should Serve Him? And what
profit should we have if we Pray unto him? So, Mal. 3.14. Ye have said, it is
in vain to Serve God: and what profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance,
and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? Indeed it is a
most dangerous Sin; i^ pierces the Soul through with many Sorrows now, and
drowns men in perdition and destruction hereafter, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Yea the more
men get by it here, the more torment shall they endure hereafter, Jam. 5. 1, 2,
3. It is a Sin that walks in a cloak, works in a mystery, and sometimes
Shipwracks the Soul, before it feels either Wind, or Sands, or Rocks; in a
Moment he goes down to the pit, and so in the end finds himself to be a very
fool, Jer. 17.1. Luke 12.20. Now,

How far this disease has prevailed in New England, is matter of solemn
Inquiry, and deserves a serious Thought; whether the Spirit of Worldliness has
not? does not grow exceeding high and strong? And the Spirit of Religion grow
low and weak? Whether the Spirit of the World be not the reigning, governing
spirit, and like to carry all before it; unless Sovereign Grace prevent? Call
for a Solemn thought.

2. Disease. He went on frowardly in the way of his heart, Isa 57.17. Ostendit
Judaeos desperatos esse, quod extrema remedia illos non reduxerint in viam. A
Disease sometimes is so desperate, no Physician will undertake its cure; the
Patient so froward and unruly, that none will meddle with him: The state of
this Patient is such that resists all the applications of God for his healing,
he is the worse rather than the better for all: He goes on frowardly, so that
it is a Patient that refuses to return; they were impenitent in Sin; now
impenitency in any Sin, makes it desperate: as the Prophet Jeremiah sets this
forth in a bright Example, Jer. 8.5. Why is this People of Jerusalem slidden
back, by a perpetual back sliding; they hold fast deceit, they refuse to
return: Here are three phrases noting this one thing. (1) They hold fast
deceit: (2) They refuse to return: (3) Their's was a perpetual back sliding; or
as some read it, an eternal rebellion, an obstinate rebellion, a strong and
mighty rebellion; the Seventy call it, an impudent shameless rebellion: all
these are proper Epithets of that obstinacy, and setledness of resolution,
which is in the heart of man by Nature, to continue in Sin; yet there is a
farther rendering of the words, which as the Original will bear, so it has an
elegancy in it; Why is this People of Jerusalem slidden back by a conquering,
or prevailing back sliding? Their distemper conquered and prevailed, against
all ordinary Medicines and Methods of cure. Now, How many sad Symptoms of this
distemper are to be found upon New England at this day, is ground of
Soul-search. Whether we do not go on frowardly in the way of our own heart
Notwithstanding all ordinary Means and Medicines used for our recovery? Whether
New-Englands Spiritual and Political Wounds and Sicknesses are not grown so
immedical and incurable, that they are past ordinary hope of healing? And
whether this People are not in Extreme danger of perishing in their own Sins,
and under Gods Judgments, Temporal and Spiritual? Unless God in rich Mercy
become our Healer and Physician. Which leads me to the Second Proposition.

PROP. II. Now at this Critical juncture when the Disease is so near it is
Crisis, this Alsufficient Physician undertakes the Cure, and Resolves to Heal
by the bright display of Sovereign Grace, He will lead him also, and restore
comforts unto him and to his Mourners.

In hoc populo etiam humani generis imaginem habemus, ut intelligamus quae sit
nostra in Deum pervicacia, totumque proprium Dei opus esse, ut pergamus in
recto cursu: Says a Learned Commentator upon this Text. Amplificat gratiam
suam, quod isti populo tametsi obstinato, contumaci and indomito, sit
propitius: Says the same Author.

When there is nothing to be found amongst this miserable People but that which
might provoke God to bring speedy and inevitable Desolation, Then this most
compassionate Physician can and does find an Argument in himself to move him to
heal and help at this Juncture, 1 Samuel 12.22, 23, 24, 25. The LORD will not
forsake his People, for his great Name sake; because it has plaesed the Lord
to make you His People. Not for your sakes do I this says the Lord, O house of
Israel, but for mine holy Name sake, Ezekiel. 36.22, 32.

Here take three Positions, for the clearing up of this Proposition.

1. Position is, That now at this Critical juncture when the disease is so near
it is Crisis, This Alsufficient Physician undertakes the Cure, and Resolves to
Heal by the bright display of Sovereign Grace and Rich Mercy.

1. Be the disease what it will, whether a distemper upon the Soul, or upon the
body, upon a Person or Province; This Physician can make an agreeable
application to them for their Healing: 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. If there be in the
Land Famine, if there be Pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, or if there be
caterpillar, if their enemy besiege them in the Land of their Cities,
whatsoever Plague, whatsoever Sickness there be: The Expression is Exceeding
full and comprehensive, so that no Person nor People have room left to say,
there is no mention of my case, condition or misery; God comprehends them all
in this expression, ( Whatever Plague or Sickness it is) whether more
Immediately from Gods hand, or more mediately by Second causes, inward or
outward Sickness, this Physician can work a through cure Our dear Lord Christ
when here, healed all manner of Sickness, and all manner of disease among the
People, Mat. 4.23 and 9.35. And he is now as able and willing to heal and help,
as when he was here upon Earth. Hence it is neither the Greatness of the
Sickness and Sin, nor the want of a Remedy, or a Skilful Compassionate
Physician, that kills the Patient: but it is his not Accepting of Healing
Medicine; His not stooping to the Remedy, his noncompliance with this
Physician in the method he prescribes to him for his cure.

2. He Heals by the bright display of Sovereign Grace and Rich Mercy. This
Grace of God is God able and willing freely to dispose of Spiritual good unto
his Creature, though unworthy and deserving ill from him. And this Mercy of God,
is God Able and Willing to Succor the Creature in Misery. Now this Grace and
Mercy may be considered either as it is in God, and so respects his Divine
Sufficiency: Or, as it flows from God, and so respects his Divine Efficiency:
Hence it may be considered either in the Degree and Purpose to give Grace and
show Mercy, which is Increated Grace and Mercy: Or in the actual accomplishment
and execution of that decree by Providence; which is created Grace and Mercy,
and is the actual Accomplishment of his purpose by his Providence.

Now as Misery is the Object of Mercy, so Unworthiness is the Object of Grace;
Hence this Miserable and Unworthy Patient is an Agreeable Object for the Great
God to display his Sovereign Grace and rich Mercy upon, and toward in healing
of him then when the case seems to be desperate: He needs common and special
Mercy to be extended to him in his deep misery; Common Mercy manifests it self,
either in Creation or Providence: Common Mercy managed by Divine Efficiency
displaying it self in Providence, is Gods Actual communication of Mercy unto,
and providing suitable Mercy for his Creatures according to their various
necessities: And this shows it self in Conservation, and Gubernation; and this
miserable Patient needs Mercy in each of these respects. Discimus hinc, salutis
nostrae initium esse misericordiam Dei, faith a good Divine. Yea he needs
special Mercy to show it self in the great works of Redemption, and the
Application of Redemption unto him, whereby he may be fitted for full and
complete Glorification.

Hence the Effectual Application of Redemption in Saving Conversion is styled
an act of Mercy and Divine Commiseration. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People; that ye
should show forth the Praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light: which in time past were not a People, but are now the
People of God: which had not obtained Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. The
Elect are called (and by Effectual Calling so made) vessels of Mercy, Romans 9.2.
So Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and in the end Glorification, are
fruits and effects of special Mercy. And this Patient stands in need of all
this Mercy.

Moreover, This Unworthy Patient stands in need of the bright and shining
display of Sovereign Grace, not only to bring him into, but to continue him in
the favor of God. Our Divines truly say, That God in the work of Regeneration
has instamped upon the Regenerate the work of his Grace which indureth for
ever; according to what is written in, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit sin; for his Seed remains in him. 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born
again not of corruptible Seed but of Incorruptible, by the word of God which
lives and abides for ever: Yet notwithstanding this Principle of Grace, if
God withdraw his Assistance, it would all come to nothing; and therefore there
is need of this Grace of God; according as it is graciously promised in Jer.
32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me.

Yea he needs the Grace of God to continue him under the Actual influences of
the favor of God: Gods own Children may be Children under Wrath, though not
Children of Wrath; it must be the Grace of God that can keep them in the Actual
favor of God.

In a word, he needs the Grace of God to recover him from his falls, and to
keep him from falling, Jer. 31.18, 19. As it is the Lord that gives Repentance
at the first, so it is God that must give Repentance afterward. Acts 5.31. Him
has God exalted with his Right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins.

3. This Almighty Physician undertakes the Cure Now at this Critical juncture,
when the Disease is so near its Crisis, That He may make the more bright and
shining display of his own Glory. The glory of the Physician, and the more of
his skill appears when the Case is thus desperate; His Wisdom, His Grace, His
Mercy Appears the more signal in his looking after such an one, as had no will
to look after Him; Although he was gasping for life, and must inevitably Die
unless this compassionate Physician speedily steps in to his help. And truly,
when we are cast in Common Law, what have we to hope in but Prerogative Mercy?
When good men in all Orders find all attempts to recover a Backslidden People
awfully to be frustrated, needs must they sink in despondency, and lose their
Faith and Hope, did they not encourage them by this consideration, that as God
can, so He frequently does, take such an Opportunity to make himself known; and
so have the whole Glory of such a Peoples Salvation ascribed to him. Psalm.
106.8. Nevertheless, He Saved them for his Name sake: that he might make his
mighty Power to be known.

Yea this Almighty Physician undertakes the Cure Now at this Critical juncture,
when the Disease is so desperate, to humble the Patient. O how will this humble
the Patient and magnify the Physician, when he must acknowledge his Distemper
to be so immedical that it had not been cured, had not God done it; He it was
that brought me up out of an horrible put, out of the miry clay, and set my
feet upon a rock, and established my going, Psalm. 40.2. He must own that it is
of the Lords Mercy that he is not consumed, it is because his compassions fail
not, They are new every Morning: great is his faithfulness, Lam. 3.22, 23.

4. I proceed to show the way of Gods Cure of this sick Patient, be it Person
or Province; and the usual Method which God takes for his Healing (though we may
not limit him who is the Absolute Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, and Heals when
he pleases, whom He pleases, and in what way He pleases) yet Gods Ordinary
way of working lies here.

(1.) God discovers to them the evil of their own ways; He makes them feel the
smart, and be sensible of the danger of their own sickness, I King. 8.38. They
see and know the Plague of their own heart. God discovers to them the Malignity
and Danger of their Disease; it is a Plague and that in the heart; and will
prove most deadly, if not prevented and healed. Romans 6 23. The wages of sin is
death. God will make them to see themselves perishing, and dying Eternally,
except the LORD undertake for them. God makes them true Evangelical Mourners,
he breaks their hearts for, and effectually off from sin, Isa. 57.15, 16.

(2.) God makes them to see their own inability to heal themselves, and that no
created Physician can cure them. This disease blinds the Understanding, makes
the Will rebellious, wounds the Conscience, disorders the Affections,
distempers the whole man; so that they have no power to help themselves; They
are bedridden Creatures, not able to stir or look out for a Cure; They know not
the way of Peace; They have dexterity to destroy themselves, not to help
themselves; They can neither find out a remedy, nor Apply the remedy when it is
found out, Prove. 30.2.

(3.) In order to the healing of this Patient (be it Person or Province) God
discovers the excellency of the remedy which He has provided for their
recovery. He has laid help upon One that is Mighty, Psalm. 89.19. He has so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish but have eternal life, Joh. 3.16. There is no want of
Skill or Will in this good and great Physician. Heb. 7.25. He is able to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. He is able to Save unto the utmost (...) the phrase may
denote three things, The perpetuity, the perfection of the Salvation which he
works, or else the perfection of his influence or causality in the working of
it. It may signify, [1] The perpetuity and indeficiency of that Salvation which
he works: He is able to Save unto the uttermost of Time, for evermore. He is
not a Temporal but an Eternal Savior, He is able to Save unto all Eternity.
[2] It may import the Absolute perfection and fullness of the Salvation which he
works. He is able to Save unto the utter most Degree of Salvation; He does
not Save to halves, but fully and perfectly from every degree of evil, whether
of Sin or Suffering, 2 Timothy 1.12. Phil. 1.6. [3] This form of Speech may denote
(think some) the perfection of Christ's influence in the Effecting of our
Salvation: He is Able to Save unto the uttermost, That is, All manner of ways:
As a Moral, and as a Physical cause of Salvation.

Here consider two things,

1. That there is no want of Skill in this good and great Physician: He is
clothed with a Divine Ability and Mediatorial Sufficiency to work a through
Care upon those that by Faith repair to Him for healing: He is the true
Immanuel, the Word made flesh, the Man Gods Fellow, a Royal Priest, a Priestly
Prophet, and a Prophetical King all in One.

(1) That there is no want or Skill in this good and great Physician appears,
in that He is true God and true Man in One Person. He is very God, not a
Metaphorical, but the True God, 1 Job. 5.20. Not a God by Office, but a God by
Nature, Jer. 23 6. This is his Name whereby he shall be called, JEHOVAH
tsidkenu, The LORD our Righteousness. Though not Son of Himself (...) as to his
Substance, yet God of Himself (...) as to his Essence: Gods Name is in him,
Exodus 23 21. The Great Letters of that Name are, the Divine Attributes: Now who
is Sufficient to work a perfect cure, if the CREATOR be not? Certainly his
Omnipatency is the best Salve for the Creatures Impotency; His All for our
nothingness.

Yea that there is no want of skill in this Physician appears, in that He is so
nearly joined unto us; He that is able and sufficient to work Salvation for us
must be a Person conjunct with us, and so was Christ; He was our Goel, our next
Kinsman by his Incarnation, and our Redeemer by his Passion; He assumed our
Nature into Himself, that he might Redeem us. Job. 1.14. The WORD was made
Flesh. All other Creations are (as it were) extra Deum, but here was a Creation
in the very Person of God. The glorious Son of God Espoused flesh and blood,
and the Bride chamber (as a Learned Divine faith) where the knot was tied, was
the Virgins Womb: There was He made of a Woman, Consubstantial with us, as to
his Humanity; who was Consubstantial with the Father, as to his Divinity.

(2) That there is no want of skill in this good and great Physician appears,
in that he has in Himself a fullness of All Increated and Created Wisdom and
Skill. Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell.
God is only Wise and Skilful, because all Wisdom and Skill is from Him, as He
has Wisdom and Skill of and from Himself, so all others have Wisdom and Skill
from Him, it is, but a drop from this Ocean: Wisdom and Skill is either Created
or Increated; Created Wisdom and Skill is from God whether it be Theological,
Civil or Physical. Dan. 2.21. God gives Wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to
them that know understanding. Hence Christ our Physician has skill enough to
cure and heal the greatest Maladies, the most incurable Diseases; whether they
be Souldistempers or bodily distresses; whether they be Political or
Ecclesiastical Wounds and Sicknesses.

2. Consider, That there is no want of Will in this good and great Physician to
Heal all those given to Him by the Father, in the Covenant of Redemption: Hence,

(1) Christ did not only cloth Himself with Humanity, but became their Sponsor
or Surety, and so in Law One Person with them, whom the Father had given to Him
in the Covenant of Redemption, That He might be their Healer and Physician. He
does not only plead their cause, but pay their Debts: Christ entered into Bond
for them, and took all their Debts and Duties whatsoever they owe to God, upon
himself, to see all performed; that they might go free and be accepted, Heb.
7.22. Hence Christ did undertake as in their Nature, so in their Name, and did
restipulate with God on their behalf, That whatsoever was owing to his Justice
and Holiness by them, either as a penalty for past defaults, or a duty to
present Commands, should all be satisfied and performed by himself, i will lay
down my life, I Will pour out my Soul, ( says Christ) let all the wrath due to
them be squeezed into one Cup, and I Will drink it up to the bottom: Let the fire
of Gods anger drop down from Heaven, and I Will be the Paschal Lamb roasted in
it; Thus willing was this great and gracious Physician to Heal this Perishing
Patient, That He Dy's that the Patient might live: Thus our Lord Christ this
Compassionate Physician was so Willing to Heal and Help the Patient, That He
becomes his Surety and was One with Him in Nature, that He might be One with
Him in Law too.

Yea his Willingness to heal and help, is Evidenced by what He has done and
suffered, to purchase and procure their healing; He has by his Obedience unto
Death satisfied Divine Justice to the full; His Obedience was a fair Commentary
on the whole Law, written in glorious Characters of Holiness and Righteousness
all his life long, and at his Death Sealed up and Clasped with his precious
blood. He was (says a Worthy Divine) as it were in pangs of forward Obedience
to be Baptized in his own blood, and posted on toward an Agony of Wrath in an
Agony of Love: and when he Arrived at his extremest Sufferings, His Signal
Willingness turned his Suffering into Doing, and his Cross into a Triumphant
Chariot; He Triumphed in it, says the Apostle, Col. 2.15. Even there his
Obedience and Love rod in Triumph; Triumphant Obedience spread out his hands
upon the Cross, and Triumphant love Opened his naked heart to the wrath of God.

(4.) Now that He may Apply this rich Remedy for the through Cure of this
distressed Patient, He puts his Spirit into him whereby he causes him to live,
Ezekiel. 37.14. And indeed the great Work of the Spirit which he has to do for
the Cure of this Patient, It is to apply Redemption to him in the whole compass
of it; and so to cause him to walk in Gods Statutes, and keep his Judgments,
and do them, which he cannot possibly do without the Spirit. The whole work of
Application in the whole life of a Christian, in Grace and Glory, is from the
Spirit; It is the work of the Spirit to convince a Person or People of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment. The Preparatory as well as the Saving work is
wrought by the Spirit; He works both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Yea he
works All the good pleasure of Gods will in a Person or People, and the work of
faith with Power, 2 These. 1.11. It is the work of the Spirit to form Christ in
the Soul, and to create it in Christ unto love and good works: Ephesians. 2:10. For
we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. God has made a Promise unto
Christ and unto Us in Christ of his Spirit, which must be fulfilled, Isai.
59.20, 21. The Spirit must be put within his People in order to their Saving
Conversion through Reformation, and future eternal Salvation; and for this he
ordained the Ministry of the New Testament to be a Means to convey the Spirit,
2 Cor. 3.6. Yea one of the greatest blessings promised in the Covenant of
Grace, is, That the Lord will pour his Spirit upon the Children and Posterity
of his Servants, Isai. 44.3. Oh then! Let this move All true Christians to
engage their very Souls in Prayer to God for his Spirit, That may heal all our
Spiritual diseases, our Political and Ecclesiastical Sicknesses: if there be
any strength for wrestling with God left, improve all the Interest you have
with God, and with his Son, that you may prevail for this Blessing, viz. That
God would please to put his Spirit into us and cause us to live.

I proceed to the Second Position, which I must but name,

2. Position. This Great and Gracious Physician will lead this weak and feeble
Patient. He is indeed so weak by reason of his long-languishing-Sickness, That
he cannot go nor stand alone; But this Physician lends him his helping hand, by
causing him according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might
by his Spirit in the Inner-man, Ephesians. 3.16. Yea he causes his Grace in him, and
his Grace with him to be sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12.9. Hence when he is weak
in himself, then is he strong in Christ his Physician, 2 Cor. 12.10.

The Third Position should have been.

3. Position. The Lord will restore Comforts to him, and to his Mourners.

But I must pretermit this and pass to the Improvement of the Doctrine.

I now proceed to the Improvement of this Doctrine, [I.] By way of Inference.
[II.] By way of Exhertatian.

1. Inference. See hence then the inconceivable Malignity of the Deadly Disease
of Sin. Sin it is an Infinite evil, Objectively Infinite; it is a fighting
against an Infinite Majesty, a striving against Infinite Sovereignty; an Enmity
to Infinite Holiness, a provocation to Infinite Justice, a Deicidium, a
striking at the very Life and Being of GOD Himself; God has no other opposite
but Sin Sin is such a Mortal Contagion as has infected the whole race of
Mankind proceeding from Adam by Natural Generation; This has opened the Door
to All Sorrow and Suffering, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; that Persons,
Families, Churches, Provinces, Kingdoms; yea, the whole world have been, and at
this Day are Entertained with: It is a disease that none but God can cure; It
is good to be Sick of Sin; but to be Sick by it, is most Mortal, except this
Physician undertake the cure: Nothing can cure this Sickness, but Unsearchable
riches of Divine Grace. As the wrong and offense is, such must the Compensation
be: the former is infinite, therefore the latter must not be finite. Hence
there is only in Christ a Divine Ability and Mediatorial Sufficiency to work
Salvation: Neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is none other
Name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be Saved, Acts 4.12.

2. Inference. See hence then what cause New England, and this Province in
particular has to ly in the dust before the Lord this Day, under the
Soulbumbling sense of our many Sicknesses, and loathsome Diseases. What
Political and Ecclesiastical Sicknesses are there amongst us? The good Lord
grant that New England may never have that bitter complaint entered against it;
which the great God once drew up against Judah and Jerusalem, Saying, Why
should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is
Sick and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head,
there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores:
they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollifyed with Ointment,
Isa. 1.5, 6. How do our Sicknesses grow upon us? How are we wounding our
selves, and like to undo our selves, if Infinite Mercy prevent not? How does
Profaneness and Immorality increase amongst us? What Prophanity of many; In
their neglect of the Public Worship and Covenant of God, and Profanation of
the LORD'S DAY? What Excessive Tippling and Drinking, which like a Flood even
drowns much of Christianity in several Places? Especially on
Training-day-Evenings, which things ought not to be. What is the Unrighteous
Treatment which those in a Public Station often Suffer from the People? What
Profane Cursing and Swearing, and taking the Name of God in Vain? for which
the Land Mourns. Is there not an Unclean Spirit let loose amongst us,
wherewith too many have been Possessed, Encouraging Incentives to Lewdness? Is
not gross Dishonesty and Oppression too much Practiced in New England?

What Church-Wounds and Sicknesses are there to be Observed and Lamented by the
Churches? How many faithful Ambassadors removed? Yea has not God renewed our
Wounds this last Year by making breaches upon our Civil and Sacred Polity? Col.
Foster Esquire the Rd. Mr. Allen, and the Rd. Mr. Russel
Has not Death the King of Terrors broke into our Council Chamger, as well as
into our Pulpits? May not God say to his NewEnglish Churches, as He said to the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art failen and repent,
and do the first works. And as He said to the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.2. Be
watchful and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to Die: for I
have not found thy works perfect before God? Churches, that are Evangelical in
their Primitive Constitution, but decaying and dying in their Religion; should
be watchful and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to Die. How
is Church discipline dying of a Mortal Sickness? How many Spiritual diseases
are to be found among Professors? What Unbelief? What Impenitency? What
hardenss of Heart, what stubborness of Will? What blindness of Mind? What
Unprofitableness under the Means of Grace? What growth of Sin and Irreligion is
to be found in New England?

How many Sicknesses and Wounds are to be found in and upon many Families in
New England? How much is Family-Religion neglected, and Family Worship
shamefully Omitted? Although the great God has awfully Threatened to pour forth
his Fury upon the Families that Call not upon his Name, Jer. 10.25. How is
Family-Government sunk into, and Languishing under a deep consumption? Is not
the Ministers Maintenance by many lookd upon as an act of Charity, and not of
Justice? contrary to Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. which I believe is highly provoking to
that God whose Ambassadors they are.

What Wounds are made upon particular Persons? What Wounds in Conscience, and
by Providence? Isai. 1.2, 3.

How many Persons (like profane Esau) despise their birthright, and Sell it
for a mess of Pottage? How many neglect the Great Salvation, and refuse to be
Healed by this Physician, who comes of his own accord and tenders to make this
Patient whole, though he never sent for him; Others that are Sick are calling and
sending for the Physician but this Sin-sick Soul inquires not after this
Physician, but rejects means of healing: Other Physicians are honorably
entertained; but Christ the best Physician is repulsed, though he tenders to heal
this Patient of free cost.

We have indeed cause with Thankfulness to God to Commemorate that Solemn and
Serious, that Full and Faithful DECLARATION, against Profaneness and
Immoralities Published by His Excellency the GOVERNOR, Council and Assembly
(then being) of this Province, who did more than Seven years ago, rightly judge
it absolutely necessary for them, the Rulers and Representatives of this
People, then to Publish unto this Province, the sorrows and disires of their
hearts, as a Testimony before Heaven and Earth, that the desired REFORMATION
might be vigoroussly prosecuted. Has this Province hearkened to the Call of God
by the Call of those our Pious Rulers? Are those Vices and Immoralities (then
Testified against) Lamented and Reformed by this People? O that there had been,
yea now were such a Heart in this People; Then had our Peace been as a river,
and our Righteousness as the waves of the Sea, Isai. 48.18. But alas! Wherein
are we Reformed? Though we have been by the former Prophets as well as by the
Surviving Ministry, Pathetically and Affectionately excited there-unto. Oh that
this People had hearkened unto the Lord, and had walked in his ways! He would
soon have subdued their enemies, and turned his hand against their adversaries,
Psalm. 81.13. May it now please the Divine Majesty who has seen all our ways of
Sin and Provocation, to say to New England, and this Province, as in our Text,
I have seen thy ways and I will heal thee! Oh that New England, and this
Province in particular would now say as we have it, in Jer. 17.14. Heal me, O
Lord, and I shall be healed; Save me, and I shall be Saved: for thou art my
Praise: And as Gods People of old said, Hos. 6.1, 2. Come and let us return
unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he
will bind us up.

3. Inference. See hence then, that there is room for our Hope of the most
desperate Patient, be it Person or People. How ever many or great his Sins and
Sicknesses may be, yet this Physician can cure him; Indeed if you consider the
Patient and his Ability, or what help there is in any other Physician: It may
be said, as Jer. 30.22, 13. Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous.
There is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up: thou have no
healing Medicines. But if you look upon this Physician and the excellent remedy
He has provided, it is a Sovereign Catholicon for every Disease, of every
Person and Province, that by faith repair to Him for Healing; for the remedy is
the most Sovereign Balsome of the Blood and Spirit of Christ; and the Physician
to apply this remedy is the Lord that dwells in Zion,; the Quality of the
remedy is most Eminent, it is a rich Balsome, a never failing Balsome: 1 John
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. Never any
failed of a Cure to whom it was applied, 1 Cor. 69, 10, 11 It cures Diseases
before Conversion: Thus it cured Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 12, 13. This cured
the Thief upon the Cross; this Healed Paul a Persecutor. This remedy when
applied Cures Diseases after Conversion; their usual name is backslidings,
when they fall back again, as Eli to the breaking of their Necks; did not
Sovereign Grace undertake their Cure. Hos. 14.4. I will heal their back
sliding, I will love them freely, Jer. 3.22. Hos. 11.8, 9.

The Physician that undertakes the cure, is most Excellent; It is our dear Lord
CHRIST, who has cured all manner of Sicknesses, and all manner of Diseases,
Mat. 4.23, 24. Luke 6.17, 18, 19. His Grace toward the Diseased (that come to
Him for Healing) is so transcendent, that it triumphs over all the Unworthiness
of the Patient (be it Person or Province) and will Heal him, though many stops ly
in the way; Psalm. 106.7, 8. They understood not his works, they remembered not
the multitude of his Mercies; they rebelled at the Sea, even at the red Sea.
Every one of these were as a stop in the way of Healing, yet Mercy got over
them all; Nevertheless he Saved them. Now as the Grace of this Compassionate
Physician triumphs over the Unworthyness of this distressed Patient that applies
to Him for a Cure; so Mercy triumphs over all the Improbabilities and
Impossibilities that seem to ly in the way of this Physician, to hinder him
from working a through cure.

II. USE is of EXHORTATION in diverse Branches.

And in the first Place I take leave humbly to propose this Exhortation to Your
EXCELLENCY, and unto those who are, or may be of the Honorable COUNCIL:
Together with those Worthy Gentlemen that Represent the People of this Province
in a General Assembly, who have ordered me (though most unworthy) into this awful
Desk at this time.

Suffer your Selves to be Entreated, in the Name of the Lord, and by this word
of the Lord, to be Encouraged; to go on in your Excellent and Distinguishing
Prudence and Integrity, to Write after this Divine Copy, in doing your Utmost,
in your respective Posts, for the Healing of the Wounds and Sicknesses of this
Distressed and Distempered Province. Be entreated to undertake and carry on your
whole Healing work, in all your Prudent and Skilful Applications of proper
Medicines for the Cure of this People and Province, in the Administration of
Government, both by Legislation and Execution; and in the management of all the
Great Affairs of the Public Weal of this People of God, which you are by Him
betrusted with the Cure of, by a very powerful Exercise of faith, in this
Alsufficient Physician, for the through Cure of this People, That GOD may be
entreated to say to New England, and this Province in particular, as in our
Text, I have seen his ways and I will heal him.

True indeed, it is Gods Prerogative royal to Heal and Cure our incurable
Wounds and Sicknesses by the bright and shining display of his Sovereign Grace
and rich Mercy; yet it has pleased His Divine Majesty to commit this Healing
Work into your hands, as you are our Excellent and Honorable Rulers.

The Wounds of the Body Politic need a Healer, as much as those of the Body
Natural. Rulers are State-Physicians: Hence the word rendered to Govern, has a
threefold signification in Scripture. First, and most properly, to bind up.
Secondly, by a Metaphor, to Heal; because there is so great a use of binding in
Healing; the skilful Ligature of a Wound, or of a broken Limb, is of so much
consequence in Chyrurgery, or the Art of Healing, that binding alone is put for
Healing: That which is well bound, is in a fair way to Healing. We find both
these acts put together in that great Promise of the Churches Glory under the
Gospel, Isai. 30.26. Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light of
the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven fold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the LORD binds up the breach of his People, and heals
the stroke of their wound And Isai. 3.7. Thirdly, the word signifies
Tropically, to Rule or Govern, and the reason arises clearly from the proper
signification of it; Because He that is a Ruler, is also a binder and a healer.
This then (Worthy Patriots) may give direction to such whose Province it is
this Day to Choose and Appoint the Persons that are to bear Rule over this
People; whatsoever other Rules discretion may point to be observed in this
affair; yet this may not be neglected by the Electors, That they choose such
Persons as they really Judge duly Qualifyed, who do give grounded Hopes that
they will Approve themselves State-Physicians, Rightly skilled, and agreeably
willed, to do their utmost to Bind and Heal the Wounds and Sicknesses of this
diseased People, by their Discountenancing of Vice and Immorality, and by their
Encouraging of Piety and Equity.

Rulers bind the People that are under them, to Order: They bind them by their
Laws: Laws are bonds, they have a binding Power, they bind either to Obedience
or to Punishment: And therefore Rulers are binders, they bind the Unruly and
disobedient; They bind with the Rule of the Law, and with the Penalties of the
Law: When any break the Rule of the Law, then they fall under the Penalties of
the Law; so that every way a Ruler is a Binder; and as He is a Binder, so a
Healer: The Laws of Government by which People are bound, are for their
healing: for the healing of their manners and corruptions; As also, for the
healing of those whom they have oppressed or wounded by their Evil Manners and
Corruptions, LAWS are the Security of a People, pie, the Security of their
Persons, of their Estates, of their Credit, and of their Liberties Civil, and
Religious, and of their Lives. Some have well compared Laws to Physic, which
does both prevent and remove those Diseases which are incident to the whole
body of a Nation or Province. Now as Magistracy consists in an Authority to
make and constitute Laws: so in an Authority to apply, actuate or execute them
in all particular Cases and Emergencies. A Law Unexecuted (says a good Divine)
is like a Sealed Book, or like a Sword locked up in the Scabbard.

May it then please Your EXCELLENCY and our Honorable and Worthy Senators in
your great Prudence to Consider, whether there be nothing farther to be done
either by Legislation or Execution, for the Healing of this SickProvince? And
for the Maintaining Justice toward men, and Piety toward God? Whether there be
no step farther to be taken to quicken under Officers, as Tything-men,
Constables and Grand-jurors, to a more vigorous accomplishment of those
Promissory Oaths that Annually they take for the Suppressing of Intemperance,
and Disorders, that are so growing among us? Whether there be no step farther
to be taken for to prevent that Land desolating Sin, of the Profanation of the
LORD'S DAY? And whether that Law which refers to the breach of the Sabbath, and
the Penalty Annexed there-unto, may not be reviewed, and the Sanctification of
the Sabbath farther secured, and more strongly guarded?

If there be nothing farther to be done either by Legislation or Execution, for
the Healing of our Wounds and Sicknesses? Yet suffer me to say, There is
encouragement to Address the Compassionate and Alsufficient Physician by the
Prayer of Faith, for Healing. This was the Method good King Jehoshaphat took
for the healing of his People, when he knew not what to do for their Cure; He
by the Prayer of faith repaired to this most skilful Physician for a
never-failing remedy, and in this way obtained it, 2 Chronicles. 20 12, 17, 20. The
Effectual-servent Prayers of Pious Rulers for their Sick and Diseased People,
are a precious Means of a Peoples Healing. That is one good way of Seeking
their Recovery, to set God on work by Prayer, and engage Him to be their
Healer. When Hez kiah and Isaiah do both Cry and Pray to Heaven, there is good
hopes it shall go well with that People, and that God will appear for them, as
he did. 2 Chronicles 32.20, 21, 22. How often did the Prayer of Moses and Aaron for
Israel in the Wilderness, slip in between them and destruction? Numb. 14.12,
13, 14 19, 20, 21, 22, 45. It was an Exemplary passage of that Worthy Prince of
Orange, who when he had but one breath to draw, spent half of it on the People
in Prayer for them, Crying (as he fell down slain) Oh my God take pity of my
Soul, and of this poor People!

Second Branch of EXHORTATION is to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry.

Oh be entreated in the bowels of Christ to go on vigorously in your constant
painful, faithful Ministerial Endeavors to heal the Wounds and Sicknesses of
this diseased People. You are ( Reverend Sirs) Spiritual Physicians by that
Solemn and Sacred Office you sustain; and you are betrusted and awfully Charged
with the Ministerial and Pastoral Care and Cure of Souls. Paul had the care of
all the Churches lying upon him, 2 Cor. 11.28. And we must give account of all
those Souls, that are committed by Christ (the Physician of Souls) unto our
Official care and charge, Heb. 13.17. Oh! what need then have we to do our
Utmost for the Healing and Curing of the Heart-Plagues, and Spiritual Maladies
of our Sick Churches and Congregations, That so no Precious and Immortal SOUL
may finally be lost through our default; but that we may be free from the guilt
of the blood of Souls, Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. It is therefore our duty to
Inculcate upon them their Malady, and to discover to them the Remedy. Oh! what
need have we to take heed to our selves, and to the respective Flocks committed
to us by the Holy Ghost, to feed them, and to give them their Food and Physic
in due season, to Preach the Word, to be instant in season and out of season,
to rebuke, reprove, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine; and to be an
Example of Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith,
in Purity. Now if we would thus be skilful, faithful and successful Soul
Physicians, we must endeavor to be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5 18. All
Christians must labor after this, but especially Ministers: There will be no
discharge of our work as Christians, or as Ministers without the Inhabitation,
and Saving operation of the Spirit: We should therefore Earnestly Pray, that we
may be so filled with the Spirit, as that we may have so much of the Grace and
gracious operation of the Spirit in us, as to enable us from an inward abiding
Principle; To believe all Mysteries Revealed, Embrace all Promises, Dispense
all Ordinances, Obey all Commands, Improve with humble Submission to Gods
disposing, all Providence to their end* Yea we should Pray that we may be
filled in the highest measure with the Spirit, to the measure of the fullness of
the statute of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. So filled, as to furnish us here to all
Gospel-obedience; and hereafter, to all Gospel Glory.

Third Branch of EXHORTATION, it is to all that Hear the Word of God at this
Time.

Let us All be Moved and Encouraged to repair to this Alsufficient Physician
for Healing to be granted to our Souls, to our Persons, to our Families, to our
Churches, to our Courts, to our Province, and to New England. There is none of
us in such perfect Health, as to stand in no need of this Physician: We have
All of us our Particular, Personal Soul-sicknesses; Our Families have their
Spiritual distempers: There are also Ecclesiastical and Political Wounds that
need a Cure: Let us then be moved to Apply to this Good and Great Physician for
Healing. Though our Diseases may seem ^o be incurable and our Wounds immedicable;
yet this Day, God opens to us a door of hope in this greatest depth, of our
Distress. There is always hope in Israel in the most desperate case: Ezra 10.2.
Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. This Physician has seen
all our Ways and Wounds, our Sins and Sicknesses, and He can say to us as in
our Text, I have seen thy Ways and I will Heal thee: He can say to New England,
as He said Zech. 3.9. I will remove the Iniquity of the Land in one day. God
can remove the Iniquity of our Persons and People in one day: And we must
obtain healing from this Physician, or die of our Sicknesses. Now it is very
proper for the Sick to choose their own Physician; and that is the work of this
Sick-Province this Day, to choose Provincial Healers, that may under the
Conduct of the Alsufficient Physician, do their Utmost for our Healing (the God
of Wisdom in His Infinite Mercy Direct the Electors, and the Elections:) But
give me leave to say this one Word to all that are present before the Lord at
this Time, that are sensible of the Plague of their own Hearts, You are Sick
and need a Physician, and are now put upon your Choice of your Physician! Will
you now Choose GOD in CHRIST to be your Physician? He comes in his own Ordinance
This Day, and tenders to undertake the Cure of all your Distempers; Be they
Soul-Maladies, Family-Diseases, Political or Ecclesiastical Wounds and
Sicknesses, He says to each such Person, and to this Province, Will thou not
be Healed and Cured, when shall it once be? As He said to Jerusalem, Will thou
not be made Clean? When shall it once be? Jer. 13.27. This Compassionate
Physician comes to the Door of your Hearts and of this Province, and offers to
come in, and Apply Healing Medicines; and to make a thorough Cure, as he
tendered to Heal the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.20. Oh! That it may now be the
Day of Christ's Power upon each of your Souls, and this Province; that the
Language of your Souls and of this Province may be, Lift up your Heads, O ye
Gates; and be ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory, this
Gracious Physician may come in, Psalm. 24.6, 7. Then may we say (with which
words I close) as we have it, Isa. 33.22, 24. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord
is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, He will Save us. And the Inhabitant
shall not say I am Sick: The People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
Iniquity. AMEN, So let it be: Oh! That this Good and Gracious PHYSICIAN would
say, AMEN, So it shall be.

FINIS.

