BONIFACIVS.

AN ESSAY Upon the GOOD, that is to be Devised and Designed, BY THOSE Who
Desire to Answer the Great END of Life, and to DO GOOD While they Live. A BOOK
Offered, First, in General, unto all CHRISTIANS, in a PERSONAL Capacity, or in
a RELATIVE. Then more Particularly, Unto MAGISTRATES, unto MINISTERS, unto
PHYSICIANS, unto LAWYERS, unto SCHOLEMASTERS, unto Wealthy GENTLEMEN, unto
several Sorts of OFFICERS, unto CHURCHES, and unto all SOCIETIES of a Religious
Character and Intention With Humble PROPOSALS, of Unexceptionable METHODS, to
Do Good in the World.

Ephesians. VI. 18. Knowing that whatsoever Good thing any man does, the same shall
he receive of the Lord.

BOSTON in N England. Printed by B. Green, for Samuel (...) at his Shop in Corn
Hill. 1710

The Preface.
AMONG the many Customs of the World, which it is become almost necessary to
comply withal, it seems, this is One, That a Book must not appear without a
Preface. And this Little Book willingly Submits unto the Customary Ceremony. It
comes with a Preface, however it shall not be one like the Gates of Mindus. But
there appears a greater Difficulty in a compliance with another usage; that of,
An Epistle Dedicatory. Dedications are become Such foolish and fulsome
Adulations, that they are now in a manner Useless. Oftentimes all the use of
them is, to furnish the Critics on, The Manners of the Age, with matter of
Ridicule. The Excellent Foyl Employed but a just Expression, in saying; It Is
almost as much out of Fashion in such Addresses, to omit giving Praises, [I may
say, Unjust ones] as it is to Believe the Praises given on such an Occasion.
Sometimes the Authors themselves live to See their Own Mistakes, and Own them.
An Austin makes the Flourishes, he had once used in a Dedication, an Article of
his Retractations: A Calvin does Revoke a Dedication, because he (...) he had
made it unto an unworthy Person. I may add, that at other times, every One
sees, what the Authors would be at, and how much they Write for themselves when
they Flatter other men. Another course must now be Steered.

If a Book of Essays to do Good, were to be Dedicated unto a Person of
Quality, it ought to Seek a Patron, who is a true Man of Honor, and of
uncommon Goodness. Thy Patron, O BOOK of Benefits to the World, should be, a
General and most Generous Benefactor to Mankind; One, who never counts himself
so well Advanced, as in Stouping to Do Good, unto all that may be the Better
for him; One whose Highest Ambition is to abound in Serviceable Condescensions:
A Stranger to the Gain of Oppression; The common Refuge of the Oppressed, and
the Distressed; One who will know nothing that is Base; A Lover of all Good
Men, in all persuasions; Able to Distinguish them, and Loving them without any
Distinction. Let him also be one, who has nobly Stripped himself of Emoluments
and Advantages, when they would have Encumbred his Opportunities, to Serve his
Nation. Yea, presume upon one, who has Governed and Adorned the Greatest and
Bravest City on the Face of the Earth, and so much the Delight of that City, as
well as of the rest of Mankind, that she shall never count her Honor or
Welfare more consulted, than when he appears for her as a Representative, (...)
the most Illustrious of all the Assemblies in the World: Beloved by the Queen
of Cities, the fairest and richest Lady of the Universe.

In One Word, A Public Spirit. Let him THEREFORE, and upon more than all these
Accounts be, Sir WILLIAM ASHHURST. For as of old the Poet observed, upon
mentioning the Name of Plutarch, the Echo answered Philosophy: So now, A
Public Spirit, will immediately be the Echo and Reply, in the sense of All
men, and with a Repetition oftener than that at Pant-Chareton; if the Name of
Sir WILLIAM ASHHURST, once be mentioned. HE it is whom the Confession of All Men
brings into the Catalogue, with Abraham, and Joseph, and those other Ancient
Blessings, who are thus Excellently described by Grotious; Homines demerendis
hominibus nati, qui Omnem Beneficij Collocandi Occasionem Ponebant in Lucro.
America afar off also knows him; the American Colonies, have their Eye upon the
Efforts of his Goodness for them. Norunt, Et Antipodes. Nations of
Christianized Indians likewise pray for him, as their GOVERNOR. To Him, the
Design of such a Book will be Acceptable; whatever may be, the Poor and Mean
way of treating the Noble Subject, which it would insist upon. To Him it wishes
that all the Blessings of those who Devise Good, may be for ever multiplied.

I will presume to do something, that will carry a Sweet Harmony, with One of
the Main Methods to be observed in Prosecuting the Design of this Book; which
is, For Brethren to Dwell together in Unity, and carry on every Good Design
with United Endeavors. --

They will Pardon me, if I take the leave to join with him, in the Testimonies
of our Great Esteem, for an Honorable Disposition to Love Good Men, and to Do
Good in the World, his Excellent Brother-in-Law. The well-known Name of a,
JOSEPH THOMPSON, has long been valued, and shall always be Remembered, in the
Country where this Book is Published. God will be Glorified, for the Piety
which adorns him, and the Pure Religion, which in the midst of the World, and
of Temptations from it, keeps him so Unspotted from the World. It was the Maxim
of a Pagan Asdrubal in Livy, Raro simul hominibus, bona Fortuna, bonaque men's
datur. Christianity will, in this Gentleman, give to the World, an happy
Experiment, that the Maxim is capable of a confutation. Because a Book of
Essays to Do Good, will doubtless find its Agreeable Acceptance with One of So
Good a Mind, and the Treasurer of a Corporation formed on the Intention to do
in America that Good which is of all the greatest, whereof Sir William Ashhurst
is the Governor, he also has a part in the Humble Tender of it; and it must
wish unto Him all the Blessings of Goodness.

The BOOK requires that now some Account be given of it. It was a Passage, in a
Speech of an Envoy from His Britanick Majesty, to the Duke of Brandenburgh
Twenty years ago; A Capacity to Do Good, not only gives a Title to it, but also
makes the doing of it a Duty. Ink were too vile a Liquor to Write that Passage.
Letters of Gold were too Mean, to be the Preservers of it. Paper of Amyanthus
would not be Precious and Perennous enough, to perpetuate it.

To be brief, Reader, The Book now in thy Hands, is nothing but an
Illustration, and a Prosecution of that Memorable Sentence. As Gold is capable
of a Wonderful Dilatation; Experiment has told us, it may be so dilated, that
the Hundred thousandth part of a Grain, may be visible without a Microscope:
This Golden Sentence may be as much Extended; no man can say how much. This
Book is but a Beating upon it. And at the same time, it is a Commentary on that
Inspired Maxim, Gal. VI. 10. As we have Opportunity, let us do Good unto all
men: Every Proposal here made upon it hopes to be able to say, When I am tried,
I shall come forth as Gold.

I have not been left altogether Uninformed, That all the Rules of Discretion
and Behavior, are embryo'd in that One Word, MODESTY. But it will be no breach
of Modesty, to be very Positive in asserting, That the only Wisdom of Man, lies
in Conversing with the Great GOD, and His Glorious CHRIST; and in Engaging as
many others as we can, to join with us in this our Blessedness; thereby
Promoting His Kingdom among the Children of Men; and in Studying to Do Good
unto all about us; to be Blessings in our several Relations; to heal the
Disorders, and help the Distresses of a Miserable World, as far as ever we can
Extend our Influences. It will be no Trespass upon the Rules of Modesty, with
all possible Assurance to assert. That no man begins to be Wise, till he come
to make this the Main Purpose and Pleasure of his Life; Yea, that every Man
will at some time or other be so Wise as to own, that every thing without this
is but Folly, though alas, the most of Men come not unto it, until it be Too Late.

Millions of Men, in all Ranks, besides those whose Dying Thoughts are
collected in, The Fair Warnings to a careless World, have at length declared
their Conviction of it. It will be no Immodesty in me to say, The Man who is
not Satisfied of the Wisdom in making it the Work of his Life to Do Good, is
always to be beheld with the Pity due to an Idiot. No First Principles are
more Peremptorily to be adhered unto. Or, Do but grant A Judgment to come, and
my Assertion is presently victorious.

I will not be Immodest, and yet I will boldly say, The Man is worse than a
Pagan, who will not come into this Notion of things, Vir Bonus est Commune
Bonum; and Vivit is qui multis est usui; and Utilitate Hominum, nil debet esse
Homini Antiquius. None but a Good Man, is really a Living Man; And the more
Good any Man does, the more he really Lives, All the rest is Death; or belongs
to it. Yea, you must Excuse me, if I say, The Mohammedan also shall condemn the
Man, who comes not into the Principles of this Book. For I think, it occurs no
less than Three Times in the Alcoran; God Loves those that are inclined to do
Good.

For this way of Living, if we are fallen into a Generation, wherein men will
cry, [Sotah!] He Is a Fool, of him that practices it, as the Rabbi's foretell,
'twil be in the Generation wherein the Messiah comes; yet there will be a Wiser
Generation, and Wisdom will be Justified of her Children. Among the Jews, there
has been an Ezra, whose Head they called, The Throne of Wisdom: Among the
Greeks there has been a Democritus, who was called (...), in the Abstract; The
Later Ages knew a Gildas, who wore the Surname of, Sapiens; But it is the man
whose Temper and Intent it is, To Do Good, that is the Truly Wise man after
all. And indeed had a man, the Hands of a Briareus, they would all be too few
to Do Good; He might find occasions to call for more than all of them. The
English Nation once had a Sect of men called, Bon-hommes, or, Good men. The
Ambition of this Book, is to Revive and Enlarge a Sect that may claim that
Name; yea, to Solicit, that it may Extend beyond the Bounds of a Sect, by the
coming of all men into it.

Of all the Trees in the Garden of God, which is there, that Envies not the
Palm Tree, out of which alone Plutarch tells us, the Babylonians fetched more
than Three Hundred Commodities? Or the Coco-tree, so Beneficial to Man, that a
Vessel may be built, and rigged, and freighted and Victualled from that alone?
To Plant such Trees of Righteousness, and Prune them, is the Hope of the Book
now before us.

The Men who Devise Good, will now give me leave to mind them of Some things,
by which they may be a little Fortified for their Grand Intention; For, Sirs,
you are to pass between Boz^z (or, Dirty,) and Seneh, (or Thorny) and Encounter
an Host of things worse than Philistines, in your undertaking.

Misconstruction is One thing against which you will do well to furnish your
selves with the Armor both of Prudence and of Patience; (...) for the
preventing of it, Patience for the (...) of it. You will unavoidably be put
upon the Doing of many Good Things, which other People will see but at a
Distance, and be unacquainted with the Motives and Methods of your doing them;
yea, they may imagine their own Purposes crossed, or clogged in what you do;
and this will expose you to their censures. Yet more particularly; In your
Essays to Do Good, you may happen to be concerned with Persons, whose Power is
greater than their Virtue. It may be Needful as well as Lawful, for you, to
mollify them, with Acknowledgments of those things in them which may render
them Honorable or Considerable, and forbear to take Notice at the present, of
what may be Culpable. In this, you may aim at nothing under Heaven, but only,
that you may be the more Able to Do Good unto them; or by Them to Do Good unto
others. And yet, if you are not very wary, this your Civility may prove your
Disadvantage: Especially, if you find your selves obliged, either to change
your Opinion of the Persons, or to tax any Miscarriage in them. The Injustice
of the Censures upon you, may be much, as if Paul rebuking Felix for his
Unrighteousness and Unchastity, should have been twitted with it, as an
Inconstancy, and Inconsistency, in that very lately he had complemented this
very Felix, and said, He way very glad he had One of such Abilities and
Accomplishments to be concerned withal, and one so well acquainted with the
affairs of his Nation. But you must not be Uneasy, if you should be thus
unjustly dealt withal. Jerome had written highly, of Origin, as a Man of bright
Endowments; Anon he wrote as hardly against some things that Origin was (it may
be, wrongfully) accused of. They cried out upon Jerome for his Levity, yea,
Falsity. He despised the calumny, and replied; I did once commend, what I
thought was Great in him; and now condemn what I find to be Evil in him. I
Pray, where is the contradiction! I Say, Be cautious; But I say again, Be not
Uneasy.

What I add unto it, is; That you must be above all Discouragements. Look for
them, and with a magnanimous Courage overlook them.

Some have Observed, That the most Concealed, and yet the most Violent, of all
our Passions, usually is that of Idleness. It lays Adamantine Chains of Death
and of Darkness upon us. It holds in Chains that cannot be shaken off, all our
other, though never so Impetuous Inclinations. That no more Hurt is done in the
World, is very much owing to a Sort of Scorbutic and Spontaneous Lassitude on
the Minds of men, as well as that no more Good is done. A Pharaoh will do us no
wrong if he tell us, Ye are Idle, ye are Idle. We have usually more Strength to
Do Good, than we have Will to lay it out. Sirs, Be up, and be Doing! It Is too
soon yet sure for an Hic Situs est.

If you meet with vile Ingratitude, from those whom you have laid under the
most Weighty Obligations; Don't wonder at it. Such a Turpitude is the Nature of
man sunk into, that men had rather bear any Weight than that of Obligations.
They will own small ones; but return wonderful Hatred and Malice for such as
are Extraordinary. They will render it a Dangerous Thing, to be very Charitable
and Beneficent. Communities will do it as well as Individuals. Excess of Desert
at length turns into a kind of Demerit. Men will sooner Forgive Great Injuries,
than Great Services. He that built a Matchless Castle for the Poles, for his
Reward, had his Eyes put out, that he might not build such another. Such Things
are enough to make one Sick of the World; but, my Friend, they should not make
thee Sick of Essays to do Good in the World. A Conformity to thy Savior, and
a Communion with Him, Let that carry thee through all!

It Will be impossible to Avoid Envy. For a Right Work, and for a Good one, and
especially, if a man do Many Such, he shall be Envied of his Neighbor. It Is
incredible, the Force that the Pride of men, has to produce Detraction! Pride,
working in a sort of Impatience, that any man should be, or do more than they.
The Minds of men, as One says, have got the Vapors; A Sweet Report of any one
throws them into Convulsions and Agonies; a Foul one refreshes 'em. You must
bear all the Outrage of it; and there is but one sort of Revenge to be allowed
you. One says, There is not any Revenge more Heroic, than that which torments
Envy by doing of Good.

It is a Surprising Passage, which a late French Author has given us; That a
man of Good Merit, is a Kind of Public Enemy. And that by Engrossing a great
many Applauses, which would serve to gratify a great many others, he cannot but
be Envied; And that men do naturally hate, what they Esteem very much, but
cannot Love. But, my Readers, Let us not be Surprised at it. You have Read, who
Suffered the Ostracisms at Athens; and what a pretty Reason the Country Fellow
had, why he gave his Voice, for the Banishing of Aristides; [Because he was
every where always called, The Just:] and for what Reason the Ephori laid a
mulct upon Agesilaus; [Because he did above other men possess the Hearts of the
Lacedaemonians.] You have Read, the Reason why the Ephesians Expelled the best
of their Citizens: [Nemo de nobis unus Excellat; sed si quis Extiterit, alio in
Loco, et apud alios sit:] If any will Outdo their Neighbors, let 'em find
Another Place to do it. You have Read, That he who conquered Hanibal, saw it
necessary to Retire from Rome, that the Merit of others might have more Notice
taken of it. My Authors tell me, At all times, nothing has been more dangerous
among men than too shining a Merit. But, my Readers, The Terror of this Envy
must not intimidate you I must press you, to Do Good, and be so far from
Affrighted at, that you shall rather be generously Delighted in, the most
Envious Deplumations.

I wish I may prove a False Prophet, when I foretell you one Discouragement
more, which you will have to conflict withal. Derision is what I mean. And, Let
not my Prediction be Derided, I pray. It was long since noted, Ridiculum Acri
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat res. It is a thing of late Started,
that the way of Banter, and Scoffing; and Ridicule, or, the Bart'lemew-Fair
Method, as they please to call it; is a more Effectual way to discourage all
Goodness, and put it out of countenance, than Fire and Faggot. No Cruelties are
so Insupportable to Humanity, as Cruel Mockings. It is extremely probable, that
the Devil being somewhat Chained up in several Places, from the other ways of
Persecution, will more than ever apply himself to this. Essays to Do Good,
shall be Derided, with all the Art and Wit, that he can inspire into his
Janissaries: [a Yani-cheer, or, A New Order, the Grand Segniour of Hell has
Instituted.] Exquisite Profaneness and Buffooury shall try their skill to Laugh
People out of them. The Men who abound in them, shall be Exposed on the Stage;
Libels, and Lampoons, and Satyrs, the moist poinant that ever were invented,
shall be darted at them; and Pamphlets full of Lying Stories, be Scattered,
with a design to make them Ridiculous. Hic se aperit Diabolus! The Devil will
try, whether the Fear of being Laughed at, will not Cool and Scare, a Zeal to
Do Good, out of the World. -- Sed tu contra audentior ito. Sirs, Despise the
Shame, whatever Contradiction of Sinners you meet withal; you know, what
Example did so before you. Quit you like men, Be Strong; you know who gives you
the Direction. Say with Resolution, The Proud have had me greatly in Derision,
yet have not I declined to do as much Good as I could! If you should arrive to
a Share in such Sufferings, I will humbly Show you mine Opinion, about the best
conduct under them; It Is, Neglect, and Contempt. I have a whole University on my
side. The University of Helmstadt upon a late Abuse offered unto it, had this
noble Passage in a Declaration; Visum fuit, non alio Remedio, quam Generoso
Silentio, et pio contemptu, utendum nobis esse. Go on to Do Good; and Go Well,
Comely in your Going, like the Noble Creature, which turns not away for any.
A Life Spent in Industrious Essays to Do Good, will be your Powerful, and
Perpetual Vindication. T'wil give you such a well-established interest in the
Minds where Conscience is advised withal, that a few Squibbing, Silly, impotent
Allatrations, will never be able to Extinguish it. If they go to Ridicule you
in their Printed Excursions, your Name will be so Oiled, no Ink will Stick upon
it. I remember, Valerianus Magnus being abused by a Jesuit, who had Labored
(by a Modest enquiry, you may be sure!) to make him Ridiculous, made no other
Defense, but only on every Stroke adjoined, Mentiris Impudentissime. It is a
most Impudent Lie! Sir. And such an Answer might very truly be given, to every
Line of some Stories that I have seen else where brewed by another, who is no
Jesuit. But even so much Answer to their Folly, is too much Notice of it. It
is well observed, The Contempt of such Discourses discredits them, and takes
away the Pleasure from those that make them. And it is another Observation,
That when they of whom we have heard very ill, yet are found by us upon Trial
to be very Good, we naturally conclude, they have a Merit that is Troublesome
to some other People. The Rule than is, Be very Good, yea, Do very much Good;
and cast a Generous Disdain upon Contumelies; the Great Remedy against them. If
you want a Pattern I can give you an Imperial one; It was a Vespesian, who when
one spoke ill of him, said, Ego, cum nihil faciam dignum propter quod
contumelia afficiar, mendacia nihil curo. And I am deceived, if it be not an
Easy thing to be as Honest a Man as a Vespasian!

Sirs, An Unfainting Resolution to Do Good, and an Unwearied well-doing, is the
Thing, that is now urged upon you. And may this Little Book now be so Happy, as
herein to do the part of a Monitor, unto the Readers of it.

I don't find that I have spent so many Weeks in Composing the Book, as
Descartes, though a Profound Geometrician, declares he spent in Studying the
Solution of one Geometrical Question. Yet the Composure is grown beyond what I
desired it should have done; and there is not one Proposal in it, but what well
Pursued, would yield the mind a more Solid and Lasting Satisfaction, than the
Solution of all the Problems in Euclid, or in Pappus. It Is a Vanity in Writers,
to Complement the Readers, with a, Sorry it is no better. Instead of that, I
freely tell my Readers, I have Written what it not unworthy of their Perusal.
If I did not Think so, truly, I would not Publish it. For no man Living has
demanded it of me; it is not Published, To gratify the Importunity of Friends,
as your Authors use to trifle; but it is to Use an Importunity with others, in
a Point, on which I thought they wanted it. And I will venture to say, There is
not one Whimsey in all my Proposals. I propose nothing, but what the Conscience
of every Good Man will say, It were well, if it could be accomplished. That
Writer was in the Right of it, who says, I cannot understand, how any honest Man
can Print a Book, and yet profess, that he thinks none will be the Wiser or
Better for the Reading of it. Indeed, I own that my Subject is worthy to be
much Better Handled, and my manner of Handling it is not such that I dare do as
the famous Painter Titian did on his Pieces, write my Name, with a double,
Fecit, Fecit, as much as to say, Very well done: and I must have utterly
Suppressed it, if I had been of the same Humor, with Cimabus another famous
Painter, who, if himself or any other Spyed the least Fault in his Pieces,
would utterly deface them and destroy them, though he had bestowed a
Twelve-months pains upon them. Yet I will venture to say, The Book is full of
Reasonable and Serviceable Things; and it would be well for us, if such things
were hearkened to; and I have Done well to offer them.

Who is the Author, there is no Need of Enquiring. This will be unavoidably
known in the Vicinity. But his Writing without a Name, (as well as not for
One,) will conceal if from the most of those to whom the Book may come. And the
concealment of his Name, he apprehends, may be of some Use to the Book; for
now, not, Who, but, What, is the only thing to be Considered.

It was a Vanity in One Author, and there may be too many Guilty of the Like;
To demand, Ubi mea Legis, me Agnosce. In true unblushing English, Reader,
whatever you do, count the Author Somebody. But, I Pray, Sir, what are You,
that Mankind should be at all concerned about you? He was almost as great a
Man, as any Ecclesiastical Preferments could make him, who yet would not have
so much as his Name in his Epitaph; he would only have, Hic Jacet, Umbra,
Cinis, Nihil. There shall be no other Name on this Composure; Hic Scribit (vel
Scripturire Studet et audet) Umbra, Cinis, Nihil.

However, He is very Strongly persuaded, There is a Day very near at hand, when
Books of such a Tendency as this, will be the most welcome Things imaginable,
to many Thousands of Readers, and have more than One Edition. Yea, Great will
be the Army of them that Publish them! M.DCC.XVI. is a coming.

A vast Variety of New ways to Do Good will be litt upon; Paths which no Fowl
of the Best Flight at Noble Designs has yet known; and which the Vultures most
Piercing Eye has not yet seen, and where the Lions of the Strongest Resolution
have never passed.

In the mean time, North BRITAIN will be Distinguished, [Pardon me, if I use
the Term, Gosheniz'd,] by Irradiations from Heaven upon it, of such a Tendency.
There will be found a Set of Excellent Men, in that Reformed and Renowned
Church of Scotland, with whom, the most Refined and Extensive Essays to Do
Good, will become so Natural, that the whole World will fare the Better for
them. To These, this BOOK is humbly presented, by a Great Admirer of the Good
Things daily doing among them; as Knowing, That if no where else, yet among
them, it will find some Reception; They will not be forgetful to Entertain such
a Stranger! --

The censure of Writing too much, (no, though he should go as far as Terentianus
Carthaginensis tells us Varro did,) he counts not worth Answering. -- And, I
Pray, why not also Preaching too much! -- But Erasmus, who wrote more, has
furnished him with a Answer, which is all that ever he intends to give unto it;
Accusant quod nimium fecerim; conscientia mea me Accusat, quod minus fecerim,
quedque (...) feurim. In plain Ingenuous English; The Censure of others
upbraids me, that I have done so much; my own Conscience condemns me that I
have done so Little The Good God forgive my Slotfulness!

ESSAYS to Do GOOD.
1. SUCH Glorious Things are Spoken in the Oracles of our Good God, concerning
them who Devise Good, that, A Book of Good Devices, may very reasonably demand
Attention and Acceptance from them that have any Impressions of the most
Reasonable Religion upon them. I am Devising Such a Book; but at the same time
Offering a Sorrowful Demonstration, That if men would Set themselves to Devise
Good, a world of Good might be done, more than there is, in this Present Evil
World. It is very sure, The World has Need Enough. There Needs abundance to be
done, That the Great GOD and His CHRIST may be more Known and Served in the
World; and that the Errors which are Impediments to the Acknowledgments
wherewith men ought to Glorify their Creator and Redeemer, may be Rectified.
There needs abundance to be done, That the Evil Manners of the World, by which
men are drowned in Perdition, may be Reformed; and mankind rescued from the
Epidemical Corruption and Slavery which has overwhelmed it. There needs
abundance to be done, That the Miseries of the World may have Remedies and
Abatements provided for them; and that miserable people may be Relieved and
Comforted. The world has according to the Computation of Some, above Seven
hundred millions of people now Living in it. What an ample Field among all
these, to Do Good upon! In a word, The Kingdom of God in the World, Calls for
Innumerable Services from us. To Do SUCH THINGS is to Do Good. Those men Devise
Good, who Shape any DEVICES to do Things of Such a Tendency; whether the Things
be of a Spiritual Importance, or of a Temporal. You see, Sirs, the General
matter, appearing as Yet, but as a Chaos, which is to be wrought upon. Oh! that
the Good Spirit of God may now fall upon us, and carry on the Glorious work
which lies before us!

2. IT IS to be Supposed, my Readers will readily grant, That it is an Excellent,
a Virtuous, a Laudable Thing to be full of Devices, to bring about Such Noble
Purposes. For any man to Deride, or to Despise my Proposal, That we Resolve and
Study to Do as much Good in the World as we can, would be so black a Character,
that I am not willing to make a Supposal of it in any of those with when I am
Concerned. Let no man pretend unto the Name of, A Christian, who does not
Approve the proposal of, A Perpetual Endeavor to Do Good in the World. What
pretension can Such a man have to be, A Follower of the Good One? The Primitive
Christians gladly accepted and improved the Name, when the Pagans by a mistake
Styled them, Chrestians; Because it Signified, Useful Ones. The Christians who
have no Ambition to be So, Shall be condemned by the Pagans; among whom it was
a Term of the Highest Honor, to be termed, A Benefactor; to have Done Good,
was accounted Honorable. The Philosopher being asked why Every one desired so
much to look upon a Fair Object! he answered, That it was a Question of a Blind
man. If any man ask, as wanting the Sense of it, What is it worth the while to
Do Good in the world! I must Say, It Sounds not like the Question of a Good
man. The (...), as Origin calls it, the Spiritual Taste of every Good Man will
make him have an unspeakable Relish for it. Yea, Unworthy to be discoursed as a
Man, is he, who is not for, Doing of Good among Men. An Enemy to the Proposal,
That mankind, may be the better for us, deserves to be Reckoned, little better
than, A Common Enemy of Mankind. How Cogently do I bespeak, a Good Reception of
what is now designed! I produce not only Religion, but even Humanity it self,
as full of a Fiery Indignation against the Adversaries of the Design. Excuse
me, Sirs; I declare, that if I could have my choice, I would never Eat or
Drink, or Walk, with such an one, as long as I Live; or, Look on him as any
other than one by whom Humanity it self is Debased and Blemished. A very Wicked
Writer, has yet found himself compelled by the Force of Reason, to publish this
Confession. To Love the Public, to Study an Universal Good, and to Promote the
Interest of the whole World, as far as is in our Power, is surely the Highest
of Goodness, and makes that Temper, which we call Divine. And, he goes on. Is
the Doing of Good for Glories Sake so Divine a thing? [Alas, Too much Humane,
Sir!] Or, Is it not a Diviner to Do Good, even where it may be thought
Inglorious? Even unto the Ungrateful, and unto those who are wholly Insensible
of the Good they receive! A man must be far gone in Wickedness, who will open
his Mouth, against such Maxims and Actions! A better Pen has Remarked it; yea,
the man must be much a Stranger in History, who has not made the Remark. To
Speak Truth, and to Do Good, were in the Esteem even of the Heathen World, most
God-like Qualities. God forbid, That in the Esteem of the Christian World, for
those Qualities, there should be any Abatement!

3. I Will Not yet propose the Reward of Well-doing, and the glorious Things which
the Mercy and Truth of God will do, for them who Devise Good; Because I would
have to do with such, as will esteem it, a Sufficient Reward unto it self. I
will imagine that Generous Ingenuity, in my Readers, which will dispose them to
count themselves well-Rewarded in the Thing it self, if God will Accept them to
Do Good in the World. It is an Invaluable Honor, To Do Good; It is an
Incomparable Pleasure. A Man must Look upon himself as Dignifyed and Gratifyed
by GOD, when an Opportunity to Do Good is put into his Hands. He must Embrace
it with Rapture, as enabling him directly to answer the Great END of his Being.
He must manage it with Rapturous Delight, as a most Suitable Business, as a
most Precious Privilege. He must Sing in those Ways of the Lord, wherein he
cannot but find himself, while he is Doing of Good. As the Saint of Old Sweetly
Sang, I was glad, when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the Lord.
Thus ought we to be Glad, when any Opportunity to Do Good, is offered unto us.
We should need no Arguments, to make us Entertain the Offer; but we should
Naturally fly into the Matter, as most agreeable to the Divine Nature whereof
we are made Partakers. It should Oblige us wonderfully! An Ingot of Gold
presented unto us, not more Obliging! Think, Sirs, Now I Enjoy what I Am for!
Now I Attain what I Wish for! Some Servants of God have been so Strongly
Disposed this way, that they have cheerfully made a Tender of any Recompense
that could be desired, (yea, rather than fail, a Pecuniary one,) unto any
Friend that would Think for them, and Supply the Barrenness of their Thoughts,
and Suggest unto them any Special and proper Methods, wherein they may be
Serviceable. Certainly, To Do Good is a thing that brings its own Recompense,
in the Opinion of those, who reckon a kind Information of a Point wherein they
may Do Good, worthy to be by them requited with a Recompense to the Informer. I
will only Say; If any of you are Strangers unto such a Disposition as this, to
Look upon an Opportunity to Do Good, as a thing that Enriches you, and to Look
upon your selves as Enriched, and Favored of God, when He does Employ you to
Do Good: I have done with you, I would pray them, to lay the Book aside; It
will disdain to carry on any further Conversation with 'em! It handles a
Subject on which the Wretches of the House of Caleb, will not be conversed
withal. It is content with one of Dr. Stoughtons Introductions; It is Enough to
me, that I Speak to wise men, whose Reason shall be my Rhetoric, to
Christians, whose Conscience shall be my Eloquence.

4. Though the Assertion fly never so much like a Chain-Shot among us, and Rake
down all before it, I will again, and again Assert it; That we might every One
of us do more Good than we do. And therefore, This is the FIRST, PROPOSAL, to
be made unto us; To be Exceedingly Humbled, that we have done so Little Good in
the World. I am not Uncharitable, in saying; I know not that Assembly of
Christians upon Earth, which ought not to be a Bochim, in this consideration.
Oh! Tell me, what Utopia, I shall find it in! Sirs, Let us begin to bring forth
some Good Fruit, by Lamenting our own Great Unfruitfulness. Verily, Sins of
Omission must be Confessed and Bewailed; else we add unto the Number of them.
The most Useful Men in the World, have gone out of it, crying to God, Lord, Let
my Sins of Omission be Forgiven to me! Men that have made more than ordinary
Conscience about well-Spending of their Time, have had their Deathbed made
uneasy by this Reflection; The Lose of Time now Sits heavy upon me. Be sure,
All Unregenerate Persons, are, as our Bible has told us, Unprofitable Persons.
It Is not for nothing that the Comparison of Thorns, and Briars, has been used,
to Teach us, what they are. An Unrenewed Sinner, alas, he never did One Good
Work in all his Life! In all his Life, did I Say? You must give me that word
again! He is Dead while he Lives; he is Dead in Sins; he has never yet begun to
Live unto God: and, as is he, so are all the Works of his Hands; They are Dead
Works. Ah! Wretched Good-for-nothing. Wonder, Wonder at the Patience of Heaven,
which yet forbears Cutting-down, such a Cumberer of the Ground. The best, and
the first Advice, to be given unto such Persons, is, Immediately to do their
best, that they may get out of their woeful Unregeneracy. Let them Immediately
Acknowledge the Necessity of their Turning to God, but how Unable they are to
do it, and how Unworthy that God should make them Able. Immediately let them
lift up their Cry unto Sovereign Grace, to Quicken them; and let them then Try,
whether they cannot with Quickened Souls, Plead the Sacrifice and Righteousness
of a Glorious CHRIST for their Happy Reconciliation to God; Seriously Resolve
upon a Life of Obedience to God, and Serious Religion; and Resign themselves up
unto the Holy Spirit, that he may possess them, Instruct them, Strengthen them,
and for His Name Sake lead them in tho paths of Holiness. There will no Good
be done, till this be done. The very Firstborn of all Devices to Do Good, is
in being Born again, and in Devising Means, that a Banished Soul may no longer
be Expelled from the presence of God. But you that have been brought home to
God, have Sad cause, not only to deplore the Dark Days of your Unregeneracy,
wherein you did none but the Unfruitful Works of Darkness; but also, that you
have done so Little, since God has Quickened you and Enabled you, to Do, the
Things that should be done. How Little, How Little have you Lived up, to the
Strains of Gratitude, which might have been justly Expected, since God has
brought you into His Mavelous Light! The best of us may mourn in our
Complaint; Lord, How Little Good have I done, to what I might have done! Let
the Sense of this cause us to Loathe and Judge ourselves before the Lord: Let
it fill us with Shame, and Abase us wonderfully! How can we do any other, than
with David, even make a Cauldron of our couch, and a Bath of our Tears, when we
consider how little Good we have done! Oh! That our Heads were Waters, because
they have been so Dry of all Thoughts to Do Good! Oh! That our Eyes were a
Fountain of Tears, because they have been so little upon the Lock out for
Objects and Methods to Do Good upon! For the Pardon of this Evil-doing, Let us
Fly to the Great Sacrifice; which is our only Expiation. Plead the Blood of
that Lamb of God, whose Universal Usefulness is One of those admirable
Properties, for which He has been called, A Lamb. The Pardon of our Barrenness
at Good Works being thus obtained, by Faith in that Blood which cleanses from
all Sin, that is the way for us to be rescued from a Condemnation to Perpetual
Barrenness. The dreadful Sentence of, Let no Fruit grow on thee for ever! will
be reversed and prevented, by such a Pardon. Sirs, A True, Right, Evangelical
Proceedure to Do Good, must have this Repentance laid in the Foundation of it!
We do not Handle the Matter Wisely, if a Foundation be not laid thus Low, and
in the deepest Self-Abasement.

5. HOw full, how full of Devices are we, for our own Secular Advantage! And
how Expert in Devising many Little Things, to be done for our selves! We apply
our Thoughts, with a mighty Assiduity, unto the Old Question, What shall I Eat
and Drink, and wherewithal shall I be clothed? It is with a very strong
Application of our Thoughts, that we Study, what we shall do for our selves, in
our Marriages, in our Voyages, in our Bargains, and in many, many other
concerns, wherein we are Sollicitous to have our condition easy. We
Sollicitously Contrive, that we may accomplish Good Bargains, and that we may
Steer clear of ten thousand Inconveniences, to which, without some
Contrivance, we may ly obnoxious. The Business of our Personal Callings we
carry on with Numberless Thoughts, how we may Do Well, in what is to be done.
To accomplish our Temporal Business, in affairs that cannot be Numbered, we find
out Witty Inventions. But, O Rational, Immortal, Heaven-born SOUL; Are thy
wondrous Faculties capable of no Greater Improvements, no better Employments?
Why should a Soul of such High Capacities, a Soul that may arrive to be clothed
in the Bright Scarlet of Angels, yet Embrace a Dunghill! O let a Blush coloring
beyond Scarlet, be thy clothing for thy being found so meanly occupied! Alas,
In the Multitude of thy Thoughts within thee, had thou no Dispositions to Raise
thy Soul, unto Some thoughts, What may be done for GOD, and CHRIST, and for my
own SOUL, and for the most Considerable Interests? How many Hundreds of
Thoughts have we, How to obtain or secure Some Trifle for our selves; to One,
How we may Serve the interests of the Glorious LORD, and of His People in the
World? How can we now pretend, that we Love Him, or, that a carnal, and a
Criminal Self-Love, has not the Dominion over us? I again come in, upon a Soul
of an Heavenly Extract, and Smite it, as the Angel did the Sleeping Prisoner;
Awake, Shake off thy Shackles, ly no longer fettered in a Base confinement unto
nothing but a Meaner Sort of Business. Assume and Assert the Liberty of now and
then Thinking on the Noblest Question in the World; What Good may I do in the
World? There was a Time, when it was complained by no less a man, than Gregory
the Great (the Bishop of Rome) I am Sunk into the World! It may be the
complaint of a Soul, that minds all other things, and rarely calls to mind that
Noblest Question. Ah! Star, fallen from Heaven, and choked in Dust, Rise and
Soar up to something answerable to thy Original. Begin a Course of Thoughts,
which when begun, will be like a Resurrection from the Dead. They which dwell
in the Dust, Wake and Sing, and a Little anticipate the Life which we are to
Live at the Resurrection of the Dead, when they Livelily set themselves to
Think; How may I be a Blessing in the World? And, What may I do, that
Righteousness may more dwell in the World?

6. HOw much Hurt may be done by One Wicked man? Yea, Sometimes One Wicked man,
of but Small Abilities, becoming an Indefatigable Tool of the Devil, may do an
Incredible Deal of Mischief in the World. We have seen some Wretched
Instruments of Cursed Memory, ply the Intention of Doing Mischief, at a Strange
rate; until they have undone a whole Country; yea, unto the undoing of more
than Three Kingdoms. It Is a Melancholy consideration, which I am now upon: and
I may say, an Astonishing One! You will hardly find One of a Thousand, who does
near so much, to Serve God and Christ, and his own Soul, as you may see done by
Thousands to Serve the Devil. An horrible Thing!

O my Soul; Thy Maker, and thy Savior, so worthy of thy Love, and thy All! A
Lord, whose infinite Goodness, will follow all that thou do for Him, with
Remunerations, beyond all Apprehension Glorious! How Little, How little, is it
that thou do for Him! At the same time, look into thy Neighborhood; See
there a monster of Wickedness, who to his uttermost will Serve a Devil, that
will prove a Destroyer unto him, and all whose Wages will be Torments. He
Studies how to Serve the Devil; he is never weary of his Drudgery; he racks his
Invention to go thorough with it. He Shames me, he Shames me wonderfully! O my
God, I am ashamed, and blush to Lift up my Face unto thee, my God.

There is a man, of whom we read; He Devises mischief upon his Bed, he Sets
himself in a way that is not Good. Now, I beseech you, why should not we be as
Active, as Frequent, as Forward, in Devising of Good; and as full of Exquisite
Contrivance? Why should not we be as Wise to Do Good, as any People are Wise to
do Evil? I am sure, we have a better Cause* and there is more of Reason for it.
My Friend, Though thou art One that makes but a Little Figure in the World, and a
Brother of Low Degree, behold, a vast Encouragement! A Little man may do a
great deal of Hurt. And then, why may not a Little man, do a great deal of
Good! It is possible the Wisdom of a Poor man, may Start a Proposal, that may
Save a City, Serve a Nation! A Single Hair applied unto a Flyer, that has other
Wheels depending on it, may pull up an Oak, or pull down an House.

It is very Observable, That when our Lord JESUS CHRIST, would recommend this
Zeal, with which the Kingdom of Heaven is to be Served, He did not mention an
Exemple of Honest Wisdom; no, but of an Unrighteous and Scandalous Dishonesty,
(as of an Unjust Steward,) for our Emulation. The Wisdom of our Lord in this
matter, is much to be observed. His Design is, not only to represent the
Prudence, but also the vast Industry, Ingenuity, Resolution, and Heroic Effort
of Soul, necessary in them, that would Seek and Serve the Kingdom of Heaven.
There is no where to be found among men, that Vivacity of Spirit in Lawful
Actions, which there is to be found in Unlawful Ones. The ways of Honesty are
plain to men, and they require not so much Uneasiness in the Minds of men to
manage them. Whereas your Thieves and Cheats, and men that follow Courses of
Dishonesty, take ways that are full of Difficulties: the Turns and the Tricks
with which they must be carried through them, are innumerable. Hence among such
Fellows, you find the Exercise of the most Extraordinary Subtilty. There is no
such Cunning, and Nimble Application to be any where else met withal. It Is very
Emphatical, to fetch from hence the colors of Heavenly Wisdom! That which I
would now be at, is this; That we Do Good with as much Application, as any men
alive can use in Evil-doing. When Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, it is
often done with both Hands, and Greedily. Why may not we proceed in our
Usefulness, even with Both Hands, and Greedily Watching for Opportunities? We
have no occasion for any Ill Arts, that we may carry on our Designs to Do Good.
God forbid, that we should ever imagine the Uniting of such Inconsistencies.
But why cannot we carry on our Designs, with as much, and as deep, and as
copious Thought, as the men of Ill Arts? And why may not we lay out our
Spirits, with as Transporting a Vigor, to Do the Things that will be
Acceptable to God, and Profitable to Men, as any Wretches have, when they Weary
themselves to commit Iniquity? To reprehend certain Ecclesiastical Drones, who
had little Inclination to Do Good, Father Latymer Employed a coarse Expression
of this importance; If you will not Learn of Good Men, for shame Learn of the
Devil! He is never Idle. He goes about, seeking what Hurt he may do! Truly, the
Indefatigable Prosecution of their Designs, which we may see in Some, whom the
Holy Word of God has called, The Children of the Devil, may Exceedingly put us
to the Blush. Our Obligations to Do Good are infinite: They Do Evil against all
Obligations. The Compensations made unto them who Do Good, are Encouraging
beyond all Expression; They who Do Evil, get nothing to boast of; but Evil
Pursues the Sinners. If the Devil do Go about, and People inspired by him also
Go about, Seeking what Hurt they may do, Why do not we Go about, and Seek, and
Think, where and How to Do Good? Verily, It Were a Character for a Good Angel,
to do so. O Thou Child of God, and Lover of all Righteousness; How can thou
find in thy Heart at any time to Cease from doing all the Good, that can be
done, in the Right Ways of the Lord? Methinks, That Word of the Lord, may be a
Burden unto us; If we have any true Honor in us, it will be so! The Children
of this World, are in [and, For,] their Generation, Wiser than the Children of
Light. Yea, they Pursue the Works of Darkness more Livelily, than any of us
Walk in the Light, wherewith our Great Savior has favored us.

7. TO the Title of Good Works there do belong, those Essays to Do Good, which
are now urged for. To produce them, the First Thing, and indeed the ONE Thing,
that is Needful, is, A Glorious work of Grace on the Soul, Renewing and
Quickening of it, and Purifying of the Sinner, and rendering him Zealous of Good
Works: A Workmanship of God upon us, Creating us over again, by JESUS CHRIST,
for Good Works. And then, there is Needful, what will necessarily follow upon
such a Work: That is, A Disposition to Do Good Works upon true, Genuine,
Generous, and Evangelical Principles. Those Principles are to be Stated, before
we can go any further; when they are Active, we shall go a great deal further.

It is in the first Place, to be taken for granted; That the End for which we
do Good Works, must not be, To afford the Matter of our Justification, before
the Law of the Holy GOD. Indeed, no Good Works can be done by any man until he
be Justified. Until a Man be United unto the Glorious CHRIST, who is our Life,
he is a Dead Man. And, I Pray, what Good Works to be Expected from Such a Man?
They will all be Dead Works. For, Severed from me ye can do nothing, Says our
Savior. The Justification of a Sinner, by Faith, Before Good Works, and in
Order to them, is One of those Truths, which may say to the Popish Innovations,
With us are the Gray Headed, and very Aged Men, much Elder than thy Father. It
was an Old Maxim of the Faithful, Bona opera Sequuntur Justificatum, non
praecedunt Justificandum. It is the Righteousness of the Good Works done by our
Savior and Surety, not our own, that Justifies us before God, and answers the
Demands of His Law upon us. We do by Faith lay hold on those Good Works for our
Justifying Righteousness before we arrive to do our own. It Is not our Faith it
self, either as doing of Good Works, or as being it self one of them, which
Entitles us to the Justifying Righteousness of our Savior. But it is Faith,
only As Renouncing of our own Righteousness, and Relying on that of our
Savior, provided for the Chief of Sinners, by which we are Justified. Sir, All
your Attempts at Good Works will come to Nothing, till a Justifying Faith in
your Savior, shall carry you forth unto them. This was the Divinity of the
Ancients; Jerome has well Expressed it; Sine Christo Omnis Virtus est in Vitio.
Nevertheless; First, You are to Look upon it, as a glorious Truth of the
Gospel, That the Moral Law (which prescribes and requires Good Works) must by
every Christian Alive be made the Rule of his Life. Do we make void the Law
through Faith? God Forbid. Yea, we Establish the Law. The Rule, by which we are
to Glorify God is given us in the Law of Good Works, which we Enjoy [I will
Express it so!] in the Ten Commandments. It is impossible for us, to be
Released from all Obligations to Glorify God by a conformity to this Rule;
Sooner shall we cease to be Creatures. The Conformity to that Rule in the
Righteousness, which our Savior by His Obedience to it, has brought in, to
Justify us, has for ever Magnified the Law, and made it Honorable. Though our
Savior has furnished us, with a perfect and spotless Righteousness, when His
Obedience to the Law, is placed unto our Account; Yet it is a Sin for us at all
to fall short in our own Obedience to the Law: We must always Loathe and Judge
our selves for the Sin. We are not under the Law as a Covenant of Works. Our
own Exactness in doing of Good Works, is not now the Condition of our Entering
into Life. We unto us if it were! But still, the Covenant of Grace holds us to
it, as our Duty; and if we are in the Covenant of Grace, we shall make it our
Study, to Do those Good Works which once were the Terms of our Entering into
Life. Manet Lex tota Pietatis; That was the Divinity in Tertullians Days!
There must be such an Esteem for the Law of Good Works retained for ever in all
the Justified: A Law never to be Abrogated; never to be Abolished! And then,
Secondly, Though we are Justified by a Precious Faith in the Righteousness of God
our Savior, yet Good Works are demanded of us, to Justify our Faith; to
Demonstrate, that it is indeed that Precious Faith. A Justifying Faith is a
Jewel, which may be Counterfeited. But now the Marks of a Faith, which is no
Counterfeit, are to be found in the Good Works whereto a Servant of God is
inclined and assisted by his Faith. It is by a Regenerating Work of the Holy
Spirit, that Faith is wrought in the Souls of the chosen People. Now the same
Work of God, and of Grace, which does in a Regeneration Dispose a man to make
his Flight by Faith, unto the Righteousness of his only Savior, will also
dispose him to the Good Works of a Christian Life. And the Same Faith which
goes to the Savior for a part in His Righteousness, will also go to Him, for
an Heart and Strength to do the Good Works, which are Ordained, that we should
walk in them. If Our Faith be not such a Faith, it is a Lifeless one, and it
will not bring to Life. A Workless Faith is a Worthless Faith. My Friend,
Suppose thy self Standing before the Judgment Seat of the Glorious LORD. A
Needful, a Prudent, Supposal; it ought to be a very Frequent One. The Judge
demands, What have thou to Plead, for a Portion in the Blessedness of the
Righteous? The Plea must be;

O my Glorious Judge, Thou have been my Sacrifice, Oh! Judge of all the Earth,
Give Poor Dust and Ashes Leave to Say, My Righteousness is on the Bench.
Surely, In the Lord I have my Righteousness. O my Savior, I have Received it,
I have Secured it, upon thy Gracious offer of it.

The Judge proceeds;

But what have thou to Plead, That thy Faith should not be Rejected, as the
Faith and Hope of the Hypocrite?

Here the Plea must be;

Lord, My Faith was thy Work. It was a Faith which disposed me to all the Good
Works of thy Holy Religion. My Faith Sanctified me. It carried me to thee, O my
Savior, for Grace to do the Works of Righteousness. It Embraced thee for my
Lord as well as for my Savior. It caused me with Sincerity to Love and Keep
thy Commandments; with assiduity to Serve the Interests of thy Kingdom in the
World. Thus you have Paul and James Reconciled. Thus you have Good Works
provided for. The Aphorism of the Physician, is, Per Brachium fit Judicium de
cord. The Doings of Men are truer and surer Indications, than all their
Sayings, of what they are within. But there is yet a further Consideration,
upon which you must be Zealously Affected for them. You must Consider Good
Works, as the Way to, yea, as a Part of, the Great Salvation, which is
Purchased and Intended for you, by your Blessed Savior. Without an Holy Heart
you cannot be fit for an Holy Heaven; Meet for the Inheritance of the Holy Ones
in that Light, which admits no works of Darkness; where none but Good Works are
done for Eternal Ages. But an Holy Heart will cause a man to do Good works with
all his Heart. The Motto on the Gates of the Holy City is; None but the Lovers
of Good Works to enter here. It Is implied, in what we read, Without Holiness no
man shall see the Lord. Yea, to be Saved without Good works, were to be Saved
without Salvation. Much of our Salvation lies in doing of Good works. When our
Souls are Enlarged and Unfettered, it is that we may Do such Things. Heaven is
begun upon Earth in the doing of them. Doubtless, no man shall come up to
Heaven, who is not so persuaded. I will mention but one more of those
Principles, which Good works grow upon. It Is that Noble one, of GRATITUDE. The
Believer cannot but Enquire, What shall I render to my Savior? The Result of
the Enquiry will be, with Good works to Glorify Him. We read, Faith works by
Love. Our Faith will first show us the Matchless and Mavelous Love of God, in
Saving us. And the Faith of this Love will work upon our Hearts, until it has
raised in us, an Unquenchable Flame of Love unto Him that has so Loved us, and
Saved us*

These, These are to be our Dispositions;

O my Savior; Have thou done so much for me? Now will I do all I can for thy
Kingdom, and People in the World? Oh! What Service is there that I may now do
for my Savior, and for His People in the World!

These are the Principles to be proceeded on. And on them, I will observe to
you a Notable Thing. It Is worthy of Observations, That there are no men in the
World, who so abound in Good works, as the men who have most of all abandoned
all pretense to Merit by their works. There are Protestants who have outdone
Papists, in our Days, as well as in Dr. Willets. No Merit-Mongers have gone
beyond some Holy Christians, who have done Good works, upon the Assurance of
their being already Justified and Entitled unto Life Eternal.

I take Notice, that our Apostle, casting a Just Contempt on the Endless
Genealogies, and Long, Intricate, Perplexed Pedigrees, which the Jews of his
Time, stood so much upon; Proposes instead thereof to be Studied, Charity, out
of a Pure Heart, and a Good Conscience, and Faith Unfeigned. As if he had said,
I will give you a Genealogy worth Ten Thousand of theirs, First, From Faith
Unfeigned proceeds a Good Conscience: From a Good Conscience proceeds a Pure
Heart: From a Pure Heart proceeds a Charity to all about us. It Is Admirably
Stated!

8. IT is to be feared, That we too seldom Enquire after our Opportunities to
Do Good. Our Opportunities to Do Good are our TALENTS. An awful Account must be
rendered unto the Great GOD, concerning our Use of the Talents, wherewith He has
Entrusted us, in these Precious Opportunities. We do not Use our Opportunities,
many times because we do not Know what they are; and many times, the Reason why
we do not Know, is because we do not Think. Our Opportunities to do Good, ly by
Unregarded, and Un-improved; and so it is but a mean Account that can be given
of them. We Read of a thing, which we Deride as often as we behold; There is,
that makes himself Poor, and yet has great Riches. It is a thing too too
frequently Exemplified, in our Opportunities to Do Good, which are some of our
most Valuable Riches. Many a man seems to reckon himself destitute of those
Talents; as if there were Nothing for him to do: He pretends he is not in a
Condition to Do any Good, Alas! Poor Man; what can he do? My Friend; Think
again; Think often. Enquire what your Opportunities are. You will doubtless
find them, to be more than you were Aware of. Plain Men dwelling in Tents,
Persons of a very Ordinary Character, may in a way of bright Piety, prove
Persons of Extraordinary Usefulness. A Poor John Urich may make a Grotius the
Better for him. I have read of a Pious Weaver, of whom some Eminent Persons
would say, Christ walked as it were alive upon the Earth in that man. And a
world of Good was done by that man. A mean Mechanic, who can tell what an
Engine of Good, he may be, if humbly and wisely applied unto it!

This then is the Next PROPOSAL. Without abridging your selves of your
Occasional Thoughts on the Question, often every Day, What Good may I do? State
a Time now and then for more Deliberate Thoughts upon it. Cannot you find a
Time, [Suppose, once a Week, yea, and how agreeably, on the Lord's Day,] to
take that Question into your Consideration; What is there that I may do, for
the Service of the Glorious Lord, and for the Welfare of those, for whom I
ought to be Concerned? Having implored the Direction of God, who is the Father
of Lights, and the Author and Giver of Good Thoughts, Consider on the matter,
in the various Aspects of it. Consider till you have Resolved on something. The
Resolutions which you take up, immediately write down. Examine what Precept and
what Promise, you can find in the Word of God, that may Countenance the
Intentions, in these your Memorials. Look over the Memorials at proper Seasons
afterward, to see how far you have Proceeded in the Execution of them. The
Advantages of these Reserved and Revised Memorials, no Rhetoric will serve to
Commend them, no Arithmetic to Number them. There are some Animals, of whom we
say, They do not know their own Strength. Christians, why should you be They?

9. LET us descend unto Particulars. But in doing so, let it not be imagined,
that I pretend unto an Enumeration of all the Good Devices, that are to be
thought upon. Indeed, not a Thousandth part of them, need or can be now
Enumerated The Essay, which I am now upon, is, only to dig open the several
Springs of Usefulness; which having once begun to Run, will spread into
Streams, which no Humane Foresight can Comprehend. Spring up, O Well! So will
every true Israelite Sing, upon every Proposal here Exhibited. And the Nobles
of Israel can do nothing more agreeable to their own Character, than to fall to
work upon it. Perhaps almost every Proposal to be now mentioned, may be like a
Stone falling on a Pool; Reader, Keep thy Mind Calm, and see, whether the
Effect prove not so! That one Circle (and Service) will produce another, until
they Extend, who can tell, how far? and they cannot be reckoned up. The men who
give themselves up to Good Devices, and who take a due Notice of their
Opportunities to Do Good, usually find a strange Growth of their Opportunities.
The Gracious and Faithful Providence of the Glorious Lord, Grants this
Recompense unto His Diligent Servants, that He will Multiply their
Opportunities to be Serviceable. And when Ingenious men, have a little used
themselves unto Contrivances, in this or that way of Pursuing the best
Intentions, their Ingenuity will sensibly improve, and there will be more of
Exquisiteness, more of Expansion, in their Diffusive Applications. Among all
the Dispensations of Special Providence, in the Government of the World, there
is none more Uninterrupted, than the Accomplishment of that Word, Unto him that
has, shall be given. I will say this; O Useful Man, Take that for thy Motto;
HABENTI DABITUR: And, in a Lively Use of thy Opportunities to Do Good, see how
notably, it will be accomplished! Sir, See what Accomplishment of that Word
will at last Surprise you; Though thy Beginning were Small, yet thy Latter End
shall greatly Increase.

10. ODI Sapientem qui sibi non sapit. The Charity we are upon, why should it
not Begin at Home? It observes not a due Decorum, if it do not so; and it will
be liable to great Exceptions in its Pretensions and Proceedings.

This then is to be made as an Early PROPOSAL.

First, Let every man Devise what Good may be done, for the Help of what is yet
Amiss, in his own Heart and Life. It is a Good Note of the Witty Fullers; He
need not Complain of too little work, who has a Little World in himself to
Mend. It was of old Complained; No man Repented him, saying, What have I done?
Every man upon Earth may find in himself something that wants Mending; and the
Work of Repentance is to Enquire, not only, What we have done, but also, What
we have to do? Frequent Self-Examination, is the Duty and the Prudence, of all
that would Know themselves, or would not Lose themselves. The Great Intention
of Self-Examination is, to find out, the Points, wherein we are to, Amend our
ways. A Christian that would thrive in Christianity, must be no Stranger to a
Course of Meditation. Meditation, It Is one of the Masters to make a Man of God.
One Article and Exercise in our Meditation, should be, to find out, the Things
wherein a Greater Conformity to the Truths upon which we have been Meditating,
must be Endeavored. If we would be Good Men, we must often Devise, How we may
grow in Knowledge, and in all Goodness! It is an Enquiry often to be made;

What shall I do, that what is yet Lacking in the Image of God upon me, may be
Perfected? What shall I do, that I may Live more Perfectly, more Watchfully,
more Fruitfully before the Glorious Lord?

And why should not our Meditation, when we Retire to that Soul-Enriching Work
of Shaping the Right Thoughts of the Righteous, Expire with some Resolution's
Devise now, and Resolve something, to strengthen your Walk with God.

With some Devout Hearers of the Word, it is a Practice, when they have Heard a
Sermon, to think; What Good thing have I now to ask of God, with a special
Importunity? Yea, they use to call upon their Children also, and make them
answer this Question: Child, What Blessing will you now ask of the Glorious
God? And Charge them then to go, and do accordingly.

In pursuance of this Piety, why may not this be one of the Exercises, that
shall go to make with us a Good Evening for the Best of Days? On the Lord's Day
Evening, we may make this one of our Exercises; To Employ most serious and
awful Thoughts on that Question; Should I Die this Week, what have I left
Undone, which I should then wish I had made more speed in the doing of? My
Friend, Place thy self in Dying Circumstances; Apprehend and Realize thy
Approaching Death. Suppose thy Last Hour come; the Decretory Hour: thy Breath
failing, thy Throat rattling, thy Hands with a cold Sweat upon them, only the
turn of the Tide expected for thy Expiration. In this Condition; What would
thou wish to have done, more than thou have already done, for thy own Soul, for
thy Family, or for the People of God? Think; Don't Forget the Result of thy
Thoughts; Don't Delay to do what thou have Resolved upon. How much more
Agreeable and Profitable, would such an Exercise be on the Lord's Day Evening,
than those Vanities whereto that Evening is too commonly Prostituted, and all
the Good of the foregoing Day Defeated? And if such an Exercise were often
attended, Oh! How much would it Regulate our Lives; how Watchfully, how
Fruitfully would it cause us to Live; What an incredible Number of Good Works
would it produce in the World?

Will you Remember, Sirs, Every Christian is, A Temple of God. It would be a
Service to Christianity, if this Notion of Christianity were more often, and
clearly Cultivated. But certainly, there yet remains very much, for every one
of us to do, that so the Temple may be carried on unto Perfection; Repaired,
Finished, Purified; and the Top-stone of it Laid, with a Shout of Grace! Grace!
unto it.

As a Branch of this Piety, I will recommend, a serious and fruitful
Improvement, of the Various Dispensations, which the Divine Providence obliges
us, to take notice of.

More Particularly;

Have you received any special Blessings, and Mercies, from the Hand of a
Merciful God? You do not suitably Express your Thankfulness; You do not render
again according to the Benefit that is done unto you; Except you set your self
to Consider, What shall I render to the Lord? You should Contrive some Signal
Thing to be done on this Occasion; Some Service to the Kingdom of God, Either
within your self, or among others, that may be a just Confession and
Remembrance of what a Good God has done for you. It Is what the Goodness of God
leads you to! I beseech you, Sirs; How can a Good Voyage, yea, or a Good
Bargain be made, without some Special Returns of Gratitude unto God? I would
now, have something of your Estates made a Thank-Offering, in being Set apart
for Pious Uses.

Whole Days of Thanksgiving are to be kept, when the Favors of God rise to a
more observable Height. Christians of the Finer Mould, keep their Private
ones, their Secret ones, as well as bear their part in the Public. One
Exercise for such a Day, is, To take a List of the more distinguishable
Succors, and Bounties, wherewith our God has comforted us. And then, to
contrive Some Notable Acknowledgments of the Glorious Lord, in Endeavors to
Serve Him, and this by way of Gratitude for these Undeserved Comforts.

On the other hand. You meet with heavy and grievous Afflictions. Verily, It Is
Pity to be at the Trouble of Suffering Afflictions, and not get Good by them.
We get Good by them, when they awaken us to Do Good. I may say, Never till
then! When God is Distributing Sorrows unto you, the Sorrows come still upon
some Errands: The best way for you to find, that they do not come in His Anger,
is for you to Mind the Errands. The Advice is, That when any Affliction comes
upon you, You immediately consider, What Special Article of Repentance does
this Affliction call me to? What Miscarriage does this Affliction find in me,
to be Repented of? And then, while the sense of the Affliction is yet upon you,
Sollicitously Consider, What Improvement in Godliness and Usefulness does this
Affliction call me to? Be more Sollicitous to Gain this point, than to Get out
of your Affliction. Oh! the Peace that will compose and Possess and Ravish your
Minds, when your Affliction shall be found yielding the Fruits of Righteousness!

Luther did well to call Afflictions, Theologiam Christianorum. This may be a
fit Place, to introduce One Direction more. We are Traveling through a Malicious
and Calumnious, and Abusive World. Why should not Malice be a Good Informer? We
may be unjustly Defamed; it will be Strange if we are not Frequently so. A
Defamation is commonly Resented as a Provocation. My Friend, Make it only a
Provocation to Good Works! The Thing to be now directed is this. Upon any
Reproach, instead of being transported into a Rage at Shimei, Retire, and
Patiently Ponder, Has not God hidden such a Reproach, to awaken me unto some
Duty? Unto what special Instance or Service of Piety, should I be awakened, by
the Reproach that is cast upon me! One thus Expresses it. The Backbiters
Tongue, like a Mill-clack will be still Wagging, that he may Grind thy Good
Name to Powder. Learn therefore to make such use of his Clack as to make thy
Bread by it; I mean, To live so, that no Credit shall be given to Slander. Thus
all the Abuses you meet withal, may prove unto you in the Hand of a Faithful
God, no other than the Strokes which a Statuary Employes on his Ill-Shaped
Marble; only to form you into a more beautiful Shape, and make you fitter to
adorn the Heavenly Temple. Sirs, you are put into, a way to shake off a Viper,
how advantageously!

Yea, I am going to show you, how you may fetch a Treacle out of a Viper.
Austin would have our very Sins, come into the Invoyse of the, All Things, that
are to Work together for Good. Wherefore, first, I move, That our former
Barrenness may now be Looked upon, as our Obligation and Incitation to a
Greater Fruitfulness. But this motion is too general. I will descend unto a
notable Particularity. I would look back, upon my past Life, and call to Mind
what more Singular Cut-breakings of Sin have blemished it, and been the
Reproach of my Youth. Now, by way of Thankfulness for that Grace of God, and
that Blood of His Christ, through which my Crimes have been Pardoned, I would Set
my self to think, What Virtues, and what Actions, and what Achievements for
the Kingdom of God, will be the most contrary to my former Blemishes? And what
Efforts of Goodness, will be the noblest and most palpable contradiction to the
Miscarriages, with which I have been Chargeable? Yet more particularly, What
Signal thing shall I do, to Save Others from Dishonouring the Great God by such
Miscarriages, as I my self once fell into. I will Study such Things. Perhaps,
the Sincerity and Consolation of Repentance, cannot be better Studied, than by
such a conduct.

You shall give me leave, to press this one more Point of Prudence upon you.
There are not a few Persons, who have many Hours of Liesure in the way of their
Personal Callings. When the Weather takes them off their Business, or when
their Shops are not full of Customers, they have Little or Nothing to do; Now,
Sirs, the PROPOSAL is, Be not Fools, but Redeem this Time to your own
Advantage, to the best Advantage. To the Man of Liesure, as well as to the
Minister, it is an Advice of Wisdom, Give thy self unto Reading. Good Books of
all Sorts, may Employ your Liesure, and Enrich you with Treasures more
valuable, than those, which the way and Work of your Callings would have
purchased. Let the baneful Thoughts of Idleness be chased out of our Minds. But
then also, Let Some Thoughts on that Subject, What Good may I do? come into
them. When you have Liesure to think on that Subject, you can have no Excuse
for not thinking on it.

11. THE Useful Man may now with a very good Grace, Extend and Enlarge the
Sphere of his consideration. My next PROPOSAL now shall be; Let every Man
consider the Relation, wherein the Sovereign God has placed him, and let him
Devise what Good he may do, that may render his Relatives, the Better for him.
One Great way to prove our selves Really Good, is to be Relatively Good. By
This, more than by any thing in the World, it is, that we Adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior. It would be an Excellent Wisdom in a man, to make the Interest
he has in the Good Opinion and Affection of any One, an Advantage to do Good
Service for God upon them: He that has a Friend will show himself indeed
Friendly, if he think, Such an One Loves me, and will hearken to me; what Good
shall I take advantage hence to persuade him to?

This will take place more particularly, where the Endearing Ties of Natural
Relation do give us an Interest. Let us call over our several Relations, and
let us have Devices of Something that may be called Heroical Goodness, in our
Discharging of them. Why should we not, at least Once or Twice in a Week, make
this Relational Goodness, the Subject of our Enquiries, and our Purposes?
Particularly, Let us begin with our Domestic Relations; and Provide for those
of our own House; Lest we Deny some Glorious Rules and Hopes of our Christian
Faith, in our Negligence.

First; In the Conjugal Relation, how agreeably may the Consorts think on those
Words; What know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall Save thy Husband? Or, How
know thou, O Man, whether thou shall Save thy Wife?

The Husband will do well to think; What shall I do, that my Wife may have
cause for ever to Bless God, for bringing her unto me? And, What shall I do
that in my Carriage toward my Wife, the Kindness of the Blessed JESUS toward
His Church, may be followed and resembled? That this Question may be the more
perfectly answered, Sir, Sometimes ask her to help you in the Answer; Ask her
to tell you, what she would have you to do.

But then, the Wife also will do well to think; Wherein may I be to my Husband,
a Wife of that Character; She will do him Good, and not Evil, all the Days of
his Life?

With my Married People, I will particularly leave a Good Note, which I find in
the Memorials of Gervase Disney Esquire Family-Passions, cloud Faith, disturb Duty,
darken Comfort. You Will do the more Good unto one another, the more this Note is
thought upon. When the Husband and Wife are always contriving to be Blessings
unto one another, I will say with Tertullian, Unde Sufficiam ad Enarrandam
faelicitatem Ejus Matrimonii! O Happy Marriage!

Parents, Oh! How much ought you to be continually Devising, and even
Travailing, for the Good of your Children. Often Devise; How to make them Wise
Children; How to carry on a Desirable Education for them; an Education that
shall render them Desirable; How to render them Lovely, and Polite Creatures,
and Serviceable in their Generation. Often Devise, How to Enrich their Minds
with Valuable Knowledge; How to Instill Generous, and Gracious, and Heavenly
Principles into their Minds; How to Restrain and Rescue them from the Patches
of the Destroyer, and fortify them against their Special Temptations. There is
a World of Good, that you have to Do for them. You are without Bowels, Oh! be
not such Monsters! if you are not in a continual Agony to do for them all the
Good that ever you can. It was no mistake of Pacatus Drepanius in his Panegyric
to Theodosius; Instituente Natura Plus fere Filios quam nosmetipsos diligimus.

I will Prosecute this Matter, by Transcribing a Copy of PARENTAL RESOLUTIONS,
which I have some-where met withal.

I. At the Birth of my Children, I would use all Explicit Solemnity in the
Baptismal Dedication and Consecration of them unto the LORD. I would present
them to the BAPTISM of the Lord, not as a mere Formality; but wondering at the
Grace of the Infinite GOD, who will accept my Children, as His, I would Resolve
to do all I can that they may be His. I would now actually Give them up unto
GOD; Entreating, that the Child may be a Child of God the Father, a Subject of
God the Son, a Temple of God the Spirit, and be rescued from the Condition of a
Child of Wrath, and be Possessed and Employed by the Lord as an Everlasting
Instrument of His Glory.

II. My Children are no sooner grown capable of Minding the Admonitions, but I
would often, often Admonish them to be sensible of their Baptismal Engagements
to be the Lords. Often tell them, of their Baptism, and of what it binds 'em
to: Oftener far, and more times than there were Drops of water, that were cast
on the Infant, upon that occasion!

Often say to them, Child, You have been Baptized; You were washed in the Name
of the Great God; Now you must not Sin against Him; To Sin is to do a Dirty, a
Filthy thing. Say, Child, You must every Day cry to God that He would be your
Father, and your Savior, and your Leader; In your Baptism He Promised that He
would be so, if you Sought unto Him. Say, Child, You must Renounce the Service
of Satan, You must not follow the Vanities of this World, you must Lead a Life
of Serious Religion; In your Baptism you were bound unto the Service of your
only Savior. Tell the Child; What is your Name; you must sooner Forget this
Name, that was given you in your Baptism, than forget that you are a Servant of
a Glorious Christ whose Name was put upon you in your Baptism.

III. Let my Prayers for my Children be Daily, with Constancy, with Fervency,
with Agony; Yea, By Name let me mention each One of them, every Day before the
Lord. I would Importunately Beg for all Suitable Blessings to be bestowed upon
them; That God would Give them Grace, and give them Glory, and withold no Good
Thing from them; That God would Smile on their Education, and give His Good
Angels the charge over them, and keep them from Evil, that it may not grieve
them; That when their Father and Mother shall forsake them, the Lord may take
them up. with Importunity I would plead that Promise on their behalf; The
Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit unto them that Ask Him. Oh! Happy
Children, If by Asking I may obtain the Holy Spirit for them!

IV. I would betimes entertain the Children, with Delightful Stories out of the
Bible. In the Talk of the Table, I would go through the Bible, when the
Olive-Plants about my Table are capable of being so Watered. But I would
always conclude the Stories with some Lessons of Piety, to be inferred from
them.

V. I would Single out Some Scriptural Sentences, of the greatest Importance;
and Some also that have Special Antidotes in them against the Common Errors and
Vices of Children. They shall quickly get those Golden Sayings by heart, and be
rewarded with Silver or Gold, or some Good Thing, when they do it. Such as,

Psalm. CXI. 10. The Fear of the Lord, is the Beginning of Wisdom.

Matthew. XVI. 26. What is a Man Profited, if he gain the whole World, and Lose
his own Soul.

I. Tim. I. 15. JESUS CHRIST came into the World to Save Sinners, of whom I am
Chief.

Matthew. VI. 6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have thy Door, Pray to thy
Father which is in Secret.

Eccl. XII. 14. God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every Secret
thing.

Ephesians. V 25. Put away Lying, Speak every One the Truth.

Psalm. CXXXVIII. 6. The Lord has Respect unto the Lowly, but the Proud He
knows afar off.

Romans XII. 17, 19. Recompense to no One Evil for Evil. Dearly beloved, Avenge
not your selves.

Neh. XIII. 18. They bring Wrath upon Israel, by Profaning the Sabbath.

A Jewish Treatise quoted by Wagenseil, tells us, That among the Jews, when a
Child began to Speak, the Father was bound to teach him that verse: Deuteronomy. 33.4.
Moses Commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob.
Oh! Let me betimes make my Children acquainted with the Law which our Blessed
JESUS has Commanded us! It Is the best Inheritance I can derive unto them.

VI. I would betimes cause my Children to Learn the Catechism. In Catechizing
of them, I would break the Answer into many Lesser and Proper Questions; and by
their Answer to them, Observe and Quicken their Understandings. I would bring
every Truth, into some Duty and Practice, and Expect them to Confess it, and
Consent unto it, and Resolve upon it. As we go on in our Catechizing, they
shall, when they are able, Turn to the Proofs, and Read them, and say to me,
What they prove, and How. Then, I will take my times, to put nicer and harder
Questions to them; and improve the Times of Conversation with my Family, (which
every man ordinarily has or may have, for conferences on matters of Religion.

VII. Restless would I be, till I may be able to Say of my Children, Behold,
They Pray! I would therefore Teach them to Pray. But after they have Learnt a
Form of Prayer, I will press them, to proceed unto Points which are not in
their Form. I will show them the State of their own Souls; and on every Stroke
Enquire of them, What they think ought now to be their Prayer. I will direct
them, that every Morning they shall take one Text or Two out of the Sacred
Scripture, and Shape it into a Desire, which they shall add unto their Usual
Prayer. When they have heard a Sermon, I will mention to them over again the
main Subject of it, and ask them thereupon, What they have now to Pray for. I
will charge them, with all possible cogency, to Pray in Secret; And often call
upon them, Child, I hope, You don't forget my charge to you, about Secret
Prayer: Your crime is very great, if you do!

VIII. I would betimes do what I can, to beget a Temper of Benignity in my
Children, both toward one another and toward all other People. I will
instruct them how Ready they should be to Communicate unto others, a part of
what they have; and they shall see, my Encouragements, when they discover a
Loving, a Courteous, an Helpful Disposition. I will give them now and then a
piece of Money, for them with their own Little Hands to dispense unto the Poor.
Yea, if any one has hurt them, or vexed them, I will not only forbid them all
Revenge, but also oblige them to do a Kindness as soon as may be to the
Vexatious Person. All Coarseness of Language or Carriage in them, I will
discountenance it.

IX. I would be Sollicitous to have my Children Expert, not only at Reading
handsomely, but also at Writing a fair Hand. I will then assign them such Books
to Read, as I may judge most agreeable and profitable; obliging them to give me
some Account of what they Read; but keep a Strict Eye upon them, that they
don't Stumble on the Devils Library, and poison themselves with foolish
Romances, or Novels, or Plays, or Songs, or Jests that are not convenient. I
will set them also, to Write out such things, as may be of the greatest Benefit
unto them; and they shall have their Blank Books, neatly kept on purpose, to
Enter such Passages as I advise them to. I will particularly require them now
and then, to Write a Prayer of their own Composing, and bring it unto me; that
so I may discern, what sense they have of their own Everlasting Interests.

X. I Wish that my Children may as soon as may be, feel the Principles of
Reason and Honor, working in them, and that I may carry on their Education,
very much upon those Principles. Therefore, first, I will wholly avoid, that
harsh, fierce, crabbed usage of the Children, that would make them Tremble, and
Abhor to come into my Presence. I will so use them, that they shall fear to
offend me, and yet mightily Love to see me, and be glad of my coming home, if I
have been abroad at any time. I would have it Looked upon as a Severe and Awful
Punishment for a crime in the Family, To be forbidden for a while to come into
my Presence. I would raise in them, an High Opinion of their Fathers Love to
them, and of his being better able to Judge what is Good for them, than they
are for themselves. I would bring them to Believe, It Is best for them to be and
do as I would have them. Hereupon I would continually Magnify the matter to
them, What a brave thing it is to Know the things that are Excellent; and more
brave to Do the things that are Virtuous. I would have them to propose it as a
Reward of their Well-doing at any time, I will now go to my Father, and he will
teach me something that I was never taught before. I would have them afraid of
doing any Base Thing, from an horror of the Baseness in it. My first
Animadversion on a Lesser Fault in them, shall be a Surprise, a Wonder,
vehemently Expressed before them, that ever they should be guilty of doing so
foolishly; a vehement Belief, that they will never do the like again; a Weeping
Resolution in them, that they will not. I will never dispense a Blow, except it
be for an atrocious Crime or for a lesser Fault Obstinately persisted in;
either for an Enormity, or for an Obstinacy. I would ever Proportion
chastisements unto Miscarriages; not Smite bitterly for a very small piece of
Childishness, and only frown a little for some real Wickedness. Nor shall my
Chastisements ever be dispensed in a Passion and a Fury; but with them, I will
first show them the Command of GOD, by Transgressing whereof they have
displeased me. The Slavish, Raving, Fighting way of Education too Commonly
used, I look upon it, as a considerable Article in the Wrath and Curse of God,
upon a miserable World.

XI. As soon as we can, weel' get up to yet Higher Principles. I will often
tell the Children, What cause they have to Love a Glorious CHRIST, who has Died
for them. And, How much He will be Well-pleased with their Well-doing. And,
what a Noble Thing, it is to follow His Example; which Example I will describe
unto them. I will often tell them, That the Eye of God is upon them; the Great
GOD Knows all they do, and Hears all they Speak. I will often tell them, That
there will be a Time, when they must appear before the Judgment Seat of the
Holy LORD; and they must Now do nothing, that may Then be a Grief and Shame
unto them. I will Set before them, The Delights of that Heaven that is prepared
for Pious Children; and the Torments of that Hell that is prepared of old, for
naughty ones. I will inform them, Of the Good Offices which the Good Angels do
for Little Ones that have the Fear of God, and are afraid of Sin. And, how the
Devils tempt them to do Ill Things; how they hearken to the Devils, and are
like them, when they do such things; and what mischiefs the Devils may get
leave to do them in this World, and what a Sad thing t'wil be, to be among the
Devils in the Place of Dragons. I will cry to God, That He will make them feel
the Power of these Principles.

XII. When the Children are of a Fit Age for it, I will sometimes Closet them;
have them with me Alone; Talk with them about the State of their Souls; their
Experiences, their Proficiencies, their Temptations; obtain their Declared
Consent unto every Stroke in the Covenant of Grace; and then Pray with them,
and Weep unto the Lord for His Grace, to be bestowed upon them, and make them
Witnesses of the Agony with which I am Travailing to see the Image of CHRIST
formed in them. Certainly, They Will never forget such Actions!

XIII. I would be very Watchful and Cautious, about the Companions of my
Children. I will be very Inquisitive, what Company they keep; If they are in
hazard of being Ensnared by any Vicious Company, I will earnestly pull them out
of it, as Brands out of the Burning. I will find out, and procure, Laudable
Companion: for them.

XIV. As in Catechizing the Children, so in the Repetition of the Public
Sermons, I would use this Method. I will put every Truth into a Question, to be
answered still, with, Yes, or, No. By this Method, I hope to Awaken their
Attention as well as Enlighten their Understanding. And thus I shall have an
Opportunity to ask, Do you Desire such or such a Grace of God? and the like.
Yea, I may have Opportunity to Demand, and Perhaps to Obtain their Early, and
Frequent, and why not Sincere? Consent unto the glorious Articles of the New
Covenant. The Spirit of Grace may fall upon them in this Action; and they may
be Siez'd by Him, and Held as His Temples, through Eternal Ages.

XV. When a Day of Humiliation arrives, I will make them know the Meaning of
the Day. And after Time given them to consider of it, I will order them to tell
me; What Special Afflictions they have met withal? And, What Good they hope to
get by those Afflictions? On a Day of Thanksgiving, they shall also be made to
know the Intent of the Day. And after consideration, they shall tell me, What
Mercies of God unto them they take Special Notice of: And, What Duties to God,
they Confess and Resolve, under such Obligations? Indeed, For Something of this
Importance, to be pursued in my Conversation with the Children, I would not
confine my self unto the Solemn Days, which may occur too seldom for it. Very
particularly, when the Birth-dayes of the Children anniversarily arrive to any
of them, I would then take them aside, and mind them of the Age, which having
obtained Help from God they are come unto; How Thankful they should be for the
Mercies of God, which they have hitherto Lived upon; How Fruitful they should
be in all Goodness, that so they may still enjoy their Mercies. And I would
enquire of them, whether they have ever yet Begun to Mind the Work which God
sent them into the World upon? How far they understand the work; And what Good
Strokes they have Struck at it? And, How they design to Spend the Rest of their
Time, if God still continue them in the World?

XVI. When the Children are in any Trouble, (...), if they be Sick, or Pained,
I will take Advantage therefrom, to Set before them the Evil of Sin, which
brings all our Trouble; and how fearful a Thing it will be to be cast among the
Damned, who are in Easeless and Endless Trouble. I will Set before them the
benefit of an Interest in a CHRIST, by which their Trouble will be Sanctified
unto them, and obey will be prepared for Death, and for Fullness of Joy in an
Happy Eternity after Death.

XVII. I incline, that among all the Points of a Polite Education which I would
endeavor for my Children, they may each of them, the Daughters as well as the
Sons, have so much Insight into some Skill, which lies in the way of Gain, (the
Limners, or the Seriveners, or the Apothecaries, or Some other Mystery, to
which their own Inclination may most carry them,) that they may be able to
Subsist themselves, and get something of a Livelihood, in case the Providence
of God should bring them into Necessities. Why not they as well as, Paul the
Tent-Maker! The Children of the best Fashion, may have occasion to bless the
Parents, that make such a Provision for them! The Jews have a Saying; It Is worth
my Remembering it. Quicunque Filium suum non docet opificium, perinde est ac si
eum doceret Latrocinium.

XVIII. As soon as ever I can, I would make my Children apprehensive of the
main END, for which they are to Live; that so they may as soon as may be, begin
to Live; and their Youth not be nothing but Vanity. I would show them, that
their main END must be, To Acknowledge the Great GOD, and His Glorious CHRIST;
and bring Others to Acknowledge Him: And that they are never Wise nor Well, but
when they are doing so. I would show them, what the Acknowledgments are, and
how they are to be made. I would make them able to Answer the Grand Question,
Why they Live; and what is the End of the Actions that fill their Lives? Teach
them, How their Creator and Redeemer is to be Obeyed in every thing; and, How
every thing is to be done in Obedience to Him; Teach them, How even their
Diversions, and their Ornaments, and the Tasks of their Education, must all be
to fit them for the further Service of Him, to whom I have devoted them; and
how in these also, His Commandments must be the Rule of all they do. I would
sometimes therefore Surprise them with an Enquiry, Child, What is this for?
Give me a Good Account, Why you do it? How comfortably shall I see them Walking
in the Light, if I may bring them Wisely to answer this Enquiry; and what
Children of the Light?

XIX. I would oblige the Children, to Retire sometimes, and Ponder on that
Question; What shall I wish to have done, if I were now a dying? And Report
unto me, their own Answer to the Question; Of which I would then take
Advantage, to inculcate the Lessons of Godliness upon them. I would also Direct
them and Oblige them, at a proper Time for it, Seriously to Realize, their own
Appearance before the awful Judgment Seat of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
Consider, What they have to Plead, that they may not be sent away into
Everlasting Punishment? What they have to Plead, that they may be Admitted into
the Holy City? I would instruct them, What Plea to prepare; First, Show them,
how to get a part in the Righteousness of Him that is to be their Judge; by
Receiving it with a Thankful Faith, as the Gift of infinite Grace unto the
Distressed and Unworthy Sinner: Then, Show them how to prove that their Faith
is not a counterfeit, by their continual Endeavor to please Him in all things,
who is to be their Judge, and to Serve His Kingdom and Interest in the World.
And I would charge them, to make this preparation.

XX. If I Live to see the Children Marriageable, I would, before I consult with
Heaven and Earth for their best Accommodation in the Married State, Endeavor
the Espousal of their Souls unto their only Savior. I would as plainly, and as
fully as I can, propose unto them, the Terms on which the Glorious Redeemer
would Espouse them to Himself, in Righteousness and Judgment, and Favor, and
Mercies for ever; and Solicit their Consent unto His Proposals and Overtures.
Then would I go on, to do what may be Expected from a Tender Parent for them,
in their Temporal Circumstances.

From these Parental Resolutions, how Naturally, how Reasonably may we pass on
to Say?

Children, The Fifth Commandment confirms all your other Numberless and
Powerful Obligations, often to Devise, Wherein may I be a Blessing to my
Parents? Ingenuity would make this the very Top of your Ambition; To be a
Credit, and a Comfort of your Parents; to Sweeten, and if it may be, to
Lengthen the Lives of those, from whom, under God, you have received your
Lives. And God the Rewarder usually gives it, even in this Life, a most
observable Recompense. But it is possible, you may be the Happy Instruments of
more than a little Good unto the Souls of your Parents; [will you Think, How!]
Yea, though they should be Pious Parents, you may by some Exquisite Methods, be
the Instruments of their Growth in Piety, and in Preparation for the Heavenly
World. O Thrice and Four times Happy Children! Among the Arabians, a Father
sometimes takes his Name from an Eminent SON, as well as a Son from his Reputed
Father. A Man is called with an Abu, as well as an Ebn. Verily, A Son may be
such a Blessing to his Father that the best Surname for the glad Father would
be, The Father of such an One.

Masters, Yea, and Mistresses too, must have their Devices, How to Do Good unto
their Servants; How to make them the Servants of Christ, and the Children of
God. God whom you must Remember to be Your Master in Heaven, has brought them,
and put them into your Hands. Who can tell what Good He has brought them for?
How if they should be the Elect of God, fetched from Africa, or the Indies, and
brought into your Families, on purpose, that by the means of their being There,
they may be brought home unto the Shepherd of Souls? Oh! That the Souls of our
Slaves, were of more Account with us! That we gave a better Demonstration that
we Despise not our own Souls, by doing what we can for the Souls of our Slaves,
and not using them as if they had no Souls! That the poor Slaves and Blacks,
which Live with us, may by our means be made the Candidates of the Heavenly
Life! How can we pretend unto Christianity, when we do no more to Christianize
our Slaves! Verily, you must give an Account unto God, concerning them. If they
be Lost, through your Negligence, what Answer can you make unto God the Judge of
all! Methinks, common Principles of Gratitude should incline you to Study the
Happiness of these, by whose Obsequious Labors, your Lives are so much
accommodated. Certainly, They would be the Better Servants to you, the more
Faithful, the more Honest, the more Industrious, and Submissive Servants to
you, for your bringing them into the Service of your Common Lord.

But if any Servant of God, may be so honored by Him, as to be made the
Successful Instrument, of obtaining from a British Parliament, An Act for the
Christianizing of the Slaves in the Plantations; then it may be hoped,
something more may be done, than has yet been done, that the Blood of Souls may
not be found in the Skirts of our Nation: A Controversy of Heaven with our
Colonies may be removed, and Prosperity may be restored; Or, however the
honorable Instrument, will have unspeakable Peace and Joy, in the Remembrance
of his Endeavors. In the mean time, the Slave Trade is a Spectacle that Shocks
Humanity.

The harmless Natives basely they tr^pan,
And barter Baubles for the Souls of men.
The Wretches they to Christian Climes bring over
To serve worse Heathens than they did before.
I have somewhere met with a Paper under this Title, The RESOLUTION of a
MASTER; which may here afford an agreeable Paragraph and Parenthesis.

I. I would always Remember, that my Servants are in some sort my Children. In
a Care, That they may want nothing that may be good for them, I would make them
as my Children. And, as far as the Methods of Instilling Piety, which I use
with my Children, may be Properly and Prudently used with these, they shall be
Partakers in them. Nor will I leave them Ignorant of any thing, wherein I may
Instruct them to be useful in their Generation.

II. I will see that my Servants be furnished with Bibles, and Able and Careful
to Read the Lively Oracles. I will put both Bibles and other Good and Fit Books
into their Hands; and allow them Time to Read, but assure my self that they
don't Mispend this Time. If I can discover any Wicked Books in their Hands, I
will take away from them, those Pestilential Instruments of Wickedness. They
shall also Write as well as Read, if I can bring them to it. And I will set
them now and then such Things to Write, as may be for their greatest Advantage.

III. I will have my Servants present at the Religious Exercises of my Family;
and let fall either in the Speeches, or in the Prayers, of the Daily Sacrifice
in the Family, such Passages, as may have a Tendency to quicken a Sense of
Religion in them.

IV. The Catechizing Stroke as far as the Age or State of the Servants will
permit that it may be done with Decency, shall Extend unto them also. And they
shall be concerned in the Conferences, wherein the Repetition of the Public
Sermons, may engage me with my Family. If any of them, when they come to me,
have not Learnt the Catechism, I will see to it, that they shall do it; and
give them a Reward when they have done it.

V. I will be very Inquisitive and Sollicitous about the Company chosen by my
Servants; and with all possible Cogency rescue them from the Snares of Evil
Company: forbid their being the Companions of Fools.

VI. Such of my Servants as may be Employed for that purpose, I will Employ to
Teach Lessons of Piety unto my Children; and Recompense them for doing so But I
would with a particular Artifice contrive them to be such Lessons, as may be
for their own Edification too.

VII. I will sometimes call my Servants alone; Talk with them about the State
of their Souls; Tell them how to close with their only Savior, Charge them to
Do well, and Lay hold on Eternal Life; And show them very Particularly, how
they may render all the Service they do for me, a Service to the Glorious Lord;
how they may do all from a Principle of Obedience to the Lord, and become
Entitled unto the Reward of the Heavenly Inheritance.

I make this Appendix to these RESOLUTIONS. I have read such a Passage as this.

Age is well nigh sufficient with some Masters to obliterate every Letter and
Action, in the History of a Meritorious Life: and Old Services are generally
buried under the Ruins of an Old Carcass. And this Passage, Its a barbarous
Inhumanity in men toward their Servants, to make their small Failings to be a
Crime, without allowing their past Services to have been a Virtue. Good God,
keep thy Servant from such Ingratitude! Worse than Villianous Ingratitude!

But then, O Servants, If you would arrive to the Reward of the Inheritance,
You should Set your selves to Devise; How shall I approve my self such a
Servant, that the Lord may Bless the House of my Master, the more for my being
in it? Certainly, There are many ways, wherein Servants may be Blessings. Let
your Studies with your continual Prayers for the welfare of the Families to
which you belong, and the Example of your Sober Carriage, render you such. If
you will remember but Four Words, and Endeavor all that is comprised in them,
OBEDIENCE, HONESTY, INDUSTRY, and PIETY, you will be the Blessings and the
Joseph's of the Families to which you belong. Let those Four Heads, be
distinctly and frequently thought upon. And go cheerfully through all you have
to do, upon this consideration; That it is an Obedience to Heaven, and from
thence will have a Recompense. It was the Observation even of a Pagan, That a
Master may receive a Benefit from a Servant. And, Quod fit affectu Amici,
definit esse Ministerium. It is a Friendship rather than a Service, Young man,
if it be with the Affection of a Friend, that you do what you do for your
Master. Yea, Even the Maidservants in the House, may do an unknown Service to
it, by Instructing the Infants, and Instilling the Lessons of Goodness into
them. So, by Bilhah, and Zilpah, may Children be Born again; The Mistresses may
by the Travail of their Maidservants, have Children, brought into the Kingdom
of God.

I will go on. Humanity teaches us, to take Notice of all that are our Kindred.
Nature bespeaks, that which we call a Natural Affection to all that are Akin to
us. To be without it, is a very Bad Character; it is a Brand on the worst of
Men; on such as forfeit the Name of Men. But now, Christianity is to Improve
it. Our Natural Affection is to be improved into a Religious Intention. Sir,
Take a Catalogue of all your more Distant Relatives. Consider them One after
another; and make every one of them, the Subjects of your Good Devices. Think;
Wherein may I pursue the Good of such a Relative? And, By what means may I
render such a Relative the better for me? It is possible, you may do something,
that may give them cause to Bless God, that ever you have been Related unto
them. Have they no Calamity, under which you may give them some Relief? Is
there no Temptation against which you may give them some Caution? Is there no
Article of their Prosperity, to which you may be Subservient? At least; with
your affectionate Prayers, you may go over your Catalogue; You may Successively
Pray for every One of them all by Name; And, if you can, Why should you not
also put agreeable Books of Piety into their Hands, to be Lasting Remembancers
of their Duties to God, and of your Desires for them?

12. MEthinks, This Excellent Zeal should be carried into our Neighborhood.
Neighborhood, You stand Related unto One another; And you should be full of
Devices, That all the Neighbors may have cause to be glad of your being in the
Neighborhood. We read, The Righteous is more Excellent than his Neighbor. But
we shall scarce own him so, Except he be more Excellent AS a Neighbor. He must
Excel in the Duties of Good Neighborhood. Let that man be Better than his
Neighbor, who Labors to be a Better Neighbor; to Do most Good unto his
Neighbor.

And here, first; The Poor People that ly Wounded, must have Wine and Oil
poured into their Wounds. It was a charming Stroke in the Character with a
Modern Prince had given to him, To be in Distress, is to deserve his Favor. O
Good Neighbor, put on that Princely, that more than Royal Quality. See who in
the Neighborhood may Deserve thy Favor. We are told, This is Pure Religion
and Undefiled; (A Jewel, that neither is a counterfeit, nor has any Flaws in
it:) To Visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction. The Orphans and
the Widows, and so all the Children of Affliction in the Neighborhood, must be
Visited, and Relieved with all agreeable Kindnesses.

Neighbors, Be concerned, That the Orphans and Widows in your Neighborhood,
may be well provided for. They meet with grievous Difficulties; with unknown
Temptations. While their next Relatives were yet Living, they were, perhaps,
but meanly provided for. What must they now be in their more Solitary.
condition? Their condition should be considered. And the Result of the
consideration should be that; I delivered the Orphan, that had no Helper, and I
caused the Heart of the Widow to Sing for Joy.

By consequence, All the Afflicted in the Neighborhood, are to be thought
upon. Sirs, Would it be too much for you, at least Once in a Week? To Think,
What Neighbor is reduced into a Pinching and Painful Poverty? Or in any Degree
Impoverished with heavy Losses? Think, What Neighbor is Languishing with
Sickness; Especially if Sick with sore Maladies, and of some Continuance?
Think, What Neighbor is Heart-broken with sad Bereavements; Bereaved of
Desirable Relatives? And Think; What Neighbor has a Soul buffeted, and
hurried with violent Assaults of the Wicked one? But then Think, What shall be
done for such Neighbors.

First, You will Pity them. The Evangelical Precept is, Have Compassion One of
another, Be Pitiful. It was of old, and ever will be, the just Expectation, To
him that is Afflicted, Pity should be shown. And let our Pity to them, flame
out in our Prayer for them. It were a very Lovely Practice for you, in the
Daily Prayer of your Closet every Evening, to think, What miserable Object have
I seen to day, that I may do well now to mention for the Mercies of the Lord?

But this is not all, It Is possible, it is probable, you may do well to Visit
them; and when you Visit them, Comfort them. Carry them some Good Word, which
may raise a Gladness, in an Heart Stouping with Heaviness.

And lastly. Give them all the Assistences that may answer their Occasions:
Assist them with Advice to them; Assist them with Address to others for them.
And if it be needful, Bestow your Alms upon them; Deal thy Bread to the Hungry;
Bring to thy House the Poor that are cast out; when thou see the Naked, Cover
him. At least, Nazianzens Charity, I pray; Si nihil habes, da Lacrymulam; If
you have nothing else to bestow upon the Miserable, bestow a Year or two upon
their Miseries. This Little, is better than Nothing!

Would it be amiss for you, to have always lying by you, a List of the Poor in
your Neighborhood, or of those whose Calamities may call for the Assistences
of the Neighborhood? Such a List would often furnish you, with Matter for an
Useful Conversation, when you are Talking with your Friends, whom you may
Provoke to Love and Good Works.

I will go on to say; Be Glad of Opportunities to Do Good in your
Neighborhood: Yea, look out for them, lay hold on them, with a rapturous
Assiduity. Be Sorry for all the Bad Circumstances of any Neighbor, that
bespeak your doing of Good unto him. Yet, Be Glad, if any one tell you of them.
Thank him who tells you, as having therein done you a very great Civility. Let
him know, that he could not by any thing have more gratified you. Any Civility
that you can show, by Lending, by Watching, by -- all the Methods of Courtesy;
Show it; and be glad you can Show it. Show it, and give a Pleasant Countenance,
[Cum munere Vultum,] in the Showing of it. Let your Wisdom cause your Face
always to Shine; Look, not with a Cloudy but a Serene and Shining Face, upon
your Neighbors; and Shed the Rays of your Courtesy upon them, with such
Affability, that they may see they are Welcome to all you can do for them. Yea,
Stay not until you are told of Opportunities to Do Good. Enquire after them;
Let the Enquiry be Sollicitous, be Unwearied. The Incomparable Pleasure, is
worth an Enquiry.

There was a generous Pagan, who counted a Day Lost, if he had obliged no body
in the Day. Amici, Diem Perdidi! O Christian, Let us try, whether we cannot
attain to Do Something, for Some Neighbor or other, every day that comes over
our Head. Some do So; and with a better Spirit, than ever Titus Vespasian was
acted withal. Thrice in the Scriptures, we find the Good Angels Rejoicing: It Is
always, At the Good of Others. To Rejoice in the Good of Others, and most of
all in doing of Good unto them, it is Angelical Goodness.

In moving for the Devices of Good Neighborhood, a principal motion which I
have to make, is; That you Consult the Spiritual Interests of your
Neighborhood, as well as the Temporal. Be concerned, Left the Deceitfulness of
Sin undo any of the Neighbors. If there be any Idle Persons among them, I
beseech you, cure them of their Idleness; Don't nourish 'em and Harden 'em in
That; but find Employment for them. Find 'em Work; Set 'em to Work; Keep 'em to
Work. Then, as much of your other Bounty to them, as you please.

If any Children in the Neighborhood, are under no Education, don't allow 'em
to continue so, Let care be taken, that they may be better Educated; and be
taught to Read; and be taught their Catechism; and the Truths and Ways of
their only Savior.

Once more. If any in the Neighborhood, are taking to Bad Courses, Lovingly
and Faithfully Admonish them. If any in the Neighborhood are Enemies to their
own Welfare, or their Families; Prudently dispense your Admonitions unto them.
If there are any Prayerless Families, never leave off Entreating and Exhorting
of them, till you have persuaded them, to Set up the Worship of God. If there
be any Service of God, or of His People, to which any one may need to be
Excited, give him a Tender Excitation. Whatever Snare you see any one in, be so
kind, as to tell him of his Danger to be Ensnared, and Save him from it. By
putting of Good Books into the Hands of your Neighbors, and gaining of them a
Promise to Read the Books, who can tell, what Good you may do unto them! It is
possible, you may in this way, with Ingenuity, and with Efficacy, administer
those Reproofs, which you may owe unto such Neighbors, as are to be Reproved
for their Miscarriages. The Books will balk nothing, that is to be said, on the
Subjects, that you would have the Neighbors advised upon.

Finally. If there be any Base Houses, which threaten to debauch, and Poison,
and confound the Neighborhood, Let your Charity to your Neighbors, make you
do all you can, for the suppression of them.

That my PROPOSAL To Do Good in the Neighborhood, and as a Neighbor, may be
more fully formed and followed; I will conclude it, with minding you, That a
World of Self-Denial is to be Exercised in the Execution of it. You must be
armed against Selfishness, all Selfish and Squinting Intentions, in your
generous Resolutions. You shall see how my Demands will grow upon you.

First. You must not think of making the Good you do, a pouring of Water into a
Pump, to draw out something for your selves. This might be the meaning of our
Saviors Direction; Lend, Having for nothing again. To Lend a Thing, properly
is to Hope that we shall Receive it again. But this probably refers to the,
(...), Or, Collation, usual among the Ancients, whereof we find many Monuments
and Mentions in Antiquity. If any Man by Burnings, or Shipwrecks or other
Disasters, had lost his Estate, his Friends did use to Lend him considerable
Sums of Money, to be Repaid, not at a certain Day, but when he should find
himself Able to Repay it, without Inconvenience. Now, they were so cunning,
that they would rarely Lend upon such Disasters, unto any but such, as they had
Hope, would Recover out of their present Impoverishment, and not only Repay
them their Money, but also (...) Requite their Kindness, if ever there should
be need of it. The thing required by our Savior, is, Do Good unto such as you
are never like to be the Better for.

But then, there is yet an Higher Thing to be demanded, That is; Do Good unto
those Neighbors who have Done Hurt unto you. So says our Savior, Love your
Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, Do Good to them that Hate you, and Pray for
them which despitefully use you and persecute you. Yea, If an Injury have been
done you, improve it as a provocation to do Benefit unto him who did the
Injury. This is Noble. T'wil bring mavelous Consolations! Another Method
might make you Even with your Froward Neighbors; This, will Set you Above them
all. It Were Nobly done, If in the close of the Day, when you are Alone before
the Lord, you make a Particular Prayer, for the Pardon and Prosperity, of any
Person, from whom you may have suffered any Abuse in the Day. And it would be
Nobly done, If at last calling over the Catalogue of such as have been Abusive
to you, you may be able to say, [the only Intention that can justify your doing
any thing like to keeping a Catalogue of them!] There is not one of these, but
I have done him, or watched to do him, a Kindness! Among the Jews themselves,
there were the Hasideans, One of whose Institutions it was, To make this Daily
Prayer unto God, Remitte et condona omnibus qui Vexant nos. Christians, go
beyond them. Yea, Justin Martyr tells us, In the Primitive Times they did so;
(...), Praying for their Enemies.

But I will not Stop here. There is yet an Higher Thing to be demanded. That is;
Do Good unto those Neighbors, who will Speak Ill of you, after you have done
it. So says our Savior; Ye shall be the Children of the Highest; He is kind
unto the Unthankful, and unto the Evil. You will every day find, I can tell
you, Monsters of Ingratitude. Yea, if you distinguish any Person, with Doing
for him, something more than you have done for others, it will be well if that
very Person do not at some time or other, hurt you wonderfully. Oh! the Wisdom
of Divine Providence, in ordering this Thing! Sirs, It is, that you may Do Good
on a Divine Principle; Good, merely for the Sake of Good! Lord, Increase our
Faith!

And God forbid, that a Christian Faith, should not come up to a Jewish! There
is a Memorable Passage, in the Jewish Records. There was a Gentleman, of whose
Bounty many People every day received Reliefs and Succors. One day he asked;
Well, What do our People say to day? They told him, Why, The People partook of
your Kindnesses, and Services, and then they Blessed you very fervently. Did
they so, Said he; Then I shall have no Great Reward for this Day. Another Day
he asked, Well, And what say our People now? They told him, Alas, Good Sir, the
People Enjoyed your Kindnesses to day, and when all was done, they did nothing
but Rail at you. Indeed! Said he; Now for this Day I am sure that God will give
me a Good and Great Reward.

Though vile Constructions, and harsh Invectives, be never so much the Present
Reward of doing the best Offices for the Neighborhood, yet, my Dear Boniface;
Be victorious over all Discouragements: Thy Work shall be well Rewarded, says
the Lord!

If your Opportunities to Do Gcod reach no further, yet I will offer you a
Consolation, which One has Elegantly thus Expressed. He that Praises God only
on a Ten-stringed Instrument, with his Authority Extending but unto his Family,
and his Example but unto his Neighborhood, may have as Thankful an heart here,
and as high a Place in the Caelestial Choir hereafter, as the greatest Monarch,
that Praises God upon a Ten thousand string'd Instrument. Upon the Loud
sounding Organs, having as many Millions of Pipes as there be People under him.

13. HOw can we leave the offices of Good Neighborhood, without Interposing a
PROPOSAL, To Animate and Regulate Private Meetings of Religious People, for the
Exercises of Religion? It is very certain, That where such Private Meetings
under a Good Conduct, have been kept Alive, the Christians which have Composed
them, have like so many Coals of the Altar kept one another Alive, and kept up
a lively Christianity in the Neighborhood. Such Societies have been tried and
strong Engines, to uphold the Power of Godliness. The Throwing up of such
Societies, has been accompanied with a visible Decay of Godliness; the Less
Love to them, the Less Use of them, there has been in a Place, the Less has
Godliness flourished there; the Less there has been of, The Kingdom of God.

The Rules Observed by Some, Associated Families, may be offered on this
occasion with some Advantage. They will tell us what Good may be done by such
Societies in a Neighborhood.

I. It is to be proposed. That about a dozen Famimilies, more or less, of a
Vicinity, Agree to Meet (the Men and their Wives) at each others Houses, once
in a Fortnight, or a Month, at such a Time as may be Agreed upon, and Spend a
convenient Quantity of Time together, in the Exercises of Religion.

II. The Exercises of Religion proper for a Meeting, are; For the Brethren to
Begin and Conclude with Prayers in their Turn; For Psalms to be Sung; And for
Sermons to be Repeated.

III. It were desirable, for the Ministers now and then, to afford their
Presence at the Meeting, and Pray with them, and Instruct them, and Exhort
them, as they may see occasion.

IV. The Candidates of the Ministry may do well, to Perform some of their First
Services here, and here Shape and Mould themselves for Further Services.

V. One Special Design of the Meeting, should be, with United Prayers, to Ask
the Blessings of Heaven on the Family where they are Assembled, as well as on
the rest: That with the wondrous Force of United Prayers, Two or Three may
agree on Earth, to ask such things, as are to be done for the Families, by our
Father which is in Heaven.

VI. Such a Meeting should Look upon themselves, as bound up in One Bundle of
Love; and count themselves obliged, in very Close and Strong Bonds, to be
Serviceable unto one another. If any one in the Society should fall into
Affliction, all the rest should presently Study to Relieve and Support the
Afflicted Person, in all the ways imaginable. If any one should fall into
Temptation, the rest should Watch over him, and with the Spirit of Meekness,
with the Meekness of Wisdom, Endeavor to Recover him. It should be like a I am
of the Medes and Persians to the whole Society, That they will upon all just
occasions, Lovingly Give, and as Lovingly Take, mutual Admonitions (...) any
thing that they may see Amiss in one another

VII. And it is not only to reckon up the (...) such a Society may do to many,
many others (...) well as to the Members whereof it is it self composed, The
Prayers of such well-disposed Societies, may fetch down mavelous Favors from
Heaven on their Pastors, whose Lives may be prolonged, and Gifts augmented, and
Graces brightened, and Labors prospered, in answer to the Supplications of
such Associated Families; And the Interests of Religion may be mightily
preserved and promoted in the whole Flock, by their Fervent Supplications; and
the Spirit of Grace mightily poured out upon the Rising Generation. Yea, All
the Land may fare the better for them.

VIII. Especially, when a Society shall set apart, whole Days for Prayer with
Fasting before the Lord, as it may be proper for them to do now and then upon
some occasions. The Success of such Days has been sometimes very mavelous:
and the Savor of them, left on the Minds of the Saints, who have carried them
on, has been such, as notably to prepare them, to Show forth the Death of the
Lord at His Holy Table; Yea, to Meet with their own Death, when God pleases to
order it.

IX. It is very sure, The Devotions first, and afterward the Conferences,
carried on in such a Society, will not only have a notable Tendency to produce
the Comfort of Love in the Hearts of Good Men toward One another; But also
their Abilities will be thereby Sharpened and Quickened; they will be rendered
more Able, to Serve many valuable Interests.

X. Unexpected Opportunities to Do Good, will arise unto such a Society: But
especially, if a Practice of this importance were once taken up; That the MEN
who Compose the Society, would now and then Spend half an Hour together by
themselves, in Considering on that Question, What Good is there to be done?

More Particularly;

Who are to be caused upon, to do their Duty, in coming to Special Ordinances?

Who is in any Special Adversity; and what shall be done to Comfort them?

What Contention or Variance may there be among any Neighbors, and what may be
done for the Healing of it?

What Open Miscarriages do any Live (...), and who shall be desired to carry
Faithful Admonitions unto them?

Finally; What is there to be done for the Advantage, and Advancement of our
Holy Religion?

In the Primitive Times of Christianity there was much use made of a Saying,
which they ascribed unto Matthias the Apostle; (...). If the Neighbor of an
Elect, or Godly, Man Sin, the Godly Man himself has also Sinned. The
Obligations of Neighbors Watchfully to Admonish one another, were what that
Saying intended. Oh! how much may Christians Associated in Religious
Combinations, do by Watchful and Faithful Admonitions, to prevent being
Partakers in other Men's Sins!

The Man, that shall produce, and promote such Societies, will do an unknown
deal of Good in the Neighborhood.

And so will he, that shall help forward another Sort of Societies; namely,
those of Young Men Associated.

These duly managed, have been incomparable Nurseries to the Churches, where
the Faithful Pastors have countenanced them. Young Men are hereby Preserved
from very many Temptations, Rescued from the Paths of the Destroyer, Confirmed
in the Right Ways of the Lord, and Prepared mightily for such Religious
Exercises as will be Expected from them, when they come themselves to be
Householders.

I will make a Tender of some ORDERS, which have been observed in some such
Societies.

I. Let there be Two Hours at a Time Set apart; and, Let there be Two Prayers
made by the Members of the Society, in their Turns; Between which, Let a Sermon
be Repeated; And there may be the Singing of a Psalm annexed.

II. Let all the Members of the Society, Resolve to be Charitably Watchful over
one another: Never to divulge one another Infirmities; Always to inform and
advise one another of every thing that may appear to call for an Admonition,
and to take it Kindly when they are Admonished.

III. Let all who are to be admitted as Members of the Society, be accompanied
by Two or Three of the rest, unto the Minister of the Place, that they may
recieve his Holy Counsils, and Charges, and that every thing may be done with
his Approbation; and so let their Names be added unto the Roll.

IV If any Person thus Enrolled among them, fall into a Scandalous Iniquity,
Let the Rebukes of the Society be dispensed unto him; and let them Forbid him
to come any more among them, until he bring Suitable Expressions and Evidences
of Repentance with him.

V. Let the List be once a Quarter called over; and then, if it be Observed,
that any of the Society have much absented themselves, Let there be Some sent
unto them, to Enquire the Reason of the Absence; and if no Reason be given, but
such as intimates an Apostasy from Good Beginnings, Let them upon Obstinacy,
after Loving and Faithful Admonitions, be Obliterated.

VI. Once in Three Months, Let there be, if Need be, a Collection, out of which
the Necessary Charges of the Society shall be Defrayed, and the rest be
Employed upon such Pious Uses, as may be agreed upon

VII. Once in Two Months, Let the whole Time of the Meeting, be Devoted unto
Supplications, for the Conversion and Salvation of the Rising Generation in the
Land; and Particularly, for the Success of the Gospel, in that Congregation,
whereto the Society does belong.

VIII. Let the whole Society, be Exceedingly careful, that their Discourse
while they are together, after the other Services of Religion are over, have
nothing in it, that shall have any Taint of Backbiting or Vanity, or the least
Relation to the affairs of Government, or to things which do not concern them,
and do not Serve the Interests of Holiness in their own Conversation. But let
their Discouase be wholly on the Matters of Religion; and those also, not the
Disputable and Controversal Matters, but the Points of Practical Piety. They
may propose Questions upon this Intention, and every one in an orderly manner,
take his liberty to Answer them. Or, They may go through the Catechism, and One
at One time, another at another, hear all the rest recite the Answers thereof.
Or, They may otherwise be directed by their Pastors, to spend their Time
together profitably.

IX. Let every Person in the Society, look upon it, as a Special Task incumbent
on him, to Look out, for some other hopeful Young man, and use all proper
pains, to Engage him in the Resolutions of Godliness, until he also shall be
joined unto the Society. And when a Society shall in this way be increased unto
a fit Number, Let it Swarm into More; who may hold an useful correspondence
with one another.

The Man, who shall be the Instrument of Setting up such a Society in a Place,
cannot comprehend, unto what a Long and Rich Train of Good consequences, he is
become Instrumental.

And they that shall in such a Society together carry on the Duties of
Christianity, and the Praises of a glorious CHRIST, will have upon themselves,
a blessed Symptom, that they shall be together Associated in the Heavenly City,
and in the Blessedness that shall never have an end.

14. HItherto my Discourse has been a more General Address, unto People of all
Conditions and Capacities. I have proposed few Devices, but those, upon which
Persons in Private Circumstances, as well as others, may be discoursed unto. We
will proceed now to those that are in more Public Circumstances. And, first,
Because no men in the World are under such Obligations to Do Good, as the
Ministers of the Gospel, It is necessary that this Word of God should be first
spoken unto THEM.

Will my Fathers and Brethren, Give me Leave. Certainly, They that are Men of
God, should be always at Work for God! Certainly, They that are Dedicated unto
the Special Service of the Lord, should never be satisfied, but when they are
in the most sensible Manner Serving Him. Certainly, They whom the Great King
has brought nearer to Himself than other men, should be more unwearied than any
men, in Endeavors to advance His Kingdom. They whom the Word of God calls
Angels, ought certainly to be of an Angelical Disposition; Disposed evermore to
Do Good, like the Good Angels; Ministers always on the Wing to do His
Pleasure. It Is no improper PROPOSAL, That they would Seriously Set themselves
to think, What are the Points wherein I should be Wise and Do Good, like an
Angel of God? Or, If an Angel were in Flesh, as I am, and in such a Post as I
am, what Methods may I justly imagine, he would use to Glorify God? What
wonderful Offices, of Kindness, and with how much Delight, would the Good
Angels do, for such their Fellow Servants! We must call upon our people, To be
Ready to Every Good Work. We must Go before them in it; By our own Readiness at
Every Good Work, show them how. Timothy, Be thou an Example of the Believers!
It is a true Maxim, and you cannot think too often upon it; The Life of a
Minister, is the Life of his Ministry. And there is another Maxim like unto it,
The Sins of Teachers are the Teachers of Sins.

Allow me, Sirs. Your Opportunities to Do Good, are Singular. Your want of
Worldly Riches, and of any way ordinarily to get 'em, is compensated by the
Opportunities to Do Good, which you are Enriched withal. The true Spirit of a
Minister, will cause you to count your selves Enriched, when those precious
things are conferred upon you, and to prize them above any Farms, or Bags, or
whatever Temporal Possessions.

In operibus sit Abundantia mea; Divitijs per me Licet, abunde^, quisquis
volnerit. Well Struck, Brave Melancthen!

It Is to be hoped, That the Main Principle that acted you, when you first
Entered upon the Evangelical Ministry, was, An Hope to do Good in the World. If
that principle were then too feeble in its operation, it is Time that it should
now operate, and that you should now Vigorously act upon it, and that the Zeal
thereof should now Eat up your Time, your Thought, your All.

That you may be Good Men, and be mightily Inspired and Assisted from Heaven to
Do Good, it is needful that you should be Men of Prayer. I lay this down to be
allowed, as my very First Postulatum! In the Pursuance of this Intention, there
appears more than a little Need of it, That you should ever now and then Keep
whole Days of Prayer, in an Holy Retirement before the Lord; Often Set apart,
whole Days, for Prayer with Fasting, in Secret, and perfume your Studies with
Devotions Extraordinary: and usually with a Mixture of Alms, to go up in the
Memorial before the Lord. By such Days, you may obtain, with the Pardon of
your Unfruitfulness, for which, alas, how often have we cause to repair unto
the Great Sacrifice! -- You may obtain, I say, a vast Improvement in Piety and
Sanctity; which is, of how vast Consequence, to make an Useful Minister!
Sanctify them (...) (or for) thy Truth, says our Savior. The should be
Sanctified, that would be Instruments for the Propagation of the Truth. You may
obtain, a certain Afflatus from Heaven upon your Minds, and such an Indwelling
of the Holy Spirit, as will render you, Grace, Discreet, Humble, Generous, and
Me^ worthy to be Greatly Beloved. You may obtain those Influences from above,
that will Dispel the Enchantments, and Conquer the Temptations, which may else
do a World of Mischief in your Neighborhood. You may obtain Direction and
Assistence from Heaven, for the many Services to be done, in your Discharge of
your Ministry. Finally, You may fetch down unknown Blessings on your Flocks,
and the whole People for which you are to be the Lords Remembrancers.

Your Public Prayers well composed and well adapted, will be Excellent Engin^^
to do Good. The more Judicious, the more Affectionate, the more Argumentative,
you are in them, the more you will Teach your People to Pray. Yea, I beseech
you, Sirs; How can you prosecute any Intention of Piety among your People more
Effectually, than by Letting them see you Praying, and Weeping, and Striving,
and in an Importunate Agony before the Lord, that you may gain it for them?

The more Significantly you represent the Various Cases of your People in your
Public Prayers; the more devoutly sensible you will make them of their own
cases. And it will wonderfully comfort them!

The Prayers made at Baptisms, may be so managed, as mightily to awaken in all
People, the Conscience of their Baptismal Obligations.

What effusions of the Holy Spirit, may your People feel, if your Prayers at
the Table of the Lord, are, as Nazianzen I remember says, his Fathers were;
Made by the Holy Spirit of God!

Your Sermons, if they be Well-Studied, as from the consideration of their
being Offerings unto God, the Great KING, as well as unto His People, they
ought to be, will Do Good beyond all Expression. The manner of your Studying
them, is that which may much contribute unto it. It is needful, that you Study
the Condition of your Flocks; and bring them such Truths, as will notably Suit
their present circumstances. In order to this, You will observe their
Condition, their Faults, their Snares, their Griefs, that you may Speak a word
in Season; and if any thing Remarkable Fall out, you will Suit the Words to the
Works of God. You may Divide your People into Classes; and think, What Lessons
of Piety, you are to Dispense, unto the Communicants; what, unto all that are
under the Bonds of the Covenant; what, unto the Aged; what unto the Worldly;
what unto the Rich; what unto the Poor; what unto them that are in Offices;
what unto them that are under Such, and Such Afflictions; what in regard of
Peoples Personal Callings. Above all, The Young must not be forgotten: You will
Employ all the Tunes imaginable, to raise Early Piety. Yea, You may do well to
let it be understood, that you would willingly be advised, by any Persons, or
Meetings, in your Flocks, what Subjects they may want or wish to hear Treated
on; By giving them Sermons on such Subjects, you at least very much Edify those
who have asked for them; and it is probable, very many more.

And, what if while you are Studying your Sermons, You should at the close of
every Paragraph, make a Pause, and Endeavor with Acknowledgements and
Ejaculations to Heaven, and with Self-Examinations, to feel some Impressions of
the Truths in that Paragraph on your own Souls, before you go any further? By
such a Practice, the Hours which you take, to Make and Write a Sermon, will
prove so many Hours of Devotion with you. The Day in which you have made a
Sermon will even leave upon your Mind, such a Savor as a Day of Prayer uses to
do. When you come to Preach the Sermon, you will do it with great Liberty and
Assurance; and the Truths thus prepared will be likely to come with a more
Sensible Warmth and Life upon the Auditory; From the Heart, and To the Heart! A
famous Preacher would say, I Never durst Preach a Sermon to others, till I have
get first some Good by it my self. And I will add, That is the way for it to do
much Good unto others. Let such a Rabbi, be called, our Hadarsan. [or, The
Preacher!] Let the Saying of the Ancient be Remembered; Qui Ludi^ in Cathedra
Lug^bit in Gehenna. And the Saying of a Modern also, not be forgotten; Cold
Preachers make Bold Sinners.

But then, Sirs, Your Visits; Oh! how much may you do for CHRIST among your
People in them! It is Pity but that you should impose it as a Law upon your
selves; Never to make an Unprofitable Visit. Even when you render a Pure Visit
of Civility, or for Diversion, it is easy for you, to keep this Law; That you
will drop some Speech or other, Good for the use of Edifying, before you leave
the Company. There have been Pastors able to say, They Scarce ever once went
into an House among their People in their Lives, without some Essay or Purpose
to Do Good in the House, before they came out of it.

The same Rule would be very well observed with such as Come unto us, as well
as with those whom we Go unto. Why should any of our People ever come anear us,
without our contriving, To Speak something to them that may be useful to them!
Our Peter Martyr having been many Days in Bucers House, Published this Report
of it. Ausim affirmare, me ab illius Mensa, semper discessisse Doctiorem I make
no Doubt, That the Observation of this Rule, may be very consistent with an
Assable, yea, and, as far as is Convenient, a Facetious Conversation. Though Quae
sunt in ore populi Nugae, sunt in ore sacerdotis Blasphemiae.

But, Sirs, In your Visits, you will take a particular Notice of the Widow, the
Orphan, the Afflicted; and carry all agreeable Reliefs unto them. The Bills put
up in your Congregations, will a little help you, to find out, who need your
Visits.

If any Special Calamity has befallen any One, it is a Time to Visit them, with
very particular Directions and Persuasions unto them, to hear the Voice of God
in the Calamity; to comply with the Intent and Errand, which it comes upon.

If any One has received any Special Deliverance, it is a Time to Visit them,
and therein to persuade them, that they will think of some Singular Thing, to
be done by way of Thankfulness for their Deliverance; and not leave them, till
the Thing be Agreed and Resolved upon.

The Handmaids of the Lord, that are near their Lying in, may on this account
be very proper objects for your Visits. At such a Time they are in much
distress; the approaching Hour of Trouble threatens to be their Dying Hour. The
Counsils that will Exactly instruct them how to prepare far a Dying Hour, will
now if ever, be attentively hearkened unto. And there are precious Promises of
God, which they should also be taught now to Live upon. To bring them these
Promises will do the work, and give you the Welcome, of a Good Angel unto them.

CATECHIZING, is a Noble I Exercise; it will insensibly bring you into a wa^ to
Do Good, that Surpasses all Expression. You Sermons will be very much lost upon
an Unc^^^chised People. Nor will your People Mind so much, what you Speak to
them in the Pulpit, as what you Speak to them in the more Approaching and
Familiar way, of Applying the Answers of the Catechism. Never any Minister,
that was a Great Catechizer did Repent of it; Thousands, Thousands: have
blessed God, with Wonders and Praises, for the good Success of it. The most
Honorable Man of God, should reckon it, no Abasement or Abatement of his
Honor, to Stoup unto this Way of Teaching. Yea, some Eminent Pastors, in their
Emerited Old Age, when other Labors have been too hard for them, have, like
the famous old Gerson, wholly given themselves up to Catechizing; Though there
have been others of whom that brave Chancellor of Paris, in his Treatise, De
Pueris ad Christum trahendis, makes a sad complaint; Adeo jam indignum videtur
apud Multos, si quis ex Theologis, aut famatus in Literis, vel Ecclesiastica
Dignitate Praeditus, ad hoc opus se inclinaverit.

The Methods of carrying on this Exercise, will be varied by the Pastors, who
so Love a Glorious CHRIST, as to mind His Word, Feed my Lambs; according to the
Varieties of their circumstances.

But Some have chosen the way of Pastoral Visits. And from the Memorials of One
who long since did so, and then left his, Paterna, to his Son upon it, I will
transcribe the Ensuing Passages.

For, Pastoral Visits.

You may set upon Visiting all the Families, belonging to your Flock; taking
One Afternoon in a Week for that Purpose.

You may still send before hand unto the Families, that you intend at such a
Time to Visit them. And when you come unto them; you may assay with as Handsome
and as Pungent Addresses as you are able, to treat every Person particularly
about their Everlasting Interests.

First. You may discourse with the Elder People upon such Points as you think
most proper for them.

And especially, charge them to Maintain Family Prayer; and Obtain their
Promises for it, if they have yet neglected. Yea, Now Pray with them, that you
may show them how to Pray, as well as to obtain their Purposes for it.

You may likewise press upon them, the Care of Instructing their Children and
Servants, in the Holy Religion of our Savior; and to bring them up for Him.

If any that you should have Spoken with, were Absent, you may frequently Leave
a Solemn Text or Two of the Sacred Scripture, which you think most agreeable
for them; Desiring Somebody present, That they would Remember you Kindly to
them, and from you Recommend unto them that Oracle of God.

You may then call for the Children and Servants, And putting unto them such
Questions of the Catechism, as you think fit, you may, from the Answers, make
as lively Applications unto them, as you can, for the Engaging of them unto the
Fear of God.

You may frequently get Promises from them, relating to Secret Prayer, and
Reading of the Scriptures, and Obedience to their Parents and Masters.

And you may frequently Set before them the Proposals of the New Covenant,
after you have Labored for their Conviction and Awakening; till with Floods of
Tears, they Expressly Declare their Consenting to, and Accepting of, the
Proposals of the Covenant of Grace, which you distinctly set before them.

Some of the Lesser Folks, you my order, to bring their Bibles unto you, and
Read unto you from thence Two or Three Verses, whereto you may turn them. This
will Try, whether they can Read well, or no. You may then Charm them to Think
on such Things, as you thence observe for their Admonition, and never Forget
those Faithful Sayings of God.

You may some times leave some Awful Question with them; which, you may tell
them, they shall not Answer to You, but Answer to Themselves. As, What have I
been doing, ever since I came into the World, about the Great Errand upon which
God sent me into the World? And, If God should now call me out of the World,
what would become of me throughout Eternal Ages? And, Have I ever yet by Faith
carried a Perishing Soul unto my only Savior, for both Righteousness and
Salvation?

You will Enjoy a most wonderful Presence of God with you, in this undertaking;
and seldom leave a Family, without many Tears of Devotion dropped by all sorts of
Persons in it.

You can seldom Dispatch more than Four or Five Families in an Afternoon; and
the work may be as Laborious as any in all your Ministry.

My Son, I advise you, to set a special Value upon that part of your Ministry,
which is to be discharged in Pastoral Visits. You will not only Do, but also
Get, more than a little Good, by your Conversation with all sorts of Persons,
in thus Visiting of them from House to House And you will never more Walk in
the Spirit, than when you thus Walk about your Flock, to Do what Good you can
among them.

In your Visits, incredible Deal of Good may be done, by distributing little
Books of Piety. You may without Great Cost, be furnished with Little Books to
Suit all occasions: Books for the Old, and for the Young; Books for Persons
under Afflictions, or under Desertions? Books for Persons under the Power of
special Vices; Books for them that neglect Household Piety; Books for the
Seafaring; Books for the Erroneous; Books for them whom you would Quicken and
Prepare to approach the Table of the Lord; Books for them that come to have
their Children Baptized. And Catechisms for the Ignorant. You may notably
clench your Admonitions, by Leaving agreeable Books in the Hands of those, whom
you have discoursed withal; you may give them to know, that you would be looked
upon as Discoursing by these unto them, after you are departed from them. And
in this way you may Speak more than you have Time to Speak in any Personal
Interview: Yea, sometimes more than you would care to Speak. By Good Books,
there is a Salt of Piety Scattered about a Neighborhood.

Pastors, Uphold and Cherish Good Schools in your Towns. But then, be prevailed
withal sometimes to Visit the Schools.

It is a Proposal made, by Holy Mr. Thomas White; That Able and Zealous
Ministers, might sometimes Preach at the Schools. Because the Preaching of the
Word is the Converting Ordinance; and the Children will be Obliged there to
hear with more Attention, than they often do in the Public. And the Ministers
might here condescend unto such Expressions, as might work most upon them, and
such as are not so fit for a Public Congregation. I have read this Account of
One who was awakened by this Advice, to do such things as these;

At certain Times he Successively Visited the Schools. When he came to a
School, he first made a Prayer over the Children, as much adapted unto their
Condition, as he could make it. Then he went through the Catechism; or as much of
it, as he thought necessary; making the several Children to Repeat the several
Answers. But he still broke the Questions, for each Article in the Answers, to
be understood by them, with a Yes, or, No, Expected from them. And he put such
Questions also, as would make them to see and own their own Duties, and often
to Express a Resolution to Do their Duties. Then he Preached a Short Sermon to
them; Exceeding Plain; on some Suitable Scripture; and with all the Artifice
and Pungency he could use, to raise Attention and Affection in them. After this
he singled out a Number of Scholars, it may be Seven or Eight, or Ten; and bid
each of them turn to a certain Scripture; which he made them Read unto the
whole School; because it still related unto something as he gave them to see by
his brief Remarks upon it, which it particularly concerned Children to take
Notice of. Then he concluded with a brief Prayer, for a Blessing on the School,
and on the Tutors in it.

We are upon Visiting; You will be sure to Visit the Poor as well as the Rich;
and often mention the Condition of the Poor, in your Conversation with the
Rich. Keep, Sir, a List of 'em!

And think on this. The Wind feeds no body, yet it may turn the Mill, which
will grind the Corn, that may Feed the Poor. In Talking with the Rich; you may
do this for the Poor in your List.

But then, in Visiting the Poor, you will take occasion to dispense your Alms
among them. These Alms you will, with as much contrivance as may be, make the
Vehicles, to Convey the Admonitions of Piety unto them; yea, the Methods and
Machines of obtaining from them, some Engagements to perform certain Exercises
of Piety. All Ministers are not alike furnished for Alms; they should all be
disposed for them. They that have Small Families, or Large Interests, ought to
be Shining Examples of Liberality to the Poor, and power down their Alms like
the Showers of Heaven upon them. Yet All should Endeavor to Do what they can
this way. What says Nazianzen of his Reverend Fathers Alms-Deeds? They will
find, That the more they do (provided it be done with Discretion,) the more
they may; The Loaves will multiply in the Distribution. Sirs, This Bounty of
yours to the Poor, will procure a mighty Esteem and Success to your Ministry.
Suadet Lingua, Jubet Vita. It Will be an ungain-sayable Demonstration, that you
Believe what you Speak, about all the Duties of Christianity, but particularly
of Liberality, and a Faithful discharge of our Stewardship, and a Mind weaned
from the Love of this World; It will demonstrate your Belief of a Future State.
It will Vindicate you from the Imputation of, A Worldly Man; It will Embolden
you, and Fortify you, with a great Assurance, when you call upon others, To Do
Good, and abound in the Sacrifices which God is well-pleased withal. Et sic
Exempla Parantur!

You will do well to keep a Watchful Eye on the Disorders that may grow up and
get Head, in your Neighborhood. Among other ways to Suppress those things,
you may Form Societies for the Suppression of Disorders; Obtain a fit number of
Prudent, Pious, well affected Men, to Associate upon that Intention; Employ
their Discretion, and their Activity, for your Assistence in your Holy Purposes.

One of the Rules given for the Minister, is, Give thy self to Reading. Sirs,
Let Gregory's Pastoral, and Bowles's Pastor Evangelicus, be some of the Books
on which you bestow a Reading. But then, if you Read Church History very much,
(and particularly, the Prudentia Veteris Ecclesiae, Written by Vedelius,) but
especially the Lives of both Ancient and Modern Divines, you will ever now and
then find, Methods to Do Good, Exemplified. You will then consider, how far you
may Go and do likewise.

How Serviceable may Ministers be, unto one another, and unto all the Churches,
in their several Associations! Many things of General Advantage to all their
Flocks may be advanced, and consulted there. Yea, It Is Pity, that there should
be the least occasional Meeting of Ministers at any time, without Some Useful
thing proposed in it.

Nero took it very ill, that Vespasian Slept, at his Music! It is very much,
very much to be Wished, That the Sin of Sleeping at Sermons, were more Watched
against, and more Warned against. Your Sleepy Hearers, if, alas, the
Catechresis may be allowed that calls them Hearers, do miserably lose the Good
of your Ministry; and the Good which you might, perhaps, have particularly
designed for them, whom at the Time of your Speaking what you prepared for
them, you see Siezed with an horrible Spirit of Slumber before your Eyes. Will
no Vinegar help against the Narcoticks, that Satan has given to your Poor
Eutychus's! Or, Cannot you bring that Civility into Fashion among your Hearers,
To wake one another!

Finally; After all the Generous Essays and Labors to Do Good, that may fill
your Lives, your People will probably treat you with much Ingratitude. Your
Salaries will be meaner than even those at Geneva. They will Neglect you; they
will Oppress you; they will Defraud you, of what they have Engaged, and you
have Expected. You have new one opportunity more to Do Good, and so to Glorify
your Savior. Your Patience, O Tried Servants of God, your Patience will do it
wonderfully! To Bear E^^^ is to Do Good. The more Patient you are under Ill
Usage, the more you Exhibit a Glorious CHRIST unto your People, in your
conformity to your admirable Savior. The more Conformed you are unto Him, the
more Prepared you are, it is possible, for some Amendment of your condition in
this World; most certainly for the Recompenses of the Heavenly World, when you
appear before the Lord, who says, I know thy Works, and Charity, and Service,
and Faith, and thy Patience.

I will say This; If to Represent, a Glorious CHRIST, unto the View, and Love,
and Admiration of all People, be the Grant Intention of your Lives; To be a
Star that Leads men to Christ, and Stands there! [(...), was the Character, you
know of Ignatius!] If you are Exquisitely Studious, that the Holiness, and yet
the Gentleness, of a Glorious CHRIST may Shine in your Conversation: If in your
Public Discourses you do with Rapture bring in the mention of a Glorious
CHRIST in every Paragraph, on every Occasion, where He is to be spoken of; and
in your Private ones, you contrive to insinuate Something of His Glories and
Praises, wherever it may be decently introduced; Lastly, If when you find
that a Glorious CHRIST is the more Considered and Acknowledged by your Means,
it fills you with wonderful Satisfaction; and with Joy Unspeakable and full of
Glory, you now cry out; Lord, This is my Desired Happiness! Truly, Sirs, You
then Live to Purpose; You Do Good Emphatically!

There was a Worthy Minister whom the Great Cranmer designed for Preferment;
and he gave this Account of his Design about him; Nihil appetit, nihil ardet,
nihil somniaet, nisi JESUM CHRISTUM. Verily, Such Men of Christ, are Men of
God. They are the Favorites of Heaven; and shall be Favored with
Opportunities to Do Good, above any men in the World: They are the Men whom the
King of Heaven will delight to Honor! And they are the Gaons of Christianity.

If I reserve one thing to be mentioned after Finally, it is because I am in a
Doubt, whether it should be mentioned at all. In some Reformed Churches, they
do not permit a Minister of the Gospel to practice as a Physician; Because
either of those Callings is ordinarily enough to find a full Employment for him
that faithfully follows it. But, the Priests of old, who reserved in the
Archives of their Temples, the Stories of the Cures thankfully acknowledged
there; communicated from thence Directions for cures in such cases among their
Neighbors. Nor has it been a rare thing it Later Ages for Clergy men to be
Physicians. Not only such Monks as Aegidius Athenienfis, and Constantinus Afer,
and others* who had Liesure for it: but such Bishops as Bacbelt, yea, such
Archbishops as Albicus, have appeared under that Character. So, Herbert
advises that his Country-Minister, (or at least, his Wife,) should be much of a
Physician to his Flock. And we have known many a Country Minister prove a vast
Blessing to his Flock, by being so. If a Minister do any thing this way. Let
him for ever make it an Engine, to Address the Souls of his People, and oblige
them unto Piety. It Is an Angelical Conjunction, when the Ministers who do the
Pleasure of CHRIST, shall also be Physicians and Raphaels unto their People! In
a more Populous Place, you will perhaps choose rather, Sir, to get some
Religious and Accomplished Physician into your Neighborhood; and make Medical
Studies your own Diversion as much as may be; but with some Eye to this, That
you will Communicate unto your Luke, what notable Things you do in Reading meet
withal; and sometimes Unite Counsils with him, for the good of his Patients.
You may this way Save the Lives of many, who may themselves know nothing of it.

15. FRom the Tribe of Levi, we will pass with our PROPOSALS to the Tribe of
Simeon: from which Latter Tribe, there has been a frequent Ascent into the
former; as well as a Step now and then from the former to the latter. The
Schoolmaster has manifold Opportunities to Do Good. God make him sensible of
his Obligations! We read, The Little Ones have their Angels. It is an Hard work
to keep a School. But it is a Good work; and it may be so done, as to be in
some Sort like the Work of Angels. The Tutors of the Children, may be like
their Tutelar Anngels. M^lchior Adam did well to call it, Molestissimam, sed
Deo Long gratissimam Functionem.

Tutors, Will you not look upon the Children under your Wing as committed unto
you, by the Glorious LORD, with a charge of this Importance; Take them, and
bring them up for me, and I will pay you your Wages! Every time any New
Children come under your Tuition, why should you not think; Here, my Glorious
Lord sends me mother Object, on which I may do something, that He my be Served
in the World! O Suffer Little Children to Come unto you, and Consider, what you
may do, that Of Such may be the Kingdom of Heaven!

Sirs, Let it be a Great Intention with you, To Instill Documents of Piety into
the Children. Esteem it, Your and Their Great Interest, That they should So
Know the Holy Scriptures as to be made Wise unto Salvation; and Know the
Savior, whom to Know is Life Eternal. Oh! Take all occasions to Drop Some
Honey out of the Rock upon them! Happy the Children, and as Happy the Master,
where they who make the Relation of their Conversion to Serious Piety, may say,
There was a Schoolmaster that brought us to CHRIST! You have been told;
Certainly, It Is a Nobler work, to make the Little Ones Know their Savior, than
to know their Letters. The Lessons of Jesus are Nobler Things than the Lessons
of Cato. A Sanctifying Transformation of their Souls, were a Nobler Thing, than
merely to construe Ovids Metamorphosis. He was a Good Schoolmaster, of whom
there was this Testimony given.

YOung Austin wept, when he saw Dida dead;
Tho not a Tear for a Dead Soul he had.
Out Master would not let us be so Vain,
But us from Virgil did to David main.
Textors Epistles would not Cloth our Souls;
Paul's too we Learned; we went to School at Paul's.
CATECHIZING; That should be a Frequent, and at least, a Weekly, Exercise of
the School. And in the most Edifying, and Apolicatory and Admonitory manner
carried on. In some Reformed Places, (we are told) the Magistrate countenances
none to keep a School, but what appears with a Testimonial of their Ability,
and their Disposition particularly, [Aptitudinis ad munus illud imprimis
puerorum Catechisationem,] for the work of Religious Catechizing.

Dr. Reynolds, in a Funeral Sermon on an Eminent Schoolmaster has a Passage
worthy to be written in Letters of Gold. If Grammar School have Holy and
Learned men set over them, not only the Brains, but also the Souls of the
Children might be there Enriched, and the work of Learning and of Grace too, be
Betimes wrought in them. In order to this, it is to be proposed, That you would
not only Pray with your Scholars every day, but also take occasion from the
Public Sermons, and from Remarkable Occurences of Providence in your
Neighborhood, often to inculcate the Lessons of Piety upon the Children.

Tutors in the College, may do well Successively to treat each of their Pupils
alone, with all possible Solemnity and Affection, about their Interior State;
show them how to Repent of Sin, and Believe on Christ; and bring them to
Express Resolutions of Serious Piety. Sirs, you may do a thousand Things, to
render your Pupils Orthodox in their Principles, Regular in their Practices,
Qualified for Services!

I have read this Experiment of One who had Pupils under his charge; He made it
his Custom, that in every Recitation, he would, from something or other
occurring in it, make an occasion, to let fall some Sentence, which had a
Tendency to promote the Fear of God in their Hearts; which thing sometimes did
indeed put him to more than a little Study; but the Good Effect Sufficiently
Recompensed it.

If I should Press for certain Authors to be made Classical in the
Grammar-Schools, which are not commonly used there; Such as Castalio for the
Latin Tongue, and Posselius for the Greek; or, if I should beg, with certain
Modern Writers, That there may be a Northwest Passage found, for the Attaining
of the Latin Tongue; that instead of a Journey which may be dispatched in a few
Days, they may not wander, like the Children of Israel, many years in the
Wilderness: Or, if I should recite Austins complaints, of Little Boys Learning
the filthy Actions of the Pagan Gods in the Schools, for giving an Account
whereof, says he, Ob hoc honae Spei puer appellabar; And Luthers, That our
Schools are more Pagan than Christian; And the Reports and Wishes of a late
Writer, who says; I knew an aged and famous Schoolmaster, that after he had
kept School about Fifty years, said with a sad Countenance, That it was a great
Trouble unto him, that he spent so much Time in Reading Pagan Authors to his
Scholars, and wished it were customary to Read such a Book as Duports Verses
upon Job, rather than Homer, and such Books. I pray God, put it in the Hearts
of a Wise Parlaiment, to Purge our Schools; that instead of Learning Vain
Fictions, and Filthy Stories, they may be acquainted with the Word of God, and
with Books containing Grave Sayings, and things that may make them truly Wise
and Useful in the World: I suppose, there will be little Notice taken of such
Proposals: I had as good never mention them; It Is with Despair, that I make
mention of them.

Among the Occasions to be taken for Instilling of Piety into the Scholars,
there is One peculiarly at the Writing-Schools. An Inveterate Sinner I have
read of, Converted unto Serious Piety, by accidentally seeing that Sentence of
Austin written in a Window; He that has Promised Pardon to the Penitent
Sinner, has not Promised Repentance to the Presumpteous One. Who can tell what
Good may be done to the Young Scholar, by a Sentence in a Copy-book? Let their
Copies be of Sentences worthy to be had in Everlasting Remembrance; of
Sentences, that shall have the brightest Maxims of Wisdom in them; Worthy to be
Written on the Fleshly Tables of their Hearts; to be graven with the Point of a
Diamond there. This may do two Executions with one Stone: God has blessed this
unto many Scholars, it has done them good all their Days.

At the Grammar School also, the Scholars may be ordered for their Exercises to
turn such things into Latin, as may be likewise for their Instruction and
Establishment, in the Principles of Christianity; and render them armed with
Supplies from the Tower of David. Their Epistles, why may they not be on such
Subjects as may most befriend Virtue in them!

I will add this; To carry on the Discipline of the School, with Rewards, as
well as Punishments, is most certainly very Advisable, very Preferrible. There
may be Invented many ways of Rewarding, the Diligent and the Laudable: And, --
Ad Palmae Cursurus bonores, -- a Child of any Ingenuity, under the Expectations
and Encouragements of being Rewarded, will do to the uttermost. You have an
Honor for Quintilian. I Pray, Hear Quintilian; (...) a Plagis, sed Potius
Laud, aut aliorum Praelatione, urgendus est puer. If a Fault must be Punished,
Let Instruction, both unto the Delinquent and unto the Spectator, accompany the
Correction. Let the Odious Nature of the Sin, that has Enforced the Correction,
be declared; and let nothing be done in a Passion; all be done with all the
Evidence of Compassion that may be.

Ajax Flagellifer may be Read at the Scool. He is not fit for to be the Master
of it. Let it not be said of the Scholars, They are brought up in the School of
Tyrannus. Pliny says, That Bears are the Fatter for Beating. Fitter to have
the Conduct of Bears than of Ingenuous Boys, are the Masters, that cannot give
a Bit of Learning, but they must give a Knock with it. Send 'em to be Tutors of
the famous Lithuanian School, at Samourgan. The Harsh, Fierce, Orbilian way of
treating the Children, too commonly used in the School, is a dreadful Curse of
God upon our Miserable Offspring, who are Born Children of Wrath. It is boasted
now and then of a Schoolmaster, that such and such a brave Man had his
Education under him There is nothing said, How many that might have been Brave
Men, have been destroyed by him; How many Brave Wits, have been Dispirited,
Confounded, Murdered, by his Barbarous way of managing them.

I have Read an Address of this Importance; and I will conclude with it, as one
of Great Importance.

TUTORS, Be Strict; But yet be Gentle too;
Don't by fierce Cruelties fair Hopes undo.
Dream not, that they who are to Learning Slow
Will Mend by Arguments in Ferio.
Who keeps the Golden Fleece. Oh, Let him not
A Dragon be, though he Three Tongues have got.
Why can you not to Learning find the way,
But through the Province of Severia?
It Was Moderatus who taught Origin;
A Youth which proved One of the best of Men.
The Lads with Honor first, and Reason, rule;
Blows are but for the Refractory Fool.
But, Oh! First Teach them their Great God to fear;
An Euge, so from God and Them you will hear.
. 16. WE have lately discoursed with the PASTORS, about several Ways to Do
Good. There are PROPOSALS, to be also laid before the CHURCHES, of matters
wherein they may do well to join with their Pastors.

Days of Prayer kept now and then by the Churches, on the Declared Intention
of obtaining the Sanctifying Influences of the Spirit of Grace upon the Rising
Generation, have had and would have, a mavelous Efficacy to Produce a
Religious Posterity in the Land; and a Seed accounted until the Lord for a
Generation. Such an Acknowledgment of Supernatural Grace in the Necessity and
Excellency of it, would be a very probable Preparation and Introduction, to the
Communication of it. And when the Children see their Parents thus Earnestly
Seeking the Grace of God for them, it would have a Natural Tendency to awaken
them, unto an Earnest Seeking of it for themselves. The Sermons also Preached
by the Ministers on such Solemn occasions, it is likely, would be very Awakening
Ones. That this PROPOSAL, has been so Little hearkened unto, it is Lamentable,
it is Admirable! But -- They all Slumbred and Slept.

There is another PROPOSAL, which has been tendered to all our Churches, and
attended in Some of them.

That the several Churches, having in an Instrument Proper for that Purpose,
made a Catalogue of such things, as can indisputably be found amiss among them,
do with all Seriousness and Solemnity pass their VOTES, That they count such
things to be very Offensive Evils, and that Renouncing all Dependence on their
own Strength, to avoid such Evils, they humbly Ask the Help of the Divine
Grace, to Assist them in Watching against the said Evils, both in Themselves
and in One another. And that the Communicants do often Reflect upon those their
Acknowledgments and Protestations, as Perpetual Monitors unto them, to prevent
the Miscarriages wherewith too many Professors are too Easily overtaken.

It has been considered, That such humble Recognitions of Duty, will not only
be Accepted by our God, as our Declarations for Him, whereupon He will Declare
for us; but also, they are the Way of the New Covenant, for our obtaining of
Help to do our Duty. --

A Particular Church, may be an illustrious Pillar of Truth, by considering
what Laboring Truth, and Part of the Kingdom of God, may call for Special,
Signal, Open Testimonies; and they may Excite their Pastors to the composing,
and assist them in the Publishing, of such Testimonies; and appear to accompany
them in the Action. It is likely, that God would accompany such Testimonies
with a mavelous Efficacy to Suppress growing Errors and Evils!

A PROPOSAL of this Nature may be worthy of some Consideration.

I. IT were to be desired, That every Particular Church, would be furnished
with a STOCK, that may be a Constant and Ready Fund for the Propagation of
Religion. And that every Minister would use his best Endeavors, both with his
own Disbursements according to his Ability, and with his Applications unto well
disposed People under his Influences, to increase the STOCK; Either in the way
of Collections Publicly made at certain Periods, or in the way of more Private
Communications made from time to time unto it.

II. This Evangelical Treasury may be Lodged in the Hands of the Deacons of
each of the Churches, where it is gathered; who are to keep True and Fair
Accounts of all that is brought in and laid out. And let nothing be drawn out
of it, without the Knowledge and Consent of the Church, to which it belongs.

III The First and Main Intention of this Evangelical Treasury, is to be. The
Propagation of Religion. And therefore, when any Essays of Good are to be made
upon Vngospellized Places, the Neighboring Ministers may Advise each of the
Churches, what Proportion they may allow out of their Evangelical Treasury,
toward the Support of such a noble undertaking.

IV. But this Evangelical Treasury may be capable of being applied unto Some
other Pious Uses; and particularly, unto such as any Particular Church may See
cause to Pursue, for the Service of Religion, within their own Vicinity. Such
as, The sending of Bibles, and Catechisms, and other Instruments of Piety, to
be dispersed among the Poor, where it may be thought necessary. Moreover, the
Help of New Congregations abroad, in their First Essays, to build Meeting
Houses for the Public Worship of God with Scriptural Purity; may be one
Article of Expense for this Evangelical Treasury.

Quaere. Our Churches have their Sacramental Collections. It Is not fit indeed,
that they should be without them. The Primitive Christians had so. Justin
Martyr tells us of the (...); Tertullian Speaks of the, Deposita Pietatis, on
these occasions. May not our Churches do well to augment their Liberality, in
their Grateful and Joyful Collections at the Table of the Lord, and Resolve,
That what is now Collected, shall be part of their Evangelical Treasury; not
only, for their Supply of the Table, and for the Relief of the Poor, but also
for such Other Services to the Kingdom of God, as they may from time to time,
see cause to countenance?

. 17. FRom Ecclesiastical Circumstances, which in such a Subject as we are now
upon, may with Good Heraldry claim the Precedence, we will make a Transition to
Political. Now, Touch the Mountains, and they will Smoke! Oh! When will Wisdom
Visit Princes and Nobles, and all the Judges of the Earth; and inspire them to
preserve the due Luster of their Character, by a Desire to Do Good in the
Earth; a Study to Glorify the God of Heaven! The Opportunities that Rulers have
to Do Good, are so Evident, so Numerous, and they have so much Power to Do
Good, that he who addresses them, cannot but be overwhelmed with some Confusion
of Thought, where to Begin, or when to Conclude, or How to assign a fit Order
unto them. Indeed the very Definition of Government, is, A care of other
Peoples Safety. Sirs, From whom have you Received this Power? You could have no
Power at all, Except it were given you from Above. Certainly what is thus
Received from God, should be Employed for God. Be wise now therefore, O ye
Rulers, be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord, with Fear, left
ye Forget and Offend Him, who has made you what you are. Kiss the Feet of the
Son of God, lest He be Displeased at your Neglect of your Duty. Don't Kindle
the Wrath of Him who is, The Blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. What is the Name of a Magistrate? The Name which He that made
him, has given him, is; The Minister of God for Good. His Empty Name will
produce a Cruel Crime, if he don't Set himself to Do Good, as far as ever he can
Extend his Influences. Is he a Vicegerent of God, and shall he do Nothing for
God? Gross Absurdity! Black Ingratitude! Is he one of those whom the word of
God coming to them has called, Gods? Gods who Do no Good, are strange Gods. Not
Gods, but another Name, too horrible to be mentioned belongs unto them: shall
we say, Gods that have Mouths but they Speak not: Eyes but they See not: Noses
but they Smell not, and Hands but they Handle not? Government is called, The
Ordinance of God. As the Administration of it, is to avoid those Illegalities,
which will render it no other than a Violation of the Ordinance; thus it should
vigorously pursue those noble and blessed Ends for which it is Ordained; The
Good of Mankind. Unworthy of all their other flourishing Titles, be they what
they will, are the Rulers, who are not ambitious of that above all; To be
Entitled Benefactors. The greatest Monarch in Christendom; One that by
computation has Fourscore Millions of Subjects, and he whom the Scripture
styles, The Head over many Countries, is in the Sacred Prophecies called, A
Vile Person. Verily, so is every Magistrate; who does not aim to Do Good in the
World. Rulers who make no other use of their Higher Station, than to Swagger
over their Neighbors, and command their Obsequious Flatteries, and Enrich
themselves with the Spoils of which they are able to Pillage them, and then
wallow in Sensual and Brutal Pleasures; These are, The Basest of Man. From a
sense of this, the Venetians though they allow Concubines, yet if a man be
Observably and Exorbitantly given to Sensual Pleasures, that wise People never
Employ him: as believing such men to be mere Good-for-nothings. Because a
Wretched World will continue Indisposed unto the Kingdom of the glorious and
only Savior, and say, of our Immanuel, We will not have this Man to Reign over
us; it is therefore very much put over into the Hands of such Selfish, and
Sensual and Wicked Rulers: and very -- centaures. While the deserved Curse of
God remains upon an Impious, and Besotted World, there must be few Rulers that
will Seriously and Strenuously Devise Good, and Seek to be Blessings unto it.
Rulers must, alas, how often be men, whose Lives are not worth a Prayer, nor
their Deaths worth a Tear. Athanasius, has well answered the Question, whence
it is that such worthless and wicked men get into Authority? He says, It Is,
(...). The People are Wicked and must be Punished with men after their own
Hearts: -- Thus, when a Phocas was made Emperor, a Religious man complained
unto Heaven, Cur fecisti Eum Imperatorem? Heaven gave to the complaint that
Answer, Non inveni pejorem. Evil Rulers are well reckoned by the Historian,
among the Effects Divinae Ultionis; They may go into the catalogue with Sword,
and Plague, and Fire. One man may be worse than All Three. Such bring up the
Rear, in the Train of the Pale Horse: The Beasts of the Earth.

O our God, our God, When will thy Compassions to a Miserable World, appear in
bestowing upon it Good Rulers, Able Men, such as Fear God, Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness? Oh! That the Time were come, when there shall be a Ruler over
men, the Just One, thy JESUS, Ruling in the Fear of God, and He shall be at the
Light of the Morning when the Sun rises; And under Him, the Mountains shall
bring Peace to the People, and the Little Hills by Righteousness; And He will
according to His Word make our Officers Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness.
Hasten it, in thy Time, O Lord; But, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do thou
not Judge! And make the Kingdoms of this World, thy own, and Remove them that
corrupt the Earth; and in a Great Chain bind up him, who pretends that the
Kingdoms of the World are his, and those who are the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World!

O All you that Love God, add your Amen, to hasten the Coming of this Day of
God!

In the mean time;

It cannot be Expressed, How much Good may be done, by a Chief Magistrate of a
Country, who will make the Doing of Good, his Chief Intention: A Constantine,
or a Theodosius, or a Gratian. The First of these, notwithstanding the vast
cares of the Empire to take up his Time, yet would every Day at Stated Hours,
Retire into his Closet and on his Knees offer up his Prayers unto the glorious
GOD. But then, that he might Recommend this Duty unto the World; this admirable
Emperor caused his Image in all his Gold Coins, and his Pictures and Statues,
to be made in a Praying Posture, with his Hands Extended, and his Eyes lifted
up, to Heaven. O Imperial Piety! To behold such a Prince at the Head of it, one
would think, were enough to Convert a World! It would, if it were not for the
dreadful Energies of one, who is by the Wrath of God become, The Prince of this
World! I Say,

The Virtuous Example of such an One, is almost enough to Reform whole Nations!
It carries irresistible Charms with it, by which Totus Componitur Orbis. A
Prince Exemplary for Piety, Sheds the Rays of Heaven, as the Sun shining in
his Meridian Strength, with a most Penetrating Force into the People, Rejoicing
under his Wings. It Is now a Rarity; but it will not be so, in the Approaching
Age, when the Kings of the Earth, shall bring their Glory and Honor into the
Holy City! A Little Piety in Princes makes a glaring Show; The Eyes of their
Subjects are Dazzled, their Minds Ravished, with it: They Numinize them. What
would be done by a Degree of Piety in them, that should bear Proportion to the
Degree of their Quality; and if their Piety were as much above that of other
men, as their Station? Roll about, O Age, that shall bring on such admirable
Spectacles!

It Is a vast Influence that such might have on the Reformation of the World, and
by consequence on its Felicity, by dispensing Preferments and Employments to
none but such as may by virtue be recommended unto them. If Good men generally
were put into Commissions, and none but Good men made Commanders at Sea, and on
Shore, what a mighty Change for the better would the World immediately be
blessed withal! I will beg Leave to say, It will be a most comprehensive
Service unto a Nation, to get them unfettered from any Test, that may render
Honest and Faithful men, incapable of Serving them. And, I will take leave also
to say; The Displacing of a Few Officers on the Score of their being found
Vicious Men, would signify an hundred times as much to Mend the State of a
Depraved, Betrayed, unprosperous Nation, as a Thousand Proclamations against
Vice followed with no such Executions.

Good Laws are important Machines, to keep very much Evil out of the World;
yea, they Reach none, without the Doing of Some Good unto them. All that have
any Share in the Legislative Power, ought very much to be concerned, that such
Good Laws may be Enacted as may be for a lasting Benefit. The Representatives
of a People, in their Parliaments, or Assemblies, will do well, to think, What
is there still defective in our Laws, Leaving the Iniquities or Necessities of
Men yet not provided against. And, What further Laws may be propounded, that
the Reign of Holiness and Righteousness may be advanced. There have been Laws,
(and sometimes none of the best, but Mischiefs Established by Laws!) which
have made the Names of those that first moved for them to be Remembered. The
Remembrance of having been, The man that first moved a Good Law, were better
than a Statue erected for ones Memory. But if other men Forget it, Sirs, you
will not want a Recompense in Gods, and your own Remembrance of it. You know
whose Prayer it was, Think upon me, my God, for Good, according to all that I
have done for this People!

Magistrates may do an unknown Deal of Good, by countenancing of worthy
Ministers. To Settle and Support such Men of God in a Place, is to be, as one
may say, the Grandfathers of all the Good which those Men shall do in the
Place. Their Consultations, and their Combinations, with Able, Faithful,
Zealous Ministers, may produce more Good Effects than ever any Astrology
foretold of the most happy Conjunction. When Moses and Aaron join to Do Good,
what cannot they do? Queen Elizabeth admired the Happiness of Suffolk, in her
Progress, where she saw a mighty good understanding between Virtuous
Magistrates and Faithful Ministers.

Briefly. We will observe a Decorum in our PROPOSALS, and not Suppose
Unattentiveness or Incapacity in those to whom we offer them. It shall only be
proposed, That since MAGISTRATES are usually Men of Abilities, they would
Retire sometimes to a Contemplation on that Generous Point, What Good may I do
in the World? And observe, what they are Able themselves, (assisted by the
Implored Grace of Heaven,) to Find out, as part of the Good, which they are to
do in Serving their Generation.

I forget my self, if old Theognis had not a Maxim, which must not be
Forgotten. When the Administration of Affairs, is placed in the Hands of Men,
Proud of Command, and bens to their own private Gain, be sure the People will
soon be a miserable People. I propose that the Maxim should be Remembered, and
this Mischief avoided.

And this one thing more, Think thou this, O man that Judge, That thou
shall escape the Judgment of God? Let the Judges of the People, consider, That
God will one Day bring them into Judgment. -- Judex nuper eram; jam Judicor.
Oh! That Rulers would Realize to themselves, as Real a matter as any in the
World! That they must give an Account unto God, concerning their Administration
of their Government. Sirs, The Great GOD, before whom the Biggest of you all is
but as a Worm of the Dust, will Demand an Account of you, How Faithful you were
in the Discharge of your Office? What you did for His Kingdom in your Office?
Whether you did what you could, that the World might be the better for you? If
you would often take this awful matter in your Consideration, which, Oh! what
Reason you have to do! -- It could not but Quicken you to very many Actions,
which would be no Grief of Heart unto you another Day! He was one of the best
Rulers, that ever was in the World, whose Thoughts run upon that point; What
shall I do, when God Rises up, and when He Visits, what shall I answer Him?
Even Abub^k^r the Successor of Mahomet, upon an Expostulation with him for his
Walking on Foot, when he took a view of his Army, said, I shall find my Account
with God for these steps. He has less Christianity than a Mehometan, who is
utterly unmindful of The Account he must give to God, of the steps taken by him.

How well did things go at Neo-Caesarea, when Basil, who Lived there, could
give that Account, concerning the Governor of the Place! That he was a most
Exact Observer of Justice; but very Courteous, and Obliging, and Easy of Access
to the Oppressed: He was equally at Liesure for the Rich and for the Poor; But
all Wicked People were Afraid of him: He Abhorred Exceedingly the taking of a
Bribe: And his Design, in short, was to raise Christianity unto its Pristine
Dignity. A Mohammedan Captain General, whose Name was Caled, said once unto a
Christian; It does not at all become men in eminent Station, to deal
Deceitfully and use Tricks. It is a miserable thing, when a Christian in
Eminent Station, will do such things!

18. THE Physician [who sometimes comes also to be a Magistrate; and Aristotle
has a Saying very contrary to the Jewish Maxim, That a City will be happy under
such a Government!] he also has his Opportunities to Do Good, and render
himself, A Beloved Physician; which he is to be advised of.

Zaccuth the Portuguese, who among many other Books written by him, wrote, An
History of the principal Physicians, was one, who after he had got into
Amsterdam, did by Circumcision render it Evident, that he had until then, and
for Thirty years together, only Dissembled Christianity at Lisbon; yet because
he was very Charitable to Poor Patients, he was very much Esteemed. We now
apply our selves to those, whose Love to Christianity, we hope, is without
Dissimulation. There is to be Expected from them, a Charity and an Usefulness,
which may entitle them to a Remembrance in a better History than that of
Zacutus Lusitanus; yea, in that Book of Life, where a Name will be of more
account, than to be found in the Vitae Illustrium Medicorum, where Peter
Castellanus has Embalmed so many of that Profession.

By Serious and Shining Piety in your own Example, you will bear a glorious
Testimony to the Cause of God and Religion. You will Glorify the God of Nature,
and the only Savior. Your Acquaintance with Nature, will indeed be your
condemnation, if you do it not. Nothing so Unnatural as to be Irreligious!
Religio Medici, has the Least Reason of any under Heaven, to be an, Irreligion.
It has been most unreasonably done of them, who have administered occasion, and
for that complaint of Christians; Ubi tres Medici, tres Athei. It is very sad,
That when we read about, the State of the Rephaim in the other World, the
Physicians are by so many Translators, (they think, with too much cause,)
carried into it. Very sad, That the Jews imagine they have had cause to say,
Optimus inter Medicos ad Gehennam: and assign this Cause for so severe a
Sentence; Non enim metuit a Morbis; Vescitur Laute, nec Confringit cor Suum
Deo; Aliquando Etiam interficit Honaines, quando Pauperes, quos Posset, non
Sanat. A Sad Story, if it be True!

Sirs; You will never count your selves to be such Adeptists, as to be at a
Stand in your Studies, and make no further Progress in your Enquiries, into
Maladies, and after Medicines. A Physician come to his full growth, Looks
Dangerously and Ominously. Had the World gone on, with nothing but an
Aesculapius, furnished with a Goat (whose Milk for Pharmacy) and a Dog (whose
Tongue for Cheirurgery,) we had been miserably of it. You will be Diligent, and
Studious, and Inquisitive; and still, Read much, and Think more, and Pray most
of all; and be Sollicitous, to Find out, and Give out, Something very
considerable for the Good of Mankind, which none before you has Lit upon: Be
Sollicitous to make some Addition to the Treasures of your Noble Profession.
Though to attain the Honor of being a Sydenham, -- Non cuivis homini contingit;
However, To Do Something, may be a Laudable Ambition.

By the Benefit they expect from you, and by the charms of your Polite
Education and Proper and Prudent Conversation, You are sometimes Introduced
into the Familiar Acquaintance of Great Men. Persons of the First Quality
Entertain you, with much Freedom, and Friendship, and Familiarity. Perhaps, you
become, under Hippocrates's Oath, almost a Sort of Confessors unto them: as
indeed, the Confessors were usually the Physicians of the People, for several
Ages. What an Advantage to Do Good, have you in your Hands, by this
Acquaintance? The Poor Jews both in the Eastern and in the Western parts of the
World, have many a time, had very Good Offices done for their Nation, by means
of their Countrymen arriving to be, Physicians in ordinary, unto the Princes
of the Countries where they have been dispersed. Sirs, Your Admission to feel
the Pulse of Eminent Persons, may Enable you, to do many Good Offices for many
Good Interests. You are Persons of that Acumen, that you need not be told,
What! You will soon discover Excellent Things and Ways, wherein Good may be
done, if you will please to deliberate upon it; What Good Motions may I make to
my Patient, that he may do Good in the World? If you Read what Gregory
Nazianzen writes of his Brother Caesarius, a famous Physician, and a man of
Honor, you will doubtless find your Dispositions this way Enkindled. You know,
how ready the Sick are, to hear Good Motions; and how seasonable it is to Ply
them therewith, when a Begun Recovery from Sickness, bespeaks their Gratitude
unto the God of their Health. Yea, and for them that are in Health also, you
may find Mollissima Tempora fandi.

Physicians often are Men Universally Learned. They have Treasure enough, and
sometimes Liesure enough, to Write BOOKS, on a vast Variety of Subjects,
whereby Knowledge and Virtue may be greatly advanced in the World. The late
Epick Poems of a Blackmore, and Cosmologia Sacra of a Grew, are fresh Examples;
Mankind is indebted unto those Learned Physicians; the Names of the Hero's are
immortalized; they need no Statues: nor need they mind the Envy of any Modern
Theophrastus. A Catalogue of BOOKS Written, on various Arguments, besides those
of their own Profession, (and unto better Purpose too, than only to Produce
Erastianism in the Churches which our Glorious Lord has instituted) by Learned
Physicians, would it self alone almost make a Book. In the Great Army of
Learned Physicians, that have Published their Labors about the Word which the
Lord has given, and for the Service of His Church, and World, I humbly move,
that the Incomparable Zuinger, and Gesner may appear as Field-Officers. A City
Tauris were too mean a Present, for Physicians of such merits. I propose them
to Imitation; that many may Follow such Leaders. You know Freher has brought on
his Theater, near Five Hundred famous Physicians, with some Account of their
Lives and Works; very few Britons among them; and none at all that Lived unto
the End of the former Century. What a vast Addition might there be since made
unto that List of Honor from the British Nations! May an Excellent Ambition to
be part of it, Excite the Capable, to Do Worthily!

Physicians are even over-stock'd with Opportunities, to help the Poor, and
heal them for Nothing. It was a Noble saying of Cicero, Nil habet Fortuna
melius, quam ut passis, neque Natura (...), quam ut velis, servare Plures. But
I will set before you an higher consideration, than what a Pagan Kirker was
ever acquainted with. Sirs, The more Charity, and Compassion, and Condescension
you treat the Poor withal, the more will you arrive to, The Greatest of all
Glories: I say, The Greatest and Highest of all Glories! -- I mean, An
Imitation of your Admirable SAVIOR. You will readily say, Quod decuit
CHRISTUM, cur mihi Turpe putem? In comparison of this Consolation, it will be a
small Thing to say unto you, That your coming among the Poor, will be like the
Descent of the Angel of Bethesda unto them. We will not presume to prescribe
unto you, What Good you shall Do to the Poor, and by what Generous Actions you
shall Take their Infirmities and bear their Sicknesses. Only we Enter an
Objection against your taking any Fees for your Visits on the Lords-Day's,
Because, the Time is none of Yours; It Is the Lords!

When we Consider how much the Lives of Men are in the Hands of God; and what a
Dependence we have on the God of our Health for our Cure, when we have lost it;
and what Strange and Strong Proofs we have had, of Angels by their
Communications or Operations Contributing to the Cure of the Diseases
wherewith Mortals have been Oppressed; [whereof I can my self relate
astonishing Instances!] and the Mavelous Efficacy of Prayer for the Recovery
of a Sick Brother, who has not Sinned a Sin unto Death; What better thing is
there to be recommended unto a Physician, who desires to Do Good, than this;
Good Sir, Be a Man o Prayer. In your Daily and Secret Prayer carry every one of
your Patients by Name, (as you would your own Children,) unto the Glorious Lord
our Healer for His Healing Mercies: Place them as far as your Prayer will do
it, under the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness. And as any New Case of your
Patients may occur, especially if there be any Difficulty in it, why should you
not make your Particular and Sollicitous Applications to Heaven for Direction!
O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, nor is it in man that
walks, to direct his Steps; No, nor in man that heals, to perform his
Cures. Hippocrates advised Physicians, that when they Visited their Patients,
they should consider, whether there might not be, Divinum quiddam in morbo.
Truly, in some sense, there is ever so, and it should be considered. What an
Heavenly Life might you lead, if your Business may be carried on with as many
Visits to Heaven, as you make unto your Patients! Or: Jacob Tzaphalon, a famous
Jew in the former Century, Published at Venice, a Book Entitled, Precious
Stones. There are several Prayers in the Book; and among them a Pretty long
one, For Physicians when they go to Visit their Patients. When the Psalmist
says, Thou have made me wiser than my Enemies; it may be read, Thou have made
me wise from my Enemies. We should Learn Wisdom from them; Fas est, et ab
host! -- O Christianity, certainly thou will Outdo Judaism in thy Devotions!

We read, Heaviness in the Heart of Man makes it Stoup, but a Good Word makes
it Glad. We read, A Cheerful Heart does Good like a Medicine, but a broken
Spirit dries the Bones. And Baglivi is not the only Physician, who has made
the Observation. That a great part of our Diseases, either do Rise from, or are
Fed by, a Weight of Cares lying on the Minds of Men. Diseases that seem
Incureable, are Easily cured by Agreeable Conversation Disorders of the Mind,
first bring Diseases on the Stomach; and so the whole Mass of Blood gradually
becomes infected. And as long as the Passions of the Mind continue, the
Diseases may indeed change they Forms, but they rarely quit the Patients.
Tranquillity of Mind will do Strange Things, toward the Relief of Bodily
Maladies. It Is not without Reason, that Hofman, in his Dissertation, Des Moyens
de vivre longtems, does insist on Tranquillity of Mind as the chief among the
Ways to Live Long; and that this is the cause why we read, The Fear of the
Lord tends to Life. They that have Practiced, The Art of Curing by
Expectation, have made an Experiment of what the Mind will do toward the Cure
of the Body. By Practicing, The Art of Curing by Consolation, you may carry on
the Experiment. I Propound then, Let the Physician with all possible Ingenuity
of Conversation, find out, what matter of Anxiety, there may have been upon the
Mind of his Patient; what there is, that has made his Life Uneasy to him.
Having Discovered the Burden. Let him use all the ways he can devise to take
it off. Offer him such Thoughts, as may be the best Anodynes for his Distressed
Mind; Especially, the Right Thoughts of the Righteous, and the ways to a
composure upon Religious Principles. Give him a Prospect, if you can, of some
Deliverance from his Distresses, or some Abatement of them. Raise in him as
Bright Thoughts as may be, and Scatter the Clouds, remove the Loads, which his
Mind is Perplexed withal: Especially, by Representing and Magnifying the Mercy
of GOD in CHRIST unto him. It is Possible, Sir, That you may in this way also,
find our Obliging Occasions to Exercise abundance of Goodness, in Doing your
self, or in bringing others to Do, Kindnesses for the Miserable.

And what should hinder you, from Considering the Souls of your Patients, their
Interior State; their Spiritual Health; what they have done, and what they
have to do, that they may be in Good Terms with Heaven? You may from their
Natural Distempers, affect your own Minds, and theirs too, with a Sense of our
Analogous Moral ones. You may make your Conversation with them, a Vehicle for
such Admonitions of Piety as may be most Needful for them: That they may
neither be found Unprepared for Death, nor Unthankful and Unfruitful upon their
escaping of it. This you may do, without any Indecent Intrusion into the Office
of the Minister; But you may indeed at the same Time do many a Good Office for
the Minister, as well as for the Patient, and inform the Minister when and
where and how he may be very Serviceable among some of the Miserable, with
whose condition he may else happen to be unacquainted. The Art of Healing was,
you know, first brought into order by men that had the Care of Souls. And I
know not why they who profess and practice that Noble Art, should now wholly
cast off that Care. Perhaps you Remember a King, who was also a Physician [For
other Crowned Heads, besides Mithridates and Hadrianus and Constantinus
Pogonatus, have been so!] and who gave this Reason why the Greeks had such
Diseases among them so much uncured; Because they neglected their Souls, the
chief thing of all. For my part, I know not why the Physician should wholly
neglect the Souls of his Patients!

I will hold you no Longer. You are not ignorant, that Medicine in the World,
once was, and in many Ungospellized parts of the World still is, A Thing
horribly Magical. Celsus tells it, as a part of the Egyptian Philosophy current
in his Time, That the Body of man is divided into Thirty Six Parts, each of
which was the peculiar Allotment and Possession of a Demon; and this Demon
was by the Magi called upon, to cure Diseases of the part that belonged unto
him. Even in Galens time we find Prestigiaturas Aegyptias Practiced; he himself
writes of them. Other Countries were from Egypt infected with them. Hence
Medicines were called, Pharmaca. The Oriental Nations had their Teraphim for
the cure of Diseases. Whence (...) signifies, both to Worship, and to Cure.
And, Curae Morborum, is reckoned by Eusebius one main Article of the Pagan
Theology. God used all proper Means, for Saving His People, from having to do
with that sort of Men, or of Means. He Commended unto them, the Study of
Nature, and of Natural Remedies. They did after the Example of Solomon, Study
Botanicks: They had their Apothecaries who were to furnish them with Materials
for Medicines. The Princes of Judea had, as Pliny tells us, Their Physic
Gardens. Probably Naboths Vineyard might have such an one in it; which might be
the Reason why Ahab did so Covet it. And Joram, the Son of Ahab, repaired
hither, to be cured of his Wounds. An Excellent Physician, in a late
Composition with which he has obliged the Public, thinks, The Sin of Asa, when
he Sought not unto the Lord, but unto the Physicians, was, both occasioned and
Aggravated by this; There were at this time none but Magical Physicians. But
some others have thought, that some of Asa's Ancestors had been Medically
disposed, and were Students in the Art of Healing. From hence might come the
Name of Asa: for Asa is the Chaldee word for a Physician. It may be, for that
cause this King might have the Greater Esteem for those who were skilled in
Medicines, and put a Confidence in them, that had with it and in it, a Neglect
of the glorious GOD; the only Author and Giver of Health. What I aim at, in
this Paragraph, is but Summarily to bespeak the Reverse of all this; That my
Honorable Asa, [ Honorable! the Son of Sirach has taught me to call him so!]
would himself continually go to God our Savior on all occasions, and as far as
he can, bring all his Patients thither also.

Finally; An Industrious and an Ingenious Gentleman of your Profession, has a
Passage in a Preface to his, Pharmacopaeia Bateana, which, I will here insert;
because very many of you can Speak the like; and by inserting it, I propose, to
increase the Number.

I know no poor Creature that Ever came to me in my whole Time, that once went
from me, without my Desired Help gratis. And I have accounted the Restoration
of such a Poor and Wretched Creature, a greater Blessing to me, than if I had
gotten the Wealth of both the Indies. I cannot so well Express my self
concerning this matter, as I can conceive it; but I am sure, I should have been
more pleased, and had a greater Satisfaction, in seeing such an Helpless
creature Restored to its Desired Health, than if I had found a very valuable
Treasure. All the Good I have done in these cases, as I never can Repent it, so
I Resolve to continue it; For I certainly know, I have had the Signal Blessing
of God, attending my Endeavors, for it.

. 19. I Will get me unto the Rich Men, -- and will Speak unto them: For they
will know the ways to Do Good, and will think, what they shall be able to say,
when they come into the Judgment of their God. An English Person of Quality,
quoting that Passage, The Desire of a Man is his Kindness, invited me so to
read it, The only Desirable thing in a man is his Goodness. How Happy would
the World be if every Person of Quality would come into this Persuasion! It is
an Article in my Commission; Charge them that are Rich in this World, That they
Do Good, that they be Rich in Good Works, Ready to Distribute, willing to
Communicate. In pursuance thereof, I will put Rich Men in mind of the
Opportunities to Do Good, with which the God, who gives Power to Get Wealth,
has favored and obliged and enriched them. It was an Account, and a very Good
one it was, that has been sometimes given of a Good man; The Wealth of this
World, he knew no Good in it, but the doing of Good with it. Yea, those men who
have had very little Goodness in them, yet in describing, The manners of the
Age, in which they have had perhaps themselves too deep a Share, have seen
cause to Subscribe and Publish this prime Dictate of Reason; We are never the
better for any thing, barely for the Propriety Sake; but it is the Application
of it, that gives every thing its value. Whoever buries his Talent, breaks a
Sacred Trust, and Cozens those that Stand in need on it. Sirs, You cannot but
Acknowledge, That it is the Sovereign GOD, who has bestowed upon you, the
Riches which distinguish you. A Devil himself, when he Saw a Rich Man, could
not but make this Acknowledgment unto the God of Heaven, Thou have Blessed the
work of his hands, and his Substance is increased in the Land. It is also a
Thing, whereof it is to be hoped, you are not unapprehensive, That the Riches in
your possession are some of the Talents, whereof you must give an Account unto
the Glorious LORD, who has betrusted you therewithal: And that you will give up
your Account with Grief, and not with Joy, if it must be found, that All your
Estates have been laid out, only to gratify the Appetites of the Flesh, and
Little or Nothing of them consecrated unto the Service of God, and of His
Kingdom in the World. We read of the Servants assigned unto the Priests of old,
Unto you they are given as a Gift for the Lord. It is what is to be said of all
our Estates. What God gives us, is not given us for our selves, but for the
Lord. And, Cum crescunt Dona crescunt etiam Rations Donorum. Indeed there is
hardly any Professor of Christianity, so Vicious, but he will own, that All of
his Estate is to be used in Honest Uses; and part of it, in Pious Uses. If any
plead their Poverty, to Excuse them, and Exempt them, from doing any thing this
way, O Poor Widow with thy two Mites, Eternized in the History of the Gospel,
Thou shall Rise up in the Judgment with that Generation, and shall Condemn
them. And let them also know, that they take a course, to condemn and confine
themselves unto Eternal Poverty. But the main Question is, about the Quota
Parts; How much of a Man's Income is to be Devoted unto Pious Uses? And now, Let
it not seem an Hard Saying, if I say unto you, That a Tenth Part is the least
that you can bring under a more Solemn Dedication unto the Lord; for whom
indeed, after some sort, we are to lay out our All. A Farthing less, would make
an Enlightened and Considerate Christian, Suspicious, of his coming under the
Danger of a Sacrilege. By the Pious Uses for which your Tenths are thus
challenged, I do not intend only the Maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry,
but also the Relief of the Miserable whom our Merciful Savior has made the
Receivers of His Rents, and all that is to be more directly done, for the
Preserving and Promoting of Piety in the World. Since there is a Part of every
man's Revenues due to the Glorious Lord, and such Pious Uses, it is not Fit that
the Determination of What Part, it must be, should be left unto such Hearts as
ours. My Friend Thou have, it may be, too high an Opinion of thy own Wisdom and
Goodness, if nothing but thy own Carnal Heart, shall determine still When, and
What, thy Revenues are to do, for Him, whom thou art so ready to Forget, when
He has Filled thee. But if the LORD Himself, to whom thou art but a Steward,
has fixed any Part of our usual Revenues, for Himself, as it is most Reasonable
that He should have the Fixing of it, certainly a Tenth will be found the least
that He has called for. A Tenth is the Least Part in the First Division of
Numbers, which is that of Unites. Grotius notes it, as the Foundation for the
Law of Tithes; Numerus Denarius Gentibus ferme cunctis Numerandi Finis est. It
is but fair, and the very Light of Nature will declare for it; That the Great
GOD, who with a Seventh Day, is owned as the Creator, should with a Tenth Part
be owned as the Possession of All Things. We don't Allow Him so much as The
Least, if we withold a Tenth from Him. Less than That, is less than what all
Nations make The Least. Certainly, To withold this, is to Withold more than is
Meet. Sirs, you know the Tendency. Long before the Mosaic Dispensation of the
Law, we find, that this was Jacobs Vow, The Lord shall be my God, and of all
that thou shall give me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee. It seems we do
not sufficiently Declare, That the Lord is our God, if we do not Give a Tenth
unto Him. And how can we approve our selves Israelites Indeed, if we slight
such a Pattern of our Father Jacob? I will ascend a Little Higher. In one Text
we read of our Father Abraham, He gave Melchizedek the Tenth of all. In another
Text we read of our Savior JESUS, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order
of Melchizedek. Hence I form this Argument; The Rights of Melchizedek belong to
our JESUS, the Royal High Priest now concerned in the Heavens for us. The
Tenths were the Rights of Melchizedek. Therefore the Tenths belong to our
JESUS. I do in my Conscience believe, That this Argument cannot be answered.
The man seems to blur one Evidence of his being one of the true Children of
Abraham, that goes to answer it. I do Renew my Appeal to the Light of Nature.
To Nature thou shall go! It Is very certain, That the Ancient Pagans did use to
Decimate for Sacred Uses. Pliny tells us, the Arabians did so. Xenophon tells
us, the Grecians did so. You find the custom, as old as the Pen of Herodotus
can carry it. It Is confirmed by Pausanias, and by Diodorus Siculus. A whole Army
of Authors, besides Doughty, have related this, and asserted it. I will only
bring in Festus, to Speak for them all: Deci^na quaeque Veteres Dijs Suis
offerebant. Christian, Will thou Do less for thy GOD, than the Poor Perishing
Pagans did for Theirs? Oh! Tell it not! -- But this I will tell; That they who
have conscientiously Employed their Tenths in Pious Uses, have usually been
Blessed in their Estates, with a very Remarkable Providence of God. The
Blessing has been sometimes Delayed, with some Trial of their Patience: Not for
any Injustice in their Hands; Their Prayer has been Pure. And their Faith of
the Future State has been sometimes tried, by their Meeting with some Losses,
and some Disappointments. But then, their Little has been so Blessed, as to be
still a Competency; and God has Blessed them with so much Contentation in it,
that it has yielded more unto them, than the much of many others. And very
often, I say, very often, they have been Rewarded with a strange Success, and
Increase of their Estates; even in this World, seen the Fulfillment of that
Word; Cast thy Grain into the moist Ground; for thou shall find it after many
Days. And that word; Honor the Lord with thy Substance; so shall thy Barns be
filled with Plenty. History has given us many and charming Examples, of those,
who have had their Conscientious Decimations Followed and Rewarded with a
Surprising Prosperity of their Affairs; And small Mechanics, or Husbandmen,
have Risen to Estates, which once they never durst have dreamed of. The
Excellent Gouge, in his Treatise Entitled, The Surest and Safest way of
Thriving, has collected some such Examples. The Jewish Proverb, Decima, ut
Dives fias; or, Tithe and be Rich! would be oftener verified, if oftener
Practiced. Prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not pour
out a Blessing upon you! But let the Demand of Liberal Things grow upon you. A
Tenth, I have called, The Least. For some, it is much Too Little. Men of great
Estates, that would not Sow for their Flesh, and rea^ Corruption, May and will
often go beyond a Decimation. Some of them rise to a Fifth; and the Religious
Countess of Warwick, would not stop at any thing short of a Third. The
Gentlemen my Readers, will Excuse me, if I carry them no Higher, and say
nothing to them, of a Joannes Bleemosynarius, who annually made a Distribution
of all to Pious Uses; and having made even with his Revenues, then said, I
bless God that I have now nothing left, but my Lord and Master CHRIST, whom I
long to be withal, and whom I can with unentangled Wings now fly unto! Yet I
will mention to them the Example of some Eminent Merchants, who have set their
Estates at a Moderate and Competent Elevation, and Resolved, They would never
be any Richer than That. They have carried on a Great and Quick Trade; but what
ever Gain carried their Estates beyond the Set Sum, they Devoted it all to
Pious Uses. And were any of them, ever Losers? Never one of them! The Christian
Emperor Tiberius 2. was famous for his Religious Bounties; His Empress thought
him even Profuse, in them. He told her, He should never want Money so long as
in Obedience to the Command of a Glorious Christ, he did Supply the Necessities
of the Poor, and abound in such Religious Bounties. Once, immediately after he
had made a Liberal Distribution, he unexpectedly found a mighty Treasure; and
there were Tidings also brought him, of the Death of a Man vastly Rich, who had
bequeathed all his Wealth unto him. Lesser men can tell very many, and very
taking Stories of this Importance, even from their own happy Experience. I
cannot forbear Transcribing some Lines of my Honored Gouge on this occasion.

I am verily Persuaded, that there is Seldom any Man, who gives to the Poor
Proportionably to what God has bestowed on him, but if he does observe the
Passages of Gods Providence toward him, he shall find the same Doubled and
Redoubled upon him in Temporal Blessings. I dare challenge all the World, to
give one Instance, (or at least any considerable Number of Instances) of any
Merciful Man, whose Charity has undone him. But, as Living Wells, the more they
are Drawn, the more freely they Spring and Flow; so the Substance of Charitable
Men, does oftentimes Multiply in the very Distribution; Even as the Five Loaves
and Few Fishes did multiply in their Breaking and Distributing; and the Widows
Oil increased by the pouring it out.

I will add a consideration, wherein, methinks, common Humanity should be
sensible of a Provocation. Let Rich Men who are not Rich toward God,
especially such as have no Children of their own, to make the Heirs of their
Hoarded Riches, consider the vile Ingratitude, which the Forks that come after
them, will treat them, withal. Sirs, They will hardly allow you a Tombstone;
And, wallowing in the Wealth which you have left, (but they complain, that you
left it no sooner unto them) they will only play upon your Memory, squib upon
your Husbandry, ridicule all your Parsimony! How much more Wisdom, would it be,
for you to Do Good with your Estates while you Live; and at your Death do That,
which may Embalm your Name to Posterity in this World, and be for your
Advantage in that which you are going unto! That your Souls may Dwell in all
the Ease and Good of the Paradisian Reflections, at the Time, when others
Inherit what you leave unto them.

I only now annex the complement of one to his Friend, upon his Accession to an
Estate; Much Good may it do you; that is, Much Good may you do with it.

I hope, we are now Ready for PROPOSALS. We shall Set our selves, To Devise
Liberal Things.

Gentlemen, It is of old said, Res est Sacra Miser. To Relieve the Necessities
of the Poor [Non Pavistis, occidistis;] this is a thing Acceptable to the
Compassionate God; who has given to You, what He might have given to Them; and
has given it unto You that you might have the Honor and Pleasure to Impart it
unto them: And who has told you, He that has Pity on the Poor, Lends unto the
Lord. The more you consider the Command and Image of a Glorious CHRIST in what
you do this way, the more Assurance you have, that in the Day of God, you shall
joyfully hear Him Saying, You have done it unto me! And the more Humble,
Silent, Reserved Modesty you express, concealing even from the Loft Hand what
is done with the Right, the more you are Assured of, A Great Reward in the
Heavenly World. Such Liberal men, it is observed, are usually Long-Lived Men.
Fructus Liberat Arborem. And at last, they pass from this unto Everlasting Life.

The Name of a LADY, what is it in the Original Sense of the Word? It was
first, Leafdian, then Lafdy: from Leaf, or Laf, which Signifies, A Loaf of
Bread. And from D'ian to Serve. As much as to say, One who distributes Bread.
The true LADY, is one who feeds the Poor, and makes agreeable Distributions to
their Indigencies. In the Days of Primitive Christianity, the Ladies of the
best Quality, would Seek and Find out the Sick and Visit the Hospitals, and see
what Help they wanted; and help them with an admirable Alacrity. The Mother,
and the Sister of Nazianzen, what a Good Report have they obtained from his
Pen, for their unwearied Bounties to the Poor? Empresses themselves have
Stouped, and they never Looked so Great, as in their Stouping, to relieve the
Miserable;

-- And when they Stoup'd, it was to do
Some Good to others. Angels, they do so!
When you keep your Days of Prayers, now is a Special Season for your Alms:
That your Prayers may go up with your Alms, as a Memorial before the Lord.
Verily, There are Prayers in Alms. And, Is not this the Fast that I have
Chosen, says the Lord: The Note of the Beggar among the Jews was, Deser^e
Something by me. Among us, it may be, Obtain Something by me.

There is a City in the World, where every House has a Box hanging in a Chain,
on which is Written, Think on the Poor; and they commonly conclude no Bargain,
but more or less is put into the Box. The Deacons have the Key, and once a
Quarter go round the City, and take out the Money. When that City was like to
have been lost; One who was not the best man in the World, yet could say, That
he was of Opinion, God would preserve that City from being Destroyed, if it
were only for the Great Charity they Express to the Poor. It Is the Richest City
of the Richest Country, for its Bigness, that ever was in the World. A City
that it is thought, spends yearly in Charitable Uses, more than all the
Revenues which the whole Fine Country of the Grand Duke of Tuscany brings in to
the Arbitrary Master of it. You know, Manus Pauperum est Christi Gazophylacium.

When you Dispense your Alms, unto the Poor, who know, what it is to Pray, you
may oblige them to Pray for you by Name every Day. It Is an Excellent Thing to
have, The Blessing of them that have been Ready to Perish, thus coming upon
you. Behold, A Surprising Sense in which you may be, Praying always. You are
so, even while you are Sleeping, if those whom you have so obliged are thus
Praying for you! And Now, Look for the Accomplishment of that word; Blessed is
he that considers the Poor; The Lord will Preserve him and Keep him Alive; and
he shall be blessed on the Earth.

Very often your Alms are dispersed among such as very much need Admonitions of
Piety to accompany them. Cannot you contrive, to intermix a Spiritual Charity,
with your Temporal? Perhaps you may Discourse with them about the State of
their Souls, and obtain from them, which you now have a Singular Advantage to
do, some Declared Resolutions to Do what they ought to do. Or else you may
convey Little Books unto them, which certainly they will Promise to Read, when
you thus bespeak their doing so.

Charity to the Souls of Men, is undoubtedly the Highest and the Noblest
Charity, and of the greatest Consequence. To furnish the Poor with Catechisms,
and Bibles, is to do an unknown Deal of Good unto them. To Publish and Scatter
Books of Piety, and to put into the Hands of Mankind such Treatises of Divinity
as may have a Tendency to make them Wiser or Better; no man knows what Good he
does in doing such things! It was exellently done of some Good men, who, a
little while ago were at the Charge of Printing Thirty Thousand of the, Alarm
to the Unconverted, written by Joseph Allein, to be all given away unto such as
would promise to Read it. A man of no great Estate has before now with no great
Trouble, given away the best part of a Thousand Books of Piety, Every year for
many years together. Who can tell, but with the Expense of less than a
Shilling, Sir, you may Convert a Sinner from the Error of his way, and Save a
Soul from Death! A worse Doom, than a, Damnatio ad metalla, is upon the Soul,
who had rather hoard up his Money, than Employ it on such a Charity.

He that Supports the Office of the Evangelical Ministry, Supports a Good Work;
and performs One; yea, at the Second Hand performs what is done by the skilful,
faithful, painful Minister, and that is many an one. The Encouraged Servant of
the Lord, will do the more Good, for your Assistences, It Is done for a Glorious
CHRIST, what you have done for him; and in Consideration of the Glorious Gospel
Preached by him. And you shall Receive a Prophets Reward! Luther Said, Si quid
Scholasticis confers, Deo ipsi Contulisti. It Is more Sensibly So, when the
Scholars are become Godly and Useful Preachers.

I have read this Passage, It was for several years, the Practice of a Worthy
Gentleman, in Renewing his Leases, instead of making it a Condition, that his
Tenants should keep an Hawk or a Dog for him, to oblige them, that they should
keep a Bible in their Houses, for themselves, and should bring up their
Children to Read and be Catechized. Land lords, It Is worth your Considering,
whether you may not in your Leases, insert some Clauses, that may Serve the
Kingdom of God. You are his Tenants, in those very Freeholds, where you are
Land lords to other men! Oblige your Tenants to Worship God in their Families.

To take a Poor Child, especially an Orphan, Left in Poverty, and bestow an
Education upon it, especially if it be a Liberal Education, is an admirable,
and a complicated Charity; yea, it may draw on a long Train of Good, and
interest you in all the Good that shall be done by those whom you have Educated

Hence also what is done for Schools, and for Colleges, and for Hospitals, is
done for a General Good. The Endowing of these, or the Maintaining of them, is,
At once to Do Good unto many.

But, alas, how much of the Silver and Gold in the World, is buried in Hands,
where it is little better than conveyed back to the Mines from whence it came?
Or Employed unto as little purpose, as what arrives at Indostan, where a large
part of the Silver and Gold of the World, is after a Circulation carried as
unto a Fatal Center, and by the Moguls lodged in Subserraneous Caves, never to
see the light any more. Talia non facit bonae Fidei ac spei Christianus.

Sometimes there may be got ready for the Press, Elaborate Composures, of Great
Bulk, and Greater Worth, by which the best Interests of Knowledge and Virtue,
may be considerably Served in the World; [Perhaps, what may be called, as the
Ostapla of Origin was, Opus Ecclesiae:] they ly like the impotent Man at the
Pool of Bethesda; and there they are like to ly, till God inspire Some Wealthy
Persons, to Subscribe nobly for their Publication, and by this Generous
Application of their Wealth to bring them abroad* The Names of such Noble
Benefactors to Mankind, ought to Live, as long as the Works themselves; where
the Works do any Good, what these have done toward the Publishing of them,
Ought to be told for a Memorial of them.

Yea, I will carry the matter further than so. The Saying may seem to carry
some Affront in it; Idle Gentlemen and Idle Beggars, are the Posts of the
Common Wealth. But they that are offended must quarrel with the Ashes of a
Bishop. It Was Dr. Sandersons. Will you then think, Sirs, of some Honorable and
Agreeable Employments? I will mention one. The Pythagoreans forbad men's eating
their own Brains; or keeping their good Thoughts to themselves. It Is an
Observation of the Incomparable Boil, That as to Religious Books in general, it
has been Observed, That those Penned by Lay men, and especially Gentlemen, have
(Caeteris Paribus) been better Entertained, and more Effectual than those of
Ecclesiastics. We all know, His own were so. It is no rare thing for Men of
Quality, to accomplish themselves in Languages and Sciences, until they have
been Prodigies of Literature. Their Libraries too, have been Stupendous
Collections; approaching toward Vatican or Bodleian Dimensions. An English
Gentleman has been sometimes the most Accomplished Thing in the whole World.
How many of these (besides a Leigh, a Wolsely, or a Polhil,) have been
Benefactors to Mankind by their incomparable Writings? It were mightily to be
wished, That Rich Men, and Persons of an Elevated Condition, would Qualify
themselves, for the use of the Pen, as well as of the Sword; and by their Pen
deserve to have it said of them, They have Written Excellent things. An English
Person of Quality in a Book of his Entitled, A View of the Soul, has a
Passage, which I will Address you with. Says he, It is certainly, the Highest
Dignity, if not the Greatest Happiness, Humane Nature is capable of, here in
the vale below, to have the Soul so far enlightened as to become the Mirror, or
Conduit, or Conveyer of Gods Truth to others. It is an Ill Motto for Men of
Capacity, My Understanding is Unfruitful, Gentlemen, Consider what Subjects may
most Properly and Usefully fall under your Cultivation. Your Pen will Stab
Atheism and Wickedness, with an Efficacy beyond other men's: If out of your
Tribe there come those who handle the Pen of the Writer, they will do uncommon
Execution. One of them has ingeniously told you; Though I know some Functions,
yet I know no Truths of Religion, like the Show bread; Matthew. 12.4 only for the
Priests.

I will address you, with one PROPOSAL, more. It Is, That you would [As Ambrosius
had his Origin,] wisely choose a Friend of Shining Abilities, of Hearty
Affections, and of Excellent Piety: A Minister of such a Character, if it may
be. And Entreat him, yea, Oblige him, to Study for you, and Suggest to you,
Opportunities to Do Good: make him, as I may say, your Monitor. Let him Advise
you from time to time, what Good you may do. Cause him to see, that he never
gratifies you more, than by his Advice upon this Incention. If a David have a
Seer to do such a Good Office for him, and be on the Look out for to find out
what Good he may do, what Services may be done for the Temple of God in the
World*

There seems no Need of adding any thing but this. When Gentlemen occasionally
come together, why should not their Conversation be agreeable to their
Superior Quality? Methinks they should reckon it beneath People of their
Quality to Employ their Conversation with one another on trifling
Impertinencies; or at such a rate, that if their Discourse were taken down in
shorthand by one behind the Hangings, they would blush to have it Repeated unto
them. Nihil sed Nugae, et Risus, et verba proferuntur in ventum. Sirs, It
becomes a Gentleman, to Entertain his Company, with the Finest Thoughts, on the
Finest Themes! But certainly, there cannot be any Subject so worthy of a
Gentleman as this; What Good there is to be done in the World? Were this noble
Subject oftener Started in the Conversation of Gentlemen, an incredible Deal of
Good would be done.

I will conclude with Saying, you must come forth to any Public Service
whereof you may be capable, when you are called unto it. Honest Jeans has a
Pungent Passage; The World applauds the Politic Retiredness of those that bury
their Parts and Gifts, in an obscure Privacy, though both from God and Man, they
have a fair call to Public Employment; But the terrible censure of these men
by Christ at the last Day, will discover them to be the arrantest Fools, that
ever were upon the Face of the Earth. That Fault of not Employing ones Parts
for the Public, One calls, A Great Sacrilege in the Temple of the God of
Nature. It was a Sad Age, wherein Tacitus tells, Inertia fuit Sapientia.

20. YOu may Remember, That One of the First of our PROPOSALS was, For EVERY
ONE, to consider, What is there that I may do for the Service of God, and the
Welfare of Man? It Is to be Expected, That all OFFICERS, As such, will conform,
to what has been thus Proposed. It should be the concern of all Officers, from
the Emperor to the Enomotarch, To do all the Good they can. So then, there is
the less Need of making a more Particular Application to Lesser Officers of
several Sorts, who have Opportunities to Do Good, more or less, in every one of
their hands. However, they shall not All of them, complain that we have
Neglected them.

In the CHURCH, sometimes there are Elders, (as in the Primitive Times,
Ecclesia Seniores habuit,) who Rule well, though they Labor not in the Word and
Doctrine. It becomes these often to consider; What shall I do, to prevent the
rise of Strife, or of any Sin, that may be a Root of Bitterness in the Flock?
And, that Christ, and Holiness may Reign in it; and the Pastor have his
Ministry Countenanced, Encouraged, and Prospered? Their Visits of the Flock,
and their Endeavors to Prepare People for Special Ordinances, may be of
unknown Advantage to Religion.

There are Deacons, Entrusted with the Temporal Affairs of the Society. It
would be well, if these would oftener consider; What may I do, that the Treasury
of Christ may be increased? And, What may I do, that the Life of my faithful
Pastor may be more comfortable to him! And, whom of the Flock do I think
defective in their Contributions to Support the Evangelical Interests, and what
shall I Speak with Great Boldness in the Faith unto them?

In the STATE, there are many Officers, to whom the most Significant and
Comprehensive PROPOSAL, that can be made, would be, To Consider their OATHS?
If they would Seriously Ponder, and faithfully Perform, what their Oaths,
oblige 'em to, a Deal of Good would be done.

But we must a little Particularize.

The Representatives of any Place; as they have Opportunities to Do Good for
the whole People; and should accordingly think, What Motions to make? So they
should be Particularly Sollicitous for the Good of that Place, which has
Elected them.

Those whom we call, The Select-men of a Town, will fail a just Expectation, if
they do not inquisitively consider this Point; What shall I do, that I may be a
Blessing to the Town, which I am now to Serve?

Grand-Iury-men, may very profitably Consider; What Growing Evils or Nuisance,
do I discover, whereof I shall do well to Procure a Presentation? They should
hold their Consultations, upon this matter, as Men in Earnest for the Good of
the Country.

Indeed, all Jurymen should be, Boni Homines, that is to Say, Good Men. Our
Old Compellation of a Neighbor, by the Title, of, Goodman, was of this
Original; As much as to say, One Qualified to Serve on a Jury. But then, let
them Do Good; and Contrive, How they may do it.

Why should Constables be Excused! Their Name, [Constabularius] first came,
from the care of Making unruly Horses to Stand well together in the Stable.
Sirs, It Is very much Good that you have to do, by being Masters of Restraint, in
your Walks, and otherwise, unto unruly Cattle. What are Vicious People, (though
Perhaps in Honor,) but like the Beasts? Well-disposed Constables in a Place,
have done wondrous Things, to keep up Good Order in it. Your Thoughts on, What
Good may I do? And, your Consultations, I beseech you!

And where Tithing-men are Chosen and Sworn, it is more than a little Good,
which they may do, if they will conscientiously do their Duty. Let them Study
well the Laws, which lay down their Duty; and let them also often Consider,
What Good may I do? And consult with one another at certain times, to find out
what they have to do, and assist and strengthen one another, in the doing of it.

I have done with the Civil List.

Military Commanders, have their Opportunities to Do Good. They do it very
much, when they uphold Exercises of Piety, in their several Regiments and
Companies. And when they Rebuke the Vices of the Camp, with a due Severity.
Might not Societies to Suppress those Vices, be formed in the Camp, to very
Good Purpose, under their Inspection? -- But if the Soldiers ask, What shall
we do? All my Answer at present, is only; Sirs, Consider what you have to do.

Commanders at Sea, have their Opportunities too. The more Absolute they are in
their Command, the Greater their Opportunities. The Worship of God Seriously
and Constantly Maintained aboard, will be of Good consequence. A Body of Good
Orders, hung up in the Steeridge, and carefully Executed, may prove that which
all the People of the Vessel may at last see cause to be very thankful for.
Books of Piety should also be taken aboard, and the men be called upon to
Retire for the Perusal thereof, and for other Pious Actions.

But while our Book seems to have so far discharged its Office and Purpose of,
A Counselor, as to leave no further Expectations, there Present themselves a
Considerable Number of Persons, who may justly Complain of it, if among
PROPOSALS to Do Good, they be left Unconsidered. Some whom we do not find among
them that Addressed the Blessed Morning Star of our Savior, for his Direction,
yet are now found among those who Enquire; And what shall we do? The Gentlemen
of the LAW, who have that in their hands, the End whereof is, To Do Good; and
the Perversion of which from its Professed End, is one of the Worst of Evils.

Gentlemen, Your Opportunities to Do Good, are such, and so Liberal, and
Gentlemanly, is your Education, [For even for the Common Pleaders at the Bar, I
hope, that Maxim of the Law, will not be forgotten; Dignitas Advocatorum non
patitur ut in ea^m recipiatur, qui antea fuerat Vilioris Conditionis:] that
PROPOSALS of what you may do, cannot but Promise themselves an Obliging
Reception with you. It Is not come to so sad a pass, That an Honest Lawyer, may
as of old, the Honest Publican, require a Statue, merely on the Score of
Rarity. You may, if you Study it, come to do so, on the Score of Universal and
Meritorious Usefulness.

In order to your being Useful, Sirs, it is necessary that you be Skilful. And
that you may arrive to an Excellent Skill in the Law, you will be well advised,
what Authors to Study; With the Well-advised in this Point, there may be more
than a little Wisdom. The Knowledge of your own Statute Law, is incontestably
needful; and so, of the Common Law, which continually must accompany the
Execution of it. Here (besides needful Dictionaries) you have your Cooks, and
your Vaughans, and your Windgates, and your Daltons, and your Kebles; and as
many more, as you have Time to Converse withal. I am sorry to find a Gentleman
about the middle of the former Century Complaining about the English Law, That
the Books of it cannot be Read over, under Three or Four Years, with any
Deliberation; and that at an ordinary rate they Cost above Twenty Pounds. I do
not propound so long and hard a Task. For the Civil Law must also be known by
them that would be well acquainted with Legal Proceedings. Volumns, huge ones
and Cartloads of them, have been Written upon it; but among all these, methinks
at least those two little ones; the Enchiridion of Corvinus, and Arthur Ducks
Treatise, De usu et Authoritate Juris Civilis; ought to be Consulted, yea,
Digested, by one that would not be an Ignoramus. I will be yet a little more
free, in declaring my Opinion. Had I Learning enough to manage a Cause of that
nature, I should be very ready to maintain it at any Bar in the World, That
there never was known under the Cope of Heaven, a more Learned man, than the
Incomparable ALSTEDIUS. He has Written on every one of the Subjects in the
whole Circle of Learning, as Accurately and as Exquisitely as those men, who
have spent all their Lives in Cultivating but any one of the Subjects. The only
Reason, why his Composures are no more Esteemed, is, the Pleonasm of his Worth,
and their Deserving so much Esteem. To hear some Silly and Flashy men, with a
Scornful Sneer talk as if they had sufficiently done his Business, by a Foolish
Pun of, All Is Tedious, is to see the Ungrateful and Exalted Folly of the World;
for, Conciseness is one of his Peculiar Excellencies; They might more justly
call him any thing than Tedious. This Digression only serves to introduce a
Recommendation of this Excellent man's, Jarisprudentia, as one of the best
Things a Lawyer can be acquainted withal. I shall wrong it, if I say, It Is Much
in a Little; I must say, It Is All at Once.

A Lawyer should be a Scholar. It Vexes one, that the Emperor Justinian, whose
Name is now upon the Laws of the Roman Empire, (because 'twas by his Order
Tribonian made his Hasty, and some say Fallacious and Unfaithful Collection of
them, from the Two Thousand Volumns, into which they had been growing for above
a Thousand Years:) is by Suidas called, (...), One that scarce knew his
Alphabet. It is a Vexation to find Accursius, one of the First Glossators on
the Laws, fall into so many Gross mistakes, through his Ignorance; and unable to
afford, when a Sentence of Greek occurs in the Text, any better Gloss than
this; Haec Graica sunt, quae nec Legi, nec intelligi Possunt. Though the thing
were a Trifle, it was no honor unto those Writers on the Pandect, that they
knew not what Gender the Name was of. It is odd, that when one Title of the Law
is, Of the Signification of words, the great Interpreter of it, should leave it
as a Maxim, De Verbebus non curat Juris Consultus. However, a Bartolus has not
so Roughen'd your Study, as a Budaeas has Polished it.

But, Sirs, When you are called upon to be Wise, the main Intention is, That
you may be wise to do Good. Without a Disposition for this, Does not their
Excellency which is in them go away? They Die even without Wisdom. A Foundation
of Piety must be first laid; An Inviolable Respect unto the Holy and Just and
Good Laws of the Infinite GOD. This must be the Rule of all your Actions; and
it must particularly Regulate your Practice of the Law. You are sensible, that
it was ever the Style of the Civil Law, to begin, A Deo Optimo Maximo. Nor was
it unusual for the Instruments of the Law, to begin with Rgr;, the two first
Letters, abbreviating the Name of PISTOC, for which the Notaries have
ignorantly Substituted an [X.P.] of later Times. The Life of the Lawyer should
have its beginning there, and be carried on with an Eye thither. The Old Saxon
Laws, had the TEN Great Precepts of the Decalogue prefixed in the Front of
them: Ten Words, in two Tables of infinitely more Account than the Famous
Twelve Tables, that were so admired by Tully, and by other Antiquity; in the
Fragments whereof collected by your Balduin and others, there are yet some
things horribly Unrighteous and Barbarous. These are to be the First Laws with
you: and as all the Laws that are contrary to these, are ipso facto null and
void; So in the Practice of the Law, every thing that is Disallowed by these,
is to be avoided. The man whom the Scripture calls, A Lawyer, was a Karaite, or
one who kept close to the Written Law of God, in opposition to the Pharisee,
and the Traditionist. I know not why every Lawyer, should not still be in the
best sense, a Karaite. By Expressing a Reverence for the Divine Law, both that
of Reason, and that of superadded Gospel, you will Do Good in the world, beyond
what you can imagine. You will Redeem your honorable Profession from the wrong
which Ill Men have done to the Reputation of it; And you will obtain another
Patronage for it, than what the Satyr in the Idle Story of your Saint Evona has
assigned it.

Your Celebrated Ulpian, wrote Seven Books, to show the several Punishments,
which ought to be inflicted on Christians. It is to be hoped, that you will
invent as many Services to be done unto the Cause of Christianity; Services to
be done for the Kingdom of your Savior; and Methods to demonstrate your own
being among the Best of Christians.

I am not sure, our Tertullian was the Gentleman of that Name, who has some
Consulta in the Roman Digesta: Some writers of his Life (as well as Grotius)
will not have it so. Yet Eusebius tells us, he was well skilled in the Roman
Laws. And in his Writings you have many Law-terms; particularly, Prescriptions
(the Title of his Treatises against Heretics) were, as we learn from
Quintilian and others, the Replies of Defendents, to the Actions of the
Plaintiffs. I propose, That others of the Faculty, Study all possible
Prescriptions against them, who would hurt Christianity, and Apologies for the
Church and Cause of our Savior. But, Sirs, It must first of all be done, in
your own Virtuous, Exact, Upright Conduct, under all Temptations.

The Miscarrriages of some Individuals, must not bring a Blemish, on a Noble
and Useful Profession.

But many will be ready enough, to allow of a Censure occurring in a late Book
Entitled, Examen Miscellaneum: (and I know scarce any thing else worth Quoting
from it:) A Lawyer that is a Knave, deserves Death, more than a Band of
Robbers; for he Profanes the Sanctuary of the Distressed, and Betrays the
Liberties of the People. Toward off such a Censure, a Lawyer must shun all
those Indirect Ways of Making Have to be Rich, in which a man cannot be
Innocent: Such as provoked the Father of Sir Matthew Hale, to give over the
Practice of the Law, because of the Extreme Difficulty to preserve a Good
Conscience in it. Sir, Be prevailed withal, to keep constantly a Court of
Chancery in your own Breast; and Scorn and Fear to do any thing, but what your
Conscience will pronounce, Consistent with, yea, Conducing to, Glory to God in
the Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward men. The very Nature of your
Business, leads you to Meditations on a Judgment to come. Oh! That you would so
Realize and Antedate that Judgment, as to do nothing, but what you may verily
Believe, will be approved in it!

This Piety must Operate very particularly, in the Pleading of Causes. You will
abhor, Sir, to appear in a Dirty Cause. If you discern, that your Client has an
Unjust Cause, you will faithfully advise him of it. Utrum Fallacijs et
Deceptionibus ad Convincendum Adversarium uti Liceat? This is the Question. It Is
to be hoped, That you have determined it like an Honest Man. You will be
Sincerely desirous, Truth and Right may take place. You will speak nothing that
shall be to the Prejudice of Either. You will abominate the use of all unfair
Arts, to Confound Evidences, to Browbeat Testimonies, to Suppress what may give
Light in the Case. You have nothing against that old Rule of Pleading a Cause;
Cognita Iniquitate, a Suscepto Ejus Patrocinio Advocatus desistere debet.

I Remember Schusterus, a Famous Lawyer and Counselor, who Died at Heidelberg,
A. C. 1672. had one admirable stroke in his Epitaph;

Morti proximus Vocem emisit;
Nihil se unquam suasisse consilio,
Cujus jam jam Moriturum peniteret.
A Lawyer who can go out of the world with such Expressions, were a greater
Blessing to the World, than can be Expressed.

I cannot Encourage any Gentleman, to spend much Time in the Study of the
Canon Law: which Baptista a Sancto Blasio, finds to Contradict the Civil Law in
Two Hundred Instances. The Decrees, and the Decretals, and the Clementines and
Extravagants, which Compose the hideous Volumns of that Law, would compel any
Wise man, to make the Apology, that one such made, for his Aversion thereunto;
Non possum, Domine, vesci stercore humano. Agrippa, who was a Doctor thereof,
said of that Law, It Is neither of God, nor for Him; Nothing but Corruption
invented it; Nothing but Avarice has Practiced it. Luther began the Reformation
with Burning of it. Nevertheless, there is one Point in the Canon Law much
insisted on, which well deserves very much of your Consideration; That is,
Restitution. When men Get Riches and not by Right, or have heaped up Wealth in
any Dishonest and Criminal ways, a Restitution will be a Necessary and
Essential Ingredient of that Repentance, which alone will find Acceptance with
Heaven. The Awe of this Thought may stand like an Angel with a Drawn Sword in
your way, when you may be under Temptation to go out of your way after the
Wages of Unrighteousness. Our Law was once given unto us in French. Many of
you, Gentlemen, ken the Modern French as well as the Ancient. Monsier Placette
has given you a Valuable Treatise, of Restitution. In his Treatise, there is a
Chapter, Des cas ou les Advocats sont obliges a Restituer. In that Chapter
there are some who will find a sad Bill of Costs Taxed for them. And among
other very true Assertions, this is one; S'il Exige une Recompense Excessive et
disproportionee a ce qu'il fait, il est oblige a Restituer ce qu'il prend de
trop. In plain English; Excessive Fees must be disgorged by Restitution. It
should be thought upon.

There has been an old Complaint, That a Good Lawyer seldom is a Good
Neighbor. You know how to Confute it, Gentlemen, by making your Skill in the
Law, a Blessing to your Neigbourhood. It was affirmed and foretold as long ago
as old Sallust; Sine Considicis satis faelices olim fuere, futuraeque sunt
urbes. You may, Gentlemen, if you please, be a vast Accession to the Felicity
of your Countries.

You shall have some of my PROPOSALS for it, in an Historical Exhibition. In
the Life of Mr. John Cotton, there is related this Passage concerning his
Father, who was a Lawyer

That worthy man was very Singular, in Two most Imitable Practices. One was,
That when any of his Neighbors, desirous to Sue one another, addressed him for
Counsel, it was his manner, in the most Persuasive and Obliging Terms that
could be, to Endeavor a Reconciliation between both Parties; Preferring the
Consolations of a Peacemaker, before all the Fees that he might have got, by
blowing up of Differences. Another was, That Every Night, it was his Custom to
Examine himself, with Reflections on the Transactions of the Day past; wherein
if he found, that he had not either Done Good unto others, or Got Good unto his
own Soul, he would be as much Grieved, as ever the Famous Titus was, when he
could Complain in the Evening, Amici, Diem perdidi.

What a Noble Thing would it be for you, to find out Oppressed Widows, and
Orphans, and such as can appear no otherwise than, In forma Pauperis; Objects
in whose Oppression, Might overcomes Right; and Generously Plead their Cause?
Deliver the Poor and Needy, rid them out of the hand of the Wicked. It will be
a Glorious and a Godlike Action!

Wealthy People going to make their Wills, often ask your Advice. You may take
the Opportunity to Advise them, unto such Liberalities upon Pious Uses, as may
greatly advance the Kingdom of God in the World.

And, when you have an Opportunity by Law to Rescue, The Things that are God's,
from the Sacrilegious Hands of the men that would Rob God, it is to be hoped,
you will do it with all possible Generosity and Alacrity.

O Excellent Imitation of our Glorious ADVOCATE in the Heavens!

Is there nothing to be mended in the Laws? Perhaps, you may discover many
things yet wanting in the Laws; Mischiefs in the Execution and Application of
the Laws, which ought to be better provided against; Mischiefs annoying of
Mankind, against which no Laws are yet provided. The Reformation of the Law,
and more Law for the Reformation of the World, is what is mightily called for.
I don't say, The Laws can be so Reduced, that like those of Geneva, Five Sheets
of Paper may hold them all; but certainly the Laws may be so Corrected, that
the World may more Sensibly and Generally feel the Benefit of them. If some
Lawyers that are Men of an Excellent spirit, would Employ their Thoughts this
way, and bring their Thoughts to pass in a Parlaimentary way, all the World
might fare the better for them. An Honest Gentleman more than Fifty Years ago,
wrote an, Examen Legum Angliae, worthy to be taken at this Day, into your
Consideration.

Your Learning often Qualifies you to Write Excellent Things, not only in your
own Profession, but also on all the Entertaining and Edifying Themes in the
World. The Books that have been Written by Learned Lawyers, would for Number
almost Equal an Alexandrian Library. Judge by a Freherus's Catalogues, or, by a
Pryns Performances. What Rare and Rich Books, have been Written by an Hale, by
a Grotius, and by a Solden? Sirs, You may Plead the Cause of Religion, and of
the Reformation, by your well-directed Pens; and you may do Innumerable
Services. There is one at this Day, who in his, History of the Apostles Creed,
and his Accounts of the Primitive Church, has Obliged us to say, That he has
offered as a KING to the Temple of the King of Heaven. May the Lord his God
Accept him!

I must now break off.

If you be called, Sir, to the Administration of Justice, in the Quality of a
Judge, you will prescribe to your self Rules, like those, which the Renowned
Lord Chief Justice Hale, so Religiously observed, as to become a bright Example
for all that Sit in the Seat of Judicature. The Sum of his, were;

That Justice be administered, Uprightly, Deliberately, Resolutely.

That I rest not on my own Understanding, but implore the Direction of GOD.

That in the Execution of Justice, I carefully lay aside my own Passions, and
not give way to them, however provoked.

That I be wholly Intent on the Business I am about.

That I suffer not my self to be Prepossessed with any Judgment at all, till
all the Business, and both Parties are heard.

Of such Methods, to Do Good, and Serve the Cause of Righteousness, and bring
on the Promised Age, wherein the People shall be Righteous, the very least of
all the Glorious Recompenses, will be the Establishment of your Profession, in
such a Reputation, as very many Incomparable Persons in it have deserved; and
the most Prejudiced People in the world, Enquiring after the Blemishes of it,
must be forced only to bring in an, Ignoramus.

21. REforming-Societies, or Societies for the Suppression of Disorders, have
begun to grow somewhat into Fashion; and it is one of the best Omens that the
World has upon it. Behold, how great a Matter a little of this Heavenly Fire
may Kindle! Five or Six Gentlemen in London, began with an Heroic Resolution,
and Association, to Encounter the Torrent of Wickedness, which was carrying all
before it in the Nation. More were soon added unto them; and though they met with
great Opposition, from Wicked Spirits, and these Incarnate as well as
Invisible, and some in High Places too, yet they proceeded with a most
honorable and invincible Courage. Their Success, if not proportionable to
their Courage, yet was far from Contemptible. In the Punishments inflicted on
them who transgressed the Laws of Good Morality, there were soon offered many
Thousands of Sacrifices, unto the Holiness of GOD. Hundreds of Houses which
were the Chambers of Hell, and the Scandals of Earth, were soon Extinguished.
There was a Remarkable Check soon given to raging Profanity; and the Lord's Day
was not openly and horribly Profaned as formerly. And among other Essays to Do
Good, they Scattered Thousands of Good Books, that had a Tendency to Reform the
Evil Manners of the People. It was not long before this Excellent Example was
followed in other parts of the British Empire. Virtuous men of diverse
Qualities and Persuasions, became the Members of the Societies: Persons High
and Low, Con and Non-con, United; the Union became Formidable to the Kingdom of
Darkness. The Report of the Societies flew over the Seas; the Pattern was
followed in other Country's; Men of Wisdom in Remote Parts of Europe have made
their joyful Remark upon them, That they cause Unspeakable Good, and annunciate
a more illustrious State of the Church of God, which is to be Expected, in the
Conversion of Jews and Gentiles. America too, begins to be Irradiated with them!

I will Recite an Account formerly offered unto the Public, of what may be
done by such Societies.

What incredible Advantages would arise unto Religion, from
Reforming-Societies, if the Disposition to them should not fall under unhappy
Languishments? And if Religion flourish, and Iniquity dare no longer show its
Head, what Prosperity of every Kind, and in every Thing, would be the
Consequence: A small Society may prove an Incomparable and Invaluable Blessing
to a Town, whose Welfare shall become the Object of their Watchful Enquiries:
They may be as a Garrison to defend it from the worst of its Enemies: They may
quickly render it, A Mountain of Holiness, and a Dwelling of Righteousness,
that shall Enjoy the most Gracious Presence of the Lord. The Society may do
Considerable things toward the Execution of Wholesome Laws, whereby Vice is to
be discouraged. Offenders against those Laws may be kept under such a Vigilant
Inspection, that they shall not escape a due Chastisement for their Offenses.
The Effects of such a Chastisement may be, that the Rebuked and Censured
Sinners will be Reclamed from their Sins; or, however, the Judgments of God,
which would break forth where such things are Indulged, will be Diverted. Vbi
Judicium, ibi non est Judicium. Swearing and Cursing will not infect the Air;
Men will not Reel along the Streets, turned into Swine by their Cups. The Cages
of Unclean Birds will be dissipated. They whom Idleness renders Dead while they
Live, will have an Honest Employment ordered for them, whereby they may Earn an
Honest Livelihood And the Lord's Day will Visibly be kept Holy to the Lord;
which one thing will soon Irradiate a Place, with a most lovely Holiness and
Happiness. Vice is a Cowardly Thing; it will wonderfully shrink before those
that will Visibly go to make Head against it. If any Laws to Regulate what is
amiss, be yet wanting, the Society may procure the Legislature Power to be so
addressed, that all due Provision will soon be made by our Lawgivers. What is
Defective in the Bylaws of the Town, may be by the Society, so observed, that
the Town shall (...), and the thing redressed. The Choice of such Officers as
may be Faithful and Useful to the Public, may be very much influenced by the
Society. If any sort of Men, are notoriously Defective in their Duty, the
Society may by directing Admonitions and Remonstrances unto them soon procure
the Defects to be amended. If any Families live without Family Worship, the
Society may tell their Pastor of them, and pray him to Visit them, and Exhort
them, and Persuade them, to continue no longer in their Paganism and Atheism;
or, if any are like to be Led away by Seducers, or other Temptations, a Care
may in this way be taken of them. Schools of all Kinds, may in many Kinds fare
the better for the Society; [And Charity-Schools be Erected, Inspected, and
Supported.] BOOKS that have in them the Salt of Heaven, may by means of the
Society be Sprinkled all over the Land; and the Savor of Truth be dispersed
about the Country. Finally; The Society may find out, who are in Extreme
Necessities, and may either by their own Liberality, or by that of others to
whom they shall Commend the matter, obtain Succors for the Necessitous.

We know, That a Small Society may do such Things, because to our Knowledge, it
has already done them; and yet, it has been concealed from the Knowledge of the
world, who they were which did them. And with Minds that have any Generosity or
Ingenuity in them, Elevating them above the Dregs of Mankind, there will need
no other Argument for the Production of such a Society, than the Prospect of
such Excellent Things. These are Things that will Mightily Commend themselves
unto the Thoughts of Well-inclined men; and they will Easily see it their
Honor, to be of a Society that will Pursue such Excellent Ends.

The Repetition of these Passages, is enough to make way for the PROPOSAL;

That a Fit Number in a Neighborhood, whose Hearts God has touched with a Zeal
to Do Good, would Combine into a Society, to meet, when and where they shall
agree; and Consider that Case, What are the Disorders that we may fee Rising
among us? And what may be done, either by our selves immediately, or by others
through our Advice, to Suppress those Disorders? That they would obtain if they
can, the Presence of a Minister with them; and every time they meet, have a
Prayer wherein the Glorious Lord shall be called upon, to Bless the Design,
Direct and Prosper it. That they would also have a Justice of Peace, if it may
be, to be a Member of the Society. That they once in half a Year Choose two
Stewards, to dispatch the Businesses and Messages of the Society, and manage
the Votes in it; who shall Nominate unto the Society their Successors, when
their Term is Expired. That they would have a Faithful Treasurer, in whose
Hands their Stock of Charity may be deposited: And a Clerk, to keep a
convenient Record of Transactions and Purposes. And, finally, That they do with
as Modest and Silent a Conduct as may be, carry on all their Undertakings.

In a Town accommodated with several such Societies, it has been an Usage, that
Once a Year, they have met, all of them together, in one Place, and have had a
Day of Prayer, in which they have Humbled themselves for doing so little Good,
and besought the Pardon of their Unfruitfulness, through the Blood of the Great
Sacrifice; and implored the Blessing of Heaven on the Essays to Do Good, which
they have made, and the Counsel and Conduct of Heaven, for their further
Essays; and such Influences of Heaven, as may bring about those Reformations,
which it was not in their Power to accomplish.

I will finish the PROPOSAL, by Reciting the Points of Consideration which the
SOCIETIES may have Read unto them from time to time at their Meetings, with a
due Pause upon each of them, for any one to offer what he please upon it.

I. IS there any Remarkable Disorder in the Place, that requires our Endeavor
for the Suppression of it? And in what Good, Fair, likely way, may we Endeavor
it?

II. Is there any Particular Person, whose Disorderly Behaviors may be so
Scandalous and so Notorious, that we may do well to send unto the said Person
our Charitable Admonitions? Or, Are there any Contending Persons, whom we
should Admonish, to Quench their Contentions?

III. Is there any Special Service to the Interests of Religion, which we may
conveniently desire our Ministers, to take notice of?

IV. Is there any thing, which we may do well to Mention and Recommend unto the
Justices, for the further Promoting of Good Order?

V. Is there any Sort of Officers among us, to such a Degree unmindful of their
Duty, that we may do well to Mind them of it?

VI. Can any further Methods be devised, that Ignorances and Wickedness may be
more chased from our People in general? And that Household-Piety in Particular,
may flourish among them?

VII. Does there appear any Instance of Oppression or Fraudulence, in the
Dealings of any Sort of People, that may call for our Essays, to get it
Rectified?

VIII. Is there any matter to be humbly moved unto the Legislative Power to be
Enacted into a Law for Public Benefit?

IX. Do we know of any Person languishing under Sad and Sore Affliction; And is
there any thing that we may do, for the Succor of such an Afflicted Neighbor?

X. Has any Person any Proposal to make, for our own further Advantage and
Assistence, that we our selves may be in a Probable and Regular Capacity, to
Pursue the Intentions before us?

My Reader, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to
Number them, which the Telescopes have already discovered, and are still to
fetch into their Discovery, besides the Nineteen Hundred, which are brought
down into the Later Globes; Yea, Tell first the Leaves of an Hercynian Forest,
and the Drops of an Atlantic Ocean; Then tell how many Good Things may be
done, by Societies of Good Men, having such Points of Consideration always
before them!

And yet, when such Societies have done all the Good they can and nothing but
Good, and walk on in a more unspotted Brightness than that of the Moon in
Heaven, let them look to be Maligned, and Libelled; As, A set of Scoundrels,
who are Maintained by Lying, Serve God for Unrighteous Gain, and Ferret Whores
for Subsistence; and are not more Unanimous against Immorality in their
Informations, than for it in their Practice: Avoid no Sins in themselves, and
will suffer none in any Body else. I suppose, they that Publish their Censures
on the Manners of the Age will express this Malignity, because they have done
so. Sirs, Add to your Faith, Courage, and be Armed for such Trials of it!

22. WE will not Propose, That our Essays to Do Good, should ever come to an
End. But we will now put an End unto this, of Tendering PROPOSALS for it. It
shall Conclude with Catalogus Desideratorum, or a mention of some Obvious, and
General Services for the Kingdom of God among Mankind, whereto 'twere to be
desired, that Religious and Ingenious men might be Awakened.

A Catalogue of Desirables, waiting for the Zeal of Good Men to Prosecute them.

[Difficilem rem optas; Generis Humani Innocentiam!]

I. The Propagation of the Holy and Glorious Religion of CHRIST; a Religion
which Emancipates Mankind from the worst of Slaveries and Miseries, and
wonderfully Ennobles it; and which alone prepares men for the Blessedness of
another World: Why is this no more Endeavored by the Professors of it?
PROTESTANTS, why will you be outdone by Popish Idolaters! Oh! the vast Pains
which those Bigots, have taken, to carry on the Romish Merchandises and
Idolatries! No less than Six hundred Clergymen, in that one order of the
Jesuits, did within a Few years, at several times, Embark themselves for
China, to win over that mighty Nation unto their Bastard-Christianiy. No less
than Five Hundred of them Lost their Lives, in the Difficulties of their
Enterprise; and yet the Survivers go on with it; Expressing a sort of Trouble,
that it fell not unto their Share to make a Sacrifice of their Lives, in
Enterprising the Propagation of Religion. O my God, I am Ashamed, and blush to
Lift up my Face unto thee my God! It were but a Christian, but a Grateful, but
an Equal Thing; but who can foretell what Prosperity might be the Recompense! If
our Companies and Factories, would set a part a more considerable part of their
Gains for this work, and set upon a more vigorous Prosecution of it. Gordons
proposal, unto all men of Estates, to Set a part a Small part of their Estates
for this purpose, [At the End of his Geography,] should be taken into further
consideration. What has been done by the Dutch Missionaries at Ceylon, and what
is doing by the Danish Missionaries at Malabar; One would think, might Animate
us, to Imitate them!

If Men of a Spirit for Evangelizing, and Illuminating a woeful World, would
Learn the Languages of Some Nations that are yet Ungospellized, and wait on the
Providence of Heaven, to lead them to, and own them in, Some Apostolical
Undertakings, who can tell what might be done? We know, what Ruffinus relates
concerning the Conversion of the Iberians; and what Socrates, concerning the
Things done by Frumentius and Aedesius, in the Inner India.

But on this Desirable there are Two Things Remarkable.

First, It is the conjecture of some Seers, That until the Temple be cleansed,
there will be no General Appearance of the Nations to worship in it. And the
Truth is, There will be Danger, until then, that many Persons Active in
Societies for the Propagation of Religion, may be more intent upon Propagating
their own Little Forms and Fancies and Interests, than the more Weighty matters
of the Gospel. Yea, t'wil be well, if they be not unawares imposed upon, to
hurt Christianity where it is well-Established, while places wholly
Ungospellized in the Neighborhood may ly neglected. Let us therefore do what
we can toward the Churches Reformation, in order to its Dilatation.

Secondly, It is probable, That the Holy Spirit in Operations, like those of
the First Ages, whereby Christianity was first Planted, will be again conferred
from our Ascended Lord, for the Spreading of it. The Holy Spirit, who has
withdrawn from the Apostate Church, will come, and Abide with us, and render
this World like a Watered Garden. His Irresistible Influences, will cause whole
Nations to be born at once; He will not only Convert but Unite, His People. By
Him, God shall Dwell with men. Would not the Heavenly Father give His Holy
Spirit, if it were more A^^^^ of Him!

II. It Is Lamentable to See the Ignorance and Wickedness, yet remaining, even
in many parts of the British Dominions: In Wales; in the High-Lands; and in
Ireland. Are the Gouges all Dead? There are pretended Shepherds, in the World,
that will never be able to Answer before the Son of God, for their Laying so
little to Heart, the Deplorable Circumstances, of so many People, whom they
might, if they were not Scandalously Negligent, bring to be more Acquainted
with the only Savior. And there might be more done, that some of the American
Colonies, may no longer be such Cimmerian ones?

III. Why is no more done, for the Poor Greeks, and Armenians, and Muscovites,
and other Christians, who have little Preaching, and no Printing among them? If
we sent Bibles, and Psalters, and other Books of Piety among them, in their own
Languages, they would be Noble Presents, and, God knows, how Useful ones!

IV. Poor Sailours, and Poor Soldiers, call for our Pity. They meet with Great
and Sore Troubles. Their Manners are too commonly such, as discover no very
Good Effects of their Troubles. What shall be done to make them a better sort
of men? There must, besides more Books of Piety distributed among them, other
methods be though it upon; Cadit Asinus et est qui sublevat. Perit Anima, et non
est qui manum apponat! Let Austin awaken us.

V. The Trades-mans Library needs to be more Enriched. We have seen, Husbandry
Spiritualized; and, Shepherdy Spiritualized; and, Navigation Spiritualized; We
have seen, the Weaver also accommodated, with agreeable Meditations. To Spread
the Nets of Salvation for men, in the ways of their Personal Callings, and
convey Good Thoughts unto them, in the Terms and Steps, of their Daily
Business, is a Real Service to the Interests of Piety. A BOOK also, that shall
be an Onomatologia Monitoria, and shall advise People how to make their Names
become unto them, the Monitors of their Duty; might be of much use to the
Christened World. And, a BOOK, that shall be, The Angel of Bethesda, and shall
instruct People how to improve in agreeable Points of Piety, from the several
Maladies, which their Bodies may be Diseased withal; and at the same time,
inform them of the most Experimented, Natural, Specific Remedies for their
Diseases, might be very useful to Mankind. These Two Subjects, if not
undertaken by any other Hand, may be so shortly by that which now Writes;
Except the Glorious Lord of my Life, immediately put an End unto it; and my
Days are past, my Purposes are broken off, even the Thoughts of my Heart!

VI. Universities that shall have more Collegia Pietatis in them, like those of
the Excellent Franckius in the lower Saxony; Oh! that there were more of them!
Seminaries in which the Scholars may have a most Polite Education; but not be
sent forth with Recommendations for the Evangelical Ministry, till it be upon a
strict Examination found, that their Souls are fired with the Fear of God, and
the Love of Christ, and a Zeal to Do Good, and a Resolution to bear Poverty,
and Obloquy, and all sorts of Temptations, in the Service of our Holy Religion;
they would be the Wonders of the World; And what wonders might they do in the
World!

Let the Charity-Schools also, Increase and Multiply; Charity-Schools, which
may provide Subjects for the Great Savior, Blessings for the next Generation;
Charity-Schools, not perverted unto the ill purposes of introducing a Defective
Christianity.

VII. Those things, that so far as we understand by the Books of the Sacred
Prophecies, are to be, The Works of our Day; It Is Wisdom to Observe and Pursue.
When the Time was arrived, that the Antichrist must Enter his Last Half-Time,
One Poor Monk proves a main Instrument of Ravishing Half his Empire from him.
Thus to fall in with the Designs of the Divine Providence, is the way to be
wonderfully Prospered and Honored. One Small Man, thus Nicking the Time for
it, may do wonders!

I take the Works of our Day to be;

1. The Reviving of Primitive Christianity; To Study and Restore every thing,
of the Primitive Character. The Apostasy is going off. The Time for cleansing
the Temple comes on. More Edwards's would be vast Blessings, where the
Primitive Doctrines of Christianity are Depraved.

2. The Persuading of the European Powers, to shake off the Chains of Popery.
This Argument; There is no Popish Nation, but what by Embracing the Protestant
Religion, would ipso facto, not only assert themselves into a Glorious Liberty,
but also Double their Wealth immediately; It Is Mavelous, that it is no more
yet hearkened unto! Sirs, Prosecute it, with more of Demonstration. One shows,
That the Abolishing of Popery in England, is worth at Least Eight Millions of
Pounds yearly to the Nation. Let the Argument be tried with other Nations; the
Argument, Ab Utili.

3. The Forming and Quickening of that PEOPLE, that are to be, The Stone Cut out
of the Mountain. Here, as well as in some other Things, None of the Wicked
shall understand, but the Wise shall understand. God will do His own Work, in
His own Time, and in His own Way. And Austin tells me, Utile est ut taceatur
aliquod verbum, Propter Incapaces.

The Conclusion.
THE Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will Perform these things: A Zeal inspired and
produced by the Lord of Hosts in His Faithful Servants, will put them upon the
Performance of such Things. Nothing has been yet Proposed, that is Impractible;
Non Fortia Loquor, sed Possibilia. But, Eusebius has taught me, Vere magnum est
magna facere, et Teipsum putare nihil. Sirs, Under and After a Course of such
Actions, which have a true Glory in them, and really are more Glorious than all
the Actions and Achievements, whereof those Bloody Plunderers, whom we call,
Conqueror, have made a wretched Ostentation: and perhaps made Inscriptions like
those of Pompey on his Temple of Minerva; -- Still Humility, must be the Crown
of all. All, nothing without Humility; nothing without a sense that you are
Nothing, a Consent to be made Nothing. You must first, most Humbly Acknowledge
unto the Great GOD, That after you have done all, you are Unprofitable
Servants; and make your Humble Confession, That not only you have done but that
which was your Duty to do, but also that you have exceedingly fallen short of
doing your Duty. If God abase you with very Dark Dispensations of His
Providence, after all your Indefatigable and your Disinteressed Essays to
Glorify Him, Humble your selves before Him; yet abate nothing of your Essays;
Hold on, saying, My God will Humble me, yet will I Glorify Him. Lord, Thou art
Righteous; But still I will do all I can to serve thy Glorious Kingdom. This
indeed, is a more easy Humiliation; but then there is one to be demanded, of
much greater Difficulty: That is, That you humbly Submit unto all the
Diminutions, among Men, that God shall order for you. Your Admirable Savior
was one who went about ever Doing of Good; Mankind was never Visited by such a
Benefactor. And yet we read, He was One spoken against. Never any one so
Vilified! Had He been the worst Malefactor in the World, He could not have been
worse dealt withal. He Expostulated, For which of my Good Works is it that you
treat me so? Yet they went on; They Hated Him, they Reproached Him, they
Murdered Him. Austin said very truly, Remedium Elationis est contuitus
Dominicae Crucis. It will also be the Remedy of Discouragement; it will keep
you from Sinking, as well as being Lifted up. You are Conformed unto your
Savior, in your Watchful Endeavors to Do Good, and be Fruitful in every Good
Work. But your Conformity unto Him, yet Lacks One thing; That is, After all, to
be Despised and Rejected of Men; and Patiently to bear the Contempt, and
Malice, and Abuses of an Untoward Generation. One of the Fathers, who sometimes
wanted a little of this Grace, could say, Nihil est quod not ita et Hominibus
et Deo Gratos facit, quam si Vitae Merito magni, et Humilitate infimi simus.
It Is an Excellent thing to come to Nothing. If you hear the Hopes of Disaffected
men, to see you come to Nothing, Hear it with as much of Satisfaction as they
can Hope it. Embrace Exinanitions; Embrace Annihilations. I find a Zealous and
Famous Doer of Good, much Affected with the Picture of a Devout man, to whom a
Voice comes down from Heaven, Quid vis fieri pro te? Whereto he replies, Nihil,
Domine, nisi pati et Contemni pro te. Sirs, Let it be seen some where else than
in Picture; be you the Substance of it. Thus, Let Patience have its Perfect
Work!

I hope, you have more Discretion, than to imagine, That because you are never
Weary of Well-Doing, therefore you should be Universally Well-spoken of. No;
'Twill be just the Contrary. To Do Well, and to Hear Ill, is the Common
Experience, and ought to be our Constant Expectation. For this most
Unreasonable thing, there are very many Reasons. 'Twill be impossible to Do
much Good, but some or other will count themselves Hurt by what you do. You
will Unavoidably serve some Interests, which others are Indisposed unto. It Is
also in the Nature of Mad men, to take up strange Prejudices against their Best
Friends; to be set against None so much as Them. Now, we may every where see
those, concerning whom we are told, Madness is in their Hearts. It will appear
in their being unaccountably Prejudiced, against those that most of all seek to
Do Good unto them. Then, He teareth me in his Wrath who hates me; he gnasheth
upon me with his Teeth; mine Enemy sharpeneth his Eyes upon me! Then, to
Skorakizing a Benefactor, for nothing in the world, but because he would have
been so! He shall be Honored, as the Lindians Worshipped Hercules, by Cursing,
and Throwing of Stones. The Wrath of God, against a Sinful and Woeful World, has
likewise its Operation in this Grievous matter. If men always upon Intentions
and Inventions to Do Good, were so Generally Beloved and Esteemed as they might
be, they would be Instruments of doing more Good, than the Justice of Heaven,
can yet allow to be done for Such a World. The World is not worthy of them, nor
do the Good that is Endeavored by them. To deprive the World of that Good,
they must be left unto a strange Aversion for those Men that would fain do it.
This Creeples them, Fetters them, Defeats their Excellent Purposes! Nor is the
Devil Idle on this Occasion. A man who shall Do much Good, will therein do much
Harm unto the Empire of the Devil. It would be much, if the Devil should not
seek to Devour, or take an Exquisite Revenge upon such Men of God. Except God
lay an Uncommon Restraint upon that Wicked One, such is the Power of the
Adversary, and such an Energy the Devil has upon the minds of Multitudes, that
he will notably and bitterly Revenge himself upon any Notable Doer of Good; and
procure him a Troop of Enemies, Three Volleys of Obloquies. But, O Servant of
God, By Him thou will run through a Troop; By thy God thou will Leap over a Wall.
We may be so far from wondering, that Wicked men are Violently Disaffected unto
a man who does abundance of Good, and Spread as many Stories, and Write as many
Libels, to his Disadvantage, as ever the incomparable Calvin suffered from
them; we may rather wonder that the Devil does not make this world hotter than
a Babylonish Furnace for him; too hot for his Abiding in it. Sirs, If you will
Do much, it is very likely that the Devil may sometimes raise upon your
Opportunities to Do Good, such an Horrible Tempest, as may threaten a total
Ruin unto them. You may fear that you see your Serviceableness, the Apple of
your Eye struck out; you may be driven to Prayers, to Tears, to Fasting often
in Secret Places; Prostrate in the Dust, you must offer up your Supplications,
with strong Crying and Tears, to Him that is able to Save your Opportunities
from Death; you must Cry out, O Deliver my Soul, (my Serviceableness) from the
Sword, my Darling, (my Serviceableness) from the Power of the Dog!

The words of the Great Baxter, are Proper and Worthy to be Introduced on this
Occasion.

The Temptations and Suggestions of Satan, yea, and often his External Contrived
Snares are such, as frequently give men a Palpable Discovery of his Agency.
Whence is it, that such wonderful Successive Trains of Impediments, are set in
the way of almost any man, that intends any Great and Good Work in the World? I
have among men of my own Acquaintance observed such admirable Frustrations of
many Designed Excellent Works, by such strange unexpected means, and such
variety of them, and so powerfully carried on, as has of it self Convinced me,
that there is a most Vehement Invisible Malice permitted by God to Resist
Mankind, and to Militate against all Good in the World. Let a man have any work
of Greatest Natural Importance, which tends to no Great Benefit to Mankind, and
he may go on with it, without any Extraordinary Impedition. But let him have
any great Design for Common Good, in things that tend to destroy Sin, to heal
Divisions, to Revive Charity, to Increase Virtue, to Save men's Souls; yea, or
to the Public Common Felicity; and his Impediments shall be so multifarious,
so far-fetched, so subtle, so incessant, and in Despite of all his Care and
Resolution, usually so Successful, that he shall seem to himself, to be like a
man that is held fast Hand and Foot, while he sees no one touch him; or that
sees an hundred Blocks brought and cast before him in his way, while he sees no
one to do it.

I transcribe this passage for this purpose. O Doer of Good, Expect a Conflict
with Wicked Spirits in High Places, to Clog all the Good thou do propose to
do; And Expect that Restless Endeavors of Theirs, to overwhelm thee with Vile
Ideas in the Minds, and Calumnies in the Mouths, of many People concerning
thee, will be some of their Devices to Defeat all thy Proposals. Be not
Ignorant of the Satanick Devices!

Yea, and if the Devil were Asleep, there is Malignity Enough, in the Hearts of
Wicked Men themselves, to render a man that will Do Good, very Distastful and
Uneasy to them. They are the Offspring of him, who Slew his Brother, because
his Works were Righteous; and they will Malign a man, because he is Useful to
other men. Indeed, Malis displicere est Laudari: But Wicked men, will Curse a
man, because he is a Blessing. Oh! Base and Black Disposition!

I happened once to be present in the Room, where a Dying man could not Die till
he had bewailed unto a Minister whom he had now therefore sent for, the unjust
Calumnies and Injuries which he had often cast upon him: The Minister asked the
poor Penitent, what was the occasion of his Abusiveness; whether he had been by
any Mis-reports imposed upon? The man made this horrible Answer; No, Sir; 'Twas
nothing but this; I thought You were a Good Man, and that You did much Good in
the World, and therefore I Hated You! Oh! Is it Possible, Is it Possible, (said
the poor Sinner,) for such a Sinner to find a Pardon! Truly, though other Causes
may be pretended for the Spite and Rage of Wicked men, against a Fruitful Doer
of Good; Yet I shall not be Deceived, if I fear, that oftentimes a secret
Antipathy to the Kingdom of God, lies at the Bottom of it. Or it may be
sometimes a Pale Envy, in Proud men, raging that other men are more Useful in
the world than they, and vexing themselves with worse than Sicilian Torments,
at the sight of what God and man do for other men. They see it and are Grieved.
Sirs, Non Bonus est qui non ad Invidiam usque Bonus est, But now, for such
Causes, you must not think strange of the Trial, if men Speak Evil of you,
after you have Done Good unto many, yea, unto those very People who Speak it.
It will not be Strange, if you should hear the Defaming of Many; If the men who
do not Love the Holy Ways of the Lord in His Churches, have no Love to you; If
never so many Aristephanes's fall upon you; If Javelins are thrown at you, with
a Rage reaching to Heaven; And if Pamphlets are stuffed with vile Figments and
Slanders upon you. God may wisely permit these things, and in much
Faithfulness, To hide Pride from you. [O Quantum est venenum superbiae, quod
non potest nisi veneno Curari!] Alas, while we carry the Grave-Cloathes of
Pride still about us, these rough Hands are the best that can be to pull them
off! If you should meet with such Things, you must bear them with much
Meekness, much Silence, Great Self-Abhorrence, and a spirit to Forgive, the
worst of all your Persecutors. Being Defamed, you must Entreat. Be Glad, if you
can Redeem any Opportunities to Do Good. Be ready to Do Good, even unto those
from whom you Suffer Evil. And when you have done all the Good that you can,
reckon your self well Paid, if you escape as well as the Crane did from the
Wolf, and if you are not Punished for what you do. In short, Be insensible of
any Merits in your Performances. Ly in the Dust, and be willing that both GOD
and Man should lay you there. Have your Spirit Reconciled unto Indignities.
Entertain them with all the Calmness, all the Temper, imaginable. Be content,
That Three Hundred in Sparta, should be Preferred before you. When Envious
People can fix no other Blemish on you, they will say of you, as they said of
Cyprian, That You are a Proud Man; because you do not Jog on in their heavy
Road of Slothfulness. Bear this also, with yet a more Profound Humility. It Is
the Last Effort usually made by the Dying Pride of Life, to bear the Charge of
Pride impatiently, with a Proud impatience.

Ye Useful Men, Your Acceptance with your Savior, and with God through your
Savior, and Recompense in the World to come, is to carry you Cheerfully through
all your Essays at Usefulness. To be Reprobate for every Good Work, is a
Character, from which 'twill be the Wisdom of all men, to fly with all the
Dread imaginable. But then, to be Always abounding in the work for the Lord,
this is always the Truest and the Highest Wisdom. It Is the Wisdom which is from
Above, that is Full of Mercy and Good Fruits. The Sluggards who Do no Good in
the world, are Wise in their own Conceit; but the Men who are Diligent in Doing
of Good, can give such a Reason for what they do, as proves them to be Really
Wise. Men Leave off to be Wise, when they Leave off to Do Good. The Wisdom of
it appears in this; It Is the best way of spending our Time; it is Well-spent, when
spent in Doing of Good. It is also a sure way, a sweet way, Effectually to
Bespeak the Blessings of God on our selves. Who so likely to Find Blessings, as
the men that Are Blessings? It has been said, Qui been Vivit, semper Orat; So I
will say, Qui been Agit, been Orat. Every Action we do for the Kingdom of God,
is in the Efficacy of it, a Prayer for the Kindness of God. While we are at
work for God, certainly, He will be at work for us, and ours: He will do for
us, more than ever we have done for Him; Far more than we can Ask or Think!
There is a Voice in every Good thing that is done; It Is that, Oh! Do Good unto
them that are Good! Thus my BONIFACIUS anon comes to wear the Name of
BENEDICTUS also. Yea, and there may be this more particular Effect of what we
do. While we Employ our Wits for the Interests of God, it is very probable,
that we shall Sharpen them for our own. We shall become the more Wise for our
selves, because we have been Wise to do Good. And of the man who is a Tree that
brings forth Fruit, we read, whatsoever he does shall Prosper. Nor can a man
take a Readier way to Live Joyfully, all the Days of the Life of our Vanity
which God has given us under the Sun. For, now our Life will not be thrown away
in Vanity; we don't Live in Vain. My Friend, Go thy way and be Joyful; For God
accepts thy works. Our Few and Evil Days, are made much less so, by our
Doing of Good in every one of them, as it rolleth over us. Yea, the Holy Spirit
of God who is the Quickner of them who Do Good without Ceasing, will be their
Comforter. Every Day of our Activity for the Kingdom of God, will be in some
sort a Day of Pentecost unto us, a Day of the Holy Spirit's coming upon us. The
Consolations of God, will not be Small, with the man, who is full of
Contrivances for God, and for His Kingdom. In short, We read, The Valleys are
Covered over with Corn; they shout for Joy, they also Sing. We may be in Low
Circumstances: But if we abound in the Fruits of well-doing, and if we feed
many with our Services, we are Covered over with Corn. We shall Shout for Joy,
and also Sing, if we be so. The Conscience of what we do, and of what we Aim to
do, will be a Continual Feast unto us. Our Rejoicing is this, The Testimony of
our Conscience! And, Recte fecisse Merces est. Yea, the Pleasure in doing of
Good Offices, it is Inexpressible; it is Unparalled; it is Angelical; more to be
Envied than any Sensual Pleasure; a most Refined One. Pleasure was long since
defined, The Result of some Excellent Action. It Is, a sort of Holy Epicurism. O
most Pityable they that will continue Strangers to it! But, Memineris, was the
constant word of Encouragement unto a Soldier. I say, Remember; there is more
to be Remembered.

When the Serviceable Man comes to his Nunc Demittis, then, he who did Live
Desired, shall Die Lamented. It shall be Witnessed and Remembered of him, That he
was one who did Good in Israel. An Epitaph the Glory whereof is beyond that of
the most Superb and Stately Pyramid! When the calumniators, who once Licked the
File of his Reputation, shall have only the Impotence of their Defeated Malice
to reflect upon. And a Thersites will not have a more Disadvantageous Article
in all his character than this, That he was an Enemy to such an Ulysses. But
what shall be done for this Good man in the Heavenly World? His Part and his
Work in the City of God, is as yet Incomprehensible unto us. But the Kindness
that his God will show unto him, in the Strong City, will be Mavelous!
Mavelous! To make the Exclamation of Austin, Writing, Of the City; Quanta
erit illa faelicitas, ubi nullum erit malum, nullum latebit bonum! His Essays
to fill this World with Righteous Things, are so many Tokens for Good upon him,
that he shall have a Share and a Work, in that World, wherein shall Dwell
nothing but Righteousness. He shall be introduced into that World, with a word
from the Mouth of the Glorious JESUS, which will be worth a Thousand Worlds;
Well done, Good and Faithful Servant! -- And, Oh! What shall be done for him!
He has done what he could for the Honor of the King of Heaven; All shall be
done for him, that may be done for One whom the King of Heaven delights to
honor.

I will give you All Summed up in one Word; It is that, Prove. 14.22. Mercy and
Truth shall be to them who Devise Good. Children of God, There is a Strain of
Mercy and Truth, in all the Good that you Devise. You Devise how to deal
Mercifully and Truly, with every one; and bring every one to do so too. And the
Mercy and Truth of God, now for ever Engaged for you, shall here Suffer you to
Lack no Good Thing, but shall hereafter do you Good beyond what the Heart of
Man, can yet conceive. A Faithful God, a Savior who is one of Great
Faithfulness, is He that has Promised it! The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

I have not forgotten the words used by the Excellent Calvin, when the order
for his Banishment from Ungrateful Geneva was brought unto him. Certe si
Hominibus Servivissem, mala mihi merces persolveretur; sed been est, quod ei
inservivi, qui nunquam non servis suis rependit, quod semel promisit. And I
will conclude with a TESTIMONY that I shall abide by. It Is this; Were a Man able
to Write in Seven Languages: could he converse daily with the Sweets of all the
Liberal Sciences, that more Polite men ordinarily pretend unto; did he
entertain himself with all Ancient and Modern Histories; And could he Feast
continually on the Curiosities which all sorts of Learning may bring unto him;
None of all this would afford the Ravishing Satisfaction, much less would any
grosser Delights of the Senses do it; which he might find, in relieving the
Distresses of a Poor, Mean, Miserable Neighbor; and which he might much more
find, in doing any Extensive Service for the Kingdom of our Great SAVIOR in
the World; or any thing to redress the Miseries under which Mankind is
generally Languishing.

An Appendix; Concerning the ESSAYS that are made, for the Propagation of
Religion among the Indians, in the Massachuset-Province of NEW ENGLAND.
IT has been desired, That our Book of Essays to do Good, may give an Account,
of Some that are actually Pursued, on One of the most important Articles that
have been proposed. The occasion for this Desire, has been given by some odd
Insinuations made by some who express a Zeal for, The Propagation of Religion,
as if nothing had been done that way, by any People of our Profession, who
readily own, That we are for Embracing and Diffusing the Holy Religion of
CHRIST, in the Original Purity wherein His Gospel has given it unto us, without
Humane Additions and Inventions. It Is true, We have cause always to blame our
selves for our own Deficiencies in such a Work of God. And if we give an
Account of what we have done, it must be with an Holy Shame that we have done
so little. Pride, and, Vainglorious Ostentation, Be thou at all possible
Distance from the Relation, which our concern to have the Grace of God
acknowledged, and a well-Designing Society of Good Men defended from Injurious
Imputations, has compelled us to communicate unto the World.

It shall be done with all the Modesty and Brevity that the matter will allow
of.

In the Book Entitled, Magnalia Christi Americana, or, The History of
NEW ENGLAND, there is a large Account of what was formerly done, for the
Christianizing of our Indians. Thither we refer the Reader, for all that was
formerly done: which when he Reads, he will certainly wish for more ELIOT's in
the World. The present State of Christianity among them, is what must now be
Reported.

The Number of Indians in this Land, is not comparable to what it was, in the
middle of the former Century. The Wars which after an Offered and Rejected
Gospel, they perfidiously began upon the English, above Thirty years ago,
brought a Quick Desolation upon whole Nations of them. All that remain under
the English Influences in the Massachuset-Province, are generally recovered out
of their Paganism, to some sense of the Christian Religion.

The Christianized Indians on the two Islands of Martha's Vinyard, and
Nantucket make a very considerable Body. At Martha's Vinyard and Elsabeth's
Islands, there are Ten Congregations, in which a glorious CHRIST is worshipped.
There are Two Englishmen, and Ten Indians, that are Preachers to them, in their
own Language. They have Schools also, in which their Children are taught to
Read and Write; and know the Catechism. At Nantucket, there are at least Three
Congregations; and more than as many Preachers.

From these Islands we will pass to the adjacent Continent, Where a careful
Enquiry has been lately made, in a Visitation ordered for that purpose by the
Commissioners for such affairs. The Result of the Enquiry was, That there are
between Twenty and Thirty Congregations of Christianized Indians, here on the
Main; whereto there belong near Three Thousand Souls. Here are Ten English
Preachers, who give them their Instructions and Assistences, and Preach unto
them, either on the Lords days, or in appointed Lectures. There are also
between Twenty and Thirty Indian Teachers, by whom the Exercises of the
Lords-dayes are mostly managed. They have in several of these Villages on the
Main, also made handsome Subscriptions of their own, toward the Building of
Meeting Houses; wherein the English likewise have helped them. They have the
whole Bible in their own Language; which has been here twice Printed for them.
This Great Light has been Satellited, with other Books which we have also
printed for them, in their own Language. Their Library is continually growing,
by New Books, wherewith we Serve and Suit the Interests of Christianity among
them, from time to time, as we see occasion. And their Schools are multiplying.
Family Prayer also is frequently upheld among them. And their Marriages are
usually celebrated according to the Directions left by the famous ELIOT, whose
Name still is of much Authority with them.

There are some Congregations of Indians, which are not advanced unto all the
Privileges of the Evangelical Church State; not yet combining for, and
Enjoying of, all Special Ordinances. Yet a considerable Number of them are so;
and some New Churches have been lately formed and filled among them.

The performances in the ordinary Congregations of the Indians, have been often
such, that there are very many English Witnesses, who have not a little admired
at the Gravity, the Attention, the Affection expressed in them. The pertinent
Prayers (and, Sine Monitore, quia de Pectore,) the Orthodox Sermons, (at the
Hearing whereof, the very Children of a dozen years old will readily turn to
the Proofs,) and the Singing of Psalms, with a Melody out-doing many of the
English, in their Meetings, have been frequently observed with Admiration. To
see such forlorn Salvages, and the most ruteful Ruins of Mankind, not only
Cicurated into some Civility, but also Elevated unto so much Knowledge and
Practice of Christianity, has to some appeared an amiable and admirable
Spectacle!

In their Churches, they have Pastors and Elders of their own; Ordained,
Sometimes by the Hands of English Ministers; and sometimes by the Hands of the
Indian Ministers, in the Presence of the English; All after the Solemn English
manner. And by Admonitions and Excommunications Publicly dispensed, they
proceed against Scandalous Offenders: for which Intent, and that they may
seasonably Find and Heal all Scandals, they hold a Church-Meeting the Week
before every Communion.

One that is at this Time, a Pious and Faithful English Minister, but Preaching
also to the Indians, has given in unto us, this Testimony.

Their Gravity, and diligent Attendance in the Time of Worship, with the
affectionate Confessions of such as are Admitted, into the Church, make me
hope, that many of them may have the Work of the Spirit wrought in them,
according to the working of the mighty Power of God. Their Method, respecting
those that are Admitted into their Communion, is more according to the manner
of the Churches in the Primitive Times, than is now practiced among the
Churches in most Parts. The Person to be Admitted, stands forth in the midst of
the Assembly; and first makes a Declaration of his Knowledge, and sometimes
desires Information in things more arduous and doubtful. And then, he makes a
Confession of Sin; which they do, (as I have seen) with Tears and Trembling,
like him in the Sixteenth Chapter of the Acts. And then he gives an Account of
Experiences he has had, of Convictions, Awakenings, and Comforts; in which they
are large and particular. After which (much Counsel and Exhortation, to remain
steadfast in the Faith and Ways of the Lord, being given them, by their Pastor
and Elder) they are Admitted. I would, (and not ungroundedly) hope, That
Additions are made unto the Church daily of such as shall be Saved. There are
many, which maintain a Christian Conversation, and are to be accounted, not
Almost, but Altogether Christians. And this does Encourage the Preaching of the
Gospel to them; when we see, it pleases God to make it, His Power unto
Salvation.

At present, we can do nothing for those Bloody Salvages in the Eastern Parts,
who have been taught by the French Priests, That the Virgin Mary was a French
Lady, and that our Great Savior was a Frenchman, and that the English Murdered
Him, and that He Rose from the Dead, and is taken up to the Heavens, but that
all that would recommend themselves to His Favor, must Revenge His Quarrel on
the English People; which issuing out from their Indiscoverable Swamps, they
have often done with cruel Depredations. When we have had the short Respites of
a Truce with them, we have made several New Attempts to carry them the Tenders
of a Glorious Gospel; but they have presently broke out into Fresh Hostilities,
which have put an End unto all Good Expectations concerning them.

There has been Something done to Christianize the Mohegins, and other Indians,
in the Colony of Connecticut; but, Lord, who has believed! They have been
obstinate in their Paganism; however their obstinacy has not put an End unto
our Endeavors.

An Exemplary Indian Minister, whose Name is Japhet, has of late years made
several Salleyes, among his Pagan Countrymen, about the Narraganset-Countrey;
and the Hand of the Lord has been with him, and many have Believed, and turned
unto the Lord.

We have made many Trials, to make the Joyful Sound of the Gospel, reach unto
the Five Nations, that are some Hundreds of Miles distant from us, to the
Westward. All that is yet accomplished, is, To Support and Reward the pains of
several Dutch Ministers, who proceed as far as they well can, that these may no
longer be such Foolish Nations; and have seen some comfortable Successes of
their Ministry.

The Principal concern for the Indians in the Massachuset-Province, is to
Preserve and Improve the Christianity already Professed among them, and Prevent
the loss of a Noble Work by some Degeneracies, which have no very well boding
Aspect upon it: Especially, to Prevent the Fatal Effects, with which the Bottel
threatens it. In order hereto, various Methods are used continually, to keep a
Watchful Inspection on their Manners, and to make what Progress we can in
Anglicising of them. These things are in the Practice Encumbred with
Difficulties, beyond what can be by most men in the bare Theory imagined. But
the Commissioners here Entrusted, for the management of that Affayr,
continually Consult and Pursue, what may be most Subservient unto the Grand
Intention.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is a Passage of the Incomparable BOIL; When I consider, how much more to
the Advantage of the Sacred Writings, and of Christian Theology in general,
diverse Texts have been Explained and Discoursed of, by the Excellent Grotius,
Masius, Mede, and Sir Francis Bacon, and some other Late Great Wits, (to name
now no Living ones,) in their several kinds, than the same Places have been
handled by Vulgar Expositors, and other Divines; And when I consider, that none
of these Worthies was at once a great Philosopher and a Great Critic; I cannot
but hope, that when it shall please God, to stir up Persons of a Philosophical
Genius, well furnished with Critical Learning, and the Principles of true
Philosophy, and shall give them an Hearty concern for the Advance of His
Truths, these men will make Explications, and Discoveries that shall be
admirable. -- You should no more measure the Wisdom of God couched in the
Bible, by the Glosses and Systems of Common Expositors and Preachers, than
Estimate the Wisdom He has Expressed in the contrivance of the World, by
Magirus's or Eustachius's Physics.

Many years after this, the admirable Witsius comforts us with a Passage of an
observable Aspect that way; Neque profecto officio hic suo defuerunt Illustres
Animae. -- There have not bees wanting those Illustrious Men, who have observed
all the Solid Discoveries in Philosophy, all the curious Researches of
Antiquity, or that has occured in Physic or in Law, relating to the Sacred
Scriptures, and have applied it all with a Signal Dexterity to the Illustration
thereof; And so it is come to pass, that Theology, which had vast Riches of its
own before, is now also Enriched with foreign Spoils, and appears with those
Ornaments, which Extort, even from them that are most of all disaffected unto
it, a confession of its most charming Majesty.

The Noble Service to Mankind, thus propounded, having been so far Pursued, it
is easy to imagine, that a Person of but common Abilities, applying himself
unto it, might accomplish a very Rich Collection of Illustrations, upon the
glorious Book of Truth and of Life. It may not be amiss, but the Treatise now
in our Hands may very agreeably do it, that the Friends of Learning and
Religion be now Advertised, of a Moderate Performance, which by the Help of
Heaven, has been produced, of such a Tendency.

No little part of what has been Written on the Great Intention of Illustrating
the Divine Oracles, has been perused. Some Hundreds of the Latest, as well as
of the Oldest Writers, that have had any thing Looking that way, have been
consulted. Many Thousands of their Finest Thoughts have been found out,
Extracted, and Digested. The Eye of the Authors Industry, has not yet Seen
every Precious Thing; yet it has often, in the three Lustres of years, which
have ran since he began his Undertaking, Visited the Place of Sapphires, and
found the Dust of Gold, which is here Exposed unto the Refined part of Mankind,
when it shall see cause to accept thereof. And there are Two Competent Volumns
of the choicest Illustrations, (in folio) now lying ready for Publication.

The Work interferes not at all, with the Two very valuable Volumns of the
POLAN Annotations; but may ask for it, as an agreeable Honor, to attend upon
them.

It is hoped, That all Impartial Christians, of whatever Denomination or
Subdivision in Christianity, will esteem it, An useful Work; For it must needs
be so, if the Books, from which the Best Things are fetched, and laid here
together, were so.

To bestow the censure of Pride and Vanity, on the Proposing of such a Work for
Publication, would be therewith to Reproach all Attempts in such a way to
Serve the Public. It Is no Trespass against the Rules of Modesty, (but it would
look like one against the Rules of Equity to call it so,) to give the Public,
a Report, and a Tender, of what has been thus Prepared. It is a Lawful and a
Modest thing, for a Man to Desire, that so much of a Short Life, as has been
Spent in such a Preparation, should not be Spent in vain.

The Author Lives in Daily Expectation of his Death; But he Dies with some
Hope, that the Glorious Head of the Church, will stir up some generous Minds,
to forward an Undertaking So Confessedly Worthy to be Prosecuted.

It is fit, that they should be informed, Where these Volumns ly waiting to be
called for. They are in a Library, to be soon found in the American BOSTON. And
this is the Title of them.

BIBLIA AMERICANA. The Sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.
Exhibited, in the Order of Time, wherein the several and successive Occurrences
may direct the Placing and Reading of them: (which Exhibition alone, will do
the Service of a Valuable Commentary.) With,

I. The common Translation, with all due;Modesty, Amended and Refined in those
many Instances, where an Army of Learned and Pious Men in our Days, have with
great Reason, Proposed it.

II. A Rich Collection of Antiquities which the Studious Researches of
Inquisitive, and Judicious Men in the Latter Ages, have recovered; for a Sweet
Reflection of Light upon the Heavenly Oracles: In Multitudes of Passages; and
particularly in those where the Idolatry, the Agriculture, the Architecture,
and the Art of War, of the Former Ages is referred unto.

III. The Types of the Bible accommodated with their Antitypes; And the Blessed
Book yielding a vast mixture of Holy Profit and Pleasure, even in those
Paragraphs of it, which have sometimes appeared the least Fruitful with
Instruction.

IV. The Laws of the Israelitish Nation, in these Pandects of Heaven,
interpreted; and the Original and Intention thereof rescued from the
Misinterpretations, that some famous Writers have put upon them. With a
particular History of the City Jerusalem, under its wondrous Vicissitudes, from
the Days of Melchizedeck, down to ours; and an Account of the present and
wretched Condition, in which it waits the Time to favor, the set Time to come
on.

V. Golden Treasures fetched out of those most Unlikely Helps, the Talmuds, and
other Jewish Writers; not only to Illustrate the Oracles once Committed unto
the Distinguished Nation, but also to Demonstrate the Truth of Christianity.

VI. Natural Philosophy called in, to Serve Scriptural Religion. The fairest
Hypotheses of those Grand Revolutions, the Making, and the Drowning, and the
Burning of the World, Offered. The Plants, the Minerals, the Meteors, the
Animals, the Diseases, the Astronomical Affairs, and the Powers of the
Invisible World, mentioned in the Book of GOD, represented with the Best
Thoughts of our Times upon them.

VII. The Chronology of this admirable Book, every where cleared from all its
Difficulties; and the Clock of Time set Right in its whole Motion, from the
Beginning of it.

VIII. The Geography of it Surveyed; The Situation, especially of Paradise and
of Palestine, laid out; An Account given how the whole Earth has been Peopled;
And many Notable and Enlightening Things contributed unto this Work by Traveller
of Unspotted Veracity.

IX. A sort of Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Acts; Or, An Elaborate and
Entertaining History, of what has befallen the Israelitish Nation, in every
Place, from the Birth of the Glorious REDEEMER, to this very Day: And the
present Condition of that Nation, the Relics of the Ten, as well as of the
Two Tribes, and of their ancient Sects yet (several of them) Existing also, in
the several Parts of the World, where they are now dispersed, at this Time,
when their speedy Recovery from their Sad and Long Dispersion is hoped for.

X. All Appearance of Contradiction, in the Pages filled from Inspiration, for
ever taken away.

XI. The Histories of all Ages, brought in, to show how the Prophecies of this
Invaluable Book, have had their most punctual Accomplishment; and Strongly
Established Conjectures on such as yet remain to be Accomplished. The most
Unexceptionable. (...) blessed Writers on the Revelation. And the true Doctrine
of the Chiliad, brought in, as a Key, to very much of the Wealth which the
Church of God Enjoyes in this Book of the Kingdom.

XII. Some Essays to Illustrate the Scriptures, from Experimental Piety, or
the Observations of Christian Experience. And many of the Excellent Things,
Observed in and Extracted from the Holy Scriptures that make Wise unto
Salvation, by the North-British Expositors, who with a Penetrating and peculiar
Search after Hints for Christian Practice, have Opened many Books of the Bible.

And many Thousands of Curious Notes, found Scattered and Shining, in the
Writings both of the Ancients and the Moderns, laid here together in a grateful
Amassment.

All done with a strict adherence to the Principles of Religion, Professed in
the most Reformed Churches.

By the Blessing of CHRIST on the Labors of an American.

In Two Volumns.

FINIS.

