MEDITATIONS ON THE GLORY OF THE Heavenly World.

I. On the Happiness of the Souls of Believers, at the Instant of their
Separation from their Bodies.

II. On the Glory of the Bodies of God's Children, in the Resurrection World,
when they shall be as the Angels of Heaven.

III. On the Glory of both Soul and Body in the Heaven of Heavens, after the
Day of Judgment, to all ETERNITY.

By Increase Mather, D. D.

Phil. I. 23, -- Having a desire to Depart, and be with CHRIST. Heb. XI. 16.
They desire a Better Country, that is an HEAVENLY. Moriar ut te Videam Au^^^^
Christus et Coelum non (...) Hyper^alen. (...) BOSTON in N. E. Printed: Sold by
(...) Eliot, at his Shop in King (...).

The Preface.
IN the Subsequent Discourses, I have Studied all possible Plainness and
Perspicuity: My design therein being to Profit Ordinary Readers; yea, the
Meanest Capacities. I have not therefore (although I incline to the Negative)
Concerned my self with the Disputes about that Abstruse Question, Whether the
Saints in Glory shall have a Perfect Knowledge of the First Being? Or (which is
the same Question) see the Divine Essence it self? That Great Scholar and
Blessed Martyr, Peter Ramus said truly, He must have Gods own Logic, who is
able to give a perfect Definition of God. But a man may Perfectly Define that
whose Essence he can see and know. I do not find ( Austin excepted) that any of
the Ancients affirm this of the ETERNAL. I know the Schoolmen (in special the
Thomists) and Popish Authors; and some Protestants are for the Affirmative. But
those very Learned Writers, Gomarus, and his Scholar Dr. Voet, have with great
Judgment endeavored a Confutation of that Opinion. I have not produced any of
their Arguments; as judging that it would be little to the Edification of my
Hearers: But in speaking concerning the Beatifical Vision, I have chosen to
keep to Plain Clear Scripture Revelation, and not to be wise above what is
Written.

It was a good Expression of a Pious man, who Died not long since; I would not
(said he) part with the Hopes I have by Christ of Heaven, for Ten Thousand
Worlds. The Awful Providence of GOD call upon us to get Hearts Weaned from
this World, and to make sure of Treasure in Heaven. These SERMONS were Plucked
out of the Burning; when Seven Booksellers shops in Boston were Consumed in
those Flames, which on the Second of this Instant October. made a dismal
Desolation in the midst of this Great Town. Happy are they who in such a Day as
this, have an Enduring Substance in Heaven.

It has been Observed, That when God inclines the Hearts of any of His Servants
to dwell much in their Meditations on Another World, it is a Sign that they
have not Long to be in This World. Mr. Bolton Died Preaching on the Happiness
of Heaven. Our Famous Mr. Mitchel (who was in his Time the Glory of Cambridge)
his Last Lecture-Sermons were on the Eternal Glory of Believers, after this
Life. Those Excellent and Heavenly Discourses have been Printed at London, and
I wish they were Reprinted in Boston; where many much Inferior to them have
been so.

If there is any thing in the mentioned Observation (or whether there is or
no,) it may be hoped that the Time of my Departure from this Earth is near at
hand. It must needs be so; because I have been an Unprofitable Servant therein,
upwards of Seventy and Two Years; and more than Fifty are Expired, since I
began my Public Ministry in Boston. Would Christians Think much of the Vanity
of all things on the Earth; and on the Soul-satisfaction which is to be had in
Beholding the Glory of JESUS CHRIST in the Heavenly World, surely they would
Long to be there.

It is Reported concerning Sylvanus (a Minister at Nazareth) that when Hierom
Enquired of him, what he did most of all desire that GOD would do for him; his
Answer was, That it would Please Him to Dismiss me out of this Evil World. And
another Religious Person (Columbanus) importuned a special Friend of his, who
Earnestly Prayed for the Continuance of his Life; that he would not make that
Prayer in his behalf. Such were the Language of his Soul to be in the Heavenly
Country.

I must acknowledge, that the Prayers of the Lord's People, in the Dear Flock
to which I am Related, and of many Others, have been the Means of Lengthning my
Days for so long a Time. I am very sensible of their Love, and Bless GOD for
it. He has made my Old Age to be a Good Old Age; in that I am not under such
Decays (how ever Decayed) as many who have attained to my Years, are; which is
a wonderful Mercy; and a signal Answer of the Prayers of my Praying Friends.
Nevertheless for the future, Let me entreat them to Pray, not for my Longer
abiding here; but that whilst I am in the World, I may be Serviceable; and
that I might be made Meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and that
the Lord will graciously Hasten my being among, the Spirits of Just Men made
Perfect.

Increase Mather.
Boston, October 10 th, 1711.
Advertisement.
Lately Printed and Published some Excellent Sacramental Meditations,
Preparatory for Communion at the Great Ordinance of the SUPPER.

By the late Reverend SAMUEL WILLIARD, M. A. Vice President of Harvard College,
and Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop a little below the Exchange Tavern the
North side of King Street, Boston.

THE Happiness Of SAINTS in HEAVEN Is Wonderfully Great and Glorious.
Ephesians. 1. 18. -- The Riches of the Glory of His Inheritance in the Saints.
THese words are part of the Apostle's Prayer for the Saints of God in the
Church of the Ephesians: In which we have first the Object of the Prayer. The
Blessed GOD is the only Object of Prayer; who is in the preceding Verse styled,
The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Father of Glory. He is the God of
Christ in respect of Christ's Mediatory Office; and of the New Covenant of
which he is the Head. In the Old Testament, God is frequently called the God of
Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob; because of his Covenant with them: But in
the New Testament, He is Named the God of Jesus Christ; who is the Mediator of
the New Covenant. He is said to be given for a Covenant of the People. And God
is styled the Father of Glory; for that he is the most Glorious Father, and the
Author of all Glory, and he to whom all Glory is due. Secondly, We have the
Matter of the Prayer; or the thing which the Apostle prays for, in the behalf
of these Saints.

(1.) That God would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him. That Wisdom and Knowledge was already given to them; but he
prays that they might have more of it. No Saints on Earth have so much wisdom,
but they need more.

(2.) That the eyes of their understanding might be (...). What the eye is to
the Body, the understanding is to the Soul. He prays that they might have
greater measures of Divine Illumination: That they might with the eye of their
Souls see further into heavenly Mysteries.

(3.) That they might know what is the Hope of his Calling. God causes
Believers on Christ to hope for the glory of heaven: And they have sufficient
ground for that hope. The Apostle prays that they might know this. And this
prayer fitly follows upon the former particular; For notwithstanding they have
infinite grounds to believe that the glory of heaven shall be their Portion,
they cannot know that they have so, except God (...) Enlighten their minds.

(4) That they might (...) how (...) that Glory is which they are called (...)
hope for. The Apostle prays not only that they might have assurance of their
(...) title to an Inheritance reserved in heaven for them; but that it is a
rich and glorious (...); which are the words before us to insist on.

I shall Endeavor to give you the Meaning of them, in speaking to the DOCTRINE
to be insisted on; which is,

That the Happiness of the Saints of God in the Heavenly World, will be
wonderfully Great and Glorious.

Some Propositions for Opening and Confirming the Truth, may be set before us.

PROPOSITION I.
The Saints of God shall enjoy Happiness in Heaven. The Inheritance which the
Text speaks of, belongs to his Saints. And it is an heavenly Inheritance; an
Inheritance not to be enjoyed on earth, but in heaven.

1. There is and ever has been an holy purpose in the heart of God to have his
Saints with him (...) heaven; there to enjoy happiness. When ever God has
purposed, shall (...) be accomplished: His Decrees are unalterable: Job 23. 13.
He is of one mind, and who can turn him? Men off times purpose, and change
their minds upon (...) thoughts: They are subject to (...), and do not (...) at
first so far as afterward. But it is not so with God only wise. Psalm. 33. 11.
The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever; the thoughts of his heart to all
generations. Now there has been from eternity a gracious purpose in the heart
of God, concerning the salvation of his Saints; and their being made partakers
of the heavenly Inheritance: 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved us according to his own
purpose and grace, i. e. his gracious purpose, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began. He has Predestined them thereunto: Romans 8. 30.
Whom he did Predestinate, them he Called; whom he Called, them be Justified;
whom he Justified, them he Glorified Heaven and Happiness was designed for them
at the Foundation of the world. When God Created the world, the first thing
that he made, was an heaven for his Saints to dwell with him there to Eternity.
In the beginning God made heaven; that heaven which is the Saints Inheritance.
Therefore, it will be said to them at the last day Come you blessed, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34.

2. God has promised this inheritance to his Saints. He has not only purposed
to give it, but has made known his Purpose by his Promise. They are heirs of
the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him, Jam. 2. 5. Wherefore
Heaven is called the Promise: Heb. 10. 36. That you may inherit the Promise.
They that inherit Heaven, inherit the Promise. God promised Adam an happy use
in Patadise, in case of his continuing this Obedience. But he has promised that
which is better than an earthly life in Paradise to the true Believer, viz.
Eternal Life in heaven: 1 John 2. 25. And this is the promise that he has (...)
Eternal Life. The Covenant of Grace is better than the Covenant of Works: It is
a better Covenant; established upon better Promises. Hence the Promises of the
Covenant are said to be (...) great and (...), ^ Pet. 1. 4. An (...) in heaven
is an exceeding (...) thing; Eternal Life there, is a (...) thing. Now what
ever God has (...), will surely be performed. He is a (...) Covenant-keeping
God, not (...) he be otherwise. All that (...) David he performed. This (...)
acknowledged (...) the Prayer which he made at the (...) of the Temple; I King.
8. 23, 24. Lord God of Israel, there (...) God (...) thee who keeps Covenant
and Mercy with the Servants that walk before thee with all their heart; whohast
kept with thy Servant David my Father that then promised him; they spakest with
thy mouth, and (...) fulfilled it with thy hand. And all that God promised
concerning the Children of Israel, he made good: Ver. 56. Blessed he the (...),
that has given rest to his People Israel, according to all that he promised;
there has not failed one word of all his good promise. We may then be assured,
that where as God has promised to give his Saints an (...) Rest in the heavenly
Ganaan, he will not fail to do it.

3. Jesus Christ has purchased this Inheritance for his saints. They have a
right unto it not only by virtue of a promise; but of a blessed p^rchase. It is
a Purchased Possession, E^h. ^. ^4. Christ has bought his People with a
valuable price: Cor. 7. 23. Ten are bought with a Price. And when he bought
them, he bought heaven for them too. The heavenly Inheritance is infinitely
more Valuable than any earthly Inheritance; nevertheless, Christ has given as
much for the purchasing of it as it is worth; Namely, his own precious Life and
Blood. Believers are bought, and Heaven is bought for them; not with silver,
and gold, but with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. Silver and
Gold will purchase an Earthly Inheritance; but the Heavenly Inheritance is
infinitely more Valuable than all the Silver and Gold in the world: But the
precious Blood of Christ is of Value sufficient to Purchase it. No mere Man or
Creature, did ever Merit any thing at the hands of God; much less so great a
Good as the Glory of heaven: But Christ has done it with the price of his
infinitely Meritorious Blood. Believers may from the consideration of the
infinite Merit of that Blood, have an humble holy Confidence, of their entering
into heaven: Heb. 10. 19. Having boldness to enter into the Heliest by the
Blood of Jesus. It is not to be imagined, that Christ has Died in Vain. The
Apostle says, If Righteousness came by the Law, then Christ is Dead in Vain,
Gal. 1. 21. So it Believers should not obtain the heavenly Inheritance, then
Christ has Died and shed his precious Blood in Vain.

4. Heaven is come down into the Souls of those who are indeed Saints of God.
Where there is real Sanctity, heaven is come into the Soul: Heb. 3. 1. Holy
Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling. Men are apt to think, that the
happiness of heaven does consist in a perfect freedom from all afflictive
Evils, and in blessed Delights; and so it does in part, but more in Holiness.
Perfection in holiness is the glory of heaven. It Is said, We are Chosen that we
should be Holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. We are Chosen that we should be happy; to be holy is
to be happy. A sanctified man has an Heavenborn-soul: He is born from above;
that is from Heaven. True saving Grace is eternal Life and Glory in the
beginnings of it. It is called the first fruits, Romans 8. 23. The first fruits
were but an handful; yet a pledge of a plentiful crop. So is Grace in the soul,
of an harvest of Glory. Hence also, Grace is called the Earnest of the
Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. When men are purchasing an Inheritance, if they give
an Earnest Penny, that assures the Inheritance to them. Thus when the holy
Spirit begins a work of Grace in the soul of the Believer, that assures him,
that the heavenly Inheritance shall be given to him.

5. The Saints of God are his Adopted Children. A Saint and a true Believer on
Christ are the same. That glorious Privilege of Divine Adoption does belong to
all true Believers. They may lawfully think and say, that they are the Children
of God: Joh. 1. 12. But to so many as received him, to them gave he Power, that
is Right or Privilege, to become the Sons of God; even to them that believe on
his Name. They have in them the spirit of Adopted Children, Crying to God, Abba
Father; as Children will Cry, Father! Father! when they need any thing. Now if
God has Adopted them, he will certainly bestow His Inheritance upon them.
Natural Children are not always Heirs; but Adopted Children are. Believers if
they are (as they are) God's Adopted Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and
JoyntHeirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

6. If it were not for this Heavenly Inheritance, Believers would be the most
Miserable men in the world. 1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this Life only we have Hope in
Christ, we are of all men the most miserable. For often it is so; that Ungodly
men Prosper in the world: They have a brave time of it here; Riches, and
Honors, and Earthly happiness, more than heart could wish. When at the same
time, the Saints and Servants of God are Exposed to all manner of Miseries; and
this it may be too for their Godliness. For thy sake we are Killed all the Day
long! Therefore we may be assured that they shall be Happy in another world for
ever; and that will more than compensate for all their Afflictions in this
world. We may from such Providence conclude, that most certainly that there is
both an Heaven and an Hell. Since Wicked men have their Good things in their
Life time here, we may be assured that there is a Life to come in which they
shall receive Evil. It was well replied by a Christian Emperor, when some
informed him that an Old Noble man above Ninety Years was newly Dead; and that
he had been one of the Wickedest men that ever lived, and yet never met with
any considerable Affliction throughout the whole course of his Life; then (said
the Emperor) we may conclude that Divines tell us the Truth, when they say that
there is another World besides this wherein we now Live. Wicked Dives Lived at
heart-ease, faring Deliciously every day; but when Dead, and his Soul gone into
Eternity, he Cries but, I am in a place of Torment. So when we see Holy men,
and it may be such as have done great Service for God, under sore Afflictions
and Temptations, we may rest satisfied, that there is an Heaven in which they
shall be Comforted. It is against the Light of Natural Reason, so imagine that
Virtuous and Godly men shall be more Miserable than the Wickededst of men. Yet
so it must be, if there is not an Heavenly Inheritance reserved for them.

PROPOSITION II.
The Happiness of Saints in the Heavenly World, will be wonderfully Great.

For,

1. The Holy Scriptures do abundantly declare it to be so: 2 Cor. 4. 17. A far
more Exceeding Glory. There is a difficulty in translating the Apostle's words,
so as to give them a due Emphasis: One translates them, Mire supra modum, A
Glory which is wonderfully above measure. Another renders them, Excellently
Excelling Glory: Kath, hyperbolen eis hyperbolen. An Hyperbolical Glory, and
more than so. No Hyperbole of Expression can be beyond what this Glory really
is. Add one Hyperbole to another, and all will come short of what the Happiness
really is. It was Luthers saying, that Christ and Heaven admit of no Hyperbole.
We can not over speak in setting forth the Excellency of Christ, or the Glory
of Heaven: It is Ineffable. When the Apostle was Miraculously caught up to
Paradise, he saw a Glory that is Unutterable. The happiness of Saints in heaven
is beyond all Conception; therefore beyond all Expression. Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard; neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that Love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The Eye can see glorious
things: Men may hear of more glorious things than they can see: The heart may
think of more than the ear can hear. But the Happiness of Heaven is beyond all
Imagination. David when inspired by the Spirit of God, could not but admire
this happiness: Psalm. 31. 19. O! How great is thy Goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that Fear thee? O how great! It Is wonderfully great. There is a
mighty Treasure of Goodness, and so of Glory Laid up for them. And where is it
Laid up? It is in Heaven. Saints themselves will wonder and be amazed at their
own happiness in the Future state; especially at the glory and happiness which
after the Resurrection they shall be the Subjects of, (as hereafter we shall
show:) Notwithstanding their Souls had been in heaven for some time, (...)
wonderfully happy, yet to see such an Addition to their happiness at the Last
Day, it will make them wonder and admire, and glorify Christ, from whom
proceeds all their Glory: 2 These. 1. 10. When He shall come to be glorified in
His Saints, and to be admired in all them that Believe in that Day.

2. The things whereunto this Happiness is resembled in the Scripture, declares
it to be wonderfully great. If it should be set before us in the proper Dialect
of Heaven, whilst we remain in this Mortal state, we should understand nothing
of it. Christ said to Nicodemus; Joh. 3. 12. If I have told you Earthly things,
and you believe not: How shall you believe, if I tell you of Heavenly things?
Christ did by Earthly Similitudes and Parables, set forth Heavenly Mysteries
Should he have spoken of Heavenly Glories, in a Style suitable to the Nature of
them; mortal men could not have Comprehended it. Therefore is this happiness
described by Earthly Similitudes; by such things as men on Earth think the
enjoyers of them happy men. There are Three Expressions in the Text before us,
by which the Happiness of Saints in the Heavenly World is denoted.

(1.) It is compared to an Inheritance: If a man has a great Inheritance fallen
to him, he is counted an happy man: Therefore is Heaven resembled to an
Inheritance: 1 Pet. 1. 4. An Inheritance reserved in heaven for them. The Joys
of heaven are called, the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. When
Heaven is compared to an Inheritance, it is in allusion to the Land of Canaan,
which was divided by Lot to the Children of Israel; and given to them for an
Inheritance. Moses said to them, Ye are not come to the Rest (...) to the
Inheritance which the Lord your God gives you, but when you go over Jordan,
(...) dwell in the Land which the Lord your God gives you to Inherit, etc
Deuteronomy. 1. 2. 9, 10. A great part of their Temporal happiness was in their
Inheriting so desirable a Land. It is called a Pleasant Land, and a Goodly
Heritage, Jer. 3. 19. But what is Heaven then? It Is said of Canaan, that it was
(...) flowing with Milk and Honey, which was the Glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20.
6. The blessed satisfactions and sweet enjoyments of heaven were figured
thereby. If the Land of Canaan was a glorious Land, what a glorious place is
Heaven do we think? The holy Patriarcks who sojourned in Canaan desired a
better Country, that is an Heavenly one, Heb. 11. 16.

(2.) The happiness of Saints in the heavenly world, is set forth by resembling
it to Riches. That you may know what is the Riches: Riches imply more than a
little: One that has but a little, is not a rich man. There is more than a
little happiness in heaven. There they have such an abundance as does fill and
^atisfy all the desires of their Soul, Psalm. 36. 8. All the earthly riches in
the world, (...) not make a man truly happy. Solomon was a rich King: But what
does he say of all these things after he had had as great experience of what
satisfaction was to be found in the Profits and Pleasures, and Honors of the
world as ever man had? The Sum total which he brings in (...), Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity. (...) 1. 2. Some of the richest men in this world,
have been the most miserable men when they have gone out of the world. It was
said to the rich man in Hell; Remember that in thy lifetime then receivedst
thy good things, but now thou art tormented, Luke 16. 25. One of the Popes
said, he could never think of those words without horror. Nevertheless, men are
apt to esteem those who are rich to be very happy: Mal. 3. 15. We call the
proud (i. e. the rich who are commonly proud) happy. Therefore is the happiness
of heaven set forth by great Riches. In heaven there are riches: there are
treasures there, Mat. 6. 20. As for the riches of this world they are decerful.
Many a man has though it with himself, if he could but get such an (...), how happy
should he be; but when he has obtained it, he has found himself miserably
deceived. But in heaven there is the true Riches, Luke 16. 11. There are some
Cities which have an abundance of Riches in them, but never any City so rich,
as the City of God the heavenly Jerusalem. The wall of this City is said to be
garnished with all manner of precious Stones, Rev. 21. 19. The street is of
pure Gold; and as for the gates of it, they were all Pearls: Every several gate
was one Pearl. A Pearl as big as a man's finger, is of great Value: but a Pearl
as big as the gate of a City, is that the like whereunto was never known. It is
therefore (as a Learned Divine in his Exposition on this Scripture observes) an
holy Fiction; intimating that the happiness of heaven is so great, as the world
affords nothing comparable to it. Amongst men on the earth, a Kingdom is the
greatest Riches: He that has all the Riches of a great Kingdom under his
Command, is a rich man: Wherefore the happiness of Saints in the heavenly
world, is set forth by that of enjoying a Kingdom: Luke 12. 32. Fear not little
Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

(3.) Another expression in the Text before us, whereby the happiness of the
heavenly world is denoted, is Glory. Riches and Glory usually go together.
Worldly (...) esteem Riches Glory: The Sons of Laban said of Jacob, he has
gotten all this Glory, Gen, 31. 1. Meaning all his Estate: Psalm. 49. 16, 17. Be
not ye afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased.
When he dies, his glory shall not descend after him. Glory is sometimes the
same with Honor. These are the two things which men most earnestly desire: If
they can obtain these two, Riches and Honor with it, they think they shall
want nothing to make them happy: Eccl. 6. 2. A man to whom God gives riches,
wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his Soul of all that he
desires. Both these expressions are used to let us understand what a desirable
and happy world the heavenly world is. Heavenly Riches, and heavenly Honors
infinitely transcend Earthly ones. Christ says, If any man serve me, him will
my Father honor. It may be God will put honor upon him in this world; but to
be sure in another world, in Heaven and at the Last Day in the Resurrection
world. Then will he commend their Fidelity in the hearing of all Angels and
Men. Mat. 29. 21. We (...) thou (...) enter th^^ into the joy of thy Lord.
Their Faith will be found to Praise, and Honor and Glory Christ will confess
their (...) before his Father, and before his Angel Rev. 3. 5. And what greater
honor (...) there be? Thus shall they (...) Glory. Is it not an honor to be
Crowned? Christ will give to his faithful Servants a Crown that fades not
away. And a Crown of what? A Crown of Life! That Is the most Glorious Crown that
ever was.

3. If we compare the happiness of Heaven with other things, we shall see that
it is wonderfully Great. If we compare it either with the Good things, or the
Evil things of this world. If we compare Earth and Heaven together, we shall
see there is no comparison between them. Before Sin entered into the world the
Earthly Paradise was a delightful place. It was the Garden of Eden; that is of
Pleasure. The Heavenly paradise does infinitely excel the Earthly Paradise in
all what is desirable. There are things belonging to the Earth, which make it
desirable to Earthly men: There are hidden Treasures in it, with which God
fills the Bellies of some men, who have their Portion in this Life. There are
precious Stones, Silver, and Gold in the bowels of it: But no Eternal Riches,
as there is in Heaven: Heb. 10. 34. Knowing that you have in Heaven a better
and an enduring Substance. There are Pleasures to be enjoyed on the Earth; but
not Everlasting Pleasures. Whenas in Heaven there are Pleasures for evermore.
There it is that God makes his saints to Drink of the River of his Pleasures,
Psalm. 36. 8. The Souls in heaven swim in holy Pleasures, and they are
Perpectual, like a River that keeps running from age to age. There are Honors
to be enjoyed on the Earth; but not Everlasting Honors. Death will soon put an
end to all worldly Grandieur. But Heavenly Glory will last to Eternity, as
hereafter we shall show. This Earth it self is but like a Stage, which is set
up but for a while, and then it must be pulled down. The Scheme, the Fashion of
this world passes away, I Cor. v. 31. After it has continued a few Thousands
of Years, it must be taken down; nay, burnt up. All the Rich and Glorious
Cities on the Earth must be destroyed; but Heaven is a City which shall stand
to Eternity. It is a City that has Foundations. All the Houses on the Earth
shall be consumed with Fire at the latter day: 2 Pet. 3. 10. The Elements shall
melt with servent heat; the Earth also and the works which are therein shall be
burst up. But Heaven is an Eternal House. These things declare that there is no
comparison between Earthly and Heavenly happiness.

Let us compare the Sufferings of God's Children, whilst they are on the Earth,
with the Glory which they shall have in Heaven: Romans 8. 18. I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us. That Glory does incomparably Out-ballance all
their Afflictions. Put their present Afflictions into One Scale, and their
future Glory into the Other Scale, and the weight of Glory Out-weighs
Wonderfully. The weight of Glory does exceed by far and far, the heaviest
Affliction that ever any Saint of God was subject unto in this world; suppose
him to have been as grievously Afflicted as Job was, who Complains that if his
Grief were thoroughly weighed, and his Calamity laid in the balances together,
it would be Heavier than the sand of the Sea. All these Afflictions are as
light as a Feather, compared with the Weight of Glory in Heaven. Sometimes One
Affliction will Weigh down all the Good and Comfort of this World. If a man is
subject to a Tormenting Disease, he would willingly part with all his Estate,
to be delivered from that Misery: But the Glory of Heaven Out-balances all.
There is no more comparison between them, than there is between a few Sands and
a Mountain.

4. If we consider whose Inheritance this is, we must conclude that it is a
Rich and Glorious One. It is God's Inheritance: The Riches of the Glory of His
Inheritance. It is said to be His,

(1.) Because He is the Bestower of it: It Is his glorious Gift; Psalm. 84. 11. He
gives Glory. If he gives Glory, He will give like himself. It is reported
concerning a great King, that when he bestowed an Extraordinary Bounty, the
Receiver said the Gift was too great; he had not deserved so much: That Liberal
King replied, If it is too much for you to receive, it is not too much for me
to give. The greatest Riches of Glory is not too great for God to give: He has
infinite Riches: Enough to make Millions of needy Creatures exceeding Rich:
Phil: 4. 19. God shall supply all your need, according to his Riches in Glory.
He has not Only Glory, but Riches of Glory: He can make Thousands of Millions
of poor Creatures Vastly rich. Can we think, that the Great GOD will bestow a
Small Patrimony on his Children? Most certainly, the Adopted Children of God
will be the Richest Heirs in the World. Believers are Heirs of God, and
Joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Parents bestow Inheritances or Portions on
their Children, according to what Estate they have: They that are Vastly Rich,
will give Portions accordingly. What a Rich and Glorious Inheritance then will
the Infinite GOD bestow on every Child of his?

(2.) This Inheritance is said to be His, because it is his Propriety and
Possession. That cannot but be a Rich and Glorious Inheritance, which is God's
own Possession: This is true concerning that Heaven which his Saints shall
Inherit. An Acute and Worthy Divine Observes, that David does by this, prove
that they who Fear the Lord are the happiest men in the world; Psalm. 115. 15,
16. Tou are blessed of the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth: The Heaven, even
the Heavens are the Lords; but the Earth has he given to the Children of men.
As for the Earth, he gives that to the Sons of men: Let them take it says the
Lord, I give it to them: it shall be their Inheritance. But that is not an
Inheritance good enough for GOD. No: The Heaven of Heavens is His: Therefore
how happy must his Saints be, when he will take them up to that Heaven which he
has reserved for himself?

5. If we consider the Properties of the happiness, which the Saints of God
shall enjoy in the heavenly World, we shall see that it is wonderfully great.

For,

(1.) It will Continue for ever and ever. This is implied when it is called an
Inheritance. Saints in heaven are not like Tenants at will; but they are Heirs.
When an Inheritance is made over to a man, it uses to be to him and to his
heirs for ever. The Inheritance of heaven is by the firmest Deed that possibly
can be, made over to Christ and to his Heirs for ever; Romans 8. 17. Joint-heirs
with Christ. Other Inheritances are but Temporal: This is an Eternal
Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. Other Inheritances may Corrupt; but this is an
Inheritance Incorruptiable, 1 Pet. 1. 4. In this World men may have their
Riches taken from them by One means or other; but Heavenly Treasures can never
be lost. An Eminent Christian when he was at a Feast, would sometimes say; Here
is good Company, and so there is in Heaven; here is a Feast, and so there is in
Heaven: but here is Taking away; whenas there is none of that in Heaven. They
that choose Heaven for their Portion, shall not have it taken from them. David
was much affected with the Mercy of God, in that he had not only given him a
Kingdom; but had promised that it should be Established in his Family for a
Long time to come. This (said he) was a small thing in thy sight. Did he think,
the bestowing of a Kingdom on him was a small thing? No: It was a great thing:
But the continuance of it in his Family for a long time, made it a much greater
Mercy. Saints in Heaven enjoy a Kingdom, not for a long time only; but beyond
all time throughout eternal ages. An entrance is ministered to them abundantly,
into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
11. If a man should enjoy the Blessedness of the Heavenly World, if it were but
for One Day, that would be a greater happiness than for him to enjoy all the
Consolations which earth can afford for Thousands of Years; but what then is it
to enjoy that Blessedness throughout the never ending Days of Eternity?

(2.) Another property of this Happiness, is, that it admits of no
Interruption, no Intermission. It is a Spring Tide that has no Ebb; a Summer
that has no Winter; a Day that has no Night following it; Rev. 21. 25. The
Gates shall not at all be shut, for there shall be no Night there. There have
been Saints on earth, who have sometimes had a great Intimacy of Communion with
God; and then they have thought how Happy should they be, if it might be always
thus: Oh! it was good to be here. But, alas! This Heaven upon Earth was soon
interrupted. Soul Ravishing Joy, has been as that Ancient said, Rara hora et
brevis mora: A rare hour and of short stay. Old Bernards Companion being filled
with Joy, said; He hoped he should never be Sad more as long as he Lived: His
Joy was soon gone, and then he feared he should never have Comfort any more;
but be Disconsolate all his Days. But Saints in Heaven have Joy without any
intermission: Pleasures for evermore. The Consolation of Heaven is an
Everlasting Consolation. The Tree of Life is said to yield its Fruit every
Month; intimating the uninterruptedness of the Delights of Heaven.

(3.) Another property of this Happiness, is, that it is not subject to any
Fading. It Is called an Inheritance that Fades not away; and a Crown of Glory
that (...) not. Things in this World which have a singular Beauty and Glory in
them, quickly Fade and Wither. It Is said of the Lily, that Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like unto it: But it soon withers. Heavens Glory does not
so. Here men are taken with a pleasant Object for a while; but when they are
used to it; they Loose their Esteem of it. In heaven nothing Withers; nothing
grows Old and Scale. After a Saint has been in Heaven as many Millions of Ages
as there are Sands on the Seashore, the Glory of Heaven is as Fresh and
Delightful to him, as it was the first Day of his coming there.

PROPOSITION III.
Notwithstanding all the Saints of God shall partake of the same Happiness in
the Heavenly World; nevertheless, as to Degrees of Glory, there will be a
Difference. Every One of them will be Top-full of Glory; yet will there be a
Difference, because Some are more Capacious Vessels than Others are. A Small
Vessel though full, does not contain so much as a Larger Vessel does. The
Apostle speaking of the Glory of Saints in another World says, that One Star
differs from another in Glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. As in this World, there are some
Christians who are Stars of the first Magnitude, which Outshine Others; so
will it be at the Last Day, and in Heaven to Eternity. Some shall be placed
next to Christ in his Kingdom, which will be a special Dignity and Glory put
upon them, Mat. 20. 23.

Several Things may be mentioned which Confirm the Truth before us.

1. There are Some who have a far greater Measure of Grace than Others have.
Job was such an One: There was none like him on the Earth, Job 1. 8. He had not
his Peer among Mortals. Moses was another who had an Extraordinary Measure of
Grace. And Nehemiah speaks of One, of whom he says, that he Feared God above
many, Neh. 7. 2. There are Some who are Strong; Others are Weak in the Faith.
Some are Little Children in Grace and Christianity; Others are Men; Others are
Fathers, having had a Long standing in the School of Christ, and attained unto
a greater Degree and Perfection than Others have arrived unto. Indeed all True
Believers are Equally Justified; because the Righteousness of CHRIST is imputed
to the Weakest Believer as well as to the Strongest: but they are not all
Equally Sanctified. Some are far more Holy and Mortified Christians than Others
are. Now if GOD bestows a greater measure of Grace on some of his Servants in
this World, there is reason to believe that they shall have a greater measure
of Glory in Heaven.

2. There are Some who have done far greater Service for God, and have been
more Active Instruments in Glorifying his Name than Others have. Paul could
say, I have Labored more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Will not
that more (...) have a more (...) Reward? Has not Christ Promised that it
shall? Rev. 22. 12. Behold I come, and my Reward is with me; to give every man
according as his Work shall be: Both according to the Quality of his Works, and
according to the Quantity of them. It is therefore said, that he which sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he which sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully, 2 Cor. 9 6. There are some who have greater Talents committed to
them than others Ever had; and they have faithfully improved them to the Honor
of the God and Giver of them: He will then honor them accordingly. One has two
Talents, another has five: One is made Ruler over five Cities, another over
ten. The holy Prophets did Eminent Service for God, in bearing a Faithful
Testimony against the Sins of the time: Wherefore a greater Reward will in the
Day of Retribution be dispensed to them than to other Servants of the Lord. The
Reward of a Prophet is distinguished from the Reward of one who is only a
Righteous man, Mat. 10. 41. Some have been Instruments of Converting many
Sinners; and so of Saving many Souls from Death. There is a singular degree of
Glory reserved for such in the heavenly World: Dan. 12. 3. They that turn many
to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. The Apostle said
to the Thessalonians, that they would be his Crown and his Glory at the Coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Their having been the Seals of his Ministry, would
add Glory to his Crown at the Last Day, and in Heaven for ever, 1 These. 2. 19,
20. Can we think, that every Saint shall have as great a Crown of Glory as Paul
shall in that Day?

3. Some Saints have been greater Sufferers for Christ than others have. If we
Suffer with him, we shall Reign with him. And when we Reign with him, the
greater our Sufferings have been for his sake the greater will our Grown then
be. An Emperor once gave a Chain of Gold as big as those Chains of Iron which a
faithful Servant of his, had been laid in, when Imprisoned for Fidelity to his
Interest. But what will Christ then give to those who have Suffered
Persecutions and Reproaches for their Fidelity to his Interest? Blessed are
they, for Great shall be their Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 13, 14. The belief of
this, was One thing which made Christians in the Primitive Times, very desirous
to Die for the Name of Christ. They were persuaded that Martyrs would have
Aureolae; peculiar Crowns of Glory given to them. They in a peculiar manner
glorify God. It was said of Peter, that by his Death he should Glorify God,
Joh. 21. 19. He died a Martyr: Was Crucified the same day that Paul was
Beheaded, as the Martyrologists inform us. If they Glorify God and Christ above
Others, will not a singular Crown of Glory be given to them?

PROPOSITION IV.
The Glorious Happiness of Saints in the Heavenly World, is not bro't to its
full Perfection at once, but gradually. There are three steps in this Glorious
Happiness which I shall now only mention; and (if the Lord will) insist more
Largely on each of them, from other Texts of Scripture.

1. At the Hour of Death Believers on Christ are Happy: Then are they freed
from all Sin and Sorrow; Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead which Die in the
Lord. They pass immediately from Death into Eternal Life, Joh. 5. 24. When they
leave this World, they go to a Better; To the Heavenly Paradise. They go to
Christ: Being absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord. When their
Bodies are Dead, their Souls are Happy in their separate state. Therefore does
the Scripture speak of the Spirits of Just men made Perfect, Heb. 12. 23. The
Spirit whilst in the Body, is usually called the Soul; but when separated from
the Body, it is a Spirit.

2. In the Resurrection at the Last Day, there will be an Addition to their
Happiness. For then their Bodies as well as their Souls, will be the Subjects
of an immortal Glory. Without doubt the blessed Souls in Heaven,
notwithstanding their present Happiness, long for the Resurrection of their
Bodies, that both may be in the Heavenly World. Now they desire it, Heb. 11.
16. And then their Glory will be Visible to the whole World. For the present,
it is not known who are Elect and who are Reprobates; who goes to Heaven and
who to Hell; but at the Day of Judgment it will be seen who are Sheep and who
are Goats. The Glory of the Saints will then be as Visible as the Sun in the
Firmament, Mat. 13. 43. In the Resurrection World, they shall be as the Angels
of Heaven: Luke 20. 36. Neither can they Die any more: For they are equal to
the Angels; and they are the Children of God, being the Children of the
Resurrection. But of this we may Discourse fully hereafter.

3. After the Day of Judgment is over, they shall be Glorified with Christ in
the highest Heaven throughout the Days of Eternity. The Children of Israel had
an Inheritance in the Land of Canaan. Believers shall have theirs in the Heaven
of Heavens: 1 Pet. 1. 5. An Inheritance reserved in Heaven for you. There (and
no where else) is that Perfect Blessedness which the Saints of God hope for the
Enjoyment of; Col. 1. 5. The Hope (that is the Blessedness which is the great
Object of your Hope) Laid up for you in Heaven. But of this also we may (if God
permit) Discourse more Largely.

USE I.
This should put us upon Examining our Title to this Glorious Inheritance. We
should not be satisfied without Knowing what is the Hope of our Calling. Have
we a good Title? Have we a sure well grounded Hope? To Know this, is a greater
Mercy and Happiness, than all the Good which the whole World can afford.

Quest. But how may we know this?

Answ. 1. Are we Saints? The Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the
Saints, says the Text. Except we are Saints, we are not fit for this
Inheritance, nor does it belong to us. Col. 1. 12. Giving thanks to the Father,
who has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
If it were possible for an Ungodly man to get to Heaven, he would not find it a
place Meet for him. It is a most Holy place. What should an Unholy Sinner do
there? He would find nothing there of that which his sinful Soul does most of
all delight in. He would find no Company there suitable for him. Sinners do not
Love the Company of Saints: They cannot say as David does, All my Delight is
with the Saints on Earth. Sometimes if an Holy man comes into the room where
there is a Company of Vain persons, they will withdraw presently: The very
Presence of an holy man Damps them, and spoils their Mirth. What then would
they do in Heaven, where there are none but Saints; and such too as are
perfectly Sanctified? Say then, Are we Sanctified? If truly so, then Heaven is
Our Inheritance: Act. 20. 32. To give you an Inheritance among all them that
are Sanctified. Are our Hearts Holy? Do our Hearts within us desire much
Holiness, rather than much of the things of this World? If GOD should put it to
our Choice, would our hearts choose rather to be Holy than to be Rich and Great
in the World? That Is a sign that we are bound for Heaven, and that our Souls
shall be there when we leave this World: Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into
the Hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his Holy place? He that has clean
Hands, and a pure Heart! Do we Endeavor to perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God, and to purify our selves as He is pure? Then may we hope that we have a
right to this Inheritance, 1 John 3. 3. What are our Lives and Conversations,
are they holy and heavenly? Do we drive an heavenly Trade continually: Phil. 3.
20. Our Conversation is in heaven. Our Trading is there, says the Apostle.
Every Saint of God has the Privilege of Trading there: He sends Ventures to
heaven, and has rich Returns. To be much in Prayer and Praises, is to drive an
Heavenly Trade.

2. Is Heaven come down into our Souls? Are we Born from Above? Are we New
Creatures? Have we Experienced a New Birth? Are we Born of God? Then the
heavenly Inheritance belongs to us, and we have reason to hope for it. He has
Begotten us again unto a lively Hope; to an Inheritance reserved in heaven, 1
Pet. 1. 3, 4. Are we Renewed in the spirit of our Minds? Are we heavenly
minded? Do we think much of heaven every day? Are put hearts there: That Is a
sign that our Treasure is there; and that we our selves shall be there e're
long; That Heaven is our Native Country, and we are going thither every day.

3. Is Christ ours? The Heaven is ours, not else: 1 John 5. 12. He that has the
Son has Life; and he that has not the Son has not Life. He that has Christ has
Heaven; and he that has not Christ, has not Heaven. Christ is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life: Joh. 14. 6. The only true Way to obtain Eternal Life in
heaven. And how shall we know that we are his? We may know it by our Obedience
to his Commandments, Joh. 15. 14. You are my Friends, if you do whatsoever I
Command you. Can we say that we do so? Then Christ and all his saving Benefits,
Heaven and all are ours: Heb. 5. 9. He is the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all that Obey him. Does Christ dwell in our hearts by Faith? Are we United to
Him? Then Christ our Blessed Head in heaven, will draw us thither after him.
And as sure as Christ now lives in heaven, we shall in his good time live with
him there. For he has said, Joh. 14, 19, 20. Because I live, you shall live
also; You in me, and I in you.

USE II.
How should Saints on Earth Long to be in Heaven? When Monica (the very Pious
Mother of Austin) had heard Ambrose Preaching a Sermon about the Glory of
heaven; She said upon it, with a Longing to be gone, What do I here! Why do I
stay below still? But especially Aged Saints of God should be very willing to
exchange Earth for Heaven: It becomes them to say with good Old Simeon, Lord,
now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, Luke 2. 29. The last Miles are
wont to seem the longest to the weary Traveller. As we draw near to heaven, we
should think the time long until we come there. This weary world should become
tiresome to us. We shall never be happy as long as we are out of heaven: But
there we shall have happiness enough. Fullness of Joy and Pleasures for
evermore. Although the happiness of the Believer is not completed before the
Resurrection of the Dead, nevertheless, at the hour of his Death, his Soul goes
into ineffable Joy. He is immediately in heaven, as from another Scripture
shall be Declared and Evinced. It was well spoken by a Dying Saint, I have but
one dark Entry to go through, and I shall be in my Fathers house, Viz. the dark
Entry of Death: I must pass through the Valley of the shadow of death, and then
in heaven: In a world in which there is no sin. And who would not be willing to
die to be in such a world? And then and there the Soul is with Christ. And what
can there be more desirable? A Martyr replied to some that Tempted him (...)
save his Life by a sinful Recantation; saying, Are you not willing to abide
with your Wife and Children? Have you no Love for them? Yes, (said he) I would
rather choose to Live with them, though in a poor Condition; than to Live
without them in the Richest Prosperity: Neverthess, I must needs say, I had
rather be with Christ than with any of them. To be with Christ is Infinitely
more desirable than to be in this world. Therefore did the Apostle say, I have
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

The Glorified SOULS OF Just Men Have attained a Blessed Perfection.
Heb. XII. 23. -- The Spirits of Just Men made Perfects.
THE Design of the Apostle in the Context before us, is, to Excite Believers
unto Holiness: This is urged from the Consideration of those great Privileges
which they are d^e subjects of. Singular Mercies call for singular Obedience
and Holiness. Believers under the New Testament are Privileged above those of
the Old Testament: They are under a more Gracious dispensation. The Gospel
state of the Church is far more Excellent and Desirable than the Legal state
was. That which remains is far more Glorious: Therefore a greater measure of
holiness is required and expected from those who are concerned in it. This,
with the preceding and following Verse contains the Privileges which Believers
receive by the Gospel. We have therein a description (...) the true Catholic
Church. The Catholic Church comprehending all Gods Elect and Called Ones, is
distributed into two Parts; Viz. That which is Militant, and that which is
Triumphant. The Apostle speaks of Both.

1. He asserts that Believers are come to Mount Sion; the City of the Living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem. By Sion, we are not to understand the Literal
Sion; but the Church of God, of which Sion was a Figure. As for the Literal
Sion, it had two (...); On One of which the Temple was Built, where the Priests
did resort to Offer Sacrifice and Incense; which had a Typical respect to the
Priesthood of our Lord Jesus Christ: On the Other head of Sion, David and other
Kings of Judah had their habitations, who were also Types of Christ. The City
of the Living God and the Heavenly Jerusalem, intend the same thing with Sion.
Sion was the Upper part of Jerusalem. The Apostle to the Galatians calls it,
The Jerusalem which is Above. The Church of GOD was Typified thereby. The
Church is the City of GOD which he has built for himself, there to (...) for
ever; and it comes down from Heaven. The Church is not an Earthly City; and a
great part of the Catholic Church is already in heaven. And as for that part
of the Church which is here below, the Ordinances which belong unto it are
Spiritual, Divine and Heavenly Institutions. The great Promises which are in
the Scripture made to Sion, and to Jerusalem are not to be understood of the
Literal Sion and Jerusalem, but of the Church. Glorious things are spoken of
that City of GOD.

2. Another Privilege of Believers, is, that they are come to an innumerable
Company of Angels. The Apostle having spoken concerning the City of God, he
proceeds to speak concerning the Citizens or Inhabitants of the heavenly
Jerusalem. These are of several Sorts. The first that he mentions are Angels:
Of these it is said there are Myriads. That Is the Greek word here used. A Myriad
is Ten Thousand. Myriads in the Plural Number, denotes (...) Millions; Or as
our Translation Expresses it, An innumerable Company: The holy Angels are so.
Daniel in a Vision saw Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand of them. Believers are
said to be come to them, because they are Fellow-Citizens with Angels. Angels
and they are Citizens of the City of GOD: Yea, and they are Fellow Servants of
the same LORD. The Angel said to John, I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy
Brethren, Rev. 20. 10. Angels in Heaven, and Believers on Earth are
incorporated into the same Family of GOD: Ephesians 3. 15. Of whom the whole Family
in heaven and earth is called. Angels and Glorified Saints are the Family in
Heaven: Believers in this World, are the Family on Earth. Angels in Heaven, and
Believers on Earth Worship the same GOD. Believers Worship none besides that
GOD who made Heaven and Earth; and the Host of Heaven, Viz the holy Angels
Worship him, Neh. 9. 6. And they Worship the same Lord JESUS CHRIST. Heb. 1. 6.
Worship him all ye Angels. John in the Revelation beheld many Angels; the
Number of them was Ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;
and he heard them saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was sla^^, to receive Honor
and Glory and Blessing. Elect Angels and Elect Men are brought into the same
Mystical Body, under Christ the Head of them all: That in the dispensation of
the fullness of times, he might gather together in One all things in Christ both
which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, Ephesians. 1. 10. It may then well be
said of Believers, that they are come to the innumerable Company of Angels.

3. They are come to the General Assembly. The Church under the Old Testament
had Conventions and General Assemblies: They had Three such every Year which
met at Jerusalem: But those General Assemblies were only of One Nation. Whereas
the New Testament Church, is an Assembly gathered out of all the Nations on the
Earth: They are Redeemed out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, Rev. 5. 9. This General Assembly is dignified by two Characters.

(1.) It Is called the Church of the Firstborn. Among the Israelites, the
Firstborn was Privileged above the Younger Brethren: he was the chief Heir,
having a Double Portion. So they who are of the true Gospel Church, shall Enjoy
the Heavenly Inheritance.

(2.) They are described to be such as have their Names written in Heaven. The
Firstborn among the Children of Israel, had their Names Enrolled in an Earthly
Register, Numb. 3. 42. But true Believers on Christ, have their Names Registered
in Heaven. Christ therefore said to his Disciples, Rejoice, because your Names
are written in heaven, Luke 10. 20. This Register is called the Book of Life,
Phil. 4. 3. Rev. 20. 15. All the Elect of God have their Names written in that
Book; not shall they ever be blotted out of it: The Book of Life, the Register
of Heaven has no blot in it.

4. Believers are come to God the Judge of all. This is a word of terror and
dread to a Christless Sinner; because the Judge is his incensed Enemy: but it
is a word full of comfort to true Believers. For through the Mediation of Jesus
Christ the Mediator of the New Covenant, God the Judge of all is become their
Friend; their best and greatest Friend, so that they have boldness in the Day
of Judgment. They may draw near to his Throne, as to a Throne of Grace. God who
is the Judge of all, will Judge for them; and will Judge and Condemn their
Enemies. He is a Righteous Judge: He will therefore Judge those to Wrath who
have troubled his Faithful Servants: And will Judge, that Believers shall have
the Crown of Life which Christ has Purchased for them. It is happy for them
that they come to that God who is the Judge of all, as to a Reconciled God and
Father in Jesus Christ.

5. Believers are come to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. They are the
words before us to insist on. Believers on Earth are come to the Saints in
Heaven, in respect of Faith, and Hope, and Love. They are incorporated into the
same Family: They are united by the same Spirit. Saints on Earth are partakers
of the same Holy Spirit, which possesses Saints in Heaven, although not in the
like degree and measure. And they are as sure to be with them in the heavenly
World, in a little time as if they were there already. Yea, in respect of
Christ their Head they are there. By the Spirits of Just men, their never Dying
Souls are meant. Every man does consist of two essential Parts, a Soul and a
Body: The first man that ever was made did so: And all other men do so. The
Soul is often in the Scripture called the Spirit: Especially the Soul in a
state of separation from the Body: For when the Soul is Unbodied, it is a pure
Spirit, like the Angels who are called Spirits. The Perfection here spoken of,
is only a Perfection of the Soul. Just men are not wholly Perfected before the
Last Day. Their Bodies are not Perfected until the Resurrection; but their
Souls are Perfected as soon as they leave their Bodies, and go to the Heavenly
World.

The DOCTRINE to be insisted on, is;

That there is a Blessed Perfection which the Souls of Just Men attain unto,
when their Bodies are Dead.

The Doctrine may be Opened and Confirmed in Four Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
True Believers on Jesus Christ are Just Men. There are but two sorts of men in
the World; the Just, and the Unjust: So does the Scripture distinguish, Act.
24. 15. The whole World is divided into these two. There is not a man upon
Earth, but is among the Just, or among the Unjust All Christless Sinners are
the Unjust: All true Believers are the Just. They are Justified Persons: GOD
declares them to be so. He is the Justifier of him that believes on Jesus, Romans
3. 26. A Righteous man and a true Believer on Christ are the same Persons.
There is a twofold Righteousness belonging to the Believer.

1. An Imputed Righteousness; Romans 4. 6. David describes the Blessedness of the
man to whom God Imputes Righteousness without Works. And Ver. 11. It Is said,
Abraham is the Father of all them that believe; that Righteousness might be
Imputed to them also. Were it not for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to
him, no man living could be a just man in the fight of God. Gal. 2. 16. Knowing
that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by Faith in Jesus
Christ; that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works
of the Law: for by the Works of the Law, shall no Flesh living be justified.
Wherefore no Soul of man had ever been among the innumberable Company of
Angels, or in the Heavenly Jerusalem, if it had not been for the Righteousness
of Christ imputed to them

2. There is an Inherent Righteousness, which true Believers are also the
Subjects of; where ever the Righteousness of Christ is imputed, a work of
Sanctification follows. If Christ is made of God unto us Righteousness for our
Justification, he is also the Author of Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Justification and Sanctification, or Imputed and an Inherent Righteousness
always go together. Believers on Christ are holy Persons. They have holy
hearts, and they live holy lives, and are therefore just men. It is said of
Zachary and Elizabeth, that they were both Righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, Luk 1. 6.

PROPOSITION II.
The Souls of Men do not Die, nor ly Dormient when their Bodies Dye. The Bodies
of men are mortal. Rom 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal Body. But the
Soul is not Mortal^. The Soul is an Immortal Spirit. In this the Reasonable
Soul of man, excels the Sensitive Soul of inferior Creatures, which does
Expire and Die when their Bodies Die, Eccl. 3. 21. Who knows the Spirit of Man
that goes upward, and the Spirit of the Beast that goes downward to the Earth?
The spirit of a Beast was in the first Creation formed out of the Earth: The
Earth brought it forth, Genesis 1. 24. But it was not so with Man. Although his Body
was made of the Dust of the Earth, his Soul was not so: that came from GOD
immediately. His Creator Breathed into him the Breath of Life, and Man became a
Living Soul, Genesis 2 7. The Hebrew word Chaijm, signifies Lives in the Plural
Number. There is the Vegetative Life of a Plant, the Sensitive Life of a Beast,
the Intellectual Life of an Angel. Man by reason of his Soul has all these
Lives. He has not only a Mortal, but an Immortal Life. His Soul coming from
God, when the Body Dies does not go downward, but upward to him who gave the
first Soul to Man. So says Solomon, Eccl. 12 7. The Dust shall return to the
Earth as it was: and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Wherefore when
men Die, they are said to Depart: Their Bodies do not depart from the Earth:
they abide in the Grave, which is their Long Home; but (...) Souls depart out
of their Bodies, and out of this World. Good Old Simeon was very willing to
Depart, Luke 2. 29. Paul knew that the time of his Departure was at hand, 2 Timothy
4. 6. And he desired to Depart, Phil. 1. 23. The Greek word Analvo, which is
used in all those Scriptures, signifies, To Loose Anchor. A Metaphor taken from
Mariners; who Loose Anchor, that so they may pass from One Port to another, and
from One Country to another. Thus it is with the Believer; when his Body Dies,
his Soul goes to a blessed Port, to the Heavenly Country. Hence the Soul is
said to dwell in the (...), as an Inhabitant in an House. (...) this World, we
Dwell, that is to say, our Souls dwell in houses of Clay, Job 4 19. Our Bodies
are Houses of Clay. Paul speaks of Two Houses which the Souls of Believers
dwell in; first an Earthly, then an Heavenly House. The Body is an Earthly
House, when that is dissolved their Souls go to an Heavenly House, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
To the same purpose Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1. 13. As long as I am, h. e. as long
as my Soul is; for the Soul is the Man, in this Tabernacle. The Tabernacle may
be pulled down, and yet the Inhabitant who has dwelt in it live still. In Ver.
14. He speaks of putting off the Tabernacle of his Body. The Soul is clothed
with the Body. A Godly man has no more cause to be afraid of Dying, than he
would be afraid of putting off his Clothes and going to Rest. The same
Apostle, in ver. 15. calls his Death, his Decease; In the Original, it is my
Exodus When Believers Die, they do as the Children of Israel did, go out of
Egypt into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey: They go to Heaven. It is said of
Papists, that they Blaspheme (Idolatry is called Blasphemy) them that dwell in
Heaven, Rev. 13. 6. Because they Worship Saints departed. At their Departure
they are with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Their Souls are Under the Altar, Rev 6. 9.
Christ is the Altar. The Soul being a spiritual substance, and not of the same
Nature with the Body, is capable of subsisting by it self out of the Body:
Although while it is Embodied, it uses to act by Bodily Organs; nevertheless, it
can act without them; and sometimes has done so. In Ecstasies and Trances, the
Soul is very active when the Body is senseless, and acts not at all. Peter was
in a Trance, and then he had mavelous Visions. Act. 10. 10. A Trance is when
all the Bodily Senses are bound, but the soul is at liberty. The Souls of men
may Converse with GOD, or with Angels, when their Bodies are cast into a deep
sleep. Thus it has been in Divine Dreams: Job 33. 15. God speaks to Men in a
Dream, in the Vision of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon them. Of this
Abraham had Experience, Genesis 15. 12. And the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 10. Ver. 9.
By these things it is manifest, that the Soul does not wholly depend on the
Body as to its Operation; and if not as to its Operation, then not as to its
Existence. The Soul when separated from the Body, has not (nor have Angels)
bodily Eyes or Ears; nevertheless, it has that which is Analogous thereunto, so
that it can see and hear. The Apostle, when his Soul for ought he knew to the
contrary was out of his Body, heard words spoken, 2 Cor. 12. 4. This which has
been said, Proves that the Soul is capable of Existing and Living in a state of
separation from the Body. And that the Souls of some have done so, we know from
Scripture. There was a Child dead: His soul gone clear out of his body. The
Prophet Elijah under a Divine Inspiration, Prayed saying, O Lord my God, I Pray
thee, let this Child's soul come into him again; and the soul of the Child came
into him again, and he revived, 1 King. 17. 21, 22. There was the Daughter of
Jairus, a Damsel of Twelve Years Old, known to be dead; but at the Command of
Christ her spirit came again, Luke 8. 55. Yea, the Scripture speaks of some
Living still, notwithstanding as to their bodies, they have been dead for more
than a Thousand Years. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they are all Living to GOD,
Luke 20. 38. It is said of believing Gentiles that they shall fit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 8. 11. Which words are
a description of going to Heaven Believers when they leave this world, go to a
joyful Feast in heaven. Lazarus Died, and was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16. 22. He sat down as a Guest with Abraham at the same Feast. But
if the Scripture were silent about the Immortality of the Souls of men, it
might be known by the Light of Natural Reason. And therefore it has been
received as (...) Truth in all Nations, and in all Ages of the World. Not only
the more Polite and Civillized Nations, but the most Barbarous Heathen have not
been so Barbarous and Brutish, as to have no sentiments of the Immortality of
their own Souls. Our American Indians before the Gospel came among them, did
not believe that their Souls died with their Bodies: but that they went to
another Country they knew not whither. Because the Souls Immortality has been
the general Sentiment of Mankind, some perverting that Truth, have embraced the
absurd Error of the Transmigration of Souls. So did Pythagoras teach his
Disciples. And long before him, the Indian Philosopher Phoe, seduced the East
Indians into that Opinion, which remains among them still. Therefore they do
not think that Souls dye. The truth is, Not Only that the Souls of men shall
not, but that they can not Die: Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul. It is beyond the Power of any Creature in
the world to kill the soul. The Martyrs would comfort themselves with that
Thought, when their Enemies would threaten them with Death; they would say, Do
your worst, you can but kill our Bodies, you can not kill our Souls. Nay, a man
can not kill his Own Soul: He may easily kill his body, but he can not possibly
kill his soul. The Damned in Hell would be glad to Kill their Own Souls, if
they could possibly do it; but they can not. When the Scripture speaks of the
souls Dying, and of the souls Destruction, a natural death like that of the
body, is not intended thereby; Only the souls Misery is called Death. When it
suffers the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, then it dies. The Soul is capable of
Meditating on Eternal Objects, which is an Argument of its Immortality. It can
think of GOD, and CHRIST, and Heaven, and Angels; which Creatures wholly Mortal
cannot do. That Habit or Principle of Grace which is infused into Regenerate
souls, never dies. It is a well of Water springing up into Everlasting Life: A
seed which is incorruptible. It abides in the soul Eternally, Joh 4. 10. 1 Pet.
1. 23. 1 John 3. 9. Therefore the soul it self must nee as be immortal. Nor do
the Souls of Men ly Dormient, when their bodies Die. There have been a sort of
Men in the world, called Soul sleepers; whose Opinion was that the souls of men
sleep with their Bodies, from the time of their Death to the General
Resurrection, and that then they shall awake. This Unchristian and Unreasonable
Opinion was Condemned in a Synod many Ages since: Yet some men of Corrupt Minds
do still maintain it; notwithstanding it is a Notion contrary to the Nature of
their Own Souls. Death is often compared to Sleep; but that is in respect of
the body and not of the soul. When Stephen Died it is said, He fell asleep; but
his Soul did not sleep: for he Died, saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
Spirits are not subject to sleep. Angels being Spirits they never sleep. The
like is to be said of Souls separated from their Bodies. As for the Souls of
Wicked men, they are in such Misery when their Bodies are Dead, as that they
can not sleep, if Otherwise they were capable of it: They are in Flaming
Torment. How then can they sleep? And as for the Spirits of Just men, in Heaven
they are always Serving and Praising GOD there: Rev. 7. 15. They are before the
Throne of GOD, and serve Him Day and Night in His Temple Sinful men in this
World, will sleep when they are before GOD: When they are Hearing his Word (as
Eutychus did) they will (...) Asleep. When they should be Praying, they fall
Asleep: But in Heaven they do not so.

PROPOSITION III.
The Immortal Souls of Just Men when in a state of Separation from their
Bodies, are made Perfect. All those Imperfections which attend them (...) their
Souls are Embodied, are done away at the hour of Death, and a Blessed
Perfection succeeds. 1 Cor. 13. 10. When that which is Perfect is come, that
which is in Part shall be done away.

Quest. What Perfection is it, which Just Men do then attain unto?

Answ. 1. When they depart out of this world, they have a Perfect Deliverance
from all Afflictive Evils. Men whilst in this world, are subject to Affliction
more or less; Job. 5. 7. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
But Especially Just men are the men which see Sorrrow in this world. Psalm. 34.
19. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous. The Lord JESUS CHRIST has
faithfully Forewarned his Disciples that so they might be Forearmed, that in
the world they shall have Tribulation: Yea, and that they should Expect it
daily; Luke 9. 23. If any man will come after me, let him Deny himself, and
take up his Cross daily. They that will resolve for Heaven, must lot upon it,
that they shall meet with many Afflictions in the way: Act. 14. 22. We must
through much Tribulation Enter into the Kingdom of God. But when once they are
got safe into the Heavenly Kingdom, they shall never see trouble more. Then and
there will that Promise be gloriously fulfilled, Jer. 31. 12. They shall not
sorrow any more at all. Just men as long as they are in the Body, are Obnoxious
to all sorts of Afflictions; but when out of the Body, to no Affliction at all.

(1.) In this world they are afflicted with Satan's Temptations. God will never
suffer that Enemy to destroy them; nevertheless, for holy ends He suffers him
to afflict them. The History of Jobs Afflictions, are a remarkable Instance of
it. He throws Darts at the Faithful Servants of God, and sometimes fiery Ones
too. And it is observed, the more good any man does in the world, the more will
Satan give him molestation one way or other. And the more Grace any man has,
the more is Satan in a rage at him. In great wrath he makes War with those that
keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. But when
once their Souls are among the Spirits of Just men made Perfect, they are got
clear of the Devils Territories, and of all his Temptations for ever. They are
out of Satan's reach there: For his wrath is only on, or near the Earth: There
he goes to and fro, and walks up and down in it. He is confined to this
Atmosphere: He can ascend no higher than the Air; where the Prince of this
world has a power of Evil Spirits and Tempters under him, Ephesians. 2. 2. But the
Spirits of Just men made perfect, are in an Heaven far above the Air. Satan
with his Temptations cannot come there. As Christ said to the Jews, Whither I
go, ye cannot come; so whither the Souls of Just men go when their Bodies die,
the Devil cannot come. He was once in Heaven, but GOD has banished him out of
that which was his Native Country, and he shall never come there again. When
Sennacherib thought to enter Jerusalem, the Lord said, he shall not come into
the City, nor shoot an Arrow there,, Isa. 37. 33. So the Sennacherib of Hell
shall not come into the Heavenly Jerusalem, nor shoot the Arrows of his
Temptations there.

(2.) Believers whilst in this world, are subject to Afflictions from the
World. For the World hated them. It hated Christ; and the more a man does
resemble Christ, and the more service he does for the Name of Christ, the more
will the World hate him, Joh. 15. 19. And if they are Hated by the World, they
will be Persecuted. It ever has been so, and ever will be so. The Seed of the
Serpent will have an Enmity against the Seed of the Woman: 2 Timothy 3. 12. All
that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. The more Godly
any man is, the more shall he be Persecuted by Ungodly men. If they can
discover themselves to be the Seed of the Serpent in no other way, they will do
it by their Venomous Tongues, in Reproaches and Revilings. But when the Bodies
of Righteous men are in their Graves, the Wicked will cease from troubling; and
when their Souls are in Heaven, that Promise in 2 Samuel 7. 10. will be fulfilled
in the perfection of it, I will appoint a place for my People Israel, and will
plant them that they may dwell in a place of their own^ neither shall the
Children of Wickedness afflict them any more. When their souls are placed in
heaven, they are in a place of their own. This world is not their own: It is
not their home. On Earth they are Strangers and Pilgrims; not Earth, but Heaven
is their home. This world is not to the Believer his own, but another man's,
Luke 16. 12.

(3.) Just men while their Spirits abide in Flesh, meet with many Afflictions
from the holy Providence of God. In Love and Faithfulness He Orders Afflictions
for them: Prove. 3. 12. For whom the Lord Loves, he Corrects, even as a
Father the Son, in whom he Delights. They many times meet with sad
Disappointments, which prove a sore Affliction to them. But when once their
souls are in Heaven, they will meet with no Disappointments there; unless it
be, that they will find Heaven to be a far happier place than Ever they could
imagine. Here they meet with Losses which afflicts them: It may be with Losses
in their Estates; as Job a just man, lost all: A Vastly Rich man, and suddenly
as Poor as Job. But when once they are in Heaven, they shall have a better and
greater Estate, than ever any man in this world had; and never loose any part
of it: Heb. 10. 34. You took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in
your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance. In this
world, they are Afflicted with the Loss of Friends, of near and dear Relations;
it may be of Children, which sometimes proves a very bitter heart-piercing
Affliction. In Rama was there a Voice heard, Lamentation, and Weeping, and
great (...); Rachel Weeping for her Children, and would not be Comforted,
because they are not, Mat. 2. 18. In Heaven there are none of these Losses.
There Friends never part. In this world, they are sometimes Afflicted with
Bodily Infirmities and Pains: But in the Heavenly World there shall be no more
Death, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain, Rev. 21. 4. In this
world the Lord's Servants may be subject unto Divine Desertions: GOD hides his
Face from them, and that proves a Soul-wounding Affliction. Heman Complains,
that his soul was full of trouble; that the Lord had cast off his soul, and hid
his Face from him; and that he suffered the Terrots of God almost to
Distraction. The Church complains, that the Comforter which should relieve her
Soul, was far from her. There are none of these Complaints in Heaven. The
blessed Souls there, have the Face of GOD always shining upon them. Then and
there the truth of that Scripture will be seen; Isa. 54. 8. In a little Wrath I
hid my Face from thee, for a Moment; but with Everlasting Kindness will I have
Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. Thus shall the Righteous be
Eternally Delivered out of all their Afflictions. But the Spirits of Just me
when separated from their Bodies, enjoy a far more Perfect Happiness than this,
of being Delivered from all Afflictive Evils.

For,

2. They are Perfectly freed from Sin. Romans 6. 7. For he that is Dead, is freed
from Sin. The Believer whose Heart is Sanctified and Sin Mortified in him, is
now freed from Sin as to the Dominion of it; but when his Body is Dead, he is
perfectly freed from Sin as to the Being of it: unto which the Apostle in those
words has respect: When once their Souls are in Heaven, before the Throne of
God there, they are Sinless and Faultless: Rev. 14 5. They are without Fault
before the Throne of God.

For,

(1.) They are perfectly delivered from Original Sin, That which the Scripture
calls, the Sin that dwells in us; under which holy men Mourn as long as they
continue in this world: Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver
me from the Body of this Death? One of the Ancients fitly compares indwelling
sin to Ivy in the Wall of an House. Others have as fitly compared it to the
Leprosy in the House of the Israelites, which must be pulled down before it
could be perfectly cleansed and cleared of that woeful Evil, Lev. 13. 45. A man
becomes a sinful Creature, as soon as there is an Union between his soul and
his body; and the just man cease to be a sinner, when that Union is
dissolved. When he gives up the ghost, indwelling sin gives up the ghost with
him. The habit of sin is wholly Eradicated out of his soul. The disposition to
sin is then perfectly abolished: The root and seed of sin has no more an
inherence in his soul. There is no more in him any inclination to that which is
Evil, or any indisposition to that which is Good.

Hence,

(2.) There is a perfect blessed freedom from all Actual Sin. When once the
Just man's Soul is in Heaven, he shall never sin more, in Word Thought or Deed;
never have one Vain Thought in his mind, nor speak one Unprofitable Word
throughout the Days of Eternity. The Just man's spirit when separated from his
body, is in a place where there never was any Sin: For there never was any Sin
in Heaven, which is therefore called an Inheritance Undefiled. If sin had been
committed there, it would have defiled Heaven, as it did Paradise. And there
never shall be sin there. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
Defiles, Rev. 21. 27. On Earth there is not a man wholly free from sin: Eccl.
7. 20. There is not a just man on Earth, that does good, and sins not. But
in Heaven there are Just men who never sin: and none but such are there. In
Heaven they are in the immediate presence of GOD, and are always sensible that
they are so; and therefore they sin not. When their Souls are absent from the
Body, they are present with the Lord, 2. Cor. 5. 8. The Lord Jesus Christ
receives their Souls, and presents them to God. Wherefore Dying Stephen said.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Act. 7. ^^. Dr. Goodwin speaks of an holy man,
who when Dying Expressed himself after this manner, Notwithstanding I am
assured that God Loves me, and will receive my Soul: nevertheless, I should be
afraid to appear before so Glorious a Presence did I not know that Christ is in
Heaven to present me to Him. Therefore the Souls of (...) men when Separated
from their Bodies are sinless: For Christ will present them as without sin to
his Father (...) He is able to present you (...) before the presence of his
Glory. (...) there is in the hearts of some (...) holy Spirit of GOD has
wrought this desire in their hearts. He would not put such longings into their
souls, if he did not intend to give them their desire. Some may be ready to
say, But how is it possible that a Soul which has so much sin in it, should be
made perfectly pure from sin in a moment of time? To this that answer may be
given, which the Angel gave to the Virgin Mary; when she was astonished at the
wonderful thing God would do for her, and said, How can this be? The Angel
said, To God nothing is unpossible. GOD is able to cause such a wonderful
Change in the Soul to be accomplished in One Day, in One Moment. GOD who
Converts a Soul from a state of sin in a moment; who turns a Sinner into a
Saint in a moment, as he has often done, can make a Sinful Soul to become a
Sinless Soul in a moment. And the Consideration of what shall be done to the
Saints, whom Christ shall find alive on the Earth when he shall come to Judge
the World at the Last Day, may Confirm our Faith concerning this also. Their
Bodies and their Souls too will be wonderfully Changed in a moment. Just before
the Last Trumpet shall sound, they will have Souls and Bodies subject to Sin;
but as soon as the Trumpet is heard sounding, they are made Perfect in a
moment. Behold, I show you a Mystery; We shall not all Sleep, but we shall all
be Changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trump, (for
the Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised Incorruptible, and we
shall be Changed,) 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. And thus it was with Enoch, and Elijah,
when they were Translated: Before their Translation they were subject to sin;
but in a moment perfectly freed from sin. Why then should it not be so with the
Souls of Just men, when they are Translated from Earth to Heaven? But this
shall be further Confirmed and Cleared in the next Proposition.

3. The Spirits of Just men when in a state of separation from their Bodies,
attain unto a great Perfection in Knowledge. There is a world of Ignorance and
Error which the minds of Good men (as well as Others) are subject unto, as long
as they are in the Body: but when absent from the Body, that Ignorance and
Darkness Vanishes away. They will then see clearly those things, which now
they have but a very dark and imperfect Knowledge of: 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see
through a Glass Darkly, but then Face to Face: now I know in part, but then I
shall know, even as also I am known. Sin has miserably Darkened the Ey of the
Understanding: In Heaven that Darkness is perfectly removed. Adam before his
Fall, had a very quick and clear Understanding: He could see into the Nature of
the several Creatures which were bro't before him, and at the first fight could
give them suitable Names. Whatever Wounds are given to the Understanding by the
Fall, are perfectly Cured in Heaven. The Soul is capable of Containing a Vast
measure of Knowledge. It is said of Solomon, that GOD gave him Understanding
exceeding much, and largeness of Heart, even as the sand that is on the
Seashore. What an infinite Number of Sands are there on the Seashore? So
there was an infinite Number of Notions comprehended in Solomon's mind. But
there is not a Soul among the Spirits of Just men made Perfect, which has not a
far more enlarged Understanding than ever Solomon had. That Eminent Divine but
now mentioned, says, that an Elect Infant dying as soon as it comes into the
world, suppose but an hour old, when once it is in Heaven, has a greater
measure of knowledge than Solomon had. Doubtless it is so: For Heaven is full
of Glorious Light, Col. 1. 12. The Blessed Souls there know more of the Nature
and Attributes of GOD, than in this World they could attain unto. Agur says, I
neither Learned Wisdom, nor have the Knowledge of the Holy, Prove 30. 4. David
speaking of the Attributes of GOD, says, Such Knowledge is too Wonderful for
me; it is high, I can not attain unto it, Psalm. 139. 6. But in Heaven they have
blessed Seize. A great part of the Happiness of the Glorified, is in this
Knowledge. It is Life Eternal to know GOD. And they have a far greater and
clearer Knowledge of the Works of Creation, and of the Divine Wisdom shining
therein, than whilst in this World they could discern. These are parts of his
Ways: How little a Portion is heard of Him; but the Thunder of His Power who
can understand? And here we are in much Darkness concerning the Providence of
GOD. They are very Mysterious. There is a Wheel within a Wheel. Good and0 Wise
men know not what to think of them; they are at a Nonplus. Providence seem to
run counter to Promises. Our Dark, Shallow Understandings can not Comprehend
the Mystery of them; but in Heaven we shall. Hear how the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 73. 16, 17. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me, until
I went into the Sanctuary of God, then I understood, etc. Thus when in the
Heavenly Sanctuary, we shall see clearly the Reasonableness, the Wisdom, the
Faithfulness of GOD in all His Providential Dispensations. And in Heaven we
shall have a perfect Understanding of the holy Scriptures. There are many
difficult places of Scripture: Peter says of Paul's Epistles, that in them
there are some things hard to be Understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. The most Learned men
in the World, have found a great Difficulty in Solving some Dark Passages in
the Scripture. In Heaven they will be made Plain. When our Lord JESUS CHRIST
Conversed with his Disciples after his Resurrection, it is said, that He Opened
their Understandings, that they might Understand the Scriptures, Luke 24. 45.
How much more will He Open their Understandings, when their Souls shall be with
him in Heaven? The Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ, is the most Excellent
and Desirable Knowledge. The Apostle counted all things Loss, for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus. To know more of CHRIST is the
Delight of Angels, 1 Pet. 1. 12. A greater Perfection in this Knowledge, is
reserved for Heaven; where we shall know Even as we are known. We see then,
that Saints in Heaven have attained unto a Perfection in Knowledge: Which must
not be understood of an Absolute, but of a Comparative Perfection: For
Glorified Souls are still attaining unto greater degrees of Knowledge: Angels
in Heaven do so; and therefore the like is to be said of the Spirits of Just
men Glorified, Ephesians. 3. 10. Both Angels and Glorified Souls, shall E're long
know that which at present they do not know, Mark 13. 32. But they have a
Perfect Knowledge, Compared with what in this world they had. And it adds to
their Happiness, that they attain unto a great perfection in Knowledge, without
any difficulty. As long as we are in this world, we must take a great deal of
pains, and spend a great (...) of time to acquire a small degree of Knowledge:
But when the Soul of a Just man comes to Heaven, he will gain more Knowledge in
One Day, and without being at any Labor for it; than he could arrive unto in
this world by a Thousands Years hard Study. Who then would not long to be in
Heaven? Yet show I unto you that which is more Excellent than Knowledge.

4. The Spirits of Just men in the Heavenly World, have attained unto a blessed
Perfection in Holiness. That Sanctification which was begun in their Souls
whilst on Earth, is there bro't to a glorious Perfection. The good Work in them
is then finished, Philippians 1. 6. The habit of Grace which was wrought in the
Soul by Regeneration, does not Die with the Body; but goes with the Soul to
Heaven and into Eternity. Grace is a Seed of God which remains; an Anointing
which abides in the soul. Death is so far from divesting the soul of its
Graces, as that it perfects in a (...) what was defective in them. (...) in
Grace is the desire of every Godly man in this world; but the attainment of
none. It Is Heavens attainment. Believers whilst in this world, are partly
spiritual and partly carnal; partly holy and partly sinful: There is flesh and
spirit in a continual Combat: But in Heaven all is spiritual, all is holy. The
Will of the glorified soul is perfectly Conformed to the will of God. Thy Will
be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; So we are to Pray, and the Expression does
imply, that among the Saints in Heaven, there is a perfect Conformity to the
Will of GOD. And as the Will, so the Affections which depend thereon are
Perfectly sanctified when the soul is in Heaven. There is nothing it regular in
them: Glorified souls desire nothing, delight in nothing but what they should
desire and delight in. There is no disorder in their Affections; they are never
out of frame, as too often they are in this world. But Especially, that chief
Affection of Love is Perfectly Sanctified: There is no defect in it; 1. Joh. 4.
18. Perfect Love casts out Fear. It Is so in Heaven. The spirits of Just men
there, are made perfect in Love. There is no Fear there, but all is Love.
Glorified souls are always in a flame of Love to God and to Jesus Christ. In
Heaven that great Commandment is fulfilled, and that perfectly. The great
Commandment is, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. In Heaven they do so. And as their Love to
God, so their Love to one another is perfect. In Heaven there is Light, and
there is Love in the Perfection of both. In this world, the best and most holy
Servants of Christ, in some lesser points (...) in their Judgments, and
sometimes in their Affections too. Pani and Barnabas, although Apostles; had a
sharp Contention. So had Hooper and Ridley, although Martyrs; and Luther and
Zwinglius, although Eminent Reformers both of them. In Heaven they agree
perfectly. It was well spoken by a German Divine, writing to his Friend,
Whether (said he) I shall see you again in this World is uncertain; but we
shall meet in that World, where Luther and Zwinglius have no difference. The
Garment of Love is a chief Ornament of the New Man. Wherefore the Apostle says,
Above all, put on Charity, which is the bond of Perfectness. Love is a
fulfilling of the Law. When that is perfect, there will be a perfect Obedience
to the whole Law of God. So it is among the Spirits of Just men made perfect in
Heaven.

PROPOSITION IV.
The Spirits of Just men are made Perfect at the Instant when their Bodies Die.
It has been showed under the former Proposition, that the Souls of Believes are
made perfect whilst they are in their separate state; we proceed now to show
that they are so Immediately at the hour of Death. They shall not wait a long
time for their Blessedness. When once the Union between soul and body is
dissolved, they are happy. Although they shall not receive their full Reward
before the Resurrection; nevertheless, they shall receive a blessed part of it
before that. God said to Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great
Reward, Genesis 15. 1. Thy Shield to protect thee in this Life; and thy Reward in
the Life to come at the end of this Life. When once a man's Work is done, then
comes his Reward. His work is finished when he cease to be on the Earth, and
therefore then comes the Reward of Glory: Joh. 17. 4, 5. I have Glorified thee
on the Earth, I have finished the Work thou gave me to do; now Glorify me.
There are many Scriptures which intimate, that the separate Souls of Believers
are immediately Happy upon the Death of their Bodies: Luke 16. 9. That when you
sail, they may receive you into Everlasting Habitations. Ceasing to be in this
World, is Failing; when also all Earthly Enjoyments fail. It Is then that Just
men are received into the Everlasting Habitations prepared for them. They go
immediately to the Heavenly Paradise. Christ said to the Penitent on the Cross,
This Day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. Christ Died but three
hours before the Day was done; the Penitent Died after him, yet that Day his
soul was with Christ in Paradise. When our Momentany Afflictions are ended,
then comes Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. That Moment is this present Life: That no
sooner ends but Glory begins. When the Earthly House of the Body is dissolved,
the Believer is in an Heavenly House, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Their souls do not remain in
a Naked condition; but instead of a Clothing of Flesh, a Clothing of Glory is
put upon them: which is that they desire, Ver. 2. No sooner is the Clothing of
Mortality put off, but the Clothing of Glory is put on, as in the 4th. Verse
of that Chapter. This blessed Truth is likewise Revealed in the Book of
Revelation. The 9th. Verse in the 6th. Chapter, speaks of those who suffered
Martyrdom, under the Pagan Emperor: Their Bodies were slain, but their Souls
were under the Altar; they were with Christ, and expected that their Murderers,
who were still dwelling on the Earth should have Justice Executed on them, for
shedding innocent Blood. Now it is said of those holy Souls, those Spirits of
Just men, that white Robes were given to every one of them, Ver. 11. White
Robes are an Ensign of Glory. The glorious Angels of Heaven, would sometimes
appear in white Robes; and the Spirits of Just men made perfect are like
Angels; and therefore they must be represented as having white Robes on them.
Moreover, the words allude to the Priests their being admitted into the Temple,
who when they were first bro't into the inner Court, had white Robes put upon
them. Thus the Souls of Just men when they first enter into the Heavenly
Sanctuary, have white Robes given to them; they are immediately Clothed with
Glory. We have also in the Revelation, a Prophesy relating to such as should
suffer Martyrdom under the power of Antichrist. Of these we understand that
Scripture, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead which, Die in the Lord, from hence
forth: Tea, says the Spirit. Antichrist has caused the Professors of the true
Gospel, to be put to Cruel Deaths: Burning is such a Death. There is a Law in
Antichrists Kingdom, that Heretics (which is the Name they give to the
Professors of the true Religion) shall be Burnt to Death. Now to encourage the
Martyrs, the Spirit says, Blessed are the Dead which Die in the Lord. You may
suffer a painful Death, yet be of good Comfort, as soon as ever you are Dead
you shall be Blessed. Says the Spirit, when a Righteous man Dies, his Soul is
among the Spirits of Just men made perfect in Heaven, before his Body is laid
in the Grave. Isa. 57. 1, 2. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to came;
he shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds, i. e. in their
Graves. It is in respect of their Souls that they enter into Peace; which
imports their being in blessed Tranquillity, and this as soon as ever they are
taken away out of this world, before their Bodies are laid to rest and sleep in
the Grave. Let us consider a little a Promise which God made to Abraham; Genesis
15. 15. Thou shall go to thy Fathers in Peace; thou shall be buried in a good
Old Age. That word Going to Fathers, is Emphatical; and has respect to the
Soul. It is true, that that Expression of Sleeping with Fathers, is sometimes
used in the Scripture to denote no more than Dying; it has respect to the Body,
whose Death is a Sleep: But that great Divine, whom we have diverse times taken
notice of, has Judiciously Observed, that Going to Fathers implies more, viz.
that the Soul goes to that World where Fathers are gone before. When Abraham
Died, in respect of his Soul he went to Abel, and to Noah, and to Shem, and to
other of his Forefathers, who were gone into the Heavenly World before him,
where the Spirits of those Just men were made Perfect. Before his Burial could
be accomplished, his Soul was gone and got among the immortal Spirits of his
Fathers. Let us observe further what is said of Abraham, Genesis 25. 8, 9. Where
we see that Promise made to him fulfilled: Abraham gave up the Ghost, and Died
in a good Old Age; and was gathered to his People, and his Sons Buried him. As
soon as he gave up the Ghost, that is resigned his Spirit unto God, he was
gathered to his People. That Expression implies, that there were a Company gone
before him, and Gathered together; and that Abraham instantly at his Death was
Gathered with them. Gathering implies Sorting: As long as they are in this
world, Good and Bad are mixed together; not Only in the same Country, but the
Wheat and the Tares grow together in the same Field of the Church: But at Death
all the Good are Gathered into the Heavenly Garner, Mat. 3. 12. And there they
are kept safe by themselves; not so much as One Ungodly Soul with them. Observe
three particulars in what is said of Abraham. (1.) That he gave up the Ghost.
(2.) That he was Gathered to his People. (3.) That he was Buried: The two first
were before the last. The like is said of Jacob; Genesis 49. 33. He yielded up the
Ghost, and was Gathered to his People. This was some time before his Burial. If
it be asked; By whom are the Spirits of Just men Gathered to their People?
Answ. It is by the holy Angels of Heaven. As at the Last Day, they shall Gather
all the Elect together, and bring them to Christ; Mat. 24. 31. He shall send
his Angels, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from
one end of heaven to the other. So the Angels Gather the Souls of Just men, and
bring them to Christ in Heaven. Angels are always near unto them; but
Especially in their Dying hours. Their Souls must pass through their Enemies
Country. The Air is the Devils Territory. Tho Lord will send a Convoy of
Angels to Conduct their departing Souls; they will fly with them to the Regions
of Bliss and Glory. When Elijah was translated, Angels were sent to fetch him
to Heaven, 2 King. 2. 11. So it is when the Souls of Just men are Translated
from Earth to Heaven. Famous Mr. Hollands last words were, Thou fiery Chariot
that come Down to fetch Elijah, (...) me to my happy Hold. This honor have
all the Saints* Yea, the meanest of them. When (...) Die d, he was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. Lazarus a poor man, yet in what
State is he Conducted to Heaven? Angels were sent to fetch him thither. Thus we
see, that the immortal Spirits of Just men are Immediately Blessed when
separated from their Bodies. The Martyrs of JESUS have Died in the Faith of
this Truth; and have Rejoiced in the Meditation of it. The Martyr Bradford said
to his Fellow-Martyr, Be of good Comfort, Brother; for we shall have a merry
Supper with the Lord this Night. Mr. Wischart a Famous Martyr in Scotland,
within a few hours before his Death, said, Some have Reported that I believed,
that the Souls of men Sleep with their Bodies; I am far from being of that
Opinion: I certainly know, that I shall be with Christ this very Night. (...)
Tailor when he came within two Miles of Hadley, where he was to be Martyred,
Now (said he) I lack but two Miles, and I am at my Father's House. Mr. Sanders,
Kissing the Stake said, Welcome the Cross of Christ; Welcome Everlasting Life.
Dr. Juels Dying words were, This Day let me see the Lord Jesus.

We proceed to some APPLICATION of the DOCTRINE. There are several Inferences
from the Truth which has been Explained and Confirmed.

Inf. I. Christians ought not to Mourn Immoderately, for the Death of their
Godly Friends. The Consideration of their present Happiness, should Moderate
our Griefs. When their Bodies are Dead; if they Die in the Lord, their Spirits,
their Souls are safe and happy. A man who has an Entire Love for another, will
Rejoice at his Friends gain; although he should himself lose something by it. It
is a Loss to us, when any of our Precious Praying Friends are taken from us by
Death: But they are happy Gainers, and that Meditation should quiet us. For me
to Die is Gain, said the Apostle. Should we not Rejoice at our Friends Gain?
Especially if they have gained a great Good; if they have gained a Crown, and a
Crown of Life too? This Consideration Christ set before his Disciples, to
Comfort and Compose their spirits, which were much Troubled and Dejected at the
thoughts of his Leaving them; Joh. 14. 28. If you Loved me, ye would Rejoice,
because I go to the Father. So if our Friends and dear Relations who are gone
from us, are gone to the Father and to Christ, at that we should Rejoice. The
Death of Children is a sore Affliction, and if they Die in their Sins, without
any signs of Repentance, that aggravates the Bitterness. This made David take
on so, when Absalom was Dead: He was much moved, and went into his Chamber and
^ept; and thus he said, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom: would GOD I
had Died for thee, O Absalom my Son, my Son, 2 Samuel 18. 33. Q. D. If I had
Died, I had gone to Heaven; but now thou art Dead in thy Sin and Rebellion
against GOD, and against thy Father; I have no hope but thou art gone to
Eternal Torments. But when there is good ground to believe, that they are gone
to the Heavenly World, that marvellously alleviates the Affliction. As we see
also in David; when his Infant Child died, he said, I shall go to him; but he
shall not return to me: I shall go to him into the Grave, and to him in Heaven
too. And truly there is reason to believe this, concerning all Children of
Godly Parents dying in their Infancy: For GOD has taken them into His Covenant;
that Covenant is a Covenant of Life; they have not Violated the Covenant;
therefore we may hope that GOD has given them Eternal Life in Heaven, where
they attain unto that Perfection, which in this world is not attainable. Does
not our Savior say, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 19. 14.
Therefore should Parents with a quiet spirit, submit unto such Dispensations of
the Divine Providence.

Inf. II. The Joys of Heaven are Wonderful. As the Happiness of Souls there is
Wonderfully Great, so their Joy must needs be so too. In One happy Day of their
Death, they are Delivered from all Sorrows and from all Sin at Once; and this
must needs cause an inexpressible Joy. What Joy was there among the Children of
Israel, when they saw themselves at Once for ever Saved from the Egyptians?
They Sang for Joy. But what Songs of Joy do we think there are in Heaven, among
the Spirits of Just men made Perfect? What Joyful Hallelujahs, when they know
that they shall never Sorrow, nor Sin, nor be Tempted any more? In Heaven they
have (...) Assurance. In this World, there are many true Believers, who have
not Assurance. Nay, it is possible, that they may go out of the World under
Doubts and Fears: But as soon as they are among the Spirits of Just men made
Perfect, they have Assurance for ever. This must needs cause Joy, and Exceeding
Joy. Jude 24. Presented before the Presence of His Glory with Exceeding Joy.
Some Believers in this Life, have had Prelibations of Heaven; some Blessed
Foretasts of it. And then what Joys have their Souls been filled with? 1. Pet.
1. 8. Ye Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. It was commonly thus
with the Martyrs. As their Sufferings did abound, their Consolations did
abound; and their Joy could no man take from them. They would sometimes call a
Prison, a Delectable Paradise. If the foretaste of Heaven has such Joy in it,
what is Heaven it self? Some when they have been on the borders of Heaven just
ready to take Possession, have had Soul (...) Joys. There was in Lanceshire, a
very Religious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Catharine Brettergh, who excelled in Charity
and other Graces, had great conflicts on her Deathbed, having been (as she
expressed it) in a roaring Wilderness of We, but after that in unutterable Joys.
She said, O the Joys! the Joys! the Joys! which I feel, they are Wonderful!
they are Wonderful! they are Wonderful! And there was a singularly Pious
Gentleman in Cheshire, Mr. John Bruen: The Day before he fell Sick of that
Sickness whereof he dyed, a near Relation saying to him, I doubt you may have
hurt your sell by rising so early and continuing so long in your Closer, he
replied, You would not think so, if you had seen such Glorious things I saw
this Morning when I was Praying, for they were so wonderful and unspeakable,
that whether I was in the body, or out of the body with Paul, I can not tell.
But then what ineffable Joy does the Spirit of a Just man feel when he is got
safe within the Everlasting Gates of Heaven! The Joys of Heaven are wonderfully
great in respect of the degree and measure of them. In Heaven there is not only
Joy but fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16. 11. The Joy there, is greater than what a
Mortal man can bear up under. It is related of an Eminent Minister in Scotland,
that he was so overpowered with these Joys as to Pray that he might not have
more until his Spirit was gone out of the Earthly Tabernacle. Lord (said he)
hold thy hand: I am a Vessel of clay and I can bear no more. A Saint in heaven
has as much Joy as ever his Soul can hold. Nay, more than that must be said,
the Joy there is greater than the capacious Soul of a faithful Servant of God
is able to contain. Math. 25. 21. Well done, thou good and faithful Servant,
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. In this World, Joy enters into the Soul,
but in Heaven the Soul enters into Joy. And heavenly Joys are wonderfully great
in respect of the continuance of them. Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.
They are not like Earthly Joys which are but a flash, and over in a Moment: but
the Joys of heaven are as the Days of heaven, they will continue as long as
there shall be any heaven: They are lasting, yea everlasting Joys. Isai. 35.
10. The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with Songs, and
everlasting Joy, upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee (...)

Inf. III. The Souls of Men and Women who die in their Sins, are after the death
of their Bodies very Miserable. What have they to Comfort them? Their Earthly
Comforts go not with them to another World. They have no Interest in them after
their Souls are in a state of Separation from their bodies. Luke 12. 20. This
night thy Soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be that
thou have provided? What becomes of the Sinners Soul when his body dies?
Whither does it go? To what Company? To what Place? His Soul goes not to an
innumerable company of holy Angels, but to a company of Devils. It was a dismal
word which the Devil spoke to Saul, when he said to him, To morrow thou shall
be with me, 1 Samuel 28. 19. The Sinner that dies to day, to morrow his Soul will
be with Devils: his soul does not go to be with the spirits of Just men made
perfect; but to the souls of these Wicked men, who have died and gone to Hell
before him. When a wicked man dies, his soul goes to be with the soul of Gain,
and of Pharaoh, and of Judas; with other Sons of Perdition. His departed soul
is carried to a woeful Prison. It is said of the Sinners of the Old Ungodly
world, that their Spirits, their immortal Souls are in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Those horrid Giants which Lived before the Flood, their souls are in Hell; and
when Ungodly men die, their souls go to remain with them until the Great Day of
Judgment. Prove. 21. 16. The man that wanders out of the way of Understanding,
shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead. In the Original it is, the
Congregations of (...), viz. of the Giants, who were Drowned and Damned, when
their Foundation was Overflown with a Flood. These are represented in the
Scripture as being in Misery, and sighing because of their Misery. Those words
in Job 26. 5. which are translated, Dead things are formed under the water: A
Learned and Great Expositor reads, The Giants Sigh under the water; denoting
the Misery of those wicked men, who Lived before and were Destroyed by the
Flood; and so of all other sinners after their Bodies are Dead. The design of
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, is to declare the Misery which Dead and
Damned sinners are in before the Day of Judgment. While Dives lay Buried, he
was in a place of Torment; and whilst his Brethren were yet Living on the
Earth, and had the means of Grace vouchsased to them; Moses and the Prophets to
instruct them; which after the Day of Judgment they have not. Its true, that
then they shall be in greater Misery than at present they are; when their (...)
as well as their Souls shall be in flaming Torment. Nevertheless, they are now
in grievous Misery. Despair is a Miserable thing: (...) Spira when he felt the
horrors of it, thought it was worse than hell. The woeful souls in hell, despair
of ever seeing any Good: They know they shall never see any Earthly good more.
Job 27. 8. What is the hope of the Hypocrise, though he Bath gained, when God
takes away his soul? And which is an infinitely greater Misery, they Despair
of ever obtaining the Pardon of their Sins, or the Salvation of their Souls.
They know that their Day of Grace is past; and the thought of the terrible
Sentence which will be passed upon them at the great Day of Judgment, fills
them with unspeakable Anguish and Horror. It is with them as with those who
have Sinned Unpardonably: There remains no more Sacrifice for sins; but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and of fiery Indignation which shall
devour the Adversaries.

Ins. IV. Oh! That every One of us might make sure of this One thing, that when
we Die and leave this World, our immortal Spirits may go to be with the Spirits
of Just men made Perfect. Christ has said, There is One thing Needful, Luke 10.
42. For us to make sure that we shall go to Heaven when we Die, is that than
which nothing is or can be more Needful. We have Mortal Bodies; and Death for
ought we know, may come upon us Suddenly. And every One of us has an Immortal
Soul: Should not then every One of us be often thinking, If I should Die who
Night, what would become of my Soul^ Is that safe for Eternity?

Therefore make sure that we are now among Just men: That we are true believers
on Christ, that so His Righteousness may be imputed to us for our
Justification; That Death may find us in (...) And that we Live Righteous and
Holy Lives, without which it will be a (...) thing for us to pretend unto
having (...). That Faith which is not attended (...) of New Obedience, is not
(...) Alas! Many men are like (...); he said, Let me Die the Death of the
Righteous, and let my [Afterwards] be (...) He knew that Righteous men will be
Happy after this Life; that when their Bodies Die, their Souls go to Heaven:
Such a Death he was willing to have had; but took no care to Live the Life of
the Righteous. If we are Perfect whilst in this world in respect of Sincerity,
and an Entire Obedience to the Commandments of God, we shall be Perfect in
Happiness, when we must be here no longer. Then when our bodies rest in the
Grave, our Souls will enter into Peace. For this we have a remarkable Promise,
and with that I Conclude, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the
Upright; for the End of that Man is Peace.

IN THE Resurrection World, THE Children of God Shall be as the Angels of
Heaven.
Luke XX. 36. Neither can they Die any more; for they are equal unto the Angels,
and are the Children of GOD, being the Children of the Resurrection.
THere was among the Jews a Sect of Heretics, called Sadduces. Writers inform
us, that they took their Name from a Rabbi, whose Name was Zadok. He had a
Master who taught his Disciples that their Obedience to GOD should not be
Mercenary: Men ought to serve Him, although they should receive no Reward for it.
Whence Zadok, and those which were his Followers, concluded there would be no
future Reward: Consequently no future World, or Resurrection from the Dead.
Some of these came to our Lord JESUS CHRIST with an Objection which they
thought was an unanswerable Argument against the Resurrection of the Dead. They
pretended that there was a Woman Married to Seven Husbands successively: If
there shall be a Resurrection, whose Wife of the Seven shall she then be?
Christ gives them to understand, that they Reasoned like Ignorant men; and
their want of Knowledge was the cause of their great Error. Another Evangelist
asserts, that he said to them, To do Err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
Power of God, Mat. 22 29. The Scriptures affirm a Resurrection of the Dead. The
Ancient Sadduces owned no part of the Scripture to be a Foundation for Faith,
besides the Five Books of Moses, Therefore Christ Consuted them out of One of
those Books, for which they pretended the greatest Veneration. Nor were they
duly apprehensive of what the Scripture declares concerning the infinite Power
of GOD. Had they Considered that as they ought to have done, they would not
have though it it impossible, nor would it have seemed incredible to them, that He
should Raise the Dead. Further to Convince them of their Error, Christ informs
them, that they Argued from a false Principle: For their Objection supposes,
that in the Resurrection World there will be Marrying and giving in Marriage.
Which is a very false Supposal, and a gross Error. For although in this world,
Marriage among mortal Men is necessary for the continuance of Mankind: In that
World in which men shall be immortalized, there will be no more Marriage than
there is among the Angels of Heaven. Holy Angels are in the Scripture called
the Sons of God, in respect of Similitude: They resemble the immortal GOD, more
than any Other Creatures do. So are the Children of the Resurrection, called
the Children of God. They shall Live a Celestial Life, like the Angels; and
resemble God as they do. And after the Day of Judgment, they shall be God's
Domestics: They shall Live with Him in the same House for ever; as Children
dwell with their Father in their Fathers House.

The DOCTRINE before us, is;

That the Children of God shall in the Resurrection World, be in some Respects
Equal to the Angels of Heaven.

I shall (by the help of CHRIST) Endeavor to Explain and Confirm the Doctrine,
in Four Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead. The Grave is the House appointed
for all the Living: But although some shall abide a long time in that House; it
is a Long Home, none shall continue there always; but they shall be brought
forth Out of it. Joh. 5. 28, 29 The hour is coming, in which (...) that are in
their Graves shall come forth. This is a truth which has been but little
believed: Very few comparatively have given credit to it. For it is not known
by the Light of Nature; Only by Divine Revelation. The Immortality of the Soul,
may be known by the Light of Nature, as we have formerly declared. Thence the
Philosophers among the Gentiles, did generally, assert and maintain that for
Truth: But that a Dead Body should Rise and be Immortalized, is that which
Reason without Revelation can not apprehend. Hence the most Learned men among
those who had no other Light above the dim Light of Natural Reason, have
derided the Notion of a Resurrection. In the University at Athens, were the
most Learned men in the World; how they Entertained the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead, we see in Act. 17. 32. When they heard of the
Resurrection of the Dead, some Mocked. One of the most Learned men among the
Heathen Writers, calls that great Scripture Truth, Puerile Deliramentum; a
Childish Dotage. He thought that to man but such as were Dilirious would
believe it. Nevertheless, all Christians do believe it. Tertullian Elegantly
begins One of his Books with these words, Resurrectio Mortuorum Fiducia
Christianorum; The Resurrection of the Dead is the Faith of all Christians. And
for this Faith among Other holy Truths of the Gospel, they were Hated and
Persecuted by their Enemies, who would not only Murder and Martyr them; but
would Burn their dead Bodies to Ashes, and scatter those Ashes far and near;
and then would Laugh at Christians, who thought it possible for such a Body to
Live again. But this was because like the Sadduces, they knew not the Scripture
nor the Power of God. It is true, that nothing less than Infinite Power can
Raise the Dead; but that can Easily do it. Wherefore the Apostle when he
Preached a Sermon in the hearing of some who dis-believed the Resurrection,
puts them in mind of the Power of God: Act. 26. 8. Why should (...) be thought
a thing incredible with you, that Goa should Raise the Dead. What can not
Omnipotence do. Although to make a Body that is dead and turned to dust, to live
again is above the Power of all the Men on Earth, or of all the Angels in
Heaven; Nevertheless ^^^nipotence can do it. That Power which created the World
out of nothing, can easily do it. We may also Argue from the Omniscience of
God, that there is a possibility of the Resurrection. He that has such Infinite
Knowledge, with His Almighty Power can Raise every man that is or shall be
dead. All things are Naked and Opened unto his Eyes; neither is there any
Creature which is not manifest in his Sight. He knows all that are dead: And he
has a singular Eye on the dead Bodies of (...) Servants. When their Flesh and
their (...) are dissolved and turned to Dust, there is not an Atom of that
Dust, but what is known to the Omniscient GOD. Let the dust of their dissolved
Bodies be dispersed never so much, the Omniscient GOD knows where every
particle of it is; and he knows how to make the dissolved Flesh and Bones, to
become Flesh and Bones again and to live. As it is said concerning the Dry Bones
in Ezekiel, in which there is a manifest Allusion to the Resurrection of the
Dead at the Last Day. Can these Bones Live? O Lord God thou know (...) The
Bones came together Bone to his Bone: The Sinews and the Flesh came upon them,
and their Skin covered them; Breath came into them, and they Lived and stood
upon their Feet, Ezekiel. 37. 7, etc. Moreover, There is some resemblance of the
Resurrection in the Ordinary Works of Providence, which although we can not
thence infer, that certainly there shall be a Resurrection, we may infer a
Possibility of it. In the Winter Season, Plants seem, as if they had no Life or
Vegetation in them, but in the Spring we see them Revive wonderfully. GOD by
his Spirit and Power Reviveth the Face of the Earth, Psalm. ^4. 30. We see Corn
is cast into the Ground, it Dies there, and yet after that it Ri^^th again. By
this Similitude, does our Savior Illustrate the Resurrection, Joh. 12. 24.
Except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground and Dye, it abides alone; but (...)
Dye, it brings forth much Fruit. (...) was that Wheat which Died and (...)
again, and bro't forth much Fruit, by which GOD is Glorified, and his Elect are
Saved. After the like manner does the Apostle reason, 1 Cor. 15. 35, -- Some
(...), How are the Dead raised? with what (...) do they come? That which thou
sowest, is not quickened, except it Dye. God gives it a body, as it has
pleased him, and to every seed his own body. When the Bodies of men are put
into the Grave, they are sown there; they will spring up at last, although it
may be long first. There is also a notable Representation of the Resurrection,
by that (...) some Naturalists Observe, viz. That (...) are Consumed to Ashes,
and those (...) into Salt, out of that Salt there (...) made to spring up the
perfect form of (...) Plants so Dissolved. Is it not (...), for Bodies that are
turned to Dust (...), to be Restored to Life again, (...) Power and Wisdom of
GOD? But it is the holy Scripture, that gives us to understand, that there is
not only a Possibility, or a Probability; but a Certainty of the Resurrection
of the Dead. From hence it is, that the Servants of God do not only Think that
there shall be a Resurrection, but they are Sure of it. Wherefore when Christ
told Martha, that her (...) ^rother should rise again, she replied, I (...)
that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the Last Day, Joh. 11. 24. The
Resurrection is asserted in the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Therefore the
Jewish Church believed it: Their Faith of the Resurrection was built in special
on that Scripture, Dan. 12. 2. Many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth
shall awake, some to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting (...).
Sometimes in the Scripture, (and (...) very often) All denotes Many (...)
sometimes Many is put for All: So (...) the Scripture mentioned. In the first
(...) made to Fallen man, the (...) from the Dead is (...), viz. That the Seed
of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head, Genesis 3. 15. Therein is implied,
that Christ should destroy the works of the Devil; therefore that he shall
deliver from Sin and Death, which are the works of the Devil. The great Plot
contrived in the Head of the Old Serpent, was to bring an Eternal Death, both
of Body and Soul upon all Mankind: The bruising of the Serpents Head intimates,
that Christ has disappointed the Plot, and delivered his Elect from that Death
which Sin has brought upon them. Hence the Servants of God that Lived in
Ancient times, before the Scripture was written; believed the Resurrection. Job
who lived before Moses, was comforted with the assurance he had of the
Resurrection of his Body: Job. 14. 15. Thou shall call, at the Last day thou will call me out of the Grave, and I will answer thee; I shall rise suddenly,
as a Servant at the call of his Master. My Body is, and my Resurrection Body
much more will be the wonderful work of thy hands. In the appointed time, thou will have a desire to the work of thy hands. Again he says, That although Worms
shall destroy first his skin and then his body, nevertheless, he knew that he
should see his Redeemer stand on the Earth at the latter Day, Chap. 19. 25, 26.
The Book of Psalms also speaks of the Resurrection: Psalm. 17. 15. When I awake,
se. when I awake out of the sleep of Death at the Resurrection, I shall be
satisfied with thy likeness. To this purpose some interpret the Psalmists
words, in Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am still with thee; when I shall arise
out of my Grave, I shall always be with God. Then shall we ever be with the
Lord. But the New Testament has more clearly and abundantly made known this
Truth unto the World. Wherefore it is said, 2 Timothy 1. 10. That our Savior
Jesus Christ, has abolished Death; and brought Life and Immortality to light
through the Gospel. The Gentle world knew nothing about the abolition of Death,
or of a Resurrection to Everlasting Life, until CHRIST caused the Gospel to
Publish it to the Nations. All the Evangelists speak of the Resurrection. It is
often asserted in the Acts of the Apostles. We find there that Paul made a
Public Confession of his Faith concerning it: I Confess (said he) that I
believe all things written in the Law and in the Prophets; and have Hope
toward God, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just
and the Unjust, Act. 24. 14, 15. In his Epistle to the Corinthians, there is a
whole large Chapter, the design of which is to prove the Resurrection of the
dead. As the Oracles of God begin with this Doctrine, in the Book of Genesis,
so they conclude with it in the Book of Revelation, Chapter 20. 12, 13. I saw the
Dead small and great, stand before God; the Sea gave up the (...) which were in
it; and Death and Hell delivered up the Dead which were in them.

PROPOSITION II.
The very same Body which Died shall Rise again. Otherwise it would not be
properly a Resurrection; Which is as much as to say, Iterata Surrectio; A
rising again of the same which fell; or taking up that which was laid down, and
not another thing instead of it. If another Body should be Created and the Soul
United to it, that could not be called a Resurrection; because that Body never
fell to the Ground. It would be a Creation, and not a Resurrection. And the
Soul might then say at the Day of Judgment, This is none of my Body; My Body is
not raised; I never lived in this Body before Death made a separation between
my body and soul. Most true it is, that the Body will be wonderfully changed,
from what it was in this world: Phil. 3. 21. He shall change our Vile Body; but
there will not be an Essential Change. As a Goldsmith makes a New Vessel of an
Old Plate; not by changing the Metal, but by changing the External Form and
Fashion of it: So in the Resurrection, the Body will be Matevially and
Substantially what it was before Death: There will be New Qualities and
Glorious Properties in the Resurrection Body, which were not there whilst in
their Mortal state; of which we shall speak under the next Proposition;
Nevertheless, it will be a Body still; and Essentially the same Body that died.
Do we not think, that Enoch and Elijah, have now the same Bodies in Heaven,
which they had on Earth; notwithstanding their being Gloriously Changed? And
the like is to be said concerning those Saints, whom our LORD shall find alive
on the Earth, at his Coming to Judge the World. Their Bodies will be
wonderfully Changed in the twinkling of an Eye; but they shall not be
Annihilated; and New Bodies Essentially differing from the former Created and
given to them: I Cor. 15. 51, 52. There have been some pretenders to believe
the Resurrection of the Body; but not of the same Numerical Body, which was put
into the Grave. So said the Manichees many Ages since: So say the Socinians at
this day. So that this has been an Old Error lately revived. As long ago as
Tertullian's time; there were some such among Professed Christians, whom he
justly calls, Partiarios Sententiae Saducaeorum; Half Sadduces, or Sharers with
the Sadduces, in their Opinion of denying the Resurrection. Although in the
Creed commonly used, the Article of the Resurrection is Expressed, I believe a
Resurrection of the Body; in many Creeds it was a Resurrection of the Flesh:
And it was so Expressed, in Opposition to those who said, that the Resurrection
Body would not be Flesh; but that it would be Metamorphosed into an Aerial
Body. Moreover, to declare their abhorrence of their Tenent, who held that the
same Body which died and was buried shall not rise again, the Christians in
Africa, when they recited that Article of the Creed, I believe the Resurrection
of the Body, they would lay their hands on their Body and say, I believe the
Resurrection of this Body. The denial of the Resurrection of the same Body that
died, is a great Error. It strikes at a Fundamental Article in our Christian
Religion. I shall therefore further insist on the Truth before us, and mention
several things for our Confirmation and Establishment in the Faith of it.

1. The holy Scriptures Expressly declare a Resurrection of the same Body. Job
believed, that notwithstanding his Body should be Consumed in the Grave, he
should Rise again at the Last day with the very same Body. I will not trouble
you with the Critical Disputes of Learned men, about the translation of his
words; but in our English Bibles they run thus, I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter Day on the Earth; and though after my
skin Worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see
for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be
consumed within me, Job. 19. 25, 26, 27. He did not think, that after the
Resurrection he should have an Aerial Body; but that he should have Flesh, and
that be should have Bodily Eyes, the same throne had before his Death; and that
with them, he should see GOD his Redeemer; namely our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
GOD as well as Man; and because he is a Man He may be seen with Bodily Eyes.
One reason why Believers shall have Bodily Eyes restored to them at the Latter
day, is, that so they may behold the Glory of the God man JESUS CHRIST. Job
moreover says, I, myself, and not another. How can words be more Expressed? And
does not the Apostle say^, This Corruptible (not (...) but this Corruptible)
shall put on (...) 1 Cor. 15. 53. He speaks as plainly and demonstratively, as
if he had pointed with his Finger and said, This very Body. Again, he says to
the Philippians, Christ shall Change our Vile Body, that it may be Fashioned
like unto His Glorious Body, Phil. 3. 21. That very Body which was a Subject of
Vileness, shall be a Subject of Glory. It shall be the same Numerical Body.
That Body which was Ours, and not another which was not Ours. It is related in
the History of the Bohemian Persecution, that when a Noble Martyr, the Lord
Henry Otto, was Condemned to Death for his Religion, (having appeared
vigorously for the Protestant Interest in that Kingdom) he said unto his
Persecutors and Murderers, You may cut my Body in pieces, Yet I do believe that
my Savior will gather them together again, and Cloathe them with Skin; so that
with these Eyes I shall see him; with these Ears I shall hear him; and with
this Tongue I shall praise him; and with this Heart I shall rejoice in him for
ever.

2. That Body which our Savior Christ had after his Resurrection, and which he
has now in Heaven, is the very same Body which died and lay in the Grave. His
Resurrection did not turn his Body into a Spirit, Luke 24. 39. And although since
his Ascension, his Body is become more Glorious than the Sun in the Firm^ment:
When he appeared to Soul, it was with a Light above the brightness of the Sun,
Act. 26. 13. Yet nevertheless, it remains a body still. That very Body which
was Once hanging on the Cross at Jerusalem, is now at the Right Hand of GOD in
Heaven. From Heaven he declares, as in Rev. 1. 18. I am He that Lives and was
Dead; and behold I am Alive for evermore. The same Body which was Dead is now
Alive, and may be seen with bodily Eyes: For so did the Martyr Stephen see him,
Act. 7. 55, 56. He Looked up st^adfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the Right Hand of God. There appeared a wonderful Glory;
and at the Right Hand of that Glory, he saw the Man JESUS standing, he said,
(...) the Heavens Opened, and (...) standing at the Right Hand of God. That
Humane Nature, which the Eternal Son of GOD has assumed, will never be laid
aside: He is a Man still. There is One Mediator between GOD and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus. And when he shall come to Judge the World, He will come with that
very Body, which was Once Dead and in the Grave. GOD has appointed a Day, in
which He will Judge the World, by that Man whom He has Ordained, Act. 17. 31.
We conclude then, that the Children of God shall have the same Bodies, but most
wonderfully Changed in the Resurrection World, which they had in this World:
For Christ is Risen as the first fruits, I Cor. 15. 23. Their Resurrection will
hold a Conformity with His.

3. If we duly Consider the Remunerating Justice of GOD, we may from that
Infer, that the same Body which died shall rise again. God will dispense
Rewards to men, according to what they did whilst in their bodies. That Body
in which the Soul Lived whilst on the Earth, will in the Body which shall
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, after the Resurrection to be made a
Subject either of Glory or of Punishment: 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things Done
in his Body, according to what he has Done, whether it be good or bad. That
body which has been partaker with the soul in doing either Good or Evil, it is
just and reasonable that it should partake in the Reward; and not another
instead of it. Can we think, that the Body which has joined with the Soul in
Sinning against God, shall escape Punishment; and another Body that never
Sinned, suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire? How does that stand with Justice?
And as for the Faithful Servant of Christ, his Body has joined with his Soul in
serving the Lord; and therefore that very Body shall be a Subject of Glory.
That Head which has been contriving to promote the Glory of GOD, that Tongue
which has been speaking for Him, those Hands which have been at work for Him,
those Feer which have been going about to do good, shall be Glorified at the
Resurrection of the Just.

4. The Bodies as well as the Souls of Believers are Redeemed by Christ, United
to Him, and Sanctified by his Spirit dwelling in them. Therefore they are the
bodies, and not Others instead of them, which shall be Raised up to Eternal
Life at the Last Day. That very body which the believing soul now lives in, and
shall dye and be put into the grave, has been Redeemed with the Blood of
Christ, I Cor. 6. 20. Can we imagine, that the body which Christ has Purchased
with his Blood, shall never Rise out of the Grave; but that his Soul after the
Resurrection shall dwell in another body, which Christ never died for the
Redemption of it? That body which belongs to Christ as a member of his Mystical
Body, which is United to him shall Rise to Glory. This is to be affirmed of the
mortal body, which the believing soul now abides in 1 Cor. 6. 15. Know ye not
that your Bodies are the members of Christ? Christ has by his Spirit taken
Possession, not Only of the believers soul, but of his body also: which is the
reason of its being raised up to an Everlasting Life: Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, Dwell in You: He that raised Christ
from the Dead, shall also Quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit which
Dwells in you. That body in which the Holy Spirit dwells, is the body that
shall die, and that shall be made alive again. The body of the true Believer is
a subject of Sanctification; and therefore that very body shall be a subject of
Glorification. He has given himself, soul and body to God in Jesus Christ, and
has served God with both; therefore both shall Live Eternally: Romans 12. 1.
Present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto GOD, which is
your reasonable Service.

There comes to my thoughts, the Dying Expressions of a Learned and Godly
Physician in Germany. As his Death approached, he uttered such words as these;
The Lord will put a Guard to this body, viz. his holy Angels, to keep my Dust
and Bones, which have been and shall be for ever the Habitation of the Holy
Spirit. It is impossible, that this Flesh and Mass of my Body, which has been
ingrafted into the Body of Christ, should be Annihilated, or for ever continued
in the state of Death: But thou the Fountain of Life, shall require from the
Earth this thine Own Image; even out of the smallest Crumbs of Dust and Ashes
which are there, and send forth thy Spirit, again to Build up this a Glorious
and a Living Body; that it may become an Habitation for thee to Dwell in for
ever!

PROPOSITION III.
Wonderful will be the Happiness of the Children of GOD in the Resurrection
World. It has been showed, that the Happiness of the Saints of GOD in another
World will be Wonderfully Great; and that their Souls do attain unto a Blessed
Perfection in the Heavenly Paradise, when in a state of Separation from their
Bodies: We now proceed to show, that there will be a mavelous Addition to
their Happiness and Glory, in the Resurrection World (...) then their Immortal
Spirits shall not loose any thing of that Perfection, which they had in a
Separate State: but their bodies will have a Glory, which in this World they
had not.

In Order to the Clearing and Confirmation of the Truth before us, several
things may be mentioned as Demonstratations of it.

1. The Children of GOD shall in that World, in diverse respects attain unto
Angelical Perfection. The Text before us says, They shall be Equal to the
Angels: Which another Evangelist Expresses by saying, They shall be as the
Angels of GOD in Heaven: i. e. Very like unto them. Which is not to be so
understood, as if they should in all respects be as the Angels are. We may not
suppose, that the Humane Nature shall be turned into the Angelical Nature. Men
and Angels are of different Natures. It is said of our Savior Christ, that
since the Children of GOD are partakers of Flesh and Blood, He also himself
likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2. 14. Angels have not Flesh and Blood.
Not did Christ take on him the Angelical Nature, verse 16. Angels have not
bodies as Christ had, and still has, and ever will have, a body which (as
formerly was said) may be seen with bodily eyes. Mark 14. 62. You shall see the
Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of
Heaven. Then the Eyes of every man in the World shall see him. Rev. 1. 7.
Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that
pierced him. But the Angelical Nature is invisible to bodily eyes. And
therefore when it is said, That the Children of the Resurrection shall be as the
Angels, we may not think that they will loose their Humane Nature, and be
turned into Angels. Angels are in respect of their Nature, Spirits: Psalm. 104.
4. He has made his Angels Spirits: but men shall not be made Spirits. It is
true, That the Resurrection body will be a Spiritual body. So says the
Scripture, as anon we shall show. It Is not said that the Body shall then be a
Spirit, only that it shall be Spiritual. Between a Spirit and a Body there is
an essential difference. If it is a Spirit it is not a Body; if it is a Body it
is not a Spirit. When therefore Christ appeared to his Disciples, after his
Resurrection; and they were terrified supposing they had seen a Spirit; to
convince them of their Error he said to them, A Spirit has not Flesh and Bones
as you see me have, Luke 24. 39. Now as Christ retains the essentials of Humane
Nature, so shall all the Children of God do in the Resurrection World.

Quest. But then in what respect shall they be as the Angels in Heaven?

Answ. [1.] In that they shall then very much resemble the blessed God as the
Angels of Heaven do. Therefore they are called, The Sons of God, Job. 38. 7.
And the Name of Gods is given to them. Psalm. 97. 7. Worship him all ye Gods,
that is to say, All ye Angels; so does the Apostle interpret those words of the
Psalmist, Heb. 1. 6. There will be a wonderful impression of the Divine Image
on them. There was so on Adam before the fall: but there will be a far more
Glorious impression of the Divine Image on the Children of the Resurrection,
then there was on Adam in his first Creation, therefore are they called the
Sons of God.

More particularly,

(1.) Angels excel in Wisdom and Knowledge. It is said concerning the
particular Time when the Day of Judgment shall begin, Of that Hour knows no
man, no not the Angels of heaven, Mat. 24. 36. importing that Angels have a
great measure of Knowledge. David's great Wisdom was set forth by saying, He was
wise according to the Wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all things that are on
the Earth, 2. Sam. 14. 20. The Children of the Resurrection shall be adorned
with Angelical Knowledge. If their Souls attain unto a Mavelous Perfection in
Knowledge whilst in their Separate State, (as from another Scripture has been
declared) that Knowledge will not be diminished by a reunion with the Body, in
the Resurrection World. What an imperfect Knowledge has a Child compared with
the Knowledge of a Learned man? A greater difference than that, there is
between the Knowledge which the Children of God have whilst in this World, and
that which they shall have in that World. Hence the Apostle speaks as in 1 Cor.
13. 11. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I
thought as a Child, but when I became a Man I put away Childish things. Our
Knowledge now is weak and childish, but then it will be manly and perfect.

(2.) The Angels of heaven are called Holy Angels, Math. 25. 31. They are the
Holy Ones the Prophet speaks of, Da^. 4. 17. They are perfectly pure from Sin.
When they appeared to men, their Raiment has been White, an Emblem of their
Purity as well as their Glory. But thus shall it be with the Children of God,
in the Resurrection World. They shall have no more Sin in them, than the Angels
of heaven have. Then will the Spouse of Christ be all fair, and no spot in her,
Cant. 4. 7. It will be a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any
such thing, but holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27. We are taught to Pray,
Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. So it shall be in the
Resurrection World. Saints on Earth will then do the Will of God, with a
perfection Equal to that of Angels in Heaven.

[2.] The Children of the Resurrection cannot dye. So it is said in the Text
before us: Neither can they dye any more. It is on this account especially that
they are said to be Equal with the Angels, viz. In respect of a blessed
Immortality. It is to be affirmed of Angels, not only that they shall not, but
that they cannot dye. It is said of the Immortal Souls of men that they cannot
be killed; much more may it be said of Angels, they cannot be killed. God who
made them is able to Annihilate them, but they cannot dye: they cannot be
resolved into pre-existent Principles, because they were not made out of such.
In this World there is not a man but what shall dye: What man is he that lives
and shall not see death? But in the Resurrection World there is not one that
shall dye. They who were Mortal in this World, become Immortal in that World,
There it is that Mortality is swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. So are the
Children of the Resurrection, as the Angels of heaven. Some may say, but is it
not said of the blessed God, That He only has Immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Ans.
It is most true, that He only has Immortality Originally. He only has
Immortality from Himself: but Angels have Immortality by the Gift of God. They
are not subject to any decay of Nature as Mortal Creatures are. Notwithstanding
they have lived more than five Thousand years, they are as strong and vigorous
as ever they were, without any the least decay. So shall it be with the
Children of the Resurrection. There they Eat of the Tree of Life, the meaning
of which, is, that the Gift of Immortality is conferred on them, Rev. 2. 7. But
of this further under the next Demonstration of the Proposition before us;
Which is,

2. That the Resurrection body will be adorned with very glorious Properties,
in respect whereof wonderful will be the Happiness of the Children of God, in
the Resurrection World. The Apostle mentions Four Properties of the
Resurrection Body, which we shall a little insist on, and enquire into.

(1.) Incorruption: 1 Cor. 15. 42. It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in
Incorruption. The Apostle comes over with it again, in Ver. 53. This
Corruptible must put on Incorruption. The Immortality of the Resurrection body,
is implied in the Incorruption of it. Since Sin has entered into the world,
there is nothing more subject to Mortality, than the frail Bodies of men. They
no sooner begin to Live, but they begin to Die: They are subject to Death by a
thousand Casualties; also by inward Diseases. There are the seeds of all
Diseases in the body, which prove Mortal to it. Besides, Nature does in time
decay. If there were no other Disease to hasten Death, Old Age is a Disease
which will infallibly bring to the Grave at last; and there it becomes
Corruption it self. Job 17. 14. I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father;
to the Worm thou art my Mother and my Sister. They and I shall dwell in the
same House together, as Fathers and Mothers, and Brothers and Sisters use to
do. The Grave is that House. But the Resurrection body is subject to no Death.
It will be an heavenly body. Then the souls of Believers will be Clothed upon,
and dwell in their House which is from heaven. 2 Cor. 5. 1. They have born the
image of the Earthly; but they shall bear the image of the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.
49. The Resurrection Body will abide like the Days of heaven, without being
subject to any Decay. There have been some few in the world, whose bodies had
been Dead, but were restored to Life again: So it was with Lazarus; and some
few Others mentioned in the Scripture, both in the Old and in the New
Testament. These Died again. It shall not be so with the Children of God in the
Resurrection at the Last Day. They shall have a better Resurrection than those
had, Heb. 11. 35. When they awake out of the dust where their bodies have been
sleeping, it will be to Everlasting Life, Dan. 12. 2. As our Savior CHRIST,
when He rose from the Dead, was no more subject to death: Romans 6. 9. Christ
being raised from the Dead, Dies no more, Death has no more Dominion over
him. So shall it be with all the Children of God, when they are Once the
Children of the Resurrection. But more than this is impli'd in the
Incorruptibility of the Body. If Adam had not Sinned, he should have been
Immortal; he should never have Died; which was implied in the Threatening, in
case he did Eat of the Forbidden Tree; In the Day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely Dye, Genesis 2. 17. We might rationally infer, that if he did
continue in his Obedience, he should surely Live and not Die: Yet we cannot say,
that he should have been Incorruptible. When it is said the Resurrection Body
will be Incorruptible, that intends its not being subject to any Alteration.
Adam's body before Sin entered into the world, was naturally subject to
Alteration: It was naturally subject to an expense of Spirits, and might have
been killed with Hunger, and would have been so, if Food had not been ministered
to him. The Tree of Life was provided for him, which had (I doubt not) a
Natural Virtue in it for the prolongation of Life. Therefore his Body was not
made Incorruptible. It was subject to Passion. A great blow would have hurt it.
Fire would have consumed it. But the Resurrection Body will be Impossible: No
Natural thing can hurt it. That which happened to the three Princes who were cast
into Nebuchadnezzars burning fiery Furnace, upon whose Bodies the Fire had no
Power, was a Miraculous Providence; but the Resurrection Bodies of the Children
of God, will not be subject to sufferings by Fire any more than their Souls
shall. In this the Raised Bodies of Saints and Sinners will differ. And
Believers shall be far more happy than Adam was. It could not be said of Adam,
he cannot Dye. He was sensible that he might possibly Die. Nor did the Serpent
say to our first Parent, that there was no Possibility; only that there was no
Certainty of their Dying upon their Eating the forbidden Fruit. He said, Genesis
3. 4. You shall not surely Die. But the Resurrection Body of the Believer, is so
Immortalized as that there is not a Possibility of its Dying any more, which is
meant by the Incorruptibility of it. Thus are the Children of the Resurrection,
Equal to the Angels.

(2.) Another Property of the Resurrection Body, is the Glory wherewith it
shall be Adorned: 1 Cor. 15. 43. It is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in
Glory. Two things may be implied in that Glory: One of which is the Admirable
Beauty of the Resurrection Body. Adam in his first Creation was a very
Beautiful Person; without doubt far Exceeding Absalom in Beauty, of whom it is
said, That in all Israel there was none so much to be Praised as Absalom for
his Beauty; from the sole of his Foot even to the crown of his Head, there was
no blemish in him, 2 Samuel 14. 25. Some who are the Children of God, in this
world have great Deformities in their Bodies. And the most Beautiful Bodies,
soon after they are Dead become Deformed; therefore are said to be sown in
Dishonor. When the Body is Sown, when it is put under Ground, it soon becomes
a deformed unlovely Carcass: But when Raised from Death, the Beauty of it will
be Perfect, because of the Comeliness which God will then put upon it. Again,
This Glory intends Brightness as well as Beauty; A shining Splendour. This is
Emphatically called Glory. Ver. 41. There is One Glory of the Sun, and another
Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for One Star Differs from
another Star in Glory. The Sun Out-shines the Moon; the Moon Out-shines the
Planets. These are two great Lights, Genesis 1. 16. The Moon Out-shines the other
Planets, which are Stars of Light, Psalm, 148. 3. Planets shine with a greater
Light than fixed Stars. Some of these shine with a greater Light than Others.
Hence are they said to differ in Glory. And so will it be with the Children of
God, in the Resurrection world. Whilst in this world, their Souls are in a
dark Lanthorn: The Earthly Body is a dark Lanthorn; but it will not be so after
the Resurrection. That Celestial Body will shine Gloriously. When our Savior
Christ was Transfigured in the holy Mount, and Moses and Elias appeared in
Glory, it is said, His Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as
the Light. This was but a Glympse of that Glory which CHRIST and his Saints
shall appear in at the Last Day. When Moses had been Conversing with GOD in the
Mount, his Face shone with such Brightness, that the Children of Israel were
not able to Look upon him for the Glory of his Countenance, 2 Cor. 3. 7. Much
more will it be so, when the Children of GOD shall Ever be with the LORD. It is
said of Stephen, that when he was convented before the Council, they saw his
Face as it had been the Face of an Angel; importing that it did shine with rays
of Light, as the Face of an appearing Angel used to do, Act. 6. 15. with Mat.
28. 3. How much more will the Faces of GOD's Children shine in the Resurrection
World; when they shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven? The Scripture says,
that they shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for
ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. Nay, more; They shall shine as the Sun. This is a
great Truth, and then cannot Easily believe it: Wherefore CHRIST affirms it
with great Solemnity; Mat. 13. 43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the
Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Who has Ears to hear, Let him hear;
Importing that this is so wonderful a Truth, as that Men will hardly give
Credit to it. There is no Creature seen by us, that shines with so great a
Glory as the Sun does. Therefore is that Glory made use of to fet forth the
Glory of the Resurrection Body. Not but that it will Outshine the Sun. The
Bodies of the Saints (says a Famous Divine) will so shine, as to Eclipse the
Glory of the Sun; for which he produces that Scripture, Isai. 24. 23. Then
shall the Moon be Confounded, and the Sun Ashamed. Another Late Writer
Expresses himself thus; What sight more Glorious, than to behold so many
Saints, Like so many Suns to Shine with incomparable Luster! A Saint in Heaven
carries with him, a Light equal to that of the Sun Seven times doubted. The
Souls of the Blessed, shall not only be Glorious; but their very Bodies shall
be filled with Glory, and invested with a Eight Seven times Brighter than that
of the Sun: For although it be said in the Gospel, that the Just shall shine as
the Sun, Isaiah the Prophet says, that the Sun in those Days shall shine seven
times more than now it does. Men are apt to think, that these are only the
Hyperbolical Expressions of some Divines: But why should they think so; when
the Scripture says, that the Lord JESUS CHRIST shall change our Body, that it
may be Fashioned Like unto His Glorious Body? There is no Glory which Eyes can
behold, comparable to the Glorious Body of JESUS CHRIST; Since the Fullness of
the Godhead dwells in Him Bodily, Col. 2. 9. The Glory of that Body infinitely
Excels the Glory of the Sun, or of the brightest created Being. It is said of
the Heavenly Jerusalem, that the City has no need of the Sun or of the Moon,
for the Lamb is the Light thereof, Rev. 21. 23. Now although there shall not be
an Equality in the Glory of Saints, to that of Christ; nevertheless, there will
be a Conformity to it: And a Glory of the same Nature, though as to Degree no
way Proportionable. Joh. 17. 22. The Glory which thou gave me, I have given
them. And there will in the Latter Day be such Reflections of the Glory of
Christ on them, as will cause them to be admired, 2 These. 1. 10. Their enemies
who despise them in this World, will then admire them, because of the Glory of
Christ shining on them. Yea, and they shall wonder at themselves to see what a
glorious change Christ has wrought on them. As suppose a man to be brought out
of a Dungeon, and to be clothed with Prince-like Robes, he will be affected unto
wonderment, as undoubtedly Joseph was when brought out of Prison and made the
Ruler over a great Kingdom; so will it be with the Saints of God when they
shall be brought out of the Grave, and clothed with Immorrality and Glory.

(3.) Another Property of the Resurrection-body, is, That it will be endowed
with Mavelous Strength. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in Power. What
weak things, what poor Creatures are the best and greatest of men? Psalm. 39. 5.
Verify every man at his best estate is altogether Vanity. Not only some men,
but every man: Kings as well as beggars, and this at their best, are not only
vain but vanity it self, and altogether so. What can can be said more to set
forth humane frailty! But the Resurrection will make a blessed change. Whilst
in this World, the Bodies of Gods Children as well as of other men, are subject
to manifold weaknesses and infirmities. How many hundreds of diseases do
Physicians tell us that the body is subject unto? But the Resurrection body
shall not be subject to any disease, nor to any grief or pain. God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, Neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. Nor can it easily be imagined how
great the Strength of this now weak body shall then be. How great was Samson's
Miraculous Strength, When he took the doors of the gates of the city and the
two posts, and went away with them bar and all, Judge. 16. 3. But what was
Samsons bodily strength, compared with that of the Resurrection body? The
Angels are called Mighty Angels, and they Excel in Strength, Psalm. 103. 20.
When the Children of the Resurrection shall be as the Angels of Heaven, they
will Excel in Strength. Anselm, Luther and Mr. Buroughs think that they will
be able to remove Mountains, and to make the Earth to shake, as sometimes
Angels have done, Math. 28. 2. Their Strength will be wonderful. And that which
adds to the wonder, is, that this Strength will never decay with Age. It is
said of Moses that when he was an hundred and twenty years old, his eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. This was Miraculous. And Caleb
could say, I am this day fourscore and five years old, as yet I am as strong as
I was in the day that Moses sent me, (when he was but Forty-two years old) as
my strength was then, so is my strength now. This also was Extraordinary (...)
commonly if men through the strength of Nature live to Fourscore, their decayed
strength is full of Labor and Sorrow through the Infirmities of Old Age. But
the Resurrection body will be as strong and vigorous after it has lived
Millions of years, as it was when first raised in Power. The bodies of (...)
and Elijah, which have been in heaven for thousands of years are as full of
Celestial vigor as they were when first translated to glory. So shall it be
with the Children of the Resurrection.

(4.) The Resurrection body will be a Spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15. 44. It is sown
a Natural body, it is raised a Spiritual body. This is a Mavelous Expression.
Luther says of it, Est sermo plane inauditus. Since Body and Spirit are of
quite differing Natures, a Spiritual body is a wonderful body. The Resurrection
body will have a spiritual Eye, and a spiritual Ear, and spiritual Hands, and
as to all other parts of the body they will be spiritual. And therefore (as an
acute and deep searching Divine has rightly observed) There will be spiritual
objects suited thereunto: but what these Objects shall be we know not. The
Scripture speaks of a glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18. What a
spiritual body is, and what the objects are, which will be suitable for it, is
a glory which shall be revealed: but thus much we know that the carnal objects
which are suited to the Natural body whilst it Lives an Animal Life in this
World, are not suitable for the Spiritual body. Meat and Drink agree with the
Natural body, and that body is for them: but it is otherwise with the Spiritual
body. It is said, Meat is for the belly, and the belly for Meats, but God shall
destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. The belly, i. e. the Stomach craves for
Meat, and God has made and appointed Meats suitable for the Natural Appetites
of the body, but the Resurrection body is not for Meats, nor Meat for it. The
Spiritual body will have no need, nor desire of Meat or Drink. It shall never
hunger or thirst. One of our English Martyrs, a faithful Minister (his Name was
Robert Samuel) after the Bishop of London (bloody Bonner) caused him to be cast
into Prison, he there suffered much by hunger and thirst; The night before his
Death, an Angel appeared to him in his sleep, saying, Be of good comfort
Samuel, for after this day thou shall never suffer hunger any more: Nor did he,
for the next day he was Martyred Thus in the Resurrection World, the Children
of God shall not be Subject to hunger or thirst, nor to any other of those
infirmities which the Natural body is subject unto. Rev. 7. 16. They shall
hunger no more, nor thirst any more. The Spiritual body will not need such
things to preserve life as the Natural body does. Without these props to
support Nature, to shore up the Earthly Tabernacle, it would soon fall to the
ground. The Children of the Resurrection shall stand in no more need of Meat
and Drink or Sleep, than the Angels of Heaven do. In that respect they shall be
Equal to the Angels. They shall Live a Spiritual and Angelical Life. The body
shall then be no Impediment to the Soul as now it is. In this state of
Infirmity, the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak, Math. 26. 41. It will
not be so after the Resurrection. The Spiritual body will be gloriously
possessed and acted by the Almighty Spirit of God, who raised it from the dead.
Thus shall the Resurrection body be a Spiritual body. And because it is so, it
will be able (which now it cannot) to ascend as well as descend. So shall the
raised Saints be (...) the Angels of Heaven, who can as easily ascend as
descend. There is a Scripture which not only the old Jewish Interpreters, but
Judicious Christian Expositors, conceive, has respect to what the Children of
God will be able to do after the Resurrection. It is that, Isa. 40. 31. They
shall mount-up with wings as Eagles. And because their Bodies shall be
Spiritual, they will be able to move with wonderful Agility and Celerity, They
shall in that respect also, be as the Angels of Heaven. An Angel goes from one
place to another with the greatest swiftness. It is said of the Angel Gabrrel
that he did fly swiftly, Dan. 9. 21. As Lightning in a Moment of Time flies
from one side of Heaven to the other. Such like is the motion of Angels: Heb.
1. 7. He makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flame of fire. We read of
Asahel, that he was light of foot as a wild roe, 2 Samuel 2. 18. The Spiritual
bodies of the Children of the Resurrection, will be able to go from place to
place with an incomparably swifter motion, than any Creature on the Earth can
do. The raised bodies of Gods Children will some of them be ten thousand Miles
distant from the place where Christ shall Erect his Throne at the Day of
Judgment, yet shall they be with him in a Moment. Say not, But how is it
possible for a Corporeal Substance to move with such Celerity? Is not the Light
a Corporeal Substance? Yet it comes down from the Sun and from the Stars (no
man can say how many Millions of Miles,) in a few Minutes of an hour. The old
Astronomers suppose that the Sun goes above a Million of Miles in the space of
an hour. The raised Saints shall (as has been showed) out shine the Sun in
glory, and then (says our Judicious Mr. Norton) Why may we not think that they
shall have a swifter Motion than the Sun it self has? My Brethren, the things
which you have heard this day are Mavelous Truths, and none but Christians
who believe the Scripture, will believe that ever a clod of Earth should be
raised to such Perfection, and adorned with such glorious Properties. I proceed
to a third Demonstration of the Proposition before us.

3. The Children of God in the Resurrection World shall have a glorious
Dominion. Psalm. 49. 14. The upright shall have dominion in the Morning, VIZ. in
the Morning of the Resurrection. Christians in the Primitives Times believed
that they should receive a Kingdom, and it was a comfortable Meditation to
them. We see what their Faith was concerning it, Rev. 5. 10. We shall reign on
Earth. They might well believe so, because there are many Prophesies and
Promises of it in the Scripture. Psalm. 15, 16. Thy Children whom than may
make Princes in all the Earth. Dan. 7. 27. The Kingdom (not in heaven, but)
under the whole heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most
high. Christ dehorting his Disciples from contending about honor and dominion
in this World, said to them, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, Luk 22. 29. One
would think that should suffice although they should in the mean time be poor
and despised. And the Apostle speaks of it as a known received Truth, 1 Cor. 6.
2. Kn^w you not that the Saints shall Judge the World: But they did not expect
to be Judges Sitting upon Thrones in this present World, but in the
Resurrection World, for so had Christ promised them. Math. 19. 28. Ye that have
followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne of
his glory, shall sit upon twelve Thrones. The Resurrection is called the
Regeneration. The bodies of the Children of God will then be New born coming
out of the womb of the Grave, and all things will then be made new. Tertullian
said fifteen hundred years ago, Confitemur regnum nobis repromissum, sed alio
statu utpote post Resurrectionem: We own (says he) that there is a Kingdom
promised to us, but it belongs to another State, it will not be until after the
Resurrection. Then will the happiness and glory of the Children of God be
wonderful. When (to express Spiritual Mysteries by Earthly Similitudes) they
shall appear with Crowns on their heads, and Scepters in their hands, and sit
upon Thrones ruling the Nations as with a ^od of iron, yea, and judging the
Reprobate Angels too, Rev. 2. 26. ^ Cor. 6. 3.

PROPOSITION, IV.
None besides the Children of God shall have a blessed Resurrection. The Text
before us speaks of their Resurrection only. All and only such shall be as the
Angels of Heaven. The Jewish Writers (some of them) have a fond and heretical
Opinion, that only Israelites shall have a Resurrection of their bodies. It is
true, that none but such as are Israelites indeed in whom there is no guile
shall have an happy Resurrection. Although all the dead shall come out of their
Graves, the evil as well as the good, the unjust as well as the just; Not only
they whose Souls are in Heaven, but they whose Souls are in Hell shall have
their bodies restored to Life again at the day of Judgment. The Sea shall give
up the dead which are in it, and death, that is the Grave shall give up the
dead which are in it, and Hell shall deliver up the dead in it, the Souls which
are there shall Live in their Bodies again; Nevertheless, the Resurrection of
the Wicked is as no Resurrection at all. Theirs is called the Resurrection of
Damnation, Joh. 5. 29. The Souls in Hell wish that their bodies might never
Live again. Like as men who are in a sad Prison, had rather be always there and
to endure their present Misery, than to be fetched out from thence only to be
Condemned to a terrible Death and Executed. So it is the case here. The Souls
of men who have dyed in their Sins are in a Prison, and so are their bodies
too, the Grave is their Prison. At the universal Resurrection they must be
bro't out of Prison Body and Soul, to have a Sentence of Eternal death passed
upon them, to be Doomed unto Everlasting fire: so that their Resurrection will
be worse than none at all. The Children of God are properly the Children of the
Resurrection. They only shall have a Resurrection unto Life; others unto the
second Death. The Scripture speaks Emphatically of the Resurrection of the
Just, Luke 14. 14. The unjust shall not receive an happy reward. The
Resurrection of Believers on Christ, proceeds from such Causes as may not be
affirmed of others.

For,

1. It is because of the Covenant which they are in with God, that they are
made partakers of an happy Resurrection. As for Unbelievers, although some of
them pretending to Christianity may be Externally in Covenant with God, they
are not Internally and Really so, and therefore their Resurrection cannot be by
virtue of that Covenant which they never had a Real Interest in: but Believers
have. By this Argument Christ proved against the Sadduces, that there will be a
Resurrection, as we see in the Verse following our Text before us, That the
dead are raised Moses showed in the bush, when he called the Lord, the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, for he is not the God of
the Dead, but of the Living. Those holy Patriarchs were Dead and in their
Graves when God said to Moses, I am their God, I am in Covenant with them. That
which is in Covenant with GOD shall Live Eternally, therefore so shall the
bodies of his Children, which implies their Resurrection. For the Covenant is
made with the Person consisting of Body and Soul, and not with the Soul only
although principally. Hence the bodies of Believers and not their Souls only are
the Subjects of the Seals of the Covenant. So concerning Baptism the first Seal
of the New Testament, the body is the Subject of that Ordinance. Believers have
their body washed with pure Water. The Lord says to the true Believer, as sure
as thou have been Baptized, so certain is it that thy body shall have a blessed
Resurrection. He has therein Communion with Christ in respect of the benefits
both of his Death and Resurrection, Romans 6. 3, 4. He shall as surely be raised
up at the Last Day to Eternal Life as Christ is risen. Moreover, Believers do
with their bodies Sacramentally, as well as with their Souls by Faith, feed
upon Christ Exhibited in the Lord's Supper. That body which does with a
believing Soul Eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ, shall have a
Resurrection to Everlasting Life. Joh. 6. 54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my
blood has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the Last Day. (...) does the
Believers Resurrection proceed from Gods Covenant with him. The Resurrection of
the body to Eternal Life, is a special Promise contained in the Covenant, 1 John 2. 25.

2. The Resurrection of Believers is Purchased for them by the Blood of Christ.
We cannot say so of Unbelievers dying in their Sins. It is by the Death of
Christ that we are Redeemed from the Curse of the Law, of which the death of
the body is some part. Christ by shedding his blood did Merit his Own
Resurrection. He was brought back again from the dead through the blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. The same is to be affirmed of Believers, as
we see in that Scripture to which the Text to the Hebrews has a respect, viz.
Zech. 9. 11, 12. By the blood of the Covenant I have sent forth thy Prisoners
but of the pit. Turn ye Prisoners of hope. The Grave is a Prison, but the Blood
of Christ has caused the Prison door to be opened, the bodies of Believers
which Rest there in Hope shall come out of that pit. All that Redemption which
Believers shall be the Subject of, is Merited by the (...) of Christ. Rev. 5.
9. Thou have Redeemed us by thy Blood. The Resurrection of the body is part of
that Redemption. The Scripture speaks of the Redemption of the Body, Rom 8. 23.
The Bodies as well as the Souls of Believers are said to be bought, 1 Cor. 6
20. It is the Blood of Christ and nothing else that has bought them.

3. It is by virtue of the Resurrection of Christ that Believers obtain a
blessed Resurrection. Thus does the Apostle argue. 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13. If Christ
be Preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no
Resurrection? If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not
risen. As sure as Christ is risen, Believers on him shall rise. For he rose as
a Public Person Representing all the Elect of God. Verse 21, 22. Since by man
came death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead, for as in Adam all
die, so in Christ all shall be made alive. There are two roots from which Death
and Life proceed, viz. Adam and Christ. The first Adam, by reason of his being
a Public Reason Representing all Mankind, has be (...) a root of death to all
his Children. Christ the second Adam, Representing all the Children of God, has
been a root of Life to them all. Because He Rose from the dead and Lives for
ever more, they shall do so too. This also may be denoted by that Expression of
Christ's being the first born from the Dead, Col 1. 18. Under the Law, a Ransom
was to be Paid for the First born, and then the rest of the Children were free,
because the first born was a Public Person, Representing all the Children of
the Family. Thus, if Christ is Redeemed from the Power of the Grave, then so
are all the Children of God in him. When Christ opened the Womb of the Grave
and came forth, then all Believers were freed by virtue of the Ransom which HE
had paid. Hence also, the Resurrection of Christ is mentioned as a first
fruits. Christ is risen from the Dead, and became the first fruits of them that
slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. The first Fruits were Consecrated, and by virtue of that
Consecration all the Corn on the ground was Sanctified. Thus inasmuch as Christ
us Risen, all the dead Bodies of the Children of God, which are as so many
grains of (...) in the Ground, are consecrated and virtually Risen with Christ.
And this also (...) peculiar to Believers.

4. (...) virtue of their Union with Christ, (...) Believers obtain a blessed
Resurrection. As for Unbelievers they are not United to Christ, and therefore
have not a Resurrection unto Life. He that has not the Son, has not Life.
Christ and all true Believers, are One Mystical Body. The blessed Head of that
Body has been (...) over Death, and triumphed over the Grave. Therefore so
shall all the Members which belong to that Head. Because of that intimate Union
which is between Christ and Believers, some Scripture, which speak of the
Resurrection, are to be understood both of Christ and of his Church. Thus, Hos.
6. 2. After two Days he will Revive us, in the third Day he will Raise us up,
and we shall Live in his sight. The Words allude to the Resurrection of Christ,
yet are applied to the Church, (...) is Risen with Christ their Head. Because
Christ was Raised from the dead, Believers shall Live in his sight for ever.
And thus also may we understand that Scripture; Isa. 26. 19. Thy Dead body
shall Live, together with my Dead body shall they arise. Awake and Sing, ye
that (...) in the Dust. Christ says to the Believer, Thy dead body did Rise
with Mine. When my dead Body rose out of the Grave, thin^ did so too. The
Resurrection of my dead Body, was a pledge and certain fore (...) of the
Resurrection of thy dead Body.

From the Doctrine thus Confirmed, we may Infer several things for our
Instruction in Righteousness.

Inf. I. All the Children of GOD are Infinitely beholden to the Lord Jesus
Christ. They are beholden to Him for the Resurrection of their Bodies. The
Apostles Preached through Jesus the Resurrection, from the Dead, Act. 4. 2. We
had never had an happy Resurrection if it had not been through Jesus. And
therefore not One that shall die in a Christless Estate will have such a
Resurrection. Christ has made Believers to be happier than Ever Adam in
Paradise was. For the present they are under a better Covenant. The Covenant of
Grace is better than the Corenant of Works, and Established upon better
Promises. It is through Jesus Christ, that we are concerned in the Corenant,
Isa. 42. 6. There are heavenly blessings, and such a glorious Perfection of
Happiness Promised to Believers on Christ, as we cannot say Adam had a Promise
of. That Heaven which is Promised to Believers, does incomparably Excel the
Earthly Paradise which belonged to Adam, and in which he should have Lived
happily with a Confluence of Earthly blessings, if he had not Sinned. And for
the present, Believers appear before God in a more glorious Righteousness than
Adam had before his fall. He had only a Righteousness of his Own, which was not
the Righteousness of One that is God; whenas the Righteousness of God is upon
all that believe, Romans 3. 22. The Righteousness of Christ is imputed to them,
and that is the Righteousness of God. And when Believers shall become the
Children of the Resurrection, they will be far more glorious than ever Adam
was. He was made Lower than the Angels, and not Equal to them in his first and
best Estate. But as for Believers, Christ has advanced them to an Equality with
Angels in more respects than one, as we have showed. Oh! how are we beholden to
Christ? Nay, in respect of him they are dignified above Angels. For He took not
on him the Nature of Angels, but the Nature of Man He has assumed. The Believer
is nearer akin to the Son of God, than any Angel in heaven is.

Inf. II. There is a respect due to the Dead Bodies of Gods Children. Since
they shall be Raised out of their Graves to such Glory as has been showed,
there is certainly a respect due to them. Although we may not worship their
Raliques as Idolatrous Papists do, Nevertheless, it is a great iniquity to cast
contempt upon them Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his
Saints. When their dead Bodies are turned to dust, it is Precious Dust. That
Body which is United to Christ, and has been Redeemed by his Blood, Death does
not separate from his Love. They then who manifest their contempt and hatred of
such holy Bodies, have not the Love of Christ nor his Spirit in them. A decent
Burial is a respect due to the Bodies of Dead Saints. To deny it to those who
are the Children of God, is great Impiety; or not to suffer them to have that
honorable Interment which is due to their Station. It is noted as a great
Wickedness in (...), that he would not permit the Prophet Urijah to be so
honorably Buried as was proper and suitable for a Prophet of God, but he Cast
his Dead Body into the Graves of the common People. And it is Observable, that
the Providence of God met with him, and (...) his impiety (...). For
notwithstanding he was a King, and the Son of a King, there was no (...)
Solemnity or Lamentations for him, but he was (...) the (...) by an (...),
drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem, Jor. 22. 19. A just
Punishment for his Barbarity toward a faithful Prophet. Such like Barbarity
would the Heathen sometimes use toward the Servants of the Lord, of which the
Psalmist complains, Psalm. 79. 2, 3. The Dead Bodies of thy Servants have they
given to be Meat unto the fowls of the Heaven, the flesh of thy Saints unto the
beasts of the Earth. And there was none to bury them. And Papists have been as
inhumane as ever were Pagans. It was prophesied concerning them, that they
would kill the faithful Witnesses of Christ, and not suffer their Dead Bodies
to be put in Graves, Rev. 11. 9. That Prophesy has been fulfilled as in other
Places, so in England, when Popery reigned there. By the Popes decree, the
bones of Wick^^ff, (that famous Witness against the Idolatry of those times)
Forty years after he was Dead and Buried, were dug out of his Grave and Burnt
to ashes, and those ashes thrown into a River. The Emperor Charles V. was a
Person of more generosity and humanity, than the Pope, for when some urged him
to cause Luther to be exhumated, he utterly refused it. But in England by the
Instigation of the Popish Bishops Bucer, and Fagius, two Learned Readers of
Divinity in the University of Cambridge, were taken out of their Graves. Peter
Martyr an Eminent Learned man, once belonging to the University in Oxford, left
the Land on Queen Mary's Accession to the Throne, and so escaped their Rage;
but by direction of the cruel Cardinal Pool, they caused Martyr's Wife, a godly
and charitable Matron, to be taken out of her Grave after she had been dead two
years, and to be laid in a dunghill; only she was honorably Re-interr'd in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Thus have Pagans and Papists used inhumane Cruelties
toward the dead Bodies of the Lords Servants. But what Confusion will take
hold on them, when they shall see these holy Bodies glorified in the
Resurrection World, and themselves the Subjects of shame and everlasting
contempt?

Inf. III. The Children of God should be careful not to Sin with their Bodies,
but to Serve and Glorify GOD with them. That body which shall become a
wonderfully glorified Body in another World, should be a very Sanctified Body
whilst in this World. How vile is it to make such a Body an Instrument of Sin
and Dishonor to the Name of God? The Body is for the Lord, 1 Cor.6.13. This
lets us see the heinous evil which is in Sins against the Body; Especially when
the Children of God shall any of them be guilty of them. Sins of Intemperance
are in a peculiar manner against the Body: Drunkenness is so. It is an horrid
thing for a godly Man to abuse his Body with Strong Drink. What? that Body
which shall be Raised in Glory! But most of all, Sins against the Seventh
Commandment are Sins against the Body: Other Sins are not so comparatively with
that. They are without the Body, but he that commits Sins of that Nature,
Sins against his own Body. 1 Cor. 6, 18. Sin^^ when Christ shall appear,
Believers shall appear with him in Glory, the thought of it should cause them,
not only to abstain from Fleshly Lusts, but to Mortify them, Col.3 4, 5. To set
forth the evil which is in Sins against the Body, the Apostle says, Know you
not that your Body is the Temple of the holy Spirit? What horrible Sacrilege
is it to defile the Temple of GOD? The Apostle infers, Therefore Glorify God in
your Body. That Head, that Tongue, those Hands, those Feet which shall be
Raised to Glory in the Resurrection World, ought to be made use of as
Instruments to promote the Glory of GOD in this World. This Meditation, My Body
shall one Day be a Subject of wonderful Glory, will cause a Man that has Grace
in his Soul to be careful not to Sin with his Body.

Inf. IV. Shall the Children of GOD be as the Angels of Heaven in another
World? then they should endeavor to be and do as like them as may be whilst
in this World. We should aim and endeavor after that which we cannot attain
unto (...) We cannot attain unto that Perfection in Holiness which the Children
of the Resurrection shall have, yet should we aim at it. Phil. 3. 11, 12. If by
any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. Not as though I had
already attained, or were already Perfect: but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. I (says Paul)
was running away from Christ, but he apprehended me, He stopped me and converted
me, that he might make me perfectly holy and happy in the Resurrection World;
This perfection am I striving after. So should we endeavor to be as the Angels
of Heaven, in respect of our Obedience to God, to do his Will an Earth as they
do it, Heaven. Then Is is a willing Obedience: They are glad to be employed in
any Service for GOD: They hearken to the Voice of his Word and do his Pleasure:
They Serve the LORD (...) and fervently, and so should we be fervent in Spirit
Serving the Lord. They are never, weary in Serving GOD. We should not be weary
in well doing. The holy Angels are constant in their Obedience, they do not
draw back. The Living Creatures, (Angels are they) turned not when they went:
they went every one straight forward, Ezekiel.1.9. To turn back from the holy
Commandment is to be like the Angels of Hell, and not like the Angels of
Heaven. Angels are humble Spirits. They will visit Prisons to be helpful to the
Servants of Christ. When Peter was in Prison, an Angel visited him there: They
will do kind Offices for Poor beggars. They will help a poor Lazarus in his way
to Heaven. So should we Condescend to men of low Estate, Rom.12.16. Angels do
good to those unto whom they Minister freely. They knew that we cannot require
them for any thing they do for us, our Clarity should be like theirs. Luk.6.35.
Do Good, and Lord, hoping for nothing again. Angels are beneficent to unworthy
Ones. To unthankful Murmurers. Such were the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, yet when God commanded them to do it, they supplied them with Bread
every Day. Psalm.78.25. Man did Eat Angels food. Angels are very Serviceable:
They are Inspectors over the World. The World fares the better for them: More
especially they do kind Offices for them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord encumpeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. And are they not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them
who shall be heirs of Salvation? We should in this respect endeavor to be and
do like them. Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore Opportunity, let us do good to
all men, especially to them who are of the household of (...). Angels are full
of Zeal for GOD: When his honor is concerned, they are all in a Flame. Those
Ministers of his are then a flame of Fire. Hence are they called Seraphims;
that is Burners: They burn with an holy Zeal. They are Zealous in Executing the
Holy Judgments of God upon Sinners. When the great Tyrant Nebuchadnezzar was
made an astonishing Example to the world, the Decree of the Most High against
him, was Executed by those holy ones, Dan. 4. 17. When the wicked Sodomites
were Destroyed by a strange Punishment on those workers of Iniquity, the holy
Angels said, We will Destroy this Place because the Cry of them is waxen great
before the face of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to Destroy it, Genesis 19.
13. So shall it be at the end of the World: The Angels shall come forth, and
shall sev^r the wicked from the Just, and shall (...) them into a (...) of
fire, Mat. 13. 49, 50. The Angels of Heaven are much in Praising GOD, they
delight therein. There was with the Angel a Multitude of the heavenly Host,
Praising God, Luke 2. 13. They are ever at that work. It Is Angelical to delight
in Praising GOD. David was an Angelical Man, and he delighted in Praising the
Lord, Some have Observed that in the Book of Psalms, he is Praising God above
two hundred times. The Angels of Heaven Love and Admire the Lord Jesus Christ:
They are taken with the Mystery of Christ, and take Pleasure in Searching into
it, 1 Pet. 1. 12. They Adore the Person of Christ. There is not One Angel in
Heaven but what does Worship the Lord Jesus Christ: Heb. 1. 6. Worship Him all
ye Angels. Millions of them are Wondering at his Glory. Ten thousand Times ten
thousand Angels stand about the Throne in Heaven, are saying, Worthy is the
Lamb, Rev. 5. 11, 12. They call upon one another to set forth the Glory of
Christ. Isai. 6. 3. One Cried to another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. Every Knee in Heaven bows
to Him, and every Tongue there Celebrates his Praises; and shall not we on
Earth do so? Had we the Tongue of Men and Angels, we could not set him forth
according to what He is worthy of. He has done more for us, than ever He did
for Angels. He has dyed for us, but not for them. They are indeed beholden to
him as GOD for their Beings. By Him were all things created that are in Heaven
and in Earth, visible and invisible: But He is our Mediator and Redeemer, which
cannot be said of Angels; if then they Love and Admire and Serve our Lord Jesus
Christ, let us go and do so.

Inf. V. The Children of GOD may have great Comfort in Meditating on the
Resurrection World. The Doctrine of the Resurrection, is to Believers on Christ
a Comfortable Doctrine.

It is so,

1. As to Themselves. It affords matter of Comfort in respect of whatever
Afflictions they may for the present be Subject unto: Deep Afflictions are a
Metapherical Grave. They are fitly resembled there unto. Psalm. 88. 10. With
thou show wonders to the Dead? shall the Dead arise and Praise thee? So did he
speak when under sore Affliction both in his Body (for it is thought he was a
Leper, v. 18.) and in his Soul which were full of Troubles, and almost
distracted with the Terrors of God. When the Lords People did as it were ly
buried in a Grave of long Affliction in Babylon, the Lord said to them, I will
open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, Ezekiel. 37. 12. He
that will bring the Bodies of his Saints out of their Graves at the last Day,
they may be sure will bring them out of what ever Grave of Affliction, they may
Ly Buried in for a time. There are Children of God who are Afflicted with
Bodily Weaknesses and Infirmities; and it may be for a Long time. We read in
the Gospel, of a Daughter of Abraham, who had been bowed Down with a spirit of
Infirmity Eighteen Years, Luke 13. 11. There will be no Bodily Infirmities to
complain of in the Resurrection World. This also affords Comfort to the
Children of God, against the Fear of Death. God said to Jacob, Be not afraid to
go Down into Egypt, I will surely bring thee up again, Genesis 46. 3, 4. So He
says to the Believer, Be not afraid to go down into the Grave, I will surely
bring thee up again; and in the mean time, Thou shall see Joseph, thy Soul
shall be with JESUS. Therefore should they go into the Grave, not only
Willingly but Cheerfully. The tho'ts of their Death being near at hand, should
be a Comfort to them. And it is moreover, a comfortable Meditation, for
Believers who die in these Last Ages of the world, that they shall not continue
Long in their Graves. It was a comfort to Christ, that although He knew he should
Die, He also knew that he should not abide Lon^^^ the state of Death: Isa. 50.
8. He is near that Justifies me; I shall not be Long in my Grave. Believers in
the Latter Days, have in this respect an Happiness above what they had in the
Years of Ancient Generations. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Samuel and all the
Prophets have been in their Graves, for more than Two Thousand Years. Although we
know not the precise Time when it will be; Nevertheless, we have
Scripture-ground to apprehend, chat the Resurrection of the Just will be within
far less Time than Two Thousand Years.

2. The Doctrine of the Resurrection, administers matter of Comfort to
Believers, against the Death of their Godly Friends and Near Relations, who
have Died in the Lord. They shall Rise again. As Martha said of her dear
Brother Laza^us, Joh. 11. 24. I know that he shall Rise again at the Last Day.
We shall see our dear Friends, and they shall see us and converse with us in
the Resurrection World. Austin in One of his Epistles, comforts a Pious Lady,
whose Husband was Dead, by telling her that she should see him again in a
Better World; and although she should not Eat and Drink with him as in this
world, nevertheless (says he) You shall Know him and Love him, more than ever
you did whilst in a state of Mortality. The Gentiles would take on Extremely,
when a near Relation died; because they had no hope of ever seeing them again,
as not believing a Resurrection from the Dead. But Christians should know
better; 1 These. 4. 13, 14 I would not have you ignorant, concerning them which
are asleep, that you sorrow (...), as others which have no hope. For if we
believe that Jesus Died, and Rose again, ever so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. This implies, that we shall see and know our
Friends in the Resurrection World; Else the thought of the Resurrection, would
not have such Consolation in it. The Apostle likewise says to the
Thessalonians, that they would be his Crown of Rejoicing at the coming of
Christ. Therefore Paul will know those Thessalonians, to whom he was a
spiritual Father; and be able to distinguish them from Other People. So Godly
Parents will know their Children, and Children their Parents. Many a Father
will then Bless GOD for giving him such Children; and Children for giving them
such Parents. And many a Godly Mother, when she shall see her Children again at
the Resurrection, will Bless GOD for making her the happy Instrument of
bringing Children into the world, which shall help to People Heaven with
Inhabitants.

Inf. VI. We should make sure of our obtaining a Blessed Resurrection. This
Assurance is attainable. Job had it, and it was a great Comfort to him in all
his Afflictions.

Oh! That men would consider that Death is certain. Oh! that they were Wise,
and would consider their Latter End; and that a Resurrection from the Dead, is
as certain as Death it self. But every man shall not have a Blessed
Resurrection. Nay, but very few that shall: Few there be that find it. It was a
fearful word which the Devil in a Possessed man once uttered, saying, I know
that at the Day of Judgment, I shall have more will be with me, than Christ
will have with Him. But if a man shall not have an Happy Resurrection, what
will be his Portion? What will be his Doom? How dismal when his Body shall be
brought Out of the Prison of the Grave, and his Soul Out of the Prison of Hell,
to appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, to have a Sentence of Eternal
Death pronounced upon him by the Son of GOD, and after that holy Angels cast
him into the Fire which never shall be Quenched? And, Oh! that Sinners would
remember that Now, before their immortal Souls are separated from their Bodies,
is the Only Time for them to make sure of a Blessed Resurrection. He that does
not make sure of it before Death, will never make sure of it. Therefore NOW be
in Earnest about it: Do it with thy Might; for there is no Work in the Grave
whither thou go. There will be no hope of it after that fatal hour, if it is
not done before that. When once the Body is gone down into the Pit of the
Grave, and the immortal Soul into the Pit of Perdition, into blackness of
Darkness for ever, there is no more hope: Isa. 38. 18. They that go down into
the Pit, cannot hope for thy Truth. And we should always Remember, that it will
not be Long before Death will be here. Who can say how soon, how suddenly? Have
we not Examples of sudden Deaths, often set before us? It may be this is the
Last Sabbath which some of us shall ever see, the Last Sermon which some of us
shall ever hear. And as Death shall Leave us, so will the Resurrection Find us;
Either among those that shall Rise to Everlasting Life, or among those who
shall Rise to a Second Death which shall be Eternal.

QUESTION.

What shall we do, that so we may be Sure of a Blessed Resurrection?

ANSWER.

1. Let us make Sure that our Souls be Risen out of a State of SIN. Are our
Souls Quickened, which Once were Dead in Trespasses and Sins? If our Souls have
Experienced a Spiritual Resurrection, our Bodies shall have a Blessed
Resurrection at the Last Day. Is there a Spiritual Life infused into our Souls?
Is there a work of Saving Grace begun there? Have we truly Repented of all our
Sins? (...) they shall not Ly down with us in the Grave, and Rise up with us to
Condemn us at the Great Day. Is there none in this Assembly, but what can say
as in the Presence of GOD, I know not of any One Sin I have been guilty of, but
I have Confessed it, Repented of it; and through Christ my Peace is made with
God? Are we true Believers on CHRIST? All and only such are Regenerate. Then
there is a blessed Scripture for us to Meditate on, and take Comfort from: It
is that, Joh. 1^. 25, 26. Jesus said, I am the Resurrection and the Life; be
that Believes on me, though be were Dead, yet shall be Live. And whosoever
Lives, and Believes on me, shall never Die.

2. The way for us to Obtain a Blessed Resurrection of our Bodies, is to be
always doing Good, and serving GOD whilst we are in the Body. I have hope
(says the Apostle) that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead. And then he
adds, Herein do I Exercise my self, to have always a Conscience Void of Offense
toward God, and toward men, Act. 24. 15, 16. When serious thoughts of the
Resurrection, shall make a man diligent in Serving GOD, and in Endeavors to be
Useful unto Men, (...) a sign of his being One that shall have a Blessed
Resurrection. Then shall we receive a Reward according to what we have Done
whilst in the Body. Works of Piety toward GOD, will then be Rewarded. Mat. 6.
6. When thou Prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy Door,
Pray to thy Father which is in Secret, and thy Father which Sees in Secret,
shall Reward thee Openly. And when will Prayer and other Works of Piety, be
Rewarded Openly? In the Resurrection World, they shall be Rewarded Openly
before the whole World. The like is to be said concerning Acts of Charity
toward Men, they shall be Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just, Luke
14. 14. And therefore the more Good we have done in the World, the greater will
the Recompense of Reward then be; the Thought whereof should Encourage us to be
very Laborious in Serving the LORD. Wherefore the Apostle, after he had
Discoursed Largely concerning the Resurrection of the Children of GOD, makes
this Conclusion; Be ye always Abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much as
ye know, that your Labor is not in Vain in the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 15. 58. In the
Resurrection World, when you shall be as the Angels of Heaven, you will
certainly know and see, that your Labor has not been in Vain in the Lord.

Believers HAVE A Well grounded HOPE, OF Perfect Blessedness in Heaven.
Col. 1. 5. -- The Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven.
THE Apostle in the Third Verse of the Chapter, gives Thanks to God for these
Colossra^s. In this Verse he me^tions the Reasons why he did so. It was on the
account of that Grace which was wrought in them, by the Preaching of the
Gospel. There are two particular Graces instanced in.

1. The Grace of Faith; described from the Object of it, Viz. CHRIST: Your
Faith in Jesus Christ.

2. The Grace of Love; which is also described from the more peculiar Object of
it, Viz. Saints; and all such. The Love which you have to all the Saints.

The words before us, are Expressive of that which was the moving Cause,
inducing these Believers to the Exercise of those Graces: The consideration of
that Blessedness which they Hoped to Enjoy in another World, had this Effect
upon them. Hope is here (as in other Scriptures) put for the Good Hoped for;
which is Perfect Blessedness. Nothing less than that is the Object of the
Believers Hope. And it is a Sure, Well-grounded Hope: They shall surely Obtain
the Happiness they Hope for. Since,

(1.) It is Laid up for them. It is Deposited in a Safe Hand.

(2.) It is in a Safe Place; Viz. In Heaven.

The DOCTRINE before us to be insisted on, is,

That all true Believers on JESUS CHRIST have a Sure Well-grounded Hope, of
obtaining Perfect Blessedness in Heaven.

PROPOSITION I.
Believers on Christ Hope for Blessedness in another World. They have a Blessed
Hope, Tit. 2. 13. They Hope (...) Salvation. They put on for an Helmet, the
Hope of Salvation, 1 These. 5. 8. They Hope for Life. Hence is that Expression
of a Lively Hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Yea, Eternal Life is the Object of their Hope,
Tit. 1. 2. They Hope for Glory, Romans 5. 2. The Happiness of Believers in the
future state when they are gone out of this world, is sometimes called Life;
and sometimes Glory. Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and
afterward receive me to Glory. Happiness does consist in the Enjoyment of the
Chief Good, which is indeed all Good at once; and thence a Soul-satisfying
Good; which this whole world with all its Delights and Comforts is not. Only
GOD in JESUS CHRIST is that Good. The full Fruition of Him, which is not to be
obtained on Earth but in Heaven, is that which Believers Hope for, with an
earnest Expectation and Desire: Psalm. 42. 2. My Soul thirsts for God, for the
Living God; when shall I come and appear before God? David Longed for Communion
with God here in his holy Ordinan^^^s; but much more for an Immediate and
Soul-satisfying Communion with Him in Heaven.

PROPOSITION II.
The Believers Hope of Blessedness, is a Well-grounded Hope. They have
sufficient Reason for their Hope: 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an
Answer to every man that asks you, a Reason of the Hope that is in you. Pagans
thought that Christians were no better than Madmen, for that they willingly
Exposed themselves to great Sufferings in this world; only because they hoped
for Happiness in another World. But they had good Reason for what they did.
They shall not be disappointed of the Blessedness which they Hope for.
Therefore it is called a Good Hope, 2 These. 2. 16. GOD even our Father has given
us Everlasting Consolation, and Good Hope through Grace. It is a Good Hope, not
only because the Object of it is the greatest Good; but it shall be made Good.
Believers shall certainly Enjoy the Good which they have Hoped for. Hence it is
said to be an Hope which makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5. This was David's
Consolation: Psalm. ^19. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect
unto all thy Commandments. Let the faithful Servants of God hope for Happiness
in another World as much as they will, they shall not be ashamed on the account
of a disappointed Hope. Herein is the difference between the Hope of true
Believers and of Other men. Some that have not true Faith, yet hope for
Happiness in another World; but it is not Well-grounded: Their Hope is a Vain
Presumption, and not the Grace of Hope. An Hypocrite who has only an External
Religion, may have a Confident Hope: but us a False Hope. The House of his Hope
is built on a False Bottom, which will shake under him, and end in a ruinous
Fall. Death will put an End to all his hopes for ever. Job 27. 8. What is the
hope of the Hypocrite, when God shall take away his Soul: But the True Believer
has Hope in his Death, Prove. 14. 32. When his Body dies, his Hope does not
die: But then he Obtains a great part of the Blessedness which he has Hoped
for. The Anchor of his Hope is sure and steadfast. Yea, as sure as the Promise
of God; Nay, as the Oath of God, than which it is impossible that any thing
should be more sure.

For,

1. The Believers Hope is from GOD. Therefore it is a sure Hope. If we speak of
the Object of the Believers Hope, or the Future Happiness he Hopes for, which
(as was said) is called his Hope, it is from God as the Author of it; and it is
therefore called the Glory of God: Romans ^. 2. We rejoice in hope of the Glory
of God. He has prepared that Glory for all true Believers on Jesus Christ. At
the Last Day, he will say unto them, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25. 34. The
Believer hopes for nothing less than a Kingdom. One of the Ancients says, that
the Primitive Christians were often speaking of a Kingdom; and expressing their
joyful hopes that they should in God's time Enjoy it: which made their Enemies
Look on them as a Phanatical sort of People: But their Faith assured them that
God had prepared such a Kingdom for them. And he likewise prepares them for it.
Therefore does the Scripture speak of Vessels of Mercy, which (...) asore
prepared unto Glory. Rom 9. 2^. He that has wrought us for the self same thing
is God who also has given unto us the Earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. ^. ^. That
self same thing, is the blessedness of heaven; a Building of God, an House
(...) made with hands Eternal in the Heavens, which they shall enjoy when
Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. God has made an Heaven for us, and he
makes us fit for that Heaven. He has made us Meet to be partakets of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. We have not wrought this Meetness in our
selves; but it is GOD that has done it, by a Work of Regeneration on our Souls;
and by giving his Spirit to us, as a Pledge of what he has prepared for us.
Then is our Hope sure and certain, and we cannot miss of Heaven. Or, if we
speak of the Grace of Hope which is wrought in the Souls of Believers, that
also is from God. There are three Graces in which Christianity does Eminently
consist, viz. Faith, Love, and Hope; of all which the Apostle speaks in this
with the preceding Verse. Where GOD gives Faith, he gives those Other Graces
also. All Grace is from him: And the Grace of Hope in particular is so. Hence
he is styled the God of Hope, as being not only the Object, but the Author of
this Grace. It is by the Power of the Holy Spirit, that this Grace is wrought
in Believing Souls. They abound in hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost,
Romans 15. 13. In this also the False hope of a man that has no true Faith, and
the Well-grounded hope of the Believer, differ. The Unbelievers Confidence is
not from GOD. It is an Hope of his Own making: He kindles a Fire, and walks in
the light of his Fire, and in the sparks which himself has kindled, Isa. 50.
11. Hence his hope is compared to a Spiders web, Job 8. 14. The Spider spins
his web out of his own bowels: So does the Hypocrite his hope. But the
Believers hope is of a Divine Original: It is an hope of God's Begetting, of
his Creating. He has begotten us unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. It is
therefore a sure and a good hope; an hope that will end in the fruition of the
good hoped for.

2. The Believers Hope is built on CHRIST. 1 Timothy 1. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ
is our hope. He has been the hope of his People in all Ages of the world: Jer.
14. 8. O the Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof. Who is that hope of
Israel? It is Christ the Promised Messiah, who was to come into the world to be
the Savior of it. Hence Paul said to the Jews, For the hope of Israel I am
bound with this Chain, Act. 28. 20 It was for his Preaching Christ, that a
Chain was upon him. Now Christ is a sure and safe Foundation for us to build
our hope upon: Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord
Jehovan is Everlasting Strength. He is called Tzur Gnolamim, the Rock of Ages.
The house of the Believers hope is Founded on this Rock of Ages, therefore it
shall not fail nor fall, but stand to Eternity. It is said of the wise builder,
That he built his house upon a Rock, and the Rain descended, and the Floods
came, and the winds blew and beat upon the house, and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a Rock, Mat. 7. 24, 25. The true Believer is the wise Builder:
Christ is the Rock on which his house, his hope is built and stands for ever.
All the Powers of Darkness can never shake it. More particularly;

(1.) The Believers hope of blessedness in another world, is built upon the
Merits of Christ's Obedience. Not upon the Merit of their Own Works or
Righteousness: For that would be to build on the Sand. Men never did Merit any
thing by their imperfect Obedience, much less Eternal Life. It comes to us not
as due Wages, as Death is, but as the Free Gift of God: Rom.6.23. The wages of
Sin is Death, but the gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. It was a prodigiously Proud and Insolent Speech of a Popish Jesuit, That
if God would give him Heaven Gratis, he would not Accept of it on those terms;
he would do something to deserve it at the hands of God. Our imperfect and
sinful Obedience (and the best that we do or can do is so) cannot be
Meritorious of any thing but Death. Only the Obedience of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, is Meritorious: Rev. 5. 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain. For his
Obedience is perfect, and without any defect. He has fulfilled all
Righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. There was no Precept of the Law of God whatsoever,
that was a Duty incumbent on the Man Christ Jesus to fulfill it, but he has done
it; and not failed in the manner of Performance. Now the Righteousness of this
Obedience of Christ, is imputed to the true Believer on his Name. The
Righteousness of God which is by Faith in Jesus Christ is upon all that
believe, Romans 3. 22. That Is the Righteousness of One who is God as well as Man,
and therefore Infinitely Meritorious. It Is the only Righteousness which God will
accept of in order to the Justification and Salvation of a Sinner; and it is
Faith that does Entitle a man to this Righteousness, and make him able to say
truly, This Glorious Righteousness is mine. God would make his Law Honorable
and Glorious: Therefore it must be Fulfilled, and perfectly Obeyed. This no man
since Adams Fall, being involved in the Guilt of his sin, could ever do.
Nevertheless, Believers in respect of their Surety, have done it. Sin has
wounded and weakened men so, that they cannot obtain Righteousness and Salvation
by the Law; but then God has sent his Son, That the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. Rom 8. 3, 4. Christ's Fulfilling of the Law is
imputed to us, if we truly believe on his Name God graciously accepts of what
our Surety has done for us, as if we our selves had done the same. Moreover, in
order to the Satisfaction of Divine Justice, it was necessary that the Penalty
of the Law should be endured. This also has Christ our Blessed Surety, been
willing for our sakes to submit unto, that he might obtain our Reconcilation to
GOD, and our being accepted as Righteous; 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to
be Sin for us. It was by the holy Imputation of God that he was made so. Our
Sins were imputed to Him, and thence he was made a Sin-offering in our stead:
That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; That the Righteousness
which God will accept of might be imputed to us. This said Justin (one of the
Martyrs in the Primitive times) was a sweet Exchange. And a later Martyr said,
Behold a Wonderful Exchange; Christ has my Sins, and I have his Righteousness.
This then is that which the Believers hope of blessedness in Heaven is built
upon: It is on the Merit of Christ's Blood; on the Obedience of his Passion, as
well as on the Obedience of his Life. He has carried the Merit of his Blood to
heaven with him. By his own Blood he entered into the holy place, having
obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. But therefore believers hope
(as well may they hope) that they shall enter into heaven also. They may have,
and should have an humble Confidence of it. Heb. 10. 19. Having boldness to
enter into the holiest of all, by the Blood of Jesus. What can keep out of
heaven, but only Sin? The sins of Believers are all satisfied for. The Blood of
Christ has made a full Atonement for them; and taken away the Guilt and
Condemnation due for them. This indeed no other blood could do. The blood of
all the Sacrifices under the Old Testament could not Purge the Conscience, or
take away the Guilt of Sin. The Law made nothing Perfect, but the bringing in
of a better Hope has done it, Heb. 7. 19. The Priesthood of Christ, the
Sacrifice which he has offered, gives unto Believers a better ground of hope
than the Law did. Because of the bringing in of this Hope, not only the Mercy
of God, but his Justice also, concur and conspire in the Salvation of his
People: Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace
have kissed each other. Nay, Justice it self looks on Believers with a smiling
Countenance: Ver. 11. Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. It is not only
Consistent with the Justice of God to pardon the Sins, and save the Souls of
Penitent Believers, but in respect of Christ, Justice Obliges him to it. It Is
therefore said, That He is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9. It cannot stand with Justice
to demand Satisfaction twice for the same Debt, of the Surety and of the
Principal too. Christ our Surety has made a Full Payment of our Debt: He has
Saved us to the Uttermost; and has left nothing for us our selves or for any
other to do after him, that so the Debt might be satisfied for.

(2.) The Believers Hope is built on the Resurrection of Christ. The Scripture
speaks of a Lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, 1
Pet. 1. 3. For that makes it clear, that God has received full Satisfaction in
the Death of Christ. As our Surety he was put into the Prison of the Grave: God
himself has Opened the Prison-door, and he is gone forth; we may therefore
hope, yea, we may rest assured of it, that our Debt is fully Paid. Christ at
his Resurrection was discharged from that imputed Guilt, which was the cause of
his Sufferings and Death. Hence his Resurrection is called his Justification:
Isa. 50. 8. He is near that Justifies me: I must be put into the Grave (says
Christ) but God will soon Raise me up from thence. And when Christ was thus
Justified, by his being Raised from the Dead, all Believers were Virtually
Justified. He was Delivered for our Offenses, and Raised again for our
Justification, Romans 4. 25. When the Believer does by Faith look upon the
Resurrection of Christ, he may say, I have a Good, i. e. a Guiltless
Conscience: For all my Sins have been satisfied for, that Debt is wholly Paid.
How does that appear? It is Evident from the Resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.
21. If Christ had not Risen from the Dead, we must for ever Despaired of
Salvation. But by that we know that his Death has been Meritorious and
Satisfactory in our behalf. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's
Elect? It is God that Justifies. Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that
Dyed: Yea, rather that is Risen again, Romans 8. 34. But there is something
further to be added: For notwithstanding the Death of Christ and his
Resurrection, there are many in the world without Hope, because they are
without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. They have not a real Interest in him.

Therefore,

(3.) Believers Hope of Heaven is built on their Union with Christ: Col. 1. 27.
Christ in you the Hope of Glory. Christ abides in them, and they in him, as
Branches abide in the Vine. He dwells in the believing Soul; Ephesians. 3. 17. That
Christ may Dwell in your hearts by Faith. It is impossible that a soul which is
United to Christ, should miss of Heaven. As long as this Union continues, the
Believer is in a safe Condition. Now that Union is Indissoluble and Eternal.
Death it self cannot dissolve it. That dissolves the Union which is between the
Soul and the Body; but not the Union which is between Christ and the Soul.
Death put an End to all Natural and Civil Relations, but not to that Spiritual
Relation which is between Christ and his People. He has said to the Believer, I
will Betroth thee to me for ever, Hos. 2. 19. As in Marriage, as long as both
Parties Live, the Relation continues. Thus as long as the Eternal Son of God
and the immortal Soul of the Believer shall Live, this blessed Union will
remain; therefore the Hope which is built upon it, is a sure well-grounded
Hope. Thus for the Second Demonstration of the Truth before us.

3. The Happiness which believers hope for, is committed to a Sure Hand. Hence
it is said to be Laid up; The Hope laid up: As a Treasure which is trusted in the
hands and custody of a Faithful Depositary: Such an one has no fear of Loosing
his Depositum, but hopes to Enjoy it in due time. In whose hand is the
believers hope Deposited? Who has laid it up for him? It is an Able Hand, who
can keep it safe: 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him. His Soul, his
Eternal Life, all the Everlasting Concerns of another World the Believer has
trusted Christ with them all. The Object of the Believers Hope is a Depositum
which Christ has laid up for him. And reserved for him, 1. Pet. 1. 4. When it is
said, the believers hope is Laid up, Committed, Reserved, all these Expressions
aim at the same thing; they denote Safety and Security. Sometimes when a man
has that which is Precious and Valuable, he will put it into the hands of a
Friend to keep for him, and if it is put into the hand of an Able and Faithful
Friend, he may well hope for the Enjoyment of it. So is it here. It is well for
Believers, that their Salvation is not in their Own Keeping For if it were,
they would soon Loose it, as Adam did, when he was trusted with the Lives of
all the World. But as for Believers, their Souls and the Eternal safety
thereof, are in the hands of a Faithful Keeper, and a Mighty Keeper: Joh. 10.
28, 29. I Give them Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish; neither shall
any pluck them out of my Hand. My Father is Greater than all; none is able to
pluck them out of my Father's Hand.

4. The Blessedness which Believers Hope for, is Laid up in a Safe Place, as
well as in a Sure Hand. It is laid up in the securest Place in the whole
Creation. For where is it Laid up? It is in the Heaven of Heavens. So says the
Text, The Hope which is Laid up for you in Heaven. So the Apostle Peter, An
Inheritance Reserved for you in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. There is no danger of
Loosing a Treasure which is Laid up there. No Enemy can come there to Rob us of
it: Mat. 6. 20. Lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where Thieves do
not break through and Steal. Hope is the Souls Anchor, and it is an Anchor that
will hold, as being Fastened in Heaven: Heb. 6. 19. Which Hope we have as an
Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the Vail. By the Vail in the Temple there was an Entrance into the Sanctuary,
which was a Type of Heaven. The Soul of the Believer does, by Faith and Hope
cast Anchor in Heaven; which is therefore sure and steadfast, come what come
can. Whilst in this world, we are in Storms: We are in a Tempestuous Sea, yet
are we safe enough if we have an Anchor within the Vail, if the Anchor of our
Hope is laid up in Heaven, that Anchor will hold; and as long as the Anchor
holds, the Vessel is safe.

PROPOSITION III.
The Blessedness which all true Believers shall Enjoy in Heaven, will be a
Perfect Blessedness. There is no Perfection of Happiness to be hoped for on
this side Heaven. All Earthly happiness is attended with that which makes it an
Imperfect happiness. Wherefore David said, I have seen an end of all
Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding Broad, Psalm. 119. 96. He saw that
all the Honors, and Riches, and Pleasures which this World can afford, would
not make Happy; but the Commandment directs in the right way to Heaven, and
there is Perfection, and a Perfection which no End of it can be seen. Although
in respect of their Souls, Believers attain unto a Blessed Perfection when they
Leave this world; as from another Scripture has been Largely showed, the
Spirits of Just men are then made Perfect: Nevertheless, their Happiness will
not be Completed until after the Resurrection and Day of Judgment, when they
shall go to Heaven Body and Soul, namely, to that Heaven where Christ in
respect of his Humane Nature now is. Hence Christ said to Peter, Whither I go,
viz. to that Heaven whither I am going, thou can not follow me now; but thou
shall follow me afterward: Viz. when thou shall leave this world, Joh. 13, 36.
The Lord also said to his Disciples, I go to prepare a place for you; that
where I am, there you may be also, Joh. 14. 3. And where is that but in his
Father's House? When Once they are there, they shall want nothing that can
Conduce to a Perfection in Happiness.

There are Four Particulars to be Considered, as Concurring in the Blessedness
of the Heavenly World. [I.] There is the Blessedness of the Place. [II.] Of the
Society. [III.] The Beatifical Vision. [IV.] The Eternity of the Enjoyment.

1. The Blessedness of the Place. That Heaven which is to be the Seat of the
Blessed, is a most blessed and desirable Place. There are some Countries on the
Earth, which are far more desirable to Live in, than Others are. But the
Scripture tells us of an Heavenly Country. There is no Country on the Earth
to be compared with that. It Is said of the Holy Patriarchs, they Desire a better
Country, that is an Heavenly, Heb. 11. 16. It appears that Heaven is a most
Desirable Place from several things.

1. From the Types of it. There are Glorious Types of it mentioned in the
Scripture; e. g. The Land of Canaan was a desirable Country to Live in; It Is
called the good Land. When the Children of Israel had provoked the Lord by
their Unbelief, He Swore that they should not see the good Land, Deuteronomy. 1. 35.
It is called the glorious Land, Dan. 11. 16. It was the Glory of all Lands,
Ezekiel. 20. 6. So is Heaven the Glory of the whole Creation: It is the Goodliest
part of the Creation of God. Because of the Land of Canaan was a Figure of
Heaven, therefore (as from another Scripture we have showed) Heaven is called
an Inheritance. None but Israelites had a right to inherit that Land. Thus none
but Believers on Christ, have a right to the Heavenly Inheritance. It was by
means of Joshua, that the Children of Israel Inherited Canaan: It is by means
of JESUS our Lord, that Believers Inherit Heaven. The Children of Israel dwelt
in Houses which they never built: So do the Children of God in Heaven, dwell in
Mansions which they had not the least hand in building them. The Land of Canaan
is called the Land of Promise, Heb. 11. 9. Heaven is so much more. We have need
of Patience, that after we have done the Will of God we may receive the
Promise, Heb. 10. 36. Heaven it self is that Promise. This was the reason why
some of the Patriatchs were so desirous to be Buried in the Land of Canaan.
Jacob and Joseph Died in Egypt, yet would they be Buried in Canaan; thereby
testifying their Valuation of that Land, not merely for it self, but as it was
a Type of Heaven. No Question but that it was for this, that Moses was so
Exceeding desirous (had the Lord seen it meet) to have seen that Land. He
prayed, until God bid him be silent, and speak no more unto him of that matter;
and said, I pray thee let me go over and see the good Land which is beyond
Jordan, that goodly Mountain, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. What Mountain was that? It Is supposed
that it was Mount Moriah, on which Abraham was Commanded to Sacrifice Isaac;
and on which afterward the Temple was built: that Mountain was a Type of
Heaven, which is a Goodly Mountain indeed. The Temple also was a Type of
Heaven. That was a Beautiful House: There was not such another Glorious
Building on the Earth. David said, It must be Builded for the Lord; and it must
be exceeding Magnifical; of Fame and of Glory throughout all Countries, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. Solomon said it should be wonderful Great, 2 Chronicles. 2. 9. And
taking it with the Buildings belonging to it, it was a wonderful Great House.
Yet this house in all its Glory and Magnificence, was but a shadow of Heavens
Glory. Again, Paradise was a Type of Heaven. That is in the Scripture called
Eden, which signifies Pleasure, and the Garden of the Lord. It was a Garden
which GOD himself Planted; the like was never on the Earth. How happy had Adam
been, might he have continued there? But to be in the Heavenly Paradise, is an
inexpressibly greater Happiness. It is promised to him that Overcomes, that he
shall Eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God,
Rev. 2. 7. Christ in Heaven, is that Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise
of God. Believers shall there Feed upon and be Satisfied with beholding his
Glory, throughout the Ages of Eternity.

2. The Names whereby Heaven is described in the Scripture, declares it to be a
Blessed and a Glorious Place. The Heaven which I am speaking of, and in which
the Hope of Believers is Laid up, is called the third Heaven. Paul was Caught
up to the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2. The Hebrew Writers have (as the Scripture
has) distinguished Heaven into three Regions, Each one of which is called
Heaven.

(1.) There is the Aerial Heaven, in which the Birds fly, and the Clouds
appear. The Scripture speaks of the Fowls of Heaven, and the Clouds of Heaven.
All that space which is between the Earth and the Stars is called Heaven.

(2.) There is the Etherial Heaven, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars. glitter.
Hence the Scripture speaks of the Stars of Heaven. With these God has Garnished
that which is the Second Heaven.

(3.) There is the Supreme Heaven, that which is the Seat of the Blessed, and
of which the holy Angels are the Native Inhabitants; who are therefore said to
be the Angels of Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. This is the Third Heaven, which is also
called the Heaven of Heavens, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Importing that it is of all
Heavens, the most Excellent and Glorious One. Sometimes it is called Heaven
Absolutely and Emph^tically: No other heaven is worth the mentioning in
Comparison of this. It is also called the City of God. The City of Jerusalem,
which was the Perfection of Beauty, and the Joy of the whole Earth, was but as
a Shadow of it. It is the City whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. All
other Cities have been Built by Men, but this no man had an hand in Building
it, or in making any part of it; only GOD himself by his own Infinite Power and
Wisdom. The Greek word there used for Builder, is Technites; which signifies an
Artificer. GOD alone was the Artificer, when this City was Built. He has showed
his Art, his Skill, his Incomparable Wisdom in Framing of it. No Creature could
have been the Author of such a Building; as we shall see and believe when God
shall bring us into it. There it is that the Great King has his Residence, and
keeps his Court with more than ten thousand times ten thousand of the Noblest
Creatures that ever were made, attending on him. This Heaven is the Palace
Royal of the Divine Majesty. Mean persons may dwell in poor Cottages, but Kings
in Magnificent Houses. What do we think of the Palace in which the King of the
World, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, has his holy Habitation? How Glorious is
it? Look (...) from heaven the Habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory.
This heaven is called God's Throne, Mat. 5. 34. When Kings Sit upon their
Thrones, they appear in all their Glory. In heaven God appears in such Glory,
as no mortal Man is able to behold. When Moses Prayed, Show (...) thy Glory,
God said to him, Thou can not see my Face; no man shall see me and live.

3. The wonderful Extent of this Heaven, sets forth the Glory and Magnificence
of it. The heavenly Jerusalem is called the Great City. The Circuit of it is
said to be Sixteen Thousand Furlongs, which make Fifteen hundred Miles, Rev. ^.
^. There never was so great a City, or (...) way comparable to it. Old Babylon
and Rome, have been accounted the greatest Cities that ever the Sun saw. Yet
neither of them were above Fifty Miles in Compass. Wherefore this Description
of the heavenly Jerusalem, does intimate unto us, that Heaven is of wonderful
Extent. The Spaciousness of it, is incredible to the Unbelieving World. All
other Places and all Creatures are comprehended within the Circumference of it.
The Glorious GOD is an Immense Being, and therefore cannot be Contained within
the Limits of Place: The heaven of heavens cannot Contain him, 1 King. 8. 27.
But the whole Creation is Circumscribed with the Heaven of Heavens. The Height
of it is wonderful: It is the Top of the Creation. Nothing is above it. Glory
be to God in the Highest, Luke 2. 14. The heaven of heavens is the highest part
of the Creation of God. That heaven for height is Unsearchable, Prove. 25. 3. I
know, Astronomers have their Conjectures about it; and they are but
Conjectures. The Old Astronomers have maintained, that it is above Eighty
Millions of Miles, from the Earth to the Starry Heaven. Late Astronomers,
suppose it to be many times more, than that amounts unto. Not only
Mathematicians, but some Divines have affirmed; That if a man should Travel an
hundred Miles every Day, he would not in the space of Four Thousand Years,
reach the Stars; and that the Third Heaven is above the Stars, as much as that
is above the Earth. We know from the Scripture, that the Empyrean Heaven is
Vastly above the highest Stars, but how much higher no man can say. And it is
Presumption in those men, who go about to Determine it. Hence Eliphaz said to
Job, Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the height of the Stars how
high they are, Job. ^^. 12. Thou see (says he) that (...) is a wonderful
Meditation, for a Christian when he walks abroad in the Night, and beholds the
Stars, to think with himself, This Body of mine which is now walking here on
the Earth, shall one Day walk above the Stars: For so it shall, when after the
Resurrection it shall be in that Heaven which is far above them. But then how
Vast must the Extent of this Heaven be? The Earth is by Geographers concluded,
to be One and Twenty Thousand and Six Hundred Miles in Compass. It is but like
a Point in a great Circle, compared with the rest of the World. The Stars are
incomparably greater than the Earth. Late Astronomers presume, that they are so
many Suns; and some of them at least as big as the Sun. A Late Learned Writer
Conjectures, that the Sun is above Three Thousand and Four Hundred times as big
as the Earth. Another supposes, the Body of the Sun to be many Thousand times
greater than the Body of the Earth. How Vast then is the Space of that Heaven,
in which all the Planets and all the Fixed Stars are Contained? But the heaven
of heavens is of a much Vaster Extent. Well might our Lord say to the
Disciples, In my Father's house there are many Mansions. There is Room enough
in that heaven for Thousands of Millions of Saints and Angels to Delight
themselves for ever. Yet all this heaven as Vast as it is, will God give for an
Inheritance to his Children. It was said to Abraham, Lift up thine Eyes, and
Look Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward; all the Land which
thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed after thee, Genesis 13. 14,
15. Thus does the Lord say of the Spiritual Children of Abraham, true Believers
on Jesus Christ, Let them with an Eye of Faith take a View of the heavenly
Canaan, let them Consider how Good and how Great it is, I will give it all to
them.

4. There are Admirable Properties of this Heaven, by which we may see how
Desirable a Place it is. Blessed Properties which cannot be said of this Sinful
Earth. And what are they?

Answ. (1.) A Blessed Purity is to be Affirmed of that Heaven in which the
Believers hope is laid up. It is true that as to the Matter of it, it is a Pure
Substance. The Purest Gold, the Richest Gems are not to Compare with it; nor is
any Earthly thing: But it is a Place of the Greatest Purity on an higher
Account, than that of the Matter out of which it does Consist. For it was never
Defiled with any Sin; and is therefore called an Inheritance Undefiled, 1 Pet.
1. 4. It is an holy heaven. Psalm. 20. 6. He will hear from his holy heaven;
with the saving strength of his right hand. How should there be Sin there, when
there is such a Glorious Presence of God in it? There never was, there never
shall be any Sin there. There shall in no wise enter into it anything that
Defiles, Rev. 21. 27. Then I am sure that Sin cannot enter into it, for that is
the defilingest thing that ever was. This Earth was a far more desirable place
before Sin entered into it, and brought a Blemish and a Curse upon it, than now
it is. They that have an earnest desire to be perfectly pure and holy, may well
Long to be in heaven^^ For there they will find that Purity which their Souls
breathe after. The holy of holies in the Temple, was a Type of the heaven of
heavens.

(2.) Another Property of this heaven is, the Constancy of its Nature. It was
not made out of Pre-existent Principles, as all things that shall Perish and be
subject to Change were. It was made out of Nothing, as soon as ever the W^^k of
Creation began, Genesis 1. 1. It was made before the Starry heaven, and before the
Earth, which was Created the day before the Sun Moon and Stars were made. For
Angels are the Inhabitants of it; and they shouted when they saw God lay the
Foundations of the Earth, Job 38. 6, 7. It remains the same that it was the
first Day that the World began, without any alteration; and will do so to all
Eternity. It is therefore called an Inheritance which is Incorruptible, 1 Pet.
1. 4. In this world, all things are subject to Change: Here is not our Rest. It
is not a Place to continue in: But heaven is; Heb.13.14. Here we have no
continuing City, but we seek one to come. Our Days on Earth are as a shadow,
and there is no abiding. But in heaven there are Mansions, which are
Everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. It is the greatest Folly in the world, for
men to think that their houses on Earth shall be continued for Ever; and their
dwelling places to all Generations: But Heaven is an eternal house: 2 Cor 5. 1.
We have a building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

(3.) Another Property of this heaven is, a wonderful Splendour. A mavelous
Clarity and Brightness beyond what is in the most Resplendent Gems. It is
called a Throne of Sapphire-stone, which shines with a great Brightness, Ezekiel.
1. 26. The Elders of Israel had a wonderful Vision: the Son of God appeared to
them in an Humane shape: They saw the God of Israel, and there was under his
Feet as it were a Paved work of Sapphire-stone; and as it were the body of
heaven in its clearness, Exodus 24. 10. Thus had they a Miraculous Glympse of
heaven. The third Heaven is by Divines called the E^py^ean heaven; not for its
heat, but for its light. Hence also resembl'd to a Jasper Stone, Rev. 21. 11.
Writers say of the Jasper, that the brightness of it never cease; the Clouds
do not darken it, nor does it leave shining when the Sun shines; nor does the
splendour of it hurt the Eyes; but the more men look on it, the more it pleases
them. One of our own Divines says truly, All the Luster and shining Beauty of
Diamonds and Precious Stones, if they could be united into one Object, are not
to be compared with this. The Sun and Stars may be looked on as spots of
Darkness, compared with this Heaven. There is (...) Night there. How should
there, when all the Glorified Body's of the Children of God, shall shine as so
many Suns in the Kingdom of their Father?

Hence,

(4.) This heaven is a most Delightful Place: For which cause it has the Name
of Paradise given to it; as but now we showed. Hence also it is in the
Scripture compared to a Mountain of Spices. The Song of Songs which is
Solomon's, Concludes with these words, Make have, my Beloved, and be thou like a
Roe on the Mountains of Spices. This is the Believers Prayer, Make haste, Lord
JESUS, to Judge the World, and to carry me with thy self, to be with thee in
Heaven; which is resembled to a Mountain, because of the height and stability
of it; and of Spices, because it is a Sweet and Delightful Place. What a
Difference is there between this World and Heaven? Here we Live in Valleys, in
a Valley of Tears, in Bottoms of Death and Misery: But HEAVEN is a Mountain, in
which there is nothing but what is Delightful and (...).

Thus concerning the Happiness of the Place in which the Believers Hope is Laid
up. We proceed;

II. To show that Saints in heaven will be happy in the Blessed Society which
there they shall have Communion with. That will add to the happiness of the
Place. And with whom will their Fellowship there be?

Answ. 1. The most Perfect and Blessed Communion of Saints, is in Heaven. This
Evil World has but Few Real Saints in it. They are the Excellent Ones of the
Earth. But, alas! They are thin sown: Psalm. 12. 1. The Godly man cease, the
Faithful fail from among the Children of men. But this world abounds with
Sinners, which makes it a woeful and undesirable World. Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me,
that I dwell in Mesech: that I sojourn in the tents of Kedar. This Earth is a
Mesech; it is Overspread with the tents of Kedar. It generally lies in
Wickedness. And in the Visible Church, there are many who are not Real Saints.
There are Tares mixed with the Wheat; and will be so to the End of the world.
Yea, in the Purest Churches in the world, there are Hypocrites. There are not
only Wise, but Foolish Virgins there, Mat. 25. 2. Who are those Foolish
Virgins? Are they not Hypocrites in Pure Gospel Churches? For men to think they
can Deceive GOD, with giving their Names and not their Hearts to Him; and to
put a Cheat upon their own Souls, is Egregious Folly: But thus do Hypocrites.
Whereas in the Church Triumphant in Heaven, they are all Real Saints; there is
not One Hypocrite among them, nor ever shall be: Job 13. 16. An hypocrite shall
not come before him: He shall never come into the Gracious and Glorious
Presence of GOD in the heavenly world. And not only Real Saints, but Perfect
Ones: Sinless ones are in Heaven. What an Heaven upon Earth would this world
be, if there were none but Saints in it; and those altogether Free from sinful
Infirmities? But alas! there is no such People, no such Country to be found on
the face of the Earth. It has been Related, That when holy Churches were first
Planted in New England, some in other parts of the world Reported, That New
England was New-Jerusalem; a Pious man who Loved to be among the Saints of God,
was thereby induced to come hither: But after he had been here a while, he
sighed and said, I see that New England is not Heaven! Men here have their
sinful Infirmities, as well as in other places. But in Heaven they have not so.
There that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect is done away.
And then after the Day of Judgment, not only some of the Elect of God, but all
of them shall be together in heaven. The Great Congregation of the Righteous,
the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn will be there, maintaining a
Blessed and Sinless Communion, and declaring the great (...) which God has done
for them. There is very little spoken in the Scripture, concerning the
Providence of God toward the Long-lived Patriarchs, who Lived before the
Flood. Without doubt, they had mavelous Experiences of the Goodness of God,
and his wonderful Works toward them. It is the Observation of an Eminent
Divine, that the Story of those things is reserved for Heaven; and there they
will have time enough to Declare them; and to Praise the Lord in the Great
Congregation. And it is hence Evident, that the Saints in Heaven shall Know one
another: Otherwise there would be little comfort in their Communion. They who
are Strangers to one another, cannot have an intimacy of Communion; as in
Heaven the Saints shall have. Such as knew them in this world, and have got to
heaven before them, will be glad to see them come thither after them; and will
give them a Joyful Reception; and in a special manner if they were their
Benefactors on Earth. Wherefore CHRIST Exhorting his Disciples unto acts of
Charity to the poor Servants of God, says, When you fail, i. e. when you die,
and cease to be in this world, and all things here shall fail and be of no
advantage to you, they shall receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.
9. They unto whom you have been Charitable, will receive you with great Joy. As
if a man gone into a Far Country, shall see his Friend who has been Kind to
him come thither after him, he Receives him with Joy. Heaven is a Far Country:
Our Friends to whom we have been Beneficial, who are arrived there before us,
will be glad to Receive us into their Communion there. Especially such as unto
whom GOD has made us Spiritual Benefactors. When a Faithful Minister of Christ
shall come to heaven, the Souls there who have been Converted or Edified by his
Ministry, will greatly Rejoice to see him. I have showed from another
Scripture, that the Servants of God shall Know one another in the Resurrection
World: Yea, such as were not known to them in this world; Nay, Ungodly men
shall then know those holy Servants of God who died and went to heaven long
before they themselves had a being, Luke 13. 28. We way from thence Argue, that
much more shall Saints in Heaven know one another; yea, such as were in heaven
many Ages before them. When our Savior was Transfigured in the holy Mount, in
the presence of three of his Disciples, (which Transfiguration was a little
Emblem and Figure of Heaven) there appeared Moses and Elias talking with him;
and Peter knew who they were, Mat. 17. 3, 4. How did he know those who had been
in Heaven many Ages? It is a Vanity to say (as some have done) that Peter knew
them, because he had seen their Pictures; for the Jews did not allow of, nor
had they any such Pictures among them. But there was a Divine Irradiation on
his Mind, causing him to know who they were. Much more will it be so in Heaven.
Then shall we know which of the Saints there is Moses, and which is Joshua, and
which is Samuel, and which is David; and so of all the rest. The though it of this
was a great Comfort to Bullinger when he was on his Deathbed: I am going (says
he) to be with the holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs who
are gone to Heaven before me. It is Reported, that the Night before Luther
Died, some proposed that Question to him, Whether Saints in heaven shall know
one another? He Answered, that surely it shall be so: For which he gave this
(among other) Reasons, Adam in Paradise knew who Eve was, as soon as ever he
saw her. Much more will it be so in the Heavenly Paradise

2. In Heaven there is an innumerable Company of Angels, with whom we shall
there have a Blessed Communion. There is Joy in Heaven, Joy among the Angels of
God over a sinner that Repents, Luke 15. 10. Then certainly the Angels Rejoice,
when they see a Soul come to Heaven to join with them in Glorifying God there.
It is true, that whilst we are in this World, we have a Communion with Angels,
more than we know or think of; for it is secret and invisible. As long as we
abide in a state of Mortality, the Presence of an Angel is awful and terrible
to us. An Angel appeared to Samson's Mother: She knew him not to be an Angel,
if she had, she would have been more terrified; but she said to her Husband, A
man of God came to me, and his Countenance was like the Countenance of an Angel
of God, very terrible, Judge. 13. 6. But in Heaven we shall be Equal to the
Angels, as immortal as they are; and therefore capable of holding a Familiar
Communion and Conversation with them. The Lord said to the Prophet, If thou will walk in my Ways, I will give thee places to walk among these that stand
by, Zech. 3. 7. Who were they that stood by? They were holy Angels. There are
blessed Walks in heaven. They that walk in the ways of the Lord here on Earth,
shall one Day walk with Angels in those Celestial walks. There shall we be as
Familiar with holy Angels, as Fellow Servants can be with one another. When
John fell at the Feet of an Angel to Worship him, he Charged him, Do it not; I
am thy Fellow Servants: For Fellow Servants to Worship one another, is most
Unreasonable, Rev. 19. 10. Now this is a great happiness. Dr. Tailor (he that
suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's Days) Blessed God for sending him to Prison,
because there (said he) I became acquainted with that Angel of God, Mr. John
Bradford. A Very Holy Man, is an Angel Incarnate. If it is an happiness to have
Communion with an Angelical Man, though in a Prison, what is it to Converse with
Angels, who have not (nor ever had) any Sin in them; and this Conversation not
in a Prison, but in the Heavenly Paradise? There they will inform us, what
Services they have done for the Church of God, by the Direction of our Lord
Jesus Christ; who is their Lord as well as ours: And what Kind Offices they
have done for us, which now we know nothing of; so shall we Join with Angels,
and they with us in Eternal Hallelujahs, to GOD and to JESUS CHRIST. Then shall
we see that Scripture Blessedly Fulfilled, Rev. 5. 13. Every Creature in
Heaven, heard I, saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that
fitteth on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

3. Saints in Heaven shall have a Blessed Communion with One, who is better
than any Saint on Earth or Angel in Heaven, that is with JESUS CHRIST. It was a
blessed word which Christ spoke to the Disciples, Joh. 14. 2, 3. There are many
Mansions in my Father's House; I go to prepare a Place for you,; and if I go
and prepare a Place for you, I will come again and receive you to myself, that
where I am, there you may be also. When He has them with him in his Father's
House, there will be a Ravishing Communion between them. The Apostles were
singularly happy, in that they were admitted to a Free Conversation with
Christ, when in his state of Humiliation here on Earth. It was said to them,
Blessed are your Eyes, for they see that which many Prophets and Righteous men
have desired to see, but have not seen them, Mat. 13. 16, 17. But how great is
their Blessedness, who see Christ in Glory; and Converse with him there?
Notwithstanding he is Exalted far above all Angels and Men, He Condescends to
Entertain a Communion with his Saints in Heaven as his Brethren. When Joseph
was in all his Glory, he Comforted his Brethren, and spoke Kindly to them, Genesis
50. 21. Christ will speak nothing to his Saints in Heaven, but (...) shall be
Kind and Comfortable. When he was Transfigured, there appeared Glorified men
talking with him, Luke 9. 30. What Communications there are and shall be,
between Christ and the Glorified, We know not; nor shall we until we are among
them. But we know th^^ they have a Blessed Fellowship with the Son of God in
Heaven: and (...) very great part of their Happiness does consist in that
Communion. It is Heaven to be with Christ. The happiness of heaven is thus
Expressed by our Savior himself; Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they whom
thou have Given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory. The
Humane Nature of Christ, in which dwells the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily, is
as full of God as it is possible for a Creature to be. There is more of God to
be seen in that Man, than in all the Creatures in Heaven or Earth. The Man
Christ Jesus, is the most Glorious Object that Eyes can behold. It is Christ's
being there, that makes Heaven to be Heaven indeed. Believers who Died under
the Old Testament were in a blessed Estate, Nevertheless, when the Man Christ
Jesus Ascended to Heaven, his coming there was a great Addition to their
happiness. His Presence filled heaven with a New Glory, beyond what Glorified
Souls had seen before that Day. It is Christ's being there, that makes heaven
to be so desirable. The Apostle therefore said, I desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. He does not say, I desire to depart that I may be in
Heaven; but that I may be with Christ. To be with Christ is better than to be
in Heaven without Him.

III. The Perfection of Blessedness consists in Seeing GOD. It is so Expressed
in the Scripture, Heb. 12. 14. Follow Holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. All the Blessedness of Heaven is denoted by that, of Seeing the Lord.
The Glorified have a clear and immediate Sight of GOD. They do not see him
through the Glass of his Word and Works, as is in this World they do; but have
an Open, Clear, Full Sight of him; 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a Glass
Darkly; but then Face to Face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know even
as I am known. Here we have but a Dark and Very Imperfect Knowledge of God.
Both the Object and our Eyes are covered with Darkness; but in heaven that
Darkness is Removed, so that we see clearly; as two men who are near together
and behold one another Face to Face. In this Life, our sight of God is by
Faith: We Walk by Faith, and not by Sight; But in heaven there is an immediate
Vision and Fruition of him. Not that in heaven God the Father is seen with
Bodily Eyes. The Divine Nature cannot be seen. He is the Invisible God, whom no
man has seen nor can see, as to a Corporeal Vision. But Mental Knowledge is in
the Scripture Expressed by Vision. It is an Intellectual Vision of GOD which
Saints in Glory are Blessed with. He is seen with the Eye of the Understanding.
Not that the Blessed have a Comprehensive Vision or Knowledge of GOD. No
Creature can Comprehend the Incomprehensible Being of GOD. Finite has no
proportion to Infinite. Therefore no Finite Understanding can have a Perfect
Knowledge of the Infinite Being: Job 11. 7. Can thou by searching find out
God^ Can thou find out the Almighty to Perfection? No Creature can ever do
it. Nevertheless, there is an Intellectual Knowledge of God, in which the
Essence of Happiness does consist: This all the Blessed have. Blessed are the
Pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. As to the Degree and Measure
of this Vision, it is according to the Pleasure of God, who will doubtless
Vouchsafe greater Manifestations of himself to some Saints in Heaven than to
Others, (as he does on Earth) according to the Sovereign Good Pleasure of his
Will. But such a Vision of God all the Glorified shall have, as will make them
happy. And nothing short of that can make the Rational Creature happy. One of
the Ancients speaks with true Devotion, when he says, If thou, Lord, should
give me never so much, except thou will give me thy Self, I cannot be
satisfied. Nothing will make a man happy, but that which will give to his Soul
a fullness of Satisfaction. No Created Good can do that: But the Vision and
Fruition of GOD will do it: Psalm. 17. 15. I shall behold thy Face in
Righteousness; I shall be satisfied with thy Likeness. Nothing will make a man
happy, but that which will make him Impeccable; that is incapable of Sinning.
The Beatifical Vision will be attended with that Happiness. An Impossibility of
Sinning in the Man Christ Jesus, proceeds from the Personal Union of the Humane
Nature with the Divine. But in Glorified Saints, it proceeds from the
Beatifical Vision. They are so filled with the Fullness of GOD, and so taken up
with GOD, that it is impossible that they should Sin whilst they are so; and
they Will be so for ever and ever. It remains then that the Happiness of the
Glorified in Heaven, consists chiefly in this Vision of God. Yea, the Happiness
of the Angels is, and for ever Will be in this. When they have finished that
Course of Obedience appointed for them, they shall be Rewarded. And what shall
their Reward be? Surely a Contemplation of the Infinite Perfections which are
in GOD. The Happiness of Christ considered as Man, is in this Beatifical
Vision. Christ therefore has said, Thou will show me the Path of Life; in thy
Presence, or as the Original Words are, in thy Face there is fullness of Joy.
Happiness in the Perfection and Fullness of it, is in being with GOD and
beholding His Face, Psalm. 16. 11. Yea, the Blessedness of GOD himself, is in
Beholding his own Infinite Excellencies and Glory. So has he been most Blessed
from all Eternity. This then is that which Elect Angels and Men Will be taken
up with in Heaven, throughout the Days of Eternity. It Will be impossible for
them to see to the End of the Divine Perfections; but there is Infinitely more
still. After the Day of Judgment, it is said, that God shall be all in all, 1
Cor. 15. 28. For the present, Christ is all in all. All comes to us through the
Hands of a Mediator: But in Heaven all will come from God Immediately. All the
Elect of God shall be satisfied from GOD alone. While in this World, they
Receive Comfort from Creatures, from Friends and kind Relations; And Spiritual
Comfort from holy Ordinances: They suck Consolations from those Breasts. But in
Heaven God will be instead of all. No need of any thing else to make us Happy.
And GOD alone shall be the Object of our Love. In Heaven we shall Love no
Creature out of God, but all in God; or rather God in them all.

IV. Blessedness consists in the Eternity of the Enjoyment. When Eternity and
Blessedness meet together, that is Perfect Blessedness. It has formerly been
declared, and let me now say it again, that to Enjoy the blessedness of Heaven,
if it were but for One Day, would have more of Consolation and true Happiness
in it, than there is in a Thousand Years of the greatest Earthly Prosperity.
One Day there is better than a Thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84. 10. But what then
is an Eternity of that Happiness? Could the Saints in Heaven have the least
Fear of ever being deprived of so great Blessedness, the thought of that would
make them Miserable. For th^^ greater the Happiness is, the greater the Misery
in being Deprived of it. But they know that if once in Heaven, for ever there:
Rev. 3. 12. He shall go no more out. This the Psalmist knew, and it was his
great Consolation, when walking in the Valley of the shadow of Death; Psalm. 23.
6. Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the Days of my Life; and I shall
Dwell in the House of the Lord for ever. Heaven is that House of the Lord, in
which Believers shall dwell for ever, when the days of their Life on Earth are
ended. There is nothing in Heaven but what speaks Eternity. GOD is there: And
he is the Eternal: And therefore he speaks, as Deuteronomy. 32. 40. I lift up my Hand
to Heaven, and say, I Live for ever. He is the Ever-living God. CHRIST is in
Heaven, and he is styled, the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. Angels are there,
and they cannot Die: And the Saints which are there, are in that respect like
them; Neither can they Die any more. Heaven it self is an Eternal House, 2 Cor.
5. 1. Hence it is called a City that has Foundations, Heb. 11. 10. It is not
like the Tents which the Children of Israel dwelt in whilst in the Wilderness,
which might easily be taken down and removed, Numb. 9. 17. But it stands on an
Eternal Foundation. That Beatifical Vision which Glorified Saints enjoy, is
Perpetual and Eternal. Christ says concerning the holy Angels, that in Heaven
they do always behold the face of his Father in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. The like
is to be said of Glorified Saints in Heaven: Psalm. 41. 12. As for me, thou
upholdest me in mine integrity, and set me before thy face for ever. The
blessed Presence and Glory of Christ in which they take such Soul-satisfaction,
in Heaven they shall enjoy it for ever. 1 These. 4. 17, 18. So shall we be ever
with the Lord. Comfort one another with these words. The Life which Saints in
Heaven Live, is an Eternal Life: Mat. 10. 30. In the World to Come, Eternal
Life. The Glory of Heaven is an Eternal Glory: 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all
Grace has called us into his Eternal Glory, by Christ Jesus. The Scripture
speaks of an Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord will preserve me unto his
Heavenly Kingdom. This Heavenly Kingdom is an Eternal Kingdom. It is called the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11. This is
a Blessed Truth, and it is Wonderful and Amazing. The thought of Eternity is an
Astonishing Meditation. If Sinners would be persuaded to think seriously of the
Eternity of that Misery which they are going into, it would Amaze them.
Miserable Francis Spira, after his Apostasy, Cried out in the anguish and
horror of his Soul, If I were to be in Hell but for a Thousand Years, methinks
it might be Endured; but when I think of Eternity, I am Amazed. So would Saints
think more of Eternal Blessedness, it could not but Affect their Souls. A Late
Writer (of which I have elsewhere taken Notice) Relates concerning an Eminent
Minister of Christ, that some who were Conversing with him, observing by his
Countenance that he was in a deep Meditation, Enquired of him what his tho'ts
might be upon? He immediately uttered that Word, For ever! For ever! For ever!
And for near upon a Quarter of an Hour said nothing else; but continued
Repeating that Word, FOR EVER. His Soul was swallowed up with the Contemplation
of Eternity, and with thoughts of being For ever with the Lord.

Does any one say, But how can this be, that such Sinners as we have been and
are, should be partakers of so great Blessedness, and the Enjoyment of it be
Eternal?

I Answer. This astonishing Grace of God proceeds from two Causes.

1. From his Free Infinite Love. He is Rich in Mercy, and because of his Great
Love, we hope for Mercy unto Eternal Life. The Love of GOD is like Himself.
Yea, it is Himself. That Love is Eternal and Unchangeable: Jer. 31. 3. I have
Loved thee with an Everlasting Love. Infinite Love can Confer a Blessedness in
respect of duration Infinite, on Unworthy Creatures.

2. Our Lord Jesus Christ has given an Infinite Price to Purchase this
Blessedness, for them whom God has given to him. Christ being God as well as
Man, His Sufferings and Obedience must needs be of Infinite Worth and Value,
Meriting an Infinite Happiness. His Blood is called the Blood of God, Act. 20.
28. It is therefore Infinitely Meritorious. Man being Finite, his happiness
cannot be Infinite Intensively: but therefore the happiness which Christ has
Merited, must be Infinite Extensively in respect of Duration; otherwise there
would be no Proportion between the Price and the Purchase.

USE I.
By way of Instruction, there are several Inferences Obvious before us.

Inf. I. Believers ought to be well Contented with their Portion, although it may
be they have but Little of this Worlds Good. If they have Heavenly Good things,
let them be satisfied therewith. The Blessedness of Heaven is Enough. If they
have Christ and Heaven, why should they care for more? Jacob once said, It is
enough, that Joseph is yet alive, Genesis 45. 28. Now (says he) I have Lived Long
enough, and in this thing I have Happiness enough. How much better may the
Believer say, I have enough, since Christ and Heaven is mine? In Heaven there
are Riches enough. Oh! the Riches of the Glory of that Inheritance. You have
been told something of it, but how little a Portion is it that we know or can
know of it, as long as we are in this world? If a Minister should Study all his
Days to set forth the Glory of Heaven, he could not declare a Millionth part of
that Blessedness. The Consideration of it, should make Christians to slight
this Vain World, which with all the Pomp and Glory of it, should be
Contemptible in their Eyes. They have that which is better than what the Earth
can afford, which should render these things as despicable to them. In
Solomon's Days, Silver was nothing accounted of, 1 King. 10. 21. There was such
Plenty of Gold, which is a more precious Metal, that Silver was slighted. This
world in which we Sojourn, should be of no account with Believers, because they
are going to an Infinitely Better and more Desirable World, where they have
Treasure laid up and reserved for them: Heb. 10. 34. Knowing in your selves
that you have in Heaven a better and enduring Substance. The Richest man that
ever was on the Earth, was not so Rich as the Poorest Believer is: Jam. 2. 5.
Has not God Chosen the Poor of this World, Rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that Love him? They are Rich in sure
Bonds, and Rich in Reversion. The Devil Proffered Christ all the Kingdoms of
the World, and the Glory of them, if he would but fall in with his Interest.
But how were they all disdained? All the Kingdoms of the World are of no Value,
compared with that Heavenly Kingdom, which God has Promised to the Believer?
Oh! Happy Believer; thy Portion is not only a Great One; but that which shall
never nor any part of it be taken away from thee. Therefore be Thankful and
rest Contented with thy Portion. And the rather should Christians be well
Satisfied with the Providence of God, in case they are but Low of it as to the
World, Considering that for the most part, they that have much of this World,
that is all the Portion they shall ever have: Psalm. 17. 14. Men of the world,
which have their Portion in this Life. And if they must have no other Portion
but what they have in this Life, Woe to them, they will be Miserable men to
Eternity. Christ said, Woe to you that are Rich, for you have Received your
Consolation, Luke 6. 24.

Inf. II. Believers should not think much of any Difficulty or Affliction,
which they meet with in the way to Heaven. The Great Reward which they shall
Receive in Heaven, will be an Infinite Compensation for all that they have Done
or Suffered for Christ. In this World they have Tribulations, and it may be
Great Ones: Act. 14. 22. We must through much Tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God. But let these Tribulations be never so much, they are not
Comparable to the Glory of Heaven. Ireckon (says the Apostle, and it was a
true Reckoning) that the Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. Therefore
Christians should not be Offended at the Cross which is in the way to Glory.
They should Consider Christ and Follow his Example. Looking unto Jesus, who for
the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, Heb.
12. 2. The Afflictions of God's Children will not be forever: They shall not be
Confounded World without end: But their Happiness will last World without end.
After they have Suffered a while, Glory comes. Well did the Martyr say, Hold
out Faith and Patience a little longer, and your work will be at an end. Their
Afflictions will last but for a Moment; and they will be a Means to Prepare
them for, and Augment their Happiness and Glory in Heaven: 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our
Light Affliction which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding
and Eternal Weight of Glory. Consider a little; In Opposition to Affliction,
there is Glory: And to Light Affliction, a Weight of Glory: To Afflictions for
a Moment, there is Eternal Glory; Nay, a far more Exceeding Glory. The Apostle
heaps up one Expression upon another, as if he wanted Words to Express how
great the Blessedness and Glory of Heaven is; as indeed no words can express
it. Who that has this in his heart, will not Rejoicing in Hope, be Patient in
Tribulation?

Inf. III. Believers on Christ should be Very willing to Die and leave this
World, so they may Enjoy that Hope which is laid up for them in Heaven. When
ever God calls them to it, they should Die willingly. Indeed, there are but few
men who Leave this World willingly. Their Souls are Forced out of their Body's,
full sore against their wills. It Is with them as it was said of the Enemies of
David, Their Souls are slung out, as out of the middle of a Sling, 1 Samuel 25.
29. Or, as it was said of the Rich Fool, Thy Soul shall be Required of thee,
Luke 12. 20. Death comes upon them like an unwelcome Baili^^, and drags their
Souls out of their Bodies. It may not be so with Believers on Christ: They
should Die with a Good will. 2 Cor. 5. 8. We are willing to be absent from the
Body. For certainly Death, how ever it has been their Enemy, is now their Good
Friend: The Day of their Death will be a better Day to them, than the Day of
their Birth. Why then should they be afraid or unwilling to bid it welcome?
There are holy Men spoken of in the Scripture, who were Very willing to Die, and
go out of this sorrowful sinful World. Abraham was so. He was full of Days,
Genesis 25 8. Said to be so, not only in that he Lived to a good Old Age, but he
was weary of the World: he had had his Full of it; and was desirous to be gone
to a Better; that is to an Heavenly Country. Jacob was willing to Die: he said
to Joseph, Now let me Die, Genesis 46. 30. The like we see in Simeon; he said,
Lord, Now let thou thy Servant Depart in Peace, Luke 2. 29. The Apostle
Paul Desired to depart and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. I might mention
other Examples, (besides those in the Scripture) of Good Men unto whom Death
has been very welcome. He that Reads the History of the Martyrs, will see how
willing they were to Die, that so they might go to Christ. They were afraid of
nothing so much, as lest their Persecutors would let them Escape, and not take
their Lives from them, when they offered themselves to Death for the Name of
Christ: They Rather Erred in too much Forwardness, than in too much
Backwardness to part with their Lives, which they did not Love unto the Death.
I could tell you of many holy Servants of Christ in these Latter Ages, who
notwithstanding they were Contented to Live, Desired rather to Die. When Mr. Dod
had been dangerously Sick, but the Physician told him, that now there' was
hopes of his Recovery; he Replied, You think by what you say to Comfort me: But
you make my heart Sad. It is as if you should tell one that has been sore
Weather-beaten at Sea, and hoped that he was come to the End of his Wearisome
Voyage, that he must go back again. Mr. Edward Deering, said to his Friends, If
I were put to my Choice, whether I would Die or Live, if it may stand with the
holy Will of God, I would a Thousand times rather Choose to Die and go to Heaven,
than to Continue Longer in this Evil World. The Servants of God have at present
the more Reason to be willing to Die, for that the Days are Evil; and they are
like to be verse. It Is true, that Happy Times are coming; but the way will be
made for them, by Terrible things in Righteousness The World must be more
Reformed, before the Good Times come. The Learned and Noble Monsieur du
Plessis, not long before his Death, thus Expressed himself, I have indeed
Desired to Live, that I might see the Deliverance of the Church, but seeing no
Amendment in the World; I see nothing that should invite me to Continue in it.
Nay, Christians should not only be willing to Exchange Earth for Heaven, but
they should Long for the Blessed Day: 2 Pet. 3. 12. Looking for, and hasting to
the Coming of the Day of God. When we think the Time Long until it comes, we
hasten to it. For this Believers should Groan Earnestly, desiring to be
Clothed upon with their House which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 2. That Famous
German Divine Bucholtzer, in his Old Age writing to a Friend, tells him, That
he Desired nothing in this World so much, as the Happy Hour of his Death.

Two Things will make us Long for Heaven.

1. Frequent daily Thoughts of the Blessedness which is there, and no where but
there to be Enjoyed. The more we think of Heaven, the more we shall Long to be
there. Try if you find it not so: Make the Experiment, and I know you will find
it so. Let us then be Heavenly Minded. When thoughts of Heaven are continually
running in our Minds, that is to be Heavenly Minded. Were that Glory and the
Eternity of it more thought on, all things on this Earth would seem Little to
us, and be swallowed up with those Meditations.

2. A Well-grounded Assurance of our own Interest in Heaven, will make us Long
to be there. Men would fain be where their Treasure is; Mat 6. 21. Where your
Treasure is, there will your Hearts be also. If a Man knows that he has
Treasures laid up in Heaven, the Longings of his Soul will be there. He will be
often thinking and wishing with himself, Oh! that I were there. When shall it
be? How long first? When will the Happy Day break upon my Soul? A Christian
that knows he shall have better Riches in Heaven instead of it, joyfully parts
with Earthly Riches. You took Joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing that
you have in Heaven better Substance; says the Apostle to the Hebrews. So they
that know they shall have an Eternal Life in Heaven, will readily part with a
Temporal Life for it. Christ said to the Disciples, Rejoice because your Names
are written in Heaven. They that have Assurance of their Names being written in
Heaven, cannot but Rejoice at the tho'ts and foresight of their going thither.
Alas! How many are there who say, We know that Heaven is a Blessed Place, and
we should be very willing to Die, had we Assurance that our Souls should then go
to Heaven? Assurance is the beginning of Heaven upon Earth: It is a
Praelibation of Heaven. It causes Joy Unspeakable and full of Glory. Saints
that have it may go Rejoicing to heaven. A Famous Biographer, Writing the Life
of M. Vessenbech, (who was a Learned and Singularly Pious Lawyer in
Wittenbergh) says, that he went out of the world with these Words, The Lord has
given me a fight of that blessed Place of Eternal Joy, where I shall be
quickly, and which it has been my greatest longing to have it hastened. The
same Author informs us, that Zuniger (a celebrated Physician at Bafil, and an
Ornament to the University in that City, on the account of his great Learning
and Godliness) had these for his dying Words, My Spirit leaps within me for
Joy, that now the Time is at last come, when I shall see God Face to Face;
whose Glory I have had some glimpse of here, and whom I have by Faith longed
after, and after whom my Soul has Panted.

USE. II.
There is a Double Exhortation before us.

(I.) To Unbelievers, not to rest in their present Estate, without a
well-grounded Hope of this Heavenly blessedness. (II.) To Believers, to Make
ready for Heaven.

Exhor. I. Let Unbelievers Endeavor after, and not be at rest until they have
Obtained a well-grounded Hope of this blessedness. Oh! that some plain known
Truths which are Awakening Considerations, might be duly laid to heart.

Consider, 1. That as long as Men remain in a Christless Estate (as all
Unbelievers do) they have no reason to think that this blessed Hope belongs to
them. If Christless, then Hopeless. Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye were without Christ, having
no Hope. They that would see Heaven, must first get into the Way which leads
thither; A Christless Sinner never was in that Way. For Christ Himself is the
Way: So has He said, Joh. 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man
comes to the Father but by Me. Jesus Christ is the only Way unto Eternal Life,
No man will ever come to the Enjoyment of God in Heaven, but by Him. The way of
Faith in Christ, which is always attended with Obedience to the Commandments of
God, is, and ever has been the Way to Heaven. It is therefore called, The Way
Everlasting, because the Servants of God in all Ages of the World have gone to
Heaven in that Way, Psalm. 139. 24. The Unbeliever has been going astray, ever
since he was born. He has been departing from the Living God, by an evil heart
of Unbelief. His back has been on Heaven, and his face toward Hell, going down
to the Chambers of Death. There are but two ways, viz. the way to Heaven, and
the way to Hell; and every Man in the World is going in one of these ways. The
true Believer on Christ is in the way to Heaven; the Unbeliever in the way to
Hell. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son of God, has Everlasting Life: he
that believes not the Son, has not Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.
What folly is it, for a Sinner who is Going, nay Running in the way to Hell, to
hope or think that he shall get to Heaven? No, he must Turn about, and go on in
another way. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will you die?

Consider, 2. That a Portion in Heaven is the only thing that Men can make sure
of. As for Earthly things there is no making sure of them. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Trust
not in uncertain riches. If men seek after them never so Earnestly, they are
not sure that they shall Obtain them. They are fitly compared to a Shadow,
which flies from those that pursue it: Or, if men gain them, they are not sure
that they shall keep them. Labor not to be Rich: will thou set thine eyes upon
that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings, they flee away.
Men oftentimes loose more in One Day, than they have gained in many Years. A
man may be a Rich man in the Morning, and a Poor man before Night. Was it not
so with Job? The like is to be said of Worldly Honors. Was not Hamam advanced
and set above all the Princes in the Court and Kingdom of Persia? But on a
sudden he falls into the utmost disgrace: All his Places and Power taken from
him, and he exposed unto a most ignominious death. Such Examples have often
been seen in th^^ World. The Most High Powereth Contempt upon Princes. Men are
not, no^ can they be sure of Life it self in this World. No man knows that he
shall Live One day to an end. How many instances have we known of Sudden Death?
But whilst Life continues we may make sure of Heaven: For it is freely Offered
to us in the Gospel. Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely. They that are willing to have Heaven for their Portion, and
Eternal Life there, may have it if they will. Do but hearken to Christ, and
consent to what He proposes and Heaven is yours. He said to the Young man in
the Gospel, Come and follow me, and you shall have Treasure in Heaven, Math.
19. 21. And if a man has once made sure of that Treasure, he shall never loose
it. He has there a Portion which shall not be taken from him. As for Earthly
Treasure, Fire, or Water, or Thieves, or Enemies may take ^away: but an Estate
in Heaven, is Laid u^ in a safe Place. The man that has an Inheritance reserved
for him in Heaven, all the Enemies in the World can never deprive him of it.
Therefore they that are Wise will make their obtaining of that their chief
endeavor.

Consider, 3. There are but few comparatively, who have a sure well-grounded
Hope of blessedness in Heaven. Many presume they have when they have not. Alas!
there are but few that ever set one step in the Way which leads thither. Narrow
is the Way which leads unto Life, and Few there be that find it; The son of God
Himself has so declared, Math. 7. 14. It has ever been thus in all past Ages,
that but few have gone to Heaven. The Old World before the Flood must needs be
very full of People, because of the Longovity of those Patriarchs. If Jacob
after the Flood had Lived four hundred years, he must have seen some Millions
of his Posterity: but the first Patriarchs Lived some of them almost a thousand
years; whence we conclude, that many Millions of Souls perished in that
Universal deluge; but how few Godly Souls were there among them? The Apostle
calls them, The World of the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 5. When the Children of Israel
came out of Egypt, they were Six hundred thousand fit for War: yet but two of
them entered into Canaan. One of the Ancients observes, that as the Land of
Canaan was a Type of Heaven, so that those two were a Type of the Small Number
of Persons that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Is it not said in the
Prophet, I will take you One of a City, and Two of a Family, or Tribe, Jer. 3.
14. Among those who have the Gospel Preached to them, but few are true
Believers: Math. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen. Nay, it is an
awful Truth, that but few of those who belong to the Visible Church will be
Saved. Church Members, tremble at it! Romans 9. 27. Though the Number of the
Children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall be Saved. What!
but a Remnant among those who are in Number like the Sand of the Seas, and
these also the Children of Israel, the Visible Church and People of God?
Verily, the Heirs of Heaven are but a Little, Little Flock. Luke ^2. 32 Fear
not, Little Flock; for it is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. How should this thought awaken in us, utmost Endeavors to make sure
of our being of those few!

Consider, 4. Many are deceived with False Hopes, until it is too late for them
to mend their Error. Their Souls drop into Hell, with a Confident but
Groundless Expectation of going to Heaven. Thus it was with the Scribes and
Pharisees: They thought they should go to Heaven. They Trusted to themselves
that they were Righteous, Luke 18. 9. They knew that Righteous men shall go to
Heaven when they dye, and they supposed themselves to be such: yet Christ told
them, That they could not escape the Damnation of Hell, Math. 23. 33. And he
said to his Disciples, Math. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Alas! Many build their hopes of Heaven on false Foundations,
on sandy Bottoms, and then the house of their hope will fall, and great will be
the fall of it. Some, yea many, build their hopes of Heaven on their Morality:
they are not to be taxed with any Scandal: No one can say to them black is
their Eye. Thus the Pharisee said, I am not as other men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers. So Paul before his Conversion, was Touching in
Righteousness of the Law blameless. There are who think they must go to Heaven,
because they have a Form of Religion, and a great Measure of Knowledge in the
Scriptures. Many such Formalists there were among the Jews, who deceived
themselves with Vain hopes of Heaven and Happiness. Romans 2. 17, -- Thou art
called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God. And art
confident, which have a form of Knowledge, and of the (...) in the Law. Many
Preachers will be Excluded Heaven at the last Day, although their having been
such was a ground of their Self deluding hope: Math. 7. 22. Have not we
Prophesied in thy Name? Such Considerations as these should cause us to make
sure work of it, in our Endeavors to obtain the blessedness of Heaven. If ever
we were in Earnest in any thing, it should be in a Master of such Infinite
Moment, wherein our Eternity and our Immortal Souls are concerned. Oh! besiege
Heaven with fervent Prayers, before it is too late; Left with the foolish (...)
afterward you cry, Lord, Lord, Open to us, when the Door of Heaven is shut for
ever. Know you not the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence and the Violent take
it by force? Remember the Words of the Lord Jesus Christ, Strive to Enter in at
the Strait Gate; the Gate of Heaven is a Strait Gate, for many shall seek to
Enter in, and shall not be able. Seeking is not Enough, there must be Striving.
There are men in the World, who if they would but take as much pains to get to
Heaven as they do to get the World, it would be happy for them. And as ever we
desire Heaven, we must make sure that our Faith be of the right sort. That we
close with Christ as (...) Gospel Offers him to us. That we Receive him in his
Person, although with his Cross; and in all his Offices, as the Great and Only
Prophet, Priest and King of our Souls. And make sure that we Repent of Sin, and
that truly and thoroughly. Remember that One Sin Loved and Lived in, will be the
Ruin of a man's Soul: suppose Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Covetousness or any
other Iniquity. Better cut off (...) Right hand, and cast it from thee', than
that thy Whole Body should be cast into Well. Forsake all Sin; that is the way
to go to Heaven. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your
Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Buine.

Exhor. II. To Believers; Make ready for Heaven. You are sure of it, if true
Believers. For we are Saved by Hope: But let us Prepare and be in a Reachness
for the Blessed Hope. It was Christ's Exhortation to his Disciples, Be you also
ready. Mat. 24. 44. Heaven is ready to receive us, when we once are ready for
it. There are some true Believers who are not so Ready Prepared for heaven as
were to be desired: Not so Meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light as
should be. Certainly the Disciples were not, when Contending about Superiority;
and the Lord said to them, Except you be Converted, you shall not inherit the
Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18. 3. There is an Habitual Meetness for heaven, in
respect of a Work of Grace (...) in the Soul. Thus all true Believers are made
Meet for the heavenly World. But there is also an Actual Meetness; Viz. when
Christians keep their Souls in Trim: As it is said of the Wise Virgins, that
they trimmed their Lamps, Mat. 25. 7. When we Live in a Lively Exercise of
Grace, and in a longing Expectation and holy Desire of the Lord's Coming, then
are our Lamps trimmed; we are ready. As to this Actual Meetness to leave this
world and go to the better Country that is the heavenly, many true Believers
are Deficient therein.

QUESTION.

What shall We Do, that so We may be Ready for Heaven?

ANSWER.

1. Grow in Grace. The Wheat must be ripe before it is gathered into the (...)
So must Believers before they are gather^^ into the heavenly barn. Now growth in
Grace ripens for Heaven. If we see a man grow in weanedness from the World, and
in heavenly dispositions, we may Conclude, that he will not be Long out of
Heaven: He is Ripening apace for a better World, and there shall he be quickly.
God has appointed what measure of Grace his Servants shall attain unto. They
cant get to Heaven until they have attained unto the full measure allotted for
them, and then they shall soon be there. Christians should not be like Stakes
in an hedge which grow not, but rather like Lillies in a field which grow until
they dye. We should therefore be diligent in improving Means of Grace in order
unto growth. The Word of God is appointed as the Instrument, not only to begin
a work of Grace but to increase it. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Desire the sincere Milk of the
Word, that you (...) grow thereby. And the Lord does (...) proportion measures
of Grace, according to Men's diligence in attending (...) Word. It Is said, Take
heed how you (...) for to him that has, shall be given, Luke 8. 18. They that
have the Grace to make in due improvement of their hearing the Word, shall have
more Grace given to them. The Lords Supper is instituted, not to begin but to
strengthen the work of Grace where it is begun. And when Believers draw nigh
unto God in that holy Ordinance, with due Preparation for it, they will surely
grow in Grace thereby. For in that Ordinance in a special manner, they Behold
as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image from
Glory to Glory, i. e. from one degree of Grace unto another, 2 Cor. 3. 18. So
will they in due time appear to be Vessels of Mercy prepared unto Glory.

2. Let us be Fruitful in Good Works. Growing in Grace, and Abounding in Good
Works is making have to Heaven. When men remove from one Place to another, they
use to send their Goods before them. It has been well observed by a Pious
Divine, that when Jacob returned to (...) own Country, he sent his droves (...)
him, and he followed after. Thus (...) we send droves of Duties and Good Works
both of Piety and Charity to go before us to the heavenly Country, which if we
are true Believers on Christ, is our own Country, and we shall e're long
follow. By this we lay up for our selves Treasure in Heaven. Let us then do all
the Good we can whilst we are on the Earth. And there will be a double blessed
consequent of it. One is that we shall be the sooner in Heaven. For if we make
have in doing Good Works, the sooner shall we come to the End of our Works, and
then we shall be in Heaven, whither our Works as to the blessed reward of them
will follow us. Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, they cease from
their Labors and their Works follow them. Our Savior Christ said to God, I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do: and now, O Father, glorify
me with thy self, Joh. 17. 4, 5. So when the Believer has finished his (...),
he shall be glorified in Heaven, (...) if he abounds therein, he will soon
(...) finished it. And then another Consequent is, that the greater will the
Glory be when we shall come there. For Christ has said, That He will give to
every Man according as his Work shall be. By abounding in Good Works, we Obtain
a Bill of Exchange for Heaven, which will be accepted by the Faithful and
Glorious Pay Master. 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19. Be rich in good Works, laying up in
Store for themselves a good Foundation, (a sure Bill of Exchange is a good
foundation) against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.

3. Let our Care be, that if Death come upon us Suddenly, we may have nothing
to do, but to Die and go to Heaven. No man in the world knows, but that he may
be taken away by a Sudden Death. So it has been oft-times, not only with
Ungodly men; but with Saints of God, and Eminent Ones too. Yea, some of (...)
have with an humble Submission to (...) Will of God, Desired and Prayed for
(...) a Death. To be sure, there is no (...) in the Scripture to Pray against
it; as some do. It is surely a great Favor of God, to have a Quick and an
Easy Passage into his Heavenly Kingdom. Our Care and Endeavor should then be,
that if the Lord should Call for us Suddenly, we may be Ready to go at the
first Call: That when he shall send the Messenger of Death for us, we may be
Ready to go at the first Knock: Luke 12. 35, 36. Let your (...) be Girded
about; so it is with men that are ready to go: And you your selves (...) unto
men that Wait for their Lord: that when he Comes and Knocks, they may Open to
him immediately. It Is a sad thing when Death comes Suddenly, for a man to
think, There is such a thing, and such a thing, which if I had thought I should
have Died, I would have done; but it has been neglected, and now I am incapable
of performing it. It is therefore a Duty and good Prudence, for a man always to
(...) a Testamentary Disposal of his (...) Estate in Readiness by him; lest
(...) Death should make him Dye (...); which it may be he would be loath to do.
The Prophet said to Hezekiah, Set thine House in Order: i. e. Make thy Will;
for thou shall Dye, Isa. 38. 1. The neglect of this Duty has been an Omission,
which many Good men have been found Faulty in; and which has occasioned a great
deal of Trouble and Confusion in their Families, when they have been gone out
of the World. But especially, and above all; our Care should be to set our
Souls in Order; that nothing is left Undone in matters wherein our (...) are
Concerned: That if Death should come Suddenly, there may not be a Cry as with
some it has been, My Time is done, but my Work is not done, nor well begun
neither. Let us be able to say, My Peace is made with God, I am in Christ; I
know not of any one Sin that ever I was guilty of in my Life, but I have
Unseignedly Repented of it. Then welcome Death, welcome Heaven.

Therefore,

4. If we would be in a Readiness for (...), our Care should be to Walk Close
(...) GOD. Let us beware of Blotting (...) for Heaven, by giving (...) to
Temptation at any Time: Luke 2^. 34. Take heed to your selves, left at any
Time, your Hearts be Overcharged with Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and Cares of
this Life. A Christian should Live every Day as if it were his Last Day: The
meaning of which is not, that he should do just those things and none other
than what he would do, (...) he knew he should Die the next Day. But he should
be as Careful not to (...) his Time, and not to Commit any Sin against God; or
Delay the Performing of any Known Duty, as he would be (...) were this Day to
give his Account to God, what he has done, and how he spent the Days on Earth.
We should Live in a (...) Expectation of our being called out of This, into the
Eternal World. So (...) Joh; All the Days of my Appointed Time, (...) I wait
until my Change shall come. We (...) soon be gone out of this Evil World; (...)
know not how soon: The sooner the (...) if so be the Will of GOD. In the (...)
time, we should Live Watching, and (...) and Praying, and Seeking, and Hop^^^:
For here have we no Continuing City; but we seek One to Come. Our Souls within
us should say, Come Lord Jesus, come Quickly. Come and Receive us to thy Self;
that where thou art we may be also, in the Mansions which thou have Prepared
for us, in thy Father's House. Amen, LORD JESUS, Even so be it, Come Quickly.

THE END
The CONTENTS.
TEXT. Ephesians. I. 18. PAGE
DOCT. That the Happiness of the Saints of God (...) Heavenly World will be
wonderfully Great and Glorious. (...) Prop. I. The Saints of God shall enjoy
Happiness in Heaven. p. (...) Proved by Six Arguments, from p. 4 to 13. Prop.
II. This Happiness is wonderfully Great. p. ibid Confirmed in (...)
Particulars; p. 13 to 30 Prop. III. As to Degrees of Glory in Heaven, there
will be a great difference. ibid Prop IV. The happiness of Saints in the future
World, is brought to its Perfections gradually. p. (...) USE I. This Should put
us upon Examining our (...) their Inheritance (...) USE II. Saints on Earth
should long to be in Heaven (...) (...) TEXT. Heb. XII. 23. The words with
those in the Context (...) (...) DOCT. That there is a Blessed Perfection (...)
of just men attain unto, when their Bodies are (...) (...) Prop. I. True
Believers on Jesus Christ (...) (...) Prop. II. The Souls of (...) do not Die,
nor (...) when their Bodies Die. p. 55. Prop. III. The Immortal Souls of (...)
when in a state of Separation from their Bodies, are made Perfect. p. 64. For,
1. They are perfectly delivered from all afflictive Evils. p. 65 to 71 2. From
Sin. ibid to 76. 3. They attain (...) a great Perfection in Knowledge. ibid 4.
To a blessed Perfection in Grace and Holiness. p. 81 Prop IV. The Spirits of
Just men are made Perfect at the Instant when their Bodies Die. p. 84 USE Inf.
I. Christians ought not to Mourn immoderately for the Death of their Godly
Friends. p. 93 Inf. II. The joys of Heaven are wonderful p. 95 Inf. III. The
Souls of (...) who Die in their Sins, are after the Death of their Bodies in a
Miserable estate. p. 99. USE. Exhort. Let us make sure of this one thing, that
when our Bodies dy^, our Souls may (...) be with the (...) of Just Men. (...)
(...) XX. 36. p. 105 (...) That the Childen of God shall in the (...) World, be
in some Respect euqal to the Angels. p. 108 (...) I. There shall be a (...) of
the Dead. ibid (...) II. The same (...) that Died (...) Rise again p. 117 (...)
III. Wonderful will be the Happiness of the Children (...) in the Resurrection
World. p. 128 (...) IV. None besides the Children of God shall (...) a (...)
Resurrection. p. 155. (...) Inf I. All the Children of God are infinitely
beholden (...) the Lord Jesus Christ. p.163 (...) Inf. II. There is a respect
(...) to the Dead bodies of Gods (...) p. 165 (...) Inf. III. Believrs should
be careful not to Sin with their (...) to (...) and glorify God with them. p.
169 (...) whilst in this World should endeavor (...) p. 170. (...) may have
great Comfort in meditating (...) World. p. 176 (...) Inf. VI. We (...) made
sure of our obtaining a blessed (...) surrection, (...) p. 180 TEXT. (...) p.
187 DOCT. (...) all true believers on Jesus Christ, have a sure well-grounded
Hope of obtaining Pefect blessedness in Heaven. p. 189 Prop. I. Believers (...)
in heaven ib Prop. II. It (...) p. 190 Prop. III. The blessedness (...) shall
enjoy in Heaven, will be a perfect (...) p. 207 USE I. Believers ought to (...)
with their Portion, although it may be they (...) of this Worlds Good. p. 246
Inf. II. They should not (...) of any Affliction which (...) with in the way to
Heaven. p. 249 (...) Believers should (...) willing to (...) and leave this
(...) so they may enjoy (...) which is (...) up for them (...). p. 2^^ (...)
double Exhortation. I. To Unbelievers p. 2^^ (...) make Ready for Heaven. p.
2^^
SCRIPTURES Opened, or Occasionally Cleared, in the Preceding SERMONS.
Chapt. Verse. Page. Genesis. 2 7 56 3 15 114 15 1 85 00 15 89 25 8 90 II.
Samuel. 7 10 68 00 19 28 Job 14 15 115 17 16 136 22 12 217 26 5 101 Psalm. 31
19 14 49 14 153 78 25 172 85 11 201 115 15, 16 26 119 96 207 Proverbs. 21 6 100
Canticles. 8 14 224 Isaiah. 26 19 16; 40 31 151 90 8 178, 204 97 1, 2 ^8
Jeremiah. 14 8 195 Daniel. 4 17 173 Hosea. 6 2 162 Zechariah. 3 7 131, 132 9 11
159 Matthew. 19 28 154 Luke 16 9 85, 228 00 22 61 20 36 107 00 37 157 John 3 12
15 14 6 41 Acts 6 15 142 7 55 123 I. Corinthians. 15 22, 23 160, 161 00 28 240
00 42 136, 138 00 43 140, 141 00 44 148, 149, 150 II. Corinthians. 4 17 13 5 1,
2 86 00 5 193 Ephesians. 1 18 16, 17, 18, 19 Philippians. 3 11, 12 171
Colossians. 1 5 204, 205, 206 00 18 161 II. Thessalonians. 1 10 15, 145 2 16
191 Hebrews. 6 10 207 7 19 200 11 10 214 12 22, 23 46, 47, 48, 49 I. Peter. 3
15 190 0 21 202, 203 Revelation. 2 7 135 6 9, 10 87 11 9 167 13 6 58 14 13 89
21 16 215, 216


