Memorials of Early Piety.

Occurring in the Holy Life and Joyful Death OF Mrs. Jerusha Oliver. With Some
Account of her Christian Experiences, Extracted from her Reserved Papers: And
Published, for the Service of Christianity; But especially to Serve the
Intentions of EARLY RELIGION.

Mark xiv. 9. -- This also that she has done, shall be spoken of for a
memorial of her.

Luke viii. 52. And all wept and bewailed her: but he said, weep not, she is
not dead, but sleeps

BOSTON in N. E. Printed and Sold by T. Green, at his Shop in Middle Street,
1711.

PREFACE.
THE Design of the ESSAY we are upon, is, To Do Good in the world; and very
Particularly, among Younger Persons of the Female Sex; whose Improvement in
Piety, would not be too much Studied, if there were much more Study Employed
than there is upon it.

I am able to say, on the behalf of this Essay, That I have a small Army of
Neighbors Importunately calling upon me for it; A good number who tell me, it is
pity such Piety should have two Burials; one in the Grave; 'tother in Oblivion:
And it is a very allowable thing to gratify their Importunity. But this is a
sort of a Threadbare Apology, which I have no value for; I have cast it off a
great while ago. It signifies nothing, if the Things Published upon it, are not
for the Service of Mankind. And if they are so, [as, Reader, I hope, what thou
have before thee, will be!] there needs neither That, nor any other Apology at
all, for their Publication.

I have not Complemented the Memory of the Deceased Person; or treated her, as
a Basil his Julitta, a Nyssen his Pulcheria, a Chrysostom his Pelagia, and a
Jerome his Marcella. Nor have I been laboring to make an Addition unto
Beverovicius's Catalogue, of, Women that have been Considerable. I have only
Shown some of the Garments of Righteousness; I will not so much say, Made by a
Younger Dorcas; (only that the Needle Work of her Pen was Employed thereupon:)
but Worn by her, and Made, I should rather say, by the Good Spirit of Grace,
whose internal Raiment of Needle Work, renders the Daughters of the LORD, all
Glorious within. The Account, I hope, is Modest; and without Flourish; And
every thing in the world forborne, but what was thought might be Useful.

The Lamp found in Tulliola's Tomb, was not of so much use, as that Shining
Piety, which is in such Papers, as we find in a little Trunk of a Young Agatha
departed from us. We are with a mighty Advantage told, what should be done,
when we are at the same time shown, what has been done, in a course of Piety.

The Sorrow on the Death of such a Christian, is marvellously Extinguished, by
such Relics! O Rome, How preferrible to thy boasted Relics! I had almost
said, Every Sorrowful Tear is a sort of a Sadducee.

And the satisfaction of having Done Good, by Exhibiting the Memorials of Piety
left by such a Christian, will be an abundant compensation, for all the
Obloquy, of some Envious People, who are of another, and a well known Character.

It was a peculiar Honor to Shallum, Neh. III. 12. That he and his Daughters,
did more than a little to build up the City of God.

MEMOIRS OF Mrs. Jerusha Oliver, Who Died, 30. d. 10. m. 1710.
1. ABOUT the middle of the former Century, there died at Norwich in Great
Britain, one of the Female Sex, and of no very considerable Quality, in the
Thirtieth Year of her Age; who left behind her a Confession of her Faith, and a
Relation of her Experience, with some other grateful and useful Remembrances of
her Piety. The famous Dr. John Collings, thought it worth his while, to Publish
those Memorials, with a Sermon of his own, which he Entitles; The Life and
Death of a true Christian; deciphered in a Sermon, at the Burial of Mary
Simpson, a Religious Young Maid, lately Living in the City of Norwich.

There has lately Died in Boston, one of the Female Sex, as considerably
Circumstanced; who had not attained unto that Age by several Years; but who has
left behind her, as Memorable Testimonies of her Piety, which may prove as
Grateful and Useful to many Survivers; and I am desired by many, to make a
brief Collection of them. Though the Collector should be supposed never so nearly
Related unto the Person Deceased, yet while he forbears every thing that looks
like Flourish and Applause upon her Character, and gives but a bare Transcript,
and Extract of those Memoirs, which her own Pen had provided, it is to be
hoped, that many, especially Young Persons, and of the Female Sex, may Enjoy
the Benefit of these things, without any Invidious Reproaches upon the offer of
them. Nazianzen began his Funeral Oration upon his Deceased Sister Gorgonia,
with a short Answer to all Cavil against so Domestic a Performance; (...),
They being things that I am so nearly Related unto, they are not the less True,
but the more known, for That; and it is but the more Just for me to give an
Account concerning them. What was Good Reason Twelve Hundred Years ago, should
still be so!

2. THE Young Gentlewoman, who is now (as I have told you,) to Write, rather
than to be Written of, was Born at Boston in N. E. April 16. 1684. a Daughter
of Dr. INCREASE MATHER; And in so saying, I have sufficiently intimated, what
Education was bestowed upon her. The Reverend Mr. Richard Mather of Dorchester,
and (by the Mothers side) Mr. Cotton, the for ever Famous Teacher of the Church
first in Boston, were her Grandfathers. She wanted not for good Sense; and as
she was betimes a Good Reader, so by being a Great Reader ever since, Four
Years Old, in Historical Books, as well as Theological, she furnished her mind
with a stock of many Valuable Treasures. But the Early Fear of God, was the
most Valuable of all the things that Enriched her; and not the least
Observable. Secret Prayer was an Exercise of her Infancy; The Fear of Sin, had
a strong Influence upon her; And especially she so feared a Lie, that she then
began a Custom she never left off; to Avoid Positive Expressions, but rather to
say, I think, or, It may be, or, It Is likely; even in things that she was most
assured of. So Dutiful she was to her Parents, that I have seen it asserted
under their Hand; She never gave occasion to them, to be once Angry with her,
throughout the whole Course of her Life! What she was in her Infancy, one might
a little infer, from a Catalogue of her Sins, which her Penitent Soul drew up,
as she was passing out of that Age, and yet scarce Entering into the Years which
we call the Teens. Her Catalogue does consist of such strokes as these; What
Sins have I been guilty of! O my Sins have been very many! -- My Prayers have
been sleighty: And I have spent my Time very unprofitably, And I have Read the
Holy Word of God sleightily. And I have Heard the Word of God sometimes, not
with so much Diligence as I should have done. And sometimes I have not attended
upon Hearing of Prayer as I should have done. And I have been Proud. And I have
been Unthankful. And sometimes I have not Obeyed my Father and my Mother as I
ought to have done. And I have Eaten things, which were hurtful for me to Eat;
And I have Eat more than I have had need to have done. And I have been afraid
to go alone to Pray. I used to Pray, when I was a bed. Those were Lazy Prayers
indeed! I have omitted those Duties of Meditation and Self-Examination. And I
have sometimes omitted to ask a Blessing of God, when I have been going to Eat;
and to give Thanks, when I had done Eating. And I have Performed this Duty
sleightily. And I have been Guilty of one Sin, which is greater than all these;
That is, Unbelief. And besides all this, there is that Sin of Sins, my Original
Sin; My Nature is Sinful. Thus wrote Jerusha, while her Infancy was hardly yet
Expired. These were the worst Things that she could Charge upon her self, when
she was then making her Essays toward the well-grown Devotions, of no less
than Whole Days, of Retirement, for the Humiliations of a Repenting Soul. O
more Aged Professors of Religion; To what a Tenderness in your walk with God,
will you be Awakened; when you see a Child, Reflecting with all the Bitterness
of Repentance, on miscarriages which few, few among the Children of men, have
any Trouble for, take any Notice of!

3. WHen she was Twelve Years old, the Resolutions of Piety in her were arrived
unto such a Fixation and Establishment, that she came to a very Solemn
Transaction with the Glorious GOD. She Entered into His COVENANT; and she did
with all possible Solemnity set her Hand unto an Instrument for that purpose,
which appears to have been very much her own Drawing up: though she had a
well-known Copy of another before her. Here it is.

The Covenant between God and my own Soul.
THE Lord has been very Merciful to me; though I have been a very Sinful
Creature. I have Great Cause to Love and Serve so Gracious a God. What can I do
less, than give up my self wholly to the Lord, to be for Him, and not for any
other? And, O most Holy Lord God, will thou be pleased to Accept of me? Yea,
Lord, I know, thou will accept of me, if I do Sincerely Give my self to Thee in
CHRIST. Then, O Lord, I Pray thee, for the Sake of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, Be at
Peace with me. O Lord, I have fallen from thee, by my Sins, and I am by Nature,
a Child of Hell. But thou, O Lord, of thy Infinite Mercy have offered to be my
God. Therefore I come unto thee, and I Renounce my Sins; and, with thy Grace
inabling me, I will Forsake them. I have been Serving thine Enemies, and
Forgetting the God that has dealt very Mercifully with me. But now, O Lord, I
will Endeavor to Serve thee; And I will not allow my self in any known Sin;
and I will use the Means, which I know, thou have appointed so the Destruction
of my Corruptions. I here give my Heart unto thee; O Lord, I Pray thee to give
me a New Heart. And I desire Grace from thee, that when thou shall call me
thereto, I may part with all that is dear unto me in the World, rather than
turn from thee to the ways of Sin. O Lord, I have not any Hopes of being Saved
upon the account of any Righteousness of my own. I acknowledge, that of my
self, I am Helpless and Undone, and without Righteousness. And whereas, thou
do offer to be my God through Christ, I do here take the Lord JEHOVAH, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, for my Portion. And I do give my self Body and Soul, for
thy Servant. I do here also Accept of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as the only way,
by which Sinners may have Access to thee. And I do here join my self in a
Marriage-Covenant with Him. O Lord, JESUS, I come unto thee, a most loathsome
Creature. Who am I, that I should be Married unto the King of Glory! I Accept
of thee for my Head and Husband; and Embrace thee in all thy Offices. I choose
thee, the Lord my Righteousness. Grant that thy Wisdom may be my Guide; I
desire, that thy Will may be my Will, and thy Word my Law. I put my Neck under
thy Yoke, I Subscribe to thy Laws as Holy and Just and Good; and I do Promise
to take them, at the Rule of my Life.

Jerusha Mather

This Transaction was on a Twentieth Day of February, 1696. And in the
remaining Years of her Life, constantly, as the Twentieth Day of February
arrived. it was her Practice, to Review her COVENANT, and Bewayl her Sins
against it, and Fly to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant for the Pardon of
them, and Renew her Holy Resolutions to Live yet more Watchfully and
Fruitfully, and Implore the Assistences of Heaven to perform what she Resolved.

I will only Single out One or Two of those Commemorations, from her Memorials:
February 20. 1703. It is this Day Seven years, since I did make a Covenant with
God; in which Covenant, I did take the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, for my Portion and Best Good; and did Promise to Forsake Sin, and to
Endeavor to Serve God; And did Accept of Christ, for my Head and Husband, and
did Embrace Him in all His Offices. The Lord Pardon my not being so Sincere in,
and so Faithful to, that Covenant, as I ought to have been, and make me Sincere
in it, and Faithful to it; And Pardon all my Sins; keep me from Sin; and that
for the Sake of the Lord Jesus Christ.

At another time. Feb. 20. This Day Twelve years ago, I did very Explicitly
enter into Covenant with God. The Lord Pardon my not being so Sincere in, and
so Mindful of, and so Faithful to, that Covenant, as I ought to have been, and
make me Sincere, and Mindful, and Faithful; And make me very Thankful unto that
God, who has not cut me down for my Unfruitfulness, but has spared me, not for
Three Years only, but Four times Three Years, notwithstanding my
Covenant Breaking. And the Lord spare me still, for the Sake of the Sacrifice
of Christ, and grant that I may receive those continual Supplies of Grace and
Strength from the Spirit of Christ, that I want, and grant, that the Holy
Spirit may Possess me, and fill me with Good Thoughts, and Good Desires, and
Good Resolutions, and Good Actions; and grant that I may Glorify God as long as
I Live; and grant that my Death may be Happy and Joyful; and that for the Sake
of my Lord Jesus Christ.

That She might go on, with a more Confirmed Piety, when she was near Sixteen
years old, She joined unto the Church, of which her Father and her Brother are
the Pastors; and Exhibited unto the Church, an Acceptable Declaration of her
Faith and Repentance; and at the Table of the Lord, Sealed the Covenant, in the
way of His Appointment.

I think it my Duty to interpose my Advice unto the Young Readers, on this
occasion. I fear, I fear, that the Action of Entering into Covenant with God, is
too often done, with a little too much of the Strain of the Old Covenant. And
for this very Cause, the Lord often leaves His Covenanting, and really
Regenerate Children, to Some Remarkable Falls into Sin afterward, that He may
drive them into more Evangelical Terms, and make them sensible that it is not a
Covenant of Works, but a Covenant of Grace, wherein they are to draw near unto
Him. I make no doubt, that the Proposals of the Two Pious Alleines, and
Janeway, and Guthry, and others, for, Explicit Covenanting with God, yea,
Writing and Signing the Instrument, have been a mighty Service to Religion, in
very many Thousands of Christians, as they were in our Jerusha. Yet I will show
you mine Opinion. The Form used by those Men of God, is hardly quite
Evangelical enough. I would propose, that the Nature of the New Covenant, which
is all over, Grace, Grace; be thoroughly considered by them who do this Action;
and that the Terms of, I Confess, and, I Consent, and, I Desire, be preferred,
unto, I Will; as Language best Suiting the Nature and the Tenor of a Covenant,
in which, it is not by Doing, but by Receiving, that we arrive unto Blessedness,
and that our Holy Resolutions be formed, as points of Thankfulness to the Lord
from whom we Receive the Gift of Righteousness, and as parts of our Promised
Blessedness; and the style thereof be, O my God, I ask of thee, that thou will
give me the Grace to do such and such things!

On Febr. 20. 1709. She remembers that it was then Thirteen years since she had
thus given her self to God, and has serious and holy Reflections on it: She did
not Live to another 20th. of February.

4. SHe had a great Felicity in a more than ordinary strength and sharpness in
her Eye Sight, being able to Read by such a dim light as others could not, for
which she was Thankful to God, and made a good improvement of it. She became
from her Childhood a notable Mistress of her Pen; wrote a Fair Hand, and rarely
Miss spelt a Word in all that Passed her Hand. She was to her Father his
Amanuensis, could read his ordinary hand and characters: Transcribed several of
his Printed Books for the Press. Among the many other Good Things, wherein she
employed her Pen, One was her Diary, wherein she did, especially for the Last
Ten Years of her Life, enter such Passages as concerned her Interior State; and
indeed seldom let a Day pass without entering Something or other, that was an
Aspiration of Serious Piety: always Ending with that clause; For the Sake of
the Lord Jesus Christ. All that I propose now to do, is only to make a few
faithful Extracts from, and useful Remarks on, these Reserved Memorials. And
the first thing, which I will mention, before I Proceed unto any thing else in
the World shall be, a Notable Proof, That the Doctrines of Grace, have no
Tendency to extinguish the Zeal of Good Works, and that Justification by a
Precious Faith in the Righteousness of God our Savior, is no Enemy to the most
Conscientious and Elevated Purity. In her Diary, she very often makes her
Flight unto the Righteousness of the Blessed JESUS, as the only Refuge of her
Soul, the only Hope of her Acceptance with God. Very, very often her Language
is this; The Lord Enable me, Sincerely to Renounce all my own Righteousness,
and enable me Sincerely to Accept of the Righteousness of CHRIST, and to depend
on that alone, for my Justification; And the Lord be Reconciled to me through
CHRIST, and Pardon all my Sin, and keep me from Sin; and that for the Sake of
the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the constant Strain! But now, Reader, Did thou
not observe one clause in her Prayer; And keep me from Sin! This is what I am
now to observe. Such a Dread and Hatred of Sin, there was in the Soul thus
relying upon the Righteousness of the Sinless JESUS alone, to Justify her, that
it is a clause for ever occurring in almost every Prayer, Let the Subject she
is upon be what it will: And keep me from Sin! I believe, the clause occurs
many more than a Thousand times.

5. EAch Book of her Diary, she usually began on her Birthday. Then she noted
her Age; Her Thanks to Heaven for Obtaining the Help which continued her to
this Day; Her Griefs for the past Sins of a Life rolled away in so much
Unfruitfulness; And her Prayers, that the Next Year might be under the Blessing
of God, and better spent, than any that had gone before it.

When she heard any Sermons Preached, (yea, or but the Repetition of them at a
more Private Meeting) She would mention the Preacher, and the Subject; and
there-upon add the Principal Wishes, which were enkindled in her Soul, by what
she had been entertained withal. O our Hearers, If we were sure, that you were
generally Such Attentive and Such Improving Hearers, how much would it
Encourage our most Exquisite Preparations for the Offerings of the Sanctuary!

If she were Detained from the Public, she would in her Diary bewayl it, as a
Chastisement upon her former Deficiences. And she would write down, her Wishes
fetched out of the Books, that she Read at home.

The Comfortable Dispensations of Providence toward her, She mentioned, with
her Thankful Remarks upon them. Yea, though it were but in being Safely carried
out and home, as far as Roxbury; She sees the Mercy of God in it.

If any Afflictive Thing befell her, She mentioned it, with her Useful Remarks
upon it. Especially, if it were an Ill Turn upon her Health; though it were but a
Cold, or a Fit of the Toothach; There Is a Prayer on the occasion.

She Remarks the Dealings of God with Others; Especially if any thing either
Good or Bad were observable in the condition of the Town; But most of all what
occurred Joyful or Grievous, unto her nearest Relatives, and their Families;
and she employes agreeable Meditations and Supplications there-upon.

When she understood that her Brother in England had been Sick and was
Recovered, she poured out her Soul in Praises to the Lord; and in Prayer for
that Brother on that Occasion. It is not then to be wondered at, if she was
deeply affected with the state of such of her near Relations as she had a
continual Conversation with, and was at all times Acquainted with their
Condition. It would make this Account too large, should all such particulars of
that Nature be inserted. Nor would we trouble the World with private Concerns.
Only as a Monument of her Piety and Prayerfulness one Instance shall be taken
notice of. She thus writing in her Diary, July, 10. 1708. This Day my Sister
Sarah, [She is Consort to Mr. Walter, Pastor of the Church in Roxbury;] who had
been Ill almost a Month; was in very Dangerous circumstances. A Messenger came
to inform her Friends of it. I was much concerned for her, and much afraid that
she would have Died. But the Gracious and Almighty GOD, who can do every thing;
and who has granted great Deliverances to me, and to all my Brothers and
Sisters, and who did some Years ago wondrously, and even beyond Humane
Expectation, deliver my Sister from Death, did again hear Prayers for her, and
did grant her to be safe Delivered this Afternoon. The Lord Sanctify to my
Sister, and to all Concerned, and to me in a special manner, the great Danger
she was in, and the great and gracious Deliverance she has had this Day. The
Lord perfect her Recovery, and grant that she and I too may Live while we are
fit and willing to Dye.

In her Diary, Aug. 10. 1710. which was Two Years after the former, speaking of
the same Sister; her words are, She has lately Experienced signal Mercy. I was
concerned for her, and inclined to Pray that she might have a better Lying-in
than she uses to have. My Good God heard me; she has had a much better Travail
than she uses to have. The Lord preserve her Life* restore her to Health,
sanctify all Divine Dispensations to her; make her Thankful, and make me
Thankful for Mercies vouchsafed to her.

Such as these were the breathings of her Pious Soul. It is surely a great Loss
to them that survive, when such a Praying Relation is taken from them: Yet it
is a Comfort that their Prayers Live after they themselves are gone out of this
Sinful and Sorrowful World.

She Oftentimes (and Constantly before the Communion,) set apart a Time, for
Solemn Self-Examination. Many Books of Piety served her in this most necessary
and Profitable Exercise. Particularly Mr. Doolittle's; and of late years, Mr.
Henry's Discourse of the Lord's Supper: But she had none more at hand than one
Entitled, A Companion for Communicants. The Result is entered still in her
Diary, I don't find the Triumphs of Assurance; a frequent Result: but
frequently it is, a Modest and Humble Hope, That she has had a True Conversion,
and that she is a True Believer on her Savior.

In one of her Diaries her words are, This Day I spent some time in
Self-Examination; The Lord grant that I might have the infallible Marks of a
sincere Christian; and grant that I may discern those Marks In another her
words are, I hope God has made me a true Believer on Christ. I have given my
self to Him; and I desire to have Him for my Portion. Very often she writes,
This Day I spent some time in Examining my self. And frequently Concludes upon
it; I hope I am a Believer! I hope I am Converted!

6. SHE was no stranger to that great Article of the Christian Asceticks, To
Retire whole DAYS, for Communion with God! To set apart Whole Days, for
Prayer with Fasting, (at least so much Fasting, as the Feeble state of her
Health would allow;) in Secret, before the Lord. On which Days, it was her
usage, to Pour out her Soul unto the Lord, in the most Extended Supplications;
Confess her own Errors, and Implore the Favors of God for her self and others;
And between those Devotions, intermix the Reading of such Things, as might blow
up the Flame of Piety. The First Time that I find her Employed in the Fast of
the Closet, is, when she was but Thirteen Years of Age. A mavelous way, for a
Child to grow Grave, and Wise, and Holy; For a Child to be an Hundred Years
Old. The last time save one, that I find any Distinct Record of her being thus
Engaged, was upon the Proposal of her Marriage to a Virtuous Young Man, Mr.
Peter Oliver, a Goldsmith in Boston. One in Good Reputation for a Skilful
Artist in his Calling, as well as for his Piety. With whom she was like to have
Lived Happily, he being very Tender of her. When her Marriage with that Person
was like to proceed, she then writes, among other things; I would keep a Day of
Prayer, to Desire the Direction and Blessing of God, and that every
Circumstance of that Affair may be ordered in much Mercy. And that I may be
provided with the supplies I now want. And I would Repent of all the sins of my
Single state before I Marry. And I would seek unto God, for Grace and Wisdom,
to order my Temporal Affairs with Discretion; And to Glorify and Serve God, in
all Relations and Conditions. The Lord hear me, and grant that my Soul may be
Married unto CHRIST, and that both in Life and Death, I may be the Lord's. The
last Time of all was just before she Removed from her Fathers House, to
Housekeeping, and about three or four Months before her Death.

When Public Days of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving arrived, her manner was to
write down in her Diary, the things which 'twas her Desire, to be Humbled for;
and the Things to be Thankful for. Here she considered not only her own Sins,
and her own Sorrows, but those also of the Family whereto she was Related; and
those of the Church whereof she was a Member; and those of the Town and Land.
Yea, her Considerations reached as far as the Circumstances of our whole
Nation, and the Afflictions of the People of God abroad in the World. It is
very surprising to see what will be done this way, by a Child, that has an
Heart possessed by the Holy Spirit of God! And, when the Mercies of God were to
be acknowledged, she not only took Notice of the Blessings that she had her
self received, but also of the Instances wherein the Lord had Blessed her
several Relatives; (especially, in the Services which He honored her Father,
and her Two Brothers to do for Him:) and the Things wherein the Town and Land,
and Great Britain also were favored of the Lord. Her Pious Methods are enough
Explained, without our Transcribing at large many Paragraphs of her Memorials;
only one or two of them.

November 23. 1709. Tomorrow a Public Thanksgiving is to be attended in this
Province. The Lord Pardon my not desiring a Thankful Heart so much as I ought,
and give me a Thankful Heart; and grant that I may on the morrow attend both on
Public and Private Duties as I ought. Make me Thankful for Public Mercies;
Mercies vouchsafed to the People of God every where. Mercies to the English
Nation. Mercies to this Land; To this Town; To this Family, To my Relations,
and to me. There has been no Breach made in the Family by Death a great while.
The Health of the Family has been preserved in a Gracious measure. My Parents
are yet Living, and enjoy Health. My Father is favored with a very Happy Old
Age. My Brothers are both Employed in the work of the Ministry; and I hope have
obtained Grace to be Faithful therein. My Sisters have I hope all of them Grace
in their Hearts, and they have all of them had great Temporal Blessings
bestowed on them at one time or other. My Sister Greens Husband has in the Year
past, Experienced an Eminent Sea-deliverance. The Lord make me Thankful for all
these Mercies. As to my self, I am Alive. I have had many Deliverances from
Death. I have had many Restorations from Sickness, and one a few Months ago. I
have had Friends about me; and suitable Medicines when I have been Sick. I
enjoy things not only for Necessity, but for Convenience. I have been preserved
from Painful Diseases, which some better than I have been afflicted with. I
have been kept both at Home and Abroad, from many Evils which would have
befallen me, if my God had not preserved me. My Fears have been many times
prevented. I enjoy a far greater measure of Health and Strength now, than I did
a while ago. I ought to be Thankful for my Memory, and Understanding, and
Speech; and for my Eyesight, which I have in greater measure than many others.
I ought to be Thankful for Temporal, much more for Spiritual Blessings. I was
Born of Pious Parents; and my Grand-Parents all of them were Pious. I have had
a Pious Education. I enjoy the Holy Scriptures; and live under a Lively
Ministry. I have many Good Books. I enjoy Sabbaths and Sacraments. And I hope
God has given me Grace in my Soul. I think I Love CHRIST; I am sure I desire to
Love Him, and to Live to Him. I have had sensible Answers of Prayer; and one
this Week. The Lord grant that the Mercies of God to me, may cause me to Devote
my Body, my Soul, my All to my God; and grant that I may Praise, and Love, and
Glorify Him as long as I Live; and grant that my Death may be Happy and Joyful;
and keep me from Sin, and assure me that my Sins are Forgiven; and grant that I
may Rejoice in the Lord, and Joy in the God or my Salvation, and that for the
sake of my Lord Jesus Christ.

These were her Meditations by way of Preparation for a Day of Public
Thanksgiving. We shall only further insert what is found among the Memorials of
her walking with God, relating to a Day of Secret Prayer, between God and her
own Soul. An Exercise of Piety, in which she was (as has been said) very
frequent. The last of them was September 16. 1710. This being (says her Diary)
the Day that I use to spend some time of it in Self-Examination; and in
probability it is (if not the last) one of the last such Days that I shall have
before I remove to House keeping, where it may be I shall not have that Leisure
Time, nor that Opportunity of a Convenient Private Place, that now I have. I
would feign spend as much of this Day as my Bodily Infirmities will permit, in
Self-Examination, (though my Health will not suffer me to Fast) Humiliation,
Repentance and Prayer. I have Experienced Gracious Answers of Prayer. When I
was about to Marry, I set a Day apart in a special manner to seek unto my God,
for a Blessing on that Affair. My God did Graciously Answer my Prayers then.
Now I am to remove from this Habitation, I would seek unto God that He would
order every Circumstance of that Affair in much mercy; that He would Pardon the
Sins I have been Guilty of here; and that He will give me Grace to Glorify Him
in all Places, and in all Relations, and that He will give all that wisdom I
shall want to guide all my affairs with discretion, and that He will also, if
it be His holy Will, preserve my Life and Health. I am (I think) above five
Months gone with Child, which has occasioned my being much indisposed at times.
I would in a very special manner this day prepare for my Lying-in, and would
therefore prepare for Death. I am of a very fearful disposition naturally, and
am much afraid of Death, and therefore afraid what will be the issue of my
being with Child; but I desire to commit my whole self, Soul and Body, and all
the concerns thereof unto my God, and my Lord Jesus Christ; and particularly
that affair of my Travail and Lying-in. My God has prevented my fears
sometimes. I desire to trust in him that He will do so concerning this also.
The Lord grant that I may be assured that my Sins are pardoned, and grant that
I may through Christ obtain the victory over Death, and over my fears of Death.
And let the blessing of God be on me while I am with Child. If it be His holy
Will preserve me from hurtful falls and blows and frights, and from every evil
accident, and grant that I may go out my Time, and when my Travail comes, Let
it be easy, safe, and short if it be the Will of God, even far better than my
fears, and that for the Sake of my Redeemer, who was born of a Woman. And let
the blessing of God be on the fruit of my Womb. Let it be a perfect Child, and
let it be the Lord's. I would devote my self and my unseen Offspring unto God.
And I do through the Grace of Christ resolve, and in His Strength promise, that
if God will spare my Life, and the Life of my Offspring, I will endeavor to
bring it up in the fear of God, and will endeavor that it may betimes Serve
God, and Believe in Christ. The Lord accept of me and mine through Christ and
give me a renewed and resigned will, and fit me for whatever may be the Will of
God concerning me, and keep me from Sin, and hear my Prayers, and grant that I
may pour out my Soul before God this day, and having done so, grant that I may
be no more sad; and this for the Sake of my Lord Jesus Christ.

After this manner: Thus Self-Examining: Thus Humbling her Soul, thus Praying,
thus Repenting, thus Trusting in God through Jesus Christ, did she leave her
Fathers house, and by reason of bodily Infirmities came no more into it, after
she was removed into a Family of her own, but is now in her Heavenly Father's
House: being in that Temple, she shall go no more out.

7. ONE main Intention of her Diary, seems to have been, that she might note
the principal Desires, which her Soul was on each Day, under the power of;
which in the Supplications of the Closet she principally insisted on. Austin
would say, The Life of Christianity, was chiefly made up of Holy Desires. The
Holy Desires, and the Daily ones, of this Young Woman, were the Things that
filled Hundreds of Pages in her Memorials. From the thousands of her Pious
Anhelations after Spiritual Blessings, I will only single out a few, that may
carry more particular Instructions in them, and such as I would wish the
Persons of her Age and Sex may take a proper Notice of. It Is not the Commending
of the Dead, but the Instructing of the Living, that I am aiming at. These
which follow were some of her Holy Desires.

The Lord Enable me to count the Cost of walking in the Narrow way, and Enable
me to Resolve to walk in that way, whatever it Cost me; and Enable me to make
sure, that I be entered in that way before it be too late.

The Lord Enable me to hate Idleness. Grant that I may Live more Profitably!
Pardon my Daily Unprofitableness; and Enable me every Day to Redeem the Time,
as I ought to do. Enable me to make Religion my main Business; That I may be
sure to spend my Time well, and set Holy Examples before me; but above all the
Example of CHRIST, for my Imitation.

I have too Vain an Heart. The Lord Enable me to Mourn as I ought to do, for
the Vanity of my Heart* And the Lord Pardon the Vanity of my Heart; And give me
a Sincere, and a Serious, and an Humble, and a Thankful Heart.

The Lord Grant, that I may not Content my self with mere Morality: But that I
may Sincerely give my self unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST. -- The Lord Enable me,
to give my very Heart and Soul to Christ, and Enable me to Love Christ more
than any thing in this world.

The Lord Pardon my not Mourning for the Sins of others, as I ought to have
done; and Enable me to Mourn both for my own Sins, and for the Sins of others,
as I ought to do; And the Lord be my God.

It is now a Cold Season. And my Heart is too Cold. The Lord Pardon the
Coldness of my Heart, and Pardon my Praying after too Cold, and too Careless a
manner; and give me a New and an Heavenly Heart; and grant that I may be
Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. And Enable me to Redeem the Time as I
ought, when I am warming at the Fire.

The Lord Pardon all my Proud Thoughts, and Words, and Actions; and give me a
very Humble Heart. Pardon the Pride of my Heart; and Pardon all my Sinful
Thoughts, and Enable me to watch over my Heart, as I ought to. That Vain
Thoughts may be a Burden to me!

The Lord Pardon my not Loving Prayer as I ought to; and cause me to Love
Prayer; and pour on me the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication. Give me the
Spirit of Prayer, and grant, that I may Love Meditation!

Grant that I may be apt to Blame my self, and not apt to Blame other persons;
and Enable me to endeavor to Reform in my self, what I see Amiss in other
persons.

The Lord Enable me every Day to be Thinking on the Day of Judgment; and Grant,
that I may be prepared for the Coming of that Day; and Enable me to Long for
the Coming of that Day.

The Lord grant, that Death may find me in Christ, and Enable me to be often
Thinking upon Death, and upon Heaven. I know I must Die. The Lord grant that I
may so Live, as that I may have nothing to do, but to Die, when the Appointed
time of my Death does come.

The Lord grant, that the Experience I have had of the Vanity of Earthly
Things, [Now being Seventeen Years Old,] may Learn me to set my Heart upon
Heavenly Things. And grant, that the Experience I have had of the Certainty of
Death, and of the Uncertainty of the Time of it, may learn me to be continually
preparing for Death.

The Lord Enable me to Live as a Stranger on the Earth, and Enable me to make
sure of an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens; and Pardon my too
much setting my Heart upon Earthly Things.

It is a great Mercy, that I may Read the Scripture every day. The Lord make me
very Thankful for that great Mercy! And Enable me, to have Recourse unto the
Scripture, as unto a Weapon that will Vanquish my Temptations. Enable me to
Love, and Prize, and Search the Holy Scripture!

The Lord Sanctify to me, all the Afflictions that I have met with; and that I
do, or am yet to, met with;

And grant that my Desires to get Good by Affliction, may be more, and greater
than my Desires to be Delivered from Affliction.

The Lord give me an Heart set upon Doing Good, and Pardon my not Doing so much
Good, as I ought to do. Grant that I may be careful to improve all my Talents
unto the Glory of God; and that the Consideration of the Littleness of my Time
on Earth, may quicken me to do all that I can! That I may be often thinking;
How I may Glorify God? And that I may Endeavor, that Others may Glorify God;
And be earnest in Prayer, That I may know wherein I may Glorify God.

The Lord give me an Heart, willing to Submit unto the Will of God in every
thing; and Enable me, when I am under Affliction to be Patient and Thoughtful.
Enable me to bear, whatever Crosses my Savior shall please to send upon me;
and when I am under Affliction, to be very Humble, and Fruitful, and Prayerful.
And Pardon my not getting that Good by Affliction, that I ought to have got by
it.

The Lord Pardon all my Sin; and Enable me to see what Sin it is, that I am
most apt to fall into; and Enable me to watch against that Sin, and to mourn
for that Sin, in a peculiar manner.

The Lord grant that I may have Eternal Life, and Spiritual Health; and grant
that the Chief Reason, why I desire Temporal Life, and Corporal Health, may be,
that so I may Serve and Glorify my Lord Jesus Christ* And that I may Sincerely
and Entirely Resign my Will unto the Holy Will of God, at all times, and in
every thing.

Has Christ so Loved me, as to Die for me? Then I have unspeakable Cause to Love
and Serve Christ. The Lord Enable me to Love Christ more than any thing; and
give me an Heart set to Glorify Christ; to Live to the Glory of Christ, as long
as I live, and willing to Suffer for the Name of Christ. That I may Serve
Christ, as long as I Live, and go to be with Christ, when I Die. Keep me from
setting my Heart upon the Things of the World; and Enable me to Love Christ,
unspeakably more, than the most Desirable Things I have in this world. And
Enable me Cheerfully to Resign the most Desirable Things I have in this world,
when God Commands me to Resign them. And grant, that I may be prepared for
Eternity.

The Lord grant, that I may not think, the better of my self for being in
Prosperity, nor the worse of others for being in Affliction. And grant, that I
may not be Discouraged, when I meet with Affliction; but that I may be made
Better by Affliction. And grant that the Mercies of God may cause me to Devote
my self Body and Soul unto the Service of my Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord
Sanctify to me, both Afflictions, and Mercies. I hope, I had rather have
Sanctified Afflictions, than Unsanctified Mercies.

The Lord Pardon my being too unmindful of my Baptismal Obligatitions; and help
me to improve my Baptism, as I ought to do.

The Lord enable me to Mourn for All my Sins; and enable me to Mourn most, for
my Original Sin, and grant that I may not Die in a Natural, Unconverted Estate.
Make me very Sensible of my Original Sin; and grant, that I may not Die before I
am New Born; but enable me in the Days of my Youth, to make sure of a Thorough
Conversion. I hope, I have given my self unto Christ!

The Lord enable me, to take heed, how I Hear the Word Preached; and grant,
that when I hear Sermons, I may have many Holy Ejaculations! And that I may
hear the Word with a Particular Application of it to my self.

The Lord grant, that I may get Good by Afflictions; and not only by my own
Afflictions, but also by the Afflictions of Others; and that all things may
Work together for my Good. And the Lord make me Thankful for the Mercies of
Others, as well as for my Own. And grant, that I may be a true Mourner, both
for my own Sins, and for the Sins of Others. And grant, that I may be much in
Prayer for Others as well as my Self. 'Grant, that my Life may be full of
Prayer; and that I may be full of Christ, and full of Joy, and full of Use.

It is the Lord, who has given me that Health, that I enjoy. The Lord make me
very Thankful. And if it be His Holy Will the Lord perfect my Restoration; and
direct to the use of what means ought to be used for me; and give a Blessing on
means; and Pardon my being too apt to depend on means; and keep me from too
much Depending on means: and enable me to Desire Life and Health for Right
Ends; and enable me to be more Desirous of the Health of my Soul, than of
Bodily Health; and grant, that my Soul may prosper and be in Health; and enable
me Sincerely to Resign my whole Self, and all my Concerns, unto the Disposal of
my Heavenly Father. I hope, I had rather have Sanctified Sicknesses, than
Unsanctified Health.

The Lord keep me from Sinning, when I go a Visiting; and enable me to manage
my Visits as I ought to.

I am afraid, that my Fears of Death, are a Sign that I am not Fit for Death.
The Lord Pardon all my Sinful Desires of Life, and Fears of Death. The Lord
enable me, to make sure of an Interest in Christ, and grant, that I may Live
above the Fear of Death; and that I may so do, enable me to Familiarize Death
by Daily Thoughts of it; and to Think much on CHRIST, on His Death, and on His
Righteousness; and on His Glory; and to be careful to Walk closely with God:
And to consider, what an undesireable Place this World is; and what a
Desirable Place Heaven is. Grant, That I may long to be in Heaven! And enable
me to get as much of that Grace, which will go to Heaven with me, as possibly I
can! And to Delight in that which is the Work of Heaven: Delight in the
Sabbath; and Delight to Serve God, and Love to be where God is Served; and
endeavor after an Actual, as well as an Habitual meetness for Heaven! And so
Live, that I may have nothing to do, but to Die and go to Heaven.

The Lord give me a very Thankful Heart; and grant that I may be often
thinking, What shall I render unto the Lord for all His Benefits? And enable me
to Glorify God with all my Enjoyments, as long as I Live: Devote my All to the
Service of my God!

If there be any Sin of Ignorance, that I do Live in, the Lord discover it to
me; and enable me Sincerely to Hate and Forsake all Sin.

Enable me to be careful, What Persons I choose for my Companions; and keep me
from Delighting in Vain Company, and cause me to Love Serious Company.

Grant, that I may manifest my Love to God, by my Hatred of Sin; and grant,
that I may fear Sin, more than Death.

Grant, that I may know (and that I may be very Sollicitous to know,) what
Errand my Afflictions come of, and that my Afflictions may do the Errand they
come of; and that the Fruit of all my Afflictions may be, to take away Sin; and
that I may Choose Affliction rather than Sin. And grant, that I may be Thankful
for those Afflictions, that do make me more Holy; and that I may have Grace,
and Wisdom and Patience, to bear Afflictions as I ought, and to take up my
Cress!

Grant, that I may Mourn for the Wickedness of the Whole World; and that I may
be Weaned from this World* and that I may be very willing to Leave this Wicked
and Wretched World, whenever God shall call me to Leave it!

The Lord be my own and bless me Bless me with Spiritual Blessings, and enable
me in the first and chief place to desire those Blessings. And the Lord add to
me those Temporal Blessings which I stand in need of. He knows what I want and
what is best for me. I desire to cast all my care upon Him, and to put my trust
in Him who has bid me be careful for nothing, but in every thing with Prayer
and Thanksgiving to let my requests be made known to Him. The Lord keep me from
Sin.

I was going on; -- But the Swell of the work, which will be Lost if it be not
Confined unto Narrow Limits, forbids my proceeding any further. So much of the
Oil in the Vessel, may suffice to answer the present Intention. I only say;
First, I do very Solemnly Declare, That I have been careful not to Add One
Word, unto the Writings from which I have been thus Transcribing. It must also
be Remembered, that it is not an Able Divine, but a Little Damsel, whose
Writings are here Transcribed. Furthermore, In these Few Passages, there are
the main Lineaments of the New Creature, and of a Work of Grace in a Mind
Renewed, and Sanctified, and Purified by the Spirit of God. They that have the
Fear of God, will Rejoice when they see these things, and Read them with an
Allubescence of Heart, as finding themselves wound up to an Unison with them.
Finally. The View of these Dispositions, may by the Blessing of God, be
helpful, and be honored with some Instrumentality, to produce, or maintain the
like in others; Especially in Persons of the same Age and Sex with her, from
whom we have the Dispositions of Piety, in such Living Exhibitions of it. An
Effect preferrible to the best Cure ever affirmed to be wrought by Macrina, the
Sister of Basil, whom Gregory Nyssen has so Panegyrized unto! And if it should
be so; a Desire of hers, more than Once or Twice occurring in her Diary, will
be happily answered. There, mentioning her Hopes of her own Conversion; she
adds, Enable me to do what I ought, that others may be Converted also! Having
mentioned her Hopes of having her own Soul Wun to and by her Savior, She adds;
Enable me to do what I ought, that Others may be Wun to Serve Christ! Ah, Dear
Child; It is now doing, beyond what thy Humble Soul could have Imagined! There
is one thing more, not improper to be mentioned, She had an heart set to do
Good according to the utmost of her Capacity: and more particularly, She was of
a Liberal disposition; She Devised Liberal Things. When she sent (as now and
then she did) her Little Ventures to Sea, at the return she would be sure to
lay aside the Tenth of her gain for Pious Uses. After she was in a Married
Estate she was according to her ability very Liberally Charitable to the Poor;
Considered the Poor.

8. IT is Evident from her Memorial, that she received many and Wondrous
Answers of Prayer. There is no need of their being so Publicly Exposed, as
they must be, if they make any part of this Relation. Only, Let Young Persons
be Encouraged from her Example and Experience. Children, You will doubtless
find what she did; The Lord is Good unto them that Wait for Him, unto the Soul
that Seeks Him.

However, One Important Article, shall not be left unmentioned. I find it an
Article of Prayer, frequently Reiterated with her; That I may Die Believingly,
Willingly, and Joyfully. And elsewhere, That I may through Christ obtain the
Victory over Death, and over my Fears of Death. Yea, Sometimes it soars to
this. The Lord grant, that I may have such Fore-sights and Fore-tasts of the
Joys of Heaven, as may cause me to long to be there.

Now, Reader, Expect a very Surprising Issue!

Her Travail drew nigh; and she had been so Indisposed, that her Friends were
doubtful of the Consequences. The last Words, that ever she Wrote were these.

Dec. 16. 1710. I am Every Day expecting my Travail. The Lord keep me from Sin;
And be with me, when my Travail comes, and Deliver me for the Sake of Christ,
who was born of a Woman. Grant, that I may put my Trust in Christ, and not
Fear. Let my Fears be Prevented, for the Sake of my Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prayer-hearing Lord, was marvellously Gracious to her. The Day following,
she was Delivered; and there has rarely been known a more Easy Travail, of a
Firstborn Infant. The Lord also answered her Prayers in giving her the
comprehensive Mercy of a Perfect Child; which when Baptized had her Mothers
Name given to her, but dyed the Week after her Mother; and now Sleeps in the
same Tomb with her.

After her Comfortable Travail, all that Week, there was great Hope of her
being Shortly and Safely Recovered. But on the next Lord's Day, a Sudden Change
appeared on her.

And a Change indeed!

She had been of a Timorous and Melancholy Constitution; which might somewhat
contribute, unto that Fear of Death, which had all her Lifetime very much kept
her in Bondage. But now, to our Astonishment, she told those who attended her;
She was sure, the Time for her Death was now come; And she was now above that
Fear of it, that she had heretofore been Subject to.

It is not the Portion of all the Children of God, to Die with Triumphant Joys.
Very Eminent Servants of God, have, with Holy Bains, declared on their
Deathbeds, that though they have Enjoyed a Calm of Soul, yet they had no
uncommon Joys. Yea, Sometimes they have rather Suffered some Dejection, some
Despondency of Mind* Pious Throgmorton when Dying, asked the famous Dod, What
shall be thought of a Dying man, who has not the Light of the Countenance of
God shining on him? Mr. Dod replied, What shall be thought of JESUS CHRIST, who
when He was a Dying Said, My God, My God, Why have thou forsaken me? This
Thought revived him. On the other side, It is the Portion of Some, to go away
Triumphing unto the Heavenly World. So did our Great Ames, unto the
Astonishment of a Popish Physician; who asked, Whether Protestants did use to
Die after that manner! Thus Mr. Holland, thus Dr. Winter, had such Views and
Joys of Heaven in their Dying Hours, That they Scarce knew, whether they were
in the Body, or out of the Body. Yea, Some Handmaids of the Lord have had such
Experiences; The Fearful Sex have Triumphed over the King of Fears. Dying Mrs.
Stubbs said unto those about her, O that you did but see what I see! I see
Millions of Angels; whom God has appointed to carry my Soul to Heaven. Dying
Mrs. Brettergh said, O the Joys! the Joys! the Joys that I feel! They are
Wonderful, they are Wonderful, they are Wonderful!

And so our Dying JERUSHA! -- When she certainly knew, that she was to Die, she
said unto those about her; Here is a Strange Thing! when I was in Health, Death
was a Terror to me. But now I know, I shall Die. I am not at all afraid of it.
She said, This is a Wonderful Work of God! I know, that I am going to Christ:
That I shall shortly be in the Heavenly Jerusalem, with an Innumerable Company
of Angels, and among the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. Said she; I see
things that are Unutterable! Then she Sang for Joy. And yet in her whole
Discourse had nothing that Looked at all Delirious. Her Father, at her Desire
coming to her, found her in an Ecstasy of Joy; Saying, O the Glory of Heaven! O
the Glory of Heaven! O the Glory of Heaven! I see a Glory, which cannot be
Expressed; Persons and Things, which I want a Language to declare what they
are! She desired a Message to be carried from her, unto her Sister at Roxbury;
That she should be sure, not to be afraid of Dying. Her Father said unto her;
Why? Are not you afraid of Death? She replied with great Earnestness; Not in
the Least! Not in the Least! Not in the Least!

I can readily Suppose, that the Force of Imagination will sometimes carry
People into Strange Transports. And I can heartily Subscribe to the Words of
our Jerusha's famous Uncle, Mr. Samuel Mather, late Pastor of a Congregation in
Dublin, and the first Preacher in the North Congregation in Boston, (in his
Book of, The Types. p. 42.) I had rather have a little Solid Comfort, in that
Good old plain Scripture way of Faith and Repentance, and Laboring with my own
Heart to apply the Promises; And I value this more than if an Angel should
appear to me out of Heaven, to tell me, that I am a Child of God. I am sure,
that if I walk closely with God, if I exercise my self unto Godliness, and unto
Communion with Him, in Faith and Prayer, and in Seeking of Him, and Humbling my
self before Him daily, I am sure, that in this way I cannot miscarry. Yet the
same Judicious Person adds, I would not advise Believers, utterly to reject all
Comforts, where there is possibly something of Enthusiasm intermixed, if there
be a Suitableness to their Condition in the Promises brought to their Hand in
such a way, and there be a Relish of the Gospel, and the Promises and Blessings
of it. And sometimes these Raptures are so circumstanced as to carry upon them
the plain Signatures of an Angelical Operation. Especially when they are in
Persons never known to be on the least subject to Enthusiasm, or to any thing
of a Rapturous Nature, but much the contrary, as it was with our Jerusha.

These Raptures did not continue many Hours. Her Flights were somewhat abated.
The Solid Comfort her Uncle Speaks of, contented her; yet she never had any
Dread of Death on her Spirit after this Day. Some Days afterward her Father
asked her, Whether she were still Willing to Die? Her Answer was; It Is Natural to
desire Life; but I am willing to be at Gods Disposal, Whether it be for Life,
or Death. As she drew near her End, She Signified, both unto her Father, and
unto her Brother; That she Hoped she was now going to Heaven. On Dec. 30. in
the Night, after she had been for some time Speechless, her Speech unexpectedly
Returned so far, that she desired, Her Father might Pray with her, That she
might be quickly in the Kingdom of God. He did so; and blessed God for giving
him such a Daughter, and gave her back unto the Lord. She continued above the
Fear of Death; and One of her Last audible words was, I am in Distress to be
gone! So she fell Asleep in JESUS.

It is no Unusual Thing, for Praying Ones, who have been much Afraid of Death,
in the time of their Health, to be Strangely carried above it, as their Death
approaches. Our Jerusha had an Excellent Grandmother, (her Fathers Mother,)
who was One Remarkable Instance of this Observation. She was a Gentlewoman of
rare Piety; and One who spent much Time in Reading, and in Meditation and
Supplication, and Communion with God. Nevertheless, She was for many years much
afraid of Dying; and particularly fearful, that the Pangs of Death would prove
terrible, and very grievous and painful. It pleased God, that the Event proved
much otherwise than she feared She dyed Easily; and filled with Divine and Holy
Joy. She left the World with those Words; Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard,
neither entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for
them that Love Him!

DEATH,
More like a Prince of Life, than King of Fears,
Said, Now I Am come, to answer all thy Prayers, and Tears.
Thus Nazianzen in his Funeral Oration on his Devout Sister, seems to Report it
with Raptures, that she dyed Singing of those Words; Psalm. IV. 8.

In Peace with GOD ly down I will;
My Quiet Sleep I Will take.
In Glad Assurance me to Dwell,
Thou, Glorious LORD, wilt make.
FINIS.
Advertisement. ^^ere is designed for the Press,
MEditations on the Glory of the Heavenly World.

I. On the Happiness of the (...) of Believers, at the Instant (...) their
Separation from their Bodies.

II. On the Glory of the Bodies (...) God's Children in the Resur^^^tion World,
when they shall be the Angels of Heaven.

III. On the Glory of both Soul (...) Body in the Heaven of Heavens, ^or the
Day of Judgment, to all ^^ERNITY.

Increase Mather, D. D.

To be Sold by Timothy Green, at (...) Shop in Middle-Street, the North (...)
of Boston, New England.


