A Funeral Sermon Occasioned by the DECEASE of Mrs. ABIGAIL FOSTER, Of Boston,
in New England.

THE DUTY and HONOR OF Aged Women, Delivered at the Lecture in Boston, March
15. 1711. After the FUNERAL of the Excellent, Mrs. Abigail Foster. Consort and
Relict of the late Honorable, John Foster Esqr. One of her Mejesties Council,
etc.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Joanna Perry at her Shop over against
the South side of the Town House. 1711.

To my Virtuous and Honored FRIENDS the GENTLEWOMEN of Boston, Who have
desired the Publishing of this SERMON.
I DESIRE thankfully to Acknowledge the Favor of GOD to Me, in the kind
Acceptance which this plain and faithful Discourse has found with You; Praying
Him to bless it indeed for much Spiritual and Everlasting Advantage to Your
Selves and Others: that it may help to excite You unto, and assist you in such
an Exemplary holy Conduct, as may be your present Comfort and Honor, and may
end at last in Your Eternal Peace and Glory.

I MUST confess that the Singularity and Nicety of the Subject, as well as its
Weight and Dignity, gave me no little fears and Check in determining my Tho'ts
there-unto; but I now the more readily Publish them, because Treatises of this
Nature seem wanting among us.

IT is a good Sign to see People pleased with the particular Direction of the
Word to themselves, either in way of Doctrine, Reproof, Excitation or Warning:
it gives Hopes that they will set themselves to Practice, which is the Crown
and End of Hearing. Yet neither is it always thus; Practice does not always
follow Conviction and Delight; As the Prophet was to Israel, a very lovely Song
of One that had a pleasant Voice, and could play well on an Instrument; they
showed much love, they heard his Words, but they did 'em not. It is the
Practice of these Truths that must Adorn and Save You, render you Amiable and
Heavenly, like the Kings Dau'ter, all Glorious within.

IT must be confessed to the Great Honor, of Your SEX, that more of the Life
and Power of Religion is with You, than with Us. When I have sometimes
contemplated this, I have though it that as it may be partly owing, under the
Soverain Pleasure and Election of GOD, to a natural Tenderness of Spirit and
Your Retiredness from the Cares and Snares of the World; so more especially to
Your Multiplied Sorrows, the Curse pronounced upon our first Mother Eve, turned
into the greatest Blessing to Your Souls. Your frequent Returns in Your own
Apprehension toward the Gates of Death, by which We all receive our Life,
suitably lead You to a returning serious Tho'tfulness for your Souls and of
Your Spiritual State; and that in a more sedate calm manner, and with longer
Continuance, (for diverse Months together) and so with better Effect ordinarily,
than Fits of Sickness are wont to have upon us; which do more surprise, and
terrify for the time, but are usually soon over and their Impressions vanish.

A PECULIAR Regard is due to You, and indeed ever had, in the Labors of Your
Pastors; among which I bring my Offering; for my Ability where-unto I freely
confess my Self Indebted, after the Holy Scriptures, to the Wise Conduct,
Deportment, and Religious Discourses, which with no little Admiration I have
observed sometimes Habitual to diverse of our Gracious Mothers. So that I here
return You but Your Own, what some of Your Selves have supplied me with, and
taught me. It Is a Pleasant way of Learning, and thus Good People do often
Instruct their Teachers.

I AM Sensible of the Advantage which the Discourse receives, from Your
Reverence to the Memory of that Excellent PERSON, Whose Death is the sad
Occasion of it. The Town justly Mourns the Awful, Sudden and repeated Breaches
made in that Honorable Family: While at the same time, It is comforted in its
Expectations from the Surviving BRANCHES, and in the Disposal which Providence
has made of the Estate into such Hands, from Whom the Public Promises it Self
so good a Use of it.

INDEED, as Providence ordered it, which determines our Habitations, Mrs.
Foster had the Early and First Reverence of my Childhood; Her Multiplied
Bereavments and Yearly returning Sorrows than making deep Impressions on the
Nei'bourhood, whilst Her Exemplary Resignations greatly Edified it. Those days
of Mourning have been since followed with a long Uninterupted Lease of
Prosperity. So GOD often prepares Persons for their Temporal Comforts by many
previous Trials; which is both a gracious Care to preserve them Humble and
Mortified in their Affluence, and also a present Reward, as Job had, for past
Patience.

TO CONCLUDE, The Example is indeed very Great and Worthy of Singular Remark,
to the Glory of the Power of Divine Grace, when Persons are Preserved Humble,
Grave, Devout, Bountiful in the midst of Insnaring Riches: their Prayers and
their Alms going up before GOD, yea remaining also with Men, for a lasting
MEMORIAL.

LET THOSE that have Riches be Exhorted to an Emulous Imitation: And may the
Grace and Consolations of GOD abound to our Aged, and the same Blessed Spirit
of Holiness and Comfort be poured out on Younger Persons; Which is the Earnest
Prayer of,

YOUR most Humble Servant, BENJ. COLMAN.

The DUTY and HONOR OF Aged Women, etc.
TITUS. II. 3. The Aged Women likewise, that they be in Behavior as becomes
Holiness.


SOLOMON tells us, that the Hoary Head is a Crown of Glory if it be found in
the way of Righteousness. A double Honor has GOD put on that Venerable Head,
and a double Reverence is due there-unto from all Beholders: the Ornament of
Grace Superadded to the last and highest beauty of Nature; and so the nearest
Approach on Earth to that Vision of the Son of Man, Who is also the Ancient of
Days and Father of Eternity, Rev. i. 14. His Head and his Hairs white like
wool, as white as snow. HE, the Eternal Purity and Holiness sometimes gildes
the Gray Head with a beam and Raye of His own Glory, and the white hairs shine
as the light; like some thread of the transfigur'd SAVIORS Raiment, or a lock
of Moses descending from the Mount.

EVEN Nature teaches, what the Law of old so strictly enjoined, Lev. xix. 32.
To rise up before the hoary head, and to honor the face of the Old Man. But
Grace teaches us to pay this Act of Reverence with double love and pleasure,
where we can see any advanced in Holiness as well as Years, full of Grace as
well as Days.

EVERY now and then we see some of these beauteous Old Monuments of Time and
free Grace taken down, or rather taken up from our heads like Elijahs, worn out
with labors and fastings, or consumed with Zeal; while Others of either Sex
are waiting in the Temple, like Simeon and Anna for their happy dismission
also. They are waiting for the full Consolations in CHRIST; by the SPIRIT they
come into the Temple; they embrace their Savior in the Arms of faith; they
Speak of Him to all that are Looking for Redemption, they Serve GOD with
Fastings and Prayers night and day, and are ready to Sing their Nunc dimittis,
Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, etc.

IN Honor unto Such, both Living and lately deceased, I have presumed to fix
at this time on these Words; The Aged Women also that they be in Behavior as
becomes Holiness.

TITUS was the Superior Pastor or Bishop of Crete, left there by the Apostle,
St. Paul, to set in order the Churches. The Apostle writes him here a very
Solemn Charge and Directory; Canons for the Church very sufficient, if men
would but Swear and pay a strict Canonical Obedience.

IN this Chapter he is directed what to Speak and Preach; In General, Sound
Doctrine; i. e. Wholesome, Solid, Substantial, and necessary Truths, which
contribute to the Souls health and nourishment. Particularly, He is directed to
teach Aged People, both Men and Women, their Duty. The Aged Men, v. 1. that
they be Sober, Grave, Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience. These
are the great Ornaments of Old Age, and greatly requisite for the Comfort,
Honor and Safety of it.

NONE are exempt from the Instructions and Admonitions of the Word. Ministers
must Preach to both Old and Young. GOD's School is (as One says) not only for
the Initiating of the Youth, but also for the Edifying the Aged.

NOR is the Sex any Exemption from the Exhortations of the Word. We must upon
occasion Preach to Women their peculiar Duties. Timothy is bid to entreat the
Elder Women as Mothers, and the Younger as Sisters with all Purity. And so
Titus must do likewise, -- The Aged Women, that they be in Behavior, etc.

IT will not therefore seem Indecent, nor I hope be Unacceptable, that I now
bespeak the Mothers in Israel, for their Direction, Excitation, and Comfort in
the holy Ways of GOD. Let Them accept this Duty from the least of their Sons.
I hope it looks respectful and reverential, while I use this Authority given us
of GOD. And let Us all in Though It and Word both, take heed to observe a strict
Purity.

THE Occasion of my present Address to You is obvious. Several Aged Women, and
some of Mrs Foster, Mrs. Webster, etc.
Eminence have lately gone from us. Let those who through Grace Survive, take
heed to their Behavior, that it be as becomes Holiness.

GREAT is the Honor which the Scripture from the Beginning does unto Good
Women. The Records of their Graces and Devotions are Many and Eminent: Their
Services to the Church and Interests of Religion signal and Illustrious: Their
Zeal, Faith, Purity, Charity, Patience bright and conspicuous: Their Courage
and Constancy at the Cross of Christ and at His Grave, out-did the very
chiefest Apostles: And peculiar were the Regards and Honors wherewith our LORD
rewarded their Piety and Fidelity. Wherever he saw their Behavior to be as
became His Holiness, they were lovely in his Eyes, and dear to his Soul. HE
accepted the Ministrations of Martha, Luk x. 41.
but more the devout Attention of Mary; the flowing Penitence too of the vii 38.
fair Sinner at his feet; She washed 'em with her Tears, nor did He forbid her
to touch 'em, nor spurned her away. How graciously did He seek out the Joh. iv.
10.
Samaritan at the Well, to wash her polluted Soul from the Spring of living
Water, his Spirit and holy Breath! How did He Praise and Magnify the Luke viii
47. Mat. xv. 18.
Poor Women's Faith, who lay trembling at His feet! And how tenderly did He
bespeak the Luke xxiii. 27, 28.29.
Weeping Dau'ters who followed Him to his Cross, while He disdained a look or a
word to the impious Rout that haled Him along to it with Scoffs and Flouts! And
finally, when He was risen from the dead, as the holy Women were first at the
Mat xx^iii. 1, 2. Joh. xx 14, 15
Sepulcher, so first he appeared to them.

I WILL not proceed to Speak of the Ministrations of Holy Women to Prophets and
Apostles; the Honors that 1 Kings xvii, 2 Kings iv.
Elijah and Elisha did 'em, and the Rank or Order which many suppose they even
held in the Primitive Church; though the Learned know well how great a Current of
Expositors interpret my Text to this very sense, Scil, the 1 Timothy v. 9.
Deaconesses who therein Ministered.

TO return: The Text is not a Rule peculiar only to Women, nor appropriate to
the Aged; Men need the Exhortation at least as much, if not more, and Younger
Women more than their Mothers. But as the Divine Providence leads me, and my
Text more especially confines me to the Aged Handmaids of the LORD; so
eminently it is their Duty and Honor that they be in Behavior as becomes
Holiness.

IN Behavior: the Greek word is singular: (...): of large sense, and well
translated by the most general word, Behavior. The whole outward deportment
and carriage; the whole Life and all the Actions of it; Every thing that
appertains to our Public Appearance and Conversation; Garb, Dress, Gate,
Countenance, Speech, Silence, Gesture, in the Habit of them all, do fall under
this Copious word, Behavior.

DOCT. That it is Eminently the Duty and the Honor of Aged Women, that they be
in Behavior as becomes Holiness.
IN Speaking to these words, I shall first enquire more in General,

I. What is that Christian Behavior incumbent on Us all, and becoming Holiness?

II. What peculiarly is becoming Women professing Holiness?

III. What more Eminently becomes Holiness in Aged Women?

IV. Why are They Eminently obliged to such Behavior?

I. WHAT is that Christian Behavior in General which becomes Holiness? It is
a Law to us all, Phil. i. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. The Gospel is the Rule of Holiness to us, in the holy
Doctrines, Laws, Examples, and Motives of it. From these we may easily gather
what the Behavior is that becomes Holiness.

IT must be such as becomes the Holy Doctrines of Christianity: the Being and
Holiness of GOD; the nature of Sin, the Redemption from it, the Mediation of
CHRIST, the Covenant of Grace, the Immortality of the Soul, the Eternal
Judgment, etc. Now what kind of Behavior do these Doctrines imply to be
pleasing to GOD, honourary to Him, and necessary to our being for Ever blessed
in Him? Truth like the Light, is both to Irradiate and Purify: 1 Pet. i. 22. Ye
have Purifyed your souls in Obeying the Truth.

AGAIN, Our Behavior must be such as the Holy Laws of the Gospel do require.
What is written there? how read thou? So live and do; and thy Behavior will
be as becomes Holiness.

SO likewise, if it becomes the holy and glorious Example, which our Lord Jesus
Christ has given us in his blessed Life. For here-unto are we called, to walk
even as He walked, to be as He was in the World, to follow His Steps, who was
Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sin, etc. Mat xi 29 1 Pet ii. 21. 1 John ii 6. Heb vii. 26.
.

MOREOVER, Our Behavior must be such as becomes the blessed Promises and holy
Motives of the Gospel: the glorious Hopes which it would beget us to: the
direct Influence whereof is 2 Cor vii. 1. 2 Pet i. 4. 1 John iii 3.
to put us upon Purifying our selves as GOD is Pure; to be cleansing our selves
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of the
LORD; and that by them we might be made partakers of the Divine Nature, having
escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust.

TO conclude, Our Behavior must be such as becomes the fair Profession which
we make, the Vows that we are bro't under, the Means and long Day of Grace
which we enjoy. We must adorn our Profession, and walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith we are called, and consider what manner of Persons we ought to be, in
all holy Conversation and Godliness under our peculiar Advantages and Bonds.
Titus ii. 10. Ephesians iv. 1. 2 Pet. iii. 11.
.

THIS is the Behavior that we profess, and which Christianity calls for and
binds unto, as the genuine fruit of Internal Holiness, and the only sufficient
Test of it. By these holy Doctrines, Laws and Motives; by this Profession, bond
and means of Holiness, we must order our selves; Our looks, words, actions,
garb, deportment; our friendships, visits, discourses and relative Obligations;
our eating and drinking* our business and dealings; our civil Mirth,
recreations and diversions; at Home and Abroad; and then is our Behavior such
as becomes Holiness.

II. MORE particularly let us Enquire, What is the Behavior becoming Holiness
in Christian Women? There is that which is peculiarly obliging, decent and
ornamental to them. As Nature, and Custom, the public judgment of Nature and
Nations; so also the Holy Scriptures, do command and commend to them, an
Eminence in Modesty, reserve, purity, temperance, humility, truth, meekness,
patience, courtesy, affability, charity, goodness, mercy, compassion:
Discretion, prudence, Piety and Devotion, guarding, influencing, and shining
brightly forth in all.

IT is Your great Honor, that more is expected in your Behavior, of all that
is nicely Virtuous and Exemplary. How do we distinguish You by expecting of
You, that whatsoever things are honest and just, pure and lovely, of good
report and praise, that you do excel in all these things!

THE things that do not become Holiness, or that are contrary there-unto, are
doubly dishonorable and guilty in You, by the Estimation of the World: for
Instance, Lightness in Behavior, sensual lusts, wantonness and impurity,
boldness and rudeness, in Look, Word or Gesture; drinking, profaneness, malice,
railing, etc. How Odious are these things justly held in Women! More
Scandalous, though not more Guilt before GOD, than in Men! Save as there may be
the greater Rape committed on the Conscience of Decency, and the Reluctance of
native Shame; strengthened by a virtuous Education, and the Admonitions of the
Holy Word.

NOR is the Weakness of Sex any Indulgence really (whatever some may think or
grant) for any Vanities of Apparel, pride, impotent Envies, Censoriousness,
talkativeness, gadding, backbytings, or the like Evils; which look yet meaner
and viler in Men than in Women, and so seem an Exception from the Rule before
laid down: for all these too do leave a Stain and dishonor on the Persons that
can Stoop to 'em, though there be not a Prostitution to things of grosser
Turpitude.

LET Christian Women read from the Context. 1 Timothy ii. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Pet.
iii. 1, 2, etc.
Holy Scripture the Exemplary Behavior, which is expected from them: Scil,
That they adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety;
not with broider'd hair, or gold or pearls, or costly Arraye; (not affecting,
nor excessive in, bodily Ornaments) but which becomes Women professing
Godliness, with good Works: Not usurping authority, but learning in silence,
with all subjection: Continuing in faith, in charity, and holiness. Their
Conversation is required to be chaste, coupled with fear; their Adorning the
hidden Man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of
a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of GOD of great price: for after
this manner in old time, the Holy Women also who trusted in GOD adorned
themselves. Finally, In our Context They are warned and exhorted, Not to be
false Accusers, nor given to much wine; But to be sober, discreet, chaste,
keepers at home, good, tender, faithful and affectionate in their domestic
Relations; that the Word of GOD be not blasphemed.

THIS is that Behavior which the HOLY GHOST has prescribed unto Women as
becoming Holiness in them. The Price of this rare Person is, as Solomon says
above Rubies, She does every one Good and not Evil all the days of her life.
She Is diligent, charitable and beneficent. She stretches out her hands to the
poor, she reaches forth her Arms to the needy. Strength and Honor are her
Clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to come. She op'neth her Mouth with
Wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law of Kindness. She looks well to the ways
of her Household, and eats not the bread of Idleness. Her Children rise up
and call her Blessed, her Husband also and he praises her. Give her of the
fruit of her hands, and let her own Works praise her in the Gates. Prove. xxxi.
10. -- 31.

III. I PASS now to the Third Enquiry, which is, What is more Eminently
becoming Holiness in the Aged, and particularly in Aged Women? What is
peculiarly requisite in their Behavior?

I ANSWER, 1. All that has been already said is to be supposed in Them in a
Superior degree, so as to be Examples and Patterns, teaching and living Rules,
shining in all Gravity, Wisdom and Heavenliness; that their Presence and Words
may always command Veneration, Awe and respectful Attention from their Juniors,
and powerfully commend the Ways of Religion and Virtue to them.

2. MORE especially, the Aged should excel in the Spirit of Devotion, and lead
by their good Example in a devout, reverent and early Attendance on the Public
Worship of GOD. As Myriam and Deborah led the Dau'ters of Israel in the Praises
of GOD: or as Aged Anna departed not from the Temple. Indeed there are no
greater Ornaments in our Congregations for Worship, than the gracious Faces and
deportment of such religious Matrons; to whom under the Influences of the HOLY
SPIRIT the Beauty and Solemnity of our Assemblies is not a little owing, and
the Spirit of Devotion Propagated to the rising Generations. But here our
Defects oblige me to say more particularly,

THAT it is highly becoming Holiness in the Aged, that they let their Dau'ters
see them at the Table of Christ, walking like Elizabeth in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the LORD blameless. What a Miss-behaviour, and unseemly thing
is it, to see grave aged Persons leaving the House of GOD when that holy
Ordinance comes on! judging themselves not yet meet for that holy Approach with
the Faithful unto Christ! or confessing their Neglects of Preparation therefore
unto this Day! And if they have been of grave and laudable Deportment before
their Children and Household, what a Stumbling is it to them! an Excuse for
their staying away, esteemed sufficient by too many! and too often an effectual
Bar to them who are inclined to come! their Reverence to their Elders (surely
one of the worst Abuses that ever was of a thing so good, or of another good
life) restraining them from this plain piece of Duty and Obedience to GOD.

BUT besides these Public Devotions in the Church, a high Spirit of Devotion
should govern the Aged in their more private Conversation; in their Families
and occasionally among their Friends. They should let their Households see that
they neglect not their Closets; though what passes there let be Secret with GOD.
Religious Discourse must next Adorn the Aged Lips, and Edify the Family and
Visitors. The many Mercies of a past Life may suitably be often called to Mind;
the Snares of an evil World warned against; the need and good of Afflictions be
thankfully remembered; and Alsufficient Grace be frequently admired and adored
that carries the Children of GOD so well through them, and Legions of worse but
more smiling Temptations. The Aged Believer will be often looking back; now
making his abasing Reflections on an unprofitable Life past, (how little done
for GOD, how little fruit bro't forth, how much time and cost in effect lost,
and how full of Sin:) then with a brighter though it and face Adoring the Grace
that has been so long magnified to so unworthy a Creature: the Grace that has
waited on him unto all Long-suffering! that has so freely succored,
strengthened, preserved supplied him hitherto! that has pitied, pardoned,
restored him, and will finally Save him. The Aged in their pious and devout
Reflections, should be frequently leaving their Testimony behind them, with
those that are rising after them in their places, of the Goodness of the ways
of Religion, whereof they have made a happy Experiment; and of the Faithfulness
of GOD to them in all the Providence that have passed over them. Let 'em
declare what GOD has done for their Souls, how Pleasant the ways of Wisdom
have been found by them, and what Peace in the End of those Paths. They may
also say what they have Seen of Others, both the Righteous and the Wicked: that
they have been Young and now are Old, yet have they not seen the Righteous
forsaken, nor his Seed; that on the other hand, they have seen the Wicked
taking root, and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree, yet he passed away
and lo he was not; they have sought him and he could not be found. From a full
Conviction they may amply declaim on the vanity of this World, the Poverty of a
Portion in it, and the Emptiness of those flattering Temptations, which so
easily beguile and bewitch us: Few and Evil, at the best and longest, do they
find the days of the years of their Pilgrimage. Finally, Death and Eternity
should be the familiar subject of Aged Persons discourse. A natural
Entertainment for them, and from them, who are so near it. The proper Effect of
a daily Preparation, and the good Symptom of actual readiness.

TO close this Head, Let me from the excellent Words of the Psalmist show the
Aged, what the Devotional Reflections, Acknowledgments, Supplications and
Resolutions are, which become them: Psalm. lxxi. 5. -- 14, -- 18. Thou art my
Hope, O Lord GOD, thou art my Trust from my Youth. By thee have I been holden
up from the Womb; Thou art He that took me out of my Mothers Bowels; my Praise
shall be continually of thee. -- Cast me not off in the time of Old Age,
forsake me not when my Strength fails. -- But I will hope continually, and
will yet Praise thee more and more. My Mouth shall show forth thy
Righteousness, and thy Salvation all the day: for I know not the Numbers
thereof. I will go in the Strength of the Lord GOD, I will make mention of thy
Righteousness, even of thine only. O GOD, thou have taught me from my Youth,
and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous Works: Now also when I am old and
grey-headed, O GOD, forsake me not! Thus should the Aged excel in the Spirit of
high Devotion: to which Head I might also reduce this which follows,

3. IT is highly becoming Holiness in Aged Persons, that they take all
Occasions fitting, Privately to instruct, counsel, admonish, countenance and
encourage Younger People, especially their Families, in the ways of GOD. Their
Years give 'em Authority, their Experiences may greatly accomplish them, their
Wisdom and Discretion will direct and Preserve them therein. I said, Days
should Speak, and Multitude of Years should teach Wisdom: Scil, to Younger
People, like my self, said wise Elihu before his Fathers. With the Ancient
should be Wisdom, and in length of days Understanding, Job. xii. 12. And one
Eminent Use of it is to advise the Younger of small Experience.

THEREFORE says our Context, Let the Aged Women be Teachers of good things.
Scil, let 'em teach the Young Women, to be Sober, to love their Husbands, to be
discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, Obedient, etc. Aged People should in
their respective Places so far imitate the Apostle, Paul the Aged, as to be
able to say of their Families, as he did to the Churches: 1 These. ii. 11, 12.
As ye know how we Exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of You, as a
Father does his Children, that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you
unto his Kingdom and Glory. Let the Aged be imparting Liberally their Prayers,
Blessings, Reproofs, and Spiritual Experiences among their Offspring: As long
as they are in this Tabernacle, let 'em stir up those that are rising after
'em; knowing that they must shortly put it off, and that their time of
Usefulness is just at its End. This is truly becoming Holiness in them.

4. GRAVITY in Garb and Deportment is highly becoming Holiness in Aged Women.
It is a great Missbehaviour, and unbecoming Age, to affect Youth; or indulge in
it self the Modes, Liberties and Customs lawful and decent in Youth. Even the
World wont allow this, and less will Religion. It brings a Persons Prudence,
even where it does not her Grace into question. It lessens the Character, where
it does not lose it. Gravity to the Aged should be like Modesty to the Young,
never to be forfeited or trespassed on. The Air of Youth in Age is a Cloud and
Slur, even where there is much Wisdom and many Graces, bright Devotion and many
Excellencies conspicuous. It is a Blemish, makes a but in the Character, and
lessens Esteem. GOD and Nature never meant these Extremes of Life to meet: that
it should be a Circle and at Seventy years the round should be begun again. A
Saint in Age should show a Soul above the Vanities of this Life and the
Pleasures of Sense, yea a Mind Mortified to them. As old Barzillai excused
himself to his Prince, that his Age forbad him the pleasures of the Court: let
young Chimham take 'em, said he, for how long have I to live? let me return to
the Grave of my Father. 2 Samuel xix. 34. One would not dress Airily, nor trip
with levity, to one's Grave: No, but look toward it and meet it with all
possible Gravity and Awfulness. Elder People should rather Wear their gray
hairs as their Ornament, and (if I might say so) make 'em their Pride; for as
Solomon truly says, Prove. xx. 29. The Glory of Young Men is their strength,
and the Beauty of the Old Man is the gray head.

5. THAT Aged Women may be in Behavior as becomes Holiness, they must take
heed to bear with Decency the Evils and Troubles that are Incident to Old Age,
and strictly watch against the peculiar Infirmities and Temptations, the common
Dishonours of it.

THESE Evils and Troubles are partly from within, as weaknesses, ails, pains,
and distempers of various kinds under the decay of Nature; or, which are more
trying, from without, -- neglects, disesteem, Insignificancy; or, which are yet
worse, Ingratitude, Undutifulness, and Wrongs. To bear all these with temper,
wisdom and resignation, from the views of another World, is noble Fortitude,
Divine Faith, and heavenly Greatness of Spirit. The height of Passive Glory, as
One calls it.

TO this Exemplary Resignation and Trust in GOD, -- to this Superiority over
the World, and the dearest and most obliged things in it, the desolate aged
Widow is often called: And we sometimes see 'em act this last and most
difficult part of Life in a truly Divine and Heroic manner: too Great and Wise
to seem to see what they bitterly suffer; and only thereby driven the more to
GOD, in Whom they may safely trust; and to Whom they may freely Weep and Pray.
SHE is the Primitive Widow indeed: desolate she trusts in GOD, and continues
in Supplications and Prayers night and day. 1 Timothy v. 5.

BUT then again, there are the Peculiar Infirmities, and common Dishonours of
old Age, which must be strictly watched against. Such are discontent and
frowardness, severity and censoriousness; together with a contempt and disdain,
if not Envy, of the Advantages or Worth of Younger Persons: and finally, which
one would least suspect, Covetousness, anxious cares, and fears for to Morrow;
distrust of Providence as well as Relatives. These are some of the Sins and
Guilts of Age; they are contrary to the Spirit of Holiness. These Errors
blemish your own Name, and dishonor Christ's; they break your Peace, your
Communion, your Walk with God; and so unfit You for the Meeting of Death with
that comfort and calm which you should desire and aim at. Therefore,

LET Aged People watch against Pevishness of Spirit, and a readiness to Suspect
their friends of Unkindness and want of respect. Watch against a Timorous
Spirit and distrust of Providence; fear of Want, and the natural Consequent
thereof, Coveteousness. Let 'em watch against Severity and Censoriousness; a
too rigid Expectation from their Youngers, or too severe Judgments of their
Innocent Liberties. Look not for your own gray hairs, on their green heads.

WATCH also against the Evil Spirit of Envying those that are rising, their
Gifts, their Applauses, and their time of Action and Use; for every Generation
will find some of their Own to magnifye, and to be served by; nor can Grace
endure that they be despised and crushed merely because Juniors in Years; when
often they Promise not to be so either in Wisdom or Grace, if GOD spare 'em to
be old, and they keep with Him.

THESE, and suchlike Temptations of Age, the advanced Believer must watch
against, if he would be in Behavior as becomes Holiness.

6. AND lastly, It is highly becoming Holiness in Aged Women, to see them of a
Beneficent, compassionate, condescending, obliging Spirit to their Poorer
Nei'bours, especially in Sicknesses and under any Troubles. Then courteously to
visit, assist, serve and help: to Wash the Saints feet if need were, and to be
ready unto every Good Work. Much of Pure Religion and Undefiled before GOD,
have we often seen in the Exemplary Humility, Courtesy, Charity, which
gracious Matrons of a Superior Rank, have readily shown in their Visits of this
nature to their Nei'bours in their Affliction. Their leisure time is thus
filled up with doing Good: their Age is no time of Idleness, -- Senes ut in
Otia tuta recedant. Hor. Sermon. Sat. Prim.
. Their Knowledge and Experience is thus profitably communicated, both for the
relief and help of Soul and Body, as occasion offers. Their friendly
Countenance and Sympathies are relieving to the Afflicted, to whom pity should
be shown: But more the distribution of their Alms together with their courteous
Words, if they are Rich and have wherewith to give.

TO say the truth; We scarce ever see the Apostles PRECEPTS to the Romans more
brightly Exemplifyed, than in some of our Grave and Good Mothers: Scil, Love
without dissimulation; the being kindly Affectioned; in Honor preferring
others; showing Mercy with cheerfulness: Abhorring that which is evil; cleaving
to that which is Good; fervent in Spirit, Patient in Tribulation, instant in
Prayer: distributing to the necessity of Saints, given to Hospitality,
rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with them that weep: not minding
high things, but condescending to them of low degree. Romans xii 9, -- 16.

THIS is a glorious fruit of Age and growth in Grace. A Life worthy to be
Prolonged, or even to be Restored, if it pleased GOD, like that of Tabitha's:
who was such a Woman, full of good Works and Alms-deeds which she did; whom
when she was dead -- how did her Nei'bours Praise and bless! and the needy
Widows, whom she had relieved, stood weeping over her! but GOD at the Prayer of
Peter gave them back the Blessing which they had Mourned themselves bereaved
of: He called the Saints and Widows and presented Her alive! Act. ix. 41.

IN Short; This beneficent Spirit (to use the Words of an Excellent Author)
will make a Woman a Mother to many when she ceases to bear, and though she no
more increases one Family, she supports many. Never may we write her Barren,
who is so fruitful in good works! the Orphans are her Children, and their Loins
bless her! in These -- Sing O barren! thou that did never bear! GOD's Grace
and Spirit in thee is better than ten Sons. Certainly, the fertility of the
Womb is not so valuable as this of the Bowels. Fruitfulness can be but a
Happiness, Compassion is a Virtue.

THUS I have endeavored to show something of that Behavior which becomes
Holiness in Aged People; more especially in aged Women. The last Enquiry is,

IV. WHY are They Eminently obliged to be of such Behavior?

I ANSWER, 1. Because Improvement and Excellence may well be expected in Age.
The Aged have had time for Growth, and a long day of Grace under Means and
Advantages. Suffer me also to suppose of them, that they were wro't upon in
their Younger days by the Spirit of GOD, and that they are grown Old in the
Service of Christ. More has been done for them than for Others, more Pains
taken with them, more have been their Opportunities; and in some proportion now
more should be the ripe fruits of Holiness brought forth by 'em, meet for the
Hand that has so long manured, dressed and tendered them. While we look on your
hoary heads, we must needs suppose and say, Behold, they are white already to
the Harvest.

2. BECAUSE of the Influence of Their Example. They give a Judgment for Vice or
Vanity upon Experience, if they are vicious, light or frothy. Younger People
are apt eno' to learn Evil of 'em, and they invite them to do so. Children are
very nice Observers of the Liberties which their Parents and Superiors give
themselves, and prone to Imitate: Especially from the defects of those whom
they reverence as People of Virtue and Religion, to take a License, and justify
themselves therein. For, would so grave and gracious and strict a Person do so,
say they, if there were any Evil in it?

3. THE Temptations of the World are past with the Aged, and therefore Holy
Behavior may be expected more especially of them. Shall they Sin on Stupidly
without Temptation? and dream on in the ways of Sin and Sense without
Enjoyment, without Taste, and desire failing? The World can no longer flatter
them with its Promises and Prospects of Pleasures, Profits and Glories, as when
they were Younger. Their blood is chilled in their Veins, their Senses and
Relishes decayed. Can I discern between (Sensitive) good and evil? said Aged
Barzillai, Can thy Servant taste what I eat or what I drink? Can I hear any more
the Voice of Singing men and Singing women?

SENSUAL lusts, the flames of Youth, are quenched by the Ice of Age, or gone out
for want of Ezel. In the Involuntary Mortification of these, Nature may seem at
last not only to cease its Reluctance against, but to come in to the Assistance
of Grace. And now what manner of Exemplary Behavior may we not expect from
such, who are thus advanced by Years above the fatal Temptations of Youth and
middle Age, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life! who are past the
World and its Snares by the very Testimony of their Senses.

4. ELDER People are so near their End, so soon to dye, and to give up their
great Account, that surely they above any should be very careful about their
Behavior. Waiting for their Lord, getting into actual Readiness for their
Summons hence; wise and wakeful, and trimming their Lamps. The Certainty of
their near approach to Death, should quicken them to more than ordinary
Caution, Watchfulness and Diligence. To be every day, as they would have Death
find and not Surprise 'em. This was Barzillai's Guard and Motive; How long have
I to live --? and what at this Age have I to do but to be Meditating my descent
to the Grave of my Father? let me retire then and spend the few remaining days
in the most fixed Preparations for a better World.

5. ELDER People should Eminently be in behavior as becomes Holiness, as much
as may be to repair the Omissions, defects and transgressions of a past Life.
These are too many, and sad to reflect on, even where there has been the
greater Circumspection, Industry and Labors. And the most faithful Servant
will most sensibly confess his great Unprofitableness. The loss of past time
and Opportunities lies heavy on a gracious heart. Omissions are a grievous
Article of guilt, in a gracious Saints Accounts. And his Inference is, Then let
me redeem and improve the few days to come, with so much the more Zeal! let me
lose no more of this short Life! let me fill up the poor Remains with more and
better Works! Knowing the Time, that now it is high-time, to awake out of Sleep.

6. AND lastly, Elder People should Emimently etc. Because it is the way to arm
themselves against the Disadvantages and Infirmities of Age, and the natural
Fears of Death.

HOLINESS is the best defense and protection of Age, under its natural
Weaknesses, and Inevitable decays. It carries People above Expectations from
this World, and raises 'em in the desires and Hopes of a better. It Enables
them to resign any further Pretensions here below, and with a Nobleness of Soul
to leave these Inferior things to Others. It fortifies unto, and exercises it
self in Patience before GOD, as to all present Trials. It claims and even
forces Reverence from others, and covers a Multitude of faults to which Age is
incident. It is Elijahs Mantle cast over his Passions, and the Translation of
the Saint is expected and attended with the utmost Honors.

BUT then as to Death's Terrors nothing tends to prevent and take away these
like this Holy Behavior. Blessed are those Servants whom the LORD when He
comes shall find so doing! and if He come in the second Watch, or come in the
third Watch and find them so, Blessed are those Servants. Luke xii. 38. Like
Old Aaron Numb xx 26.
unclothing himself in the Mount, there to die; so may we hope that the Aged
waiting Believer may be willing to be Unclothed: Or like the Apostle 1 Timothy iv.
6. 2 Cor. v. 2. Phil i. 23.
ready to be Offered, groaning earnestly to be clothed upon, and having a
desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.

IT now remains to make some brief IMPROVEMENT, and it shall be in these three
USES.

I. TO Admonish and Awaken the Wicked in Age.

II. TO Quicken and Encourage Aged Saints in the Ways of Holiness.

III. TO Exhort Younger People to the Reverence of Aged Saints, and to Imitate
them in all holy Behavior betimes.

I. THE first USE may be, to admonish and awaken the Wicked in Age. Whoever
they be that are Old and Graceless, Old and Vicious.

ENTREATING You as Fathers, yet let me lay before you the Rebukes of GOD. If
Holiness be so becoming the Aged, then how Unseemly, how Aggravated, how
Dangerous is your State of Sin? With what Blushes, with what Tears should I
bespeak you, or You hear what has been already said? With what fear and
trembling should you look back on a Life of Sin, not yet begun to be repented
of? And with what Horror should you look forward into a Miserable Eternity, if
you die in this State? And yet every Night may you look that your Soul may be
required!

SURELY You should Instantly bewail your long Aggravated Habits of Sin, and
Contempts of the Gospel; and seek earnestly to CHRIST, if you may be renewed
once at length unto Repentance! if possibly you may be forgiven! if yet free
Grace may be magnified toward You!

AH! What a Curse to ones Self, and what a Woe to the World, is a Life advanced
in Vice, and spent in Ungodliness! The Sinner an hundred years Old is but the
more Accursed. Isa. lxv. 20. The Reflections of this Person must needs be very
bitter, and his Prospect before him proportionably sad. His Bones are full of
the Sins of his Youth, and his Conscience of the remembrance of their dire
Guilts.

WHAT a grim Face will Death have to Morrow to the old Impenitent Sinner! It
Stares dreadfully upon him that is never so Young, but what Flames are in its
Eyes as it seises the Aged, in Sin! What Legions of Guilts committed from the
days of Youth and upward, will come in Arraye! the black Guard and Train that
attends the King of Terrors in that Execution! How many more, and much sorer
lashes of Conscience, suppose ye, must he undergo, who from his Childhood has
been trampling the Gospel, the Blood of CHRIST with His Authority under foot!
Always resisting, grieving, quenching, and doing despite to the SPIRIT of
Grace! Had he died thus in Youth he had been chastis'd with cruel whips, but
now with what Scorpions!

O THEN, My Fathers, Let me beseech you in the Bowels of Christ to bethink your
selves as You are going off the Stage, of your wretched fearful State. If Death
should Serve its Arrest on you to day, where would you be? What would become of
your precious Souls? and whither would you go? Ask your selves --. Has your
Behavior been, or is it through Grace as becomes Holiness? And if not --, Can
you hope to See GOD? Or can you bear to be rejected, Accursed of Him? With what
Sorrow must you ly down at last, no new Birth having past upon you! How will
you rise to Judgment with these Complicated Guilts upon you! Should you go on
in Sin with these trembling Knees! stooping, crouching, and at last sinking
under the loads of Guilt! What a Shame are vicious Inclination,
Inconsideration, and supine Forgetfulness of your Souls at your Years! And how
Astonishing is the Hazard you stagger on in! Yet at last Remember, seek and
submit to your long forgotten Savior, and his Alsufficient Grace.

BUT I must take leave; lost in this Maze of Misery, and willing to pass out of
it, to a Second USE, more comfortable and pleasant; which is,

II. TO Quicken and Encourage Aged Saints in the Ways of Holiness. O how
Becoming, how good and pleasant is it to see you here! to see your Devotion, to
sit at your feet and hear your Wisdom!

YOU do not Live Useless now you're Old: You do not cumber the Earth: No, but
are its Ornaments and Blessing. You are the Salt, you are the Light of the
World: without You it would be Unsavory and full of darkness.

WE bless GOD, who has shown such Grace to Men! that any live to adorn the
Doctrines of CHRIST to this length and degree. It is like that Infinite Bounty
and gracious Care for our World, which has placed so many Bodies and Stars of
light in the visible Heavens, that from Generation to Generation it may be
Enlightened by their Beams, warmed cherisht and Enricht by their Influences.

IF You are Old in Grace, then GOD has greatly Glorified Himself in and from
You: the Power of his Grace, and the Riches of his Mercies have been Magnified
toward You: the Immutability, Freeness and Sufficiency thereof. You have lived
to the Edification of others: been Benefiting the World, by your Example,
Prayers, Services and good Works. The Good of your own Souls has been all the
while abundantly consulted and promoted: You have made rich Advances, we hope,
and grown Strong in the Grace of the Lord Jesus. You may know more (its likely)
than many of your Teachers of a life of Communion with GOD: and be arrived to
some happy Measures of Assurance. Great also is your Reward in Heaven, after a
long Service to your Savior here on Earth: Not having been Weary of well
doing, in due Season you shall Reap; and that not Sparingly, if you sow
Plentifully. If you have been recovered late from a Course of Sin, the more
have you to admire, with deep abasement, of the Exceeding Power and riches of
Soverain Mercy; and the more be quickened to the further working out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling.

BE Exhorted to hold on and Persevere in Holy Living; trusting in and casting
your self upon that free Grace, which You have already so much Experienced.
Pray for and Bless the Generations rising after You. Impart Your Spiritual
Experiences, Charges and Counsels among them. Freely You have received, freely
Give.

AS to Your Selves, -- Be neither weary of Life, nor afraid to die: but Live
expecting your Change, and believe in GOD to carry You well through it. GOD has
done for You more Already, than all that remains to be done, in order to Your
happy passing the Gulf of death. He that has kept You in Life, and shown You
Grace; will not now at last leave You in Death. His Rod and his Staff have
comforted You thus long, and what Evil can you now fear? will these be removed
(think you) just as you are entering the Shadow of death? O thou of little
Faith, wherefore do thou doubt!

TO conclude this Exhortation: Be thankful for Life, resigned as to Death, and
let the last part be best Acted, if it may be; that You may pass off the Stage
with Decency and Honor. As Nature grows past Worldly and Secular Action,
remember You are the more at Liberty for, and called off unto, the Exercises of
the Spiritual Life. As Mr. Baxter exhorts the Aged, -- "Cleave closer than Ever
to Christ, being presently to be cast upon Him as your Savior, and to appear
before Him as Your Judge. As the Body withers, let your Souls retire to Him, as
the Root of your Spiritual Life, which is hid with Christ in God.

III. LET the last USE be of Direction and Exhortation to Younger People, to
Reverence Holiness in their Elders, and to Imitate them therein betimes.

1. HONOR their Persons with double honor: paying both the Respect which is
due to their Age, and also the Veneration due to the Grace of GOD crowning them
in it. Internal Esteem and Love, together with External respects, are due to
them whom GOD has so Enobled in their Souls and dignified. Even Pharaoh paid a
Reverence unto Jacobs venerable Face, and received a Blessing from his lips.
Much more did Joseph hastily descend from his Princely Chariot, to bow down to
his feet Solomon rose from his Throne to meet and bow himself before his Royal
and Gracious Mother, who had so well taught and charged Him, after She had born
Him. The Form of Aged Samuel is hence represented (no matter by whom) as the
Visage of the Gods: said the Woman to Saul, I saw Gods ascending, -- An Old Man
and covered with a Mantle, -- and Saul stooped with his face to the ground and
bowed.

2. LET Young People Imitate the Holy Behavior of the Aged betimes. This is
the only sure way to be like them in Holiness, if you live to be Old. Lay a
good foundation: begin early: it is hard to change hereafter. Vice roots and
fixes it self by Indulgence in Youth: Custom in Sin hardens, and Age stupefyes.
If we would ever be Old in Grace, it must be found in us while we are Young:
for One converted in Age is but a Young Saint; old in years but New born; Born
again, it is true, but out of due time.

TO Us who are Young GOD has exhibited his Grace in those that are gone or
going before us, to excite us to seek it Emulously for our selves, to be our
Guide and Guard through life, and our Crown at the end of it, as it is theirs. So
live we therefore now, treading in their steps wherein they have followed
Christ, that We may be (by the same Grace of GOD) to the next Generations,
should we live, what These are to us; Our Glory and Joy, our defense and
safety, the Ornament and Munition of the Church.

LET us retain in Mind their Excellencies, and bury their Infirmities; not
taking our Judgment of them from their present Decays, but their past Use and
Services, and their abiding growing Devotion.

LET us Pray for them, how much soever our Superiors in Gifts and Graces; and
return their cries to Heaven for us, in humble Requests for their final
Perseverance. Let us desire and ask the Continuance of such ancient Blessings.
Let the World never be weary of these Monuments of the Presence of GOD in it,
and His Image continued on it. Let us pray to the GOD of the Spirits of all
flesh, that He would take of His Spirit on His Moses and Aarons, and put it
upon many Others; that there may be a Succession of Holy Saints in the
Generations to come, Joshuas and Calebs in future times, to sit in Moses Seat,
and Shine in his Grace. Let us even bless our Elders, and ask for them a Growth
in all Goodness unto their latest hour, and the Consolations of the SPIRIT of
GOD to be increased to them; that like a Taper which has seemed long a going
out, giving its uncertain broken flashes now and then, They may in their last
Moments revive, and give the brightest light of all.

FINALLY, When GOD takes away His Aged Saints, let those that Survive weep for
themselves in their Death. Though they die in a good Old Age, and as Corn full
ripe are gathered into the Garner; yet our Loss is great in their Infinite
Gain: the loss of their Example, and Faith, and Prayers. Isai. iii. 1, 2. For
behold, the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, does take away from Jerusalem and from
Judah -- the PRUDENT, and the ANCIENT.

IT is such a Bereavment of this Town, in the Decease of the Excellent Mrs.
FOSTER, whose Mourning we wear to day, that has led me to these Meditations.

AN Aged GENTLEWOMAN, Who was from Her Youth up, in Her whole Behavior, in
every Relation and State of Life, in the Height of Prosperity, and in the
depths of Adversity, as becomes Holiness.

A BRIGHTER and more Amiable Pattern is scarce to be found in an Age, of High
Devotion, Gravity, Prudence, Humility, Courtesy, Compassion, and Beneficence.

I SHALL by no Means attempt Her Character, but I propound Her Life to You all
that knew Her, as a much better Sermon on my Text, than I am able to bring You.
And how much harder and more Excellent is it to Live these Rules than to Preach
'em!

I AM Glad to say, That through the Grace of GOD we have Many other Gracious
Matrons of Exemplary Sanctity Surviving, and Some Restored to us lately from
the Brink of the Grave; the LORD Continue (...) long to His Glory, and Increase
Their Numbers and Graces, and raise up many of Our Dau'ters, of every Rank; and
more especially so Adorn the very Virtuous DAU'TERS of the Deceased; that They
may fill up Her Place, and Shine in Her Spirit, and Transcribe Her Exemplary
Life.

LET THIS be the Testimony of Your Filial Honor and Veneration, which Ruth
paid to Her Gracious MOTHER-IN LAW, by Whose Holy Behavior She had been won to
GOD: Ruth. i. 16, 17. Entreat me not to leave Thee, or to return from following
after Thee: for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest I will
lodge: Thy People shall be my People, and thy GOD my GOD: where thou die,
will I die, and there will I be buried: the LORD -- forbid it, that even Death
it self should part Us.

FINIS.

