A Sort of BELIEVERS NEVER SAVED. OR, The Danger of Miscarrying in Point of
SALVATION, by a false Ineffectual Faith; a Faith having no Root; whereby Many
Professors either fall away after Hopeful Beginnings; or Miss of Heaven in the
Height of their Hopes. The Substance of Two SERMONS; Part of the Opening and
Applying the Parable of the Sower, and the Seed that fell on the Rock, Luke
viii. 13.

Preached at Lynn, in the County of Essex, N. E. By J. SHEPARD.

Published at the Request of some of the Inhabitants of the Town, for the
Benefit of others in the Place.

1 Cor. xiii. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith: Prove your
own selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
Except ye be Reprobates.

BOSTON: Printed by B Green: Sold by Eleazer Phillips at his Shop under the
Townhouse in the Kings Street. 1711.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
WHAT is here Emitted in the Subsequent Pages, was never Preached to be
Printed, but only to be Succeeded with Prayers, for an Impression upon the
Hearts of the Hearers: and Published to Gratify such Pious well Affected
Persons, who having received some fruit and benefit thereby themselves; were
willing to be at Expenses in Publishing what is here presented, with a single
aim at the Profit of their Neighbors: and that the Seed sown might yet produce
more Fruit, to the Glory of God.

The Author would have been very well Satisfied and Contented, if the Ensuing
Sheets had been lodged in silence, with the Rest of his Useless Manuscripts, as
being sensible, that what is Exposed to Public View (though the best Ends be
aimed at) is Exposed to the Cavils and Censures of such, who Read only to Pass
their Verdict upon the Worth or Weakness of the Author; rather than for any
Edification or Profit.

But since (through Grace) the Seed has fallen upon some Good Ground, and
Prospered; as it does abundantly Compensate the Barrenness of the other Sorts
of Soil; So it does arm against the Reflections of those, who are wont to
Redicule the Foolishness of Preaching: Remembering also the Obligations I lie
under to a kind People, whom I have Served in the Gospel of Christ upwards of
Thirty Years; and who may justly Challenge any of my Poor Labors, for their
Rewards.

Upon these Grounds, what has been Publicly delivered, could not Reasonably
be denied a farther Publication; Especially the Subject Insisted on (though
weakly managed by the Author) yet it is of the greatest Importance in these
Latter, Declining, Apostatizing Days; wherein (as our Savior has foretold,
Luke 18.8.) That Faith shall scarce be found on Earth; and wherein most are so
besotted to the Earth, that they are miserably bewildered in their way to
Heaven: Ignorance, Atheism, Error and Epicurism besot the World: Millions are
born into the World, they know not Why, nor for what End; They live in the
world they care not How, nor after what Manner; and they go out of the World
they know not Whether, or to what Place. Millions of miserable Souls live as if
they had no SOULS they have somewhat (it may be) for this Life; but what have
they to build on, for ETERNITY* Souls they have, that must live for Ever; but
no Preparation for Life and Happiness for Ever; All have Souls to Save, but few
have Salvation for them; an Eternity to Pass through; but nothing to bear their
Charges in that Endless Duration and Ages without End.

If any among these Dark Mountains here below, should chance to Stumble upon
the Jailors Question, and cry out, What shall we do to be Saved? Why what is
here offered, may Contribute something, which (with Gods Blessing) may Prove an
Answer in due Season by directing to a Saving and Effectual Faith in Christ,
the only Condition of Salvation; and Detecting a false Counterfeit Faith,
whereby Multitudes of Professors run themselves upon the Rocks;
making-Shipwrack of Faith and a Good Conscience; and so miscarry in point of
Salvation: that Believe but never are Saved; and miss of Heaven in the Height
of their Hopes.

Now that those that have Published, Heard, or may Count it worth their
Leisure, to Peruse what is here Emitted; and that the Seed of Faith may take
Rooting in them all; that they all may be begotten unto a lively Hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead; and that such may have a standing
in Grace, and be built up in their most Holy Faith, and not fall away from
their stedfastness, like the stony Ground, in the Hour of Temptation; And the
Good Lord Grant unto us all at last an Inheritance, among them, that are
Sanctified by Faith in Christ: is the Ardent Prayer and Request of the most
Unworthy Servant of Christ, in the Fellowship of the Gospel.

Lynn. April 3d. 1711. J. SHEPARD.

A Sort of BELIEVERS Never Saved, OR, The Danger of Miscarrying, in Point of
SALVATION; by a false Ineffectual Faith; A Faith having no Root.
LUKE, VIII. 13. They on the Rock are they, which, when they Hear, Receive the
World with Joy; and these have no Root; which for a while Believe; and in time
of Temptation fall away.


OUR Blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, the Great Prophet of his Church; and the
Apostle and high Priest of our Profession, was wont to reveal the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven in Parables; and in Parables to utter things, that have
been kept Secret from the Foundation of the World. Great truths were thus
Parabolically Delivered, Enigmatical and hard to be understood and discerned; a
singular judgment upon Gospel-Despisers for their Contumacious Infidelity;
Least at any time, they should see with their Eyes* and hear with their Ears;
understand with their-Hearts; and should be Converted and Healed; Our Savior
therefore spoke to them in Parables; and without a Parable Spoke He not unto
them, Matt. 13.15. But who is wise shall understand these things; Prudent, and
he shall know them. These Mysteries (though Mystically Revealed) the true
Followers and Disciples of Christ shall be instructed in them.

Our Savior (in the Chapter, wherein you find our Text) observing the
Infidelity and Unfruitfulness of great Numbers of his Hearers and Followers; He
puts forth a Parable admirably adapted to the Purpose; to set forth the various
Efficacy of the Word (the Seed of Faith) upon four several Sorts of Hearers,
viz. By the Parable of the Sower, and the Seed, that fell upon four several
Sorts of the Ground; the High Way, the Stony Ground, the Thorny Ground, and the
Good Ground.

The Parable is (1) Propounded v. 5, 6, 7, 8. (2) Expounded in our Text and
Context.

In our Text, under the Parable of the Seed that fell on Stony Places (or on
the Rock) our Savior Detecting a Sort of Hearers, upon whom the Word (the Seed
of Faith) falling, it had two notable Effects. (1) Moving the Affections [ When
they Hear they Receive the Word with joy.] (2) Operating Faith. [ Which for a
while Believe.] The Seed of the Word, Received with Joy, Produced this Fruit. [
Faith] Which Fruit is Described three ways in our Text.

1. From its Sprouting and Springing: It Sprang from a Sudden Pang and Flash of
Joy in Hearing.

2. From its Lasting and Continuing: they Believe for a while, and indeed it
was but for a While: it was not long and lasting.

3. From its Wasting and Withering, Occasioned by the Scorching Sun of
Temptation. [ In the Time of Temptation they fall away.] So Mat. 13.6. When the
Sun was up, they were Scorched: and the Reason is Rendered; Because they had in
Root, they withered away.

So in our Text [These have no Root; Which for a while Believe, etc.] Their
Faith was not well bottomed, well Rooted, but like the Seed, that fell on the
Rock, where possibly there was some Earth, on the Top of the Rock; or Worked
into the Roots of the Rock: but no depth of Earth: Hence the Roots being
Shallow, when the Sun arose, the moisture was soon dried up; and the Sprouting
soon turned to Withering.

So it was with the Seed of Faith, that fell upon these Hearers; there was some
shallow Earth, but the Rock at the Bottom; the Heart Unbroken, Unhumbled,
Unsubdued; hence the Seed had some Sprouting but took no Rooting: Their flashy
affections, in Hearing the Word, had no Principles, to maintain them; therefore
came to nothing. The Root of the matter was not in them: they wanted depth of
Earth: The Plough had not gone deep enough; and therefore, though the Earth were
good and the Seed good; yet not being well covered, it miscarries: Exoriuntur
sed Exuruntur: the Roots are burnt up, like the Wicked, Job 18.16. His Roots
are Dried up beneath; and above his Bud is cut off.

Thus we see what becomes of the Faith of the Stony Ground Hearers: they had a
Faith; but not being well Bottomed and Rooted, it was not Sound and Saving:
they fell away and missed of Heaven, in the Height of their Hopes,
notwithstanding their Faith.

Admist the many Truths, that are Deducible from this Text, we are to take
notice of this one; from those Words, [ Who for a while Believe; and in time of
Temptation fall away.]

DOCTRINE. There is a Believing, or a Faith which many that Sit under the
Hearing of the Word Preached, may attain unto, that is not Sound and
Effectually Saving; or notwithstanding which, Persons may fall away and
Miscarry in Point of Salvation.
There is a believing or a Faith which many attain unto, through a Delight in
Hearing the Word Preached; who yet miscarry in Point of Salvation: So it was
with the Stony Ground, they Heard the Word with Delight; they Received it with
joy; which Produced a Faith [the Genuine Fruit of Hearing the Word, For Faith
comes by Hearing, Romans 1.16.] And when Faith Springs from Delight in Hearing
the Word; Such persons are ready to think themselves in a sure and safe Estate;
and that their Faith is well bottomed, they bid fair for Heaven: But even such
may be Deceived and miscarry in the great Point of Salvation, for want of
laying a good Foundation; there being nothing of the Work of Humiliation: they
never went to the Bottom, to break the Rock at the Heart: Saving Faith has
Humiliation laid for its Foundation, When Faith arises only from a Flash of
Delight in Hearing the Word, it is but a Counterfeit and not Lasting. Many
Apostates have had many meltings and much Sudden strong joy: So had those
Stony Ground Hearers; but it amounted not to Saving Faith. They had some flight
Knowledge of Christ, their affections were stirred; their understandings were
gilded over with a Common kind of Supernatural Light, ( Heb. 6.4.) but not to a
Transmentation. They were Elevated in Hearing the Word; and had some Ascensions
upwards, in their Affections; but were like Meteors hanging a while in the air,
not having strength enough to ascend to the upper Region: Hence they soon
vanish: their Faith fails and comes to nothing.

The Word [ The Seed of Faith] in the Parable, falls upon four Sorts of Ground;
but it takes Rooting in but One. The Good Seed, if not cast into the Good
Ground, it yields no Harvest. The Word [ The Seed of Faith] it miscarry's in
most: It is trampled upon by the High Way Hearers; and the Devil Cashiers it:
the Devil comes and picks the Word out of their Hearts; lest they should
Believe and be Saved, v. 12. The Seed of Faith in others soon withered and
scorched up; as in the Stony Ground: Faith in others is chocked and stifled; as
in the Thorny Ground; Eminently with those three Chokers, the Cares, and Riches
and Pleasures of the World.

The Seed of Faith Prospers only in the Good Ground: there, though small and as a
Grain of Mustard-feed, it grows and flourishes to Life Eternal.

It had some fair Beginnings in the Stony Ground and Thorny Ground; there were
some motions, some meltings and some Good Affections, some Breathings in
Prayer; and Delight in Ordinances; as in Hearing the Word, etc. Here were fair
Beginnings! So it is with many. Oh! see how far a man may go; and yet be never
the near after all. The Stony and the Thorny Ground were nearer to the nature
of the Good Ground, than that of the High Way; and yet no Fruit of Faith: they
fell Short of Heaven. They had some sproutings of Faith, a sort of Faith; but
yet far short of Saving: they attained to a Faith but yet (our Text tells us,)
They fell away, and missed of Salvation.

It is not Every Faith, that is Saving: there are many that attain to a Faith;
but yet never obtain the End of their Faith. It is a most certain Truth, That
there are many Believers that shall never be Saved; for all Faith in the Name
of Christ is not sound and saving. It is true, it is granted, that Faith or
Believing is the Gospel Condition of Salvation, Joh. 3.16.36. Act. 16.31. Mark.
16.16. He that Believes shall be Saved, but he that Believes not shall be
Damned. Faith and Salvation are inseparably Connected; and without Faith there
is no Salvation. This is the Hinge of our Salvation: Here is the Condition of
Life under the new Covenant: The Covenant of Grace is, Believe and Live;
Believe and be Saved. Faith is the Condition; but then you had need look to
your Faith, that it be of the Right Stamp: a Faith of the Operation of God; for
Every Believing is not Saving: there are many that Believe and are Damned; as
well as others that Believe and are Saved. Great Numbers Pretend to Faith; and
Hold up a Head of Profession; but there are many Professors that are no
Believers; and many Believers, that have not Faith; and many, that have Faith,
that miss of Heaven.

Many there are of Great Profession, that Live and Dye in strong Delusion; and
miss of Heaven in the Height of their Hopes; being mistaken, as to the
Foundation of their Faith. There are many in Hell, that have had a Presumptuous
Confidence that they should get to Heaven: Praesumendo Sperant and Sperando
Pereunt: Many Damned, that have been Persuaded, they should be Saved: there are
many, that go believing to Hell; their Eyes never opened till shot into the
other World.

Many grow bold in an Ignorant Sottish Conceit of their good Estate, because of
some good affections; and because they have some slighter Experiences, though
unsound: some taste of the good Word of God and a Faith, that has sprung from
a Delight in Hearing the Word: they have Received the Word with joy; as the
stony Ground; which for a while Believe; and yet miscarry at last and miss of
Heaven; their Faith being not the Faith of Gods Elect; as wanting its true
Object, and a Good Foundation, having no Root; and therefore cannot stand in
the Day of Trial, against the Burning Tempest and Floods of the Wrath of God to
come: those scorchings will wither up their shallow Roots.

But for a more methodical Proceeding, in the management of the Truth in Hand
briefly.

I. We shall Confirm the Truth from Scripture, by Proving, That there is a
Believing that is not Saving.

II. Discover what Sorts of Believers those are, that miscarry in Point of
Salvation; or that do not Effectually Believe.

III. What Sorts of Faith, such attain unto.

IV. What be the Flaws and Defects in their Faith; whence it Proves ineffectual.

V. I shall briefly lay down, The Signs of an unsound; and the Nature of a
Sound and Saving Faith: which may lead on to some suitable Application.

I. For Confirmation; The Scriptures of Truth tell us, that there are many
Believers, That shall never be Saved: Our Text produces an instance in the
stony Ground Hearers, they were called Believers: they had a Faith, yet that
their Faith was not Sound and Saving; as appears from the last Clause of the
verse, [ In time of Temptation they fell away.] There is a Believing, that does
not put the Subjects into a state of Salvation: many may be Believers on the
Name of Christ; and yet not true and effectual Believers; as many Believed,
when they saw the Miracles which he did; and yet were short of Saving Faith,
Joh. 2.23: Men may believe on Christ with some kind of Faith; and yet never be
Accepted and Entertained by Christ with his Peculiar Love; and Consequently
never Saved.

All Faith in the Name of Christ is not sound and saving: this truth is
confirmed also from other Scriptures: We read, Joh. 12.42, 43. Among the chief
rulers many Believed on him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess
him; for they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God; and
therefore Christ tells them, Joh. 5.44 That such a Believing could be no true
Faith. [ How can ye Believe, that receive honor, one of another*] See, Acts
4.4, 32. We read there of a great Multitude, that are called Believers, to the
number of about five Thousand; but yet there were in that crowd of Believers,
sundry that were unsound; as appears by the special instance of Ananias and
Saphira, Chap. 5. So, Act. 8.13. Its said (of that Sorcerer) That Simon himself
Believed; and was Baptized; but yet he had no true Faith; for ( v. 21.23.) his
heart was not right in the sight of God; we find him in the Gall of Bitterness;
and in the Bond of Iniquity. See, 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding Faith and a good
Conscience, which some having put away, concerning Faith have made shipwreck;
and therefore they were Bottoms, laden with some kind of Faith: they had of
that ware in their vessels; how else could they make shipwreck of it: So, 2 Timothy 1.5. The Apostle speaks of an Unfeigned, therefore there is a feigned
Faith, Jam. 2.14, 17. There is a Dead Faith there mentioned, which Saves not.
But thus the Scripture is frequent in the mentioning of a Faith that is not
Saving, Psalm. 78.34, 37. Isai. 48.1, 2.

II. We may Enquire, What Sorts of Believers those are that miscarry in Point
of Salvation; that do Believe, but not Effectually.

Omitting needless distributious.

A. They may be reduced to two Sorts.

1. Those that do only Outwardly Profess before men to Believe; that do conform
their outward man, to the ways of God; and take up a general formal Profession.
There are swarms of these especially, in all places, where Religion is in
Credit, men run with the crowd and do as orders do; they put on a visard of
Religion, a common show of it, without any Impression; or any Considerable
Impression upon their Hearts at all.

Indeed those in the Text went farther than thus; for they did not only seem,
Pretend and Counterfeit a Believing; but had some real Common work upon them:
But yet those others are in a large sense called Believers, that do make an
Outward Profession, as many do for fashions sake; out of Custom; Example of
others; to please men; to be well spoken of, to gain Credit, etc. though they
have no Love to God, nor his ways, in their Souls. So. Act. 8.13. So men go in
the crowd (as they from Egypt) these, in a large sense, are called Believers,
who seem before men to Believe, when all this while, there is no truth of Grace
in their Hearts. There is a great deal of seemingness in the World; and Every
Grace has its Counterfeit; and those that have no Grace, can for a while Look
and Live like Saints.

2. Another sort of Persons, who pretend to Faith; but fall short, are those,
That have some Impressions upon their Minds and Hearts, and do really believe
(and not only seem to do so) with some kind of Faith, which yet is not Saving
and Effectual: there is something, that looks like true Faith: they have some
kind of work wrought upon them; it is not a mere outward Seeming; they have
some kind of actings in their Minds and Hearts toward Christ; some stirrings
of Affections. Now how far this goes and discovers it self; take up in these
following particulars.

1. Men may take up a Profession of the Truth; and not only seemingly, but
Really: they may do as others do; be carried in the stream and crowd of
Professors, in the Place, where they are; attend Ordinances; take up the Name
of God and Christ, into their Mouths; seem to be Religious, Jam. 1.26. Say,
Lord, Lord; give an outward Honor to the ways of Christ; and yet fall short.

2. They may Believe the Truth of the Scriptures, at least in a general Way;
both know the Heads and Truths of Religion; and also Believe them; Believe that
Christ is the Son of God and Savior of the World. Men may believe the great
Truths concerning his Person, Natures, Offices, Benefits; The Mystery of his
Incarnation, His Birth, Crucifixion, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension,
Session at the Right Hand of God, and Intercession there, His coming to
Judgment; the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting. In a word; a
man may know all the Heads and Points and Principles of Religion; and Believe
all the Articles of the Christian Creed; and yet miscarry in Point of
Salvation, for want of Effectual Saving Faith.

A man may believe, that Christ is the Savior; and yet fall short of Saving
Faith; not having a distinct understanding of the way of closing with Christ in
his Offices, as the object of Faith: So they, Joh. 6.12. When they had seen the
Miracles, that Jesus did, Said, this is of a truth, that Prophet, that should
come into the world: they believed what was Prophesied concerning him; and that
he was the Great Prophet and Teacher sent of God; and so his Doctrine to be
true, and that he was indeed the Messiah, that was to come; and therefore they
believed on his Name: though they did not take up his Name aright. There was a
common work of Grace upon their Hearts: there was a general work of Conversion
wrought in them; but not Saving Faith: But hence they cry out; This is of a
Truth the Prophet that should come; and so; Joh 7.31. And many of the People
Believed on him, and said, when Christ comes will he do more Miracles than
these which this Man has done. These you see, had a Faith; and what they did
understand of Christ and of his Doctrine, they did believe it to be true. And
thus there are many, that do Assent to the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel:
they believe what the Scriptures say concerning Christ, and the way of
Salvation by Faith in him; but yet fall short of Saving Faith*

Man may be much Affected with and toward Christ, Receive his word with Joy;
They may extol, applaud hint; they may behold his Works and Miracles with
wonderment and joy in his word; as the Stony Ground, and cry out as they, Joh.
7.46. Never Man spoke as this Man* The word may rap them into a great esteem of
it, and an high Persuasion concerning the Glorious Truths delivered.

Never Sermon had such an Impression; never Preacher spoke like this Man! But
yet after such Raptures of Affection, such may fall away with the Stony Ground;
and believe but for a while.

4. They may be Forward and Earnest for a Time, in attending upon Christ, and
Seeking after him* As those, in the Text, Who for a while Believe: they may be
forwardest with the first, as the Seed in the Stony Ground; sprang up quickly
and forwardly. And there may be a great Zeal for the Name of Christ, as they
showed, Joh. 6.15, 24. They would come and take him by force, to make him a
King; and they followed him, whithersoever he went: they took Shipping and came
to Capernaum, Seeking for Jesus, v. 24.

Many others are zealously Affected, for the Name of Christ; and therefore have
a strong Faith and Confidence, that they shall be be accepted at that Day; as
appears by there Plea, Matt. 7.22. Many will say unto me in that Day, Lord,
Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils,
and in thy Name have done many wonderful Works. And yet notwithstanding their
forwardness and zeal, they fell short of Saving Faith; and missed of Heaven in
the Height of their Hopes; for Christ says to them, v. 23. I never knew you:
Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. And thus we have discovered what sorts
of Believers they are, that miscarry in Point of Salvation; that do Believe,
but not Effectually.

III. We may Enquire, What Sorts of Faith such attain unto?

This may be easily gathered from the sorts of Believers, that pretend to a
Faith; but it is not Sound and Saving. There are two Sorts of Faith, that are
not Saving, viz. an Historical, and a Temporary Faith.

1. An Historical Faith. Many, yea most, that live under the Sound of the
Gospel, may attain to this; and do content and quiet their Hearts with a bare,
Notional Knowledge and Assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel: On this Sandy
Bottom most Professors Build their Hopes for Heaven; and claim their
Privileges among the best of Saints on Earth; even to Eat and Drink in Christ's
Presence. Indeed without knowledge the Mind cannot be good; and the History and
Knowledge of Gospel Truths is necessary and leading on to a Saving Faith. See,
Romans 10.14. How shall they Believe on him, of whom they have not Heard? Yet a
bare Historical Faith will Scarce Distinguish the Faith of Men from the Faith
of Devils, Jam. 2.19. Thou Believe there is One God; Thou do well; The
Devils also Believe and Tremble. They Believe there is a God and they Tremble
at his Wrath: their Hearts ache and Tremble within them. They Believe, that
Christ is the Son of God and the Savior of Men: See the Confession of their
Faith, in the Possessed Gergesene, Matt. 8.29. What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, Thou Son of God: art thou come to Torment us before our Time? The Devils
Believe and Tremble; but how many among us, worse than Devils in this Respect,
that Believe, but never Tremble at the Wrath of God; and at the Wrath of the
Lamb; a Generation of Gods Wrath; who are warned, but never awakened to flee
from the Wrath to come, Matt, 3.7. They Believe the Judgment, and Know the
Terror of the Lord; they have an Historical Faith, but more Regardless than
Devils; They Believe the History of Gospel Truths revealed; but are Strangers
to the Mystery of Godliness: The History of the Great Truths of the Gospel,
Relating to the object of Saving Faith, may be attained by Reading,
Instruction, by acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures opened and applied in the
ordinary Dispensations of the Ministry; but the Mysteries of those Gospel
Truths can never be discerned, without Supernatural and Saving Illuminations of
the Spirit working Faith in the Soul. A man may have his natural understanding
informed in the Doctrinal Truths, necessary to Salvation; but his Mind blinded
by Satan, least the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image
of God, should shine into him, 2 Cor. 4.4. A bare Historical Faith is, when the
Mind only gives assent to the Truth, without any work upon the Heart; this is a
Sort of Faith, but far from Saving.

2. There is a Temporary (or rather an Ineffectual) Faith. When there is some
work on the Heart; but not thorough and solid: So the Stony Ground in our Text,
and others that we read of, that were Christ's Followers; they not only Believed
the Doctrine of Christ, so far as they knew of it, but also their Hearts were
Affected: they Heard the word with joy: they did not merely dissemble; but they
had their Hearts awed and affected with the Majesty and Power of Christ's
Doctrine and Miracles: So that for a while, they Believed: they had a Temporary
Faith, now this Temporary Faith, where there is some kind of lighter work upon
the Heart, which is not thorough, it may Express it self sundry Ways, (as we
find in the Scriptures) viz. From hence, from this Temporary Faith, there may
be,

1. A Forwardness in men to give up their Names to Christ, to become his
Followers and Professed Disciples; to Enrol their Names in that little Flock
and Company, that are for Heaven, Matt. 8.19. Master (said that Scribe) I will
follow thee, whithersoever thou go, Luke 9.61, 62.

2. There may be a taste of the Sweetness of the Things of Christ, of his Word,
Grace, Benefits and Heavenly Privileges, Heb. 6.4 -- 6. Having a taste of the
Gift of Faith; they may also have a Transitory and Lighter Participation of the
Sweetness of the Word and Joys of Heaven, by some Hopes and Pangs of
Transporting Affection: as Balaam had, Numb. 23.10 Who can Count the Dust of
Jacob and the Number of the fourth Part of Israel? Let me dye the Death of the
Righteous, and let my last End be like his. So the Stony Ground, in the Text,
Joy in Hearing the Word and the affecting things therein.

And so, on the other side, there may be Tears and Terrors in the
apprehensions of Wrath; as in Felix and Ahab and Judas: The Affections may be
stirred; and yet the Rock, the stone in the Heart never broken; the Will and
Affection never thoroughly broken and transformed; the Conscience never purged;
and the Heart never took off from all other things to cleave to Christ alone.

3. There may be a Doing of several Eminent Services for Christ; for which they
may have much applause from men and be lifted up in the Mouths of others, Matt.
7.22. They may be Ministers admired in their Preaching, Preach well, and they
may be Instrumental in their Places, and by their Gifts, to do much Good: God
may so Sanctify a man's Gifts, as to make them Profitable to others; and yet not
unto the Salvation of his own Soul.

4. There may be an Affectionate Acknowledgment for the Present; and Conviction
of the Excellency of Christ; and that none is like to Christ: Joh. 7.46. The
Officers answered, never Man Spoke like this Man. Yet we have not Grounds to
think, that they were Savingly wrought upon; for they go their ways and return
to the Tents of his Enemies. They were but for the Present overpowred and
astonished by the Majesty, appearing in Christ, and in his Word: So Matt. 7.28,
29. And it came to Pass, when Jesus had Ended these Sayings, the People were
astonishd at his Doctrine; for he taught them, as one having Authority and not
as the Scribes. They were strangely transported and raped with an Ecstasy of
admiration and amazement, at his Doctrine; for he taught them, as having
authority: but how many Heard Christ at that Time, who in Hearing did not Hear:
yet all this that we have been speaking of falls short, because the whole Heart
is not Divorced from all things else, and turned to God in Christ Jesus. There
is no Effectual Change in the Soul; but the Rock is unbroken the thorn
unstubbed up: Men Sow among Thorns; and hence the Fruit is choked. And thus we
have Discovered, what Sorts of Faith are not Saving and Effectual.

IV. We may Enquire into the Flaws and Defects of Faith: whence it Proves
Ineffectual and Unsound?

1. When the Object of Faith is not Rightly understood and discerned. This
Defect is such a Flaw, as Renders the Faith of such of none Effect: and here
many miss it in Point of Salvation: thus it was with many in the Gospel, that
followed Christ and did indeed Believe, that he was the Messiah; they wanted a
right understanding of Christ the Object of Faith, whom they were to close
withal: So they, Joh. 6.14.15. They dreamed of a Temporal Kingdom and a
Temporal Advantage and Pomp, to come by the Messiah, which was the Common
Error of the Jews at that Time: They Embraced him, as a Worker of Miracles, by
whom his Followers might have Glory and Honor, etc. But they did not
understand the Spiritual Office of Christ; nor did they look at the Spiritual
Blessings to be had by him: They Mistook the Person, they Believed on; or at
least were not duly Informed concerning him out of the Word; and so were not
well Grounded either in the Knowledge of the Object, or the Word of Faith.
These Defects and Flaws Spoiled all: Their Faith was not rightly set upon the
True Object.

2. A Second Flaw and Defect in Faith, that makes it unsound and ineffectual,
is The want of an Inward Spiritual Work of Humiliation and Regeneration. When
Persons are strangers to Inward Regenerating Grace and change of Heart; then
they are strangers to Saving Faith. Whatever other Qualifications and
Excellencies they may Pretend to, Relating to the Knowledge of the Object of
Faith, Eminency of Gifts, Parts, Place or whatever; yet without Inward
Regenerating Grace, wrought by the Spirit, causing a Change of Heart; no Saving
Faith. We have an Instance of this in Nicodemus, Joh. 3.1 -- 10. He was a man
in Place, a Pharisee, a Ruler of the Jews, One that was a Follower of Christ,
an admirer of him: Rabbi (says he) We know that thou art a Teacher, Sent from
God. v. 2. He had a Respect for Christ; and hence Christ falls upon him with
that, in the first Place, v. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, i. e. Thou art taken with the Miracles; and give me
Honorable Titles; and have some Good general Affections; yea but thou want
still a Work of Regeneration, a new Birth, a Change of Heart and State, a
Spiritual Work of Grace Soaking into the whole Heart, and making the Frame
thereof new: without this thou can never come to Heaven. Do not think, that a
General Historical Faith or some general Good Affections will serve without
Regeneration: And hence also such want the Preparatory work of Sound
Humiliation, in order to Saving Faith. Such have not the Fallow Ground broken
up; nor are they Broken off from their Sins and Selves: they yet remain like
the Stony Ground: the rock at the Bottom remains still.

3. A Third Flaw and Defect, rendering Faith Ineffectual, is, Not coming up to
the Gospel Terms of Effectual Faith. Not complying with the Gospel Conditions
of closing with Christ; Renouncing and Forsaking all other things, and
Following Christ with the Cross on our Backs; not getting over the
Stumbling Blocks of the World, viz. Worldly Honors, Pleasures, Profits; So as
to part with all for Christ.

This was the fault Christ found with many Followers of him, and seeming
Believers on him: Thus Nicodemus came by night, for fear of the Jews, and as
ashamed to be Known to Own Christ: He was not got over the Blocks of Carnal
Fear and Worldly Honor: So they, Joh. 12.42, 43. Among the Chief Rulers, many
Believed on him; but did not confess him, least they should be Put out of the
Synagogue: for they loved the Praise of men more than the Praise of God.

The Terms of Saving Faith propounded are to forsake All to Follow Christ, to
Renounce Sin, Self, and World, Matt. 14.26, 27, 33. The Stony Ground in the
Text, fell away in Time of Temptation. The Faith of most can hardly comply with
Gospel Proposals: the Terms Proposed are not agreeable to their Dispositions
and Affections: Hence* their Faith fails them: In the Hour of Temptation they
fall away.

4. A Fourth Defect and Flaw in Faith arises from the Falseness and Hypocrisy
of the Heart. Men Believe; but not with the whole Heart. This God calls for,
The Heart: and this is a mark of true Faith, Romans 10.10. For with the Heart man
Believes unto Righteousness: Upon this Flaw and Defect we may ground the main
Reason for the confirmation of the Doctrine, viz. Why there is a Believing that
is not Saving; and so, Why there are many Believers that shall never be Saved.

Because God accepts of no Faith as Saving, but only that, which is with all
the Heart. That which carries the whole Soul with it; that whereby a Man does
embrace whole Christ, according to the Terms of the Gospel, with an whole
Heart; that, that infers a change of Heart, that carries with it a New Heart,
and a New Spirit. But now there may be some kind of Believing, and yet not come
thus far.

1. Because of the Deceitfulness of the Heart. There is such cunning and guile
in the Heart, that it will seem to Do some things; seem to Believe, and yet not
believe indeed; act a part upon the Stage of Profession; and yet hide and keep
its Sin: yea not only deceiving others, but a Man's Self, by its fair pretenses
and partial comings off.

2. Because of the strong and deep-rooted Enmity of the Heart against God and
Christ, which is not overcome and subdued by lighter Impressions: Nor when
there is some Temporary good Affection toward Christ. The heart may yield a
little, and yet not be changed from its enmity and opposition to all that is
Holy.

3. Because of the Inability of Nature to put forth the Supernatural act of
Faith, without the Mighty Power of the Spirit, to cause it so to do. It is
above the Power of Nature, (yea though assisted with the common workings, lighter
impressions, strivings and motions of the Spirit) to put forth such an act as
Saving Faith is: Joh. 6.65. No man can come unto me, Except it were given unto
him of my Father.

V. We now Proceed to lay down the Signs of an Unsound, and the Nature of Sound
and Saving Faith.

1. An Unsound Faith may be Discovered by these Signs; which may have some
reference to what has been Premised.

1. That Faith is Unfound, that is without Previous Humiliation. A sudden Faith
and Joy, without Humiliation, without breaking of the heart for, and from Sin:
Such was the Faith of the Stony Ground in our Text; it had no depth: the Rock
at the bottom was never broken and dissolved. Consider, if thy Faith has been
but a sudden pang of Affection in Hearing the Word, without Conviction, sight
and sense of Sin and Wrath, etc. Such slight Faith is not to be rested in. When
a Man on the sudden, hearing of the Riches and Glory of Christ, is taken
therewith; but never was Convinced of Sin; never saw himself in a perishing
condition; never stung with the fiery Serpent; never lost, poor, miserable,
blind, naked in thine own feeling, etc. Why this is a shallow Faith, which a
little heat of the Sun will wither away. Till a Man see Sin, as the greatest
Evil; he will never prize Christ, as the greatest good.

2. That Faith is Unsound, that does not bring a Man to an absolute, present,
preremptory consent to take Christ, and give up himself wholly to Christ upon
his own Terms. So it is with many; Christ makes his Motion, requires their
Hearts, bids them renounce all other Lovers, and embrace Him alone for ever;
but when the Heart gives him good Words, and yet puts him off, and says, I
will hereafter, at such a Time, I will consider of it; and so continues
Parlying and Bartering with Christ; but comes not to an absolute Marriage
consent, to part with all, and close with him; this is a discovery of an
Unsound Heart. Why if there be not such a Faith as reaches the proper Work of
Faith, i. e. The absolute Taking and Receiving Christ on his own Terms; then
truly is here no effectual Faith, Luke 9.61. The Unsound heart has still
somewhat to do, before it will Follow Christ: it never comes to a present
closing with him.

3. That Faith is not sound, which is not see upon the Person of Christ, upon
Christ Himself. To run away with the Word and Promise, and to miss of Christ
himself, is a broken Faith, which will deceive. Saving Faith does not only
close with a Truth or Proposition, but with a Person. Many, when they hear of
the Word, the Promise, (viz. He that confesses and forsakes, shall find
Mercy. He that hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, shall be filled. He
that Mourns is Blessed, etc.) Why they apply the Promise to themselves, and
believe the Truth of it, and so have Peace: Here they rest, and here is all
their Faith but to believe on Christ, and Match and Close with the Person of
Christ, this they are great Strangers to.

4. That Believing that a Man has found Easy, which he could do and attain of
himself, by his own Strength, that is Unsound. Right Faith is not of our
selves, Ephesians. 2.4. The Lord makes the Soul, on whom he works effectually, to
feel that it is not of Himself, it is not in his own Power to Believe; it is a
Supernatural Work (as we have heard.) If a Man's Faith be bred by Flesh and
Blood; by his own Will and Strength, etc. it is a base, bastard Faith, and not
begotten of the right Father, and therefore shall never possess the
Inheritance. If there has not been a Supernatural Hand and Power on thy Heart,
thou art in a State of Nature to this day.

5. That Faith that does not Separate and Divide a Man from every known Sin,
and set him upon a Warfare againct all Sin whatsoever; that Faith is not Sound.
Faith so separate, I mean, as to make a Man willing to part with Sin, and
desirous to improve all means against it.

6. That Faith that is Barren and Unfruitful, is an Unsound Faith; that brings
not forth Fruits of Grace and New Obedience in the Life, and Conversation. When
a Man has a Faith, that does him no good, that he is never the better for; the
Faith that brings no Life into the heart, no quickening Spirit into the Soul;
but a Man is the very same after he has believed, as he was before; Dead to all
good Works; when there is no Working by Love. That is a false Faith that is
without Works, Jam. 2.14. 2 Pet. 1.8, 9. And know for a certainty, that the
Faith that never Sanctifies thee, will never Save thee in the Day of Jesus.

2. The next Branch to be Enquired into* is, The Nature of Sound and Saving
Faith. And I intend here, only some brief hints, both Negatively and
Affirmatively; to show both what it is not, and what it is.

1. Negatively: Which may lead us to a right understanding of it, and the
Premises may be helpful herein.

1. Saving Faith is not a bare Knowledge of, or Assent to the Truth of the
Scriptures; to believe the things that are written in the Law and Gospel: though
this must be, but this is not Saving Faith, James 2.19. Neither is it the Truth
of the Scripture only in general, but Christ Jesus, the Person of Christ, that
is the Object of Saving, Justifying Faith.

2. Neither is it the bare Believing of Christ, or of the Truth about the
Doctrine of the Gospel. Though this is necessary; Romans 10.14. How shall they call
on him, in whom they have not Believed? And how shall they Believe in him of
whom they have not heard? etc. There cannot be believing on Christ, without
Believing of Him, without Knowledge and Assent to the Truth concerning his
Person, Offices, Offers and Benefits. There must be in all Adult Believers a
competent Understanding of these Things, and Assent to them; this is absolutely
necessary. True Faith is an Affiance grounded upon Knowledge: An unknown Christ
cannot be Believed on, as, Act. 17.23. Paul found an Altar at Athens with this
Superscription: [ To the Unknown God,] whom therefore (says he) ye ignorantly
Worship. But this is not enough; to believe Christ and to believe on Christ are
several things; the former is but the act of the Mind, the latter of the Will
also, Joh. 5.40.

3. Nor is it an Assurance or Settled persuasion of a Man's Interest in Christ,
and of the Lords Everlasting Love to him in Christ. Though this being rightly
grounded is a Precious, sweet and comfortable thing; and true Faith ought to
grow up to this. It is fearful Security for any to be at rest without
Assurance; but yet this Assurance is not the proper act of Saving, Justifying
Faith; but follows it, as presupposing it: for there must be Interest in
Christ, in order of Nature, before there can be Assurance of it; and there must
be Saving Faith, before Interest, 1 Job. 5.13. Romans 5.1. Therefore, being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But,

2. Affirmatively. To speak Positively, What this sound and effectual Faith is,
that is the condition, upon which Salvation is Promised in the Gospel. Not to
enter into any large or full Discourse. In Sum, you may take up this
Description of it.

Descirp. Saving Faith is a Saving Grace of the Spirit, whereby we Receive and
Rest upon Christ Jesus, for Righteousness and Life.

Or more fully.

Effectual Faith or Believing, Is when a Soul, feeling its Sinful and Perishing
condition, receives Christ, as he is freely offered in the Gospel, rests on
him, as an Alsufficient Savior for Righteousness and Life.

This sets forth the Nature of Saving Faith, whereby an humbled Sinner, being
persuaded of, and assenting to the Truth of the Gospel, and Christ revealed
therein; he does heartily embrace and rest on Him for Righteousness and
Salvation. But the Nature of Saving Faith may be more familiarly set forth, by
the essential requisites comprised in the Description.

There are four essential requisites, that go to the constitution of Saving
Faith. There must be, (1) An humbling sight and sense of Sin, and Misery by
Sin. (2) A sight of Jesus Christ, revealed and freely offered in the Gospel.
(3) An embracing and receiving Christ thus offered. (4) A resting and relying
upon him for Righteousness and Life.

1. There must be an Humbling sight and sense of Sin. This Humiliation (or
sensibleness of Sin) whether you call it a part of Faith, taken largely; or a
preparation for Faith, taken strictly: to be sure it is a necessary requisite
unto Believing. It is the humble Publican that comes to Christ for Mercy in
earnest, Luke 18.13, 14. Faith and flying to Christ, the City of Refuge, is but
a Notion to the secure and unhumbled. In believing there is, A flying for
Refuge and Help to Christ; and implies sense of evil and danger. There is an
hearty embracing of a Remedy, that presupposes hearty sense of a disease. It
was the bitten Israelite that looked to the brazen Serpent. It is the stung and
wounded Sinner, that will look in earnest to Christ Jesus, Mat. 9.12, 13. Isai.
61.1, 2, 3. There must be a closing with a Savior from Sin, as Precious, 1
Pet. 2.7. That implies, that Sin is apprehended to be bitter: The Soul must be
apprehensive, that it is Perishing; thy Perishing condition must be felt: there
must be a sense and feeling thereof; as the famishing man feels what it is to
be hungry: the man that is in danger of his Life, feels what it is to cry out
for help: the sick man feels what it is to need and prize the Physician. Oh!
was thy heart ever wounded for Sin and made sick of it? Did the Lord ever
awaken thee by his Word, not only to Dream of a Natural Estate; but to see it;
to see thy self a dead man, under the Power and Guilt of Sin, under the
strength of the curse, Romans 7.9. Has the Spirit convinced thee of Sin? That is
the first step in order to the Working of Saving Faith, Job. 16.9.

2. A Second requisite of Saving Faith, is, The sight of the Object, a sight of
Jesus Christ revealed and freely offered and held forth in the Gospel. And this
revelation and offer, it must be entertained with an understanding and
assenting to the Truths revealed. There is in Faith (or goes to the making up
of Faith) Knowledge, Assent, and Affiance; the former of these cannot be
without the revelation of the object; and the two latter cannot be without the
former. There must be a revelation of a Christ, and a sight of Christ in the
understanding, in order to the closing with him by the Will: Joh. 6.40. This is
the Will of him that sent me. Every one that sees the Son and believes on
him, may have everlasting Life: -- and this sight is both by Knowledge and
Understanding of the doctrine of Christ, and by assent thereunto, or being
persuaded of the truth thereof, which precedes embracing, Heb. 11.13. Joh.
20.31.

Make not a light matter of the revelation and offer of Christ in the Gospel:
it is essentially requisite to Saving Faith. In the day of Grace when the
Spirit, by its powerful operations, works Saving Faith in the Soul; it does it
by opening the eyes of the understanding, to see Christ revealed and freely
offered in the Gospel, and letting in the sweetness and savor of it to the
Heart and Will; Romans 10.17. and 1.16, 17. 2 Cor. 3.18. It is possible indeed
that a man may have the revelation of Christ in the Gospel, and some real sight
of the things of Christ; and yet not savingly embrace them; as in those that
are enlightened, and yet fall away, Heb. 6.4. and 10.26. And those, in our text,
Who for a while Believe. There is some revelation, some light, some knowledge;
but ordinarily and usually men that live in unbelief, they are Defective in
knowledge of what is revealed in the Gospel, concerning the object of Faith; or
at least in assent to what is revealed; especially this latter; but Christ, as
an All-sufficient Savior, with his Redemption, Righteousness, Benefits, etc.
revealed in the Gospel and freely offered and held forth; is the ground of our
Believing or closing with him by Faith.

3. A third essential requisite of Saving Faith, is, The Souls embracing and
receiving Christ, thus revealed and offered, even the Person of Christ, Christ
himself. God holds forth his Son, and the Soul takes him; that is Faith, Romans
5.17. Faith it is the Souls embracing, -- receiving, resting relying on,
trusting in Christ, as revealed and offered in the Gospel. This expresses that
Fiducia or Affiance, which is the main or most formal act and nature of Saving
Faith. These terms express the formal and fiducial act of Faith, resting on
Christ or trusting in him; this is the formal nature of Faith: hence it is not
only to believe Christ; but to believe on Christ: hence believing is often
expounded by trusting (as, Ephesians. 1.12. Matt. 12.21.) and that imports these
three actings of Faith.

1. A rolling and casting our selves upon Christ, having no other bottom to
stand on, and seeing with him a Rock able to bear us, and Arms open to receive
us. Now we throw our selves and our whole weight upon him, and fall into his
Arms, Psalm. 37.7. and 55.22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee.

2. A staying, hanging, leaning, depending upon him, Isai. 50.10. Who is among
you, that walks in darkness and has no light; let him trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay upon his God.

3. An Acquiescence in Christ; a resting of the heart in him (as well as on
him) as believing that he is also able (as well as faithful) to be and do that
which we depend upon him for. And now being come to the Rock of Ages and built
upon it; having committed our selves to Christ, embracing him, and relying on
him; now we rest there, as in One, in whom there is good enough to satisfy us,
and power enough to help us and save us; and who is faithful to fulfill what he
has promised. The soul sees him able enough to sustain him, a rock and bottom
strong enough to bear him: he sees his arms long enough to reach, strong enough
to hold him; ready enough to embrace him: hence he casts and throws himself
thereinto, and seeing no help nor hope in himself; no ability at all to save
and deliver; and seeing Christ able, mighty, faithful, willing to help, every
way All-sufficient: hence the Soul finds in him an everlasting foundation; a
rock fit to stay on; hence it lets all other hopes and stays go; and rests and
trusts here for ever.

4. Faith is a resting and relying on Christ for righteousness and life; for
righteousness unto justification, Rom, 5.17. Isai. 45.24. In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength. We do not only want power from Christ to help us;
but righteousness to be the matter of our Justification; the foundation and
ground of our whole Salvation; for that is the inlet of Life eternal. In acting
of Faith the Soul comes in special to Christ for Righteousness: Romans 10.4, 10.
For Christ is the End of the Law for righteousness, to every one that
believes. And Faith looks to Christ, as for imputed Righteousness unto
Justification; so also for inherent Righteousness and Life in Sanctification:
And hence Faith is a relying on Christ for Life; Spiritual Life began in the
Grace of Sanctification here, and completed in the perfection of Glory
hereafter.

Thus you have the essential requisites of Saving Faith, setting forth the
formal Nature of it, which few attain unto. The truth is, Most Professors
content themselves with a false Ineffectual Faith, like the Temporaries in the
Text, Who for a while believe, and in Time of Temptation fall away: Or as
others, who at last miss of Heaven in the height of their hopes, being mistaken
as to the grounds of their Faith not well rooted. It is not every Faith, that
is Saving; nor every Believer that shall be Saved; nor every one that Cries,
Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom. The Way through Faith to
Salvation is a difficult Way to hit, and dangerous to miss; and Multitudes
miscarry, even many of those that are Believers, who shall never be Saved.

The APPLICATION.
USE I. This Doctrine may shake loose and unsound Professors out of their
carnal Security, and false Peace, by means of their Resting in their Faith. A
false Faith breeds unto many a false Peace. Many there are that use their Faith
still to shelter them from all Convictions and Terrors of the Lord: they have
bad hearts, and many corruptions, and are full of wants and failings, etc. yea,
but they believe, and that Salves all: they have Faith in the Name of Christ.
Indeed if your Faith be of the right stamp, you may rejoice: True and Sound
Faith in Jesus Christ is that, whereby we have our Righteousness; and may have
our Peace in the midst of many failings and imperfections. So Paul had, and so
the Saints in Scripture had. If you have but Paul's faith, i. e. A Sin-lamenting
faith, as, Romans 7.24. A Groaning faith, Romans 8.23, 26. A Laboring faith, Col.
1.29. A Sanctifying faith, Romans 6. A Growing faith, Phil. 3.10 -- 13. And if
you have John's faith, A faith that works by love; then indeed you may triumph
over relicts of Sin, and Imperfections of Grace. But the false and counterfeit
faith will be the Ape of the true; that also will cry Peace, and then it does
but deceive.

Men will cover all their noisome and running Sores, with the Fig Leaves of a
false and ineffectual Faith, which will be but as a Spiders webb at last, Mic.
3.11. Oh! Remember there is a faith that will not do; a believing that will
never Save; and search and see if thine be not such. An Awakening thing it is
to consider, That a Man may be a Believer and yet fall short: he may have a
faith, and yet perish and be damned for all that. Now (I say) seeing there is a
faith that will not evidence the Subjects thereof to be in a safe Estate;
therefore rest not presently because you have some kind of faith; but search
and see whether it be not Unsound or no: And to find out this, I may refer you
to the Premises, and what may be spoken in the following Use.

USE, II. Of EXAMINATION.
Examine and Try whether you have that Faith, that Believing that is Sound and
Saving and Effectual. We see there is a faith that is not sound; and there is
much of that kind of Ware in the World. There is a Stony-ground, and there is a
Thorny-ground-believing that never reaches home. There are many Believers that
fall short: why then we should never rest, till we have attained sound and
saving Faith: Why, as, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the
faith: prove your selves, etc. Sirs, see what metal you are made of, whether
true Gold, or Copper; be not put off with every Varnish, with every glittering:
All is not Gold that glitters; is a true Proverb. There are Multitudes of
Professors, with their high Privileges, that make a glittering show among men;
that pass for current Coin here, that will not pass at that Day of Trial, when
God shall Kindle his fire in Zion, and set up his furnance in Jerusalem, Isai
31. There are many that pass Examination and Trial among men, that crowd among
Believers unto the Church on Earth, that shall never have a Seat among Saints
in Heaven. Multitudes of Counterfeits among us, whose faith upon a due Trial
will not amount to the value of a brass Farthing. We are often deceived with
Counterfeit Pieces for Current Money; and our want of discerning makes the same
passable: So we cannot discriminate between Professors and Professors, between
Formalists and true Believers. We know not what offerings Persons present
before the Lord; but be sure there is a World of false Coin cast into the Lords
Treasury. Many sit down at the Table of the Lord, who have no right to the
Childrens Bread: they feed without Faith, or Fear, or Examination of their
Fitness; but such should tremble at the Damnation threatened, and remember the
caution given, 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. But let a man Examine himself and so let him
Eat, etc. for he that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks
Damnation to himself. And so does he that has not Sound and Saving Faith,
whereby to discern the Lords Body; this being an essential requisite to that
heavenly Participation. Many for want of this Effectual, Saving Faith may
deceive their own Souls, and so miss of Heaven in the heights of their Hopes;
as they, Luke 13.26. and, Matt. 7.22. Lord, Lord, Open to us: we have eat and
drank in thy Presence, etc. But Christ will disown them, and send them packing
away, with that Curse, Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity.

Oh Sirs! Examine your selves, be much upon this work of Self-Examination: Be
not deceived, as to Trust in every working, thou find and feel in thy own
Heart; every pang of sweet Affection; every stirring of Joy and Delight in
Hearing the Word; though be thankful for any such thing. There are many Hearers,
that hear Sermon after Sermon, the most ravishing Truths of the Gospel
displayed in the most Affecting and Charming manner, in the highest strains of
Divine Rhetoric to gain their Affections; and yet to this day never come up to
that with the Stony-ground Hearers (in the Text) to Receive the Word with Joy.
It may be thou never heardst a Sermon in thy Lifetime with any Affection of
Joy or Rejoicing in Hearing the Word; but rather that has been thy inward
Thought and working of Heart, Mal. 1.13. Behold! what a weariness is it, etc.
and thou art restless till the Tiresome Glass be run out, and the Tedious
Sermon be ended. Alas! many (if not most) that sit in our Assemblies, are mere
Highway Hearers, that are so trodden, beaten, hardened with the commonness of
Preaching, that they are not Affected with any thing. The wild fowl of roving
Thoughts and carnal Affections devour all.

Such as these are far from Faith: they have scarce so much as any kind of
Faith or degree of Believing: they are not got so far as the Stony-ground, Who
receive the Word with Joy, and for a while Believe: but neither is this a faith
that reaches home. Oh! it highly concerns all to see whether they have that
Faith that accompanies Salvation. Fall upon the work of Examination, grounded
upon the Premises and the Nature of Saving Faith; If you pretend to faith,

1. Examine which way you came by your faith. Consider how faith was wrought in
thee; or whether thou have a kindly work of faith wrought in thy Soul. Have
thou been made to see thy Perishing condition, by reason of Sin and Wrath lying
upon thee? Can remember how the Lord has made thee bemoan thy self to him
with Ephraim, Jer. 3.18, 19. To renounce all false Props and Confidences With
Paul, Phil. 3. To confess the iniquity of thy Sin with David, Psalm. 51.32. To
cry out with them, What shall we do? Act. 2.37. Have thou seen the wonderful,
glorious, rich Grace of God in the free offer of Christ in the Gospel? Did
thou ever see the fight of Christ in the Gospel, as a most glorious sight?
Did thou ever relish that glorious object offered, as exceeding sweet and
precious?

Has it broke thy heart, that yet, after all thy backslidings, He should lift
up a cry of Grace in thine Ears? Jer. 3.1. Have thou been made to hear the
Voice of Christ's call in the Gospel, and been thereby drawn to come to him,
and to receive him, and close with him? Was it thy special end in coming to
Christ, to get Possessed of himself, and by him deliverance from Sin and
Spiritual Life? and has that been the voice of thy Soul in coming to him, Hos.
14.2, 3. Take away all iniquity.

He, that has had Faith wrought in his heart, has been made to know what
these things mean: such Breathings and Workings as these, are the Footsteps of
the Spirit of Grace, and Expressions of that Faith, which is of the operation
of God. Thus (I say) Examine which way you did come by your Faith: How says
was wrought in you.

2. Examine whether you have changed the Rest of your Souls. Where there is
true faith, the Rest of the Soul is changed; there is a resting upon Christ or
in him; and indeed that is the formal Nature of faith; a resting and relying on
Christ for Righteousness and Life. Naturally all men Rest somewhere else, viz.
in Themselves, in the World, in their carnal Contentments and Hopes, in their
own Righteousness: therefore the Believer has changed his Rest: his Rest is
now upon God in Christ Jesus, Heb. 4.3. For we, which have Believed do enter
into Rest. The Soul casts it self upon Christ, as the whole foundation of its
Hope, Rock of its Refuge, stay of its Soul, and the All of its Expectations and
Desires. Oh! Examine, is Christ the Rock, you build your Rest on; the strong
Hold you shelter in; the help you Trust to; the Portion you Live upon; the Hill
of Salvation your Eyes are to; the Hope and Good, that gives Quiet and
Contentment, and Rest unto Souls.

3. Examine, Do thou Live by Faith, Whence is the Spring of thy Life? Is
Christ the Feeder and Maintainer of thy Life by Faith? as, Gal. 2.20. Faith is
the Believers daily work: He is often putting it forth and acting it upon
Christ. Is Faith thy Practice, thy Trade? Are thy Prayers the voice of Faith?
Oh! are we Knit to an higher Principle? Have we a Pipe laid to a higher
fountain than this World?

Oh Consider of such things, and make clear this grand Tenure and Title to
Salvation (to that glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light and Glory) Faith
in Christ Jesus, Sound and Saving Faith: And would you by Examination have
further Knowledge of it, what it is? For your further help here, take these
three Characters of a sound and effectual Faith.

1. That Faith is sound, that is accompanied with a forsaking of all for
Christ; Sin, Self, and World, and all the Lusts and Vanities thereof. When
there is an absolute Divorce from all others, then there is a Marriage to
Christ; for there is no intermediate state.

2. That Faith is sound, that is accompanied with esteem of and love to Christ;
and that produces a Conjugal Affection to him. He has the Wedding Garment on,
that has a Marriage Affection to Christ Jesus. Where there is such peculiar
Love to Christ, there the Heart is indeed set upon him; for Love carries the
whole Soul with it. Ibi anima ubi amat, et amor figit Oculum: Love it is a
knitting Affection* This knits the Soul to Christ. Where there is Love out of a
pure Heart, there is Faith Unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

3. That Faith is sound and effectual, that Purifies the Heart, and is fruitful
in the course of ones Life. A Purifying and a working Faith, such a Faith as is
accompanied with Repentance, and followed with new Obedience, Act. 15.9. Jam.
2.18. Gal. 5.6. That Faith is effectual that is accompanied with a change of
Heart and Life. True Faith and Repentance ever go together.

USE III.
From the Premises be Instructed, that nothing short of Effectual Saving
Faith, can give a man any grounded Hopes that he shall be Saved: Or what ever
any person has or may pretend unto, that is short of and separated from sound
and effectual Faith; can give him no title to Heaven and Happiness. We see it
is not every Faith that is Saving; much less any thing short of Faith: and yet
many such things persons place their Trust and Confidence in, and build their
Hopes of Salvation upon. Many things there are that persons are apt to lean
upon and comfort themselves with, which yet will give them no Title to
Salvation; because short of saving Faith: As Paul in the days of his
Pharisaism, he thought he had many things that could stand him in stead, which
after he saw were Vain; and nothing would do, but Faith in Christ whereby he
might be found in him, Phil. 3.4, -- 8. Take a short view of what persons build
their Hopes of Salvation upon, which yet fall short of saving Faith.

1. Some would gather up hopes for Heaven, because of their Happiness here on
Earth. Their Outward Prosperity wherein God Blesses them, from whence they
gather that God loves them; and it shall be for ever well with them: and here
they bottom their hopes for Salvation. If any should be so stupid and foolish
as to rest in worldly Wealth, Riches and Honors and Comforts of Outward
Estate; why remember these are not Faith, nor akin to it. The Lord has no
where said in all the Scripture, That he that is a Rich man, or a Great man,
shall go to Heaven. Riches do not carry Faith along with them, nor help to it;
but often much hinder it, Matt. 19.23. The Young man in the Gospel went away
sorrowful, for he had great Possessions: whereupon, says Christ, A rich man
can hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 1.26. For you see your
Calling Brethren, how that not many Wise men, after the Flesh, not many Mighty,
not many Noble are called. The Poorest Man on Earth may get to Heaven, as soon
as the Richest, you often sooner. It is he that is Rich in Faith, that is the
Heir to the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5.

2. Some build up their Hopes and Confidence, upon their Gifts and Parts.
Natural and Acquired Wit, Memory, Learning, Activity, Knowledge of Arts, or
Skill therein, etc. Why these are good and commendable in themselves, and very
useful, and make men famous, but these are not Faith: these alone will not
Save. Had one the Parts and Abilities of an Achitophel, yet these alone would
not render one any Better, than he who, with Judas, went and hanged himself.
Knowledge is good and excellent, yet may be separated from Faith and Love; and
then it is nothing in Point of Salvation, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Yea Ministerial Gifts
themselves may be separated from Faith, as in Judas, and others, Mat. 7.22. And
if so, they Save not. Oh! thou may know many things, and yet not Know Christ
and him Crucified, with a believing application to thy Own Soul; and then thou
know nothing, that will stand thee in stead for Salvation.

3. Some Build their Hopes of future Happiness and Salvation upon good Nature
and Disposition. The Temper of some is not so inclined to some Vices; and more
apt to gain Love and Esteem, than others are: but this is not Faith, no nor
Sanctification. The Young Man in the Gospel was of an Amiable Lovely
Disposition and Demeanor: Mark 10.21. Jesus beholding him, Loved him; and yet
missing of Christ, he misses of Heaven. An Absalom can so pleasingly carry it,
as to Steal the Hearts of the men of Israel; and yet a Graceless Wretch. Be it,
thy Disposition and Carriage is such, as every one is taken with thee; yet take
heed of Resting in that, that will not suffice. A lovely Young Man (you see)
may go down to Hell, not following Christ with a Self, and World-renouncing
Faith; when a Rude rugged Jailer, believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, may go to
Heaven.

4 Some Build their Hopes of Salvation upon a comparative Goodness, that they
are not so Bad as others. Many do, Pharisee-like, bear themselves upon this,
Luke 18.11. But be it so; yet to have less Sin, than some others; that is not
to have Faith. Thou art not so bad as many others; but it may be it is also
True, thou art not so good as many others, who yet never shall be Saved. It may
be thou art not so good as the Young Man in the Gospel, or the Scribes and
Pharisees; and yet they are gone to their own Place. Oh! thy Righteousness must
exceed theirs, if ever Saved, Matt. 5.20. Oh! you must exceed those, whom
happily thou have not yet equallized. If thou art not so bad as others, yet art
thou as good, as the Rule of the Gospel requires unto Salvation? Have thou
sound Faith in Christ? It is not what others are, but what the Rule, the Word
of God, the Terms of the Gospel require, by which thou shall be judged another
day.

5. Others Build their Hopes of Salvation upon Moral Honesty and Virtue and
External Blamelesness. To be a just Dealer, a good Neighbor, Civilly Honest, a
good Common-Wealths-Man; a good Townsman, a good Householder, etc. To perform
these external civil Duties Well, is more than is found with many; but yet this
alone has not the Promise of Salvation made unto it. Paul a Pharisee was
blameless, Phil. 3.6. Alas! it must be another kind of Righteousness, than
this, that will stand before God, viz. The righteousness, which is of God by
Faith, Phil. 3.9.

6. Others Build their Hopes of being Saved upon their Outward
Church-Privileges. They Enjoy Means and Ordinances: they are within the Pale of
the Church: they are Jews outwardly by Profession and Privileges; the visible
People of God; but manifest it is, that these things are separable from Saving
Faith: A visible and an invisible Saint are not of equal latitude: To have Eat
and Drank in Christ's presence, will not be a sufficient Plea at that day, Luke
13.26. The Promise is not that every Churchmember shall be Saved; but every
True Believer shall be Saved. Oh! it is not the shadow of Outward Privileges,
that will shelter you from the Wrath of God. The Sinners in Zion are under as
much cause of fear, as any there, Isa 33.14. It is no new thing to go out of a
Church on Earth, into the Chambers of Hell. Many, that walk with Saints now,
will be sent to Devils one day. Many, that are Ear-mark'd among Christ's Sheep
here, will be found to be Goats, when Christ's Fold shall be searched at that
day. You Build much upon it, that you are within the Bosom of the Church; but
Oh! are you within the Bosom of Jesus Christ by Faith. Thou art an Israelite,
but art thou an Israelite indeed by effectual Faith in Christ.

7. Others Build their Hopes for Heaven upon the apprehension of a Saving Work
of Conversion wrought by the Spirit; but mistaking Legal Terrors, for
Evangelical Convictions, and being deceived by some Common and Remoter
preparations.

If Persons have been Convinced, Awakened, Terrifyed, Troubled and Affrighted
out of the Lewdness of their former ways, and have Prayed and took up good
Resolutions, and here-upon their Hearts have been quieted and calmed, now they
think all is well; but even such things as these are separable from Saving
Faith: such as these, as some legal Trouble wounds them; so a little legal
Reformation heals them. Thou wast Terrified and Troubled; but was it not rather
a Pang of fear, than a Spirit of Mourning for Sin? Thou had Terrors, so had
Judas; but did they carry thee to Christ Jesus, did they end in Faith unfeigned?

8. Others Build their Hopes for Heaven and Salvation upon their Reformations
and Duties Customarily Performed. They have laid aside their Gross Sins; and
have took up a course of duties: they come to Meeting, and they Pray in their
Families, and it may be do something in Secret too; and here they rest in the
work done; and but done formally and carelessly, without delight and constancy;
and merely to stop the mouth of Conscience, rather than to attain the end of
Duty: and they Cry Peace to themselves and say, All is Well.

Oh! Upon what a slight shady weak Bottom, do men build their Hopes of
Salvation? But verily, it is a matter of the greatest Concernment in the world
to see what Bottom you build your Hopes upon: Why nothing short of Effectual
Saving Faith, can give a man any grounded Hopes of Salvation.

USE IV.
Hence see the Reason why so Few are Saved; viz. because there are but a very
Few that attain to sound and saving Faith. Many are Called, but very few of
those many are Chosen and effectually Wrought upon, Mat. 20.16. and 22.1^
Heaven is well compared to a stately Palace, with a narrow Portal: Hence so few
enter it. The Gate is strait; the Way is narrow, and Few then be that find it,
Mat. 7.14. There are but a very few that shall be Saved. Christ's Flock is
called, but a little Flock, Luke 12.32. Sometimes scarce discernable; as in the
Old World, but Eight Persons saved from the Universal Deluge. Noah Condemned a
whole World of wicked People, by his contrary courses; and became Heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.9. Though Christ has ever had a
Church in the world, yet many times brought to a very low Ebb: Sometimes over
run with Idolatry, Paganism, Hae^e^^. Hierom complained in his days, that the
whole world was turned Arian; and Basil Lamenting the obscurity of the Church,
cried out, An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit Domin^s? Has God utterly
forsaken his Church? It is the miserable Portion of the greatest part of the
world, that they shall be Damned!

Such as have Surveighed the known parts of the world, inform us; that if the
known parts of the world were divided into Thirty one parts, the Christians
part is but as Five to Thirty One; the Mahometans as Six; and the Idolaters as
Nineteen. And among the Christian part of the world, the greatest part by far
overrun with Antichristian Idolatry; the smallest part Protestants: And among
the Protestant Professors, all are not Covenanters in Church Fellowship; and in
some Churches, the most are the worst. Chrysostom solemnly Professed in a
Sermon to the People of Antioch, (where he was beloved and did much good) that
he could not be well persuaded, that an Hundred among them should be Saved* and
he doubted of them too; though there were many Thousands in the place. And thus
it may be, of the many Thousands in one City* possibly not an Hundred Saved of
the many Hundreds in one Town; possibly (as in Abraham's suit for Sodom) not Ten
Righteous in the Place. How many Families passed over, and possibly not one in
a Family Saved. Look into the greatest Assemblies, the largest Meeting-places,
thronged with multitudes of Hearers, it may be but here and there one pricked
at the Heart, by the Word of Faith. Look into Churches, many sit down at the
Feast of the Gospel; but it may be but here and there one with his
Wedding Garment on. It is not every one, that Cries Lord, Lord, that shall
enter into the Kingdom of God. There are many Professors; but few Sincere
Converts: and many Believers who shall never be Saved; and the reason is,
because of the difficulty of attaining Saving Faith; therefore so Few are Saved.

USE V. Of AWAKENING.
It is matter of Awful and Awakening Consideration to every Soul; and calls
upon us to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling. To think how many
Run, and obtain not the Prize; but fall short of the Crown of Life. Oh! To
think, there are many Believers that shall never be Saved, with what Fear and
Care should it fill us? Heb. 4.1. Let us fear therefore, lest a Promise being
left us of entering* into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
It is not every Running, every Believing, we see, will serve the turn. Oh! How
solemn a thing it is to think, there are many Believers that never shall be
Saved: Not only many Sinners, many Drunkards, many Whore-mongers,
Sabbath Breakers, Thieves, Liars, Swearers; many Profane Persons; but many
seeming Believers, many Professors, many Church Members, many that seem fair
and go far, never shall be Saved. The Scripture says, He that Believes shall
be Saved; i. e. he that indeed, truly and effectually Believes. But the
Scripture also tells us, that there are many that are in a sense Believers,
that have some kind of Faith; others think, and themselves think they are
Believers; and yet such shall miss of Heaven in the height of their Hopes:
they shall not be Saved. Oh! What need to throw down thy self before God, and
to ly at Him for a through Work to be wrought. Run not away with Tastes; rest
not in Beginnings, in Pangs, in sudden Stirrings, in Overtures; but follow on
in the use of all Means, with Groanings unutterable, Hos. 6.3. Oh! Cry to
Heaven for Effectual Faith, Effectual Conviction, Humiliation, Conversion,
Believing; a Faith that is well rooted. Put up David's Petition with the
greatest Importunity, Psalm. 119.80. Let my Heart be sound in thy Statutes. Rest
not in Uncertainties relating to the state of thy Soul; that Peradventure thou
may be Saved, and Peradventure thou may be Damned; but use all Diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure. Oh! Be Awakened to look to your State
and Standing; and to see what Bottom you build your Hopes of Salvation upon,
that you may not mistake in that great Point of Saving Faith. Tremble to Live
in a state of Unbelief; to sit under the Hearing of the Word Preached, and yet
fall short of Saving Faith.

By way of Awakening Consider, (1.) The Misery and Danger of such an Estate.
(2.) The Sin and Sinfulness of it.

^. The Misery and Danger of a state of Unbelief. The Gospel Terms run thus; He
that Believes shall be Saved; and he that Believes not shall be Damned, Mark
16.16. Oh! Can you be at quiet, in a state of Unbelief? The time hastens, that
you shall have no Portion in this world: What will become of you if you have no
part in Christ? Oh! Do not sit down Careless and say, All is well; I shall yet
have Time enough to get into a state of Salvation, and to obtain Saving Faith.
To Awaken out of this Stupidity, remember these four Particulars.

1. At present thy state is a state of utmost Misery. The Wrath of God is piled
upon thee: the whole Curse of the Law is now abiding on thy Soul, Joh 3.36.
Thou art ready to drop into Hell every moment: Devils are Preying upon thy
Soul: The Shackles of Sins and Lusts, the Chains of Darkness, the Bolts and
Irons of a Blind Mind and Hard Heart are upon them. Thou art sinking in the
Seas of the Wrath of God; and at present thou have no hold of any thing, that
can Save thee: so that thy Present state is Doleful, and not to be Rested in.

2. Thou know not whether thou shall have much, or any time more to attain
Saving Faith in. Thy present state is certainly Miserable; but thy future time
to escape it, is Uncertain. Oh! The stopping of time Ears to Day, may be thy
Undoing for ever. Thou lottest upon more time; but rememember, Luke 12.20. Thou
Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee. And remember the Advice of
our Savior, Ver. 40. Be ye therefore Ready; for the Son of Man comes at an
Hour when ye think not.

3. Remember Faith is not in thine own Power, Ephesians. 2.8. It must be the
Operation of the Mighty God: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost must come into thy
Soul, and put forth an Almighty Power there, if ever saving Faith be wrought in
thee: And thou that receivest this Grace in vain now; how can thou expect,
that he should do any such thing for thee hereafter?

4. The longer thou Live and Continuest in Unbelief, the more unlikely it is,
that ever thou should be brought to Believe. Thy Heart is still the more
Hardened, and God the more Estranged, and Satan has the more Hold of thee. But
thus see the Misery and Danger of a state of Unbelief.

2. See the Sin and Sinfulness of such a state. Unspeakable is the Sin, that
the Unbeliever lies under: All Sin lives and reigns, where Unbelief lives and
reigns; for now the Curse reigns in its strength, and sin has dominion, Romans
6.14. A man is in his sins still, if not in Christ by Faith. Faith flies to a
Savior for deliverance from sin; but Unbelief despises a Savior, and chooses
to live in sin. Unbelief in its own Nature, is an exceeding great sin: A
despising of God, when he tenders the greatest Gift of his Love, his only
Begotten Son; when he offers Himself and his Grace upon the sweetest and
easiest Terms. Oh! This sin of Unbelief, it is a Damning sin. And if we
Enquire, Who they are, that are guilty here; and in a state of Unbelief: For we
see all men have not Faith. Briefly to single out such.

1. They that have no Acquaintance with Christ, but are utter Strangers to him;
either grossly Ignorant, or utterly Negligent of Him. Where there is Faith, it
brings the Soul acquainted with Christ: but there are, that live under the
Means and Ministry of the Word, that are utter strangers to Christ, as to any
distinct Knowledge of him. Christ is but a general Name, an empty Sound in
their Ears: These are in their Unbelief: The god of this world having blinded
the minds of them that Believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4.

2. They whose Hearts were never yet Broken and Humbled. Faith grows in a
contrite Soul; and not upon a Rock. The stony Ground, where the Heart is an
unbroken Stone, and has no depth of soft Earth, it will not bear the good
Grain of effectual saving Faith. And how many Rocks are there, that were never
Broken; hearts of Stone, never turned to Flesh: to whom Sin was never bitter,
nor Wrath terrible, nor Christ sweet.

3. They that allow themselves in any known Sin, 2 Timothy 2.19. They that have
sound and saving Faith, do faithfully maintain a War against Sin, as Sin; and
so against All Sin. It is otherwise with the Unbeliever, he knows there is some
sweet sin, some secret sin that he spares and loves and will not forsake. To go
on boldly, carelessly and impenitently in any Known Sin, is inconsistent with
effectual Faith in Christ, and with that Regeneration that the Believer is made
Partaker of.

4. They are yet in Unbelief, that are Engaged so to the Things and
Contentments of the world; as that they cannot part with them for Christ, Joh.
5.44. Jam. 4.4. 1 John 2.15.

5. They that Establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. We must remember,
that Faith is a going out of our selves to Christ, and resting on him for
Righteousness.

USE VI. Of EXHORTATION.
Labor after Sound Saving and Effectual Faith. There is nothing else without
this, that will Entitle you to Salvation, or give you Right to Life Eternal. If
you would take the way to attain to Salvation, attain to saving Faith: atttain
to the Righteousness which is by Faith, Romans 9.30. If you would work out your
own Salvation, this is the main Work, Joh. 6.27, 29. It is not a few Moral
Endeavors, or Religious Devotions, or Reformations will be to any purpose,
without this. You say, I will Pray, and I will be Diligent in my Calling, and I
will Sanctify the Sabbath, and will Cleave to the Truth: Yea, but nothing will
serve; neither can you do any of these things to purpose, unless you attain to
sound and saving Faith. Consider, you Perish if you do not Believe: You will be
Damned if you have not Faith.

If one should tell you of a thing your Life lay upon; you certainly Die if you
get not such a Receipt; what Pains and Cost would you spare? You would send far
and near for it. Oh! The Lord of Heaven and Earth tells you in his Word, that
no Faith, no Salvation: You Die for ever, if you get not Faith before you Die.

But Believe, and you shall Live: You shall have Life Eternal, and all that
pertains to it, 1 John 5.12, 13. And this is that, that will be the support of
your Life here. When the World withers about you, yet if you have Faith, you
have Roots that reach to the Well of Life, Jer. 17.7, 8.

Faith brings in all: Faith goes to the Market where all is to be had, and
furnishes it self to the full. Faith is a discriminating Grace: it is that
that makes the difference between Christianity and Morality; and nothing does
so Honor God as the Grace of Faith. Get Faith and you have all; but without
it, nothing at all. And, Oh! Labor that your Faith may be sound and effectual.
Get good C^^^ that may pass current in Heaven; Faith of the right stamp.

And for Direction here;
1. Tremble to rest in Beginnings, in Ineffectual Work; in some Tastes and
Stirrings, Enlightnings and Meltings, and Pangs of sudden Joy in Hearing the
Word of Faith: as the Stony Ground (in our Text) without making Thorough Work,
Heb. 4.1. Do not rest in slight Work, in some little Smatterings, in Tastes of
the good Word of God.

2. Cherish the Motions of the Spirit: And Thank God and Bless Him on thy
bended Knees, for that Little thou have; for those Beginnings he has given
thee; tho it be but Common, though it be but Little; yet Bless him for it: It is
the way to have more.

3. Attend and Listen to the Word of the Gospel, and the Preaching thereof:
Romans 10.17. So then Faith comes by Hearing; and Hearing by the Word of God. It
is the great End of Hearing to get Faith. Hear the Voice of Christ, speaking in
his Word, and say, as, 1 Samuel 3.9. Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. And
Labor to be a Profitable Hearer of the Word; so may thou be a Believing
Hearer of the Word.

4. In all Means look to and ly under a Power above and beyond Means to create
Faith in thee; even the Power of God in Christ Jesus.

5. Pray and Cry to the Lord for Faith, for sound and saving and effectual
Faith; Jer. 31.18. Faith is the Gift of God: Ask it of him, Ephesians. 2.8. Oh! The
Lord can teach thee to Pray, whilst thou art Praying; and teach thee to
Believe, whilst thou art Crying after Faith, and saying, Lord, help my
Unbelief, Mark 9.24. And pour out thy Heart to God with Groanings that cannot
be uttered; that he would go in with thee; and that he would not leave thee in
the Midway. Oh! Beg sound and effectual Work, Psalm. 119.^.

6. Be often Renewing thy Faith. That is a great means to perfect Faith, and
that which is lacking in it. By often Believing, thou shall come to see and
feel, that thou do effectually Believe.

7. Use Faith much. If you think you have Faith; let it appear by this, Use it.
Do not think it enough to say, Thou hopest God has wrought Faith in thy Heart,
and thou art in a (...); and (...) ^rap up thy Faith, (...), and lay it by thee
against thou co^^ to Die. Oh! Know it; that will prove a miserable, rusty Faith
at Death, that was not made use of in the time of Life. No; but if thou have
any Faith; use it: Use it to sanctify thy Heart, Act. 15.9. Use it to overcome
the World: Use it to mortify thy strong Lusts and Corruptions, and to maintain
a Warfare against them: Use it to carry thee thorough Afflictions, Changes,
Troubles, Trials: Use it to the increase of all Grace, and Live by it, Gal.
2.20. And GOD grant, as, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your Faith being much
more Precious than of Gold that Perishes; though it be tried with Fire, might be
found unto Praise and Honor and Glory, at the Appearing of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

