A SERMON Preached at the Queen's Chapel in Boston, upon Christmas Day, The 25
th. of December, 1712.

Published at the Request of the Gentlemen of the Vestry.

By Mr. HARRIS, One of the Ministers of the said Chapel, and Fellow of
Jesus-College, in Oxford.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Joanna Perry, at her Shop
in King Street. 1712.

A SERMON Preached at the QUEEN'S Chapel in Boston, upon Christmas Day, 1712.
S. JOHN Chapt. I. Verse 12. But as many as received Him, to them gave he Power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name:


WHEN Our Blessed Savior took upon him Human Nature, his Design was to make us
partakers of the Divine Nature and Happiness: He came down from Heaven, that he
might advance us to the blissful Mansions of his Father's House, and deliver us
from the Dominion of the Powers of Darkness, into the glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God. As this is the greatest blessing which God could give, or Man
receive, Our Lord's Mission was supported with the strongest Evidence, that He
did not only bear a good Will to Men, but had likewise Power to bestow upon
them all that Life and Immortality which his Gospel brought to light.
Nevertheless, His Divinity being hid under the veil of his Humanity, and the
Majesty of his Person being eclipsed, by the meanness of his outward
Appearance, neither the excellency of his Life and Doctrine, nor the completion
of Ancient Prophecies, nor mighty Miracles performed by him, were able to
persuade the obstinate Jews to look upon him as the Promised Messiah; on the
contrary, they despised and rejected him, and strove as much as in them lay, to
make their Malice and Hatred infinite, like his Love. Such entertainment did
the great Founder of our Religion meet with from an ungrateful World, for whose
sake he humbled himself here upon Earth, and endured so much Misery and
Affliction. Jesus Christ came to his Own and his Own received him not. The
Conversion of the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, was his earliest and chief
care; their Land was honored with his Sacred Birth, and to them the glad
Tidings of Salvation were first Preached: But though Christ was in a Peculiar
manner the glory of that People, yet the beams of his Light, and the Influences
of his Coming, extended to the Ends of the World; after a long gloomy Night of
Ignorance and Error, the Sun of Righteousness rose upon all Nations, with
healing under his Wings; the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile was broken
down, and a lively Faith qualified all People for the Divine Favor, and the
participation of those benefits which Christ purchass'd for his Church. For as
many as received Him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to
them that believe on his Name.

In discoursing upon which words, I Will First consider the Dignity of the Person
whom we are to receive.

Secondly, I Will show, How we are to receive Him.

Thirdly, The great advantage of doing so, for thereby we become the Sons of
God.

Fourthly, I Will represent the great Sinfulness of not receiving Jesus Christ.

And in the Last Place, Draw some Inferences from the whole.

First then, with respect to the Dignity of his Person: We are assured that
Jesus Christ though he condescended to be Born in Time, yet had a Being before
Time was, and Existed from all Eternity; before he Sojourned in this World, He
enjoyed the Felicities of Heaven, which was his proper Country, and everlasting
Throne of the Prince of Peace. But as the first Adam by his Transgression
rendered himself Obnoxious to the Divine Wrath, and was banished from a Paradise
upon Earth; so the second Adam who knew no Sin, underwent, for a while, a
voluntary Exile from the Celestial Paradise, that he might confer it upon us,
and work a Reconciliation betwixt God and his Rebellious Subjects. I came forth
from the Father, says he, and am come into the World. Again, I leave the World
and go to the Father, Joh. xvi. 17. In his Conversation with his Disciples he
set them his own Example, as the most perfect Model of Humility, Meckness,
Self-denial, and other Virtues, which he taught in the Sublimest manner; His
Soul was too great to be in love with Sublunary Vanity, and therefore he
affected no Grandeur, but avoided Ostentation, and despised the air of Popular
applause; as he was the Son of Man, he professed he came not to be Ministered
unto, but to Minister, and to give his Life a ransom for many: Yet that we may
not doubt his heavenly Extraction, We read, That the Angels Ministered unto him,
and Worshipped him: For being in the Form of God, he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; tho he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
Form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men. It Was the grace and
favor of our Lord Jesus Christ, That though he was Rich he became Poor, that we
through his Poverty might be Rich. For it is undeniably plain and clear that
Himself chose that mean condition wherein he Lived, because upon occasion he
could work a Miracle for the payment of the tribute Money; and all Creatures
were obsequious to his pleasure; He was Heir of all things; and though he had not
where to lay his Head upon Earth, the glorious Mansions of Heaven were disposed
of by him; and since he assured his Disciples, He went thither to prepare a
Place for them. The most likely way to Wean their Affections from Earthly
things, was to show them in his own Person, how little he valued the Delights
and Conveniences of this present Life. He likewise took our Sicknesses, and
bore our Infirmities in his own Body, but at the same time gave his chosen
Followers a convincing demonstration of Omnipotence in his wonderful
Transfiguration upon the Mount, where his Face did shine as the Sun, and his
Raiment became white as the Light; this showed him able to perform what he said
to the Jews, Destroy this Temple and in three Days I will raise it up;
Signifying thereby his Resurrection, which declared him to be the Son of God
with Power, and was a mighty Argument of his Divinity, and the Truth of his
Religion. Such was the blindness of the People of Israel, that they esteemed
him, Stricken, Smitten of God and Afflicted; Whereas his Death served to make
his Victory and Triumph the more Illustrious, when he broke the Prison of the
Grave and ascended up on High, and led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto
Men. The Angels received Him with Acclamations of Joy, and Sung; Lift up your
Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye Lift up, ye Everlasting Doors; and the King of
Glory shall come in. Thus God Exalted Christ far above all Principality and
Power, and Might and Dominion, and every Name that is Named, not only in this
World, but also that which is to come; and has put all things under his Feet,
and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church. He is the living
Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God and precious; He is that
Rock from whom the waters of Life flow; He is the Bright and Morning Star which
chased away the Clouds of the Night, and brought in an Eternal Day; He is that
Light which Lights every Man that comes into the World, that Directs them
here, and Guide's them into the happy Seats of Endless Glory hereafter.

Finally, Jesus Christ is that Great Prophet who taught the way of God
Perfectly. He renewed in Man the Image of God, by those most excellent Rules
and Precepts, which he gave for the Practice of true Holiness and Virtue. The
Gentiles had by their great Wickedness almost quite Eras'd those natural
impressions of Good and Evil which were written in their Hearts; and the Jews
by their corrupt glosses had miserably defaced the Moral Law which was engraven
in Tables of Stone. Our Blessed Savior gave Strength and Beauty to them both,
he Polished and Brightened the Principles of Reason, rescued the Law from the
false interpretations of the Pharisees, and pressed upon the Consciences of the
People the most difficult Duties of the Divine Life; for the better Observance
of which, he makes a clear Revelation of Eternal Rewards and Punishments, and
acquaints them that if their Righteousness did not exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but should be cast into outer darkness, where there is Weeping and
Gnashing of Teeth. Thus He framed the Noblest Institution and Religion that was
ever vouchsafed to Mankind; but this was not enough, for our first Parents and
all their Posterity being deeply fallen from their Primitive Perfection, 'twas
expedient there should be Satisfaction made for the Original and Actual
Transgressions, which the Sons of Men are guilty of: Jesus Christ alone could
make a full and sufficient Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the World;
because in his Humanity he was of the same Nature with the Offenders, but
without Sin; and his Divinity added an Infinite Value to his Sacrifice, though it
was not capable of Suffering. And now having obtained an Unchangeable
Priesthood, and having overcome Death by his Death, He continues his Care and
Protection to his Church, which he bought with a price inestimable. He
nourishes the Souls of his Disciples with the Spiritual Food of his Word and
Sacraments, pour's upon them plentiful Effusions of his holy Spirit, and
Promised to be with them to the End of the World. And in the last and greatest
act of his Regal Office, He shall come again with Glory to Judge both Quick and
Dead; and shall Pronounce the Sentence of Everlasting Punishment to the Bad,
and Life Eternal to the Good and Pious.

Thus I have considered the Dignity and Excellency of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, which was the first thing I proposed to Speak to. I come,

Secondly, To show how we are to Receive Him. Now to Receive Christ, is to
Believe on his Name; That is, To Exercise all the acts of such a Faith as
produces the genuine fruits of Piety and Obedience. If we so acknowledge
Christ as to believe in him, if we so believe in him as to Love him; if we so
love him as to keep his Commandments; then we are rooted and grounded in love,
and Christ dwells in our Hearts by Faith. This kind of Faith is that Key which
opens the heavenly Treasures; that Spiritual Eye which discern's the Invisible
things of God; that Hand which reaches to the Tree of Life; and that Pillar of
Fire which leads the true Israelites through the Wilderness of this World, into
the Celestial Canaan. For so it is Written; Joh* iii 16. God so loved the
World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in Him
should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life. The Purifying of the Heart is one
great property of Faith, and is the Wedding Garment put on by those who truly
believe in Jesus Christ. Otherwise, if our Hearts be Unsanctifyed and full of
Sinful Thoughts, we shall give our Savior a worse entertainment than he
received in the Manger, among the brute Beasts: But the Holy Spirit Purifies
the Heart by Faith: as it is Written, Acts xv. 9. How acceptable to God Purity
and Innocence is, there cannot be a greater instance than our Dear Lord's
Conception: She who was so much in favor with God, as to bring a Savior into
the World, was indeed descended from the Royal Line of the Kings of Judah,
according to Ancient Prophecies, but at this time the Stem of Jesse was brought
very low, being reduced to its roots; and the blessed Virgin's Virtue was more
Illustrious than her Family. And as God showed his great Love of Holiness in
the Conception of his beloved Son, so he likewise did at his Nativity. The
humble Shepherds were the Persons to whom the glad Tidings of great Joy were
brought, and they heard the Angels Sing their Anthems of Praise, for the Birth
of a Savior. The heavenly Host visited them whose harmless Lives bore the
nearest resemblance to their own: and who in their mean Calling retained some
Footsteps of Man's Primitive Righteousness. The Inhabitants of Courts and
Cities were not disposed to welcome a Lawgiver, who should reform the Extortion
and Injustice of the one; and the Pride and Luxury of the other: Earthly
Treasures were all their care, and they gave themselves little trouble about
the Heavenly; and accordingly Christ tell's them, It was easier for a Camel to
go through a needles eye than for such to enter into his Kingdom. The Prince of
Life will meet with no better a reception from us whilst our affections lie
grovelling upon the Ground, and our minds cleave to the Dust; but if we desire
nothing upon Earth in comparison of him, and count all Temporal things as
dross, when they come in competition with our Duty; and Purify our selves from
all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; then we shall be qualified to entertain
this Divine Guest in our Souls; our Bodies too will become living Temples of
the Deity, and delightful Habitations of his Presence. But this is not the only
property of Faith; for it enlightens our Understandings as well as Sanctifies
our Hearts; and this illumination of the Mind, makes us cordially embrace the
Religion of the Crucified Jesus. For want of it the Jews stumbled and fell;
they were an extremely carnal People, and looked for happiness no farther than
the pleasures of Sense: At the time of our Savior's appearing amongst them,
they retained their Polity and Government, but their Necks were galled with the
Roman Yoke, and they were Tributaries to that People; which made them
impatiently long for the Messiah, whom they expected to be a Temporal
Deliverer, that should raise Himself a Kingdom upon the ruins of the Roman
Empire, and other Worldly Powers. Jesus Christ disappointing them in their
Expectations; they were very far from owning Him to be the King of Israel. And
as his Humiliation here below were a stumbling block to the Jews, who had some
Knowledge of the true God, so was it foolishness to the Greeks, whose Minds the
god of this World had wholly darkened. There is nothing more evident to an
Unprejudiced inquirer, than that the Prophecies of the Old Testament concerning
the Messiah are made up of two sorts of Predictions; One foretelling his first
advent to Save the World, the other his second coming to Judge the World. With
respect to the former, the Prophet Isaiah describes Him, in the liii d.
Chapter, As a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, without Beauty that we
should desire him. With respect to the latter, Daniel uses these Magnificent
expressions, in the vii. Chapter 13, 14.v. I saw in the night Visions, and
behold One like the Son of Man, came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the
Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People Nations and Languages
should Serve him: His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. So gross were the
Understandings of the Jews, that the generality of them took no notice of this
distinction, but refused the Holy One, and the Just. In like manner the Cross
of Christ was foolishness to the Greeks or Gentiles, because the necessity of
such an excellent Persons Sufferings was a thing beyond their comprehension;
being unacquainted with the true origin of Mankind, they knew nothing of that
Sacrifice of Atonement which was to reconcile them to God. Our Savior's
Sublime Precepts and Stupendous Miracles would certainly have given Him in
their esteem a preference to the greatest of their Philosophers were they
satisfied in the reasons of his Passion; they would soon have desisted from
their cruel Persecutions, if they had been firmly persuaded that the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in Him, who was numbered among the Transgressors. Such of the
Gentiles who consulted and believed the Scriptures made no Scruple of giving
their assent to this Truth: The admirable Harmony betwixt the Old and New
Testament, and the Resurrection of Jesus from the Dead, convinced them of his
Divinity, and took away the Scandal of his Cross. Upon this account St. Paul
congratulates the Ephesians, in the following Words, Wherefore I also, after I
heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and Love unto all the Saints, cease not
to give thinks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers; that the God of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of him: the eyes of your Understanding
being inlightn'd: -- Ephesians. i.15, 16, 17.v. From hence it appears that
Illumination of the Mind is the happy consequence of a Lively Faith; and if it
be joined with true Holiness, it will enable us worthily to Receive our Lord
Jesus Christ.

I proceed therefore to show,

Thirdly, The great advantages of doing so; for thereby we become the Sons of
God. Nothing can give us so adequate an Idea of the greatness of this
Privilege, as the contemplation of the Misery of our Natural Estate. How are
we born to possess a few Months of Vanity here below* How short is our Life!
Short indeed in Time, but tedious in the Troubles that attend it! Our Reason
does distinguish us from the rest of the Creation in nothing more than in the
pain it gives us; the brute Creatures are sensible only of the present Moment;
but we double our Miseries by anticipating the future, and reflecting upon the
past: The Natural Evils we suffer are many and real, and the happiness we enjoy
is but imaginary, or at the best, but a privation of Pain. So in Moral things,
how weak and faint is the light of unassisted Reason, how uncertain to direct
our steps in the way that we should walk, how unable to lead us to that Rest
and Happiness which we so earnestly desire. The best Men among the Heathens
allowed themselves in great Vices, and the most perfect of their Governments
encouraged several Enormities, by the very Laws of their Constitution; which is
particularly true of the Lacedaemonians: Though a Plutarch inform's us, The
Spartan Virtue out-shin'd all the rest. It is easy to account for this
universal Corruption of the Gentile World, by observing how much at a loss they
were to Know what should be the reward of their actions; the vulgar sort were
amused with a Poetical Fiction of Flowery Plains, and Elysian Fields; but their
most Exalted Sages confessed it doubtful, Whether there was any such thing as a
Future State, or not. So true is the character which St. Paul gives of them,
That they were aliens from the common Wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant, having no hope, and being without God in the World: They were the
Children of Wrath, and of Disobedience, being dead in Trespasses and Sins. The
Jews indeed were in a much better condition; and Israel was honored with the
title of God's Son, even his first born: As it is Written, Exodus iv.22.v. He was
their God, and they were his People. But not to insist upon the great Defects
of their Law in many other points, I shall only mention at present this
difference betwixt them and us. Though they were the Sons of God, and the
Peculiar favorites of Heaven, yet they had no other express Motive to
Obedience than the Promise of an Earthly Inheritance: therefore it is that the
inspired Penmen so often lament the vanity of Human Life, wherein their
comforts ended almost as soon as begun. That good Prince Hezekiah describes
this condition of Mortality in the most moving strain. The Grave cannot Praise
thee, Death cannot Celebrate thee: They that go down into the Pit cannot hope
for thy truth; the Living, the Living he shall Praise thee, as I do this day:
Isai. xxxviii.18, 19.v. But now the Gospel has opened a new Scene of things,
and discovered such Mysteries as have been hid from the Foundation of the
World^ He that believes in Christ though he were dead, yet shall he live: And
whosoever lives and believes in Him shall never dye. The Adopted Sons of God
under this gracious Dispensation, are Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and when
they arrive at that happy Place, they shall Inherit there Immortal Glory and
Eternal Joy. We must complain no more of the calamities of this World, since
they serve to quicken our Pace to a better; and Death it self loses its
Terrors, as being but a short Passage to an Endless Life. And that we may not
miss of the prize of the High Calling that is before us, God assist's us with
the aids of his Holy Spirit, by whose Inspiration the Thoughts of our Hearts
are cleans'd, our Lusts subdued, and all the hindrances of our Salvation
removed: Such is God's Paternal Love and Care of us in and through Christ, That
he has not given us the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but the Spirit of
Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans viii.14. Another instance of the
Divine Goodness which we enjoy in this State of Adoption, is the Plenary
Remission of our Sins. The blood of Christ speaks better things than that of
Abel, and takes away the Sins of the World. They who sincerely repent and
believe the Gospel, shall be Saved from Eternal Death; God will be Merciful to
their Unrighteousness, and their Iniquities will he remember no more. The
consideration of these inexpressible benefits one would think sufficient to
make us perform the conditions upon which they are Promised, Namely, To Believe
in Christ, by whom alone we are Justified and Reconciled to God. But lest there
should be in any of you an Evil Heart of Unbelief,

I come in the Fourth Place, To represent the great Sinfulness of not Receiving
Jesus Christ as our Savior. If our Duty rises in proportion to the Means of
Conviction, which are afforded us, then our guilt will be very great should we
deny our assent to the Truth of the Gospel: for Almighty God in his Infinite
Wisdom has used all possible methods to Excite our Faith, and Engage our
Obedience to Jesus Christ: which will appear, if we do but consider first, The
Intrinsic Excellency of the Christian Religion, which evidently bears the
stamp of Divinity upon it, as being agreeable to the highest reason, and
advancing Human Nature to the greatest Perfection it is capable of in this
World; It acquaints us with the great End of our Creation, Establishes a just
empire over our Passions, and Instructs in the way of obtaining true Happiness,
viz. The Beatifick Vision and Fruition of God: Nay, so complete are the
Doctrines of the Gospel, That they do not only make our Lives more Divine and
Rational, but likewise free them from a great part of the Miseries of this
World: Were they duly observed, the Peace of God would attend us through all the
changes and chances of this Mortal Life, and safely conduct us to the Haven of
Rest and Felicity: The Wisdom from Above which is first Pure, and then*
Peaceable, would restore this present State to it is Original Innocence and
Tranquillity, and make Wars and Tumults which disturb these Lower Regions to
cease in the Earth. In short, The Christian Religion does so infinitely exceed
all others, that if there were no other argument, this alone is a sufficient
proof, that our Blessed Savior was a Person sent from God. But alas, This is
the condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil; and therefore extraordinary
Miracles were used to fix their belief and attention: The Jews were extremely
Sottish in ascribing them to the Devil, because as our Savior argued, they
tended to the Destruction of Satan's Kingdom; they were most of them acts of
Charity and Mercy toward Men, and were brought in confirmation of that holy
Institution which Jesus Christ Published to the World; whereby the Powers of
Darkness were utterly subverted, and Mankind was rescued from their Miserable
Slavery, and Subjection to Evil Spirits: the Finger of God therefore was
plainly visible in those Mighty Works, and they were effects of a Divine Power
Inherent in Jesus Christ. However, besides this evidence of Miracles God has
given us the sure word of Prophecy to depend upon, that there might not be the
least pretense for Infidelity; how were the Time and Place of his Birth, the
most important actions of his Life, his bitter Death and Passion, and his
Victory over Hell and the Grave exactly foretold many Ages before our Savior's
Incarnation; to Him bear all the Prophets Witness; Nay Isaiah's style is so
clear and particular, that it is difficult to relate the History of past
Transactions more distinctly than he has Propheci'd of things to come. How just
then is that Sentence which Christ pronounces upon the Unbelieving World, after
his appearance among them? He that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the Name of the Only begotten Son of God. This is a very
fruitful Topic, but I hope there is no need to enlarge upon it, and
considering the Severity of the Season, will conclude with a brief APPLICATION
of what has been said.

First then, Let us not neglect this Great Salvation; but let us sincerely
believe in Jesus Christ, and act suitably to such a belief. Our Duty is set
before us in the clearest Light, and we have more Powerful Motives to Obedience
than either Jews or Gentiles had; our Obligations therefore are greater, and
more will be expected from us; and though we are Justified by Faith in the blood
of Christ, yet we know, That without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. Thus
are we to receive Jesus Christ here, if we expect to be received by Him
here-after; for He solemnly declares, Not every one that says unto Me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my
Father which is in Heaven; And, Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command
you. S. Matthew. vii.11.v. S. Joh. xv.14.v.

Secondly, Let us set a just value upon the glorious Privilege of being made
the Sons of God. As we are Heirs of Eternity, and entitled to a Kingdom that
shall not decay, let us never do any thing unworthy of such Hopes, and
unbecoming such a Relation; but let us walk as Children of the Light, and of
the Day: and since Jesus Christ has Sanctified our Nature in taking it upon
Him, let us not Debase it with those Vices which were inexcusable even in the
Heathens.

But,

Thirdly and Lastly, Let us be careful to render our just Tribute of Praise and
Thanksgiving for the ineffable Mercy of God, in sending His Own Son into the
World. Our Savior is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon us, which
gives Light to them that sit in darkness, and guides our Feet into the way of
Peace. Let us therefore extol the Name of God, and say; Allelujah, for the Lord
God Omnipotent Reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor unto Him.
Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto Him that sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb for Ever and Ever.

FINIS.

