NEPENTHES Evangelicum. A brief ESSAY, UPON A SOUL at EASE; In what PIETY will
bring both PARENTS and CHILDREN to. A SERMON Occasioned by the DEATH of a
Religious Matron, Mrs. Mary Rock. Who having entered the Eighty first Year of
her Age, withdrew from us. 30 d. 7 m. 1713.

By Cotton Mather, D.D.

Matthew. XXVI. 13. It shall be told for a Memorial of her.

BOSTON: Printed by Thomas Fleet, for David Henchman at his Shop in
King Street. 1713.

A SOUL at EASE.
BOSTON-Lecture, 1 d. 8 m. 1713.
Psalm. XXV. 13, His Soul shall dwell at Ease; and his Seed shall inherit the
Earth.


THE Text I now Read, had not been Readd unto you, if the Providence of God had
not furnished me with an Extraordinary Commentary upon it. Yesterday there took
her Flight from us, an Excellent Handmaid of the Lord, in whose Dispositions
and Circumstances, my Text had a most Emphatical, and Observable Commentary.
And I shall do but what is required in the Fifth Commandment, if I take this
Opportunity of doing a Justice to the Memory of a Just One, whom we all agree
to Honor as a Mother Israel: And for whom we are this Day, Bowed down heavily,
as One that Mourns for his Mother. A Person, who was One of the Firstborn,
if not the very First of her Sex that was Born, in this famous Metropolis of
the English-America: And who deserves to be Honorably Mentioned, as long as
BOSTON shall endure, which, I hope, will be unto the second Coming of our
Savior. May it be an happy Omen, that Many Daughters of this our New-English
Jerusalem will do Virtuously, when we see the First of them, like another
M^^^am, (her Names-sake) leading them in the Praises of God.

I will not lose the Sight of Her, though I will for an Hour seem to address
nothing but the Text, that I have chosen on her Occasion: A Text, wherein I see
both the Blessings of the Upper-Springs, and the Blessings of the
Nether-Spring, flowing unto us. Our God has this in His Order for our Meeting
this Day; Gather the People together, and I will give them Water. O
Congregation, Sing hereupon the Song of Israel; Spring up, O Well; Sing ye unto
it!

I verily believe, that Blessings to be received in another World, are here
engaged unto the Fear of God. But, I find, Interpreters do generally understand
certain Blessings to be received in this World. And I know, That Godliness has
the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of the Life that is to come. I
am willing so far to comply with the Voice of the Board of Interpreters, as to
employ first a Discourse on certain Blessings, which Piety will obtain for us,
in the Life that now is. But I foresee, that before I have done, the Blessings
which Piety will obtain for us in the Life that is to come, will break in upon
our Meditations. We shall be unavoidably, and as it were by Surprise, led into
the Meditations of them.

You may behold here, a Conjunction of Blessings: An Aspect full of Happiness.
One is, An Easy Soul. The other is, An Happy Seed. Indeed there is a very great
Adaptation in the mention of these together. They are very Aptly joined. Our
departing Soul does not fall into Uneasiness on any Point more sensibly, than
the Condition of our Seed. That which makes us very Uneasy, is, our Thoughts,
What may become of our Children. O Godfearing Man, Fear nothing; let thy Soul
dwell at Ease; thy Offspring shall be well provided for.

This is the DOCTRINE that is now ready for you.

To Live in the true Fear of God, is the way to Lodge in a sweet Ease of Soul:
And they that fear God have this good Thing particularly to make them Easy,
that their Children after them shall fare the better for them.

We will begin with the Advanage which our Piety will bring to Our selves: The
Advantage of, An easy Soul The Fear of the Lord will be the Ease of the Soul
that has it. Piety will rescue the Soul from Disturbance, from Vexation, from
such Troubles and such Tumults, as will else Discompose it wonderfully.

We will first of all take Notice of some General Instructions, about the Ease
of Soul which Piety will be attended withal. If Ministers would accurately
consult the Languages wherein our God has written His Oracles unto us, they
would often find such Hints, as would otherwise pass unobserved, though most
highly worthy of Observation. Here is an Instance. There is an Instructive
Elegance and Emphasis, yea, a Variety of Instructions, in that Expression, His
Soul shall dwell at Ease.

First. The Ease of Mind obtained by Piety, will be a Lasting Ease. Our Soul
will Dwell in it. Our Abode will be in Ease. We shall have an Abiding Ease.
There will be a Continuance of our Ease. We enter into it, at our First
Conversion unto Piety; we shall remain in it, unto all Eternity. It will not be
the short Blaze of Thorns Crackling under a Pot. When, I pray, when will it
come to an End? Not until the Soul it self come to an End: A Lamp of God, that
shall Burn forever. The Account is a Joyful One, a Pleasant One: Psalm. XVI. 11.
Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures forevermore.

Secondly. The Ease of Mind attained by Piety, is to be enjoyed in the Darkest
Time that passes over us. Our Soul shall spend the Night in it. This is the
English of the Hebrew Word used here. When it is with us, a Night of Darkness
and Sorrow, even then we shall be at Ease. There shall arise unto us Light in
Darkness. We shall meet with such Things as will give us Ease, and Revive us,
when we Walk in the midst of Trouble. When it is a very Dark Time with us, and a
Midnight of Confusion is on our Affairs, and our Flesh can See nothing but
Hazard and Horror on every side, Now is the Time that Piety will give Ease unto
us. It will do that Thing; Job XXXV. 10. Give Songs in the Night.

Thirdly. The Soul is the Seat of that Ease which is attained by Piety. Our
Body may be ill at Ease, notwithstanding our Piety. A Pious Man may have a
Diseased Body; a Body, that shall be as they said the Laborious Calvin's was,
An Hospital of Diseases; a Body that shall Feel, as Timothies did, Often
Infirmities. Lord, One whom thou Love, is Sick! But the Soul may be at Ease,
when the Body is in Pain. When the Outward Man is even broken to Pieces, Piety
will enable us to say still, My Mind is Easy! Our Soul shall be Sedate, yea,
Solac'd, when our Outward Man is never so much off the Hinges. If Piety would
only Ease the Body, we should call it, A Physician of no Value. It Is the Soul,
the Soul, that most wants to be made Easy. Easiness in the Outward Man indeed
cannot be expected here: This is a World that has Thorns every where growing in
it. But now, the Boast of Piety is that; Luke I. 46, 47. My Soul does Magnify
the Lord; my Spirit has Rejoiced in God my Savior.

We will now go on in the next Place, to Enquire more Particularly. What is
that Ease which Piety brings to the Soul? And, Whence that Ease of the Soul
arises? Diverse MAXIMS of PIETY are to be taken into our Consideration, and for
our Encouragement in the course of Piety. By these MAXIMS, the Enquiry will be
sufficiently answered.

I. Piety brings us to Dwell in a Good State: And, Oh! the Glorious Ease which
belongs to the Soul of that Man, who finds himself to be fixed in a Good State
for Perpetuity! What we render, His Soul shall Dwell at Ease, is in the
Original, His Soul shall dwell in Good. It is an Ease flowing from a Sense of
Good. A Good State makes the Mind Easy. By the Fear of God we are brought into
a Good State. And that our Mind may Dwell at Ease, the Fear of God will bring
us to Dwell in a Good State. We shall be fixed in it. The New Covenant is a
Good Covenant. It is called, The Better Covenant. Piety settles us under the
Covenant of Grace. A Soul settled under the Covenant of Grace, may Sing that
Song; Psalm. CXVI. ^. Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has deals
Bountifully with thee. My Friend, what is there now to Disquiet thy Soul? Thou
art in a Covenant, which makes over the Alsufficient GOD unto thee for thy
Portion: Surely a most sufficient Portion! A Covenant that puts thee into the
Hands of a most Powerful and Merciful Savior: And none can Pluck thee out of
those Hands! A Covenant, that provides a full Supply of all thy Wants, a full
Relief of all thy Fears, a Defense from all Damage in this World, and a
Perfection of all Blessedness in the World to come. Soul, Do but now sincerely
say, Great GOD, Be then my God; And Glorious JESUS, let me by thy Merit, and
thy Conduct, be brought home unto God! So from this Moment, this will be thy
Covenant. A Soul in such a Covenant, may Dwell at Ease; and always think, I am
well, I am well; I have all that my Soul can wish for! It Is a Soul that
Inherits all Things: A Soul that has GOD for a Father: One whose Father is, The
High Possessor of Heaven and Earth: To be the Heir of such a Father, the Care
of such a Father; Soul, take thine Ease; thou have Goods laid up, not for many
Years, but for Eternal Ages!

II. To Dwell in CHRIST and in GOD, is to Dwell at Ease: Piety brings us to
such a Dwelling. It brings to what may be the Version of the Clause we are
upon; His Soul shall dwell with the GOOD ONE. And who that is, we know very
well. By the Fear of God, we come to Dwell in the Glorious ONE, who is Goodness
it self. The Note of the Fear of God is that; Lord, Toon have been our Dwelling
I lace in all Generations. Oh! most Easy Dwelling Flace! Piety brings us to
Dwell in a CHRIST; And so to do, is to Dwell in a Rock. The Believer flies to a
Christ as to a Rock, and says, Here will I Dwell, for I have desired it! Such
an one, Dwells in me, and I in him, says our Lord. It may be said unto the
Believer, what we Read; Number. XXIV. 21. Strong is thy Dewlling Place, and thou
put thy Nest in a Rock. Oh! the Safety of such a Dwelling! Oh! how
exceeding Wise the Soul that makes Choice of such a Dwelling! A Feeble Soul,
that has made an House in such a Rock, may well be an Easy Soul! O Soul in
Christ; What, what should hinder thy being a Soul at Ease? The Great GOD
becomes the Habitation of such a Soul. We Read, 1. Joh. III. 24. He that keeps
His Commandments, dwells in Him. And how excellently Accommodated must the Soul
be, which Dwells in God! Certainly, in the Infinite GOD, there is enough to
make an Happy Soul; and therefore an Easy Soul. A Soul in GOD, is a
Wellsheltered Soul. He who Dwells in the secret Place of the most High, and
abides under the Shadow of the Almighty, such an one will say of the Lord, He
is my Refuge, my God; in Him I will trust. The Intention of all this Metaphor
is thus much; (for I will uncloath it:) By Piety we Repair to God in Christ; We
Secure His Friendship, His Favor, His ready Succor; We Converse with Him
continually; We are taken under His Protection. A Soul dwelling here; may Dwell
at Ease. What can there be to Annoy such a Soul?

III. To Dwell in Peace is to Dwell at Ease. Piety brings us to Peace: The
Paths thereof are Paths of Peace. To be at Peace with God, This, this is to
be Easy; and hereby, Good shall come unto thee. Now, by the Fear of God we come
into it. We Read; Psalm. CXIX. 165. Great Peace have they which love thy Law,
and nothing shall Offend them. Piety brings us to the Pardon of our Sin. The
Guilt of Sin, is the most heavy Load that ever was heard of; A Load enough to
break the Back of an Angel! What would a Soul thoroughly Awakened, and horribly
Terrified with the Guilt of Sin, give to be Eased of such a ponderous Load?
Piety carries the Laden Soul to the Sacrifice of that Savior, who says, Come
to me, and I will give thee Rest! O Soul coming to Piety and Repentance: The
Voice of Heaven to thee, is that; Math. IX. 2. Be of good Cheer, thy Sins are
forgiven thee. It Is; Be at Ease, the Lord has put away thy Sin; Thou shall not
Die. A Soul Glorifying the Holy God in the ways of Piety, is a Soul Reconciled
unto GOD. The Wrath of GOD is turned away from that Soul: That Soul, being
Justified by Faith, has Peace with GOD. The Song of that Eased Soul may be, I
will Praise Thee, O Lord, because though thou wast Angry with me, Thine Anger is
turned away. And what follows? Thou do Comfort me. A Peace of Conscience! A
Soul dwelling at Ease, is a Pacified Conscience, a Peaceable Conscience; A
Conscience, which from the Blood of a Savior sprinkled upon it speaks Peace to
the pardoned Sinner. In the Wisdom of the Ancients, the Note was, Haec est
Animae Suavissima ut Saluberrima Requies. A Conscience Raging and Roaring with
Guilty Apprehensions, is of all things the most Intolerable: Such a Wounded
Spirit, who can bear it? who can bear it? The Soul is Eased, when the Painful
and Grievous Wounds of the Conscience are healed. A Conscience quieted, by the
Blood of the Son of God Cleansing from all Sin, this renders an Easy Soul.
Piety brings a Quiet unto the Conscience. It speaks Peace to the Soul. Soul,
Dwell at Ease, when thy Conscience has in it, that Peace of God that passes
Understanding. A Soul at a continual Feast, surely is a Soul dwelling at Ease.
A Good Conscience is a continual Feast.

IV. Holiness brings Ease to the Soul, by Healing the Distempers of the Soul.
The Fruit of Piety is an Healed Soul; therefore an Easy one. An Holy Soul, is
an Healed Soul. The Fear of God is Health to the Soul, and Marrow to the Mind;
It makes an Healthy Soul. The Passions of the Soul, are the Things which will
not let it be Easy; Things which break the Rest of it. Hence it is that we Read;
Isa. LVII. 20, 21. The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, which cannot Rest;
There is no Peace, says my God unto the Wicked. Piety Cures our Passions;
Moderates them; Regulates them. In Piety the Soul is brought into Order; The
Disorders of the Soul are mightily Rectified. This makes an Easy Soul. A Lust
in the Soul, is a Thorn in the Soul. The Soul cannot be at Ease, while a Lust
is Inflaming and Enraging of it. Piety pulls out the Thorn. Our Holy Savior
does in the Piety which He Works in us, Redeem us from all Iniquity. Piety will
teach the Soul to Love nothing in this World Inordinately, and makes us willing
to deny our selves of every thing that God would have us go without. Piety will
teach the Soul to lay aside all Inordinate Care; It will help us to cast all
our Care upon God, and put our Trust in Him for the Issue of all. Oh! the Ease
of the Soul, that can do such things! Content makes an Easy Soul; yea, it is an
Easy Soul. A Soul Dwelling at Ease, is a Soul contented with the Condition
which God has appointed for us. Piety brings us to Contentment. A Grand Lesson
which Piety teaches the Soul, is that; Be content with such Things as you have.
It brings the Soul to this Easy Frame; Lord, Not my Will, but thy will be done.
We Read; 1. Tim. VI. 6. Piety with Contentment is great Gain. Piety will be
with Contentment; and therefore it will bring us to great Ease.

V. Piety puts the Soul upon that Course, which Usually, yea, Naturally brings
Ease to the Soul. The Fear of God will always produce and excite Prayer to God.
Every one that is Godly will Pray. Now Prayer is the truest Hearts-Ease. When
the Soul is not well at Ease, the kind Invitation of Heaven unto us, is that;
Psalm. LV. 22. Cast thy Burden on the Lord. Piety will do this thing; and this
throws off the Burden; This Eases the Soul. Whatever Distress be upon the Soul,
Piety will say, Well, I will go tell my Father of it! If the Soul be in any
Grief, Piety will Vent the Grief, in a Prayer to the Father of Mercies; A
Prayer to the God who does not willingly Afflict or Grieve the Children of Men.
The Resolution of Piety is, To be careful for nothing, but in every thing to
present a Request unto the Lord: Then follows, Phil. IV. 7. The Peace of God
shall Garrison your Heart and Minds through Christ Jesus; at such a rate, that
the Enemies of your Tranquillity shall not be able to break in upon you. Indeed,
the Heart knows its own Bitterness; and we often know the Plague of our own
Heart; A Grief that is known to none but our own Heart; none but we our selves
are privy to it. But now, Piety will put this Grief into a Prayer, and so carry
it unto the Lord. A Grief carried thither, is eased by being so. Either the
Ground of the Grief is removed, or else the Sense of (...) the Grief is
assuaged; when it is by Prayer spread before the Lord. We Read of one who was
of a sorrowful Spirit, 1. Sam. I. 18. She could say, I have poured out my Soul
unto the Lord; And anon, Her Countenance was no more Sad. Oh! No such Anodyne,
for an unquiet Soul! A Praying Posture is an Easy Posture for the Soul. To fall
down on the Knees, this eases the Soul. It was urged, Psalm. LXXXVI. 4. Rejoice
the Soul of thy Servant; for unto thee, O Lord, I do lift up my Soul. Verily,
To lift up the Soul unto the Lord, this Comforts the Soul, Gladdens the Soul,
Eases the Soul: A Praying Soul takes the way to be an Easy Soul. There is no
Case but Prayer will suit it: It is the Universal Medicine.

VI. Piety Assures the Soul, that those Things, which most threaten the Ease of
the Soul, shall but promote the Good of it. The Fear of God will bring us to
Dwell in Good, because it assures us, that nothing shall befall us, but what
shall do us Good. So to Dwell in Good, is to Dwell at Ease. That which will not
let us be Easy, is the Calamity whereto we are obnoxious. Our Disasters do
spoil and break our Ease. We think we are Hurt, or we fear that we shall be so.
But Piety brings us under the covert of that Word; Romans VIII. 28. All things
shall work together for Good, unto them that love God. Ah, Soul, that cannot be
Easy! The Affliction which Discomposes thee, and will not let thee be at Ease,
will do thee no Hurt. It is a Faithful God, who sends thy Affliction upon thee;
One who says, I will do thee no Hurt: And thou shall certainly find, That God
has meant it unto Good. An excellent Servant of God, sadly tortured with the
Stone, would in the midst of his Affliction cry out, I am upon my Fathers Rack.
Child, Though thou may be upon a Rack, yet it is thy Fathers Rack! Afflicted
Soul, Consider this; Realize this; My God is doing of me Good, by all His
afflictive Dispensations! Why should thou not be at Ease, when thou art
sure, that anon thy Experience will be that; Psalm. CXIX. 7. It is good for me
that I have been Afflicted. Oh! Be at Ease; Thy Poverty comes to make thee Rich
in Faith. The Reproaches on thy Name, are to fit thee for a Crown of Glory. The
Loss of thy Friend, is that thou may have the Good part that cannot be taken
away. Be Easy; This Affliction, which for the present is not Joyous but
Grievous, will Afterward, Afterward! -- be found for thy Benefit. The Fruits
of it, will be such as will Express the Righteousness and Faithfulness of God,
in all His Dealings with thee: Peacable Fruits: Oh! let thy Soul be at Ease,
and in Peace, from the Prospect of them! That Hope, All for the Best, All for
the Best! Methinks, it may always keep a Soul at Ease. A Soul ever Sailing on
the pacific Sea; while Bound unto the Port which I am now presently to tell you
of.

VII. Piety will provide a Dwelling for the SOUL, after Death; and so good a
Dwelling, that the Ease of Soul in it, will be Wonderful! Wonderful! Wonderful!
The Blessings of the Life to come, are now, as I foretold, come unto us. The
Fear of God provides an Easy Dwelling for the Soul of the Good Man, at the Time
when his Seed Inherits the Earth. At the time of our Death, it is that our
Children enter upon the Inheritance that we leave unto them, and make their
Division of it. At this time the Soul of a Good Man shall have a Dwelling in
Good; It shall dwell in a good State, and in a good Place, and therefore dwell
at Ease. I am obliged unto the Famous Alting the Younger for this Illustration.
The Immortality of the Soul is plainly Confessed and Asserted in this
Expectation. The New Testament has most plainly Testified this Article of our
Faith: It is not possible for any Words to be plainer or fuller for this
Purpose, than those Words of our Savior; Matthew. X. 28. They that Kill the
Body, are not able to Kill the Soul. But Sirs, you see the Old Testament also
acknowledges it; An Easy Dwelling for a prepared Soul, when it leaves the Body.
Let no Man be now so Brutish, as to make any Doubt, whether he has an Immortal
Soul or no. There is a late Infamous Bigot, whom they will needs have to pass
for a very Learned Man; that for a notable Proof of his Learning, has written a
Discourse to prove from the Scriptures and the First Fathers, that the Soul is
a Principle naturally Mortal. You have seen the Scriptures Condemn that Foolish
Man; and one cannot well Imagine, with what Face, he could call in the Fathers
to Patronize his wicked Opinion. I may not be allowed here to Digress for the
Confutation of an Assertion made with so much of an Impudence, that cannot be
accounted for: But I hope, Justin Martyr may pass for one of the Fathers, who
in his Apology, over and over again asserts, All Departed Souls to be in a
state of Sensibility; All of them to have a Sensation continued unto them.
Well, but what comes of a God-fearing, and so a prepared Soul, when it must no
longer Dwell in the Body? The Soul is by Death, turned out of its Dwelling;
turned out of Doors. But a Regenerated Soul, a Sanctified Soul, a Purified
Soul, finds a Dwelling at its Departure hence; A Comfortable Dwelling; A
Dwelling where it shall be comforted. Our Savior who is gone to prepare them
for us, has told us, Luke XVI. 9. When ye fail, they shall receive you into
everlasting Habitations. Our Sin has brought us into Debt unto the Justice of
God. When we Die, the Creditor comes upon us for the Debt. Then we fail; we are
Broke; we are Bankrupts. Our Dwelling is taken from us. We are turned out of
All. But Then! our Compassionate Savior has Habitations for us, in His
Heavenly Mansions. An Excellent Minister in Hereford-shire, not very long ago,
uttering these Words, We know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have, -- There he stopped; There he faltered; There he
expired. Instead of Speaking the rest, he went unto it. I will now speak it. --
A Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternally in the Heavens.
Would you know where the Dwelling is? Our Savior said unto the Dying Penitent;
Luke XXIII. 43. This Day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Piety will bring to
Paradise. The Dwelling of a Soul distinguished by Piety, shall be in the
Paradise of God: That which Tertullian calls Locum Divinae Amaenitatis
recipiendis Sanctorum Spiritibus Destinatum. Soul, During the Sleep of Death,
and in the Days of Darkness, This, this will be the Lodging of the Soul: A
Paradise, where no Sin, and by Consequence, no Sorrow will cleave unto the
Soul. A Paradise, where the Soul will be elevated unto such Contemplations of
Him, as to render it after some sort, present with the Lord: A Paradise, where
the Soul shall Feed on the Tree of Life, and be refreshed by the Principle of
Grace, which God has planted in it. O most easy Dwelling! We Read of the Dying
Saints; Isa. LVII. 2. They enter into Peace, they rest in their Beds. Of the
Soul Dwelling in such a Paradise, we Read, It is Comforted. There is nothing to
render the Dwelling of such a Soul Uneasy, but only its remaining under that
part of the Curse; Its Body left Rotten in the Grave; and the Delay of the
Resurrection of the Dead, which it is waiting and longing for. But even this
Matter of Uneasiness is made Easy, by some Visions of a Glorious CHRIST in the
mean time enjoyed, and the glad Assurance of being er'e long Raised, and then
taken into the City of God.

But we will proceed now, to the Advantage which our Piety will bring to Ours:
The Advantage of an Happy Seed. Good Men have this good Thing to make them
Easy; their Children after them shall fare the better for them.

Let us Inform our selves upon what Account!

First. The Piety of Parents does bring their Children into the Covenant of
God. Pious Parents give up Themselves unto God, in His Covenant. But then, they
give up their Children as well as Themselves; their Children as a part of
Themselves. The Result is that; Genesis XVII. 7. An everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and unto thy Seed after thee. Oh! the Rich Inheritance of the
Children thus brought into the Covenant of God, and of Grace! To Inherit the
Earth, yea, to Inherit the whole World, is not so much as to have the great God
in Covenant with us, for our Inheritance. It follows; If these Children Die in
their Infancy, they have a Claim to all the Blessings of the Covenant, in the
Eternal World. When the great GOD says, I will be the God of these Children, He
intends, I will bring them to a part in the Heavenly City. O Pious Parents,
your Dead Children are but gone before you, into the Suburbs, and some
Foretastes of that Inheritance, which you have secured for them. Yea, this
Clause, They shall Inherit the Earth, must be a little more nicely thought
upon. There is an Earth to be Inherited by these Children: Even that New Earth,
wherein shall dwell Righteousness; that New Earth, over which they shall Reign,
of whom is the Kingdom of Heaven. These Children of Abraham, are to be Heirs of
the World; But in the World to come. When you Read of, Inheriting the Earth, O
Saints, look forward, as far as that World, for the Explaining, and the
Fulfilling of it. If these Children should survive their Infancy, the Covenant
has ensured this, That they shall have an Offer of the Gospel; That Christ, and
Grace, and Heaven, shall be Offered unto them. Unto them first is that Savior
sent, that would Bless them in turning them from their Iniquities. O Invaluable
Privilege!

Secondly. Piety in Parents, does dispose them to pursue a Good Education for
their Children. Of a Pious Parent, it was said in Genesis XVIII. 19. I know him,
that he will Command his Children, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
Even so, Such a Parent, I know him; He will instill the Principles of Religion
into his Children: They shall be well Catechized Children. Such a Parent, I
know him, He will inform his Children how to fly from Sin, and turn to God, and
close with Christ, and walk in a Conformity to the Doctrines of the Christian
Religion. Such a Parent, I know him, He will Advise his Children against the
Paths of the Destroyer, and restrain them and rescue them with all possible
Agony from those Destructive Ways. It Is a vast Felicity, to have such an
Education! But there is one Point of Education more, that such a Parent will
bestow upon his Children. He will find out a fit Employment for his Children:
He will have them taught some Employment, by which they may Inherit as much of
the Earth as may be needful for them, and they may be Useful in their
Generation: He will not bear, that they should be brought up in Idleness, and
prove mere Drones in the Hive of the Commonwealth. He makes to the World, an
Honorable Present of Well-educated Children!

Thirdly. Piety is a Prayerful sort of a Thing. Pious Parents will Pray for
their Children. Pious Parents are Praying Parents. They lay up a Stock of
Prayers for their Children. We Read of such an One; Job I. 5. He offered
Sacrifices according to the Number of all his Children. -- Thus did Job
continually. The Prayers of an Abraham for his Ishmael, O my God, That my Son
may Live in thy Sight! The Prayers of a David for his Solomon, O my God, That
my Son may have a perfect Heart given to him! There is a mighty Efficacy in
these Prayers. They avail much; Pious Parents are always Travailing for their
Children with them. Children, These Prayers will not be lost. It will be your
Fault, if they be! The Relations that have been given in the Histories of the
Church, concerning the Success of Prayer made by Pious Parents for their
Children, before and after the Days of Monica have been many and Mavelous. I
will now single out One, which perhaps you have not met withal. I know the Name
of a Worthy Man, who lived some while since in the County of Cornwall; and who
had a Son wandering from God, and from him, under a very Vicious Character. He
procured a Number of Ministers to join with him, in a Day of Prayer for the
Conversion of that Prodigal Son. On that very Day, Behold, the Prodigal
returned, with a new Temper and Biass of Soul given to him. God blessed a
Calamity that befell him, for his Awakening and Conversion; And from that very
Day he became a New Creature, and a Servant of God. Afterward this Worthy Man,
when he lay a Dying, said, I have Ten Children, whereof Nine are in Christ; God
has converted Nine of them to serious Piety. I Die Believing for the Tenth; He
also shall be brought home unto God. And this also was accomplished. Verily,
The Children of such Parents, are not soon to be despaired of!

Fourthly. The Piety of Parents, does often bespeak Prosperity for their
Children. We Read; Prove. XX. 7. The Just Man walks in his Integrity; His
Children are blessed after him. It Is often so; Pious Parents have their Piety
often Rewarded in the Prosperity of their Children. They get their Estates
Honestly; they wear well; their Children Inherit the Earth which they leave
unto them; the Third Heir it may be Rejoices in what was left by his
Grandfather. More than this; Pious Parents devote a Good Portion of their
Estates to Pious Uses. Yea, I must say unto you, They ALL do so! I say again,
whatever Havoc the Assertion may make among some Covetous Hypocrites, They ALL
do so. Now, this lays up a Good Portion for their Children. The Parents devise
Liberal Things; the Children reap the Harvest of that Liberality. The Alms
dispensed by the Parents, are a Seed sown in the Earth for the Children. It Is
to cast the Bread-corn into moist Ground, [which we are directed to do, Eccl.
XI. 1. For it is to be Translated so:] It will be seen after many Days. The
Children will have the Crop. After their Parents are laid in the Earth, even
then the Children, as the Reward of their Piety, do Inherit the Earth. If the
knowledge of their Children doing well, should arrive unto the Souls of the
Parents Dwelling at Ease, -- But these are Secret Things. And I know, of whom
it is said, His Sons come to Honor, and he knows it not.

APPLICATION.
I. Let the Antithesis now be called in; An Admonition Hearkened to, that is to
be Trembled at. The Soul of a Wicked Man may not be at Ease; nay, cannot be at
Ease. Ah, Impenitent Sinner, Where, where is thy Dwelling? Thy Dwelling is
under an Old Covenant, which speaks to thee none but very Uneasy Things; even
those Things, Isa. III. 10. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him. It
was of Old said, Woe to them that are at Ease in Zion. But, O Sinner in Zion,
How can you be at Ease when you think on the Woe that lies upon you? Is it not
an Uneasy Thing, to lie under the Wrath and Curse of God? An Uneasy Thing, to
be a Slave unto Sin, unto Satan, unto the most Cruel of all Taskmasters? An
Uneasy Thing, to be in hourly Danger of being siezed by the Messengers of
Death, and forced away before the Tribunal of a Righteous and a Terrible God?
Ah, poor Soul, Unreconciled unto God; There is Danger, lest thy Dwelling be
quickly in a Place of Torments; in the Place of Dragons! The Revelation which
never deluded any Man, has forewarned thee of such a Place: It Is no Delusion!
Oh! Who can dwill with everlasting Burnings? But Sinful, and secure Soul, thou
are in hourly Danger of going down to such an uneasy Dwelling. How, how can
thou Dwell at Ease, in this Condition? It was demanded of such as you, Jam. V.
1. Weep and Howl for the Miseries that shall come upon you. Verily, The first
and the best Thing to be desired for you is, That you may not have a Soul
dwelling at Ease in this Condition. I Wish thee very well, my Friend; But I
cannot express a more Charitable Wish for thee than this; That thou may feel
no Ease in thy Soul, till thou art got out of this Condition. Good God, make
thou the Souls of our Unconverted Children, very Uneasy, while they continue so!

II. But now, let none that Fear God, be Enemies to the Ease of their Souls. O
Pious ones, don't refuse to be Comfored. Don't reject the Legacy of your Dying
Savior. Don't give way to any Overwhelming and Unreasonable Uneasiness of
Soul. That the Exhortation which now speaks unto you, as unto Children, may
obtain, you have three Things incumbent on you.

One thing you have to do, is this. Your Title to an Easy Soul should be
cleared up. You should get a clear Sight of it, and a well-grounded Assurance,
That you are in good Terms with Heaven. Wherefore, Examine your selves; with an
Impartial Examination faithfully Search and Try your selves. Ask, Have I so
Renounced all my Idols, that the great God is now on the Throne in my Soul,
above them all? And that He sways more with me than any of them? Ask, Have I
embraced my Lovely Savior in all His Offices, and earnestly Repaired unto Him
for all the Benefits of His Great Salvation? Ask, Do I walk in the Fear of God,
awed by His Eye upon me, loathe to Displease Him? Have I an Undissembled Love
unto my Neighbor, and a Joy in his Welfare? Is this World of less Account
with me than the World to come? To put it out of Doubt, that these Things are
in you, Renew, Repeat, Revive those Acts of the Soul, which may make you feel
the Presence of them. Do those Things in a way of Mourning for Sin, and Turning
to God, which when they are done, your Souls may and should then Dwell at Ease;
The Things which accompany Salvation. And now say; Psalm. XLIII. 5. Why art thou
cast down, O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I
shall yet Praise Him.

Another thing you have to do, is this; Don't listen to Temptations that would
give causeless Disturbance to the Ease of your Souls. A busy Tempter, who seeks
Rest and finds none, is he who breaks yours as much as he can. But as you Read;
Psalm. XI. 1. In the Lord I put my Trust. How say ye to my Soul, Flee as a Bird
unto your Mountain? Thus Repel them who Trouble you: How say ye to my Soul, Thy
Sins are too many, too heinous, to be Forgiven? I put my Trust in the Blood of
the Son of God, which cleanses from all Sin? How say ye to my Soul, The Spirit
of God is utterly departed from thee? I put my Trust, That I have the Spirit of
God at Work upon me, even in my Fears of His Departure? How say ye to my Soul,
Thou have such an hard Heart, as carries the Mark of one Rejected of God? My
Trust is, That my Heart begins to Soften, inasmuch as I begin to feel the
hardness of it.

A third Thing you have to do is this; Lie down upon a Pillow stuffed with the
Promises. A Soul supplied with, and applying of the Promises, may soon come to
this Easiness? Psalm. IV. 8. I will lay me down in Peace, and Sleep; for O Lord,
thou alone make me Dwell in Safety. In the Poetical Antiquity and Mythology,
there was a Celebrated Nepenthes, [or No-Grief] an admirable Remedy, which put
an end unto all Sorrow and Anger, and caused People to forget all their
Exercises. No Man could Weep (said the Poets) in the Day that he tasted it,
though he had lost the Dearest Friend in the World. The Philosophers try to have
the Properties of it answered in Opium. No, Sirs, It Is nothing but our Glorious
Gospel, that will after all, afford the true Nepenthes. In the Promises of our
Glorious Gospel alone it is, that we have a genuine Cure for all that brings
any of our Uneasiness upon us. My Brethren, There are Promises that will suit
all your Occasions of Uneasiness. Are you Uneasy, because you see Poverty
coming in like an Armed Man upon you? Take that Promise, and make a Living upon
it; Psalm. XXXIV. 10. They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good Thing.
Does the Death of any Desirable Relatives make you Uneasy? Take that Promise,
and what it brings with it, instead of them all: Heb. XIII. 5. He has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Does the view of your own Approaching
Death make you Uneasy? Take that Promise, for a Rod and a Staff, to walk through
Hazar-maveth withal; Psalm. XXIII. 4. Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow
of Death, I will fear no Evil; For thou art with me. Are you Uneasy because of
Perils that you are near to, and must go through? Take that Promise, and make a
Cordial of it; Isa. XLI. 10. Fear not, for I am with thee; Be not dismayed, for
I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold
thee with the Right Hand of my Righteousness. Do the Thoughss of the Orphans,
which you are, you know not how soon, to leave in an evil World, make you
Uneasy? Take that Promise, and look on it, as a competent and perpetual Fund,
for them to subsist upon; Psalm. XXVII. 11. When my Father and my Mother forsake
me, the Lord will take me up. Who can be Uneasy in the midst of such
Accommodations; or be in Straits in the midst of such Sufficiency?

III. The Children of Pious Parents, must attend unto the Counsils of God. YOU,
my Children, have something to do, that you may be the better for your Parents.
And I will tell you, what that something is. You must lay hold on the Covenant
of God for your selves; and heartily say unto the Lord, Thou art my God. You
must come into this Disposition; O Great GOD, has my Parent chosen thee? I also
do make Choice of thee, to be my God! And, Child, Will thou not from this Time,
come into that Resolution, Lord, Thou art my Father, and thou shall be the
Guide of my Youth? Truly, the Language now expected from you, is that; Exodus
XV. 2. The Lord is my God, and I will prepare Him an Habitation: My Fathers
God, and I will Exalt Him. Herewithal, you must Conform to the Defires of your
Pious Parents. Thwart them not; Grieve them not; cause not an Heavy Heart unto
them; Don't make them Uneasy. Be not the Sons of Eli, who hearkened not unto the
Voice of their Father. You know the Doom, and the Death of those miserable
Children! Yet more; Your Pious Parents have prayed for you; have made Thousands
of Prayers for you, with strong Crying and Tears. But you must Pray for your
selves, if you would fare the better for the Prayers of your Parents. Nor can
you fare the better for your Pious Parents, except you tread in the Steps of
their Piety. Remember Their Piety will but aggravate your Perdition, if you
continue Impious. We Read of One in Hell, which cried out, Father Abraham, I am
Tormented in this Flame. O Children whose Parents have been the Friends of God,
If you are found among His Enemies, as your Impiety will declare you to be
such, you will be thrown into Hell, and your Damnation there, will be the more
Exquisite and Horrible for the Parents which you are descended from. Your
Parents will become your Torments: And the Remembrance of what they did for
you, and how you have Sinned against it all, will Torment you wonderfully; the
Smoke, and the Cry of such Torments, will Ascend for ever and ever! So did the
Thundering Baptist, warn the Children of Pious Parents; Matthew. III. 9, 10. Think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. Every Tree which
brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire. I see, I
see, Oh! what Numbers of our poor Children, in a Course of Impiety, throwing
themselves down into that Unquenchable Fire. A most Lamentable Spectacle! O
Lord, I beseech thee to deliver their Souls!

But it is time for me, in my Historical way, which one would think should be a
very Significant way, to Clinch the Nails which I have hitherto been driving.
And I may upon a due Reflection, make this Report unto you, That the Religious
Matron who yesterday withdrew from us, was One, in whom the Truths which have
now been delivered, concerning a Soul Dwelling and preserved in Ease by a
Piety, and an Offspring rendered, and by themselves and others esteemed, Happy,
in Pious Parents, have been in a very Conspicuous Degree exemplified. Such a
Good Report she has of all, and of the Truth it self. I also must make a Record
of it, and my Record shall be true.

We are not Bribed by the Riches of them who Dye and are buried, for to bear
any flattering and fulsome Testimonies for them. Nothing without a Shining
Piety in our Friends, can obtain our Testimonies: Though sometimes Public
Stations, or such things as place Persons in the Light of more Public
Observation, may invite us to Enlarge upon them. Philip de Comines complains
of it, That when he expostulated with a Carthusian, for putting the Term of a
Saint on one that had been a Person of a very evil Character, his Monk replied
upon him, Sir, We always make a Saint of a Benefactor. I hope, that you will
find Us clear of that Scandal; and that you have often found us most Expatiate
in Commending such Saints as have laid us under no Temporal and Personal
Obligations.

The Excellent Father of this Gentlewoman, and of this Country, (whose Life
makes a Great Article among the MAGNALIA of New England,) would in her
Childhood, often present her to them that came to see him, and say with a
peculiar Satisfaction, This is my New England Token! because a good God had
sent her to him, as a Token of His Favor to his Family, so soon after his
coming to New England. And I know not why New England should not now present
her to the World, as a Token of the Divine Favor to a Country, which He has
adorned with such bright Jewels, as do surpass those of the Orient. When she
lay at the Point of Death in her Minority, and was indeed given over for Dead,
while Mr. Cotton was at Prayer with her, the Heart of her Father was raised
unto a particular Faith for it, which he immediately declared, That the Child
should Live! And now, having outlived the Eightieth Year of her Age, I have an
Opportunity to tell you, what sort of a Life it was, which that Prayer of my
Grandfather, had its Remarkable Answer in. It was a Life of the most exemplary
Piety in all the parts of it; And my Sermon has all along done little more than
tell her Story, when it has told you, what the Fear of God will do, and what
Ease and Peace it will bring unto.

While she was a Wife, to a most valuable Servant of God, Mr. SAMUEL DANFORTH,
the Pastor of Roxbury, she was no Stranger to Afflictions; especially in the
Infirmity and Mortality of many Children. But by being thus Afflicted, she was
but the more improved in that Piety which made her Honorable in the Eyes of
all that have the Fear of God at all directing of their Sentiments.

As those Holy Women that bore a part in the First Voyages to this Wilderness,
were those Good Things, than which the World had not many to show, that were
Better, or more worthy to be had in Everlasting Remembrance: Thus our Land has
not many Things to be more boasted of, than a set of Holy Women found among
their Daughters, who have been Polished Stones in the Temple of God, and
Patterns of the Things that are Holy, and Just, and Good. WOMEN, that have most
entirely given themselves up unto God, and studied and practiced Holiness in
all manner of Conversation: Women, that have known and loved a dear SAVIOR,
and lived by the Faith of the Son of God: Women, that have walked with God, in
the Religion of the Closet, and set an high Price on Communion with Him in the
Assemblies of Zion: Women, that have been Wise, and Good, and most Obliging in
all Relations, and bestowed upon their Children an agreeable Education: Women,
that have with incomparable Patience and Meekness, entertained the Cross that
has been ordered for them: Women, that have been Blessings to their Neighbors,
and been helpful in a Thousand kind of Offices among the Distressed in their
Neighborhood. Such was this Handmaid of the Lord; and among such, a Star of
the first Magnitude.

For near Twice seven Years before she Died, her Sight was utterly taken from
her. But, Oh! the Light arising to her in all her Darkness! Some that have been
Blind all their Days, have yet been such Illuminated Persons, that they have
been Eminent Preachers of the Gospel, yea, most notable Writers, for the
Defense and Service of it. Among such Sons of Bartimaeus, I know not that the
Armies of the Living God, ever had a more Illustrious Champion than that most
accomplished Literator, the present Professor of History in the University of
Glasgow: [Mr. WILLIAM JAMESON.] A Sampson by whose Hand God pulls down the
Temple of the Romish Philistines! I snatch at an Occasion to mention this
Miraculous Man, because I have really wished and fought an Occasion to Express
my Desires that his Learned Books were more Common among us Others there have
been, who have only lain Blind in their Latter Days; but yet have in the Light
of God so seen Light that they have been able to Guide others in the ways of
God, and show them the Paths of Life. And such an One was this Handmaid of
God; One under Total Blindness, yet Gloriously Resembling the Living Creatures
that are full of Eyes! When the acute Milton had lost his Eyes, he Comforted
himself with this; Orbitatem certe Luminis quidni leniter feram, quod non tam
amissum, quam Revecatum intus atque Retractum, ad acuendam potius mentis Aciem
quam ad hebetandam sperem. 'My Sight is only called Inward, that it 'may be
sharpened there. And he argued, That as Man lives not by Bread alone, but by
the Word of God, we see not with our Eyes alone, but by being under the Wise
and Kind Conduct of God. Thus this Pious Person had her Sight, but as it were
turned the more Inward and Upward by her Blindness, and fixed upon those Things
which had hitherto been the Object of her Faith. She gained a stronger Sight of
Him that is Invisible; a clearer View of the Things which are not seen and are
Eternal. Cicero affirms, Democritus easily comforted himself under the loss of
his Ey-sight by this; That if he was not able to distinguish Black from White,
yet he could perfectly well discern Good from Ill, Right from Wrong. This Pious
Person, One more Wise unto Salvation than any that the Roman Orator had ever
heard of, when God called her to make her Sight a Sacrifice unto Him, had this
Reparation of her Blindness, that she had the more Lively Sight of Things in
the Kingdom of God; she more distinctly viewed those Things, which if they
could be seen with our Eyes, we would find the Love of them Wondrously raised
in us. Every one will Delight and Wonder saw, A Soul dwelling in Ease! Her
Submission to the Will of God: Her Admirations of what she saw in a most
endeared JESUS: Her Thankfulness to them who brought the Word of God unto her,
which was continually done by one or other, almost all the Day long; Her
Chamber a very Chapel wherein something of Devotion was ever going on; A
little Antichamber of Heaven! The unexpressible Pleasure she took in Prayer to
God: Her Fruitfulness in Religious Conferences: Her Affectionate Love to the
Children of God: Her profound Humility, perpetual Self-Abasement,
Self-Abhorence: And her lively Anhelation after the Heavenly World, with a most
finishing Resignation to her Savior, for His own Time, and His own Way to
bring her unto it.

It was impossible to see her in her Dying Hours, without seeing the ghastly
Visage of DEATH Gloriously altered; and the meaning of, O Death, Where is thy
Sting? tendered in a most noble Illustration of it. And now, when her sense of
every Thing in this World, was in a manner gone, if either CHRIST, or HEAVEN,
were but mentioned, it seemed as if the mention of those Two Words, infused a
New Life into her. She made me think of that Excellent Lady, Olympia Fulvia
Morata, who in her last Moments declared, That she had now got the Sight of a
most Excellent Place, and a very Delightful one; ever Shining with an
Astonishing Light and Brightness; Hastening whereto, her Triumph was, Tota sum
laeta; I am now as full of Joy as I can hold; A Singular Happiness did she ^^ow
and long enjoy in her Children, and their Tender and Helpful Behavior. Her Two
Sons, have long been Faithful and Painful and eminently Serviceable Ministers
of the Gospel: Her Two Sons-in-Law have been as well Sons-in-Love unto her: And
her Daughters have been worthy to be called Hers.

And now her Soul is gone to Dwell in Ease, her dutiful Offspring, will
doubtless Inherit so much of the Earth, as will Reward the Duty which they have
so Examplarily paid unto her. But this is not what they so much propose: It Is
the least of their Desires; as it was of Hers for them. An Heavenly Inheritance
will be theirs; A Better and a Lasting Substance in Heaven! -- If they go on to
prefer and pursue That, as I hope they do, and walk in the steps of Parents,
who have laid up so many Thousands of Prayers, That they may do worthily in
Israel. And their Experience, how remarkably God has been a Father to them,
since their Excellent Father left them Orphans in a difficult World, I hope,
will be considered as an Encouragement for all Godly Parents, and for their
Children.

FINIS.

