Golgotha. A LIVELY Description of DEATH. WITH Such THOUGHTS, as are to be
Entertained by Men, that they may not Perish, in that very Day, when the
Thoughts of Men do Perish.

Occasioned By some fresh INSTANCES of Early Mortality. WITH A more particular
MEMORIAL of One of them; Namely, Mr. Recompense Wadsworth, a late Schoolmaster
in Boston

By COTTON MATHER, D.D

Eccl. vii. 2. This is the End of all Men, and the Living will lay it to his
Heart. BOSTON in N.E Printed by B Green, for Daniel Henchman at his Shop in
King Street 1713.

A Lively Description OF DEATH.
Made, 28 d. 4 m. 1713.
PSALM. CXLVI. 4. His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth: in that
very Day his Thoughts perish.


A most aw^^^, and a very Moving and Quickring Spectacle! A Lifeless Carcass
ought always to be so. Behold, the Mortality to which we are all obnoxious!
Behold, the Dark and Sad Effects which our Mortality w^^ produce upon us! We
will Breathe and Pause upon it: We will Rise and Fly from the Earth which is to
be no longer Ours, toward Heaven in ou^ Meditations. We will employ our Best
Thoughts, to find out the way, that in that very Day, when we Die, we may not
Perish.

The History of the Psalm will give us the Intention of it, and of this
Remarkable Passage in it. When Cyrus had given the Jews Liberty to return unto
Jerusalem, and rebuild the Temple, and restore the Worship of God, in that Holy
City, the Samaritans, a mungril sort of People, so joined with their
Adversaries, that little was done in it, notwithstanding the Favor which that
Great Monarch had shown unto them. Cyrus was no sooner gone, and Cambyses on
the Throne, but there seemed an End of all Hope, that they should Proceed any
further in their Desires. To prevent their Pear, and Excite their Faith, on
this Difficult occasion, those Two Great Prophets, Haggai and Zechariab appear;
And probably One of those (for Antiquity is of this Opinion) composed the Psalm
now before us. The Psalm Exhorts them to put their Trust in God. Accordingly
Cambyses dies; Darius comes to the Throne; Then, in spite of all opposition,
the work of God goes on; (...) People accomplish what they had so much and so
long desired. When the Breath of that Crowned Head Went forth, and the Monarch
returned unto his Earth, in that very Day, all the obstructions that had been
given to the work of God, came to an End.

We have before us, a Lively Description of Death; Even of the Death, which the
Greatest, and the Wisest, and the Best of Men, must meet withal; Yea, Princes
themselves, and the most Excellent among the Sons of Men. There have been
Princes, that have been called, Gods. Indeed, there has been a mistake, in
applying this, to all Princes and Rulers, in general. It seems to have been
peculiar unto those of the Israelitish Theocracy. It Is true, if any in our
Days, employ their Power for God, we may be content that they come in for a
share in this Term of Honor. And yet, even these Earthly Gods, are but Gods of
Earth. Alas, Let such Gods know, they are to Die like Men. Those also that are
peculiarly Men of God; Men full of GOD, and His most Glorious Temples in the
World; Men that are the Heirs of Everlasting Life; These must also Die like
other Men; and put off their Earthly Tabernacle. The Cand^d^tes of Heaven, we
have daily occasion to put on our Black in Mourning for our Loss in their
Departure thither.

But, what befalls men when they Dye? Some Accidents of Mortality are here
Specified. Let us make our Particular, -- But, Oh! Let it be a profitable,
Reflection on them.

First of all, you shall have them all, in One Collection.

Of a Dring Man, it may be said, His Breath goes forth; and, He returns to his
Earth, and, His Thoughts Perish in the very Day, that he dies.

You see My Friends, first, How a Man Lives; ^is by his Breath. Secondly, How a
Man Dies; It Is by his Breath going forth. Thirdly; What becomes of a Man, when
he Dies. First, The Man; He returns to his Earth. Secondly, The Thoughts of the
Man; They Perish in that very Day. Each of these Articles, is to be distinctly
considered.

^ If a Man's Breath goes forth, he dies, he is gone! A Man d^^s if he cease to
Breath; Ordinarily he Lives no longer than he Breathes. The Life of Man lies in
the Power of Breathing. The first Infusion of Life into Mankind is thus
related; Genesis II. 7. God breathed into his N^strils, the Breath of Life. Our
Bodies have Muscles, which by their Motion draw in and send out, the Air. By
this Respiration, the Blood which runs through the Lungs, is attenuated, and
brought into such a comminution as is necessary to the free circulation of it.
The N^ horn Infant, begins this way of Living; and holds it on to the End of
his Life At last, the Stopping of the Breath, or the failing of the power to
Breath^, is the which puts an End unto the Life. The cor^inuance of Life, turns
upon that; Job XXVIL. 3. All the while my Breath is in me, and the Spirit of
God is in my (...) s^. There are cases, wherein the Children of Man h^ve
Subsisted Breathl^^s for some Hours, yea, for whole Days, and have our lived
it. But when the Breath totally fails, the Man dies. He that has altogether
does ^^^athing, is a D^ad Man. When (...) (...) Last Gasp of a Man, we pronoun^
(...) Dead. We read; Jam. II. 26. The Body without the Breath, is Dead. Idols,
when the Bible would call them Dead Things, it says, Neither is there any
Breath in their Mouths. Man is a Breathing Piece of Clay; and when he leaves
off Breathing, he becomes Lifeless, and Senseless Clay. No longer than the
Blood, wherein is the Life of Man, has the Air fanning and breaking of it, and
Perhaps affording a Sort of a Balsame unto it, will the Soul continue in the
Clay Tabernacle. The Vital Ty between the Soul and the Body, is in the Blood.
The Texture and the Motion of the Blood is kept in due order by the Breath.
When the Breath is totally checked and the Blood can have no more of any
refocillation from it, it stops, it coagulates, it putrifies; the Soul can stay
no longer; its House is no longer tenantable.

But let us make some useful Remarks, on the most obvious Observation in the
World.

First. With some Surprise, we may now make this Remark; How does every Man Die
Every Hour! His Breath goes forth, it may be, twenty times in an Hour. Truly,
The Instrument of our Life, is the Harbinger and Monitor of our Death; Even,
the Going forth of our Breath. My Friend, All thy Breathing, is but a Gosping
for Life. A Breathing Life, it is at best but a Dying Life. Indeed, Our Breath
which now goes forth, does again Return. But, when a few Days are past, it
will go, whence it shall not Return. The Faculty of Breathing, will ere long
have a fatal ^struction given to it. He was a Prudent Man, who said; I Cor. XV.
31. I die daily. Oh! Let every Man Breathing, Often with his Breath, fetch in
such awakening Advice as this; My Breach will certainly and speedily sail me My
L^fe is going as well as my (...) my Breath will go forth for all together. My
Breathing T^^^ wi^^ ^^^tly be ever. No Man will have Power (...) the Breath, to
(...) his Breath in the D^y of (...) Death. O my Soul! What (...) then Breath
after so much as (...), that thou may be ready for thy (...).

Secondly, There is this Remark to be now also made by every Man alive; What a
poor thing is Man. What a Frail thing, the most Mighty Man^ How little is the
Life of Man to be depended on! Trust not in any Son of Man, for this very
cause; His Breath goes forth, and then the Man is gone.

For a Man to depend on his own Life, it is a very Foolish Thing. We have that
pungent Admonition given unto us; Jam. IV. 13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, to
Day, or to Morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there, a year, and
Buy and Sell, and get Gain. What is your Life! It is even a Vapor that
appears for a little time and then vanishes away. Even so; Go to now, ye
that flatter your selves with Goods laid up for many years. Go to now, ye that
promise, you will some years hence turn unto God. Go to now, ye that put off to
another ^^ar those things, which ought immediately to be performed (...) is
your Life? If your Breath go forth, you are Dead. Your Last Breath, who can
say, how near it is? If that be Breathed out, you have no more opportunity to
do any thing. Oh! Bo^st not of to Morrow: thou know not, what a Day may
bring forth. And for a Man to depend on the Life of another Man is an equal
Folly. To build a Weighty Hope, a Pompous Hope, on a Breath which is going
forth! What better this, than to Build Castles in the Air? Thus we read, Isa.
II. 22. Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils: For wherein is he
to be accounted of? Woe to that Man, who has no Friend, but a Man whose Breath
is always going forth! A most uncertain and unstable Friendship, to subsist
upon! Soul, Retire to the Glorious GOD, and say; What can any Man do for me? If
a little Breath fails, Lo, my Friend, and my Stay fails. Lord, my welfare is
laid up in thy Favor. Thou art my Ever-Living Friend. Man will Dye. I will
expect no more from any Man, than what is to be expected from a Dying Thing.

And then; If a Man be our Enemy, what need we be much Afraid of him? A Man
whose Breath will soon fail him, and then his Wrath all comes to nothing. When
the poor Animal Dies, then (as the Italians use to say upon a certain
Occasion,) all his Malice is dead with him; Dead, that is, as to any mischief,
that we may suffer from it. We are thus advised; Isai. LI. 12. I even I, am He
that comforts you, who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a Man that
shall Die, and of the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass. Though our Enemy,
may Breathe out nothing but Fire and Fury against us; God can soon stop his
Breath; He will soon be out of Breath. Poor Creature, what can he do! -- He is
not worth my taking any further notice of him! --

Thirdly. How much ought we to Fear, and Love, and Serve the Glorious GOD! How
much keep alive a continual Reliance on Him, and Resignation to Him, in the
Continuance of our Lives! It is the Demand; Psalm. CL. 6. Let every Thing, that
has Breath, Praise the Lord. Every Breath we draw, there is in it, the Fav^^r
of GOD. If GOD order our Breath to go forth, we are gone. All Men have this
Dependence on GOD; Lord, Thou take away their Breath, and they Die; and
return to their Dust. Say then, If thou art in the Class of Reasonables, now
say; What is the best Employment thy Breath can be put unto? Surely, we ought
to employ our Breath, in Speaking the Praises of God: Nothing, more proper to
be Resolved upon, My Mouth shall Speak the Praises of the Lord! Surely, much of
our Breath should be laid out in Prayer to God. Yea, we should be as unable to
Live without Praying, as to Live without Breathing. Surely, we should beware of
prostituting our Breath to the wrong use of any Evil-Speaking with it! The
wretches who articulate their Breath into the horrid Language of Fiends; How
worthy do they render themselves, that the GOD whom they Blaspheme should smite
them with an Immediate Suffocation! And as with our Breath we should Bless God,
even the Father, Even so, we should be careful that we do not Curse Men, who
are made after the Similitude of God: No, But Study, that our Breath may be the
vehicle of Truth and of Good unto them, and of what may Feed them, and Minister
Grace unto them. And since we Live no longer than GOD indulges our Breath unto
us, Oh! Let us take heed of the Sins that may provoke Him to take away our
Breath. Urged unto any wicked Thing, say, Never while I Breathe, will I do such
a Thing! Let us particularly Take heed of Living Unfruitfully. They who Live to
no Good purpose, do forfeit their Lives. To what purpose can it be desired,
that God should prolong their Lives!

In fine; It was a sharp Rebuke, -- Oh! take heed of deserving to be so
rebuked; Dan. V. 23. The God, in whose hand thy Breath is, and whose are all
thy ways, thou have not Glorified. Sirs, Glorify GOD, as the Giver of your
Breath. And, To Glorify God, Let this be the main End of your Breathing, and of
all that you do, as long as you Breathe. Breathe after nothing so much as this,
nothing but in Subordination to this; Oh! that I may but acknowledge GOD in all
my ways; the GOD, in whose Hand are all my ways. And, Live by Faith as well
as by Breath. Maintain your Dependence on GOD, for your Breath. Acknowledge
Him, in that agreeable Style, The God of my Life!

I will take advantage, from the phrase of, Breath in the Nostrils, to press
your Duty upon you. It Is the phrase, by which we have the Anger of the Great GOD
set forth sometimes unto us. His Breath is in His Nostrils. Verily, If you do
not lay out much of your Breathing Time, in the Acknowledgments of GOD, you
will find, His dreadful Anger, putting an End unto this Time, and punishing
you, where the Breath of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimstone, does kindle a
Fire, that burns unto Eternity.

II. When a Man Dies, then he Returns to his Earth. Dying, is a Returning to
the Earth, yea, to a Man's Own Earth.

The Phrase of, Returning to the Earth, leads us back to the Original of Man.
For The Lord God formed Man out of the Dust of the Ground. This is the
Humiliation which we have to take notice of; Genesis III. 19. Thou shall Return to
the Ground; for out of it, thou wast taken: For Dust thou art, and unto Dust
shall thou Return.

We will Enquire; First; What of the Dying Man is it, that Returns to the Earth?

In one Word; So much of Man, as came out of the Earth. And therefore, not the
whole of Man; therefore no more than the Body of Man. The Body of Man, is of an
Earthly Constitution. It was first lodged in the Earth. And the Nourishment of
it, is fetched from the Earth. It Is this, that is to find a lodging in the
Earth, when the Earth is no longer to nourish it, and sustain it, and recruit
it. There is a Spirit in Man, which will not Return to the Earth, but go
another way. We read, Eccl. XII. 7. The Dust shall return to the Earth, as it
was; and the Spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. When the Body Returns
unto the Earth, our Nobler Part goes to the Abdita animarum Receptacula, as
Austin expresses it, the Hidden Receptacles of Souls, which are with God. When
we Die, then our Life, that is, our Soul, the Spring of our Life, and that part
that shall never Die, this will be bid with God. But the Body, this is to be
laid in the Grave. The Grave is the House of all the Living. When we cease to
Live, our B^dy is laid in the Dark and Cold House of the Grave. The B^dy must
be laid in that Pit of Corruption. It Is in Bondage to Corruption; Bound to be
laid where it must undergo Corruption. There it must be crumbled and mouldred
into Dust. And whence this Destruction, upon this curious W^kmanship of God; a
Body so curiously, and Fear^lly, and Wondrously (...)? We may say; An Enemy has
(...) this. But what Enemy? SIN, SIN, Thou art our Deadly Enemy. At the mention
of thee, I may say, I have now found thee, O mine Enemy. The just Penalty of
the Law, which the Great GOD gave unto us, is Death. By Sin we have
Transgressed the Law. In that Sin we hearkened unto the Tempter; The Breath of
the Old Serpent, we so took in, as to be Poisoned with it. So it is, that our
Breath comes to fail us, as it does. We see none Returning to the Earth, but we
may say, Behold, the Desolations that Sin has brought upon the Earth! Here is a
part of the Hurt which our Sin has done unto us. Ah! Sin, Thou cause of our
Death; what cause have we to count this more Bitter than Death? How can we
Entertain Light Thoughts of so great an Evil!

We will enquire; Secondly: What we have hinted unto us, in this, that the
Dying Man must Return to His Earth?

These things. First. A Dying Man is left Owner of nothing in this World,
except one may say, that little Piece of Earth, which he Returns unto. It Is very
Remarkable; The Princes of this World; the Men who would have the Earth given
to them alone; Even the Mighty Men who have the Earth, and the Honorable Men
who dwell in it; Of such as these, it is here said, He returns to His Earth. It
is not said, They return to their Castles, to their Cities, to their Kingdoms.
No, These are now, Another. They return to their Earth, because a little
Earth, is now all that is left unto them. We read, 1 Timothy VI. 7. We brought
nothing into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Well known
is the Story of that Great Emperor Saladine, who would have it Proclaimed at
his Funeral; A Death Shroud is all that the Great Emperor of the East, is now
left Owner of! Man, Thy Death will dispossess thee, of all that thou have in
the World. It will only leave thee a few Clods of the Valley, or a little Turf
upon the Hill of Golgotha, to be Sweet unto thee. He that was Possessor of many
Acres, yea, of many Countries, must return to a Confinement of Six Foot of
Earth. He that was ^rray'd in Purple and fine Linen, must Return to a close
Chamber in the Earth, where he shall have no more than a Winding Sheet. He that
had his Chest full of the Shining Earth, which bewitches the Children of Men
into a Love of it, that is the Root of all Evil, must Return, where he shall be
himself locked up in a Stable-Chest, without a penny of it. So we read; Psalm.
XLIX 16.17. One is made Rich, and the Glory of his House increased; when he
Dies, he shall carry nothing away; his Glory shall not descend after him. It
has been a Remark made on our Father Abraham's purchasing the Cave of Macpelah,
That the first purchase of Land that ever we read of was of a Burying place. O
you Eager purchasers of Land, and contenders for it, and what it produces; The
Burying-place is that, wherein all in a little while will terminate.

Secondly. It Is too Common a thing, for the Earth, to be all that the Dying Man
has cared for, before and until he Return into it. It is His Earth, inasmuch as
his care was to make it HIS. His whole care was to make sure of Earth. We read,
Phil. III. 19. There are many, who mind Earthly Things. The most Men are
Earthly-Minded Men; So they Live, and so they Die. They have chosen the Earth
for their Portion. They know no Good, but what lies in Earthly Enjoyments. It
is an Elegant pungency, with which the Children of Men are called upon, O
Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the word of the Lord. They have this Character
assigned them, in the word of the Lord; Psalm XVII. 14. They are the Men of the
World, who have show Portion in this Life. They are all for Earth while they
Live; and so, they Return to their Earth, when they Die. The Curse of the
Serpent is come upon the Children of Men, since they have been Seduced by the
Old Serpent; they are under that Vengeance of Heaven, Dust shall thou Eat, all
the days of thy Life. I will add, a terrible Gloss, which the Blessed Old
Prosper had upon that Passage; Who are the Dust, but the Terrenis Cupiditatibus
inhiantes Animae, The Souls that pant after nothing but Earth! Such Souls
become the woeful Food of the Serpent; Satan makes a prey of them; they fall
into the mouth of that horrible Devourer. It will be so, when the Earthly
minded wretch does Return to the Earth. And then, as I have been saying, it
will be found, that his Earth is his All. A Covetous Tyrant, at his Death, had
melted Gold poured into his Mouth, with such a Sarcasm as this upon him; Take
now, what in thy Lifetime, thou wast always unsatiably thirsting for! Even so,
when an Ungodly Man comes to Die, and the Covetous, whom the Lord abhors, he
then ^eturns to his Earth, and it may be said unto him; Here thou have that for
which thou have all the Days of thy Life been Laboring.

This Observation will be followed with some Instructions.

First. What a wretched Vanity are they Guilty of, who are Sollicitous for
nothing, but that they may with a little Earth, have a Body well-provided for!
Alas, the most of Men are Solicitous for nothing, but only to make Provision
for the Flesh, and a Provision from the Earth; Solicitous for nothing, but only
to have a B^dy well accommodated. Ridiculous Man! This Body is Returning to its
Earth in a very little while. It Is impossible to keep the Body, from Returning
to the Earth. Our Language indeed humors, the stupid Notion, as if Man were
nothing but Body. As I remember our Epigrammatist bestows a little Satyr upon
us for it. We say, Body for Person. And accordingly Men generally consider
nothing so much as their Body. But, Oh! the Madness of Leaving the Soul, all
this while unconsidered! We have been better taught than so; He, Like whom none
teaches has said unto us; Joh. VI. 27. Labor not for the Meat that perishes,
but for that Meat, which Endures to Everlasting Life. Thus are we to be
counseled. Labor more, to have thy Soul Fed, Cherished and Strengthened with
the CHRIST, who is the Bread of Life, than ^o get Food for thy Body, when Death
is quickly to Feed upon. Labor more to have thy Soul adorned with the Graces
which are of Great price in the Sight of God, than to get Ornaments for a Body,
which is quickly to be buried in loathsome Deformities. Labor more to have a
Soul Entitled unto, An House Eternal in the Heavens, than to get a Splendid
Lodging for a Body, that is quickly to be Imprisoned in a Subterraneous
Habitation. It Is a Madness to do otherwise; Oh! do not with this Madness
uncured, go down unto the Dead! It was required; Isa. XLVI. 8. Show your selves
Men. Verily, you do not show your selves Men until you come to this
Determination; My Body is Returning to the Earth. I will Seasonably and
Sollicitously give all Diligence, that I may have something more than a little
Earth, to befriend me in my greatest Necessities. There is a Better and a
Lasting Substance in the Heavens, which is to my Soul, the One Thing that is
Necessary. O my Soul, Awake; Embrace thy Savior; Entreat Him to bring thee
home unto God; and so lay hold on Eternal Life. The Man is Mad, who is not thus
disposed, thus concerned.

Secondly. Though we Return to the Earth, yet let us Believe and Rejoice in the
Great Savior, who will Redeem us from the Earth. Our Dear Savior says unto
His Faithful Ones, (like what He said unto our Father Jacob,) Be not afraid, my
Child, of returning to thy Earth. I, that have my self been in the Grave, in
the Belly of the Earth, and Risen again from thence, will be with thee, and
surely bring the up again. That passage, which we render, Their Beauty shall
consume in the Grave, from their Dwelling, is to be read; Psalm. XLIX. 14. Then
shall their Rock come to destroy Death, He shall come from His Habitation. It
follows [and so it well may!] God will Redeem my Soul from the Power of the
Grave. This was the Ancient Faith; Job. XIV. 14, 15. If a Man Die, shall be
Live again? All the Days of my appointed Time will I wait unti^ my Change
come. It means, the Change which Man shall see, when he rises from the Dead,
and Lives again. Then, Lord Thou shall call, and I will answer thee; Thou will
have a Desire to the work of thine Hands. Even, to see a Restoration of the
Body, which is a Work all full of Miracles! Ti^ true; The Resurrection is as
great a Work, as Creation. Indeed, it is here intimated, That if Man be
recovered after his Death, he must be fetched out of his Earth again. But then,
he that made Man out of the Dust, can Raise Man out of the Dust. My Brethren,
will you attend unto the Consolation? The Day is at hand, when the words of the
Holy Daniel shall be accomplished; The many Sleepers in the Dust of the Earth
shall awake; And when the words of the Holy Isaiah shall have their
Accomplishment; They who dwell in the Dust, shall awake and Sing. But are there
no Songs then, that we may go down to the Dust, and fall Asleep withal? Yea,
there are Songs for that Night, wherewith God our Maker has furnished us. That
is one of the Songs; Psalm. LXXI. 20. Thou who have shown me great and sore
Troubles, wilt fetch me to Life again, and wilt bring me up again from the
Depths of the Earth. That is one of the Songs; Mic. VII. 8. Rejoice not against
me; O mine Enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in Darkness, the Lord
shall be a Light unto me. Oh! Let us go down Singing thus, unto the Place of
Silence; Assured of the Songs with which the Redeemed of the Lord shall return
from thence; the Songs of never-ending Joy, and of a Return from the Land and
the Hand, of our Enemy.

But my Discourse is coming to an End: And the End of all, is the only
remaining Article of it. There is but one Proposition more belonging to it.

III. In that very Day, when our Lives come to an End, our Thoughts also come
to an End. Our Death strikes at our Thoughts; and lays an Arrest upon them, in
such Terms as those; Ezekiel. VII 6. An End is come, the End is come; it watches
for you; behold it is come!

The Thing to be now Enquired is; What Thoughts, will Perish, and come to an
End, when we Return Breathless to the Earth, and our Breath and Life comes to
an End?

Not, All Thoughts. Our Minds will not Leave off all Thinking, when we Leave off
Breathing and Living here. The Opinion of the Soul-s^^epers is an Idle Dream.
If the Soul cannot be Killed by the Death of the Body, then it will hold on
Thinking, after the Body is Dead. But of the Things which Kill the Body, our
Savior has assured us; Matthew. X 28. They are not able to Kill the Soul.

The Departed Soul of a Godly Man, will have his Thoughts. The Soul in the
State of Separation fulfill that Word; Psalm. LXIII. 6. I will Meditate on thee
in the Night Watches. The Soul will feed on the Tree of Life, in Thoughts on
the Good Fruits, which a Divine Principle in it, brought forth, before its
Transplantation into the Paradise of God. The Soul will be ravished with the
Consolations of God, in the Multitude of its Thoughts on what the Savior has
done for him, and will do for him; and in most comfortable Visions of the Lord.

The Departed Soul of a Wicked man, will have his Thoughts too. We find it
Spoken as to a Separate Soul of such an one; Luke XVI 25. Son, Remember what
was in thy Lifetime. The Conscience in a Criminal Soul, will with bitter,
doleful, raging Thoughts, Look back on the vile Things he did in the Time of
his Probation here. The Soul of such an one, will be thrown into inexpressible
Anguish, by Thoughts, on the Fiery Indignation, whereof he has a fearful
Expectation.

But then; First: A Dead man has done Thinking on such things as here take up
the Thoughts of the most of men. All Projecting Thoughts for Things to be done
in this World; these are all over; they Perish in that very Day, when we Die,
and leave the World. Thus we read, Eccl. IX 5, 6. The Dead know not any thing:
Also their Love, and their Hatred, and their Envy, is now Perished; neither
have they any more a Portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun.
Whatever Thoughts we have, of becoming Rich and Great here, and of having our
Houses made considerable; now no more of those Thoughts; we have now for ever
done with such Thoughts.

Secondly: A Dead man, is gone, past all Hopes, to Execute any of his Thoughts.
His Thoughts now Perish; inasmuch as his Designs do so. If he has Contrived any
thing to be done, the Contrivances are all defeated, in that very Day, when his
Eyes are closed and his Hands can stir no more. Thus we read, Eccl. IX. 10.
There is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the Grave whither
thou art going. Whatever Plan we had laid in our Thoughts, it is now knocked all
to pieces: The proposals in our Thoughts, are now laid all aside: The Thoughts
are all Abortive, they miscarry, and they never see the Light.

Thirdly: The most of the Thoughts in the most of men, are found Mistakes, when
they come to Die. It is a Thunderbolt hurled at the Head of an Impious man;
Psalm. L. 21, 22. Thou Thoughtest, I was altogether such an One as thy self; But
I will Correct thee. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver. An Infinitely Holy God may say to the
Sinner, Thou thoughtest I would not punish thee for thy Sins. A Glorious Christ
may say, Thou thoughtest there was no need of looking after an Interest in me.
Exceeding Sinful Sin may say, Thou thoughtest me to have no great Evil in me. A
sorry World may say, Thou thoughtest that I should afford a Satisfying Portion
to thee. A Sinner in ill Terms with Heaven, has his presumpteous Thoughts, that
he shall go to Heaven when he Dies, When Death comes, he is Torn to Pieces. Ay,
and so are his Thoughts too. He Perishes, and all his Vain Thoughts Perish with
him. His Thoughts are found woeful Errors, and in that very Day, they Perish,
with an Eternal Confutation of them.

And now, in a few Admonitions relating to this Observation, Let us bear the
Conclusion of the Matter.

First. What Thoughts you have, that you will Turn to God, and make sure of
being Happy after Death; Oh! Let these Thoughts be accomplished before you Die;
and therefore, importunately and immediately prosecuted. The Thoughts of the
Delaying Sinner, his Thoughts that he will One Day Turn, and Live unto God, by
that Repentance which he now delays; In that very Day when he dies, these
Thoughts all Perish; and so does he for his Leaving them so unfinished. A
Sinner has his Thoughts of this Tendency, I will hereafter forsake my Sin, and
accept my Savior, and give my self up unto God; and will take a Convenient
Season to m^ke my Calling and Election sure. Death siezes on him, while these
Thoughts are yet unperformed. Miserable Sinners, Thy Thoughts are all Perished.
There is no Room left for any more such Thoughts. Thy Lamentable cry may now be
that; Job XVII. 11. My Days are past, my purposes are broken off even the
Thoughts of my Heart. As it has been said, They that go down to the Pit,
cannot hope: So may it be said; In that very Day, when Men go down to the Pit,
they cannot have any more Thoughts how to escape the Pit. It is too late now,
to Think on that Great Question, What shall I do to be Saved? Wherefore, O
Think presently what you have to do; Even before it be too late; and let your
Thoughts be presently put in Execution. Come to that Issue; Psalm. CXIX. 59 60.
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies; I made haste,
and I Would laid not, to keep thy Commandments.

Secondly; Be not misled into Thoughts which will Perish, as the Dreams of a
misguided Life, when you come to Dic. while men are Living, in the Midst, and
in the ^r^^d, of Worldly Amusements, they have many Thoughts, whereof we may
say, They are a Multitude of Dreams, and in them there are diverse Vanities.
They are Thoughts which make men to Perish; they drown Men in Perdition; and
then the Thoughts themselves will Perish. Of these, we have that call of God
unto us; Jer. IV. 14. How long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee? What
will be the Thoughts of a Dying Man? Of Sin, a Dying Man thinks; To Sin, Oh!
it is to do an abominable Thing. Of a Savior from Sin, a Dying Man thinks; To be
found in Christ, Oh! nothing, nothing so desirable! Of Time, a Dying Man, who
hears the Angel of Death Swearing, Time shall be no more; Such an one thinks
Oh! the Unknown worth of Time! It cannot be better Spent, than in the diligent
Service of God! Of this World, a Dying Man, who is taking his Leave of the
World; such an one thinks, A most Undone Man is he, who is put off with a
Portion in such a dispicable-World! Of Religion, or a Life Placed in Holy
Essays to Secure a Blessedness after Death; What are the Thoughts of a Dying
Man? They are, It Is Good for me to draw near unto God. My Hearets, Take up such
Thoughts Now. A Dying-Hour will Confirm these Thoughts, and not Confound them.
They will not Perish in that very Day, but rather have a fresh Life given unto
them. And while you cherish these Thoughts, you must harbor none but Right
Thoughts about Your selves. It is a Warning from God; Gal. VI. 3. If a Man
think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. The
Hope of the Hypocrite, is kept alive by False Thoughts. Those Thoughts, will
Perish when he dies; and he too, under the Efficacy of their Strong Delusions.
It Is an Hope, that will Perish; What is it, and what becomes of him, when God
shall take away his Soul? Oh! Beware of taking up with any thing short of a
Thorough Conversion unto God, or of Thinking your selves to be Converted while
you are yet in your Sins.

Thirdly: Fill your Minds with a Sort of Thoughts, which will turn to a Good
Account after Death; yea, which will be still carried on after Death. Such will
be, The Right Thoughts of the Righteous. Oh! the Felicity of the Man, that can
say with him; Psalm. CXXXIX. 17. How Precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God!
How great is the Sum of them! Christians, Be full of Thoughts, How to advance
the Kingdom of God upon Earth; Full of Thoughts, How to befriend Mankind, and
bring Men to Know Him, Whom to Know is Life Eternal; Full of Thoughts, How to
do Good unto all about you, in all Relations in all Capacities. I cannot say,
How far such Thoughts will be Continued with you after Death; But this I will
say; These Thoughts will not Perish then; for they will be Rewarded after
Death; A Full Recompense will be given to them. No otherwise will they Perish,
than the Seed grown into the Fruit. And then, Holy Thoughts; Be full of them;
Thoughts that the Eye of God is upon you; and Who God, and your Savior is; and
How you shall Glorify Him. Thoughts that naturally flow from the Grace of God,
Renewing and Purifying, and Elevating of the Soul; These are Thoughts that will
never Perish. No; they will pass into the Heavenly World with you. There you
shall be more full of them, than ever you were here below; And your being full
of them here, will be a Sign, that you shall arrive thither, where you shall be
in them as in (...) ^lement for ever more. About a work of Grace in the Soul,
we read; Jo^ IV. 14. It is a well of Water Springing up i^ to Everlasting Life.
The Spring bubbles (...) in Holy Thoughts here below; and it sha^ continue to
do so, in Everlasting Life. T^ Other Thoughts, they shall Perish; But, O^ Holy
Thoughts, you shall Endure; We sha^ put off Other Thoughts, as our Vesture, at
(...) Change which our Death brings upon u^ But, Oh! Holy Thoughts, you will be
the sa^ for kind Above, that we had here below and your Years will never come
to an End.

Finally. Entertain such Thoughts, (...) would come recommended unto you from
Such as have had their Breath g^ forth, and have returned unto Earth, bu^
breathed something of Heaven, before the Dyed, and returned unto Heaven when
the Dyed; Such as have Dyed in Youth but Liv^ unto God, before they Dyed.
Within the^ Two Days our afflicted Neighbourhoo^ has had such an affecting
Spectacle. Tw^ Young Persons, a Pio^ Young Man, [Mr. Recompense Wadsworth And.
Mrs. Sarah Smith]
[and a^ Useful;] And a Pio^ Young Woman, carrie^ unto their Graves, the One
within half an Hour, of the Other (...) Neighbors, Hear the Voice of God, in
^h a Dispensation; and Entertain those ^ghts, which it invites you to. The
Thoughts Early Mortality are those whereto you ^e an Invitation On such an
Occasion, (...)! Think; As Young (...) I am, I may die too! ^d what a foolish
Thing will it be, for me, to be Concerned only about those Things, whereof ^m
to take an Eternal Farewell, when I die? ^at a Sottish Thing will it be, for me
to put (...) away the Evil Day, and be found Christ(...), and wholly
Unprepared, when I die! But ^n, Go on, and Entertain such Thoughts, as (...)
have cause to suppose, these Virtuous ^ng Persons, would, if it were in their
^wer more particularly persuade you to. ^ould the Inparadised Spirits of these
dear ^^ildren address you, doubtless you might ^ar them saying to you; Oh!
Think it ^rth the while to begin betimes, your Preparing (...) Death; we don't
Repent, that we took so ^^ch Pains in Preparing for it! Oh! Think worth the
while, to Pray without ceasing; (...) now reap a Joyful Harvest of all our
Prayers! (...)! Think it worth the while to do all that (...) can, in working
about your own Salvation, (...) now Rejoice, that we did with so much ^r and
Trembling, once Ply that work, so much we did.

Certainly, My Children, If you will not hear such a Voice as this; You will be
deaf to Thunder. If you will yet be Strangers to such Thoughts, what can be
Expected, but that you will Utterly Perish, with them, in your own Corruption!

However, that if it be possible some Unperishing Thoughts may be raised in
you, I do in the Name and Fear of the Glorious GOD require it of you, that you
Retire, and in a most Serious Retirement employ some Thoughts on these three
most Solemn Questions.

Quest. I. Can I tell, how soon my Breath may go forth, and I may return to my
Earth?

Quest. II. Am I yet Ready for the Time, when my Breath will go forth, and I
shall return to my Earth?

Quest. III. If my Death find me in my Sins, not United unto my Savior, not
Possessed, and Purified and Rectified by His Holy Spirit; What, what will
become of me?

Bestow some Thoughts on these Pungent Questions; My Children, I Charge it upon
you. If you would not Perish, Your Thoughts on such Questions must be frequent
with you.

A Short Memorial OF Mr. Recompense Wadsworth.
ONE of the Young Persons, whose Death gave Life to the foregoing SERMON, was
Mr. Recompense Wadsworth; Unto whose Memory it will be a piece of Justice, that
a brief TESTIMONY be given, that may represent him, as One Worthy of
Remembrance among the People of God.

He had an Academical Education, which brought him to the Laurels of our Two
Degrees. His Friends designed him for the Evangelical Ministry; but his Genius
led him rather to that Employment, which Educates other, to be Ministers; and a
Place in the Tribe of Sinteon, rather than of Levi. He had performed the part
of a Schoolmaster in diverse Places, but was at length chosen, (and we
thought, fixed,) the first Master of the Grammar School, Erected lately by a
Generous Benefactor to the Public, in the North Part of Boston. We Promised
our selves much Satisfaction in him; with Hopes, which the Early Stroke of
Death, arresting him in the Twenty-fifth Year of his Age, has at once
Extinguished.

That he may still do Some of that Good, whereof he was desirous to have done
very much, and if he had Lived, no doubt, would have done, I will preserve a
short Instrument of Piety, of his own handwriting, which I have lying by me.
It is a brief Declaration of his Faith, and Conversion, and Repentance, which
he wrote, when he was about Seventeen Years of Age.

I BELIEVE, that there is One Only, True GOD; the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit; which are Three Distinct Persons and Each of them GOD, and all of
them, One and the same GOD: And this GOD, is the Fore-Ordain^, Creator,
Preserver and Governor of all Things, according to the Counsel of His Will.
That God made Man Upright, after His own Image; In Knowledge Righteousness, and
Holiness: But he transgressing the Law of His Maker, fell from that Holy and
Happy State, and brought himself, with his whole Posterity, into a State of Sin
and Death. That Man thus fallen, being unable to deliver himself from this
Miserable State, God so Loved the World as to give His only Begotten Son, JESUS
CHRIST; who gave Himself a Sacrifice for our Sins, and became a Ransom for us,
by Suffering the Wrath of God, and the Death of the Cross, to Reconcile us unto
GOD; and though He was Dead and Buried, yet He so triumphed over Death, that He
Rose again on the Third Day * and afterward ascended into Heaven, where He now
remains, Ruling in Equal Power and Glory with the Father; and makes
Intercession for us; But He will Come from thence at the Day Appointed, and
Judge the World in Righteousness; I believe, that God the H^ Spirit has fully
Revealed the Truth and Will of God, contained in the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament the perfect and perpetual Rule of Faith and Obedience; And that
He d^^^ ^^^^^tually Apply to His Elect, by (...) them the Saving Bene^ (...)
the Redemption Purchased by the Blood of our Savior; which precious Benefits
are dispensed by the same Spirit, in the Use of those Holy Ordinances which our
Lord has Instituted in His Written Word, for the Begetting and Perfecting of
Grace, to be carefully Observed, until His Second Coming: And that this Holy
Spirit dwells and works in all, who are drawn to Believe in Christ; who
being United unto Him the Head, make up one Catholic Church, which is His
Body; the Members whereof, having Fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, by Faith, and with one another in Love, do receive here on
Earth, Forgiveness of Sin with the Life of Grace; and at the last shall receive
a Resurrection of their Bodies; and shall for ever Enjoy the Life of Glory with
God in Heaven when the wicked shall go into Everlasting Punishment.

I desire to bless God, while I was Young, I was not only Baptized, but also
faithfully instructed in the ways of the Christian Religion. That Instruction
indeed had at first no more Effect upon me, than to keep me from gross and
scandalous Sins. God was pleased sometimes to Visit me with Sickness, which
together with the Fear of Death, would put me upon Praving to Him. And yet this
was also but after a formal manner. When my Fear of Death left me, my Praying
Frame also left me. I seldom thought of getting an Interest in Christ, but
minded the World more than Real Religion. When one of my Relatives told me,
what great Obligations I was under, to give my self up unto Christ, and honor
Him with an Open Profession of Him, God was pleased to set this home upon my
Heart. And reading a Book, Entitled, Contemplations on Eternity, I saw with
more awakened Thoughts, that I had but a Little Time to be here, and that I had
a Great Work to do, and that it would be infinitely worth my while to get an
Interest in my Savior here, and so have an Eternity of Happiness hereafter. I
have been often times perplexed concerning my Eternal Welfare; and often full
of Doubts and Fears, whether I should be Saved and whether the Holy One would
be willing to Save Such a Sinful Creature. I have sometimes almost run into
Despair; But then, I have cried unto God, and begged of Him, that He would help
me to Repent of my Sin, and Believe on my Savior. And the Lord has heard me;
and brought much Comfort into my Soul. Especially in helping me, to call to
Mind that Scripture; Come unto me, all ye that Labor and are heavy-laden, and
I will give you Rest. And from that Word, God sent His Son into the World, not
to Condemn the World but that the World through Him might be Saved: God helped me
to see how willing the Glorious Redeemer is, to Save Poor Sinners; and I was
Encouraged to come and cast my self upon Him, and Rely, upon Him alone for
Salvation.

I saw, that I who now durst not live in any known Sin and who would not live
in the Omission of any known Duty, yet really did so while I neglected a due
approach unto the Table of the Lord. Wherefore, inasmuch as not only the
Commands of God in His Word, have often called me to give my self, Soul and
Body, up unto Him, but also the Christian Religion which I profess and my
Baptism, in which I took the Lord to be my God, and Renounced the Flesh and the
World and the Devil and came under a Ded^ (...) Work and Will of the Glorious
Lord, bind me here-unto; And since my felicity hereafter depends upon my now
Dedicating of my self unto God; And that so, when I come to die, I may find
nothing undone, that I should have done, I would in the presence of God, and
his Holy Angels, give my self up unto Him, and join my self unto His People.

My Desire is, That I may have my Savior more Endeared unto my Soul; my Heart
Softened; my Sin Subdued; my Faith Strengthened; my Evidences Cleared; and my
Soul assured of Eternal Life.

And he is doubtless now gone, where this Holy Desire (which Austin well says,
is the Life of a Christian,) is most fully, and in a most glorious manner
answered; as our Gracious God uses to fulfill the Desire of them that fear Him.

Though this Comprehensive Instrument, be that which I have chosen to Exhibit as
the First Article of the Things which I extract from his more Private Memoirs,
yet I find some other Passages in them, which I am willing to have Remembered.

In the Year, 1704 I find this Memorial en(...) by him in his private Papers;

Aug. (...) I was Admitted into Harvard Col(...) have I been! I have done
nothing for God. Oh! that God would now help me to be Studious, not only to get
Humane Learning, but that I may be Wise unto Salvation.

And yet for some time after this, he laid aside the sense which he had thus
begun to entertain of his true Interest, and indulged those vanities, from
which in about a Year after this, the Glorious Grace of God so remarkably
recovered him, that the serious and solid and thoughtful Frame, into which he
was changed, was a matter of Observation.

Ere he had been Two Years a Student at the College, he had made a more
sensible progress in that Wisdom. Then I find an Instrument written and signed
by him, Sept. 21. 1706. Wherein he Renewed his consent unto the COVENANT of God
and of Grace; and with all solemnity recapitulating the various Obligations
that lay upon him to do so, he did Accept and Avouch the Glorious JEHOVAH to be
His God; and Embrace a Lovely JESUS, as the way to come unto the Enjoyment of
Him; and Renounce the Service of Sin, and Resolve to Watch against the
Temptations that might invite him unto it; and subscribe to the Laws of the
only Savior as all of them Holy and Just and Good. On this Transaction he
afterward made a frequent Reflection in the course of his Life, to quicken his
care of Holiness in all manner of Conversation.

While he lived at the College, he associated with a considerable Number of
the Undergraduate Students there, in a practice which very much befriended the
Interests of Piety in themselves, and which all the more considerate Friends of
Piety will doubtless be so much the Children of Wisdom as to Justify. They
formed a Society, which laying to heart the too general Decay of serious Piety
in the Professors of it, resolved upon Essays to speak (...) one unto another,
and in the sweetest methods of Bretherly Love watch over one another, and carry
on some suitable Exercises of Religion together, wherein they might prove
Blessings not only unto one another, but unto many more whom they might be
concerned for. In this their Association, having first come into the
Resolutions of Living by the Faith of the Son of God, and as becomes those whom
He has Redeemed from a vain Conversation, and of maintaining a Just and Meek.
and Charitable Carriage, toward their Neighbors, they engaged all possible
Kindness to one another, and to increase their Number as far as the Rules of
Prudence and Goodness, might lead them to it. On the Evenings of the Lords
Dares, they met, and Prayed together, and Read Instructive Treatises, and
communicated unto each other their Thoughts on proper Subjects and Sing the
Praises of God. On Saturday^ before the Communion, they spent the Afternoons
together, in preparing for the Interviews with Heaven, which they had before
them. And sometimes they spent whole Days in Prayer with Fasting before the
Glorious God; particularly to obtain Blessings for the College whereof they
were the Members. This Action has been very sensibly blessed of God, for the
advantage of them that combined in it; and this Young Man in particular, was
one who found the desirable Effect of it, on himself, the rest of his little
Time in the World. He was after this, very solicitous about answering the
Characters of, An Upright Christian; which therefore he found out, and wrote
out; Especially from the Excellent Scudders Treatise of, A Christians Daily
walk. And for his own Walk he made a Collection of Scriptures, which contained,
Rules for his Affections, and his Thoughts, and his Words, and his Works.

He drew up a short Catalogue of things under this Title; Sins, which I think,
I should most bewayl, and ask pardon for, if I were now to Dye.

And another under this Title; The Graces, which I should pray to God for, if I
were now to Dye.

He has also left Notes, which discover his concern to uphold an Examination
every Night upon those Three Articles.

Q. 1 What has been the Mercy of God unto me this Day?

Q. 2 What has been my Carriage toward God this Day?

Q. 3 If I Dye this Night, am I in a state of safety for Eternity?

That he might improve in universal Knowledge, and Enrich his mind with the
Labors of a Diligent Hand, he had his Quotidiana; or Blank Books, wherein he
entered the more notable things that occurred unto him in his Reading: and still
numbering of the Notata, he formed an Index of them, that he might readily turn
unto them In such imitable ways, he held on, preparing for the Death; which
has now bereaved us of him.

The Hand which Baptized him, having born this (...) for him commends the
Example of this Piety to the Survivers; and has no more to add, (...), Go thou,
and no like-wise.

To procure a due Regard unto One Paragraph of the foregoing Relation I will
transcribe a short Passage from the Life of Mr. Thomas Board, and (...)
^omparable Young Man, who was designed for the evangelical Ministry under the
Acidemical Education of Mr. Joseph Peter, but was taken off by Death at the Age
of Seventeen This Excellent Youth, writing the Story of his own Conversion to
Serious and Vital Piety has the Ensuing Passages.

When I was between Twelve and Thirteen years old, the Grace of God laid hold
on me. It found me trifling, but it ^uickly made me Stripes. I shall never
forget the D^y, the Day of my Espousals and of the (...) of my Heart.

By the Direction of my dear Master. Some of greater Maturity than I retired to
Pray together, to help forward One another Salvation. Poor I was happily to
the way but busy at my Sports. One of them my dear Friend, the Happy Instrument
asked me to go with them: and I being (...) was ambitions to associate with
them; not knowing, as far as I can recollect what their Design was. Had I known
it had been for Prayer. I fear I should have chosen my Diversions But God and a
great Work to do in me and for m^ (...) how rich how wonderful is the Grace of
God! Wh^st they were Engaged in Dety, I did little else but Laugh behind the
(...) Th^s I came away not the better, but the worse: had not the Grace of God
overruled. (O my Soul, Behold and Admire the Good Hand of my God upon me!)
Soon after, I overheard two or three Censuring me for my Indecent Atheistic
Carriage, and my Heart instantly Smote me O see, how the Stratag^ms of Satan
sometimes through Grace become the means of Salvation! He designed it for Evil;
but the Grace of God overruled it to my Everlasting Welfare: Thus the Good
Work began, and my Repentings were kindled together. My Heart burned within me!
One of my Companions was so faithful to me, as to Reprove me Seriously, and
Speak to me affectionately about another World: And the Spirit of God Set in
with the kind Admonitions; Every Expression came with Power: Forthwith I
resolved to set on the Great Work of Salvation. O see, my Soul, what God can
do? Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings He ordains Strength, to still
the Enemy and the Avenger.

That which helped on the Good Work, was the Good Company I had. It pleased God
at this very time, to work upon the Consciences of almost all our Class; who
had all a very great Concern upon us, for our own, and One another Souls, our
Precious and Immortal Souls. We had each others Examples and Prayers to help on
One another to Heaven and Glory. O how Sweet was it, to talk with my
Companions, of an Everlasting State! How much was I affected with their
Discourses! Thus we walked together as Brethren, Edifying One another, and
drawing One another nearer and nearer to God in a way of Duty Good Examples are
good Guides to Heaven!

I hope, there will be some Good Effect of the Passage which I have thus
transcribed, as well as of the whole Discourse which it now belongs unto.

FINIS.

