Wholesome Words.

A VISIT of ADVICE, Given unto FAMILIES That are Visited with Sickness; BY A
Pastoral LETTER, BRIEFLY Declaring the DUTIES incumbent on all Persons in the
FAMILIES, that have any Sick Persons in them.

Job XXXIII. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

Calamitas est Saepius Disciplina Virtutis.

Min. Faelix. Boston, Printed for D. Henchman, 1713.

The Intention.
THe ESSAY now before us, is Published; Not only that it may be dispersed to
afflicted Family's, in a Time of Epidemical Sickness, when our Pastors, who
would fain Visit all the Sick, have not Strength to go through a Service, to
which, their Charity disposes them, as much as their Ministry Obliges them. The
Publication also aims, at a Supply for our Visits of the Sick at any other
Time; for we are sure, Them we shall have always with us: And we cannot Speak
unto them, every thing that we mightily desire to have them Think upon. But,
You that are the Tenders and Watchers, may perhaps find your Opportunity's to
Read a few Proper Lines unto your Patients; Which, when it is done, -- O Spirit
of Grace, Do thou accompany it, with thy Gracious and Saving Operations!

A Pastoral LETTER, UNTO Family's that have Sickness Exercising of them, or any
one Person in them.
YOU are so well Instructed, O our Afflicted Neighbors, that you cannot be
ignorant of this Truth; Sickness and Weakness carry's in it, very strong
Obligations to Duty: And Sickness in a Family bespeaks Duty from no less than
all the Family. When Sickness comes into any Family, though but One Person should
be Visited, it administers a Manifold Occasion for Serious Religion to be
Exercised by the whole Family, even by every Person belonging unto it. We have
though it it therefore a part of our Pastoral Watchfulness over you, our Dear
Flock, to put into your Hands, (for, alas, how many do Forget the Exhortations
delivered by us, when we manage the Public Exhortations!) a Brief, a Plain, a
Faithful Monitor of the Duty, whereto the Voice of God by Sickness among us, is
aloud calling of us. These are the Admonitions, whereto your Attention is now
demanded in the Name and Fear of God.

I. There is a Duty incumbent upon the whole Family, even upon every Person
that can understand their Duty, when Sickness comes upon any Person in the
Family. If any One Person in a Family be under any Sickness, there is an Holy
Improvement of it, and an Improvement in Holiness on it, whereof every Soul in
the Family should be studious. Particularly;

First. Let the whole Family acknowledge, that the Sickness of any one in the
Family, is by the Providence of the Great GOD bro't upon them. When there was
only a Child Sick in a Family, it was said, 2 Samuel XII.15. The Lord struck the
Child, and it was very Sick. It Is Atheism in us, if we do not own, that a
Sparrow falls not unto the Ground, without the Providence of God; and we are
Blinder than the Owl, if we see not the Providence of God in it, when Sickness
threatens to lay any of us or of ours, in the Ground. The Providence of God is
to be eyed, as in all the Comforts of a Family, so in all the Troubles of it.
When Sickness does Happen in a Family, it comes not merely by Hap. It was said,
Amos III.6- Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? We
may say, Shall there be Sickness in a Family, and the Lord has not sent it?
When Health is taken away from any of us, it is by the Hand of Him, who is, The
God of our Health. It was the Creation of God, which put our Body's in their
good Order at the first: If Sickness put our Body's out of Order, there is the
Providence of God, ordering of it. Are we Sick? We must Esteem our selves to be
Stricken and Smitten of God, and Afflicted. Indeed, there are some Diseases, in
which the more Immediate Hand of God, (and of His Angels,) may Scourge the
Sinful Children of men. The Leprosy, as it often Arrested, first, the Houses,
and then the Garments, and then (upon Impenitency) the Body's of the
Israelites, in the Holy Land, seems to have been one of those Diseases. And
even the most Famous Pagan Physician, advises the Practitioners of Physic, to
mind, whether there be no extraordinary Stamp of a Divine Hand in those
Diseases, which they undertake to meddle with. But every Disease, whatever be
the Next Cause of it, must be looked upon as proceeding from God, the First
Cause of all. Is any one Sick in a Family? Let every one there say, It Is the
Hand of God that is now upon the Family. GOD is now fulfilling that word; Mic.
VI.13. I will make thee Sick in smiting thee.

But then, Secondly. Should not this Acknowledgment be accompanied with a
suitable Humiliation of the whole Family, when Sickness is in a Family? It Is
highly Reasonable that it should be so. Where Sickness comes, the Complaint is
that, Psalm. CXLII.6. I am bro't very Low. Certainly, it becomes a Family to lie
very Low before God, when He shall send Sickness into it. Sickness in a Family,
does cause no little Sorrow to the Family. It Is an unspeakable Encumbrance unto
a Family, to have Sickness in it; it Encumbers a Family with a multitude of
Inconveniences. The Pale, the Swollen, the Wasted, and perhaps the Spotted
Faces of the Sick in the Family, are such as our Heavenly Father has been
Spitting upon: Shall He Spit in our Faces, and shall we not be Ashamed? A
Family under the Rebuke of God by Sickness, is then to take that Advice, 1 Pet.
V.6. Humble your selves under the Mighty Hand of God. No Weary Murmurings, I
beseech you, when weary Days, and weary Nights, through Sickness are appointed
for you! It Is GOD, that has appointed 'em. Humbly own the Sovereignty of God;
Say, Lord, Thou might have made All Sick, as well as One! Humbly own the
Righteousness of God; Say, Lord, We all deserve to be Sick, and are Punished
less than our Iniquity's deserve! Humbly own the Wisdom of God, and Submit unto
the Sickness in the Family, as a Cross of His lying upon us. The Sickness may
be called a Potion, which our Lord Himself has mingled for us: It becomes us to
say, The Cup which my Heavenly Father orders for this Family, shall not I drink
of it? Imitating the words of the Psalmist, [Psal. XXXIX. 9, 10, 11.] Humbly
say; Lord, I will be Dumb, and not open my Mouth, because thou do what is
done in the Family; It Is the stroke of thy Hand, that is upon us in our
Sickness; We are consumed by the blow of thy Hand. It Is thy Rebuke, that makes
what is desirable here to Melt away!

Thirdly, Sickness bringing such an Humiliation upon a Family, methinks, it
should also bring a Reformation into the Family. When a Distemper comes into a
Family, it is very certain, it should Cure every Disorder in that Family. All the
Griefs and Groans of a Sick Person in the Family, are so many Pungent Sermons,
for the Reformation of all that is amiss; Lively Sermons upon such a Text as
that; Job XXII.23 Thou shall put away Iniquity far from thy Tabernacles. When
Sickness comes into a Family, it is a Day of Adversity, wherein every one in
the Family should Consider, how they have Miscarried, and Reform all their own
Miscarriages. But especially, it now concerns the Master of the Family, so to
take the Warning from the Sickness in his Family, as to Reform every thing that
may be there Provoking to God. My Friend, Let the Sickness there put thee upon
awful Tho'ts, what shall now be done, that Family Piety, and Family
Instruction, and Family Government, may more flourish in thy Family, than
heretofore. Most of all, If any Master of a Family, has been so very Criminal,
as to neglect Family Prayer, let him hear the Cry of the Sickness in his Family
unto him, thus Articulated; Oh! Neglect Family Prayer no Longer! Now call thy
Folks together; tell them that thy Family, whereto the God of Heaven speaks by
the Sickness now upon it, shall be no longer Prayerless; tell them thou art
afraid lest God go on to pour out His Fury in something worse than Sickness,
upon a Family that Calls not on His Name: Fall down upon thy Knees in the midst
of them, and spread the Sins, the Wants, the Fears, and the Desires of thy
Family, as well as thou can before the Lord. Happy and Healthy, that
Sickness, which thus Reforms the Family that it comes into!

More than so; Fourthly. If it be a Time of General Sickness, we should all in
General join in the Methods of Devotion, to obtain a stop to the Judgment, by
the Efficacy of the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation. Sometimes a Sickness
rages in a Place; and not one or two, but many Family's are Visited. Now it is a
Time for all the Family's in a Neighborhood, Unanimously to Concur in more
than ordinary Supplications. The Cry of a Raging and Spreading Sickness to a
whole Neighborhood, is that, Jon. III.8. Fast, and Cry mightily unto God, and
turn every one from his Evil Way. But that the Supplications may become
Effectual, there is one Signal and Glorious point of Christianity to be
observed. There are Destroying Angels, as with Drawn Swords, by a Commission
from God, inflicting of such a Sickness, for the Destruction, or at least the
Vexation of the Inhabitants. The way to prevail with God, for the preventing of
such a dreadful Commission, is to Bring and Plead a Sacrifice. It was of old
said, Numb XIV.46. Bring Incense, go quickly, and make Atonement; for there is
Wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is begun. But what Sacrifice have we
to Plead in this Case? None truly, but the Alsufficient Sacrifice of our Lord
Jesus Christ. We are then to Plead this with God; O Most Glorious God; Our Lord
Jesus Christ has Suffered that just Wrath of thine, which is due to us for our
Sins: Let the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ save us from thy Wrath: Oh,
Pity us, and Pardon us, and let us be saved from horrible Sicknesses, for the
sake of those Expiatory Sufferings wherein our Lord Jesus (...) born our
Sicknesses. Christians, (...); The Believers who so Present before God the
Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, on the behalf of the Towns where they Live,
are the very Gapmen of the Towns. And by this Faith in that Great Sacrifice, we
may particularly procure our own Houses to be Sprinkled with that Blood, be
which our Family's may be preserved in Jesus Christ. Oh! Nothing so Grateful to
the Blessed God; no Plea so Powerful, as to mention the Blood of His Beloved
Son before Him.

II. There is a Duty incumbent on such in the Family, as are not lying under
Sickness, when Sickness lies upon others in the Family. A Sickness of any one
in a Family, gives many Healthful Counsils, to those that are yet in Health.
For;

First. The Sickness of any One in a Family, should engage the rest that are in
Health to be very Thankful for their Health. It would indeed be worthy of a,
Lord, have Mercy upon us, on the Door, if all in a Family should be Sick. An
Healthful Person, has always very great cause to be a Thankful Person. What
says the Psalmist? Psalm. XLII. 11. I will Praise Him who is the Health of my
Countenance. But the Sickness of any (...) unto us, aggravates the Cause, and
(...) for Thankfulness. Our Health, when others are Sick, as it is a
Distinguishing Favor, so it is an Unmerited Favor. Why me, Lord! When others
are Pining in Sickness, there can be no Reason assigned for the Mercy of God,
in sparing our Health, but only the Mere Mercy of God. This affords a very
cogent Reason, why we should be very Thankful for the Mercy! Well then; See thy
Sick Friend Sweating, Hear thy Sick Friend Sighing, under Sickness, when
Chastened on their Bed: Their Soul abhors all manner of Meat, they Draw near
unto the Gates of Death, they Pant, they Faint, they can hardly Speak: But all
this while, they Cry aloud unto thee: Oh! Prize thy precious Health, and Praise
Merciful God, for a Mercy that never can be Prized Enough!

Secondly. And yet, Prepare for Sickness! The Sickness of One in a Family, bids
all the rest, Prepare to be Sick. The Feeble Voice of the Sick, it as Notably,
as if they should Lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, Speaks unto us, that;
Isa. XL.6. All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof, is as the Flower
of the Field. Sickness in a Family, is a Lecture upon Humane Frailty: And the
Language of it, is Oh! Do with thy Might what thy Hand finds to do, while thou
art in thy Health; and leave not unto a Time of Sickness, the doing of those
things, for which there is no Time in Sickness! If it be Necessary for us, to
make, A WILL, that Right and Peace, may not be injured when we are Dead, a Sick
Person in a Family will show us, that we should not have this to do, when we
come to be Sick. But above all, It Is Necessary for us, to make a Timely
Provision for Eternity. This PROVISION is made, How? By Consenting to every
Article, in the Covenant of Grace; By Submitting to the Lord Jesus Christ, as
our Priest, our Prophet, and our King; By Accepting of, the Righteousness which
our Surety has Wrought out for us, that we may therein stand Righteous before
the Judge of All; And By Complying with the Holy Spirit, who offers to Renew
us, and Possess us, and Com^^rt us to God, and Unite us to Christ, and Rescue
us from Sin, and Prepare us for Heaven. Immortal Soul; Necessity is laid upon
thee to do these things, and Woe unto thee, if thou do them not. But will a Sick
Bed afford a Proper Season, for the doing of such things? It may be, you have
not heard, (as I have) the Miserables upon a Sick Bed, Crying out with
inexpressible Anguish; In my Health, I made no Preparation for Death! And, O
Sir, It is not now too Late? Is it not now too Late? But the Sickness in your
Family, may terribly inculcate this Caution upon you; Don't, Oh! Don't put off
your Turning to God, until you come to be Sick: You Will make Poor, Mean, Sickly,
and most Uncertain Work of it, if you do.

And Thirdly. Have they that are in Health, nothing to do for the Sick in the
Family? Yes; We should Exhort one another, whom we see under Sickness; and so
much the more, as we see the Day approaching, wherein they are to take that
Important Step, which their Everlasting Weal or Woe turns upon. Oh! Drop as many
Sound Words as we can, upon our Sick Friends. And Speak For them, as well as To
them. Carry them to our Lord Jesus Christ, by our Prayers for His Help, as they
did of old, and found it not in vain to do so. Yea, Pray With them too, as well
as For them, if it may be done with Decency. Husbands, and Parents, and Masters
in the Family, can do no less. It is said, Jam. V.16. The Prayer of Faith shall
save the Sick. Nor should we withold any Charitable Assistences, that we can
give toward the Relief of the Sick. To Relieve the Sick, is an Angelical
Office and Service! When the Pestilence made horrid havoc in Alexandria, 'twas
noted, That the Heathens ran away from their dearest Relations, under the dread
of the Infection; when the Christians bravely exposed their Lives in looking
after the Sick, and with a sort of Martyrdom, even Died themselves to save
others from Death. Yea, our Charity should look Abroad, as well as at Home; and
be able to say, My Soul is grieved for the Poor. The Sickness in thy own
Family, O Good Man, should awaken thy Consideration of the Sick Elsewhere,
whose Poverty and Penury is greater than thine, and who are destitute of such
Comfortable Supports as thy Sick ones are surrounded withal. There is a
Wonderful Encouragement; Psalm. XLI. 1, 2, 3. Blessed is he that Considers the
Poor, the Lord will Deliver him in time of Trouble; the Lord will Preserve him,
and Keep him Alive, and he shall be Blessed upon the Earth; The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of Languishing; Thou will make all his Bed in his
Sickness. Every Syllable is a Cordial, beyond the Richest Elixir in the World!
Will you take Notice of it, O ye who Devise Liberal Things!

And, Fourthly. With their Alms, there should go up the Prayers of them that
are in Health, as a Memorial before God, that He may keep them in Health. It is
a due Course, Psalm. XLII. 8. My Prayer is unto the God of my Life. Let the
Sickness of any one in a Family, set all the rest a Praying, that they may be
Preserved from Sickness: A Praying, Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I put my
Trust: A Praying, Lord, Deal bountifully with thy Servant, that I may Live and
Keep thy Word. In thus Praying, we should urge the agreeable Promises of our
God; such Promises as we find in the NINETY FIRST PSALM; A Psalm, which may be
of Singular Use to us, especially when Epidemical and Pestilential Sicknesses,
are formidable among us.

III. When Sickness is in a Family, there is a Duty incumbent upon the Sick
themselves, as well as upon the rest in the Family. Perhaps, O Languishing
Persons, you may hear these Lessons Read unto you, if you are through Sickness
not able your selves to Read them.

First; Repentance! Repentance! That is the Sick Man's main Duty and Interest;
though it is well if Repentance then come Soon Enough, to Be Good, or to Do any
Good. Now to carry on this Repentance, there must be several Actions. If
Sickness be come upon you, Examine the Cause of the Sickness, I mean, the Sin
that is the Moral Cause of it. When Sickness overtakes us, there is usually
some Cause to be enquired after. God will have us to know, That He has not
without a Cause done all that He has done unto us. [See 1 Cor. XI. 30.] Upon
the Arrest of any Sickness then Conclude, Here is a Sickness come for
Something! And immediately fall to enquiring what Controversy of God with us
may be the most probable Cause of our Sickness. Make that Petition, Job X. 2.
Show me wherefore thou Contendest with me. And then, Let both Scripture and
Conscience have a fair Hearing upon it. It is said, Fools because of their
Transgressions, and because of their Iniquities are Afflicted with Sickness.
When we have Discovered the Folly that has bro't our Sickness upon us, Oh!
Confess it and Bewail it before the Lord, and Ask the Pardon of it, through the
Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, which Cleanses from all Sin. Yea, but
the Sick Man must express this Repentance of Every Sin. Sickness causes
Loathing. O Sick Man, Let all Sin become of all things the most Loathsome unto
thee. If thou have any measure of Strength for it, Let the EXPOSITION of the
TEN COMMANDMENTS in the Catechisms be distinctly Read over unto thee; Make a
pause upon every Clause, and ponder, Have not I Omitted what is thus Required
by God? And, Have not I Committed what is thus Forbidden by God? Judge thy self
before God, as worthy to be Judged unto Eternal Misery's, for these thy Sins.
But be sure to Reflect upon that Fountain and Bundle of all Sins, thy Original
Sin, and Know the Plague of thy own Heart. Thus Mourn for all thy Sins, even
till thou do Water thy Couch with thy Tears. And especially Mourn for thy
Loss of Time: A Sin big with bitter Lamentations. In Sickness we lose much
Time, and are threatened that we shall have but little more Time. Now is a Time
for us to Mourn, Lord, I Mourn that I have so Sinfully Misspent my Time. When
the Ax is laid unto the Root of our Tree, in Sickness, what can we do, but
Mourn for our Unfruitfulness? Behold now the Lord JESUS CHRIST, that Savior
and Great One, making a Tender of Himself and of His Great Salvation, even unto
the Chief of Sinners. Oh! Hearken to Him; for now He says to thee, Distressed
Sinner, Look unto Me, and be Saved! Let so Gracious a Tender, Melt thy very
Heart within thee; with a Distressed, an Agonizing, an Astonished Soul, declare
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, Lord, I fly to thee as my Refuge, my Helper, and my
Portion, and by thy Help, I give my Self back unto thee! Do this once, Do it
again, Do it a thousand times over, Do it as long as thou have a Breath to draw
in the World. Thy Life, the Life of a Never dying Soul depends upon it.

But is it not now altogether Too (...) It is true, A Deathbed Repentance is
very seldom True! Oh! Mourn, That thou have made it So Late. Let the Late^^ss
of thy Repentance, be not the least Matter of thy Repentance. And yet Strive to
enter in at the strait Gate. It may be it is not altogether Too Late; The Door
is not yet shut: And Better Late than Never!

Secondly; It becomes a Sick Person, Sincerely, Entirely, Cheerfully, to Leave
unto the Great God, the Issue of the Sickness. Adore the Great God, O Sick Man,
as the Absolute Lord of thy Life. Be willing to Die or to Live, just as the
Great GOD shall Please to Appoint. Stand like a Sentinel, in thy Station, ready
to ^^ove just as thy Great Commander shall give His Orders concerning thee.
Suppose God should even Refer it unto thee, whether to Die or to Live, be ready
to Reply, I would Refer it unto Him again! Say, Psalm. XXXI. 15. Lord, My Times
are in thy Hand; And add, Lord, It is fit, that thou alone should have the
Disposal of all my Times.

Thirdly; A Sick Person should be more Desirous to be Delivered from Sin, than
from Sickness. Be more Sick of Sin, O Sick Man, than of any Sickness. About the
Rage of thy Sinful Passions, Let this be thy Sense, This is worse than any
Fever. Let no Pain in thy Flesh be so Painful as This; There dwells no Good
Thing in my Flesh. Sickness makes thee Listless and Feeble; Oh, Let thy
Listlessness to, and Feebleness in, the Work of God, be more Uneasy to thee. It
was said, Isa. XXXIII. 24. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am Sick; the People
shall be Forgiven their Iniquity. Count it better to have Iniquity taken away,
than to say, I am not Sick.

Fourthly; If God will have the Sickness to be unto Death, yet let it be unto
the Glory of God, by your Dying in Faith: A Faith whereof the End will be the
Salvation of the Soul. It is an excellent Epitaph upon some; Heb. XI. 13. They
Died in Faith. You Live by it: Oh! Die in it.

The Sick bro't thus Low, are doubtless now, no longer Able to Read; But let
some Faithful Attendent, watch an Opportunity now to Read these Lines unto them.

Distressed Sinner; Behold the Lovely JESUS, the Man on the Throne of God, in
whom the Eternal Word and Son of God has Chosen His Everlasting Habitation,
that Savior and Great One, making a Tender of Himself, and of, His Great
Salvation, even unto the Chief of Sinners. Be Amazed at this Grace! Lift up thy
Cry to Sovereign Grace, for Help to Believe and Embrace this most Gracious
Tender, which of thy self thou art not Able to do. Then with an Agonizing and
an Astonished Soul, Declare unto the Glorious JESUS, Lord, I fly to thee, as my
Refuge and my Savior. Oh! Do thou now apply to my Repenting, Humble and
Contrite Soul, the Pardon, which thou did by thy Precious Blood Purchase for
me, while I was yet an Enemy of God. But with a Pardon, Oh! Bestow upon me that
Blessing, which my Soul would value as much as any Pardon; The Blessing of a
New Heart: The Blessing of an Heart filled with the Love of God: The Blessing
of an Heart always to choose the Things that Please the Lord. Having thus led
them into the Path of Life; Let this one more Paragraph be Read unto them.

O Man; Apprehensive of thy Soul drawing near unto the Grave, and thy Life unto
the Destroyers; if God will have thy present Sickness to be unto Death; yet let
it be unto the Glory of God, by thy Dying in Faith, even a Strong Faith, which
will give Glory to God. Thy Faith must be thy Life; and thy Victory over Death.
Die like Stephen, by Faith, Committing a Soul into the Hands of the Faithful
JESUS. Let thy Dying Ejaculations, be with all possible Frequency and Fervency
in those Terms; Psalm. XXXI. 5. Lord, Into thy Hands I Commit my Spirit. Die,
Persuaded, that thy Soul shall never Die. Fully Believe, the Immortality of the
Soul; Departing hence, think, I am going to the Immortals. Die, Persuaded that
thy Body shall after Death return to Life. Strongly Believe The Resurrection of
the Body, when thy Mind is taking a Farewell of thy Weakened Body. Die, Persuaded
of the Heavenly Blessedness, which is Reserved in the Heavens for the
Righteous. If thou can attain to it, Come to that, I desire to be Dissolved,
and to be with Christ, which is by far the Best of all! Reckon Death which is
the Last Enemy, to be turned into a Good Friend, by the Influences of the Dear
JESUS, who was Dead and is Alive, and behold, He Lives for evermore. The Sting
of Death having been once fastened on our Surety JESUS, now, even Triumph over
it, and say, O Death, Where is thy Sting? Thou will only strip me of my Sin,
which is my worst Enemy; and fit me for my Everlasting Rest. Finally, Die,
Persuaded, That the God with whom the Fatherless find Mercy, will take a
Fatherly Care of thine, after thou shall be Dead and Gone; Persuaded, for thy
Orphans, that when their Father and their Mother forsakes them, the Lord will
take them up. Oh! By Faith leave them in the Hands of thy Savior, and then say
with the Martyr; I have Left them with an Able and a Faithful Guardian. My
Friend, May thy End be in this Peace of God! And now, Suppose a Sickness prove
Mortal to any in the Family, is there no Duty now incumbent on the Family? Yes;
The Duty of the Profoundest Resignation! Whatever Flower in our Garden be
Cropped, though it be our Isaac, yet Resign it, and let it be said of us, Genesis
XXII. 12. Now I know that thou Fear God, because thou have not witheld any
thing from Him! A Bereavement bro't by Sickness upon a Family, must be
undergone with Patience; For, If thou Faint in the day of this Adversity, thy
Strength is but Small. Too Small is the Strength of a Rachel, when, for the
Death of her Children, she Refuses to be Comforted; Yea, Too Small the Strength
of a David, when he Cries, My Son, O my Son, I wish I had died for thee!
Lamentations are not Amiss; We must not be Stocks and Stones: But yet, we may
do much Amiss in our Lamentations. It is Enjoined upon Christians, 1 These. IV.
13. Do not Sorrow as others, that have no Hope. Our Lord came upon some
Immoderate Mourners, with such a Reprehension; Mar. V. 39. Why make ye this
Ado? He speaks it unto our Mourners; Why make ye this Ado? May not the God of
Heaven Dispose of the Potsherds of the Earth, as Pleases Him? Why make ye this
Ado? Have you Lost All, and is not GOD and CHRIST Living still? Why make ye
this Ado? Are not the Dead gone only a Little before, and shall not you Quickly
follow them? Be Still then, O ye Storms of Grief in the Bereaved. Let us now
hear nothing but This; The Lord has Given, and the Lord has Taken away; and
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

FINIS.

