The Necessity of Religion IN SOCIETIES AND Its Serviceableness to Promote the
Due and Successful Exercise of GOVERNMENT In Them: Asserted and Showed.

A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL-ASSEMBLY of the COLONY of CONNECTICUT, at
Hartford, May 14* 1713.

By JOHN BULKLEY, A. M. Pastor of the (...) in Colchester

Published by Order of Authority.

Printed and Sold by (...) Gre^^, 1713.

An Election SERMON.
s XX. 11 And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the Fear of GOD is not in
this Place; and they will Slay me, etc.
IT is observed by the Learned, that in the earliest Ages of the World, those
who had the greatest Authority Civil, had likewise the Sacred conjoined with
it: That as Civil Society's are no other than a Combination of particular
Family's, so before Family's associated into those larger Society's, the Master
of the Family was the Priest of it.

And that hence it is that we read of Noah, Jacob and Job, that they
Sacrificed; and of Abraham's Instructing his Family. Every Head of a Family was
both King and Priest in his House, and performed the respective Functions
belonging to each. Afterward (as most conceive) the Firstborn in Family's had
the possession of the Priesthood, and were exercised in it till the giving of
the Law. To Confirm which Opinion, that Text (with some others) is alleged;
which we have, Numb. 3. 11, 12. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, And I,
behold, I have taken the Levites from among the Children of Israel, instead of
all the Firstborn that opens (...) among the Children of Israel: therefo^
(...) ^^vites shall be mine. Where we find God (...) the Levites from among the
Children of Israel, instead of the Firstborn. But whether this was so or not,
yet most certain it is, that the Civil and Sacred Powers were united in the
same Persons; and that not only in the Morning of the World, before Family's
(for mutual advantages) associated together; but we have instances of it also
afterward, even till by Positive Laws the power of the Priesthood was
restrained to the Tribe of Levi. Thus (as the Sacred Oracles inform us)
Melchisedeck was both King and Priest in Salem; and upon the acount of his
twofold Office (as well as in other respects) was an Eminent Type of Christ,
who is a Priest upon a Throne. So we find Moses (in like manner) exercising
both these Powers, till Aaron and his Sons were Consecrated to the latter of
them, Exodus 24. 5. and 29. 35. And hence is that expression, Psalm. ^9.6. Moses
and Aaron among His Priests. In imitation of which, probably it was that in the
Gentile World (after the dispersion) as there were Sacrifices and other
Solemnity's of Sacred estimation, attended in Honor of their Gods, so the
Power of the Priesthood was often possessed by those of Royal Dignity among
them. Profane Story furnishes us with instances of this nature; particularly
among the Egyptians, Lacaedemonians and Romans, diverse of whose Emperors (even
after these Powers were separated among them) are said to retain the Title of
Pontifex Maximus, among the rest of their Imperial Honors.

It Is not to be doubted, but that the exercise of these two Offices by those
holy Persons of old, was very agreeable to the mind of God. As for Moses, what
he did in either of them, was by express Warrant from God: And although we find
not the like as to others, yet there is no reason to doubt, but they acted by a
like Divine Authority therein.

Now this Union of these two Powers in the same Persons in those Ages of the
World, as its otherwise Instructive, so particularly it Suggests to us the
Mutual Serviceableness of Civil Government and Religion each to other. Civil
Government duly Administered, contributes not a little to the Well-being, Growth
and Progress of Religion in Society's; and this on the other hand, is highly
conducive to the due and successful Administration of Civil Government. Of such
importance is Religion to these ends, that where it is not, there is little
reason to hope for or expect them. In this case, as Government is not likely to
be duly Administered, so neither to be attended with Success in its
Administrations: Religion being as necessary to a due Observance of Good Laws,
as to the Making and due Execution of them.

So depraved is the Nature of Man in his fallen State, and such is the mighty
Power and Influence of Sin in him, that where the Powerful influences and
restraints of Religion are wanting, there is little reason to hope that either
Rulers or Ruled, will adorn their Places by a due discharge of the Duty's of
either of them. Abraham seems to have been very sensible of the truth of this,
when he reply's to Abimelech, as in our Text; Because I thought, Surely the
Fear of God is not in this Place; and they will Slay me, etc.

In the first Verse of this Chapter, we have an account of Abraham's remove
from Mamre to Gerar; And Abraham journey'd from thence toward the South-
country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar. He had
dwelt in the Plain of Mamre about fourteen Years, and now removes (as is
conjectured) because of the nearness of the stinking Lake of Sodom thereto.
This is followed with an account of Abimelech's taking Sarah his Wife, thinking
she had been his Sister; ver. 2. And Abraham said of Sarah his Wife, She is my
Sister: and Abimelech King of Gerar, sent and took Sarah. Whereupon God appears
to Abimelech in a Dream, admonishes him of his Sin and Danger in what he had
done, and Charges him to restore her again, Ver.3, -- 8. It Is observable, that
God in the Charge He here gives to Abimelech, styles Abraham a Prophet; ver. 7.
Now therefore restore the man his Wife; for he is a Prophet, and he shall Pray
for thee, etc. From which Text (with some others) I may observe to you by the
way, its inferred by some; That the true Notion of a Prophet, lies not in
foretelling future events, but in declaring and interpreting to the World the
Mind of God received by immediate Revelation from Him: That a Persons receiving
that which he makes known to others by immediate Revelation from God, is that
which formally Constitutes a Prophet; and that its wholly extrinsecal what time
his Prophesy respects, whether that which is past, present, or to come: And
that therefore Abraham here has this Title given to him; and he with Isaac and
Jacob are called Prophets, Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. Not because of any Predictions uttered by them, but because
of the frequency of immediate Revelations to them. Consonant to which we find,
that those in the New Testament who Expounded the Scriptures by immediate
Inspiration, are called Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32. But this by the way.

Abimelech being thus admonished of God, and acquainted that Sarah was the Wife
of Abraham, resolves to restore her; sends for Abraham and Expostulates with
him, for his so dealing with him, ver. 9, 10. Hereupon Abraham Apologizes for
himself, ver. 11, -- 14. Our Text is a part of this Apology; Because I thought,
Surely, etc. In which words two Things are observable.

1. Abraham's expression of his fear of Barbarous Treatment in that place, They
will Slay me for my Wives sake. Which he mentions as the reason why he had said
of Sarah, that she was his Sister.

2. We have the special Reason of this Fear, viz. the want of Religion, or the
Knowledge and Fear of God in that place: Because I thought, Surely the Fear of
God is not in this Place. The expression is not to be understood, as implying a
wrong though it or apprehension concerning the Place, as if he had conceived it
destitute of the Knowledge and Fear of God, when really it was not. One Arias
Montanus.
more agreeably with the Original Text renders this Clause, Because I said,
Verily, (or Truly) the Fear of God is not in this Place. Q. D. I said, or knew
it to be void of the true Fear of God, and therefore Feared, etc. Which Phrase
(the Fear of God) seems here to be comprehensive both of the Act and Rule of
holy Fear.

1. Of the Act: Which is here put (as it elsewhere is in Scripture) for the
whole of Religion. Eccl. 12. 13. The Fear of God being not only in it self an
Eminent part of Religion; but also a Grace that has a peculiar influence upon
all other parts of it, is not unfitly put for the whole of it. And upon this
account it is, that sometimes men of Piety (or Religion) are described by this
Divine Qualification, Job 1. 1,8. Psalm.25.12,-14. and 128. 1.

2. Of the Rule of Fear; the Law or Word of God. So this Phrase is sometimes
taken, Psalm.19.9. The Fear of the Lord is Clean. Where by [Fear] is intended
the Law of God, or Rule by which its guided: So here, the Phrase seems to be
inclusive of this. For although in that day of the World, the Will of God, or
Rule of Religion was not committed to Writing, yet the People of God had it by
Tradition. God appeared to Adam, Abraham, and the other Patriarchs, made known
His Will to them, and from them 'twas handed down to others. So that this part
of Abraham's Apology amounts to thus much; q. d. Though the Place I am in be not
altogether Barbarous, wholly without Civil Subordination or Government; and
Persons are not entirely at liberty to pursue their own Desires, yet because
its destitute of the Knowledge of God and His Will, and consequently of the
Fear and Reverence of them, which in all Persons (of what Character o^ Degree
soever) is the best Preservative from Evils of any kind; I could not therefore
promise my self Protection and Safety here, was afraid that other Restraints
would be ineffectual to bridle men's Lusts, and prevent their offering Violence
to my Person, if Sarah were known to be my Wife; and therefore said she is my
Sister. In a word; Our Text Suggests to us the Miserable State of those
Society's, as to their Civil Concerns, where (or in which) Government has not
the powerful influences of Religion attending of it: And from thence this Truth
may be offered for the Subject of our present Consideration and Improvement,
viz.

DOCTRINE. That Religion is not only Consistent with, but greatly (...) to the
Due and Successful (...) Civil Government in Society's.

The Term [ Religion] in our Doctrine, is wont to be variously applied and
taken: Sometimes Subjectively, for the internal Principles and Acts of it:
Sometimes Objectively, for the Word of God, or Rule of Religion: Sometimes for
the particular Form or Manner of Worship in Society's: It Is to be understood
here in the former of these Acceptations. And in this sense, so necessary is it
to these ends, that where it is wanting (even in Society's that are otherwise
under the best Regulations) there is little reason to hope that either
Government should be ^^^ely Administered, or any of the ends of it Obtained:
That good Order, Peace, Tranquillity should flourish in them.

That Religion (in general) is very Serviceable to the designs of Government,
seems to be a Principle which Nature furnishes men withal. Hence we find, that
those who in former Ages have introduced particular Forms of Government among
these and those in the Gentile World, have therewith been careful to introduce
Religion likewise. Thus those famous Lawgivers, Hormes, Solon, Lycurgus, Numa,
etc.

And most certain it is, that of such advantage to the designs of Government,
was even the Pagan Religion in many Places, that an Heathen Plutarch.
could make this Remark, viz. That Religion is a Foundation that limits and
joins Society's together. And again; That it is as impossible for a
Commonwealth to Subsist without Religion, as a City without Foundations. But
what Virtue soever it might have this way, yet certain it is, that as none of
the Vanity's of the Heathen may compare with the true GOD; so neither, the
Influences of their Abominations, with those of the true Religion in this point.

He that rightly Considers this, and withal the Influences of it upon the Minds
of men, will soon be convinced of this, and say, That nothing is equally
Serviceable with this to promote these Ends: And that this of all things most
powerfully Obliges men to act in a due observance of the several Obligations
they lie under to God, themselves, and one another. In a word; What was wont to
be said of the imaginary Soul of the World, may be said of true Religion in
Society's, it ty's each part to it self, and one to another; and disposes of
every thing for the good and advantage of the Whole. And this truth is in part
at last Confessed by the greatest Enemy's of it, when they tell us of Religion
(Objectively taken,) that its a thing of Humane Original, the Politic Device
of Princes the better to awe and keep their Subjects in Obedience: Which although
it be a most unjust Imputation upon it, yet supposes the Truth now asserted.
And accordingly, this and all other means proper to Maintain, Secure and
Advance it, are wont to be Commended (by the greatest Masters of Civil Policy)
to the particular Care and Regard of Society's, as things which are likely to
be fruitful in the best Consequents.

There are Two Propositions, the one supposed, the other expressed in the
Doctrine.

PROP. I. It Is supposed, that Religion is not of the Essence of Civil
Government: Or that Civil Government may be in Society's (in some sort at
least) without it. It is easy to distinguish, between Government in the
abstracted Notion of it, and the due Constitution, regular Successful Exercise
or Administration of it. The difference between these is very great, and the
Proposition intends the former; not the latter. Religion is not Essential to
convey to Persons a right to Rule; [Dominion is not founded in Grace] nor yet
to the Discharge of the Material part of the Duty's, either of the Ruler or the
Ruled. These two, viz. Religion, and Government in Society's, though they are
very Essential, and highly Contribute to the Well-being each of other, yet are
not so inseparably Connected, that we may say of them as of Relates, That they
take each other; and can in no wise Subsist alone. These things are not only
mentally separable, but really and in fact are so. But this by the way.

PROP. II. Though this be so, yet Religion is not only Consistent with, but
highly Serviceable to advance the due and successful Exercise of Government.
There are different Forms of Government, and various Modifications of these
Forms, wherein the Power of Rulers is laid under different Limitations or
Restraints, and the Liberty or Privilege of the Ruled various in Degree.
Moreover, There are various Orders or Ranks of Persons in the Seat of
Government: Some acting in an higher, others in a lower Sphere, having
different Titles and Powers annexed to them. But whatever Form of Government
may be in any Society's, and however Regulated, and whatever Orders or Ranks of
Persons may be Employed in the Administration of Rule in them, (be they Supreme
or Subordinate) yet Religion is of the last Consequence to these Ends.

Agreeably to this, the Wisdom of Christian Nations has always directed them to
show particular Regard to this, Countenance and Encourage it, and all proper
Methods for the Propagation of it; and this as for other reasons, so
particularly because of its benign influences upon the Civil Concerns of all
Society's.

Under this Proposition, I shall endeavor to show how, or by what means
Religion becomes so Serviceable to these Ends; and that I may not exceed the
Bounds of your Patience, shall endeavor to reduce the several Ways by which it
does so, unto the Five following more General Heads.[ I.] It Contributes to
these Ends as it Establishes Good Principles. [ II.] As it Directs and
Influences Rulers to pursue the best Maxims or Rules of Government.[ III.] As
it Influences them in all Administrations, carefully to Observe the proper
Extent and Limits of their Power. [ IV.] As it lays the most forcible
Obligations, both upon Rulers and Ruled, to be Faithful in their respective
Duty's. [ V.] As it Restrains and Subdues those Lusts that are the Causes of
all Irregularity and Unsuccessfulness of Government in its Administrations.
There seems not to be any way wherein Religion is Serviceable to these Ends,
but what may be reduced to one or other of these Heads.

I. It Contributes to these Ends, as it Establishes Good Principles: Asserts
the Divine Original of Government, and Founds it in Divine Insti^^tion. That
however Particular Forms of Government (with the various Regulations they are
under) cannot (as such) lay Claim to a Divine Right, yet that Government in
General, Civil Subordination and Power is the Ordinance of Heaven. Most certain
it is, that whether there be Government among Men yea or not, is not a matter
left to Humane Determination; but it is already Resolved by the Most High, That
there be a Rule over Men* The God of Israel has Said it, the Rock of Israel
has Established it. And the Power of those who are Exalted to the Seats of
Government, is from Him. Whatever the particular Instruments or Means of
Conveying this Power, and Vesting it in these and those particular Persons
(that Sway the Scepter over a People) may be, yet the Power it self is from
God; a Ray of His. In Elective States, where Persons are Advanced by the
Suffrage of others to Places of Rule, and Vested with Civil Power, the Persons
Choosing give not the Power, but GOD. They are but the Instruments of
Conveyance, and do but Design the Persons that shall receive it from Him. And
hence it is, that Humane Laws bind the Conscience: Not simply as Humane, but as
made by that Authority which is Divine in its Original, and to which Obedience
is Commanded in the Divine Law. Now with this useful point of Knowledge
Christianity furnishes Persons: It instills and establishes such Principles as
these, viz. The Powers that be, are Ordained of God; and there is no Power but
of God, Romans 13. 1. By Him Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth, Prove. 8. 16. Rulers are His Ministers for Good, Romans 13. 4. And by this
means become serviceable to these ends. Such Principles as these respecting
Government, greatly contribute to the Rectitude and Success of it. They greatly
promote Fidelity in Rulers, by a due exercise of their Authority.

When Rulers are Established in this, and duly Consider that they are Gods by
deputation, the Ministers of the Most High, Armed and Vested with His Power,
and that with this design, viz. That they may be as Gods to those over whom
they Rule, by a due imitation of the Excellency's appearing in the Divine
Government, it will entertain them with many strong and forcible Motives to
utmost Application in endeavors to answer the end of their Creation, by a due
Exercise of the Authority Vested in them.

And as for those who are in a state of Subjection, or under Rule, such will be
the influence of these tho'ts upon them, as will have a good tendency to give
Success to those Administrations.

Where these Principles of Christianity have not obtained in Society's, Persons
are ignorant of them: Or any Principles of a contrary Nature are advanced; by
reason whereof Civil Subordination or Rule, is looked upon as Humane; a thing
without Divine Warrant, Authority, and the Sovereign Institution of God, it is
fatally Prejudicial to these ends. Levelism directly tends at once to destroy
both the Rectitude and Success of Government; to make Rulers betray their
Trust, prostitute their Authority to the worst designs, and to enervate the
Force of all their Administrations. Whereas these rectified tho'ts concerning
it, render it Sacred and Venerable in the eyes of all, inspire Rulers with the
most Noble Resolves, and the Ruled with a due Fear and Reverence of it.

II. As it directs and influences Rulers, in all Administrations to pursue, or
yield up themselves to the Guidance of the best Maxims or Rules of Government.
This Fear of God, as it will produce in them an Abhorrence of such Rules of
Government, which although they are recommended by some as Healthful to a State,
yet are really Prejudicial to whatever is desirable therein, so in the whole of
their Conduct to yield up themselves to the Government of those that are of a
contrary tendency. The due and successful Exercise of Government, has a
necessary dependence upon this; insomuch that where such wholesome Rules are
wanting in Society's, or Rulers govern not themselves by them, but by
unaccountable Humors, and arbitrary Will, which are never Steady and Constant;
and do not in this Article labor to imitate the Divine Government; which is
managed by fixed and steady Rules, there is no hope that either of these Ends
will be obtained. Government agrees with all other Arts in this, that its
managed by certain fixed Rules or Precepts, and the Rectitude and Success of it
may no further be expected than those Rules are attended. By these and the wise
and prudent Application of them, a State is Upheld and Perpetuated, the Beauty,
Order, Proportion, Strength and Unity of it Maintained; and all hurtful
Distempers that threaten the Ruin of it, either Prevented or Purged out.

Agreeably to this, there are no Regular Well-ordered Society's where these
things are not to be found. Indeed these Precepts of this Divine Art (as to all
of them) are not the same in all Society's, but various according to the
different Constitutions of them.

As the same Applications in Physic will not suit with all Body's, but due
regard is wont to be had to the difference of Temper or Constitution* so
neither the same System of Politics with all Body's Politic, nor yet with the
same at all Times, and under all Emergency's; and accordingly they are wont to
be diversified with a Prudent Regard to the difference of Constitutions and
Times.

Now whatever Rules of this Art of Government are recommended, either in the
Sacred Oracles, or by the best Masters of Civil Policy (agreeably thereto) as
Healthful to a State (be they more general, or of a more restrained Nature)
Religion will influence Rulers to act and do all things in their respective
Stations, under the Direction and Influence of them. And not only so, but will
very much Fortify them against the dangerous impressions of any Temptations
(alluring or terrible) tending to turn em aside from them: And by this means
also, becomes Serviceable to these Ends.

Suffer me here, by the way, but to Suggest two or three of these, instead of
many, that might be more largely insisted upon.

1. 'Twill influence Rulers in the whole of their Conduct, to appear with a
distinguishing Zeal for the things God has put a peculiar Honor upon and
Dignified with His Name. I mean, His Word, Worship, Ordinances, Day, etc. Zeal
for God and the things wherein His Glory is peculiarly concerned, is
inseparable from the Fear of God. Elijah says, 1 King. 19. 10. I have been very
Jealous for the Lord of Hosts; for the Children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, etc. Wherever it is, it will produce a due
ConcernandCare that the Name of God be Magnified, His Worship Maintained, His
Ordinances and Day Observed and Reverenced, together with an inflamed
Indignation against whatever is Repugnant to these things Now due Care and Zeal
in Rulers to preserve these things in due Esteem and Veneration in Society's,
is a Rule of Government, the Healthful Nature of which to all Society's, both
God and Man concur in asserting.

It Is a Rule, not only many ways recommended in the Word of God, but moreover
by the greatest Masters of Though It, and that to all Society's however Constituted
or Distinguished in their Formal Natures. I may insert here the words of one,
Machiavell.
who has deservedly obtained a place among those of the first Rank for Wisdom;
who treating of things tending to the Prosperity and Welfare of Civil
Society's, says of these things; That were they regarded by Rulers according to
the Precepts and Instructions of Him that first gave and appointed them, the
States and Commonwealths of Christendom, would be much more Happy and Firm.
There needs no uncommon Sagacity to see the Propriety of this Rule to the ends
for which its wont to be recommended. He that believes the truth asserted in
our Doctrine* and withal considers that the design of God in these things, and
in requiring our Reverent Observance of them, is our Conformity to Him; that by
these things as Means, we might be made partakers of the Divine Nature, and
transformed into His Likeness. In a word, That this Fear of Him might be
instilled into the hearts of Sinners, preserved and flourish there, and that
the Neglect and Contempt of these things is utterly inconsistent with these
designs, cannot but see it to be a Rule of the last Consequence to the Civil
Good of Society's, and in particular to the Ends mentioned in our Doctrine.

2. It will influence Rulers to employ their Wisdom and Power (as far as they
may) to Rectify whatever in the State is Prejudicial to these Ends. As
ReligionandReason jointly concur in asserting it as a good Rule of Policy, that
Rulers to their utmost assertandmaintain whatever in the State apparently tends
to advance these ends; so no less that their Wisdom and Power be prudently
employed to rectify whatever therein stands in the way of them; and that
whether it be in the main frame of their Administrations, or any thing else.
Among the several Forms of Government in the World, there are some apparently
unsuitable to these ends; they are proportioned not to Advance any designs of
Government, but to gratify Pride, Tyranny and Oppression.

Others, although they are more adapted to these ends, yet not all equally so;
some are more advantagiously suited to the ends of Government than others. And
hence doubtless, it is in a great measure that the Success of Government in its
Administrations in different Places is so Various. The greatest Sagacity and
Prudence is necessary in founding States, and drawing the Plan or Scheme of
Government in Society's: And many times notwithstanding the best Prudence and
Conduct, great Errors are committed in the management of that Affair.

Sometimes again in Governments of the most perfect Model, or advantageous
Form, the due and successful Exercise of it is otherwise Obstructed. It Is
difficult to enumerate the many things in Society's which many times concur to
hinder the due Exercise of Government, and obstruct its Success. But whatever
it be that stands in the way of these things, this will influence Rulers to use
all due and proper Methods for the removal of it. As for what may be amiss in
the main frame of their Administrations, they will be hereby led to rectify,
and as far as is in their Power, and may be done with Safety to the State, they
will endeavor to reduce all things to the most perfect Model.

And as for whatever else may prejudice these things, they will take care to
remove them. Men of Corrupt Principles and Practices, who many times (by
managing their Private views and designs) put all things out of Order in
Society's, (as Solomon suggests, Prove.25.5.) They will be hereby influenced to
discard and put from them. And whatever Establishments may have been made, and
prove really disserviceable to these ends, they will reverse, or so alter as to
make them Contribute to the carrying on these good Designs.

3. Where and as far as Places of Trust and Power are at the dispose of Rulers,
this will influence them in preferring Persons to them, to have entire regard
to their Merits, or those suitable Qualifications, that justly recommend them
thereto. In the management of this affair, it will dispose them to lay aside
Faction, Interest, Affection, and all those Private Views which too often are
wont to influence in affairs of that Nature, and to regard those Natural and
Divine Qualifications mentioned in the Word of God as necessary in those who
are to Rule over Men. In a word; Among the Precepts of Wisdom left us by that
Wisest of Kings Solomon, in his Book of Proverbs, there are many excellent
Rules of Government suggested. He tells us, Chap. 16. 12. It is an abomination
to Kings to commit Wickedness: and that the Throne is established by
Righteousness. And 25.2,-5. It is the Glory of God to conceal a thing; but the
Honor of Kings is to search out a matter. Take away the Wicked from before the
King, and his Throne shall be established in Righteousness. And 20. 28. Mercy
and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy. And 28.16.
The Prince that wants Understanding, is a great Oppressor: but he that hates
Covetousness, shall prolong his Days. Concerning all which (with others) as we
may say they suggest excellent Precepts, very necessary to be observed by
Rulers (of what Rank or Degree soever) in their Public Capacity, so Religion
will influence them, not only to View them in Idea, but Exemplify them in their
Conduct.

III. As it influences Rulers in all Administrations, carefully to observe the
proper Extent and Limits of their Power. This Particular Properly belongs to
the forementioned General; and might have been there mentioned as a Rule of
Civil Policy, which this Fear of God will influence Rulers (in their Conduct)
to observe; but I choose to Consider it by it self. As all Civil Power is a
Derivative, comes from God, and is a Ray of His, so is it His Prerogative to
impart it in what Degrees He pleases, and to fix the Bounds and Limits of it;
which accordingly He has done in His Word. As He has therein Ordained a
Subordination among Men, that some have a right to Rule over others; so
likewise has He given Laws to their Authority, and not left them at Liberty to
Pursue and Accomplish their own Desires.

And as for the various Degrees of Persons, that may be Employed in the
exercise of Rule, and the respective Limitations of their Power, though it be a
matter left to Humane determination, yet must be Managed with due regard to
those General Laws God has given, describing and determining the Bounds of
Humane Authority.

In the Management of this Affair, as due Care must be taken to Vest such
Powers in Men as by a due Exercise of which the general Ends of Government may
be provided for, so likewise that no Authority be Vested in them, that is not
Proportioned to those Ends. Now I say, whatever Powers may by the Positive Laws
of Society's, be settled upon these and those (be they Supreme or Subordinate
in the Seat of Government) in Subordination to those Laws of God before
mentioned; Religion will influence them in the whole of their Conduct, to have
due regard to the proper Extent and Limits of it. As it will oblige them to
exercise the Utmost of their Authority, to further the designs of Government;
so on the other hand, to be very Cautious how they encounter and bear down the
Laws with their Prerogative. And that this Fear of God in this way Contributes
not a little to the ends mentioned in our Doctrine, will be very evident in two
or three Articles.

1. The Power Vested by God in Rulers, is a Limited Power. As it is a Power
Subordinate to God's, so Limited by Him. This is true, whether we speak of
Power Supreme or Subordinate. We find, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. God giving this Solemn
Charge to him who should first be advanced to Royal Dignity over His People;
That he should write him a Copy of the Law in a Book, out of that which was
before the Priests and Levites; that it should be with him, that he should Read
therein all the days of his Life; and that for these Ends, viz. That he might
learn to Fear the Lord his God; and to keep all the Words of this Law; that his
Heart might not be lift up above his Brethren; and that he turn not aside from
the Commandment to the Right hand, or to the Left. And its observed by
Interpreters, upon 1 Samuel 10. 25. Where it is said upon Readiness Election to be
King, that Samuel told the People the Manner of the Kingdom, and Wrote it in a
Book, and Laid it up before the Lord. Its observed I say, that when that People
would not be Satisfied without a King, that Samuel did by Divine Appointment,
write the Manner of the Kingdom in a Book; i. e. Those Fundamental Laws or
Rules, by which that Form of Government should be Regulated among them. So we
find Moses, by the Direction of the Unerring Spirit, giving it in Charge to the
Subordinate Rulers, the Judges among that People; Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. That they
should Hear the Causes between their Brethren, and Judge Righteously between
every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that was with them. That they
should not respect Persons in Judgment; but hear the Small as well as the
Great; that they should not be afraid of the Face of Man, and that because the
Judgment was God's. Much to the same purpose, we find that worthy King
Jehosaphat, Charging the Succeeding Judges afterward; 2 Chronicles. 19. 6,7,9. And
who knows not, that God gave to His People of old Laws Political, by which
Rulers were obliged to proceed in Affairs of Government; many of which being
founded on Common Equity, and not immediately respecting the Commonwealth of
the Jews, as such are of Common and Perpetual Obligation.

The declared design of God in Vesting Civil Power in any, carry's in it
Evidence to this Truth; This is (as the Apostle declares, Romans 13.4.) that they
may be the Ministers of Good. And by Consequence, their Power is so limited as
to be proportioned to that End. Its not in the Power of Rulers to make what
Laws they please, Suspend, Abrogate or Disanul them at pleasure. It was the
Saying of an Heathen, Tacitus.
and indeed it became only such an one; Principi Summum rerum Arbitrium Dij
dederunt; Subditis Obsequij Gloria relicta est: i. e. The only thing left to
the Ruled, is to Obey the Arbitrary Determination of Princes.

God has not Subjected the Lives, and Liberty's of the Ruled, to the Arbitrary
Will and Pleasure of Rulers. David contracted the Guilt of Murder in the Death
of Uriah, as he afterward found to his Cost. Ahab Unlawfully desired, and at
last obtained Naboth's Vineyard, as the Event showed. And it is spoken of by
the Spirit of God, as an instance of the Unjustifiable Usurpation of
Nebuchadnezzar, That whom he would he Slew, and whom he would, he kept Alive;
and whom he would he Set up, and whom he would he Put down, Dan. 5. 19. And
were it not thus, there would have been some real Consolation in those words of
One Anaxarchus.
to Alexander, designing to Comfort him when Grieved in Mind that he had Slain
Clytus in his Debauch; Regi^ac J^^^ themin atque Justitiam assidere: Justice
and Judgment always attend GOD and the King in all they do.

2. Such Laws are given, or Bounds fixed to the Power of Rulers, that is wisely
proportioned to the Ends of Government. What the design of Government is, the
Apostle suggests, when he directs us; 1 Timothy 2. 2. To Pray for Rulers, (Supreme
and Subordinate) that under the influence of their Administrations, we may lead
Quiet and Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. In which words, he
gives us to understand, that the Protection of Persons in the Undisturbed
Enjoyment of those two grand Interests, [viz. Religion and Property] is the
Design or End of it. Rulers are designed by God to be a Shield and Defense to
those under them in their just Rights and Liberty's; such as by the Laws of GOD
and their Own (consonant thereto) are settled upon them: And when by their Wise
and Prudent Administrations, they Skreen and Protect those under them in these
two grand Interests; when their Religion is Secured to them against the
Invasions of Error, Profaneness and Superstition; and their other just Rights
against the Attempts of any whatsoever: When with Job they deliver the Pour and
the Fatherless, and him that has none to help him, Job 29. 12. Break the Jaws
of the Wicked, and pluck the Spoil out of his Teeth, ver. 17. Disappoint all
their Unjust and Cruel Designs, so, that none have occasion to complain upon
these accounts, then they answer the Design of their Exaltation. Now I say,
such Laws are given by God to the Authority of Rulers, that are wisely Suited
to these Ends; and when those Limitations are duly observed by 'em in their
Administrations, 'twill Contribute wholly to further the same.

Rulers may not do any thing to the Prejudice or Hurt of these Interests of a
People. This will be Evident, if the true Extent of their Authority, with
relation to this Twofold Object of it be Considered.

1. As for Men's Civil Rights, as Life, Liberty, Estate, etc. God has not
Subjected these to the Will and Pleasure of Rulers; nor may they (either by
Secret Practices, or Open Violence) Invade or Disturb their Free Enjoyment of
them. They may not Enact any Laws to the Prejudice of them, nor Disanul such
Laws of the State as tend to Secure these Interests. The whole Power of
Legislation is to be Employed either in Determining things not Determined in
the Divine Law, (Natural or Positive) or else about things already Determined
in those Laws. And in both Rulers are bound to act and do all things in
Subordination (and with due Regard) to those Laws of God, designed to Secure
Persons in the Undisturbed Enjoyment of these things. It Is already Determined in
the Divine Law (with relation to these Interests of a People) that the
Enjoyment of them be free and undisturbed: And Rulers may not make any
Determinations repugnant hereto: Or if they do, they are of no force. No Law of
the Civil Magistrate can bind in Opposition to the Divine. For God when He
gives to Men a Power of Legislation, He does it Cumulative, (as they say) non
Privative; not so as to deprive Himself of it. The whole therefore that is left
to the Legislative Powers, with relation to these things, seems to be to
Enforce what GOD has already Determined concerning them: By suitable Rewards
and Penalty's to endeavor to further and secure Obedience thereto. And as for
such things as being indifferent in their own Nature, not already Determined in
the Law of God, nor by Principles deducible therefrom, although they are subject
to the Determination of Humane Authority, yet all must be done in due
Subordination to those Laws of God that have made it a Sin in any to invade
these Rights of a People.

2. In like manner, if the true Extent of the Power of Rulers with relation to
that other Interest of a People [I mean, Religion;] be Considered, 'twill
appear so far limited as to be in all Respects wisely adapted to the End before
mentioned. That Religion (Considered as Publicly Professed in Society's) is a
part of the Care and Charge of the Civil Magistrate, none can in reason deny.
It Is an old and true Saying, Ecclesia in Republica, non Respublica in Ecclesia:
The Church is in the State, not the State in the Church. But though it be so, it
is not subjected to his Arbitrary Will: but here also Humane Authority is laid
under wise Regulations. It Is a Power Subordinate and Dependant, and Regulated by
an higher Law. This will appear in a few Hints.

It Is not left as a matter of Liberty with Rulers, to determine whether
Religion shall be Publicly Professed, or God Publicly Worshipped, yea or not.
Its in their Power to introduce Religion into Society's, and incorporate it
with the Laws of them, which when it is once done, they have not a like Power
to discard it again. Even that Heathen Prince Darius, Sinned and Transgressed
the limits of his Authority, in that Profane part of his Decree, Dan. 6. 7, --
That no man should ask any Petition of any God for thirty days.

Neither is it left to the Determination of Rulers, whether due Care be taken
by them for the suitable Support of it, yea or not. It Is already determined in
the Law of God, That they shall do so. This as it has made the Worship of God
an indispensible Duty, and Determined of the several parts of that Worship, and
that a certain Order of Men be set apart to that Service, (who shall devote and
give themselves to it) so likewise, that a suitable Revenue be settled upon
them. Indeed, there seems not to be any determination in the law of God of any
particular Proportion of men's Estates for this end or use. That ancient Law
that stated the Tithe, seems to be a Law (...) on reasons peculiar to the
Commonwealth of the Jews as such; and not upon reasons common to all Places.
The Priests and Levites under the Law, as they made up a considerable part of
that People, (ordinarily a Thirtieth part, as is observed) so much was the
peculiar Blessing of God upon their Labors in Tilling the Earth, that the
common Returns of it were very great: Sometimes Thirty, sometimes Sixty, and
sometimes an Hundredfold; as may be gathered from the Parable of the good
Ground, in the Gospel. And it being so, it seems unreasonable to extend that
Law to other Nations, where those that Ministered in Holy Things bear not that
proportion to others, and the Soil is not so rich in its Returns.

But though it be thus, yet that a suitable Support be always continued to those
who Minister in Sacred Things, the Law of God has determined, and that as due
by a Natural Equity, 1 Cor. IX. And to determine otherwise, Rulers are without
Power.

Nor yet may Humane Authority Ordain what it pleases in the Worship of God.
Jeroboam, (who made Israel to Sin) Ahab, Ahaz and others who did, so,
transgressed the lines of their Authority. As for the Parts or Means of
Worship, they are already Determined and Stated in the Word of God; and from
the Obligation of the Second Commandment must be fetched and warranted from
thence. They may not appoint what Ordinances or Ceremony's they please, in the
Worship of God. The same Principles that will Warrant their Appointment of any
thing, (though in it self never so innocent) will equally bear them out in
Introducing the whole Mass of Romish Superstition into the Church of God.

Nor finally, may they Usurp the Ministerial Function, and Perform the Acts
peculiar thereto. It appertains not to them to burn Incense unto the Lord,
but to the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. In a word; The Power of Rulers with respect
to the Object of it, seems to be reduceable to these Heads: They are to see
that God be Worshipped; and that the several parts of Worship be attended
according to the Rule of the Word, in Decency and Order: That the True Doctrine
of the Gospel be Taught; and the Sacraments Rightly Administered. Though they are
not (as One Dr. Stilling fleet.
says) Imperata facere; yet they are Imperare facienda. And see that they are
so according to the Order of the Gospel. And a People thus Professing the true
Religion they are to Protect and Defend: And to Oppose every thing Publicly
tending to the Subversion of it. They are to Secure them against the invasions
of Atheism, Heraesy and Profaness. We have Instances of diverse Good Kings,
thus Employing their Power: As Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. They
stand obliged in these Points, as they are Custodes and Vindices Legis Divinae.
From all which it is Evident, that the Power of Rulers is in all respects suited
to the forementioned design of Government; and that when the proper Limits of
it are duly observed by them, 'twill Contribute wholly thereto. With David
they will become the Feeders of their People; the Shields of the Earth; and
Nursing Fathers to the Church, Psalm.78.71,72. and 47.9. Isa. 22. and 49. 23.

3. It being so, it necessarily follows, that the Rectitude and Success of
Government has a great Dependence upon due Care and Caution in this Point. The
Power of Rulers being a Subordinate, Limited Power, and thus wisely suited to
the End of Government, all Errors in this particular, (as in the Defect, so in
the Excess) must be very Prejudicial thereto.

IV. As it lays the most binding Obligations both upon Rulers and Ruled, to be
Faithful in their respective Duty's. There is a Civil Relation between the
Rulers and the Ruled; and as all other Relations among Men have peculiar Duty's
annexed to them, so it is with this What the Duty of the Ruler is, we have in
the general heard. On the part of the Ruled, there is Honor of Reverence,
Tribute and Obedience due. There is a peculiar Respect and Honor due to
Rulers: They are styled Dignity's, with reference to the place of Superiority
they stand in above others: And that Honorable Name they are Dignified with [
I said, Ye are Gods:] And as they are so, so there are peculiar degrees of
Deference, and Respect due to them above others. David though unjustly and
cruelly Persecuted by Saul, yet because of his Dignity, (he being the Lord's
Anointed) one Dignified with the Name and Authority of GOD, he shows a peculiar
Honor and Respect to him, 1 Samuel 24.6. Again, Tribute and Obedience to all
Lawful Commands, are due from the Ruled: Romans 13.5,6. Wherefore ye must needs
be Subject, not only for Wrath but also for Conscience sake. For, for this
cause Pay you Tribute also: For they are God's Ministers, attending continually
upon this very thing. And those are styled Children of Belial, who bro't no
Presents to Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 27. The word in the Original, [Mincha,] signifies
a Gift, Oblation, or Offering; and is commonly applied to the Sacrifices which
were offered to the Lord. Its rendered also a Present, Genesis 32. 13. Which seems
to suggest it to be the Duty of the Ruled, not only to Acknowledge them by
Paying that Tribute which may Recompense their Labors in Government; (which is
an act of Justice) but moreover to manifest their peculiar Respect, by
Presenting them with their Gifts. Now I say, Whatever Duty's belong to this
Relation, (whether on the part of the Ruler, or the Ruled) Religion has a
distinguishing influence to promote Fidelity in them.

As to Rulers, it presents them with the most powerful inducements to
Faithfulness. It is no less proper to prevent Errors in the Defect, than in the
Excess. Thus it is, as by (...) her Means, so particularly by unveiling (...)
Nature of an Oath, and the Solemn Obl^^^^ion it carry's with it. An Oath in
general, is a Solemn Invocating GOD to Witness for the Confirmation of the
Truth, and Sincerity of what we Say or Promise. Hereby an Eminent Honor is
given to God: He is acknowledged as the Author, Lover and Rewarder of Truth;
and as one that Sees and Knows all things. It Is a part of Natural Worship, and
reduceable to the First Commandment of the Law, in regard of the Object
Invocated, viz. GOD. But in respect of the Reverend Use of it, (or the Name of
God in it) so its to be referred to the Third Commandment. It Is either
Assertory, or Promissory; and as in the former, we do in the most Solemn Manner
Call upon God in these (or the like) words, Let the All-seeing GOD, the
Fountain and Author of Truth, that GOD that ponders the Spirits, and is the
Righteous Judge of the World, come down and Witness to the Truth of what I
Assert; and let Him take Vengeance on me, if I Assert that which is False. So
in like manner, we do in the Promissory Oaths. We Invocate Him in like manner
to Witness to the Truth or Sincerity of our Promises, and Imprecate the like
Vengeance upon our selves, in case of In-sincerity. In every Oath, there is
evermore an Imprecation expressed or implied. This in short is the Nature of
it, as might be showed at large. And from hence it is evident, it is a thing of
the most Solemn Obligation, and to be inviolably kept, though we Swear to our
Hurt, Psalm. 15. 4. And by laying open the Nature of this, and the Solemn
Obligation of it, Religion becomes (not only otherwise) Serviceable to
Government, but particularly as it promotes Fidelity in Rulers. Again, It is
very powerful this way, as it gives to and maintains in them, a Rectified Sense
of their State: That however (in other respects) they are distinguished from
others, yet in this they stand upon a Level, viz. That they are liable to
Death, and the Consequents of it. Hereby they will be led often to revolve in
their Minds, that they are as liable to Death, and the cruel Arrests of a
guilty Conscience in their last Hours, and the dreadful Condemnation of the
Judge at last, as others, in case of Unfaithfulness. It will be often reminding
them of that Solemn Memento of their Mortality which we have, Psalm. 82.6,7. I
said, Ye are Gods: but ye shall Die like Men. In a word; It will be often
removing the Vail that is drawn over the invisible World, and making those
lively representations both of the Joys and Horrors of it; which will
powerfully incite to such a Deportment of themselves in their Places, that now
they may have, and at last share in the Felicity of an Unreproaching
Conscience, and be filled with Hope and Confidence toward God.

Again, Religion is equally powerful to promote Fidelity in the Ruled. It is no
less proper to make Good Subjects, than Good Rulers. It is observed by the
Machiavell.
Historian, of Numa, that when advanced to Royal Dignity among the Romans, and
being willing to reduce that then Barbarous People to Civil Obedience, he did
by the influence of a False Religion of his own invention, work them to ready
Compliance with whatever was designed by the Senate or Princes. Thereby that
Virtue was given to their Determinations, that in all things there was in them
a ready compliance. How much more powerful is the True Religion for this end
than any of the Inventions of the Wisest Heathen? It Establishes the Duty of
the Ruled upon permanent Principles, and Secures it by the most forcible
Considerations.

V. As it Restrains and Subdues those Lusts that are the Causes of all
Irregularity and Unsuccessfulness of Government in its Administrations. Had Man
continued Loyal to his Maker, retained that Image of His that was the Glory and
Felicity of his Primitive State; as doubtless there would have been Order and
Subordination among Men, (Children being no sooner Born than they are actually
under the Authority of their Parents) so the respective Duty's of Superiors and
Inferiors arising from that Subordination, would have been grateful and
pleasant: the fruits of choice and inclination. There would have been no
propensity in either to invade the Rights each of other, nor any reluctance
against, nor irregularity in the performance of the respective Duty's incumbent
on them. They would have been under the Governing influence of those good
Principles which would have disposed every one to a due Observance of his
Province, and a cheerful and regular discharge of the Duty's belonging thereto.
In a word Superiors, Inferiors and Equals had walked in sweet Agreement
together, and Order and Tranquillity had covered the Earth. But since he is
stripped of that Blessed Image, has lost his Primitive Rectitude, and Sin has
invaded and taken Possession of his Nature, he is changed to Amazement. There
is now no good Propensity in him, and he is willingly Subject, and yields a
cheerful Obedience to the Vilest Lusts and Passions. It Is thus with all Ranks
and Degrees of Men whatever. The Rebellion of our Common Parent, was a Sin of
Universal Efficacy, and derives a Guilt and Corruption to all Mankind, in all
Ages of the World. However Men may be distinguished upon other accounts, yet in
this Article they agree, viz. That an Hereditary Corruption is thereby diffused
into them. Superiors and Inferiors (of what kind soever) in this stand upon a
Level. Sin has equally Invaded them, Marred the Rectitude of their Faculty's,
and Subjected them to the Empire of Lust and Passion. Pride, Envy,
Covetousness, Sensuality are Naturally the Guides of our Lives, and to the
Dictates of these we are very Obsequious. And from hence (as the proper
Fountain) all the Disorder and Confusion in the World takes its rise. Hence it is
that the Good Order, Beauty and Tranquillity of Society's is so often defaced
and disturbed. That Rulers either neglect their Duty, or fail in the Discharge
of it; cast of all Care of those under 'em, or set up a Despotick Power,
paramount to all Law, and discard the Justice (and other Virtues) that should
shine out in all their Administrations. And on the other hand, Hence it is that
the wisest Administrations are many times so Unsuccessful, the Ruled Murmur,
refuse Submission to wholesome Constitutions, and invade the Rights of those
that are over them. In a word; From hence Injustice, Oppression, Rebellion,
Fraud, Violence, and whatever else in Superiors, Inferiors or Equals is
destructive to the good Order and Tranquillity of Society's results and flows.
And unless these imperious Lusts be restrained or rooted out, there can be
neither Rectitude, nor Success in any Civil Administrations. Now, this Fear of
God (of all things) is the most Effectual for this end: And whatever Virtue may
be in any thing else tending this way, it is derived from hence. This lays the
most powerful Restraints upon the Lusts of all, and casts those Blocks in the
way to all Sinful Gratifications, which it is hard to surmount or get over: And
not only so, but extirpates and roots them out. It not only prevents the Act,
but kills the Principle, and implants the contrary Habits. It bridles all those
Vicious Propensity's in Men, that are insuperable by other Means, and
miraculously Renews the Understanding, Will and Affections, the Sources of
Action. From all Which its more than Evident, That Religion is not only
Consistent with, but highly Serviceable to Advance the Ends mentioned in our
Doctrine.

APPLICATION.
USE I. Hence it follows, that Enemy's to Religion are Enemy's to the State.
'Twill be readily acknowledged by all, That Civil Government contributes not a
little to the Well-being of Religion. As the Maintenance and Progress of
Holiness is the principal Design of God in the Ordination of a Rule over Men,
and all other more immediate Ends of it are to be pursued by Rulers as Means
subserving to this; so when it is duly Exercised, Rulers have this Noble Design
always in View, and all their Administrations are wisely proportioned to it, it
is very Serviceable for these Ends. The Continuance, Growth and Progress of it
has a great dependence upon the Wisdom and Fidelity of Rulers in discharging
the Trust reposed in them. This is particularly true in this Degenerate Day,
wherein Impiety, Profaneness, and the Contempt of all that is Sacred and Good
have gotten such an Ascendant, and made such Advances in the Christian World,
that were they not under this Restraint, they would like Pharaoh's lean K^ne,
make a quick dispatch of all that is Comely and Good in it. But yet for the
Honor of Religion on the other hand, it may be said, That it contributes
nothing less to the Well-being of Civil Government: And were it not for this,
(most certain it is) there would be little else besides the Name and Shadow of
it in the World.

And that this is so, (besides what has been already said) will be further
Evident, if we consider, That no Instance can be given of any Society in the
World whereby Government is Duly and Successfully Administered, (even so far
forth as it relates to the Civil Rights and Immunity's of the Ruled) where it
has not the assisting Influence of the true Religion attending of it. The
Apostle suggests to us what the State of Corinth was before Christianity was
introduced among them, in those words of his to the Church there; 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Where having enumerated a black Catalogue of the Vilest Enormity's, such as are
most inconsistent with the good Order and Tranquillity of Civil Society's; As
viz. Uncleanness, (in the most horrid Instances of (...) Theft, Covetousness,
Drunkenness, Reviling, Extortion, etc. He tells them, And such were some of
you. And of the Gentile World in general, the Apostle assures us, that it is
filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness,
Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Backbitings, etc. Romans
1. 28, 29. Very agreeable to the dark Character which the Psalmist gives of it
in his day, Psalm. 74. 20. Where he tells us, that the dark Places of the Earth
are full of the Habitations of Cruelty. Injustice, Oppression, Violence are
Evils Triumphant there. In such Places Men live Precariously, and hold whatever
is Dear and Valuable to them, by no surer Tenure than the volluble Will and
Pleasure of those that are able to Destroy them. Their State is much like that
of the Fishes in the Sea, and the Beasts in the Wilderness, where the Greater
devour the Less. The wisest Constitutions without this, are ineffectual to
bridle men's Lusts, and hold them within due Limits. It is upon this Ground or
Principle, that Abraham Infers or Argues as he does in our Text; Because I
said, Truly the Fear of God is not in this Place; and they will Slay me. Such
therefore are deservedly to be esteemed Enemy's to the State, and (in desire at
least) Subverters of all that is desirable and good in it, that are Enemy's to
Religion. And alas! How many are there of these, even within the Christian
Pale? Some are Professedly and Openly so: The present Degenerate Age affords
many of these Monsters. They talk of it as a Dream, openly Defy it, and treat
all those with Scorn that make Profession of it. Others, although they mask
themselves with a Form of Godliness, and make specious Shows of it to carry on
their Carnal Designs, yet as they are without the Power of it; so Enemy's to it
in their Hearts, and though not Openly, yet Secretly (and as far as will stand
with the preservation of their Interest and Honor) seek the Ruin of it. And
are there not many of these even among us? The things which are designed by God
to implant His Fear in the Hearts of Sinners, and to be as Food to Support and
Nourish it there, (I mean, the Public, Instituted Worship of the Gospel, which
is designed by God for these good Designs) they are Enemy's to, and wish in
their Hearts there were no such thing. And moreover, This sort of men are not
only to be found among the more Base and Vile among us, but even among such as
would hold a place among those of Rank and Quality. I think I am not too severe
in this Censure; especially considering there are in many among us, those
things which will not (unless we impose upon our Reason) allow of a more
favorable Construction.

But surely these Men are far removed from right Thot's of things, and however
they may think themselves not a little Skilled in Politics, and have liberal
Tho'ts of their own Wisdom, yet surely Wisdom will never Die with them. They
little know what the amazing Consequents of their Desires ( could they obtain
'em) would be.

USE II. Hence it follows likewise, That the Decay of Religion, is a sure Sign
of a Decaying State. It being of such Influence to Promote the Weal and
Prosperity of the State (as has been showed) it must needs follow, that the
Decay of it must be a Presage of Ruin thereto. Its asserted by a great
Politician, Machiavell.
That the Religion introduced by Numa among the Romans, (though it was no other
than the Product of his own Brain) was one of the prime Causes of their
Felicity and Grandeur. For this ( says he) produced Good Laws, Good Laws, Good
Fortune, and Good Fortune a Good End in whatever they undertook. And from hence
says of the True Religion, That as there is nothing Contributes more to the
Advancement of a State than that, so nothing that more certainly bodes Ruin
thereto than the Dying, Decaying State of it. Consonant to this, we find this
mentioned, as one of Ephraim's Gray Hairs; Hos. 7.9, 10. Strangers have
devoured his Strength, and he knows it not: Yea, Gray Hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows not. And the Pride of Israel testifies to his
Face, and they do not return to the Lord their God, nor seek Him for all this.
And though possibly there may be many here present who will not believe me, yet
let me tell you, There is nothing has a darker Aspect upon our Civil Liberty's,
and more Threatens the Ruin and Loss of all, than the Languishing State of
Religion among us. It is observed by the Person but now mentioned, (and
certainly its an Observation worthy of our serious Remark) That however a
People Degenerate and Corrupted may possibly recover their Liberty's when lost,
yet when they have done so, they are not likely long to maintain them. And to
evidence this tells us, That the Romans having expelled the Tarquins (who
cruelly invaded their Liberty's) quickly recovered them again, and maintained
them for a long time. Whereas afterward, when the whole Race of the Caesar's
were destroyed, they could not introduce the least shadow or appearance of
Liberty among them: The reason of which difference in the same People ( he
tells us) was, because in the time of the former Kings they were not so
generally Corrupted, as afterward. Universal Spiritual Thraldom in Society's,
is inconsistent with Civil Liberty: When once Irreligion and Profaness get the
Ascendant in them, and a general Corruption of men's Principles and Morals
prevails, this will soon put all things out of Joint, and bring a Deluge of
Misery's with it.

USE III. Is Religion thus Serviceable to these good Designs? then all Means
designed and proper to Secure and Advance it among us, should be very Valuable
and Precious in our Eyes: And due care should be taken to Countenance and
Encourage them, as things on which our Civil Weal does not a little depend. Of
this Nature is the Public Worship of God, which as it is designed for, so very
proper to Inchoate, Propagate and Increase the Spiritual Life in the Soul. The
Word of God therein dispensed has an Objective Virtue in it, whereby its apt
and proper not only to Regenerate, but to Increase the Vigor and Activity of
the New Life: -- To build us up to an Inheritance among all them which are
Sanctified, Act. 20. 32.

Again, All prope^ Methods for the due Education of Youth, and their
Improvement in Knowledge, Piety and Virtue. It Is observed by the Historian
Howell.
of Julian, That after his Apostasy from our Holy Religion, (being an Enemy to
it, and resolved to Suppress it if Possible;) One method improved by him for
that end, was, his shutting up all Schools of Learning, and forbidding to
Christians the Liberty of instructing their Youth in the Liberal Arts and
Sciences, Jesting away the reason of this Injustice with Scoffs, as he did the
rest; saying, That since Plato, Aristotle and Isocrates, Adored Mercury and the
other Gods, he held it absurd, that the Christians should learn from their
Books whose Religion they Condemned and Loathed. And certainly this was a
proper Mean for the End to which it was Designed.

And the Encouragement of these things, as it is especially incumbent on
Rulers, who are designed by God to be the Physicians of the Body Politic, both
to Cure and Prevent the growth of any hurtful Distempers in it, so when they
are duly careful in their Administrations so to do, what we have heard
necessitates us to look upon it as a Token for Good unto a People.

USE IV. Our Text and Doctrine suggests to as who those are that are most meet
to be Employed in Places of Rule over a People. That they are such who are
themselves under the Governing influence of this Fear of GOD, and Consequently
will be most industrious in Endeavors that others may be so; and take due care
to proportion and suit the whole of their Conduct to this good Design.
Accordingly the^e are the Persons we are directed in the Word of God to make
Choice of for this end, Exodus, 18. 21. 2 Samuel 23. 3.

But I shall Conclude with a word of EXHORTATION, directed to the several
Orders of Persons here Present, to contribute and do what they can in their
several Places to Secure and Advance this Interest among us. And here,

I. In the first Place; Let this word of Advice (with all due Submission) be
directed to the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, with the
Worshipful ASSISTANTS of this Colony. Honorable and Worshipful; What has been
said necessitates a though it of Religion as a thing most Serviceable to the
designs of Government, and to Conclude that the most advantageous Forms of it
(though managed by the most Refined Politics) are not likely to Succeed without
this; and that the Civil Interests of a People are not a little embarked on
this Bottom. Whatever Sentiments the brutish, insensible part of Mankind may
have of it; whose Eyes Lust has veiled and far removed them from right tho'ts
of things; though they may look upon it as a thing Serviceable only to advance
the Separate Interests of a (...) Persons; yet I doubt not of the Concurrence
of all those in this Opinion concerning it, whose Minds are not utterly
depraved, and who are not themselves Strangers to those powerful influences of
it, by which it becomes thus Serviceable to promote the Public Good.

In Particular, There is no reason to believe but that your Selves are very
sensible of this Truth, do look upon Religion as a Main Pillar by which the
Commonwealth is Supported, and that the Fall and Ruin of this among us, will
bring an Amazing Destruction upon all our Civil Interests. You are not
insensible, how necessary this is for all Persons of what Character or Station
soever; and that without the influences of it, none are likely to approve
themselves in any Relation. Which being so, (as Religion may well claim a
particular Regard from YOU, and that the interest of it have a Governing
Influence upon You in all your Councils and Administrations, so) we are
encouraged to hope and beseech You, that in the whole of your Conduct, You
would make it manifest, that it is a Thing that lies very near Your Hearts;
that you are particularly Concerned for it; and this by Uniting your best
Endeavors to Secure and Perpetuate this Interest among us, and Rescue it from
the sad Decay's which at present it is under.

You are not insensible, how well a distinguishing Zeal for this Cause of GOD
among us, will become your Exalted Station. That nothing will better Entitle
you to the Honorable Style of Gods, (which you bear) render you more
Venerable, so much Establish your Authority, Secure the due Respect and
Obedience of those over whom you are set; and help you to attain and answer the
grand Design of HIM by whom you Rule, in putting Honor upon you. This was that
which rendered Job so Venerable in his day; That when he passed through the City,
and prepared his Seat in the Street, the Young men that saw him hid themselves,
and the Aged arose and stood up; the Princes refrained talking, and the Nobles
held their peace in his Presence. It Is apparent to every one whose Eyes are not
utterly closed, that Religion sadly Languishes among us. How small is the
Number of Painful, Practical Christians, that show forth the Power of Godliness
in their Lives? Nothing is more apparent than that, the Religion of the Body
(even) of Professors among us is sunk into a Lifeless Formality: And that there
are but very few in whom there is any thing to be seen of that Good Spirit that
followed God into this Wilderness. The Apostle Paul describing to Timothy, 2 Timothy III. those Perilous Times which he there assures him should overtake the
Church before the end, gives him a black List of the Evils which (he assures
him) should then be prevalent among Professors themselves, ver. -- 6. Certainly
this heavy Prophecy is to a sad degree fulfilled in our Days, these Perilous
Times are far advanced upon us, the Spirit and Temper of the generality of men
among us is drawn to the Life in those Verses. Now it being so, and the
Reforming growing Evils belonging to your Province, You will give me leave,
Humbly to Call upon you to bestir your Selves in this matter; and as the
Eminency of your Station gives you singular Advantages, so that you would Apply
your Selves hereto. May I not say to you, as Mordecai to Esther, upon another
Occasion; Who knows whether God has not raised you for such a Time as this? Be
sure this is what God expects from you in the present Day and Season. You are
not insensible, of the Worthy's Recorded in Scripture, who have gone before you
in this Work; who by a Zealous asserting the Cause of GOD in Degenerate Times,
and dispensing a Vigorous Influence to the Suppressing growing Evils, have
added to that Crown that is now placed on their Heads. Not to mention others,
Nehemiah Signalized himself in this Work. The Holy Spirit gives us this account
of him, viz. That he was a man sent to seek the Welfare of the Children of
Israel. This was the design of his Mission and coming among them: And this with
unwearied Applications he pursued and failed not to answer. And this he did,
(as by other means, so particularly) by Stemming the Tide of Profaneness, and
Reforming growing Evils among them. I may add further, (what you very well
know) That the Obligation you lie under to the Civil Interests of this People
(simply Considered) is not the only thing urging this Duty upon you; but there
are other Motives of a Nobler Extraction, which (because your Wisdom suggests
them to you) I forbear to mention.

In a Word; It is said of that excellent Emperor Constantine, that he was wont
to style himself,[ Episcopos Pros* Ta He^o,] A Bishop or Overseer of Religion.
An Overseer to Prevent and Rectify all Visible Disorders therein, Defending the
same, and to Establish proper Methods for the Continuance and Growth of it. We
trust you will give us reason to Conclude you have the same Sentiments
concerning your Selves, and that by a due Concern of your Selves in the matter
now urged. And thus doing you will yet further Entitle your Selves to the
incessant Cry's of all that Love GOD, That He would be with you in your Work,
Counsel and Strengthen you in it, and Think upon you for Good according to all
that you have done, or may do for this People, Neh. 5. ult.

II. I shall now Address my self to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
MINISTRY. And here I assure my self, 'twill be no ways Unacceptable to you, to
be put in mind of what you know to be our common Duty; and that you will suffer
the word of Exhortation. Religion being a thing of such Benign Influence upon
the Civil Concerns of all Society's, it ly's indispensibly upon us also to
bestir our Selves, employ all our Talents, and unite our best Endeavors to
further this Good Design. As our Rank and Station in the World, and the
peculiar Influence which we may reasonably (...) supposed to have upon all
Persons of what Character soever, gives us peculiar Advantages to Contribute to
this good design more than some others; so that Zeal for God which is but
justly expected in us in some degrees of Eminence, should effectually engage us
in it. If we consider our selves in our Civil Capacity, as Members of the
State, who expect Protection from the Laws of it, and to share in the Happiness
arising from the good Order, Peace and Prosperity of it, so we stand bound to
this Duty; but if we consider our selves as the Ministers of CHRIST, who by
Office are Co-workers with Him in the Concerns of His Royal and Prophetic
Offices, and by a solemn Consecration have been set apart thereto; the strict
Charge we lie under, to be Faithful in our Work, and the solemn Account which
in a very short Time we must give of our Stewardships, it is evident we lie under
peculiar Bonds, the highest Obligations imaginable, to rouse and stir up our
selves, and with utmost Application to engage in this affair. Certainly, there
never was a day wherein there was greater need of Zeal and Warmth in this
affair, than in the present; wherein even the vilest Enormity's have
established a Reputation in the World, are Legitimated by common Practice, have
lost that Fear and Shame that was wont to attend 'em, walk in the daylight;
and as its wont to be said, Non querunt angulos. And it being so, shall we shut
our Eyes, and fold our Hands? And that we may be Successful Instruments, and
really Contribute to this good design, suffer me here in a few Hints.

Let us often endeavor to recommend Religion to the Reason and Consciences of
our Hearers. Religion is a reasonable Service, Romans 12. 1. The Faith and
Observance of which it consists, are both grounded on the highest Reason. Faith
in assenting to the Doctrines of it, proceeds upon rational grounds; and all
the Duty's of it are most equal and just. Let us make it a principal part of
our Work, to impress a sense of this. Let us not account it eno' to make
Addresses to the Affections of our Hearers; this is but to Storm the Outworks,
and leave the main Strongholds of Sin Untouched. The impressions made on the
Affections, are easily rased out; whereas due Conviction of the reasonableness
of Religion, will abide with and have a permanent Influence upon them.

Again, Let us often set before them the Present and Future World, so vastly
different in their Quality's, the kind and duration of the Good and Evil things
of them. This is a proper Mean to wound the interest of Sin at the heart,
discover to Sinners the Folly of their Choice before they come to their end,
and by sad experience shall be convinced thereof. It Is a considerable part of
our work, to set these things before Sinners in a true light: To unmask the
Present World, and remove the Vail that is drawn over the Future and Invisible;
and make lively discover^ of the vast disparity between the Good and Evil
things of Each.

Again, Let a due Zeal appear in all our Administrations: Particularly in
dispensing the Word of Life. As we should therein appear Shining, so no less
Burning Lights: And to this end, let us labor our selves to have a sense and
feeling of the Truths we deliver. This will enable us in a suitable manner to
apply our selves to our Hearers and very much further our Success therein. It Is
the Mind that convinces the Mind, and the Heart persuades the Heart. He that
speaks from a Sacred fire in his own bosom, will inflame others.

Further, Let us as far as is possible, give our selves to our Work. Suffer
that Address of Paul to Timothy; 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to Reading, to
Exhortation, to Doctrine. Indeed, such are the Circumstances of many of us,
that entire applications to our work are impossible: Yet are all of us
guiltless in this Point? Are we as far as we may devoted to our work, and not
needlessly turned aside from it? Oh! Let us make it appear in the whole of our
Conduct that the Saving of Souls is our principal aim. Nothing short of this,
will be a sufficient Justification before the enlightened Tribunal of our JUDGE
at last.

Finally, Give me leave further to add, That due strictness in the Trial of
Candidates for the Ministry, and Care that none but such whose merits recommend
thereto, be admitted into the Pulpit, will doubtless contribute well to this
good design. It Is a part of that Solemn Charge that lies upon us as Ministers,
That we lay Hands suddenly on no man. And consequently, that care be taken that
the way of Persons admission into the Pulpit be not too wide and easy. And most
certain it is, that as a worthy Ministry is the only Means ( since Miracles are
ceased) to Maintain and Propagate true Religion, so due strictness in the
Examination of Persons for and Admission of them to the Ministry, is the most
proper means imaginable for the attaining such a Blessing.

In a word* Let us labor in all respects to be Faithful, and Fulfill the
Ministry we have received of the Lord. So only may we hope here to enjoy the
Peace and Comfort resulting from an Unreproaching Conscience, and hereafter (
when the great Shepherd of the Sheep shall appear) to receive a Crown of Glory
that fades not away.

III. I shall now Direct my self to such Gentlemen as are here present, the
REPRESENTATIVES of this Colony. Such are our Circumstances under the present
Constitution, (which through the indulgent Providence of GOD, and the Royal
Favor is yet continued) that the Welfare of Christianity has a great
dependence upon your suitable Discharge of the Trust Reposed in you. And as you
are now met together, to Consult and Do such things as to your Wisdom shall
appear to have a tendency to the Welfare of this People, so it is to be hoped,
that what has now been said may so far obtain in you, that you will allow
Religion a share in your Consultations, manifest a due Concern for the
Languishing State of it among us, and cheerfully Concur to establish all
Methods proper for the Recovery thereof. It cannot be denied, that worthy Deeds
have been done (for this end) by those in whose Hands the Legislative Power has
been lodged among us: Yet in as much as notwithstanding what has been
heretofore done of that Nature, this Interest continues still to Languish among
us, it is evident that you are called to make a further Essay in that matter.

Where the Methods Established among a People to prevent a growing Apostasy,
and to secure and advance the Cause of God among them, are apparently
Ineffectual, (whether it be through the manifest Unsuitableness of those Methods
for this end, or through Defect in the Prosecution of them) there ly's an
indispensible Obligation upon Rulers to take these things into their
Consideration, and to endeavor to Rectify or Mend what is wanting or amiss in
them.

It is an excellent piece of Advice (and very necessary to be observed by all
Persons however employed) which the Apostle Paul gives, 1 These. 4. 11. Study --
to do your own Business. None should go beyond their Line, and meddle with
things foreign to their Province. Yet I think I shall not exceed the Bounds of
my Commission, nor incur the Censure of any that are Wise, if I tell you, that
it is not a matter of Liberty whether you will take this matter into your
serious Consideration, and make a Trial what may be done in it, yea or not.
Such is the State of Religion among us, and such Violent Symptoms appear upon
it, that nothing is more evident, than that if a Remedy be not speedily
Applied, the Disease will be past Cure. Certainly, This is an Interest so
Valuable, as to deserve your most deliberate Though It and Care for the Securing of
it. There needs no more to beget in any a Veneration of it, than impartially to
View it. Its own internal Excellency's are sufficient to recommend it to every
impartial eye; and (which seems to be Peculiar to Christianity) it may be
further said to the Praise of it; That the more we Know, proportionably greater
will our Veneration be. To Conclude this particular, Let me tell you, That from
what we have heard it is very evident, that you cannot be Faithful in your Trust,
and duly assert and seek to Maintain the Civil Interests of this People whom
you Represent, in a Neglect of the Advice now given. In a word; When the Ways
of God are Deserted, and Religion runs Low among a People, this is a time
wherein any Service we do for it, is peculiarly Acceptable to God. As a Prince
Dethroned by his Subjects, retains a most tender Affection for those who
continue Loyal to him in the general Revolt, and seek to Re-inthrone him again:
So we may reasonably Conclude, that GOD will ever regard those with a Peculiar
Goodness, that stand for Him in Declining Times and to their Utmost endeavor
to retrieve His injured Honor and Interest. I shall take the Liberty here of
Suggesting a word or two.

1. Let the Inferior Posts and Stations in the Government, be filled with Men
of Zeal and Piety. As the determination of the Persons who shall be employed in
Subordinate Places of Trust in the Government, is much in your Power, so the
Interest of Religion ought to have a Governing Influence upon you in the
Management of that part of your Trust, and your Counsels and Determinations in
that matter, should be managed with particular Regards thereto. 'Jethro's
Advice to Moses, is Obligatory as to all Ranks or Degrees of Rulers Supreme or
Subordinate. And whatever Good Establishments have been made, or now, or
hereafter may be, for the Service of this interest among us, yet if the
Prosecution of them be entrusted in the hands of Persons void of these
Qualifications, they are never likely to do any Good. A Sword in a Coward's
hand will never Atchieve any thing, nor yet in the hands of one that is utterly
averse to the Use of it. Common Reason will dictate to every man, that as for
such as are so far under the influence of Sense, as to be false to their own
Souls ( that choicest Depositum) in the everlasting Concerns of them, will not
scruple to Betray a more Public Trust that may be Reposed in them. Where these
Divine Qualifications are in Persons, they will inevitably produce a dear
Concern that this Interest may Flourish, and a Vigorous Prosecution of all
Methods proper for that end; but where they are wanting, there will be a
wretched indifferency of Spirit with respect thereto, and whatever
distinguishing Advantages such Persons may enjoy to be Serviceable to this
Interest, yet they will never improve them. Let the interest of Religion
therefore have a Governing influence in the Management of this Affair; lay
aside all Affection, Interest, and those Sinister Views (which possibly may
sometimes have too much influenced herein) and let Religion be your Guide and
Counselor therein.

2. Such an, Establishment for the Support of the Gospel, as might make
Ministers in general to give themselves to their Work; and Settle the Worship
of God in New Plantations, and such Settlements in Towns as lie remote from the
place of Public Worship, and cannot (without intolerable difficulty) attend
upon it; would doubtless Contribute well to this good Design. I must Confess, I
was at a stand with my self, whether I had best recommend this Particular, yea
or not; knowing how Unacceptable any thing of this Nature is to many; and being
sure of not escaping a Censure for it: However, if a solemn Declaration that
the interest of Religion is the main thing influencing hereto, will excuse me
from it; I can freely make it. I plead not for the Wealth and Grandeur of those
in the Ministry. They are men of the same Make with others, and with them
liable to be Corrupted by these things. And doubtless it was not without reason
that it was said of old, That when the Chalices were of Wood, the Priests were
of Gold; but when the Chalices grew to be of Gold, the Priests became Wooden.
But yet, such a Support of the Ministry as may enable them to live separate
from the World, and devoted to their Work, is of absolute necessity to the
design of their Office. And most certain it is, That however the present Method
Established for this End among us, may secure such Incomes to some Ministers as
that they are happily advantaged to give themselves to Contemplation; yet as
for others, they are left under miserable Circumstances, and that without
remedy, by any thing as yet done for this End among us. It Is the solemn Charge
of Paul to Timothy; and in him to us all, wherever disposed of by the Divine
Providence, 1 Timothy 4. 14,15. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them; that thy profiting
may appear to all. This Charge ly's in common upon us all: But with how many is
this impossible? I know no reason to believe, but that the generality of those
in the Ministry among us, would esteem it an happiness to be devoted to their
Work; but with many of us this is impossible. As we are not Statues without
Souls, so neither Angels without Body's: We are compounded of Flesh and Spirit
as well as others, live the same Animal life, and are incident to the same
common Infirmity's and Necessity's. We would ( were it in our power) joyfully
give our selves to Reading and Meditation, that our Understandings being
enriched with Spiritual Knowledge, we might (as good Householders) bring forth
of our Treasury things New and Old, and be able to hold fast the sound form of
Words, as becomes those, who are the Depository's of the Sacred Truths of the
Gospel, to be: But we cannot do it. We would carry into the Sanctuary with us,
and there entertain our Hearers with Discourses Pertinent, Clear, Distinct,
Nervous and Well-Labour'd, like the Well-beaten Oil of the Sanctuary; we would
Visit our Flocks, and c. But we cannot do it: Our Places are poor, and not able
to Subsist us; and our own Hands are forced to minister to our Necessity's. And
hereby (besides a Thousand other Inconveniency's of a lesser nature) the Cause
of God suffers, beyond what it is easy to conceive of. Ministers are compared
to the Luminary's of Heaven, that by their Light, Heat and Influences, are so
Beneficial to this Lower World. The Metaphor points out to us the grand designs
of their Office; that it is to impart Light, Heat and Influence to others: But
if they are Clouded with ignorance, or Eclipsed by the interposition of Earthly
things, they must become (at least comparitively) Useless and not capable to
promote these good designs of their Office, as otherwise they might be* And is
not this like to be the case of many of us, and this the inevitable effect of
the present Method established among us for the Support of the Ministry? Its
Observed by an Excellent Historian, Bishop Burnett.
concerning the Greek Churches, That when once the Emperors of the East took
the Nomination of persons for the Ministry into their own Hands, and preferred
the Illiterate and Unaccomplish'd thereto, those Churches were soon bro't to
that pass for Ignorance and Corruption, that it is no wonder that they (...)
given up by God to such terrible Calamity's as were bro't upon them, first by
the Saracens* and afterward by the Ottoman Family. Verily, we seem at present
to be in imminent danger of the same infelicity: GOD grant it may not have the
like issue. Most certain it is, that such is the Extent and Difficulty of the
Ministerial Work, that when our whole Time is devoted to it, the best of us
fall short. I shall conclude my Discourse on this Head, with the words of a
great Divine Dr. Bates.
on that but now mentioned Charge of Paul to Timothy; If Timothy (says he) who
had Supernatural Gifts by Inspiration, was obliged to be intent and diligent in
the application of his mind to the Mystery's of Godliness, how much more should
those be so, who must acquire knowledge by Search and Industry, and the Divine
Blessing upon it? As (says he) Fountains (by secret Passages) derive from the
Sea, the waters that flow in their Streams, so Ministers by Reading,
Contemplation and Prayer in their Retirements, obtain the knowledge of Divine
Things which they convey in their Sermons to their Hearers.

Again, The present Method established among us for this end, leaves New
Plantations (that are unable themselves to Support the Worship of God) and such
Settlements in Towns as are remote from the Place of Public Worship, and cannot
without intolerable difficulty attend upon it, under a sad necessity of being
without it. No provision is hereby made for the Dispensation of the Word of
Life to them, and they must be without it, unless the Blessed Spirit ( from
above) will Descend and Minister to them. And how Deplorable the State of
Religion already is in some such Places, there are others here that know as
well as I. Which being so, there is little reason to hope that things will be
better with us, Religion secured and recovered from its present decayed State,
unless some more genuine Method be Established for this end.

3. You will show your Fidelity and Zeal in this good design, by employing your
Wisdom in devising some proper Methods to give Force and Virtue to the Laws
designed to restrain Vice and Immorality; and particularly that of Excess or
Intemperance among us. How wretchedly is the Force of the Laws evaded, that are
designed for this end; and how little Care taken in most (...), by those who
should see 'em put in Execution, that they are so? Insomuch that
notwithstanding them, we are still in imminent danger of being Deluged with
Intemperance. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? May not
this Honorable Court find out an Expedient ( if not to cure, yet at least) to
stop the progress of this spreading Contagion?

4. To Conclude, Let this word of Exhortation be acceptable to us all; and let
us all (in our several Places) Contribute what we can to this Good Design. Were
it proper for me here to Address you, as those who have an aversion to Religion
by showing you, that its no ways contrary to Reason; that it is truly Great and
Venerable, Amiable and Lovely* and by offering Arguments Demonstrative of the
truth of it, yet time would not allow of such an Essay. Besides what
Considerations might be offered from Religion (simply considered) to persuade
to this Duty, what we have now heard, furnishes us with Arguments hereto, drawn
from another Fountain. We are a people very tender of our Civil Interests, and
jealous lest by any means they are invaded or taken from us. And surely in this
we err not; they are things deserving our most tender regard: Yet most certain
it is ( and what we have heard may Convince us of it) that the Continuance of
these things has a great dependence upon the success of the Counsel now given;
and that unless we stir up our (...) and do what we can to secure and recover
(...) among us, we shall but vainly attempt by other means to secure these
things. If this Interest be suffered still to Languish, and at length to Die
among us, our best Politics will be Ineffectual to preserve our other
Interests also from dying with it. This will bring a quick and an amazing
destruction upon whatever is beautiful and desirable among us, and our Land
will soon deserve the dark Character given by the Psalmist to the Gentile
World: 'Twill be full of the habitations of Cruelty. If we utterly Degenerate,
we shall not Degenerate into a Moral Heathenism, but something much worse. In a
word, Have we not loud Calls in Providence, to bestir our selves in this
affair* What else ( but that we might be stirred up to strengthen among us the
things that Languish and are even ready to Die) is the design of those repeated
Rebukes we have been under? The Psalmist speaking of the Works of God in Common
Providence, says of them, Psalm. 107. ult. Whosoever wisely observes them, will
understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord. In this as a Glass we may see the
Bounty and Goodness of God. But if we take a View of those Works of His in
Providence that have more immediately respected our Selves, (...) may invert
the Psalmists words, and say, (...) observes them, will see of the (...). O let
not an insensible heart deceive (...)* Let us not show our (...) of th^^ (...)
and make, as not to be (...). In a word, Let us (...) with a just sense of the
Amazing Consequents of a persevering Apostasy. HOW dreadful have the effects of
this been in others? We find God ( that so He might beget in His backsliding
People of old, a due sense of what the Consequents of their Apostasy (if
continued) would be and thereby check their further progress in it) directing
them by the Prophet Jeremy; to consider what the fruits of it in others had
been, Jer.7.12. Go (says He) unto my place which was in, Shiloh, where I set my
Name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my People
Israel. And here, not to mention (...) instances, How bitter have been and are
the effects of this in those once famous Greek Churches* (...) have for a long
time sat, and still sit in Darkness and in the shadow of Death, being bound in
Affliction, are groaning under the intolerable Oppressions of cruel Exactors;
and may truly Complain with the Church in her Calamitous state, Psalm.44.19.
Thou have (...) broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of Death. Though once ( with far more reason than (...)) they might
promise themselves exemption from such Calamity's, Yet this is now their State.
And what then may we expect, unless we Repent? Certainly, their Misery's as
they are to be Lament (...) and should excite our compassion and prayer for
'em, so when we hear of 'em, we shall do well to call to mind those words of
Ch^^^^* If these things be (...) in the Green Tree, what shall be done in the
Dry*

FINIS.

