The Young Man Spoken to Another ESSAY, TO Recommend and Inculcate the Maxims
OF Early Religion, UNTO YOUNG PERSONS; And Especially the Religion of the
Closet. In a SERMON Preached unto them on a Special Occasion.

By COTTON MATHER, D. D.

Vidi jam Juvenem, premerit cum serior Aetas,
Maerentem stultos praeterisse Dies.
Tibul. BOSTON, Printed by T. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at the Sign of the
Buck in Marlborough Street, over against the South-Meeting-House, 1712.

Preface.
THE Publication of this ESSAY, to Quicken Early Piety, after so many that have
gone before it, needs no Apology; for it is not Possible to make too many. The
Subject is Copious; the Object is Numerous; the Occasions are Infinite.

The SERMON which is now laid before the Reader, has nothing Extraordinary in
the Composure of it. He has indeed here only the First, Rude, Untranscribed and
so Unpolished Notes of the Sermon, Written and Preached by One, who is pretty
tolerably Employed at Constant, and Frequent Preaching. But the Importance of
it is Extraordinary; and sometimes the less of Polishment, the more does the
Sovereign Grace of Heaven give Success to our Plain Discourses. Before the
Sermon is out, the Reader will see why and whence it comes unto him; yea,
surely he will Hear, when he finds, That One comes unto him from the Dead.

Instead of going to Tullies Offices, I will go to Ambrose's for a brief
Recital of the Ornaments with which we would Fain see our Young People
Beautified* Honor Adoluscentum est, Timorem Dei habere; Parent thus defer;
Honorem habere senioribus; Castitatem non aspernari; diligere Clementiam et
Verecundiam quae Ornamenta sunt Juvenilis Aetatis. Oh! Let 'em Fear God, Honor
their Parents and their Betters; Preserve Chastity, Clemency, and Modesty. This
is all we will ask for.

THE YOUNG MAN Spoken to. In a SERMON Preached upon the Devout and Dying Desire
of a Religious Young Man. BOSTON. 4 D. 3 M. 1712.
Zechariah II. 4. Run, Speak to this Young Man.


IT is then an Angelical Service which I am upon. To bring the Messages of
Heaven to Young Men, is an Angelical Service. It seems there is not an Angel in
the Blessed Realms of Light, but what would rejoice to arrive among you, on the
Service and the Errand wherein the Chief of Sinners is now Engaged. If I keep
close to my Instructions, and bring to you nothing but what is Propounded and
Supported, from the Oracles of God, which I shall Endeavor to do, you will
hear nothing, but what will call for as much Regard, as if it were bro't by an
Angel from Heaven. Sirs, What if you should this Day see, what the Beloved John
saw upon a Lord's Day of old; An Angel flying among you, with the Everlasting
Gospel to Preach unto you; and saying with a Loud Voice; O all People, and very
Particularly O Young People, Fear God, and give Glory to Him! Certainly, You
would hear with much Attention, with much Affection, with a most awful
Reverence. Behold, A very Sinful Man, but coming in the Name of the most
Glorious LORD, brings to you, the Everlasting Gospel; He Runs to bring it, unto
the Young People in the Neighborhood. It is no other than what an Angel from
Heaven, would be willing to bring among you; and it is as awfully to be
Regarded!

Our Prophet Zechariah, was favored with an Apparition of an Angel unto him;
and the Angel in this Exhibition, gave him a Prospect of Jerusalem going to be
laid out, and rebuilt, under the Influences of the God, who sets Bounds to our
Habitations. This Angel is met by another Angel, who brings him an Order from
God, immediately to Run unto that Young Man, and speak unto him something that
it would be very Profitable and very Comfortable for him to be acquainted
withal.

In Imitation of that Good Angel; and who can be better imitated? -- I will now
Run and Speak unto those Young Persons whom I have now before me, some very
Observable Things: And you will see anon, perhaps with some Surprise, my Text
admirably supplying me, with all my Observations.

There is first a General Doctrine, which I shall bring unto you; and make it a
most agreeable Preliminary and Introduction, unto the more Particular
Instructions, that are to Ensue upon it. And this is,

The DOCTRINE. There are things of no small Importance, which the Great GOD
orders to be spoken unto Young Persons; yea, to be Earnestly spoken unto them.
There is not a Young Man among us, but the Great GOD has given Order, Speak to
this Young Man. Yea, My Child, The Great GOD Himself speaks unto thee The
Maxims of Piety are those Important Things, which the Great GOD Orders to be
spoken, unto all the Children of Men. The Maxims are addressed in those very
Terms; Psalm. XLIX. 1. Hear this All ye People, give ear All ye Inhabitants of
the World. But they that are Children in Age, are very Particularly to look on
themselves, as concerned in the Address of such Things. Young Persons must not
look on themselves unconcerned in he Maxims of Piety; Those Things are of as
much Importance unto Young Persons, as unto any in the World; The Voice of God
which utters those Things, is as much Directed unto Young Persons as unto any
in the World.

We will at once Enquire; How it is that the Great GOD Speaks unto Young Persons:
and, What are the most Important Things that He would have to be Spoken unto
them?

Our Answer to these Complicated Enquiries, is this.

First. There are Important Things, which the Great GOD speaks unto Young
Persons, in the Light of Nature, the Light of Natural Reason, that which
Enlightneth every Man that comes into the World. It is of all things, the most
Evident; There is a Spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty has
given him an Understanding, of much Duty which he owes to his Almighty Maker.
The Rational Spirit of man, is apprized of, and furnished with, certain
Principles, which are instamped thereon, by the God who forms the Spirit of man
within him. The Inwrought, the Innate Principles, in the Rational Spirit of
man, dispose him to acknowledge Things Good and Evil, Things Right and Wrong;
as well as Things True and False. Though he may not always make the Actual
Acknowledgment, yet if the Light be brought unto him, or things be set in their
due Light before him, he is quickly Compelled unto it. We read, Prove. XX. 27.
The Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord. Young People, The Great GOD has
Lighted His Candle in your Souls. You Know, and you cannot but Own, That there
is a GOD, unto whom you owe all possible Homage and Obedience. You Know, and
you cannot but Own, That you are base Wretches, if you don't Honor, and Obey,
and Requite your Parents. You Know, and you cannot but Own, That in your
Dealings with your Neighbors, you ought to do as you would be done unto. These
Three things are as Plain, as that Three and Three make Six. If you do but
behold, the Works of God, in the Creation and Government of the World, these
will Proclaim such Things unto you; God speaks unto you such Things as these by
all the Works of His Hands. The Dictates of the Conscience within you, are
awakened, are inferred, are confirmed, from all the Works of God about you. You
may Reasonably Gather many Lessons of Piety, from all the Works of God; yea,
There is no Speech nor Language, where their Voice is not heard. Alas, if you
Forget God, or if you Abuse one another, you Rebel against the Light, with
which the God that Made you, and Formed you, has accommodated you. God speaks
unto you, and you stop your Ears against the Voice, that should make the
Pillars of Heaven to tremble. You have a Conscience which terribly Condemns you
for your Wickedness. If you Go on still in doing Wickedly, you may Rationally
Conclude, that the Great God speaks this also unto you; Rebel, He that Made
thee will not have Mercy on thee, and He that Formed thee, will show thee no
Favor.

Secondly. There are Important Things which the Great GOD speaks unto Young
Persons, in the Spectacles, which they have before them, in the Dispensations
of His Providence. There are Two sorts of Spectacles, wherewith Young Persons
are continually Entertained by the Providence of God. One thing daily to be
seen by Young Persons, is that; Prove XIII. 21. Evil pursues Sinners. Children,
You see such as are Wicked Overmuch, Die before their Time. You see, Such as
will not keep their Tongues from Evil, don't see Many Days, or much Good in their
Days. You see Profane, Vicious, Debauched Children, soon Plunged into woeful
Miseries. You see Undutiful Children Cut off by the tremendous Vengeance of
God. You see Heaven Discharging its Thunderbolts on the Heads of them that will
Go on still in their Trespasses. The Great God speaks to you in what you see.
The Thundering Voice of God unto you, in such Spectacles, is, O take heed of all
Impiety. O don't by work of Darkness, pull down upon your selves the Strange
Punishments reserved in outer Darkness, for the Workers of Iniquity! Another
thing daily to be seen by Young Persons, is that: Job XXXVI. 14. They Die in
Youth. Children, You see all Ages liable to the stroke of Death. You see
Children Die as well as Old Men; Ten times more Die before Twenty than After
Sixty. You see Children carried from the Cradle to the Sepulcher; and Graves in
the Burying-place, that are shorter than the Youngest of you. You see Children
Die as well as they that are an Hundred years old; Infants Locked up in Coffins;
and as they use to say, Skulls of all Sizes in Golgotha. You see, Some with
whom the Sun goes down at Noon, and some with whom the Morning is turned into
the Shadow of Death. The Great God speaks to you, in what you see. The Lively
Voice of God unto you in such Spectacles, is; O don't vainly Promise a long
Life unto your selves. O do not upon a vain Presumption of a long Life, put off
your Preparations for Death, and your laying hold on Eternal Life!

Thirdly. There are Important Things, which the Great GOD speaks unto Young
Persons, in His Glorious Gospel; that Grace of His, which does bring Salvation;
that Voice of Him that speaks from Heaven. Young Persons have the Bible in
their Hands, the Book of God, and of Life; the Scripture given by Inspiration
of God. It may be said of our Children, as 2 Timothy III. 15. From a Child thou
have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation. The Parents will be inexcusable, and more Uncompassionate unto their
Offspring than Ostriches and Sea Monsters, and must not be called, Christian
Parents, if they do not what they can, that their Children may have the Bible
in their Hands, and in their Minds. Children, You have the Great GOD speaking
to you in the Bible. When ever you look into the Bible, it should be with this
Persuasion; you should often look into the Bible on this Intention; I will hear
what God will speak unto me! The Voice of the Great God unto you in your Bible
is that; Psalm. XXXIV. 11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you
the Fear of the Lord. The Bible is a Letter from Heaven as much unto you, as if
your very Name, were in the Superscription of it. And that you may be the more
sensible of God speaking unto you here, you are here yet more distinguishingly
called upon. So you are, Eccl XII. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. So you are, Psalm. CXLVIII. 12, 13. Both young Men and Maidens, old
Men and Children. Let them Praise the Name of the Lord. So you are, in all the
Scriptural Examples of Early Piety. But besides this; When the Word of God is
Opened and Applied in the Sermons of His Ministers; young Persons make a part
of our Auditory. Young Persons are to take their Portion in all the Sermons of
the Evangelical Ministry, wherein Wisdom says unto them, Unto you, O Men, I
Call, and my Voice is to the Sons of Men. Yea, the Prudent and Faithful
Stewards in the House of God, will sometimes Carve out a Special Portion for
the Young Persons in their Auditory. The Servants of God will be careful to
avoid that Character of the Foolish Shepherd; Zach* XI. 16* Which shall not
seek the young one. Children, When Sermons are Preaching, you have the Great
GOD speaking to you in them. Instead of Sporting, or Sleeping, or any
Irreverent Carriage here, Oh, with what Reverence and Godly Fear ought you to
behave your selves; and think, How dreadful is this Place? It Is the House of
God, and the Gate of Heaven! It Is not a weak Man, but the Great GOD, who is now
speaking to me! It is the Great GOD, who tells you in our Sermons, That you
need a Savior; and that you will find the Lovely JESUS, a Mighty, a Ready, and
an Only Savior. It is the Great GOD who tells you, That you must Walk in His
Fear, and in all Holiness and Righteousness before Him. It is the Great GOD,
who tells you, That He will bring every Work into Judgment, and Reward every
man according to His Work. You are Deaf to GOD, if you hear us not!

There is an Improvement, which the Great GOD has Ordered me to make of these
things. There is this thing to be spoken, yea, to be Earnestly Spoken, unto the
Young People in this Assembly of Zion: Oh! Take a due Notice of the Things,
which the Great GOD Orders to be spoken to you; Children, Pay a due Respect
unto those things! Methinks, I overhear the Holy One saying to me, Run, Speak
to these Young People. To Run, is the Motion of one in Earnest. I must now be
in Earnest with you. Children, That which I am Earnestly to speak unto you, is
this; GOD has been speaking to you; The Mighty GOD, even the LORD has Spoken
to you. Now, Oh! Mind what He speaks; Let the Voice of God have a due, and a
deep Impression upon you. What a Blessed Intercourse was that between the Great
GOD, and the Child Samuel! 1 Samuel III. 10. And the Lord came, and stood and
called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak for thy
Servant Hears. O Young People, The Great GOD comes, and stands, and calls
unto thee very many times over; Sinner, Sinner, Soul Perishing in thy Sin, O
Forsake thy Sin, and Embrace thy Savior! Under the Admonitions of God, O
Children, Be able to answer; Lord, I hear what thou speak; and I desire to
be thy Servant. The Commands, the Comforts, the Reproofs of thy Word, Lord, Thy
Servant would hearken to them.

The Thing which I have to demand of you, is; That you cast no Scorn upon the
Word of God; but that you Comply with the Voice of God speaking to you in His
Word. The Demand is, That you Mind, and that you Do those things, which God
shall speak unto you; and be ashamed of not having Respect unto all His
Commandments. Child, He is thy Father, and He should be, Oh! Let thy Choice
make Him, the Guide of thy Youth. We read of some Young People, 1 John II. 14.
Ye are Strong, and the Word of God abides in you. Oh! Give a due Reception to
the Word of God. Lodge it in your Understandings, your Memories, your
Affections. Hide it in your Hearts, with dispositions to be thereby Preserved
and Rescued from your Sins.

To Enforce this Early Piety on our Children, I will Run, and Earnestly Speak
these two things unto them. Yea, you shall presently see, that the Great GOD
has Ordered me to speak these things.

The First Thing is, That the Great GOD will deal with you, as you deal with
His Word. Children, Love the Word of God, and God will Place His Love upon you.
Treasure up the Word of God, and God will make you His Peculiar Treasure.
Contain the Word of God, and your Portion from God shall be Shame and
Everlasting Contempt. O that your Ears were open to this Discipline, and that
such an Instruction as this from and for the Word of God were Sealed unto you.
It speaks thus; Them that Honor me, the GOD that speaks in me will Honor;
they who Despise me, shall be lightly Esteemed of the GOD who shines and
breathes in me.

I remember a Remarkable Passage, 2 Timothy I. 12, 14. He is able to keep, that
which I have committed unto Him. And, That good thing which was committed unto
thee, do thou keep. The Jews mention Two Depositums of God; The Lamp within us,
or, the Soul; And the Lamp without us, or, the Law; and they introduce the
Great GOD speaking thus unto us; My Lamp which is my Law, is in thy Hand; and
thy Lamp, which is thy Soul, is in Mine. If thou diligently keep My Lamp, I
will keep thine; if thou put out, if thou tread on, My Lamp, I will deal so
with thine. Our Apostle seems to have an Eye on both of these, Deposita. GOD
will Require it, when His Word is Well-treated with Young People; will Revenge
it, when His Word is ill-treated: Ye have done it unto me, says the Lord.

The Second Thing is like unto it; indeed but a Continuation and Amplification
of it. It is, That the Great GOD will hear you, Speaking and Praying to Him, as
you hear Him Speaking to you. Children, Be you never so Prayerless now, there
will come a Time, when you will pour out your Prayer unto the Almighty. In the
Trouble that will at some Time come upon you, you will Visit Him on your Knees,
and Pour out a Prayer, when His Chastening shall be upon you, and drive you to
it. Now, be advised. The Lord God has Spoken this, and who can but Prophesy
it? The Word of God comes to you, with such a Pathetical Warning as that
wherewith Jotham once began his Parable; Hearken unto me, that God may hearken
unto you! If you will hear the Counsels of God, God will hear your Prayers. It
was a sweet Word, Joh: XV. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. When the Great GOD sees,
That you set your selves to Do, whatever He shall Speak to you, and Ask of you,
Lo, He says upon it; This is a dear Child; I will do for Him for above all that
he can ask or think; yea, before he calls, I will answer, and whiles he is yet
speaking, I will hear. But I am to step into Mount Ebal, for the other part of
my Prophecy; If God Speak, and you Disregard what He Speaks, and if you turn
away from Him that speaks from Heaven, and if you Reject the Counsels of God;
Such, even such will be the Disregard that your Prayer to Him shall meet
withal. Can any thing be more Dreadful, but can any thing be more Equal, than
that Indignation of Heaven Zech. VI. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as
He Cried, and they would not hear,; so they Cried, and I would not hear, says
the Lord of Hosts. Oh! Tremble before the terrible Threatening of God; and
forget not that Young People are Peculiarly Threatened in it; Prove. I. 24, 25
28. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my
Reproof: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me Early, but they shall not find me. Hear this, O all you Children of
Unperswadeableness, that will not Hear. You will One Day lift up the Cries of a
Distressed Soul unto the Lord; When the Griefs of Death compass you, and the
Pains of Hell get hold on you, with what Agony of Soul, will you then Cry unto
the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver my Soul! But, O the Confusion which
you are providing and bespeaking for your selves! O the Wrath which you are
heaping up! When God speaks to you in His Wrath, what will it be but this?
Wretch, Thou would not hear me; I spoke unto thee in thy Prosperity, and
thou would not hear; Now, I know thee not, O worker of Iniquity! Children,
Consider these things, which at the Order of God, I have thus Run to speak unto
you.

Having thus Employed and even with a Running Dispatch Applied a General
Doctrine; I will proceed unto certain more Particular Instructions. Things,
that God Orders to be spoken unto you. And they shall be only such Instructions
as the Tendency and Intention of my Text shall give me a clear Commission to
offer unto you. My Text clearly says unto me, Run, Speak to the Young People
such things as these!

The First Instruction.
Young Persons may be Servants of God; Sincere, Faithful, Useful Servants of
God; Yea, do Noble Services for the most Glorious Lord.

Run, Speak to this Young Man. Who, and what was this Young Man? A Zechariah,
who, though a Young Man, yet was a Servant of God; yea, a Prophet of God, One
improved in Eminent Service for Him. A Young Man, and yet sent by God unto His
People, to say unto them, Turn ye unto me, says the Lord. It is very sure, he
had himself then in his Youth turned unto the Lord. It is the Note of a
North-British Expositor upon it, God may Employ Young Men to Serve Him. Upon
the bare Proposal of the matter, Oh! How can any Young Man in the Congregation,
forbear that Exclamation; Isa. VI. 8. Lord, Here am I; Send me! Hard-hearted
Youth, who can hear of Serving such a Lord, and not long to become a Servant of
that Glorious One! There were Services to be done for God, among His People of
Old; But, who were used in those Excellent Services? We read, Exodus XXIV. 5. He
sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt-offerings, and
sacrificed peace offerings unto the Lord. There are Young Persons, who come and
Cheerfully put their Necks under the Golden Yoke of a most Gracious Redeemer.
There are Young Persons, who are Inclined, and have Begun, to Live unto God,
and make the Will of God, the Rule of their Lives; and Submit unto the Will of
God in disposing their whole Condition for them There are Young Persons, who
are Zealous of, and Fruitful in, Good Works; and have their Eye so much on the
(...) and Kingdom of God; that it may be said of them, They are every day at
work for Him, yea, always abounding in the work of the Lord: Young Persons,
Inquisitive to Known their Duty, Solicitous to Do it; Ever saying, Lord, What
would thou have me to do? And making this their main Business in the World.
Yea, sometimes a Young Jeremiah, is used by the God of Heaven, to speak for Him
unto Multitudes; A Young Josiah, to make whole Provinces and Nations the better
for him.

My Hearers, Require not of me, a Demonstration of this Assertion. I Require it
of YOU, That You be your selves the Demonstration of it. I come to you with
that Exhortation; 2 Chronicles: XXX. 8. Yield your selves unto the Lord. Children,
It is required of you, that you become the Servants of God, and Bind your
selves this Day unto the Service of your Glorious Lord. It is pity, that you
should be Bound out unto any Temporal Service, until the Indentures of your
Service to the Great GOD, and your Savior JESUS CHRIST, be settled. O Servants
of all sorts in the Neighborhood; You have put off the Service of the most
Glorious One too Long, if you are gone into any Service before you have come
into His. They that are too Young for any other Indentures, are Old enough to
mind this Grand Concern: They that count themselves of a Quality too High for
any other Indentures, cannot be too Big for these. But what am I saying? The
Indentures are already Sealed. O all ye Baptized ones; Your Baptism was the
Seal of your Indentures, wherein you were Bound unto the Service of your
Incomparable Savior. The Thing required of you, is, That you now Renew the
Consent of your Souls, unto your Baptismal Covenant. Let it be done in those
Terms; Psalm. CXIX. 94. I am thine, Save me. Let it be done with such Wishes;
Oh! That I may be a Vessel of Honor for God the Father, a Loyal Subject of God
the Son, a Living Temple of God the Spirit, for evermore! A Young Servant of
God could say, O Lord, Truly I am thy Servant, (and over again,) I am thy
Servant; I am the Son of thy Handmaid. The Church, whereof you are the
Children, is the Handmaid of the Lord. Once has it been said over you, at your
Baptism, in the arms of the Handmaid of God; This is a Servant of the Lord.
Now, do you say it over again; O Lord, Truly I am thy Servant. And never, never
seek to be Loosed from these Bonds. It is herewithal required of you, That you
come this Day into Resolutions for the Service of God. Oh! that you would
heartily, and presently come unto them! Say; 'I Resolve to Renounce the Lords
that have heretofore held me in my Sins! I will not allow my Flesh any Sinful
Delight. I will do no Sinful Action to gain the World. I will maintain a
Perpetual Warfare against the Temptations of the Devil. I Resolve to Live
Godlily, and Soberly, and Righteously; and in the way of Patient Continuance in
Well-doing, seek for Eternal Life. But, O my Savior, I Rely upon Thee, to
assist me in keeping these Resolutions. Children, The Service of the Glorious
LORD, Oh! Count it your Glory. It will bring you to Heavenly and Immortal Glory!

The Second Instruction.
Young People may be those Children of God, who even while they are yet in
their Youth, may be singularly dear unto the Angels of God.

We have here a Young Man, who had one Angel talking in a most familiar
Conversation, with him, and at the same time another Angel hastening a point of
Information to him. The Angels of God have often appeared like Young Men; The
Angels of God have much oftener had Pleasure in Religious Young Men. We read
Mat. XVIII. 10. Even Little Ones have their Angels. There are Little Ones, for
whose Welfare the Angels of God are concerned; Little Ones they are for their
Growth, and still in their Youth; but yet the Angels of God are with
unspeakable Pleasure, Ministering Spirits for them, and go forth to Minister for
those young Heirs of Salvation. Young Persons there are, who are become very
agreeable to the Angels of God; The Angels of God are their Friends, and gladly
take the Charge of them, and become their Friendly Guardians; The Angels of God
gladly do Kind Offices for them, and multiply their Kindnesses to them. Yea,
they Run, and are upon the Wing, in a Benign Ministry for them. There are Young
Persons, for whom the Angels of God rejoice to fulfill that Promise; Psalm. XCI.
11. He shall give His Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
And that Promise; Psalm. XXXIV. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear Him, and delivers them. The Young Persons are, Deliciae
Angelici Generis; the Favorites of Heaven, and the Darlings of the Angelical
World.

But, Oh! Who are those Happy Children? You shall have a brief Description of
them.

First, A Thorough and an Early Conversion to God; This will be necessary. We
read, Luk XV. 10. There is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one
Sinner that Repents. A Young Person becoming a New Creature, the Angels of
God are the Joyful Spectators of it; The Morning Stars do sing together at it,
and the Sons of God shout for Joy. O Enemies of God, which His Angels with
Abhorrence look upon; Repent of your Enmity; Become the Converts of Zion; Then
those Angels will come to be Glad that they have such Newborn Children of God
under their Tuition.

I go on. You must betimes be the Lovers of the Glorious JESUS. Nothing,
Nothing must be so Precious to you, as the Glorious JESUS. The Angels of God
Love Him; and Love those who do so; There is this Favor for them who Love Him
in Sincerity. Those winged Inhabitants of Heaven, are the Wings of your
Savior. Oh! Make your continual Flights unto Him; Then those Wings will with
Alacrity stretch out themselves unto you; Take you under their Protection. The
intense Lovers of JESUS, are the Disciples whom JESUS Loves. Have you not been
told of a Young Man who came under this Denomination? Child, If JESUS Love
thee, His Angels will do so too!

Once more; They are Holy Angels. Children, Don't Vex them, with Unholy
Practices. Unholiness will disoblige them wonderfully. Urged unto any
Wickedness, Oh! Refuse it, Avoid it, with Young Joseph's Detestation, How shall
I do this Wickedness, and Sin against God? You will Please God, if you Walk
with Him; and this will be marvellously Pleasing unto His Angels too. The Holy
Angels are Glad, when they see a Young Man Holy in all manner of Conversation.

But, Lastly; Shall we not bring in Goodness too? The Angels of God are Good
Angels. They are Glad, when they see Young People Good. Children, Be full of
Goodness. Do no Wrong, Do no Harm, to any one in the World. Make the Prosperity
of others your own, and Promote it what you can; and Sympathise with them in
their Adversity. Wish well to every one, and Do all the Good that ever you can.
The Good Angels are Yours, O Greatly Beloved Ones, if you come to this!

In fine; We read of a wondrous Thing befalling a Young Man; 2 King. VI. 17.
And Elisha Prayed, and said, Lord, I Pray thee, open his Eyes, that he may see,
and the Lord opened the Eyes of the young man, and he saw: and behold the
Mountain was full of Horses, and Chariots of Fire round about Elisha.

I will only Pray, Lord, Open the Eyes of every Young Man among us, to see the
things of his Everlasting Peace; Turn the Young Man from Darkness to Light,
with a Sanctifying work of thy Spirit upon Him! Then O Young Man, thou might
see Fiery Chariots of Angels, with a most Heavenly Gladness attending on thee!
Ah! the Folly, Ah! the Madness, in the Heart of the Young Man, if this
Consolation of God be Small unto Him!

The Third Instruction.
Young Persons may be Admitted and Advanced unto an Intimate Communion with
Heaven; Heaven may hold a most Gracious and Intimate Communion with them.

He was a Young Man, who had Heaven Opened unto him; who had the Angels of
Heaven made very sensible unto him; who had the Great GOD of Heaven favoring
of him with mavelous Communications. A Young Man may Die and go to Heaven;
yea, a Young Man may go to Heaven before he Dies; be well acquainted with the
Heavenly World. Heaven is accessible for Young People as well as others. There
are Young People, who are no strangers to Communion with Heaven: Young People
to whom the Great GOD Communicates Himself with most Entertaining, most
Astonishing Condescensions.

The CASE which remains now to be insisted on, is this.

What is Communion with Heaven; and in what methods may Young Persons arrive to
that Communion?

Communion with God; It is a Thing much Talked of; less Understood, much less
Pursued, least of all Attained. Children, I would have you betimes take up
Right Notions of this Blessedness, and Right Methods of attaining it.

Briefly, Communion with God, lies in Receiving from God, and in Rendering to
Him.

First. The Great GOD holds Communion with Young Persons, in what they Receive
from Him. He holds Communion with them, in Communicating to them: You shall see
this go on by Two Steps, unto a very Special Intimacy.

First, Young Persons come to Communion with God, in the Communications of His
Holy Word unto them. When God makes known His Mind and Will unto Young Persons,
then He has Communion with them. When He had Communion with Moses, it was in
that; Exodus XXV. 22. I will Commune with thee; or, Confer with thee. When God
Speaks to you, Children, then He has Communion with you. Part of His Communion
with you, is, His Revealing of Himself unto you, and His Acquainting you with
what He would have you to Know and to Do, that so you may Glorify Him and Enjoy
Him for ever. O Reader of the Sacred Oracles, and of what Opens them; O Hearer
of the Discourses which Explain and Apply the Sacred Oracles; O Mind Consulting
the Will of God, as Written in thy own Soul, and Proclaimed by what He has done
in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas and in all deep Places; The Great GOD has
Communion with thee, in all the Light, which by these things He Conveys unto
thee. And the more Full, the more Clear, the more Irradiating and Satisfactory
the Light is, the more Communion the Great GOD has with thee in the Conveyance
of it. But then,

Secondly, Children, You shall come yet nearer than so. Young Persons are taken
into Communion with God, by the Communications of His Holy Spirit unto them.
The Communion that God has with them, is that; 2 Cor. XIII. 14. The communion
of the Holy Spirit. In the impressions of the Holy Spirit on Young Persons, God
has Communion with them. Children, Sometimes the Spirit of God, will make unto
you, most grateful Discoveries. He will Open your Eyes to behold the wondrous
Things in His Law; He will Unfold unto you the Mysteries of His Gospel; He will
cause you to Discern the Things that are spiritually to be discerned. More than
so; The Spirit of God will go on to Sanctify you; and Purify you, and impart a
Principle of Grace unto you, and Strengthen that Principle in you, and Revive
the Image of God in your Souls, and make you more Conformable to the Image of
His Jesus, and Enkindle the Life of God in you, and Quicken you in Living unto
God. This is not all; The Spirit of God will Excite you to the Things that are
Well-pleasing to Him; Will Incline you to the Things that Please Him; Will
Inspire you with Purposes of Well-doing, With Contrivances to Do Good; Will
Animate you to Services, and put you upon Abounding in the Fruits of
Righteousness. In fine; The Spirit of God, will bring Home the Love of God into
your Hearts; Will assure you of His Everlasting Love; Will comfort you with His
Encouraging Promises; Will Seal you to the Day of Redemption; Will fill you
with His Great Consolations; Will abolish your Griefs, extiguish your Fears,
enliven your Hopes, and cause you to Rejoice with Joy Unspeakable and full of
Glory. Now in all these things, the Great GOD has Communion with you. O Soul
Panting after Communion with GOD, mistake not the matter. Do not confine the
Communion unto any one of these Fruitions. Child, Thy God has Communion with
thee, when He Awakens thee, when He Abases thee, when He brings Contritions
upon thee, as well as when He Ravishes thee with His Consolations which are not
Small.

Secondly. Young Persons hold Communion with the Great GOD, in what they Render
to Him. The Returns, which Young Persons make unto God by His Assistence, these
are their Communion with Him. Children, Your God calls for your Heart; He says;
Prove. XXIII. 26. My Son, Give me thy Heart. You hold Communion with Him, when
you give Him your Heart; when your Heart is filled with suitable Thoughts of
Him; when you place the Desire of your Heart, the Delight of your Heart, the
Dependence of your Heart upon Him. To Pray unto God, is to Commons with Him;
When Young Persons Repair to the Great GOD with the Request of their Heart,
then they hold Communion with Him. If their Heart be in the Request, then it is
an Hearty, a Real, a Proper Communion. Young Persons have Communion with the
Great GOD, in every Acknowledgment they make of Him. They have Communion with
Him in all their Ways, when they Acknowledge Him in all their Ways. Indeed,
Young Persons have Communion with God, in all their Obedience to Him. When God
Requires and they Obey, there is a most amiable Communion between Him and Them.
In short, To be Sensible of God, is to have Communion with Him. Young Persons
Converse with God, when they Think of Him: when they Set the Lord before them;
when they are Sensible of Him Speaking to them, or Dealing with them.

This is that Communion with Heaven whereto Young People may be admitted.

And, in what Ways may they now Seek and Gain Admission to it?

Children; The First Thing which I must mind you of, and Charge you to be ever
mindful of, is this: Don't forget the Mercy-Seat.

In the Blessed JESUS, through whom God becomes Propitious to us, you have the
Mercy-Seat, whereof that on the Ark of old, was a Figure. In Him you see GOD
Sitting on the Throne of Grace! Remember then; Without a Glorious JESUS, what
Oh! What, would the Holy GOD be unto me? What, but a Consuming Fire and
Everlasting Burnings! Ah, How could Sinful Stubble Draw near unto Him! It is my
Glorious JESUS, who Reconciles me to God. Without such a Reconciliation,
certainly, He could have no Communion with me; none, but in Thunder and
Lightning, to Destroy me among His Adversaries! It is my Glorious JESUS, that
makes all my Homage to God be what it is: All my Offerings, it is He that enables
me to bring them all. It Is in His Name that I bring them all: It Is through Him that
I have Access unto the Father. It Is on His Account that they find Acceptance
with God; We are Accepted in that Beloved One. O my Dear JESUS, To Thee am I
beholden for all my Communion with God. How Dear, how Dear, ought this Glorious
JESUS to be unto me! Children, The more of CHRIST you have with you, the more
you may Expect of Communion with GOD.

Secondly; It Is in the Ways and Means of His own Appointment, that God will
hold that Communion with Young Persons, for which He has appointed them. There
are,

First, Ordinances of a more Public Celebration, wherein Young Persons may
have Communion with God; Such Ordinances as are Celebrated in the Assemblies of
Zion. The End why the All-wise God, has Instituted these things, is not merely,
that there may be the Work done; It Is not merely to impose a Task upon us; No,
They are Ways and Means; and His End in them, is, That He may hold Communion
with His People in them. [See, Psalm. XXVII. 4. And, 2 Cor. III. 18.] Yea, and
He has Engaged Himself to hold Communion with His People in them. He has said;
Mat. XVIII. 20. Where Two or Three are Gathered together in my Name, there am I
in the midst of them. Concerning these Ordinances of the Lord, I shall advise
our Children, with this Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

First; You cannot Reasonably Expect such Communion with God, in any other Ways
and Means, as you may in those which Himself has Appointed. It is true; Such is
the Compassion of GOD, that He has had Respect unto the Sincere Designs of some
Good Men, when they used Indirect Ways and Means for Communion with Him. He
has regarded their Sincerity, and overlooked their Superstition, and Visited
their Souls, in the use of Liturgies, and of Holidays, which yet He has not
approved. But men have no ground for any such Expectation, That God should Own
them, when they go to put upon Him their own Ways and Means of Communion with
Him; That God should Own and Bless Humane Inventions; That God should come to
us in the Modes wherewith we go to Prescribe unto the Holy One of Israel. The
Second Commandment binds us up, to such Ways and Means of Communion with Him,
as He Himself has appointed. Now in that Commandment there is that awful
Clause; Exodus XX. 5. I am a Jealous God. The Jealousy of the Holy God will burn
against your Will Worship. Your Substitutions of, I know not what, in the room
of the Divine Institutions, They will Enkindle the Jealousy of the Holy God.
They will Provoke the Holy One to say, Who has required these things at your
Hands? They are Vain Oblations: They are an Abomination to me; I cannot away
with 'em! Children of GOD, and, O Children of NEW ENGLAND, if you would have
Communion with God as your Father, and with the God of your Fathers, keep close
to the Ways and Means of His Appointment. Have His Warrant for all you do in
His Worship. Then will He Commune with you.

Secondly; You should Prize and Use all Opportunities of coming to the
Sanctuary, and count it a Lamentable Thing to be Banished from the
Opportunities to Bless God in His Congregations. Children, To make a Small
Matter serve you, as an Excuse for your Absence from the Sanctuary, truly, this
were a very Bad Symptom upon you. Oh! Deprive not your selves, of this Token
for Good on your Souls; Lord, I have Loved the Habitation of thy House! When
any Calamity keeps you from the Sanctuary, reckon this as a Considerable
Article of the Calamity; Psalm. XLII. 4. I had gone with the Multitude, I went
with them to the House of God. Oh! Let it be a Sorrowful thing unto you, when
you cannot Go with the Multitude unto the House of God. Let it broach your
Tears, to think; I am now Banished from Communion with God! This Lamentation
should be accompanied with some Essay, to fetch Good out of Evil. Wherefore,
when you are kept at Home, O Humble your selves before God at Home. Humbly
Search and Try your Ways; And Humbly Confess; Lord, I did not Prize and Use my
Opportunities for Communion with thee in thy Sanctuary, as I should have done,
when I had those Opportunities. O Pardon me for the sake of the Great
Sacrifice. Then Ruminate on what you have been in the Sanctuary formerly
Entertained withal; and Resolve, with the Help of God, that if ever you come to
the Sanctuary again, it shall be more Holily, more Livelily, more Fruitfully
than ever in your Lives before.

Thirdly; Come to the Sanctuary always upon the true Intention; always
intending and propounding of Communion with God. When you come to the
Sanctuary, let it not be from Custom, for Credit, or any inferior Account. Be
able to give the Genuine Answer to that Question; What went you out for? Let it
be, For Communion with God. In coming up to the Sanctuary, Children, Let the
Cry of your Souls be that; Psalm. LXIII. 1, 2. O God, Thou art my God, Early
will I seek thee; To see thy Power and thy Glory in the Sanctuary. These, These
must be the Dispositions of your Souls. It is good for me to draw near to God,
and I am now going to draw near unto Him. In Precious Interviews with God there
is laid up the Life of my Soul; and I am going to those Interviews. God is
willing to hold Communion with me, at the Wells of Salvation; and I am going
with Joy to draw water out of those Wells of Salvation. Child, Go, and God be
with thee.

But I may now pass on to say, There are also Devotions of a more Private
Character, which our God has Appointed. And in these also Young Persons may and
should have Communion with Him.

Among the Devotions of a greater Privacy, The Religion of the Closet, calls
for the greatest Regards imaginable. Children, Behold, This House is a Witness,
how many Scores, and Hundreds of Times, the Young People here have had this
Religion Pressed upon them. Verily, You are left altogether without Apology, if
this Religion remain still Disregarded with any of you. But I have now a New,
and a Fresh, Occasion for the Pressing of it.

There has newly Dyed among us, an Hopeful, and a Pious Young Man, [ Mr. Peter
Oliver.]
One Well Beloved in the Vicinity; who, a few Hours before he Dyed, Expressed
these Desires to me; with Repetition, and Importunity he Expressed them. Sir, I
Pray you to Exhort mightily the Young People of this Place, that they would
spend much Time in Secret Prayer, and be much in the Religion of the Closet. It
is what I have, through the Grace of God, my self not been a Stranger to, and I
now Enjoy the Benefit and Comfort of it. Behold, I am this Day fulfilling the
Will of the Dead; and inviting you to Everlasting Life. If a Spirit Clothed in
Garments of Light might come down unto yet, from the Paradise of God, or, if
the Angel, who was Charged, Run, Speak to the Young Man, were this Day to speak
unto you, what Exhortation could he bring of more Importance than this?
Children, Be prevailed withal, to Delay no longer; to Dally no longer; to make
no more Excuses; But Set upon the Exercise of Secret Prayer immediately. Begin
this Day to Retire for Secret Prayer, and uphold the Exercise all your Days.
Choose a fit Retirement, like Nathanael, under his Fig Tree; and make it your
daily Exercise to pour out your Supplications unto the Lord. You cannot be at a
Loss what you shall say. The CXIXth. Psalm; the whole Book of Psalms; all the
whole Bible; the whole State of your own Soul, and of all that you have any
Relation to, will afford you Materials for your Supplications.

How much do those Young Men Consult their own Welfare, who can say with him;
Psalm. CXIX. 47* I prevented the Dawning of the Morning, and I Cried! Oh! that
ours, would go alone every Day; and first Consult the Word of God, and then
turn it into Cries unto Him! First find out the Wants and Cares and Loads of
their own Souls, and put them into Cries unto the Lord.

Young People of both Sexes, you are all Concerned. We read concerning the
Chariot of Solomon; Cant. III. 10. It was Paved with Love by the Daughters of
Jerusalem. The Carpet laid under his Feet in his Chariot, was it seems, wrought
with Lovely Figures, by the Ingenuity of these Young Gentlewomen. Oh! that ours
would by Weeping Supplications to their Savior, Kneeling on the Floor of their
Secret Chambers, as it were lay a Well-wrought Carpet of their Love unto Him!

I Expect it of you, that you Consider Two or Three Questions on this Occasion.

Quest. I. Is it not the Positive Command of your Savior? Mat. VI. 6. Enter
into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy Door, Pray to thy Father which is
in Secret. And can he Challenge the Name of a Christian, who tramples on such a
Positive Command of our Savior? Or, What will such an one do, when God rises
up; when He visits, what shall such an one answer Him?

Quest. II. Are not the Blessings to be Gained by Secret Prayer, well worth all
your Labors for the Gaining of them? Reconciliation with God, and all the
Blessings of Goodness, bestowed by the Infinite GOD, in Both Worlds, on those
to whom He is Reconciled; Are not such Things worth a little Praying for?

Quest. III. When you are come to the Time of your Death, and the End of your
Time, will the Time that you have spent in Secret Prayer be then Repented of?
In your Last Hours, will you not then Wish, Oh! That I had spent fewer Hours in
other Things, but many more, many more, in Praying to God, and Preparing for
Eternity?

Quest. IV. If after such Solemn and Frequent and Various Warnings as you have
had, you will still continue Prayerless, and Fearless, may you not be justly
Afraid, that the Holy GOD may by His Judgments upon you fulfill that Word; He
that being often Reproved, hardens his Neck, shall be suddenly Destroyed, and
that without Remedy?

And now, as the Angel siad, Run, Speak to this Young Man; I will so invert it;
Young Man, Run, Run into thy Closet, and there Speak, and Pray, and Weep unto
thy Savior. Take up that Purpose therewithal; Psalm. CXIX. 32. Lord, I will Run
the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall Enlarge my Heart.

Children, I Demand your Immediate Compliance. Your Duty has been set before
you: The Demand is, That you Run into it. The Terms of it are, To Day, lest any
of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin.

I remember a Passage in Deuteronomy. VII. 11. The Commandments which I Command thee
This Day. And I remember the Gloss which the Jewish Rabbi's have upon it; Hodie
ea sum facunda, non-cras; It Is, Because they are Things to be done To Day; they
must not be put off till, To morrow. And indeed it was a common saying among
the Jews, a Saying of the Fathers among them, relating to the Resolutions of
Piety; Si non Nunc, Quando? That is, If not Now, When? Alas, If you will not
Now, it may be feared, it may be feared, you Never will.

Our Savior mentions it, as His Glory and His Delight; Psalm. XVIII. 44. As
soon as they Hear of me, they shall Obey me. Oh! Deny not unto a Dear Savior,
this Glory and this Delight; But now, As soon as you have Heard, that He
Expects your Secret Addresses to Him, and Serious Endeavors after Communion
with Him, Immediately Obey Him. And, Oh! Lift up that Cry unto Him, Draw me, O
my Savior, and I shall Run unto thee!

FINIS.
Let an Hymn of my Incomparable WATT's, fill this Vacant Page. Youth and
Judgment.
LO the Young Tribes of Adam rise,
And through all Nature rove,
Fulfill the Wishes of their Eyes,
And taste the Joys they Love.
They give a loose to wild Desires;
But let the Sinners know
The strict Account that God requires
Of all the Works they do.
The Judge prepares His Throne on high,
The frighted Earth and Seas
Avoid the Fury of His Eye,
And flee before His Face.
How shall I bear that dreadful Day,
And stand the fiery Test?
I give all mortal Joys away
To be for ever blessed.
THE END.

