PREFACE
To the ensuing DISCOURSE.
IF private Conferences, Remonstrances or Capitulations, for almost four Years
past, would have prevailed with the gravest Heads we have, to have debated the
point in Controversy betwixt me and the Church, I had not Exposed in Print
these few Sheets, so very much against the mind of some to near related to the
Charge. Most concerned, have, or might have seen it, before I sent it to the
Press, but it returned only with these Notes, some said, 'Twas sharp, another
very Ingenious Person, of great Sense, advises, Not to Publish it, for no other
reason, but my own Ease; but I am more Easy to print than to forbear. But what
is meant by sharp, I know not, unless too too true, and if so where is the
Damage? I have fetched no blood; if I have, like a File, rubbed off the Rust, it
is but to show the pure clean Mettle. Rebake them sharp, says Paul. And why?
because the Corruption will Impostumate, and turn to Gangreen. The Reformation
was never Effected by Encomiums, nor Polite meanage. He Is too Polemick, or
Satyrick, said another. No! I am neither Lewd nor Malicious; then Satyr is
proper. But who is so sharp as our own Folk, whose Language would not become me
now. But were it no more for the sake of Innocent Truth, than the Damage I have
sustained, and the unjust Wounding of my Reputation, this had never Peeped into
the World in so mean Clothing. But Truth had none at her first Entrance, till
she was dressed up by the Learned, and then they made her look more like a Whore
than a Chaste Virgin. But I a plain Rustic, and hope to be plainly understood,
without Thomas Story's Key to open the Nice Point, as he called it, (for such
was his Sermon up and down the Country, so Nice, so New and Strange, never
heard of in our Pulpits before, as by and by will appear; wherefore his advice
was, To come to him to open the Mystery.

Know Reader, this Discourse is intended for none but such whose known
Principles from the beginning have been against Co-ersive Power and Force,
professing Regular Conformity to the Laws of our blessed Lord and Master Christ
Jesus, both in Doctrine, Practice and Discipline; But if any have mist it in
either, I find it my Duty to let them know Where and How, and clear the Truth
from Error and Innovation; and if I have wronged any Person or Cause, let me
know it, and I Will Repent and Recant.

But it would look very strange, if after Four Years Pause on my Papers and
Searching, for all I had sent to our Elders, and carrying them to our Yearly
Meeting at Burlington (for what, judge Reader) and to this Day, no man ever
told me of one Error in all my Scribbles. I say, now to Charge would look very
oddly; however, I am not too old to learn yet; but if what I have Writ, be
unanswerable, according to our own Axioms, then, I hope, some Body will thank
me, for taking so much pains, to wash the Spots out of Mothers Coat, not with
Gall, but with clean Water of the Word of Truth. No! I am neither prejudiced
nor biased; but if all my Labor be lost (which I hope will not) I must leave
the Issue to the Great Baptizer, that can wash, and must wash us, if ever we
are clean. Why do I differ with Friends (say some) To which I Answer, That I
don't see where I differ in the least point, if by Friends is meant such as
were called Quakers Fifty or Sixty Years ago. But Woe is me! my Mother, that
has born me a man of Strife and Contention. I do not affect Quarrels; but for
strife or Lawful Striving, and Contending heartily for the Principles of our
Primitive, most holy Profession, it falls to my Lot; and Woe is me if I do not
do it. Is there not a Cause, when I see Errors creeping in so fast? What!
though the Church have a Plenipotentiary Power let her not exceed her
Commission, nor bind that (...) her head, Christ has freed, etc. He never
allowed her a Jurisdictive Power. The highest degree of her Authority is but a
Censure. If that will not do the Civil Magistrate must. But if the Members of
the true Church will be Civil Magistrates, they must divest themselves of the
Canonick Gown; lay by their Spiritual Sword, and put on their Wardrobes, and
take up the Carnal Weapon. This is and has been the trade of our Spiritual
Shepherds, this thirty years, to my knowledge; and when this piece of Carnal
Drudgery is over, it is but putting on their Pontificalibus, and then go to
Church and sing divine Service, and be as Spiritual as ever, till next Court,
etc.

Tribute to Caesar, How paid by the Best Christians, WITH Some Remarks on the
late Expedition to Canada, etc.
THat which induced me to write the following Periods was the one half of a
Sermon Preached by Thomas Story the 16 th of September, 1711. beginning with
this Text, Except a Man be born again, he cannot enter or see the Kingdom of
God. Had he kept here, and so ended, we had been Edified to the furthering our
Progress thither.

But all the other half of his Doctrine was to lead us to Canada; such a
Digression, I believe, was never known in our Pulpit before, nor in any other.
The Text was forgot by Hearers and Preacher too (for ought I know) for he never
came to it again at that time, and so left a great Army of us (near two
Thousand Souls) either to follow the Camp, or pay others in our stead (which is
all one) for so doing. Tribute to Casar was the whole Burden of the Story. No
High-Church-Man in England, no, not Sacheverill himself could have managed the
Subject better. I confess it Amazed me as much as if (at unawares) I had been
in the midst of the Camp between New York and the Lake. Strange Doctrine (says
one) I never heard the like, says another. What! was this the Quakers Doctrine
formerly? I know is was not, says another.

But from John 3. 3. we skip to Romans 13. 1* to 7. Let every Soul be Subject to
the higher Powers, etc. If by the higher Powers is meant here Kings and Rulers,
let G. FOX Answer for me, as on the same occasion elsewhere, to persuade us to
pay our Taxes [of which more anon] see his Book, entitled, Several Papers
given forth, 1666. page. 8. Friends, To you all that desire an Earthly King,
etc. are not you worse than they in the Days of Moses, and as blind as the
Jews? etc. Did the Christians in the Days of Christ, and his Apostles, cry up
any King but Christ? or to have any other Ruler over them? Is he not the Head
of the Church? Has he not all power in Heaven and Earth given to him? Must not
all bow to and be Subject to him, and all things to be done in his Name? You
say Peter said, Honor the King and Love the Brotherhood, and honor all Men.
This don't hold forth that Peter bid them set up an Earthly King over them,
neither do ye read, though there were so many Thousands Convinced among them*
that there was an Earthly King among them; neither do ye read that there was
any Kings since the Days of the Apostles, but amongst the Apostate Christians,
and false Church, the Mother of Harlots.

But to the Powers that are ordained of God, if all the Powers that are, are
ordained of God, then God ordains Powers to plague and vex his own Royal Seed,
which is absurd to affirm. Besides, when the Devil took Christ into the
Mountain, and showed him all the World, These, said he, are mine, and (Christ
did not gainsay it) I give them to whom I please; I, the Prince of this World;
Can any suppose this Power was ordained of God? permited it mightt be* as he
permits Wicked Princes, and Popes too, that Tyrannize over their Subjects. Are
these the Powers the Apostle means? Yes, says T. S. Casar must be obeyed,
though a Tyrant. But I can prove all the Ancient and Modern Reformers ( R. B.
not excepted) oppose him. The whole World wandered after the Beast; The Dragon
gave his Power to the Beast, see Rev. 12. 13. 17. prove sufficiently what
Powers were of God, and what not. And pray, who ordained our Powers here? Why,
W. Penn. And who ordained him Supreme Ruler and Governor? Charles the second.
And who ordained him, the whole Course of his Life and Actions speak louder
than Words. But by G. F's Rule, We as well as other Earthly Powers are
Apostates, false Church and Mother of Harlots.

Thus by our own Rules I have Answered what Rulers ordained are, that Rule for
Casar and themselves more than for God. I Charge no Body.

The next verse, Romans 13. 2. He that Resists the Pomers receives Damnation.
I have received no Damnation for Resisting the Ordinance; no, though I am a Low
Churchman, I am for Passive Obedience; and where for Conscience I cannot
Assist, I Will not Resist, but suffer my Pewter Dishes to be taken from me, and
not so much as murmer at it, as I did.

3 dly, Rulers are not a Terror to good, but Evil Works; He that resists such
Rulers deserves to be whipped; and this answers and agrees with G F's printed
sheet sent up and down the Country here to make us pay our Taxes; for Caesar's
Weapons are for Punishment of Evil doers, etc. for which he is to have his
Tribute. etc. I wonder how this made for the Cause in hand, to pay Tribute for
a vigorous War against Canada.

But hear Samuel Claridge in the same Paper, We don't think it (...) us to
enquire what the Queen does with the Taxes we pay her.

All this is granted. But take a parrellel case, Cor. 1. 10* If any, (...) bid
you to a Feast, and ye are disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat,
ask no Question for Conscience sake; But if any say, this is offered in
sacrifice to Idols, eat not, Chap. 8. v 7. Howbeit there is not in every man
that Knowledge, for some with Conscience of the Idol to this hour, eat it as a
thing offered unto an Idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled. Hence I
observe, We ought not to ask Caesar what he does with his Dues or Tribute, but
pay it freely. But if he tells me it is for no other use but War and
Destruction. I Will beg his Pardon, and say, My Master Forbids it. But some have
now, as then, who with Conscience defiled, eat it as a thing Offered to Idols.
T. S. for one, before five or six, said If the Officer demand a Tax of me, and
tell me, it is to maintain War, I Will pay it* And another Preacher C. B. If a
Ship of War comes here for Supplys to fight, I Will assist to my Power. All which
exceeds the Text, and every Article of our Fundamental Doctrine and Practice,
and which is so obvious, that every body knows it. Nay, to Corroborate the
Case, at a Meeting at Byberry, he the said Tho, Story thus, Friends in England
pay their Taxes to kill Friends in Holland, and they in Holland to kill Friends
in England. At another time, in my bearing, Friend (...) England and Holland
pay their Money to maintain War. At another Meeting He said, Friends paid their
Taxes, and Tyrants must be obeyed, but not in their Tyranny. But these
Dilemma's are plain^ Deliriums, Cant and Jargon, and the whole a Lump of
Sophistry, Verse. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good. But if I do
no Evil, I need not be afraid. V 5 Ye must needs be subject not only for Wrath,
but for Conscience sake. How for Conscience? not against Conscience, as being
implicitly enthrawled to Caesar, instead of God. By all which it plainly
appears, All the Noise* we have made for Tribute to Caesar is only to his Civil
Capacity, in the Apostles sense, and the sense of the Old Quakers too.

Render therefore to all their Dues. This Literally understood would make sad
work; for had the Apostle Paul obeyed all his Commands, he had saved his head*
It was an Objection wisely answered by John Milton, viz. Religion to God and
Loyalty to Caesar cannot be parted, for it is Contrary to the plain Teaching of
Christ; no man can serve two Masters. Our Penn as wisely says, Our Civil
Obedience is only due to Caesar, not to confound the Things of God with
Caesar's; for no man can be true to him, that is false to his own Conscience, nor
can he extort from it a Tribute to carry on any War, much less Offensive, nor
ought true Christians to Pay it.

But ever I go further, let me tell the Reader the cause of this great Dispute
about Tribute to Caesar, Thus Our Powers here ordained an order, without any
Ordination but their own (for the Queen never thought on it or expected it from
Quakers) for Two Thousand Pound for Military uses (though it is denied) but if I
prove it not to all but Bigots, I loose the Cause, but if I do ( I have heard
many say) they are great Hypocrites.

Just upon news of the Expedition to Canada, our Powers Convened, the Governor
was Ordered to send two Hundred Men [not a word of Money] for this Expedition.
Our Powers to show their Loyalty to Casar, very Frankly orders two Thousand
Pounds to be Levied in Form, and the Severest that ever was known here or
elsewhere ('it is said) And when the Army was on their way, Samuel Hariot told
me, his Sloop had been pressed and another Master sent with her if he had not
gone himself with Bread and Flower, Freighted by the Treasurer S. C. and
ordered by our Governor to go first to the Governor of NewYork, and thence to
the Governor of New England at Boston, to whom this Cargo was delivered. How
or to what Uses this Cargo was Employed is not my Business, but some that knew
the thing, and can tell, and would if it did not interfer with the Honor of
our Religion; however, it is said the Army was little the better for it.

The meaning of this Politic Fetch (you must know) was kept under the Thumb in
the House; but a Member, a man in Boots told 'em, They had better be plain and
above board with the Country.

But why so private, when the Jersians at the same time (a Friend the Speaker)
raised a larger Fond, directly and in express words for the Expedition against
Canada; and all the Country (some few excepted) paid it, and no body to call
them to account, for such unaccustomed Practice among the Quakers; and yet, at
the same Time, the same People, to a Nicity, scruple, and will not pay Caesar's
Militia, nor the Poor Parson, a civil Minister, that has had Acts of Parliament
for Five Hundred Years, to pay him Tithe; This we cannot do for Conscience, though
the Powers ordained, do order it. How do we Obey the Power then, (though
Defensive, as this was an offensive War.

But Secondly, To prove this Two Thousand Pounds was for War only too, though
affirmed to the contrary, It was to the Queen, and to her disposing ONLY; if
so, was it not Presumption to Rob her of her Prerogative, and give her Money,
Ten Pound per Month to all the Runaway Servants, that went to serve the Queen
in this War? Was not this paying to maintain War? I need say no more, all the
Country believe it, And Thomas Story, the Oracle to the Powers, advised to it,
with, G. O. and I. L. Who need then be ashamed to own it? But this was Nuts for
Prelate, and Presbyter, Now, says one, the Quakers can Pray, and Pay, and
fight, and Obey, who before railed at 'em for doing neither. The other to me
said, Now ye are gone, T. S. and G. O. have given up the Cause. By all which, I
observe (as well as all thinking men) That the Pulpit has always been the
Magazeen of Firebrands, that used to set the world in Flames, and so it does
still* (with grief and shame it is spoke,) in our Communion, as well as in
others; And all this happens, because the Pulpit Sets up too near the Chair of
State

We must have Ministers of the Gospel to be the Powers, Governors, Judges,
Justices, Statesmen, and every thing that belongs to the Powers, Viz. the
Civil, Military, Classick, and Provincial, ( G. Fox notwithstanding to the
Contrary).

It Is no Improper Question, if again I ask, Who ordained these Powers? for from
Christ to Constantine, they were never heard of. If they had properly belonged
to Christ's Kingdom, we should have had order, upon order, and a continued
Succession (no doubt) of the same form of Government; But alas! it is absurd,
ay, and prepostrous too, to plead for such a Government, where Christ's Kingdom
is not, nor never was nor will be, viz. in the States Polites. Another Question
follows, What do we there then? We, We, I mean, that above all People pretend
to be most Christ-like, (Chew upon this a while, and try how it will digest in
your Stomach) I have told ye often, and now again, that Christ's Kingdom is his
Church ONLY; and if it be true, (and I know of none that dares to deny it) How
comes it to pass that ye Weave the Church and the State into one Garment or
Piece? Though they were one Corporation under the Law, Christ made them two
distinct Functions, unless you will have Gospel to be Law, and Law Gospel. I have
often told our Church Doctors, They have no more to do in Caesar's Court, than
in his Camp; the last they decline in Conceit. But don't the Court maintain the
Camp? Don't the Camp defend the Court? Then where is the difference? We deny the
Camp in words, but in works we do maintain it, Witness the Bread and Flower we
sent them by Samuel Harriot at the very juncture, when they were going to
Canada. Tush! it is mere Cant to deny it. But from whence do all these Blunders
proceed, but from Ambition, Ignorance, Carelessness and a Superstitions
Veneration to the Clergy. But more of this by and by.

It seems to me as if our Moses has left us, and gone up into the Mount, and
committed us to the care of Aaron, who forgetting, or neglecting his duty, has
made a Golden Calf, and set us all a dancing about it, and Sacrificing our
Reason and Senses to it; the Name of which Calf is Custom, Humane Tradition,
Ordinance, etc. These are the Gods we serve, or the Tyrants we obey. But Moses
comes down by and by, and he will make Dust of the Idol, and teach ye better
manners, or I am mistaken. Excuse this small Digression.

I hope I have sufficiently Proved the above Fond and Tax was raised and levied
on the Country for no other end, but to maintain an offensive War.

The next point is to prove, How Inconsistent it is with our own Fundamental
Principles, as well as the Doctrine of Christ, and all the Primitive Christians.

It would swell my little Book too big, to Incert all our Friends opinions on
the Subject; I Will therefore only incert Robert Barely's Apology page 406. If
the Magistrate be truly a Christian, or desires so to be, he ought himself in
the First place, to obey the Command of his Master, saying, Love your Enemies,
etc. and then he could not Command us to kill them; but if he be not a true
Christian, than ought we to obey our Lord and King, Christ Jesus, to whom he
ought also to obey; For in the Kingdom of Christ, all ought to Submit to his
Laws, etc. If any say he paid Tribute to Caesar, so do we; What then? This is
but a man of Straw, and proves not the Case.

Again we have suffered much in our Country, because we neither could our
Selves bear Arms, nor send others in our place, nor give our Money for the
Buying of Drums, Standards or other Military Attire, etc. Let it be Remembered,
that when the Emperor would have employed the Christian Soldiers to fight
against their Brethren, they refused; see Sle^den, page 487. lest we destroy by
our Works what we Establish in Words. I need say no more, all the World that
know us, know, that this is our very professed Principle; and the whole
Doctrine of Christ is Love, Faith and Good Works. Upon what Topic Tho. Story
builds his Antichristian, as well as Anti-Quaker Sophisms, I know not. If his
Doctrine be Orthodox, this must needs be Hetrodox; and if so, I am gone and
have lost the Prize. But I fear him not, let him defend in Print, what he has
said in the Pulpit, if he can, or dare. But that this is an AntiChristian
Principle, either to indulge Fraudulent Stratagems of War, as R. E. says,
Christians dare not do, which is a deceitful Insinuation to make People
believe, we don't pay to maintain War, nor make Laws for that Purpose, when at
Bottom it is so, and the Consequence proves it. A sharp Reprimand for which,
I Will give you from the poor Indians of (...) in New England* Thomas Pots, one
of our Preachers being on the spot, at the same Juncture of that Expedition,
was told by Friends there, that the Inhabitants of that Island, the English,
etc. ordered these Indians to appear in Council, to give their Result what they
intended to do in this Affair; (take their Answer and Record it with our
Ancient Brethren, that first learned us to depend wholly on our God) These
Indians met, told the Council as follows, If Canada Indians and French are
permitted to come down upon us, we will go (...) and meet them, and Capitulate
with them, and see if we can persuade them not to hurt us, for, and because, we
are an Innocent People, and never Intended to hurt them etc. But whether they
will hear or forbear, we know not, but will trust in our God; for he is able to
Deliver us. (Observe, these Indians are Christian Proselytes)

Another Indian in Long Island, told the People there, Their God was Angry with
them, because of a great Dearth, that their Cattle dyed so fast that a Cow was
offered for Six Shillings; and the reason of this, said he, is because ye are
continuing to kill an Innocent people, that never did you any hurt. I wonder
who hurt us? unless God Almighty, who at the same time killed Seven or Eight in
one Day, when we were continuing this under hand Mischief, against a people who
never did, nor never ( I believe) could or would hurt us, had we kept our hands
clear of their Blood. But, -- God make us to see this weak side and Repent.

Now I Will compare Thomas Story, with Robert Bardy, an old Soldier of Divine
Mettle, whom none dare deny for a true Quaker and Christian, whose Memory
lives, and will forever. If inconsistency, in Fundamental Truths makes false
Doctrine, as two Contradictions cannot be either true or false, I Will leave it to
the Verdict of the Learned, which of these is the best Champion, or the
greatest Man for Truth;

R. B. If a Magistrate be a true Christian, or desires so to be, he ought in
the First place, to obey his Lord and Master, King Jesus; But if not, we ought
not to obey him, but our Lord, and c. But T. Story says, Caesar must be obeyed,
though a Tyrant.

Reader, Judge of this Harmony betwixt R. B. and T. S. A Tyrant obeyed, says
Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Zwinglins, etc No, spit on their heads,
etc. Nay, says my Author, it can be proved, that fifty Kings and Emperors have
been deposed for their evil Government. Then not obeyed. Ezekiel. 14: 9. Thus
faith the Lord, Let it suffice you Princes of Israel, Remove Violence and
Spoil, and Execute Judgment and Justice; Take away your Exactions from my
People, faith the Lord. R. B. We neither can our selves bear arms, nor may
others.

(...) Story, We ought to pay our Tribute to Caesar, though he demand it for
(...) bearing of Arms, and killing our Friends, and we know it. Christ and ^.
B. Do violence to none, Love Enemies, Cloth and Feed 'em. Tho. Story bids to
pay, do violence, send Bread and Flower to feed such that are going on purpose
to kill (our Friends too for ought we know.)

Pray unty this Gordian Knot, this Riddle and Paradox. If War, or the
Favorites of it, be altogether contrary to the Law and Spirit of Christ, the
maintaining of War by paying to it, is altogether contrary to the Law and
Spirit of Christ; and if we contrary to his Law, do these things, then we break
his Commands; and if breaking his Commands, or exhorting so to do be false
Doctrine; (for this T. Story did) Ergo for the whole. And if this be not found
Argument, I Will lay down the Cudgels.

These Truths I have been Preaching, (if Writing be Preaching, as I think it
is) this three years, to our Elders within Doors; and for my love and good
will, they have turned me out, and for no other cause, let 'em prove it if they
can. And seeing I have had so ill Treatment, and a deaf Ear to all the Epistles
and Remonstrances I have given them, I now appeal to all Sober Christians
without Doors, Whether I have deserved to be abused as you will see by and by.

According to the Apostles rule, and the Quakers too, 1 Cor. 14* Let two or
three Speak, and the rest Judge. But for this Presumption of mine, of Judging,
am I called in Question, and Judged, in a more Arbitrary manner than Ever I
heard of any Malefactor, either in Church or State. What! Judge my Testimony,
Arraign my Doctrine, put me to prove what I have preached! Insolent fellow! I
am not bound to Answer thee! What come thou (...) for (...) thy Rattles?
Here Is the Foundation of this Dispute, occasioned by Thomas Story, and his
language to me, who is so Conceited of his Doctrinal Notions, and so dogmatical
that we ought to believe it, if it comes from his mouth; And such is the
Superstitious Veneration to this poor man, that rather than call him, or suffer
him to be called to account for his Doctrine, patiently take (like Asses) all
that is laid on their Backs.

But W. Penn against the Clergy (not our Clergy) says, The Consequence of not
doing it, has been the Introduction of much false Doctrine, Superstition and
Formality, which gives just occasion for Schism. We blame other Professions for
their too much Relyance on their Teachers and Church Ordinances, Discipline
(Church Discipline) Yes, said Thomas Story, The Church is the Ground and Pillar
of Truth; so says Papist and Prelate too; so says T. S. ay! and so say I. But I
ask T. S. too, What Church this was? Whether Militant or Triumphant? but no
Answer to this, only, If the Church believe his Doctrine, I had no Business to
call him in Question. No, yes but I will, and do call him, and Church too, to
Answer for this Anti-Church Doctrine; And if they Defend either one or the other,
I Will oppose (to my power) both. But it is too clear, Ignorance and Carelessness
is the very cause of Implicit Faith and blind Obedience. And thus it comes to
pass, that after a people have had a good degree of Knowledge of Divine Truths,
yet it may and often does Vanish away either through Idleness and Carelessness,
attended with Formality and Supperstitious Ceremony. What a natural propensity
People have to Change! though Truth cannot Change. This saying we all have at
our Fingers ends. Nevertheless, when the Preachers change in their Doctrine, we
ought not to persuade our selves, that we are incapable of Judging in Matters
of Religion. No! we ought to be scrutinous, and cannot sufficiently over-hawl
whatever we hear preached. But read W Penn's Address to Protestants, it will
sufficiently excuse me for Examining T. S. with his false Notions. But false or
true, here is the Misery, no such thing in our Church as Debateing any point of
Doctrine, in a Monthly or Weekly Meeting, though preached in the greatest
General Meeting of all America. Nay, so far from Debating, that he is counted
Rude and Absurd, that dares contradict the Doctor; No! have a care, if he does,
by our new Rule of Discipline, we'll turn him out. But more of this anon.

Now something by it self of Civil Government.

I Have Observed before, That Civil Government belongs not properly to the
Church of Christ, nor was it ever Introduced here, till Constantine, the fast
Friend to Pontifix Maximus, Episcopus Episcoporum, viz. The Pope and the
Prelate, where the effect has lodged ever since, not to the honor of Christ,
nor his Spouse, the Bride, the Lambs wife; The Woeful Consequence of this
Hodge-Podge Mess of Medly, and Jumbling of Church and State together again,
that had been so long parted by Christ himself, brought more Trouble into the
Church, and was more occasion of the Suffering of the Church, than all the
Sufferings she ever met with before, as any one a little acquainted with
Reading, may and will easily understand. But to us, that have been as great
Sufferers under this Civil Ecclesiastical Power, as any in this last Age,
(burning excepted,) for us, I say, in this Province, to assume to our selves
the State Politic Power, is the point I mean to debate with our Church Members
in Public, after many years private Conferences with them, and their weak
Opposition, dropped with these words, or the same in effect, We wish it were come
to that, as there was no need of us in the State, etc. But I Will go on, and show
what Harmony there is betwixt Church and State.

If we do but take our measures by the holy Scripture of the New Testament, and
not fly to Apostolical Example, we shall Resolve the Case at once.

In the beginning, when men grew Numerous they contracted themselves into
Societies, for preservation of Concord and good Discipline, and began to think
on foundations to set their Structure upon, and found by Experience, that no
Natural or Artificial Building, nor Civil nor Ecclesiastic Society of Men,
could be upheld without a Bottom on which they were first founded; first, The
Civil Society united, that they might live safely, and enjoy their Libertys
without Opposition, and they united into Churches* to live Religiously,
according to Christ's Doctrine, and the Example of the Apostles. Now Civil
Societies have their Laws proper and peculiar to themselves; and the Churches
have their Rules of Discipline peculiar to themselves, and far different from
each other. But the cause of so many Wars in Christendom, has been because the
Civil Magistrate and the Church confound their Jurisdictions under the Law.
These Societies were (as 'twere) one Corporation, Individual; for the Priests
and Levites had their Ministerial Office in Civil Causes; but Christ has made
them now two distinct Provinces. I would fain know, how we come to unite them
together again? Or what Rule or Foundation our Gospel Ministers have to build a
House on such a Bottom, that has neither Christ nor his Apostles for Example?
Then if neither Precept nor President be from, of, or by them, Certainly it
must be against them; and if against them it must needs be Antichristian, and
Anti-Apostolical. That Christ never abetted such a Discipline to his disciples,
is plain from his Doctrine to them, of Lording over one another (We want him
here, to Check our Lords and Masters, that Lord it over their Brethren with the
utmost Severity, and without Compassion make him pay, or take from him more
than the utmost penny, which too, is not really due by Gospel Right; Ay! and
delivered over to Councils to be Scourged, etc. Viz. Fined and Imprisoned, his
goods violently taken from him, who for Conscience sake dare not obey these
Lords, which are our Brethren in the Church, and good friends there, But out of
the Church, Tyrants. How should it be otherwise, the State cannot be upheld
without Force and Violence; But how this becomes the Spirit and Life of our
Peaceable Savior, may soon be answered. If he had been minded to uphold his
Kingdom by this Rule, we now take, Caesar nor Pilate could never have stood
before him. But it is as clear as the Sun, neither he, nor any that belonged to
him, had any business in the State, nor none of the Primitive Christians, till
Constantine, who brought into the Church more Poisonous Doctrine, than ever
will be purged out, until the General Reformation, and the Restitution of
christ's Kingdom. Hence it appears, (as himself said) My Kingdom is not of this
world.

I believe all this will be readily granted by our Wise Men, who will perhaps
tell me, I may spare my Labor etc. Granted. I answer, If he that knew not his
Masters mind was beat, what must be done to them that knew it, and did it not?

That this was our Faith Sixty Years ago, I remember, ay, and believe, had been
our practice now at this time, had not a Long headed States Politician decoyed
us into the Foil, as Ducks are. But is it not a pity, that we that began in
the Spirit, should end thus in the Flesh! But what business a Gospel Minister
has out of the Church I would fain know* Look to thy self, and the Flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made thee Over seen: Have thou any thing to do with
them that are without, Viz. out of the Church is not this Apostolic Doctrine?
And I believe, he would find business enough there too, if he would mind it. Come I Would
have us take one Pattern from Rome for once, and try the Experiment.

The Roman Censor, though a Civil Function, had no Jurisdiction, nor Courts of
Plea, or Indictment, nor any punitive Force annexed. It stood more with the
Majesty of that Office, to have no other Constable, Sergeants or Boms about
'em, than that of Terror and Shame.

Then (pray observe) if the Courts of Judicature, to a Politic Censorship,
seem too Contentious, much more may it to the Discipline of the Church, and her
Members, to be quite divested of all Jurisdiction whatever? for so much the
less Contention, so much more Christian. And could this Roman Office of a
Censor, without his Jurisdicial Sword, strike such a Terror and Awe on the
great Spirits of Rome, as with one dash of Igno^^^^^, to make the Guilty
Tremble? Much more may the true Christian Minister, Guard himself with more
piercing Beams of Dread and Majesty, to Conquer the Enemies of the true Church,
without the Keys of State to help; for when the Church Members, without Carnal
Weapons (indeed they ought to have none) are able to do so great a work upon
the unforced Obedience of Men, it argues a Divinity about them, well becoming
their holy Function. Thus far Milton.

I wish our Divines had this faculty of the Roman Censor, there would be no
need of all the Constables in the County to Guard them with Clubs and Staves,
to knock down all that do not Obey Order.

But I Guess what Answer I shall have here, Why we observe the same Rule in our
Church?

Reply; But this was a Civil Capacity, nor is the same Rule neither observed in
our Church, for it has not the same Efficacy nor Power; for the Offender,
without any shame at all, or Regret, will make an Hypocritical Confession, Sign
a Paper, etc. and hold his old course still (under the Rose) and no show of
Reformation,

But to Politics again, This has been Objected, The Burden of the State has
providentially fallen on our Shoulders in this Uncultivated Land, where Rules
of Discipline have been wanting; and why may we not assist in the Civil Power?
Seeing good men are fittest for Government? and the act seems to become them
too very well; They Encourage Virtue, and punish Vice. Well! of a Civil Plea,
this is the best that can be offered. Again, The Saints shall Judge the Earth
Good still; besides, here is Acts of Justice, Mercy and

To all which I answer, If Saints be Judges, they must use none but Saints
Weapons; The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, etc. says Paul. But then I
Query, Are none good or fit to Rule, but such of our Communion? Yes! But though
Such; This interfers not with the Discipline of the true Church; If the Duty of
Office, can be performed by Love, Persuasion, Argument, or by the Authority of
that Power, Christ gives his Church, and that is no Jurisdictive Power, I Am
sure; as appears by the Power he used himself, to any of his Churches (though
some take more, as I Will prove ever I have done) When the two Brothers Quarreled
about their Estate, and applied to him, Who made me a Judge or a Divider, (said
he)* Again, The Woman taken in the Act of Adultery, Go away, do so no more. I
could paraphrase on these two Examples, but Wise Men know the meaning without
it, and it plainly appears he used no Coertion or Punitive Force; and he forbad
it to all his Followers. Judge then! can you serve two Masters? In short, the
Government of Christ, is O economecal in his Church ONLY, and is altogether
Love and Peace, and has no business with any of the Affairs of State, any
further than to Admonish to Justice, etc. But, is it not Strange to see a
States Minister, a Justice of Peace, and a Gospel Minister in one Skin; indeed,
he may have two Cloaks, his Divinity Cloak, and his Humanity Cloak, but then he
must lay by one, when he wears the other. Its not common to wear two great Cloaks
at once; But to be very Exact, he should have three at least, one for the
Pulpit, the other for the Upper House, and the third for the Honorable Bench;
and this Cloak too, must be lined with Stuff called Patience, to bear with all
the Billings-gate Rhetoric, with the Brawls and Hocus Pocus Fiteagues of the
Noisy Bar; And what a fine Show the Pulpit Divine makes amidst the throng of
K(...)s and F(...)s, judge ye.

I look upon this Piece of Politics in our Church, (I meddle with no other) to
be an Innovation, and as great an Abuse to our Profession, as any that ever yet
was Introduced into the Church, from the Apostles to Constantines Time. And
then the Woeful presage was threatened from Heaven, This Day is Poison entered
the Church; I fear our Church too, is Poisoned by the Pill. Why not? the
quality is the same, it must needs then be so, for it is Compounded of the same
Drugs, which makes me, in consideration of our Primitive Innocence, with Wonder
as well as Grief, Sing,

Great God! are these the Fruits of our Profession,
of which so long time we have been only Talking!
How comes it thus to pass we loose Possession
Just by a Counter walking?
It had been better we had never been born,
Then Truth, through us, should ever be made a scorn.
What! must our Sixty Years long Travail all be lost,
Because of some men's Murmurs,
Be made of none Effect, and left at last,
On this side Jordan, for Moabs Tribe to scorn us!
'T were better far in Thraledom we'd expired,
Then loose that Land by us so long desired.
At another time thinking of the Feats and Defeats of War, my Muse Jingled thus,

But what a Noble Plot is Crossed,
And what a great design is lost?
What Time is spent and Money Wasted,
And this great Enterprise is Blasted;
And that which Aggravates the Cause,
There Is some dare not obey their Laws,
And this begets more Civil Wars,
And Mixes with the Churches Jars,
That used to be no Carnal Power;
But if this hold, 'twill all Devour.
Some Folk don't love Music, therefore I Will make an end, and call another
Cause.

Advertisement.
Suppose the Government alter, and we are put upon to raise Two Thousand Pound
more in Direct terms for Defraying Military Expenses only, must we deny or
comply? Here will be the Trial of our skill. If we refuse, the Plea is good
against us; if we comply, we are gone then, sure enough, and no body will
strive to help us

It is an Action never to be forgot, how our Sapienti-potent T. S. busied
himself in flaming Zeal to Caesar, when he rode Post with his Parquet of
Printed Papers, borrowed from G. F. and S. C. (which Papers was but a man of
straw neither) persuading us to pay our Taxes to Caesar, as a Civil Minister,
to punish Evil and favor Good, all which we knew to be our Duty before he was
born. But he inverted the Term, from Civil to Military, and by his Sophistick
turns, and false Logic (for he has a special faculty in Tropes and Figures,
viz. in Elench and Dilemmas, that is) to make his Story and Arguments to hold
both ways; and such persons as were utterly averse to pay for War Uses, he had
such Power, that he over awed their Consciences, and instead of a Gospel
Minister of Peace and Salvation, he is now a Son of Mars, and Minister of State;
and by his Military Lecture Preaches little but War and Destruction. Oh! how
unlike this is to our Primitive Hero's, that left their Swords in the Field, to
make Shares and Coulters of 'em. But, behold! this Mysterious Juggle and Cheat!
after he had with his Charms, amused the poor People, he told them, It was a
nice point; but if they would come to him, he would un^iddle the Mystery; but
though I addressed my self to him, in an humble manner, to know this Nice Point,
as he called it, he ask't me, What I came to him for with my Rattles? Very
unbecoming (I thought) of one that should give an account with Meekness and
Fear, of his Faith. But in stead of this Account, I met with then, and since,
before five or six of our Eldest Members) nothing but Insolent Taunt,
Imperious, Proud, Disdainful Language and Behavior, Yet the Church winks at
it; and instead of Reproving him, and satisfying my tender Scruples, in behalf
of (...) hundred more, I am brought to the Bar, to the Bilboes, and Arraigned
for an Offender, and denied, for no other cause (that I know or ever heard of)
but for opposing T. Story with his high Church Doctrine. It is pretended,
indeed, I did not give him Gospel order; but this is not true neither. But what
Gospel order is there for public Hetrodox Doctrine, Preached before Thousands
of Persons? It was no personal Damage or Trespass, for which that order was
intended, as appears by the Text, and W. P. upon the famous Add ess to
Protestants. But to wipe off all Scruples, and to show how partial, or rather
Maliciously, I was dealt with, I did first go privately to him, and secondly,
by order of the Meeting with five or six, as above, yet from a propensed and
designed Pique, or in plain true terms, Malice (...) (for I can prove I was
Judged six Months before I appeared at the Bar) thinking if I were denied, no
Body would regard what I had to say in my own Defense. Here Is Discipline by a
Scheme! Nova Stilo.

Some Customs, Rules of Discipline and Ceremonies in the Church of
Philadelphia, that are neither Lawful, Moral, Ecclesiastical nor Civil.
AS there is no Society or Corporation, whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, that
want their Rules of Discipline, for the sake of Concord, so these Rules must be
founded on Reason and Conscience, or else the Superstructure will totter and
fall.

What Foundation the following Rules have, let any Church Member demonstrate,
if he can.

If we are sure we are in the Right, and don't condemn our own weak Teaching
and Ceremonies, What can be more fair, than when a man of Conscience, and (for
ought we know as good as theirs that taught us) what we do know, should not by
writing, tell the Church his Opinion, what his Reasons, and wherefore, What is
now taught by the Teacher cannot be found? What! Must we pretend to be
Champions of Truth, and must not suffer her to appear on the Stage, nor be
heard what she has to say for her self, fearing she should fly up in the faces
of such, that would tread her down. To prevent which, all Complaints or
Addresses, of what kind soever, must be First Surveyed by two, three or four
Lisencers or Surrogates, before it will be Admitted a hearing; And these men I
have known to be biased, if not Prejudiced; They take the Paper to a Corner of
the House, and read two or three Periods, Twenty or Thirty Lines, and having a
profound Reach, and deep Sense of the Essential part, only by guess, they
return to the Table and Report, This Paper contains Matter of Charge, not fit
to be read. Let any man of Sense but weigh the Objection; It Is matter of
Charge: This is enough to damn all Complaints; If it be matter of Charge, though
for never so great an Injury done, or for the most Blasphemous Doctrine that
can be taught, and the Wisdom of that Church, who take this for Sufficient
Reason why the Remonstrance or Message, (though a Revelation from God) It must
not be heard, without Lisence of the Confidents, in whose Sense they can repose
their Trust, and act accordingly. Now if this be not Implicit Faith and a blind
Submission, Which is my Right hand? The Meeting agree from a firm Belief and
Reliance on the Abilitys of the Surrogates, take their words for it (being
competent Judges of Faith, Religion, Doctrine, and Conscience too) think it
time ill Spent to hear the Case, though of the greatest moment for this Life; and
next, it must not have a hearing there, without the Manual Stamp of IMPRIMATUR.

Strange Discipline, not unlike SPAIN or ITALY; for they say, See if this Paper
be fit to be read or printed, for which I see no Reason, unless to keep us
Ignorant, like the poor LAY-PAPISTS of LORETTO; for it can be proved to be a
Popish Institution, imitated by the Prelates. And, what! must we take it from
them? Well! but whether they must be read or not, they are commanded to be
brought to the Meeting, to do with them as they think fit; not to be read, but
destroyed and for refusing, to Dis-member. Here Is the rare Discipline Rome all
over; Nay the Inquisition is not above it; And by this Rule I am measured; But
I see nothing ruins the Rule of true Discipline so much as Prejudice,
Partiality and Pride, mixed with Ignorance, the Mother of False Devotion. And
while these Rule in any Church or State, no Wall of Brass can secure the
Innocent from being a Prey to Vultures, Lions, etc. The Plea of Not Guilty,
goes for Nothing, in vain to contend, but be gone, and not suffered to hear my
own Doom. A Criminal has more Justice in any Court of Judicature. No! I must
neither Plead, nor my Papers for me, but are, and were Judged both, (as I can
prove) before we come to the Bar. Well! but the Authority of the Meeting so
Commands my Property and Faith; Is not this a Shameful Upstart, NewFangled,
Tyrannick Ceremony? and to Dissect me for not submitting! Oh, unmerciful
Doctors!

The whole College, ( Pilate and Herod, good friends, too) all agree (though
faintly) but never once tried, whether the Member were found or not, but for
fear it should Fester, cut it off, and many ( I doubt not) believe I am as
sound in the Faith as any Member in the body; Beware of Hypocrisy, I am sure I
am in the Right, and sound too, and am not afraid to Vindicate my Axiom in
flaming Zeal, against all that oppose me, for the honor of Dear Mother that
denis me for it, though I have been her Dutiful Son above these Forty Years (in
all her lawful Commands, and never was justly Chargeable with Immorality, more
than others; (...) better loved) But if she sets up an Arbitrary, Tyrannick
Government, and commands my Forty years Experience of my Knowledge of the
Religion, of my Judgment, my Hope, and Conscience too (which is as Valuable to
me as hers) and say, I must bring them to her Footstool to do as she sees sit.
But here I beg her Pardon, and tell her, her Rule is mine to my self, and I am
as proper a Judge of her Actions, as she is of mine, while I keep to the
Fountain Rule (as she professes) viz. The Spirit of God. But,

We Have some Topping Ladds that bare the Sway,
Steal Mothers Keys, and make us all Obey.
Yes,
Jump over Church Walls, to Helm of State,
Where we must at their Elbows wait;
And what Decrees so e're they make,
We must obey, for Conscience sake.
But more of this in another Sheet, not proper to be exposed at present, nor
never shall, if there be any hopes of a Reformation.

But why she should deny me for denying or opposing Antichristian Doctrine is
the Paradox. She told me in my Youth, she would not allow of fighting nor paying
for 't, she tells me now, by her Son T. Story, Friends, or her Sons, pay for
fighting and killing one another. And if this be not Antichristian, what is?
And if I had not opposed this Doctor and Doctrine, she would not have opposed
me. I wish she would hear these her Sons Remonstrance; she is my Mother still, I
never had any other, nor will, though I Am denied Sonship; not that I beg to be
taken into her Bosom again; No, I Will not come there till she gives better Milk
(this is Bloody) in order to it, I advise to a gentle purge (a strong one will
not hurt) for she wants it; it will make her Limbs to thrive, and beget a
wholesome Constitution; And then I Will down on my Knees to come in Favor again;
till then I Will live as I can; I Am big enough to be weaned, and I can eat strong
meat.

Well! I am Resolved to run the Venture of another Praemunire. She has another
weak side, and I Will tell it to her face; For I have more cause than any of my
Brothers for so doing, Thus Here Is an Old Doctor, a Father in Israel, seeks to
Supplant me of my Birthright privately, but by chance I hear of it; I tell
Mother; she bid me be quiet and still, and she will deal with him; my hands are
tied by Mother, mean while he beats me, gets Judgment at Law (contrary to her
Discipline) against my Estate in New Jersey, worth 20 Pound per Annum, and
another Trick as bad as this, she gives away a Lot of mine in Town worth One
Hundred Pounds. I Complain; But this too must be Submitted to her Surrogates,
and Bonds to hold me fast. They know that no Law, Usage nor Custom can Deprive
me of it, and tell me so, nevertheless I am Trick't out of it, by what Rule or
Authority I never knew yet. But the Church has good Unity with the Award, as
also in another Case of the same nature, and never heard a Word Debated. Oh!
this powerful KEY is enough to Ruin Kingdoms as well as private Families! but I
Complain of this Usage (as loosers will cry) I Would fain appeal to a Superior
Court, from this Award. No! No Appeal. This I call the greatest Monster in the
World. Work or Starve. But who can like this Rule, when Old Age, Weakness and
Want comes? If this be not a Wicked Rule, I know not what is. Now, I Will Appeal
to any, but Wise Men, if I am not an Obedient, Patient Son, to loose Three
Hundred Pounds, rather than displease Mother? I am sure she ought in Conscience
to Redress this Injury, and Regulate the Rule too, least others be Ruined by
it, as well as I. This is a dear Rule to me, and the like not heard of in any
Protestant Church in the World. No Tyrant could do worse (unless to my Life)
and what is my Life, if what should Support it, be taken from me? Better kill me
at once. But here is another Trial for me; after my Vineyard is gone, she takes
away my Vail, and beats me too. Was ever poor Ladd so Buffeted! Yet
notwithstanding this and more, if it could be, I heartily pray for all her
Legitimate Sons and Daughters, as for my own. And if a Thousand deny me on the
(...) of this Account, I shall still hold the same Faith my Mother first taught
me, or that God first gave me and Mother.

One Article more (and a great one) against Mother, Which amongst all her Rules
of Discipline [tho' Scripture afford plenty] she has not one Rule to Regulate
two Capital Sins [next to Murder] and almost Epidemical Sins, viz. Covetousness
and Extortion. It was the business of the Primitive Church to purge out those
Evils from among them, not any Member that for good Conscience sake testified
against Innovation and Corrupt Doctrine, for the First, worse than Heresy or
Idolatry, the Last, worse than the first, Swearing, Drunkenness or Adultry is
Witchcraft, yet no Rule for this unruly Fellow, Except a Declaiming in the
Pulpit. And what avails that, when Practice makes a Virtue of both? Who thinks
it a Sin to advance his Monopoly, or an evil to take Advantage of Necessity or
Ignorance, to buy as Cheap and sell as Dear as possible, Forestalling
Ingrosing, Hoarding up till the next Ship be cast away or retarded? and though
plenty in hand, enough to serve all the Province, yet this happy Hit makes the
Market rise. And who is the first? I that have most, it may be, a Gospel
Minister. Why not? Who will not make Hay while the Sun shines? If he shine no
more, what shall we do, give away the opportunity? No. Salt, etc. rises, it
Costs Two, I must live, and I Will have Five or Six, or keep it, it will be
dearer, and so with other goods. But do we by this convince the World, We hate
Covetousness? No, we persuade 'em we love it, our Practice shows it. What
avails then all Pulpit Provision, when we pay so dear for seasoning it with
Salt? If Domestic Doctrine out-vied our Neighbors, this might fill the Church
with Proselytes. But the best Rhetoric will not do half so well. I think then
it is high time to find a Rule, and Square too, besides a Line, to help on this
Emergent occasion, lest for want of such Rule of Discipline, untaught and
practiced, we loose the way to the Gare, or it be shut against us for want of
timely care.

We Read of a man formerly, that laid House to House, etc. and (...) 'em, and
bid his Soul be quiet, he would enough; yet he was called Covetous. Pray, what
Title or Epitaph shall I bestow on him that Adds, and Builds, and Buys, and
Fills, and will not say it is enough yet, but a Perpetuum Mobile hawls and
pulls with Arms and Skulls, and is not content yet? Was it not a pretty Sight
to behold our Metropolitan See up to the A -- se in Mud, Water and Ice, the
last Winter, fishing for Bags for his Heirs (when he gets 'em) Besides his
other Monopoly, gained by his Pulpie Rhetoric, with his Politic and
Sophestick Turns? But though admired for his great Talent, the time will come he
shall be Dumb, with all the whole Fraternity that belong to the Tribe of
Avarice; And then, and not till then, shall Church Flourish. Our Ancient Gospel
Ministers left their Nets, and never took them more, that we read of. But now,
instead of leaving them, how many take 'em along with them to Catch. What? Men?
No. What then? Bags. Of what sort? Any sort; Gold, Silver, Wheat, Barley, Oats,
Bread, Flower, or any thing that comes to hand. All Is Fish that comes to the
Net.

But what is the Matter, that this Thirty Years we have been fishing, and ha'nt
caught one poor Indian? How should we? We never cast the net on that side the
Ship where they are to be had. New England and N ew-Y ork has out done us, I
understand they have labored hard to bring them to the Faith of Christ, etc.
What have we done? Except two poor honest Fishers, that have left their Nets
and tried once, and caught none yet (I fear) -- This is worth the most Serious
thought of a Gospel Minister.

The Apostle PAUL valued himself for Preaching the Gospel where it was not
heard of; but most of us go where they may be sure of a Belly full, and good
Lodging, and to preach among such as have something to give, and know as much
as themselves. And that is one Reason we get no more Proselytes but what are
spurious. -- I know what Answer I shall have for not preaching to Indians, We
stay for a Motion. And as I cannot disprove this, I cannot prove, (nor they
neither, I doubt) they have the Divine Oracle for preaching to any other; if
they had, some Fruit would be brought forth. But I Will forbear.

I am persuaded Thomas Story, our Apostle, could or would not have been
Tongue-tied so many Weeks or Months, if Providence had not cast him on Sancta
Domingo, (taken by the French coming from Jamaica) where the Name of a QUAKER
was not heard of. I asked him if he Preached there? No, said he. But if he had
had the Oracle for his Commission, which no doubt he pretended to, when he took
the Churches Authority to preach elsewhere; then he would not have been
Silent, besides, his Concern to Travail again on the same (...). But the
obstructions he met with, are obvious, too manny to insert here, and too
Ridiculous or selfish. Here I Degress. But again, Discipline. Pray get a Rule
for this Violent Passion, too common for many Merchants, when a Note is drawn
upon 'em for such Goods, in lieu of Money* I want such Goods, says the person
that has the Note. Why, that is Money, says the Merchant. What Is Goods? Why,
what I can best spare, or get most by; But thy Note must be paid at 25 per
Cent. odds to Cash paid down. This I can prove true, and the ill scent of the
Action stinks all over the Province; yet no notice in Philadelphia for this.

Lastly. Here be some unruly Fellows we want to have Ralied or Punished, but
Partiality, Indulgence or Indifference lets them slip, viz. Sons of Bacchus,
Sparks of Venus, Gamesters and Dancers, But there is hopes of 'em (say they)
they keep to Meeting. This does a little while, till shame comes on the Church,
for want of Discipline But were the Church clothed with that Majesty which
becomes her, her Authority would be seen, in Controuling the Pri vate and Sly
Manners of Men of all Degrees, and strike such a Re verence of her self, merely
by her Spiritual Sword, that it would cut down the most undaunted Delinquents.
Public, Open, Profane Acts, are openly to be Rebuked. It Is better to turn
such out before they bring too much Shame. These are the Folks (our Members)
Mother ought to Chastize. And one dash of Ignominy from her Royal Brow would
make them Tremble; But alas! she presumes Authority to Censure where she has no
Cause or Ground, Bottom or Foundation; and this will (...) her of all Authority
at last; and the Daughters, etc. will langh, and Cry, Ha, Ha, when they hear
what I am turned out of the Synagogue for, and such Sparks kept in as abovesaid.

All these Regulars, that have no Rule, and Canons that have no Law, nor
Christian Custom, are Monsters, and ought to be Banished all Society, both in
Church and State.

But, is not this a Rite that is quite Wrong? when Judgment is gone against me,
I go to the Clerk for a Copy; No not without leave of the Meeting. Where has
this Custom any President, in any Court of Judicature?

Hear two or three more weak Ceremonies, and than Judge of the whole Catalogue.
-- Here Is a Couple wants to be Coupled, one a bare F ormalist, and has no
Religion but Theory, and Traditional; the other a Nonconformist, but has the
Practick part of Solid Religion, and both believers. They, lay their Intents
before the Meeting (only he dissents in some points of Faith) No! we cannot
allow of such Marriages; it interfers with our Discipline. They are baulkt, but
cannot forego their Engagements, nor violate their Nuptial Vows, but they
proceed according to Laws made by the Church Members. A Gospel Minister gives
them a Bill to publish their Marriage; but when it is done, he must or ought to
be present at the Solemnity; but this is against Discipline, for any Member to
witness to a Lawful Marriage. No, if this be suffered, we shall Gallop over all
bounds of Discipline, and the Act must be Censured and Condemned, if Unity be
preserved. What must we do? loose a good Wife or Husband, or not Marry at all;
rather than loose the Unity of the Meeting? Answer this point, and then I have
done.

Now, I modestly offer, Whether it is not high time to Regulate these
irregular, impracticable and unnatural Rules, lest we make our selves
Ridiculous to all Christian Communion? For I do know, they have ruined many a
Man and Woman irretrievably; and some both in Soul, Body and Estate, merely
because they have been forced asunder, after God and Nature had Cemented their
hearts and minds. This of all the foolish Rules is the worst.

But this, with all the rest of the Irregulars, are Judged already (...) the
Supreme Court, where there is neither Prejudice, Injustice, Partiality nor
Passion; Ergo, This, etc. must and will dwindle and Rot, by Degrees, and not
long first, I believe.

I know a Man that loves good Discipline, as well as any body, that had a Son
lately Married, both came to Meeting from their Cradle, but the Woman was
bashful, and would not show herself before the Meeting; they put their Bill up
according to Law, and were decently Married, the Justice a Member of the
Meeting, present, and a great many Relations, all of the meeting abovesaid*
pray over-hawl this breach of Discipline? as much as that Gospel Minister of
the highest Class, that was present at a Marriage of a known Fornicator,
Married by a Justice, I never heard, that any one charged him for breach of
Discipline, nor any other Justice of the Meeting, though present at such
Marriage, but not one of the little Members must Escape, but must condemn the
act, or turn out. -- I shall not further Enlarge at present. But, That I doubt
not but we shall learn better, do better and be better when we mend; But what
will mend us God knows best; it may be a Rod; it used to do it in my time. I
rather wish we might be good without it* But see little hopes of it.

Postscript.
I Thought to have added (as our Custom has been in England this Fifty and odd
Years) a Catalogne of all the sufferers for Conscience sake in this Province,
for not paying to uphold War. But at present, I Will instance two or three
Monstrosities, and leave the Rest until another time.

H. Paxson of Bucks County, who served the Country in Assembly about Twenty
Years, at Times, and had nothing for it, was by Virtue of a Warrant (as he told
me) signed by Joseph Kirkbride, Gospel Minister, States Man and Justice, and
delivered to the Constable ( Tho. Stackhouse, Church Member Assistant) thus
used, he came to demand this Tax, as abovesaid, in the Queens Name, Paxson told
him, it could not be in her Name, she never demanded any; he answered, he must
have it in some body's Name, shows his power, Paxson kindly treats him with
best he had, and when he had filled his Wem, and drank plentifully of good
Cider, he Distrains the Plates he had eat on, and the Tankard he so freely
toped out of, but the Wise begged the Tankard, and bid him take something in
Lieu of it.

Ezra (...) of the same place, Preacher, was committed to the Sheriffs Custody
by the Bench ( I. K. present on the Bench) for Refusing on a Conscientious
Principle to obey their unchristian Orders.

Nicolas Ireland of Chester County, for same cause of Conscience that could not
Pillage and Riffle his Neighbors, on the same foot, as abovesaid, was
committed to Goal, by a Warrant (Enquire if not from Justice Caleb P.) and
there kept, till by Law, was forced to remove himself, and pay his Fine. I ask
my Reader if we did not use to call this Persecution in England? [But this is
more to be noted than all the rest] in any that I have spoke with, and many
more that I have heard of, that at first dared not (for Religion sake) pay this
Tax, yet some through Sinful Cowardlyness, others for sake of Peace (not of
Conscience, but the favor of the Plotters of this Contrivance) and others,
because the poor Constable must otherwise have (...) do (...) though Directly
opposite to Conscience, comply and (...) it (But it may be those formal
Peace-mongers may be disquieted one Day)

But since I Writ my Pamphlet, I Providentialy met with the Elaborate Works of
Divine Dell, who has a place amongst, (...) not (...) our Prints, and highly
Esteemed by good Men for his Excellent Pieces now extant, I am not a little
pleased to see how Concordant we v^e in our Sentiments and Notions of
Church Government, as well as John Milton, a Man no less famous for good sense,
and Contemporaries, besides the Sacred Text and all our ancient Friends, and
lastly and principally the Evidence and Authority of Gods Spirit, that bears me
up against all that Oppose the publishing these Essential points of our holy
Profession, etc. If I had no other Authority, nor any body in the World to
stand by me, this only would, and will, I am sure, support me. And tho I am, by
some that have seen my Work, dissuaded to publish it, I shall not despair of a
Reformation, when it happens into the hands of any not prepossessed; nay, such
wise and good Men too that have Viewed me with a narrow Eye, silently
acknowledge the Truth of which I offer; Nevertheless these Pillars in the
Church are and will be the Atlas's of the State. I don't care, I Will wash my
hands, and leave 'em to the next Revolution, and then we shall see who is the
blackest, they or me.

I little thought Custom would have got such footing in so little time as
Thirty Years; by Custom I mean ill Custom; good Custom seldom holds long;

But the Devil and Self puts in for a snack.
When once it is got footing, 'twill trun the scale back,
Makes me think of our No-Fool J. T. whose lines want (...) Characters, least
our pur-blind Doctors should not ken 'em,

" The Treacherous Mistress Custom first creeps in
" By gentle steps, so sly, she is hardly seen,
" Till fixed by time, an Empire she obtains,
" A Tyrant worse then Nero, then she Reigns;
" Tame Fools assist, their Follies to Increase,
" And Wise Men too often err, for sake of peace.
But what Peace a Wise Man can have in the truckling to known Errors, I wot
not; Yes, the Unity of the Friends and Peace of the Church. But read DELL and
he will tell thee what is the true peace of the true Church, not to Cloak
Innovations and Absurdities, false Doctrine and gross Error: This is my
business to unmask, and I hope I have done it honestly. And this I wot well,
That as Fools do see Wise Men stoop under pretense of Peace, No wonder then
that the Empire of that Cruel Tyrant Custom, is so great, the greatest in all
the World, I dare say. But this I Will tell you that are concerned, That if ye,
like Schoolboys, will play Truant together (I mean out of the School of
Christ) Ye shall be all Whipped together for Company. Think of me when I am gone;
the time is near, that ye shall see (unless ye loose your Eyes) that the nearer
ye get to the State, the further ye get from the true Church.

Ye know your Lord and Master tells ye, You cannot be Heirs to God and Mammon
too. My advice therefore is, To choose while it is in your power, lest when ye
would ye cannot; for its a clear Truth, ye can Rule but in one, properly. But
the Mystery is to make ye believe it; for some men will not be guided by their
knowledge, because of Pre-possession, but will Persuade themselves they see not
that heretofore was as clear to them as the Sun. Wherefore I say, open your
Eyes, and look at this Text, and lay by your Honorable Faculty of the Gown.

The House of God is his Church, and the Body of Christ is his Church; the
Church is Subject to Christ. Now am I not Homogeneal with that Body to whom I
am joined? To be joined to two bodies is a Monster. And if the house of God be
his Church, can any Man join himself (Homologically speaking) to both Houses,
viz. Church and State too? Lastly, If the Church be subject to Christ, Pray
whose Subjects are ye? You Will answer, To Both. Well then, if this Plea will do,
go on in the Name of George King of Great Britain; for his Servants ye are and
good Subjects too.

I conclude with Devine Dell, in his Book, called, The way of true Peace and
Unity in the true Church of Christ. His first Practical Rule, Thus, The true
Curch is to preserve it self Distinct from the World, and is neither to mingle
it self with the World, nor suffer the World to mingle it self with it; for if
the World and the Church be mingled together in one Society, the same Common
Laws will no more agree to them who are of such contrary Natures, Principles
and Ends, then Light and Darkness, Life and Death.

His second Rule. The Church being thus distinct from the World, it is to be
content with its own power for its own Affairs. But that the Affairs of the
State belong to the Church of Christ or any of the true Members, is the point
in controversy. Let the Learned Answer this, and perhaps it may save me the
Labor of penning another Thesis, to Prove that the People called Quakers have
no more to do in the State, than the State has to do in their most Solemn
Meetings.

By the State let the unlearned know, it is the Worlds Power, the Civil
Magistrate that bears not the Sword in vain, not the Sword of the Spirit, for
that belongs to the true Church, and no other.

FINIS.

