THE Churches Quarrel ESPOVSED, OR, A REPLY In Satyr, to certain Proposals
made, in Answer to this Question, What further Steps are to be taken, that the
Councils may have due Constitution and Efficacy in Supporting, Preserving and
well Ordering the Interest of the Churches in the Country?

1 Kings 18.27. Elijah Mocked them.

Tit. 1.13. Wherefore Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith.

Abjiciendus Pudor, Quoties urget Necessitas.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in N. York, 1713.

Question and Proposals.
Question.
WHat further Steps are to be taken, that the Councils may have due
Constitution and Efficacy in supporting, preserving and well ordering the
Interest of the Churches in the Country?

1st Part, It was proposed,
1 st, That the Ministers of the Country form themselves into Associations,
that may meet at proper times to Consider such things as may properly lie
before them, Relating to their own faithfulness toward each other and the
common Interest of the Churches; and that each of those Associations have a
Moderator for a certain time, who shall continue till another be chosen, who
may call them together upon Emergencies.

In these Associations,

2 dly. That Questions and Cases of importance, either provided by themselves
or by others presented unto them, should be upon due deliberation Answered.

3 dly. That advice be taken by the associated Pastors, from time to time, e're
they Proceed to any action in their Particular Churches, which be likely to
produce any imbroilments. That the associated Pastors do Carefully and Lovingly
treat each other with that watchfullness which may be of Universal advantage,
and that if any Minister be accused to the Association whereto he belongs, of
Scandal or Heresy, the Matter shall be there examined, and if the Associated
Ministers find just accusation for it, they shall direct to the calling of the
Council, by whom such an Offender is to be proceeded against.

4 thly. That the Candidates of the Ministry under-go a due Trial by some one
or other of the Associations concerning their Qualifications for the
Evangelical Ministry, and that no particular Pastor or Congregation Employ any
one in occasional Preaching who has not been Recommended by a Testimonial under
the hands of some Association.

5 thly. That they should together be consulted by Bereaved Churches, to
Recommend to them such Persons as may be fit to be employed amongst them for
present Supply, from whom they may in due time proceed to choose a Pastor.

6 thly. That hereunto may be referred the Direction of Proceeding in any of
their particular Churches about the Convening of Councils that shall be thought
necessary for the Welfare of the Churches.

7 thly. That the Several Associations in the Country maintain a due
Correspondence with one another, that so the state of Religion may be the
better known and secured in all the Churches, and particularly it is thought
necessary to the well being of these Churches, that all the Associations of the
Country meet together by their Respective Delegates once in a year.

8 thly. And finally, That Ministers Disposed to Associate endeavor in the
most Efficacious manner they can, to Prevail with such Ministers as
unreasonably neglect such Meetings with their Brethren, in their proper
Associations, that they would not expose themselves to the Inconveniences that
such Neglects cannot but be attended withal.

Second Part, It is proposed.
1 st. That these Associated Pastors, with a proper Number of Delegates from
their several Churches, be formed into a standing or stated Council, which
shall Consult, Advise and Determine all Affairs that shall be proper matter for
the Consideration of an Ecclesiastical Council within their respective Limits,
except always, the Cases are such as the Associated Pastors judge more
convenient to fall under the Cognizance of some other Council.

2 dly. That to this end these Associated Pastors, with their Respective
Churches, shall Consociate and Combine according to what has been by the Synods
of these Churches recommended, that they act as Consociated Churches in all
holy Watchfulness and Helpfulness toward each other, and that Each Church
choose and depute one or more to Attend their Pastor, as Members of the Council
in their Stated Sessions, or Occasionally, as Emergencies shall call for.

3 dly. That these Messengers from the several Consociated Churches shall be
chosen once a year at the least.

4 thly. It is propounded, as that which from our beginning has been
Recommended, that the Churches, thus Consociated for these purposes, have a
stated time to meet in their Council, and once in a year seems little enough,
that they may Inquire into the Condition of the Churches, and Advise such
things as may be for the Advantage of our holy Religion. But the more
particular time is best left to the Determination of each respective
Association.

That the Associations shall Direct when there is Occasion for this Council to
convene, on any Emergency, and shall direct whether the whole, or only a
certain Number of these consociated Pastors and Churches shall Conveen on such
Occasions.

It appears agreeable to the present Condition of our Churches, and from our
beginnings acknowledged, That no Act of the Councils are to be reckoned as
Concluded and decisive, for which there has not been the Concurrence of the
Major part of the Pastors therein concerned.

7 thly. The determinations of the Councils thus Provided, for the necessities
of the Churches, are to be looked upon as final and decisive, except agrieved
Churches and Pastors, have weighty Reasons to the contrary, in which cases
there should be Provision for a further hearing; and it seems proper that the
Council convened on this occasion, should consist of such Pastors as may be
more for number then the former, and they should be such, as shall be directed
to, and convened for this purpose by the Ministers of an Association, near to
that whereto these of the former Council belonged, unto which the agrieved
should accordingly apply themselves, and in this way expect a final Issue?

8 thly. If a particular Church will not be Reclaimed by Council from such
gross Disorders as Plainly hurt the common Interest of Christianity, and are
not mere tolerable differences in Opinion, but are plain Sins against the
Command and Kingdom of our Lord JESUS Christ, the Council is to declare that
Church no longer fit for Communion with the Churches of the Faithful; and the
Churches represented in the Council, are to Approve, Confirm and Ratify the
Sentence, and withdraw from the Communion of the Church that would not be
healed: Nevertheless if any Members of the disorderly Church do not justify
their Disorders, but suitably testify against them, these are still to be
received to the wonted Communion by the Churches; and if after due waiting, the
Church be not recovered, they may upon [ advice] be actually taken in as
Members of some other Church in the vicinity.

These Proposols were Assented to by the Delegates of the Association, met
according to former Agreement, at B -- September 12 th, 1705. To be commended
to the several Associated Ministers in the several parts of the Country, to be
duly Considered, that so, what may be judged for the service of our Great
Lord, and his holy Churches, may be further Proceeded in.

At an Association-Meeting the foregoing Proposals were Read and Assented to,
etc. Present, Nov. 5. 1705
THE Epistle Dedicatory To the Fraternity of the Churches In the New England
Colonies.
Truly honorable, and beloved in Christ;
IT is not from any Disrespect or for want of Honor to the Reverend Eldership
and Pastors of your several Communities, that I apply my self more immediately
and thus abruptly to your selves in this Dedication. But for that it seems most
agreeable with my present Province. The privileges of the Fraternity being so
peculiarly the Theme and subject of my pains, I esteem it very proper to
Introduce my following Essays, with a few words of Advice more directly to your
selves, if you may be thence moved and encouraged to assist for the support of
Christ's and your own Interests. I desire to be without offense to any, and Pray
that all such Worthy Persons, wise and faithful Pastors in these Churches (who
are as much obliged by their office to stand by and defend the Established
Interest and Rights of them as I am, and far more capable) will interpret my
whole Action in the most favorable Sense. And though I have not with the Noble
Cortius leapt into a Chasm made in the forum; yet I have ventured to step into
the Gap, to keep the Breach, till (...) hands come up, for the Service of my
Country, and in Defense of their sacred Liberties; so that I hope many of you
will come in with a new supply and Recruit of Courage and Argument when and
where mine fails; and for the present I presume none of you will be offended,
though I do thus Immediately address the Churches over which you preside, with
the following Principles of their Interest and Duty wraped up each in other.
Then

Honorable Brethren!

1 st. In general my Advice is to you, That in good order and with all
Gracefulness which becomes Wise Men, you will with Zeal, Courage and
faithfullness, Stand in the Defense of and Maintain your Church Libertys; God
certainly obliges you to do it, with all the discretion and bravery of Spirit,
which becomes freemen, in withstanding Vassalage or a Servile State, Gal. 5
1.13. Stand fast therefore in the Liberties, wherewith Christ was made us free,
and be not Entangled again with the Yok of Bondage: The Plea is as forcible
against a Christian as a Jewish Thraldom. For Brethren, ye have been called
unto Liberty. I must acknowledge I have no particular Prejudice against any of
the Governments of Christian Protestant Churches in the World, so as to defraud
or dispossess any of them of Heaven; or Monopolize so great a Royalty to our
own; But yet I am of this opinion, considering the just Title of the Crown, the
Churches, the People, the Capacity of Soil and Climate together, That the
Constitution and Way of New England Churches cannot be mended by Exchange.

Briefly to Instance in the Civil part, or Interest of the Crown, I think it is
very easy to evince, by the Precepts both of Religion and Policy, That the
Parliament (that wise and August Council of the Nation) could not have invented
an Establishment in Church Order, more for the service of the Imperial Crown of
the British Empire than our present Constitution, especially in such a Country
and Climate as this is.

I shall not now any ways enter upon the Question, but only give just a short
hint as to the Revenue. Our Present Constitution does indeed, somewhat more
then Sip; It takes an honest Healthful Draught at Natures Fountains, but leaves
the flowing streams for Empire to sit at till filled with saciety.

The Ecclesiastics in some Kingdoms in Europe are ready not only to chide with
Crowned heads, but to take them by the throat, and wring out of hands, if not
almost a Moity, yet a vast share of the golden Fleeces that should supply the
Public Treasuries, and cloth the Nakedness of the Kingdoms, and the People
have no more wit but to Justify and defend them in their Claims and
Oppressions, and that till they themselves (in great Numbers) are as thin and
raged as Penury it self; for by their Rules of adjustment, when the Church has
gotten an Unconscionable share, Then the Crown or Subject must be almost
starved; for there is not left a sufficient and plentiful supply for both.

But now our New England Constitution is very fair-mannered; for when it sits
down to the Staled Ox (made ready) it carves Temperately and (wit-hout much
Defacing) Leaves the whole to Empire to make its Armies and Navies, with the
rest of its needful and unwearied Servants welcome. That in Loyalty to your
Prince, and for the support of the Royal Revenue, you may Justly preserve your
Freedoms.

Let us also Consider the best Good of a whole People.

It is most certain, true Grace is the one thing needful, and the main concern
for the Improvement of the Powers both of Prince, Noble and Peasant, and though
Grace be of that nature that it will grow (after a fashion and in some sort of
soil) almost under any Government, Yet it is most agreeable with Laws of Piety
and Wisdom (for the good of all in general (to choose and secure that
Constitution and form of Government that is most a greeable, and which most
naturally breeds it, and in greatest Plenty.

By the suffrage of our Nation, that Government which sensibly Clogs Tyranny,
and Preserves the Subject free from slavery, under the ambition of men of great
Fortune and Trust, is the only Government in the state, to advance men's temporal
Happiness; and we in the Country Honor the Resolve in Civil Affairs, and also
affirm (upon great Experience) that such a Constitution in Church Government is
(also) the only way to advance Grace and man's Eternal Happiness; and we are the
more Ratifyed in our Opinion, for that the experiment has on the other hand
been tried, with a Witness, in almost all Kingdoms of the Christian World, and
the first, by Disseising the Fraternity of all Interest in Church Government,
only they have had the liberty to be Governed with a Hook in their Nose (like
wild Cattle in a string) by the mercy and pleasure of their Drivers; but as for
any share in the Exercise of Government, they have had no more, than the Horses
in the Royal Stables, for that their Spiritual Owners having Seized all the
Keys of Church Power, they profess no Dividend shall be made, and also they
themselves being Uncontrollable by any, and unaccountable to any, unless it be
to Christ himself, as they pretend; Though I believe, thousands of them never
Expect to meet with him, nor think that he ever will audit any Accounts of
theirs.

But however, for the comfort and glory of the Present Life, the whole
Government of the Spiritual Kingdom, in all its Branches, and with its Immense
Profits, has Established theirs. But this sort of Discipline, has sunk great
part of the Christian World, as many times over, as Ages have past, since it
has been Intailed Universal Rector, and where it has kept absolute possession
of the Throne.

And must the Waves and present Currants fit and waste these Churches toward
those Rocks and ship-wracks, whilst we have such good hands and Pilots on
board? God forbid!

Therefore let these Churches and the noble Fraternity of them, Stand their
Ground, Keep fast hold of what you got, Rev. 3.11. hold that fast which thou
have, that no man take thy Crown.

Hold your hold Brethren! Et validis Incumbite Remis, Pull up well upon your
Oars, you have a Rich Cargo and I hope we shall escape Shipwreck; for according
to the latest observation if we are not within fight, yet we are not far from
Harbor; and though the noise of great Breakers, which we hear, Imports hazard,
yet I hope daylight, and good Piloting will secure all.

More Particularly I ask your Patience with Liberty (still for your service) to
make the few following Distinct Petitions.

I. Petition.
Honorable Brethren!
WOuld you know what you are, and who you are, in the more ample and Heroic
Sense of your state?

It is certainly very agreeable with Grace, for the upright, sometimes to shift
Ideas, and change such as are mournful; for those which bear a bright aspect in
their condition, otherways they may rob God of the Glory of the best part of
his Grace and Bounty, and dis-inable their own strength, for some of the most
important Service they are called to in the World; therefore Nehemiah plucks up
his Courage and says, Should such a Man as I flee? as though he should say, he
knew himself owner of too many great Endowments and Intrustments, to be so
little as to run for it, or be dreaded with such an Alarm. Neh. 6.11.12.

So Brethren, Imagine your selves to be something more than Ordinary; for
Really you be so; and that as you are a Gospel Combination, and Collectively
Considered.

What! the best men of our Country, who form our Courts and Command our Armies,
that makes the Figure and Casts the true luster (by their great Wisdom and Real
Accomplishments) in all great shows and Appearances, Must all these be made
null or Buried in a Miosis (as is frequently Enacted by Ambition) for the sake
of some inferior Members in a Fraternity? which is as much as to say, in State
Affairs, because Cobblers stalls or Orange Sellers Baskets afford no states men,
Ergo, none to be found; or because that in many great Counties there may chance
to be an hundred Knaves, and twice the number of Fools, Ergo there be no
Legales Homines, Lawful men, fit for Juries; no men fit for Burgesses or
Knights of the shire, to be found to make Parliament Men? and so the Kingdom
must needs loose all its Ancient Rights by Default And whether or no such
Observations as these, that are so very Conclusive, as you see, may stand for
better Law and Logic in the Churches then in the Empire?

But if of equal force in each Constitution, then Whether this is not the way
to inter and bury the Glory of the Empire and Churches in their own Rubbish,
whilst we Incapassitate the Heroes of both by an Argument a minori ad Majus,
viz. by inferring the Insufficiency of the great and wise, because of the mean
and base mingled in the same Communities.

II. Petition.
THat you will put such an Estimation and value on your Church Liberties as the
English do on their Civil. And this is but a very reasonable Request, if you
consider the Differing Treasuries under custody, viz. Immortal Souls on the one
hand, and outward Fortunes on the Other.

Many of you Know the storys (possibly better than I can recite them) which
tell us what Ship Loads of Blood and Treasure those Civil Things have cost the
English World; and how near they still lie to English men's hearts. And many of
you being immediate Successors, cannot but be very sencible what these
New England Liberties have Cost your Progenitors, some of them having buried
their Estates, and all of them their Bones in these Foundations, and left you
now in Possession, that if you should put Contempt upon their Adventures, their
Courage, Wisdom, Zeal and Self-denial, by under-Prizing these Inestimable
Infranchizements, and fight them as though they were now to be Endorst by your
own hands with Hezekiah's Nehustan, God may then put you to learn the Worth of
them at that School where they Learnt it; and I am sure you will pay dear for
your Tutoring if it comes to that.

III. Petition. Honor and Oblige your Pastors and Public Ministry.
IT is certain they are very great Articles in the Reasons of your well being,
Mat. 5.13.14. They make all things more Savory, and to go down with a better
Relish; Yea, they alter Tragedies and Comedies into a more grateful
Entertainment. What is all the Glory in the World without the Gospel Purity
Dispenc't, and its most Refined Influence? These are the Light of the World,
and carry the Lanthorn aloft in the dark night of your Travels, through the
tempestuous Ocean of a Miserable Life, to direct all to a safe Landing at last.

Indeed, I must acknowledge, your Ministers, when sound and faithful, are to be
accounted and esteemed amongst the best of your Friends, though when Currupt and
Prejudiced, the worst of your Enemies.

I think the Devil himself, and the World of his accomplices, cannot do you the
damage, They may upon a Revolt. That I beg you will be Curious and careful of
your Interest Imbark't and Deposited there.

And without making any scruple (in the Main) they are your hearty and faithful
Servants. Endeavor to increase their Love, and let them see and feel you have
a double honor for them for their works sake. And if after all your repeated
Grace and Goodness, they will desert and betray you, they shall then Incur a
double Guilt, both by Transgressing the Laws of Gratitude to you, and of
Loyalty to their great Lord.

And I assure you, Sirs, I should upon such Terms be very loath to share in
their Tryumphs, though their gains should be seemingly great, and their signals
and shouts equal with the Caesar's of the World in their going off.

IV. Petition. Furnish your Churches with Ruling Elders!
THe nature of the Office is not only agreeable with your Frame, and exacted by
your Principles, but indeed carries safety and Protection in it to your
Liberties; such Trustees are not liable to Curruption, as other Officers, in
that you do (as it were) transmit and entrust them with your very Principles of
self-Preservation, which are of that nature as never to alter their Sentiments,
unless it be in the Dissolution of the subject, when all falls together. The
Office seems a Creation, where your just and regular sympathies, and
Antipathies center by the Laws of nature; that what you love, they love; what
you hate, they hate; and being Ex Officio, of the standing watch and Guard,
they will peculiarly Personate your selves upon every notable Crisis, and
naturally Caring for your Affairs, will, like wakeful Sentinels, curiously and
with Courage guard your Liberties.

Let Churches which are numerous and fuller of eminent Gifts, lead the way, and
then excite and provoke their sister Churches to such Love and good Works for
the advance of the Common Cause. There are without doubt, in these Churches,
many private Members, worthy Persons, suittably qualified for this Office, who
(like some Edge-Tools heedlesly left to Rust out in oblivien) lie hid, yet,
when found, and put to use, will prove themselves truly Eminent.

Let Christ's Churches seek amongst their neglected Hoards; for they are,
without doubt, Church by Church, far Richer then they make for; There are,
Indeed, Complaints of great Poverty, and of a Dearth and Scarcity of suitable
men. But I presume it is done with great Injustice; and Complaints of this
nature in these Churches, are but the Complaints of Servants that are full fed;
and Relieve no case by Complaining, but rather Reflect dishonor upon their
good Master, who has bought all and bestowed enough, and also incur blame to
themselves for not Improving those Talents for the advance of his Exchequer,
which they themselves have wrapped up in a Napkin, and that in this case, by too
much Symbolizing with the Carnal and Politic Men of the world, who to humor
some by-ends (under the Masquerade of Indigent Persons) make themselves very
poor, though God has given them great Riches, Prove 13 7. This is a true (though a
serious Affirmation) That in our Constitution and Principles, there is as plain
a Precept, if not as great a Reason for this Officer, as for any other in our
Churches; and yet, as to matter of fact, we find it to be rara Avis in Jerva,
like a blak Swan in the Meadow; and though the whole species is not quite rooted
out, yet it is grown very rare to find one Individual.

Now the fault must be some where, and I am Satisfied, our Poverty is least to
blame.

That some body or another must needs be Culpable, on the Account of this great
omission, may I without offense issue out search and inquest, to know who is to
blame, upon this failure whether Brethren, or Public Officers, or whole
Churches?

I. Private Brethren.
MAy not the blame be laid in some Cases and in some Churches, upon some very
capable Christian Gentlemen, who though not Encumbered (for the Public) with any
other Incoherent service, yet are possibly too shy of this Trust, when offered
to them? It must needs be acknowledged, the Office is almost Perfectly a piece
of Mortification and Self-denial; there is no provision in it to feed Ambition,
or feast any other Lust; all is full of watching and Painfulness, and the
Reward and Wages quite out of sight. But how ever in such Examples, whether
Persons so qualified and so called ought not to comply, or themselves hear the
Blame.

2 dly The Terms of Christ's Kingdom are very strict and Rigorous, for the
Honor of his own Crown, when our Just Titles are Competitors, and he lays the
Conditions of our Obedience, upon a great forfeiture, if we don't submit, when
called to Duty, Matthew. 10.37, 39.

2. Public Officers.
MAy not the Ordained Officers, in some Cases and in some Churches, be taxed or
blamed, for this great Omission? such as out of Trimidity and Distrust, Jealous
Ruling Elders, least they should instead of Colleagues prove Corrivals in the
Exercise of their own Trust and Authority, for being men not of such deep
learning, yet may prove so fortified with Friends, and so popular, as that they
may be capable to overtop men of greater Learning, and wiser Principles of
Conduct in all Administrations.

Now if any of Christ's Churches are vacated of this Officer by such Jealousies
as these, or of the like nature, can the officers be without Blame? and if so,
then whether the first born Son may not justly Imprecate future Barreness on
his own Mothers Womb, for fear lest he should be supplanted of the Inheritance,
by the next Son or Brother born of the same ventre?

2 dly Such Officers as may plead their own particular Conscience and (...),
against the Office, as being of a doubtful Original, or of an uncertain
Institution, and therefore make bold to over Rule our plain Precept for it, and
the Church submits: whether is not a great Blame here?

It seems apparent by all Rules of Order and Government, That this is too to
sovereign in the one, and too Servile and Careless in the other.

For that no Officers particular Conscience must be a Rule to govern any
particular Church, contrary to the Churches own Law, or Rule of Establishment;
For if it be, then the Churches must have as many distinct Charters and
Differing Books of Canons, as their Pastors have Differing Consciences; which
is a plain inlet to all Sorts of Confusion.

3 dly Such Officers who plead the custom of the Churches, and so make the
Illegal Omissions of some, a sanctuary for the same Fault in others; but
whether this Plea from Custom will hold Officers exempt from blame, when
weighed in a Just Balance? Custom is Justly allowed a great Conqueror in the
World, it subdues whole Kingdoms to its Empire, and all men submit and adhere
to its Demands and Dictates, as to an Oracle? But then it must be Custom that
is Honorable, Laudable, and Uninterrupted, otherways a Custom which
continually crosses a plain Precept is very Culpable, and contracts a long
series of Guilt, and may expect to be persued with a tedious train of sad
Consequence, although it should with much presumption wipe its mouth and say, I am
Innocent. Therefore custom is no Plea in this case, but rather renders all who
depend upon it, to be reduced to a Desperate Posture in their thoughts and
Arguments; for though there is a Customary Omission, that has prevailed in the
Churches to a fad Degree, as to this Office, yet the Omission has all a long
crossed a Precept, and has been Confronted by the Custom of other Churches in
the Land, who have attended their duty; so that those Churches who have
Maintained the Practice have kept lawful possession of the Right, and the Title
being matter of Record, and founded in Law, there Remains no shelter here from
Custom for Delinquints.

4. Whether those Officers are Justifiable, who honor the Office, yet do
honestly and uprightly think that the narrow Extent of Territory may (as to
many Churches) serve as a supersedeas to the Office? For what need of so many
great Commissions in so small Bodies? But whether small Churches have not great
Work belonging to them, sufficient to Improve a full Complete set of Officers,
and possibly, all little enough to do the work Well, if the nature and extent
of it be rightly considered and faithfully managed; for who is sufficient for
these things?

3. The Churches.
WHether the Churches, as incorporate Bodies, are free from Blame when they
don't Regularly endeavor to complete themselves in all Offices, and prosecute
their Claim to this with Effect?

The Ruling Elders are the Churches Previledge, and a very great Right, on
which their well-being and stability does much depend, and the great Omission
in the Country has probably brought things to that posture of sickleness as we
now find them at? then whether the Churches can be exempt from Blame, when they
suffer such vacancies to continue, when it is in the Power of their hands to
Remedy it?

Here indeed is a great Question Commencing, viz.

Question 1. Whether any Church can Possibly, and according to Rules of Order,
Proceed to elect Ruling Elders, when other of their Officers in actual Rule and
Trust, shall refuse to call and Guide the Church in the Choice?

I shall indeed Transgress the bounds of my own intentions, and the Civility of
an Epistle, if I should now undertake a full and complete answer to this
Question.

I shall therefore at present only just Index the Principal Titles or Heads for
Answer, by Pointing briefly at the Duties of Officers, and the prerogatives of
the Churches in the Case.

1. It is most apparent through the whole Ministry of the World (unless in
absolute Monarchies) that it is the duty of all Public officers to Minister
according to the plain Rules of the Public state, and not by their own Fancy
or Wills, and so in this case, the chief Ruling Officers (then in being) In
point of Conduct are obliged to lead the Church in their Operations, according
to the Churches plain and settled Principles, And not reluct because their own
persuasions do otherwise incline them* It is now plainly too late for any
Officer to pretend Conscince against Established Rules: This Objection should
have been made before they had taken Office. But now it is out of Season, for
they were Elected and Ordained to Govern the Church not by their own thoughts,
as the Rule, but by the Churches Cannon, and that by their own consent, when
they took Office. And moreover, this is most evident, that if such Powers which
belong to the inside of men's being, viz. their Hearts, Phansies, Notions,
Judgments, Imaginations or Consciences, call them by what names you please, or
let the Owners freely fix the Titles (the odds is not great) Now if these are
to be the Rule of Churches, then Pastors and Ruling Officers have (in their
degree) as absolute a Dominion over the Churches, as the great Turk has over
his Bashaws, and other Vassals.

But I hope, none here will claim this Dominion. And if not, then let Pastors
and Teachers do their Duty in point of Conduct (if the Churches are not Remiss
in theirs) and this great vacancy may be soon supplied, and there is also a
Relief for Officers, if their just prerogatives are any ways touched by the the
Traverse.

2 dly. To Confine the discourse to this present Example, and to shorten terms,
for brevities sake, it must be granted, that any particular Officer sensible of
his duty, that shall undertake to gratify and lead the Church, in the Election
and choice, etc. This makes the case very easy in point of Conduct* Yea, though
other Officers in the same Church should either oppose or not act. For that any
one Officer in a Church, where there may be many of the same nature, he himself
is vertually the whole College of Officers in any Office-Act that he performs
without them. As in civil Affairs, a particular Executor so far sustains the
whole Executorship, as that he can make a vallid Act in that Ministry, though
many others are joined with him in the same Testament, and yet don't nor will not
Act with him, in this or that affair, though confirmed in their Trust; which
Principle is founded in the nature of a joint Tenancy in general, and in a
joint Trust in particular, held by many Equals.

3 dly. The case is very difficult when the standing Officers join as one man,
and will not guide the Church in these Elections referred to, etc. And I must
needs say, I fear here has been the great bar to this Office.

We may from Interest, as well as Duty, Rationally suppose the Inclinations of
the Churches, and the desires of many of them have been made known by repeated
and honorable Solicitations, therein, saying to Arcipus, Fulfill thy Ministry
Co. 4.17. and we may also affirm, the Principle is plain, the Office is
acknowledged, at home and abroad to be of Divine Original. but however this is
certain, it is a formal establishment by these Churches, and not now to be
Disputed. Yet the Officers pretend, they see no Reason to give way to the
Churches Desire or Demands, neither will the conduct in this Case, though their
Duty does oblige, that so the Church may be completed in its Officers; No!
they are pleased by Acts of a Superintending Power, to lock the Church Door,
and turn this Key against the Office, and no Pleas or Persuasions can alter
their resolutions. But hereby the Officers do plainly abdicate their Office, by
changing the Acts of a limited trust, bounded by precept into what is merely
Abitrary; so in a Decree, they break up the Relation between themselves and the
Church, And by such an Essential Error so contrary to the Churches Charter and
their own Commission they forfeit all at once, though Lenity and Mercy may
favor them with a long life; Yet in the Eye of Justice they are Dead men, if
not in nature yet in Law, And upon their OBSTINACY may justly be DEGRADED.
Therefore in such a case, when it comes to that Extremity, the Churches may and
ought to call in Council and Proceed in their work and Duty for their own Well
being, after the manner of an Inorganick Church Platform, Chap. 10 and this I
need not stand to discribe, our Platform, The Laws of the Province and the
Practice of the Churches in other Cases, and vacancies will do it.

Then whether these Congregational Churches through these Provinces may not
justly reflect Blame upon themselves, for too Supine and negligent a frame of
Spirit, toward so Great an Interest, and so noble an Office, seeing they have
such a share in Government, and can fairly Rescue themselves and their own
Rights, by the Power and Principles of their own Essence, when their other
Officers neglect Duty?

V. Petition.
THat you will please to Revise the study (and in order to it) a New impression
of your Platform.

It is very usual for many Gentlemen in your Country, Landed men, and men of
Estates, every man to keep his Law-Book by him, as his Bible, the Bible for the
solace of his Mind, and the Law-Book for the safety of his Estate, that upon
any Defamation of Title, or other Encroachments, when his Lands and Properties
are in hazard, he may know whither to repair for his Direction, and how to make
his Defense. And so methinks it should be with the Members of the Churches, as
to their stated Rights by their Cannon Law! That there should be a kind of a
Penalty (if the hazard in such a defect be not punishment enough) on such
Delinquents, as live Members of Christ's visible Kingdom here, and yet live
without the Platform, the Ecclesiastical Political Charter of these Churches.

I must needs say, and I wish I could whisper it so low that the Echo might
never Rebound to Gath or Askelon, and yet be distinctly heard through these
Churches) That I fear the Impression of the Platform is almost Extinct, if not
quite worn out in the Country. And that as it was said in the day of Battle,
under King Saul, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of
any of the People, so here, though your Bible, which is the sword of the spirit,
is in every man's hand yet possibly, this Spear or necessary weapon, in the
defense of your Gospel Liberties, is scarce to be found in the hands of one in
a Thousand, through all the host of Israel. I do therefore advise my Country, and
these Churches, to furnish your selves, and that you would encourage the
Stationers, in this Design, and they can soon Recruit you. My Honorable and
Dearest Friends!

If we are push't on to Battle, and our Weapons then in the Oar, we may Justly
suspect we shall be but too easy and cheap a Conquest for Assailants. Therefore
furnish your selves in good time with this piece of Artillary, that you may be
well fixed and equipt for Service.

Don't you hear from the top of yonder Proud and Lofty Mountain, the Enemies
Trumpets, and their Drums Beating a Preparative? Therefore let all the good
Soldiers of Christ be Complete in this and all other parts of their Armor,
and at an hours warning, unless you reckon your Treasure not worth Defending.

VI. Petition.
WHether it may not be very proper for these Churches, after so long an
Interval to Admit of this Address, viz That they will please to meet or
Represent themselves in a Provincial or General Synod?

That if there be any thing in our Church Government which may want Emendation,
that (as they say) it may be done, Secundum usum sarum, or Regularly and
according to the manner of these Churches; or if there be any new forms,
needful to be Incerted, or whatever else may in a way of order be thought
necessary for the Advance of Religion, it may be fairly decided for the service
of the whole. And also, if it shall then be judged Prudent, our Principles for
the Seizing, and Trial of the more ungovernable, and stouter sort of
Delinquents and Offenders, may be Revised, and somewhat enlarged, that so it
may be made very easy for all particular Churches, to make out processes
against them, and that they shall find the Churches Fetters will hold them.
That forever after all small Juncto's of Men, or particular Persons, Member or
Members of the Churches (let their Character and Capacity be what it may be)
shall be deterred from being so hardy and bold as to Divulge their Pernicious
Doctrines, and seditious Sentiments, with such Presumption, and such hopes of
Impunity, as some of late have done.

Thus, Right honorable and beloved in Christ!

I have nothing more at present to add by way of Petition to your selves, but
only that you will please to take this poor piece of Service in good Part.

And though it be but as a little Goats Hair, or a Badgers hide, or two Skins
(not well dressed) yet it may be some way useful for the Tabernacle. And tho it
will not shelter against storms of great shot, it may serve to cover and shield
from some slighter Arrows.

But let it be what it may be in every other man's opinion, it is in mine (as to
design and Intention) my Love, Honor and Loyalty to my God, Prince and
Country, for whose Service I was born, according to the Received maxim, Non
soli nobis nati sumus. And here I pay one part of my Debt to those great
Creditors in such specie as I have; Therefore I hope for pardon from, and
acceptance with all of them.

My Conclusion is with Devoutest Application to the Supreme Throne, that the
Almighty God will bless the Great ANNE, our Wise and Protestant Princes,
New-Englands Royal Nurse and great Benefactress, that she may live to see all
the Protestant Churches through her vast Empire, more virtuous and more united,
and as they all meet and Center with their Differing Persuasions, by their Love
and Loyal Actions in her Person and Government, Let her Most Excellent Majesty,
next to Christ, continue absolute in her Empire over their hearts, and as she
has made such a complete Conquest, of all Differing Parties within her
Dominions, by her wise and virtuous measures, and thereby won all the Fame of
Rule and Soveraignity from her Royal Progenitors, who could never so charm such
Migthy Nations. Let her Reign continue the exactest Model for all Courts in
Europe! and when she is full Repleat and satisfied with Length of days, and the
most Glorious Effects of a Prosperous Reign, let God favor her Lasting and
flourishing Name with an Unperishing Monument, on which Justice shall become
Obliged to inscribe this Memento, viz. Here lies in Funeral Pomp, the Princess
of the Earth, the Storehouse of all Enobling and Princely Perfections, That if
all the Monarchs on Earth, have lost their Excellencies, their Arcana Imperii,
their State, Wisdom, Skill in Government, and all Sorts of Heavenly, Princely
and Heroic Virtues, Here they may be found lodged in this One Vnparalled
MONARCH.

Let GOD Bless his Excellency, and Preserve the Government of the Province, and
let it continue always in the hands of Natives, and let our Country
Successively breed men of such Merit as shall always Enamour Imperial Majesty
with their Loyalty and Worth; and that their true Deserts may ever purchase for
them such a high Station, whilst they shall plainly outweigh their Rivals in
the Royal Balance. And let them be always Patrons to these Churches, as an
acknowledgment to the Crown of Heaven, as the settled Condition of Tenure they
hold by and possess such Royal Demesness.

Let the great and good GOD of Heaven and Earth Bless these Churches, the
Beauty of the wilderness, and Continue so noble a Ministry as they now have,
and Prosper and Requite their faithful and unwearied Labors, and let him
Continue the Succession and furnish the next set with Greater Accomplishments
and virtue.

Let CHRSIT JESUS the Great Shepherd, who has the Care of the Flocks in the
Wilderness, Preserve Inviolable the inestimable Privileges and Liberties of
these Churches, and let him Entail them with all other Civil and Sacred Rights
and Immunities which they now Enjoy, as a sure Estate of Inheritance, to the
last Posterity of this People. And let their Children and Childrens Children
Remain from Generation to Generation, until the World be Done with, and the Sun
has left shining.

So Prays The meanest of all Your Servants In CHRIST J. W.
May 31, 1710.
In ANSWER To the Foregoing PROPOSALS.
THe Nobleness of Parentage, by the Laws of Honor, entales on Posterity (with
other Rights) a protection from all incivilities, but not from the austere
Demands of Justice, when that is affronted and violated. Justice keeping the
Golden Rule ( Quo dat Suum Cuique) observes no other Destinctions, than what it
first makes in its Distributions amongst the Rich and Poor, the Noble and
Ignoble, it is no Respecter of Persons, for that it is Superior to all men,
and sits as a veiled Empress holding the Balance to weigh out equal to each
one according to the Merits of the cause, and sees no man.

There being now under Cognizance, such as are of honorable Families, yet
arrested and brought by due course of Law to Answer for high Crimes, it must
not be supposed Rudeness in Manners, though they be somewhat freely and Rusly
handled, whilst the prosecution is held agreeable with the Impeachment and Rule
of Justice. And as for my self, who am under Commission from Authority, to
appear in Defense of my Countries Sacred Liberties, I can in my own
Justification, affirm, That I have no dishonorable Inclinations, but carry a
Just mind, so as to Condemn no Man or thing, but upon plain evidence, nor to
agravate any Plea beyond its just Bounds.

Therefore, though in the following pages there may be discerned a great Liberty
in Argument, with a mixture of Satyrs, as though none by my Inferiors were
Involved in the Charge, Yet ascribe it unto my love and veneration for so great
an Interest as I appear for, and not to any base intent of sinking the honor
or darkning the Luster of better Men. I neither desire nor design to hurt any
Man, No, not so much as an hair on his head, but I Solely aim at ERROR, that is
the But I Level for.

Thus having by this brief, but sincere Apology secured the Honor of my
Intentions, if I am worthy of belief, I shall no longer interrupt the Process,
but shall nextly, draw up the Indictment, upon which these Proposals are to
pass, and abide a Trial.

And this I shall do in a form borrowed from Sir Edward Cook, the Kings
Attorney in the arreignment of Sir Walter Rawleigh, in these Words.

HEre is Mischief, mischief in Summo Gradu, Yea, Exorbitant Mischief. This is
the charge I offer to make good against the Proposals, at the Bar of Common
Reason, in order thereto I shall prorced and Expect to produce sufficient
Evidence under Two heads.

1 st, By a few Praeliminary Queries. 2 dly. By a more Critical Examination of
the Proposals themselves.
1* As Introductory, and for the bringing in further Evidences against the
Criminal Proposals, now upon their Trial, I offer these following Queries.

1st. Query.
Whether the Churches in New England are not fairly in Possession of a Form of
Government, by which they are distinguished from most of the Reformed Churches
in the World, more then by their Grace? and if so (which no man that knows them
will deny) Then it must be some superior Power, or their Own voluntary Act,
regularly obtained, that must out or dispossess them. Did an Equal Claimer
appear, yet long and quiet Possession holds against a Writ of Ejectment, a very
strong Plea in the Sessions, both of Reason and Law, according to that
acknowledged Maxim, in Requali Jure, melior est Conditio Possidentis, When two
plead an Equal Right, he is in the best Condition who is in Possession; Then it
can be no less then a very Indisputable Right, and duly prosecuted with
Effect, that can Dispossess these Churches of their Government.

2d. Query.
Wheither length of time has Discovered any Essential Error in the Government
of these Churches?

And 1 st. it has, or 2 dly it has not.

1. If time has made any such Discovery, yet the Proposals have not been so
fair as to detect it, or describe wherein, or in what Respect. The Great
service these Churches, with their Government, have done, in subduing and
Beautifying a wilderness, bespeaks some considerable Respect from all men, who
value Wisdom or Piety; That it must needs seem a harsh piece of Justice, with
or without any formal Trial, for them to be driven from Plenty, and sent to the
Doors of their own Tenants to Beg for a Booty, out of that Estate which was
once their own: at least, by a seisin in fact, if not in Law; For that the
Proposals Kill, and take Possession with far less Ceremony or Legal
Formalities, Than Ahab did in gaining the Right of Naboth's Vineyard; when, if
there is any Essential Error in their Frame or Constitution, and that they have
either Ignorantly or Treacherously assumed any peculiar Prerogative, which
belongs to Christ Throne, as King, that was never their due to possess (and so
being considered as Usurpers, are dead in Law) yet notwithstanding it would not
have Offended against the Laws of Gratitude in sending them to their Graves, to
have put some more Marks of Honor upon them, by certain solemn and usual forms
of Trial in the Prologue of their Dissolution; for they have been certainly
great and good Servants to the Public, that if they deserve to dye, they ought
to dye under all the Marks of Honor which Justice can allow of, at the least a
Grand Sessions, a Jury and Liberty to make Plea in their Own Defense, and under
the Influence of Royal Council, should have been Granted, unless they may be
treated as Conquerours serve unfortunate Pirates, who when taken, are without
form of Law hung up at the Yards Arm.

2 dly. But if no such discovery can be made, Whether it is a wise and just
thing for men to alter their Government? The Churches of Christ in this Country
have been in Possession of this form of Government, and it has been
established by Certain or Legal and Orderly Familarities, and Universal
Consent, and has continued upwards of three score Years. And as the poet says,
Parvarios Casus, Per Tot Discrimina Rarum Tendemus In Caelum; They have passed
various changes, and great Temptations, and yet to this day, by this Reason of
Discipline have been kept as clean Swept, as any Churches of God in the World,
and any such Imbroylments as have lately happned in the Churches, have been
more the Folly of Administrators, in not keeping to the Rules of Government,
then from any Defect in the Constitution. Then what reason have we to meditate
a Change? No, Certainly; It will be more Divine, and agreeable with the Law of
our Religious Gratitude, to join with the Reverend Mr. Nicholas Noise, in his
Doxology, or use of Triumph and praise for the great Mercies he recites in his
Election Sermon, Page 79. says he, Thanks be to God and the King! our houses
and our Lands are our own, without every man's being at the cost of a Charter,
and yet we have the Liberty of our Religion, and the free Exercise of it,
without subscribing New Articles of Faith, Worship or Discipline; which is a
great favor of God, if we have Wisdom and Grace to improve it Rightly.

Query, Whether the right Improvement will be to alter the Scheme of our
Government or Discipline, seeing no body else will do it for us? NO Surely! But
it will be more agreeable with both our Policy and Duty to follow the good
Advice Mr. Cotton Mather leaves us in his Golden Street, Page 40. in these
Wards, Where we have a Platform left us that is According to the Word of our
Gracious Lord, and the Pattern in the Mount, we shall be great Enemies to our
selves if we do not keep to it.

3d Query.
Whether it be not great Boldness for any particular Gentlemen to Invade, null,
Alter or Weaken so great a Right and Propriety, as is the Government of these
Churches without their Consent?

Government is the greatest Blessing in the World of of a worldy Nature; it is
Felony, cheaper by far to the Loosers to plunder men of their Estate and
wealth, nay, and of their Lives too then to dispoyl them of Government; for by
the latter, you harass and worry them in the world, with Plagues and miseries,
worse then death it self, that the basest is far better, then no Government; a
churlish Tyranny, is better then an Insolent Anarchy, when men are without Law,
and all hail Fellows, not well but badly met. And for men to alter or warp
Government, without all Interested parties are agreed, is a very bold Intrusion.

That, yea, that Government which is in any good measure formed, and dos agree
with the nature freedom of Humane Beings, and adjusted by the Laws of wisdom
and Honor, and plain inly, and fairly Established, is too much of God in the
world, and too Great a Royalty belonging to men, for any to play the Knave or
Fool with.

And when a Government has done all things in the main well, and has Reapt in
a great Stock of Blessings, now to Shuffle it out of Place, is Fickleness, and
not Policy; for a sensible Series of Blessings will always atone for some
seeming Defects in a Constitution. Therefore when all Israel met at Ramah, in a
general Assembly to alter their Consular Government, which had been Crowned
with Signal Blessings, they got ill will in the Court of Heaven for it, 1. Sam.
8.7.

The great success which attended, signified it to be a Theocracy, and that it
had more of God than of man in it, which is an Argument ( Caeteris Paribus) for
all other Governments, and so for this of New England Churches, which has been
Honored with great success, and many Blessings from its Beginnings to this
day; therefore well does Mr. Cotton Mather describe the Subject, and advise his
Country, in his last Sermon on the Street of Gold, says he (in a Remarkable
passage out of a letter) page 40 Here is a Temple Built, more Glorious then
Solomon's, not of dead Stones, but living Saints, which may tempt the Greatest
Queen of Sheba to come and See, and allure even Kings from far to come and
worship in. Therefore, as to their Government (says he) Sirs, do not Spoil it,
Oh, Destroy is not! There is a Blessing in it.

4th. Query.
Whether by comparing the proposals and our Platform we don't find them
Repugnant, and so Contradictory, that if one stands, the other must fall?

And that we can as soon Reconcile a Republic with an absolute Monarchy, or
the best sort of free States with a Politic Tyranny, or at least with an
Oligarchy, when the chief end of Government is the Enriching and Greatness of
its Ministers; and this we may do when we have compounded these Proposals and
our Platform, so that as that Faithful and Noble Friend to these Churches, the
famous and and Learned Increase Mather, D. D. in an Appendix to his
dissertation Concerning the Sacrament, Laments several Plots conspiring the
Dissolution of these famous Churches, in these Words, viz. The bold Attempts
which have of late been made to unhinge and overset the Congregational Churches
in New England by Decrying their Holy Covenant, etc. We may here justly
Heighten the Complaint, and cry, Pro^ Dolor! hine Lachrimae! Alas, Alas! here is
the Grief! hence flows our Tears! for here is a Bold Attempt indeed, not only
to dispoil the House of some particular Piece of Furniture, but to throw it
quite out of Windows, not only to take away some of its Ornaments, but to blow
up its Foundations. For those bold Attempts which that worthy complains of,
seem now to be Grown very Rampant; for here is in view a Combination of
Workmen Disafected which the fashion of the Old Fabric, who (in pretense)
Design to Repair, but in Reality to Ruin the Whole Frame. They appear (indeed)
something in the manner of Nehemiah's Men on the Wall, Neh. 4.17. as it were
with a Trowel in one hand, with which they now and then put on a little
untempered Mortar to plaster over a chink or two, where the Old work by length
of time, is somewhat Weather-beaten, to pacify the Jealousies of the
inhabitants, that they may think these Builders (surely) are mending, and not
Maring their old Comfortable Habitation. But in Reality they have in the other
hand a formidable Maul, not as Nehemiah's Weapon to Defend, but to break Down
the Building; for they are all hands at work Banging the Platform in Pieces,
upon which the old Fabric is Built. That may not the Churches and all their
Lovers sigh and complain, as once Cicero did, O Tempora! O Mores! who would
have expected such Times and such things from such men?

5. Query.
We must needs then enquire, From whence the Proposals derive their force? Who
gives them Letters of Attorney or Commission to sue these Churches (by a Quo
Warranto) out of Possession of their Government? To me (I must needs confess)
the Attempt is very Daring; and I see no way of Reconcilation, unless the
Scheme drawn in the Proposals can be fairly sheltered under some more
authentic and specious Umbrage, than the bold Dictates, though of the Wisest
of men, when they are pleased to set themselves up Oracles for their Country.
So I come,

2. To the more Critical Examination of the Proposals themselves, which I shall
Attend, 1. More Generally. 2. More particularly, by taking a survey of them in
their distinct Sections.


1. More Generally, by Inquiring into their Original, and nature.

1. By making a more Exact Inquest and search after their Original, and in this
debate they forfeit their Essence, unless they can derive their Essence, unless
they can derive their Pedigree, either

1. From Gods Immediate Inspiration. Or,

2. From Ancient Revelation. Or,

3. From Right Reason, which is a Ray of Divine Wisdom instampt upon Humane
nature. Or,

4. From the Platform of the Churches, which is a systim of Government,
collected by our Ancestors out of several Fountains, and Principally from the
Scriptures. Now in pursuing this Distribution, I shall diligently enquire,
whether we can hear of their Original under any of these heads.

1. As to Immediate Inspiration, I must needs presume, these Gentlemen will not
dare to Assert, that they are sent Immediately from God with this Message to
the Churches; they are too good and wise to pretend (with Enthusiasts) to
Immediate Vision, or a spirit of Prophecy; both the matter and manner of their
writing sufficiently convinces, that these Proposals are their own Sentiments;
they durst not put, a Thus says the LORD upon them; such on Inscription is too
Heavenly and Royal for such Coin: for both they and we know, according to Dut.
30.12. it is not in Heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may know and do it? there is no need to
send Messengers to that Court, to learn by Immediate and Extraordinary
Information, either the Laws of our Duty or Interest; for that God has made
all things sufficiently plain, by this Time of day, either by Scripture or
Reason, for the Conduct and Government of his Churches, yea, of the subjects of
his Universal Intellectual MONARCHY in this World.

2. As to the Ancient Revelation; Holy Scripture, that best, though not the
bigest of Books, is the saints Library, and the Clergy-mans Pandects, whence he
takes the Rules for the Mannagment of his Trust; so that it is very Amusing
that the Bible should be forgotten in Drawing up such Schemes as these; as though
the usage of the Popes Conclave, which turns the Bible out of doors for a
Wrangler, and gives the chief Seal to Tradition, etc. were here in fashion.
Indeed, I cannot but esteem them very unfortunate Proposals to be turned so
naked into the World, as not to have the least tincture of Scripture to Gaurd
them from Contempt; no, not so much as a Citation, that might admit of so much
as a strained Consequence in their Defense. And so, though less Profane, yet
they are also less Politic then the most desperate of Heretics, who always
bring their Errors on the stage guarded with Scriptures, and craftily Endeavor
to make their Citations look with such an aspect, as though they were encampt on
their side. But here we have nothing for our Faith to lean on, but so many
austerer Ipse Dixits, as bitter Pills of Death for the Churches to Swallow,
without any of the Confection of Heaven or the Sweet Manna Sprinkled upon them;
or else only so many naked Humane Persumptions, as Arrows or Bolts, too Rashly
shot out against the sides of our Churches, and no word of Scripture to Tip or
feather them. Nay, it is very Memorable, and I account fatal, and to be
observed, that GOD, that secret Title of the Almighty, with which the Holy
Scripture does so abound, is not once named (as I can find) in the whole
Treatise; as though the most sacred Titles, as well as Sections of that heavenly
Book, would move Fears and irritate Jealousies, rather then pouer down Solace
and Comfort upon this Undertaking. Therefore, in a word, the whole Bible is
thrown by as a Sealed Parchment, or as one that never Prophecies good to such
Adventurers. Therefore these Proposals being apprehended as Sea Rovers, and
Indicted upon the statute of Pyracy, and upon Examination being found without
the Prince of Princes Colors and yet doing great mischief, in Assaulting and
Wounding his Churches and Lawful Subjects, on their honest occasion, being
bound on a Voyage to their own Country, they can no ways in Justice escape, but
must Pass under the Sentence, and endure the Pains of Death, for they were
taken Fighting without Commission.

3. As to REASONS.

Recta Ratio, Right Reason, that great Oracle in Humane Affairs is the Soul of
Man, so formed or endowed by Creation with a certain Sagacity or Acumen (in
many particular Examples sharpened by the constitution of nature, by Grace and
study) whereby man's Intellect is enabled to take up ( pro Medulo or in a
degree) the true Idea or Perception of things, agreeable with and according to
their Natures. So that if we bring these Proposals under Examination by the
Laws of Reason, we must enquire whether they are agreeable with the nature and
Constitution of the Churches, if they fully harmonize with their Principles of
Essence, then they may be enroled for Canons; but if they Jar and are plainly
Repugnant, we may then Lawfully censure them, and pronounce them Irrational.
Whether these Churches are constituted by Scripture or Reason, yea or no, that
is not our Question, but being of such a Frame or Constitution, as they now
are, and always have been, all who pretend to Support and preserve them, and
yet take such measures, as will utterly overthrow and dissolve them, such
Repairers have apparently deserted the Dictates and Government of Right Reason.

And here we may Collect an Induction of some few hints of certain particulars
for Evidence; the Platform Asserts a Classes to be no Gospel form of Church
Order; The Proposals say it is, or they abuse our Credulity. The Proposals
Order the Association to have the first Cognizance of Church Cases; our
Government says, No, it belongs to the Jurisdiction of particular Churches. The
Proposals give Power to the Association to limit Elections, and to Direct them;
but our Government says, No, it will not Consent; the Election of Officers is
the Prerogative of the Churches, and they wont, as yet, part with it, etc. So
that when we can by the Rules of Grammar Resolve yea or no, yea or nay, to be
the same voice and word, then you may Reconcile the Proposals and the
Platform; that Certainly whatever there be of Religion, the Method is
apperantly Disagreeable with Common Reason.

4. As to the PLATFORM.

I shall represent it by a kind of a short Prosopop^, thus, viz. enquiring
whether the Proposals are deduced from this fountain, the Platform with all
its Chapters, and with one joint Consent, as plain as the Tongue in their heads
can utter it, say, that never since it Possessed the Government, so much as
Dreamed of them. It may say with destruction ( Job 28.22.) we have heard of the
Fame of these things, with our Ears, but never Imagined so much as a seminal
virtue in our own being, for their Procreation, but rather starts with the News
of their approach, out of fear of its own Dissolution from their Repugnant and
formidable nature. Therefore as in a grievous fright, from Surprise, Cries out
with Athaliah, Treason, Treason! And Begs that Zeal and Conscience, those two
Solicitors for the Crown, will at this Grand Court of Oyer and Terminer Implead
and Prosecute them as Traitors to the Prince of Peace, and Fellons to these
Churches, Christ's Loyal Subjects. So I come,

2. To enquire into the nature of these Proposals, by Surveying their
Composition and Properties.

1 st. Their Composition.

They seem a Conjunction of almost all the Church Governments in the World, and
the least part is Congregational. Indeed at the first Cast of the Eye, the
Scheme seems to be the Spectre Ghost of Presbiterianism, or the Government or
of the Church by Classes; Yet, if I don't mistake, in Intention there is
something Considerable of Prelacy in it, only the distinct Courts of Bishop
with the Steeples of the Churches, Tithes, Surplice and other Ornaments, do not
show themselves so visible, as to be discerned at the first look; yet with a
Microscope you may easily discern them really to be there in Embrio, Et in Rera
nature; for this is a known Maxim, Quod necessario Subintelligitar non Deest,
What is necessarily understood, or lies hid in the Intention of a Design, is
Really here, by just Interpretation; Therefore these Proposals which dare
Revolt so far at a step, as these have done, must needs understand no less in
their aim, than of an Enobling Government for Clergymen, which our Princes and
Parliaments have adorned the Churches with. This seems Rational, that those
which never stick at Robbing the Churches of such an Immence Treasure, as the
Proposals carry off, will never stand, Shall we! Shall we! at the offer of a
Bishopric, which is a Barrony with all its Rights and Royal Appurtenancies.

There is also something in it which Smells very strong of the Infallible
Chair, To Assume the Power of making Rules, to Ingross all Principles of
Process, The Right of Election, the last Appeal, The Negative Vote, and all
Super-Intending Power in Matters Ecclesiastic, as the Prerogatives of
Clergymen, Distinct from all other Estates and Ministers in Government; or
thus for the Clergy to Monopolize both the Legislative and Executive part of
Cannon Law, is but a few steps from tht Chair of universal Pestilence, and by
the Ladders here set up, Clergymen may, if they please, Clamber thus high, for
when they are invested with what is in these Proposals provided and intended
for them, who then can control them but the Almighty himself? as was said of
those daring men, Genesis 11.6. And now nothing will be Restrained from them which
they have Imagined to do; for who can now withold from them Infallibility, or
stop the Direful and Definitive Sentence? Who can limit their Power or shorten
their Arm in their Executions? Their Bulls can now, upon any any affront,
Bellow and Thunder out a Thousand terrible Curses, and the poor affrighted and
Invassal'd Layity, both Princes and Subjects (being here as in the grave put
under one and the same Topic) must forfeit their Salvation, if they don't
tamely submit, and obediently become their Executioners; for that it is now
evident that all Power is, if not Really given, yet formally stolen, and in
Intent Bequeathed to them.

2 dly. Their Properties.

1 st Property, is Disorder Order is both the Beauty and safety of Universe,
take aside the (...) whereby the whole hangs to gether, the great Frame of
nature is unpin'd and drops piece from piece; and out of a Beautiful structure
we have a Chaos. These Proposals are therefore very mischievous, if not in
matter, yet in the manner of Production; they are full of Disorder, being
things born out of due time, their Conception is without Countinance, from the
Rule of Order. Indeed there is no Statute to be found that will justify the
first Coitus of Parents, neither will any allow their Social Life; that the
Birth must bear the Attender, of being both begotten and Born, out of Lawful
Wedlock, and so in Point of Honor fall under the Censure of the Levitical Law,
and must be kept back from Promotion, for Deuteronomy. 32. A Bastard shall not enter
into the Congregation.

That to pass all other Remarks, if we are under mistake in the assertions, I
then demand and enquire, Where is that Lawful Authority which Published Legal
Banes, with the Consent of all the Interested Persons, and the regular
Consumation of the Match? If any Rule can be found to shelter and Honor the
Conception and Birth, let it be produced, and it escaping other Felonies with
Life, this Scandal shall be taken off, but otherwise it must remain as a Bar to
the tenth Generation.

The 2 d Properity Is Usurpation. The Proposals Apparently Usurp the Churches
Prerogatives. It has been asserted, and it is true, These Churches have been
Settled upon the Platform of their own Government for upwards of Sixty Years;
they have often Revised and Re-inforc'd the Establishment, both as the
Principles of their Consociation and Union in General, and the Form of
Government for every Church in particular. Then, for these Proposals without
License to assume a Legislation, and form a Government, so repugnant to their
own, can be no less then Usurping a Dominion over them, contrary to the Rule, 1
Pet. 5.3. neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage. Lesser Acts against Empire
has cost many a bold man his head; What! for a particular kno^ or Juncto of
Gentlemen to make so bold with a settled Government, as to pick out all the
Enobling Royalties, Liberties and Enfranchizements in it, and Sacrifice them to
their own Ambition! It is enough to put mankind into an Uproar.

It is fresh in Memory, that when some of our English Princes (and one would
think, if any men may, they may be allowed to aspire, yet when they) have
Presumed on less things than these Proposals reach after, in gratifying their
Aim at an Absolute Monarchy, when as they have not dared to lay out with such
freedom, a new Form of Government, with a wide mouth, gaping to devour the
English Liberties, (as these Proposals do the Churches, but only with much
secrecy, covin and Policy, they have by some more Clandestine measures been
Intruding upon the ancient Liberties of the English Nation) Every one knows
what direful Convultions this has bred in the Bowels of the Kingdom. And may it
not serve to enliven this Plea? To invite all such who are with Plato, Owners
of a great Genius at Inventing new or Modeling old Governments, to try their
Skill in altering the English Monarchy, and see how it will be Probated. That
is, suppose you should venture to Interdict the Royal Assent, or Convert the
present Monarch into a Duke of Venice, or dissolve the Lords in Parliament or
(rather in Harmony with this Scheme) Turn the Burgesses and Knights of the
Shires (as a sort of men not fit for Politics in Parliament) out of doors? And
whether our Sovereign, the Peerage, or Subjects of English Liberties would take
it well? And whether Christian men may make Bolder with the Established
Government of Christ's Churches, then with that which belongs to Civil Affairs?
In Honor to the New England Churches, and with veneration for the English
Monarchy, I dare assert, that there is in the Constitution of our Church
Government more of the English Civil Government in it, and it has a better
Complexion to suit the true English Spirit, than is in the English Church, or
any other, both as to the Legislative and Executive part of Government. Indeed,
considering how things are at home in Church and State, I have been sometimes
ready to Query, Why the Nation should be so Enamored with their Civil, and yet
so Careless and Regardless of their Gospel Liberties, so as to Trust their
Consciences with their Clergy, more immediately, and yet will not venture their
Estates with their Learned Judges, without the Privilege and Mediation of
Juries; as though they were more careful and wise in securing their Estates than
their Souls, and valued one far more then the other. But I shall go on with the
Comparison.

1. As to the Legislation; Our New England Convocation admits, and the
Government does profess the fraternity as necessary to the being of all
Synodical Assemblies, that as far as Legislation, spiritual, is left to men,
and as they have a great Treasure, viz. Their Salvation Imbarqued, so they have
a great Interest in the Management of it; and herein they agree with the
English Caution and Wisdom, in the Modes of Civil Government of the Empire; for
the Commons are one great state in the Civil Legislation; and as they have a
great Power in the mannagement of that Great Trust.

2. As to Administration or the Executive part of Government, Our New England
Government grants a Jurisdical Power to the Fraternity (...) makes them proper
Judges in all Ecclesiastical Cases and Administrations, on Persons Cognizable,
or that must pass a Trial Juridice; which is agreeable with the Constitution,
Nature and Practice of the Civil Government of the Empire; for under the
Prosecutions of Law, no English Subject, in Life, Limb or Estate, must be past
upon, but by the Judgment of his PEERS; Yea, in all Pleas of the Crown, such
Confidence has the Government put in the Loyalty and Discretion of the Commons,
that our English Juries are stated Arbitarors and Umpires between our Prince
and his Subjects. Yea, such a dependence has the whole Nation in Keeping these
Liberties in their own hands, that they Reckon the Commons in Parliament and
Juries in the Common Wealth, to be the great Pillars of English Honor and
Liberties, and they esteem them as Ramparts built by the Wisdom of our
Ancesters, to Defend us from Tyranny and Slavery.

That considering the affinity in these two Constitutions, one would be ready
to Query, Whether the Heroic true English Spirit is not Parent to both? Or
whether they are not equal Debtors to the Gospel, for their Original? The
Improvement of this comparison is briefly this; Suppose some of the great
Ministers of State should venture to sweep away all those Civil
Enfranchizements which are English-mens Birthright, and set up an Arbitrary
Power, with a pretense of doing Justice and Judgment in the Kingdom, by more
concise and expedient Measures, whether they might not be seized? And whether
the Statutes would not be Chain strong enough to hold them, as Traitors to a
well formed Government, and then laid fast by a Mittimus for great Usurpers?
And whether the Plea will not hold in Just Proportions, on the other side of
the Comparison?

3 d. Property Riotous. The nature of a Riot may (in part) be thus described,
it is an Unlawful Assembly of more than three met in one place to do an
Unlawful Ast, as violently breaking down of Walls, and pulling up of Hedges,
and wrongfully entering into men's Rights and Possession, and that in a fray and
Terror of the People. In managing this Plea, I shall only desire that the
Illegality of the Assembly which formed these Proposals, with the Objects and
things they intend, and the ancient Boundaries which they plainly Invade,
together with the fearful apprehensions that many good and sober People in the
Vicinage have concerning the Enterprise, may be Critically examined, and I
doubt not but when we obtain the suffrage of this Honorable Court, it will
Determine, The Impleaded Criminals are of a Riotous nature, and so the
INDICTMENT will stand more valed against them.

4 th. Property, Sacriligious, etc.

5 th. Property, Rebellious.

It grieves me to utter the Epethites agreeable with the Nature of these
proposals; yet they must Blame their own Nature, but not my Justice, if I give
them but their due; for I find them in the breach of a Royal Statute, yea, I
think of a Penal Law. This is plain, They take away the Liberties, Privileges,
Discipline and Government of these Churches, all which are Established to them
by the Law; and that not only by their own Cannons, but by the Laws of this
Province, as by a Royal Magna Charta, viz. in an Act for the Settlement and
Support of the Ministers, page 3. in these words, The Respective Churches in
the several Towns within this Province shall at all times hereafter use,
exercise and enjoy all their Privileges and Freedoms Respecting Divine
Worship, Church Order, and Discipline, and shall be encouraged in the Peaceable
and Regular Profession and Practice thereof.

This Act (as one says on the great Charter of English Liberties) Deserves to
be written in letters of Gold, and hung up in all our Houses of Gods Public
Worship, to signalize the Zeal (in the Presence of God, Angels, and Men) of the
Authority of the Throne and Empire, for the Establishing of these Churches, and
Christ's Interest in them. Now, Considering that the Power, Policy, and Grace
of the English Crown, should Thus lock up the Churches Treasure for them, and
set such a Centinal, with the flaming Sword of Justice in its hand, to Dread
and Awe Intrudeeis, it must needs be a very bold Action, (if it ben't Plump
Rebellion) to Attempt or design such a Sequestration or Imbezellment as the
proposals DO.

6 th. Property, Vnfaithfullness, etc.

7 th. Property, Ingratitude.

For the Stewards of great Families, when Advanced to Honor and a Profitable
Trust, by the free Election and Grace of Noblemen, when their Lords are laid
down to rest, and sleep too securely, or are gone out of Town, with this
presumption, that their Estate is secure, it being put under the care of Loyal
Trustees and Thankful Servants; Now for such Trustees and Stewards, upon such
opportunities to Pocket up or load away the Riches of the Family, and set up
for themselves, and leave the Proprietors Beggars, whom they found in Wealth
and Plenty, is both Infidelity and Ingratitude. Now let the Churches be plucked
and deplum'd, as the Proposals intend, and they are after the possessing a fair
Estate, become Banckrupts; And let those stewards that are guilty Answer for
the Robbery, for my part I will have no share in it.

8 th. Property, Impolicy.

And I am sure there is great store of this in these Proposals; I shall
Instance but in two Particulars.

1. In Timing the Challenge that is here made, to Brave a Rich and Powerful
Enemy at so great a distance, and invite them by sound of Trumpet to a Pitched
Battle, when Surprise and Ambushments might be laid, and do the work with the
Expense but of a tenth part of the Blood which this may cost. This is not
agreeable with the Art of War; Achitophel would have put a Derision upon such
Measures. Jacob's Sons when taking a Bloody design in hand, first contrived to
Stupify and blunt the Courage of their Enemies, and then came upon them by
Surprise, e're they could Arm in their own Defense (Though it does not justify
their Cruelty, yet it magnifies their Subtilty) for thereby they brought their
design about, when as if they had gone a more Blunt and daring way to work
Simon and Levi, had not been half a breakfast for the Hivites, Genesis 34.25.

So here, had the Churches been Convened, and no noise made of this Design,
they Possibly (though their Treasures are fortified by Right, and so in safety,
and their Troops more ten to one then their Enemies) yet by ambushments or
Surprise they might have chanced to have been Coakered or Conquered out of all,
by being flattered, overawed, or over Argued, into a Surrender or Submission;
But we may now Rationally hope the Alarm will Rouse the Whole Camp, and each
Squadron will Rebound it to the next with a hinc Proixmus Vrit Vcalogon; And so
the Plot may upon a Defeat, blame its own bad conduct, more than its Fortune.

2 dly. the Design it self ( Quo ad finem Executionis) let it come to Birth, as
is Designed, or Desired, and the very Heavens would either frown upon or Laugh
at it for its folly; If we Examine the Climate of the Country, the Degrees of
Latitude, and the Severe Stars that chiefly govern, There is no good Policy in
the Design; so that, me thinks, the Universal frame of nature Cries it Down for
a Non-Compos mentis; for there are no such great Creatures as are here
Conceived, can fare in hard cold Countries as the Camelion does in warm, there
must be a very great hoard to support them; and Nature does honestly Confess,
she cannot answer the Bills of Fare, which belong to their Table, and do her
Duty to the Royal Exchequer; and this must be Maintained, or all breaks to
pieces.

Again, let it be considered, whether it ben't great Intellectual Weakness, or
want of Policy, for one Generation to contrive needless Loads for the next,
especially when they may get as well to Heaven without carrying such Packs
along the Road? It has been universally the humor of mankind, according to the
Laws of Nations and Nature, when Roused by the Regular Dictates of Self-Love,
to endeavor that every following Generation might be more lightsome, free,
noble and happy than that which did immediately preceed.

They say, the Chinees dig Clay and use it not, but leave it heapt, or in Pits,
mellowing for the next Age. Every Prudent man builds his House for Duration.
The Prince enlarges and betters his Dominions. The Peasant sweats to advance
his Estate, and then each leaves all in Greater Triumph to their Heirs.

The Kentish Yeomantry are had in honor to this day, for not stooping to the
Conqueror, till they had Conditioned, and thereby secured their fair Estates of
Lands in Fee and Free-holds forever from all Forfeiture by Felony, according to
their Country proverb, The Father to the Bough,
The Son to the Plough.
Such is the Mercyful foresight of Mankind, and his charitable Care and fore
cast for such as shall follow, though they may never be seen or Known by their
wise Progenitors.

But here is plainly a Conspiracy very Heterogenious to such Judicious Acts of
Humane Providence; A Design plainly, if not perfectly to Enslave, yet to bring
Posterity into a needless Vassalage and Thraledom.

This is an acknowledged verity amongst wise Statists, That that Monarch who
has the Command of the Seas, can at his Pleasure Command any Maritime Country.
And so, those men who have the Command and Empire of the Conscience of Mankind,
can Command their Estates, and indeed whatsoever else is grateful to them.

Then, where abouts are we in our Politics, when we have delivered up the
Royalties that are Challenged? and in what a weak Capacity shall we leave
Posterity in? Nay, these Vertuoso's themselves, seem to be hardened with the
Ostrich against their Own Natural Issue, unless the thing would chance to
spring up as quick as Jonas Goard, and hang as full of Pearls and Diamonds as
the Sea and Rocks of India, and they themselves shall have the first shake, and
fill all their Coffers, with this Harvest, or at least, that they are assured
that they can and shall Entail their Offices as securely as their Lands, upon
their own Children, as was the Order of Priesthood, and the Fashion of the
house of Levi. But alas! these modes are all worn out, and made null; and such
men's Sons, as we are now treating of, in with the Multitude, must carry their
falling Equal share of the Common Load; that should the Project prevail, under
their Mannagement, (might they but look up out of their Graves in about half an
Age) They may complain in Elegy, after the manner of Virgil over his, Sic vos
non vobis. Hos ego versiculos feci, Jubit alter Honorem. These verses I made,
but another man carries away the Honor. So these Gentlemen might even say, we
have Contrived to greaten the Clergy, and with Bees have filled a Rich Hive,
and Built a fair Nest well feathered, but our Posterity, we see, is never the
warmer, nor will they lick their fingers of it; and not only so, but are the
men that must make up the tenth Sheaf, and deliver the tenth Cock, Calf and
Lamb unto others out of their poor Demesnes. And also it may Justly beget a
mournful Remembrance in Posterity of their Parents, and make them often look
with a sad Countenance upon their Fathers Graves, not because they are Dead,
but because they had not ended their days sooner, viz. before this Scheme (so
Oppressive and Cruel to their small Free-holds) had taken effect under their
Mannagement.

2. We come now, according to engagement, to take a Survey of the Proposals in
their destinct Sections.

SECT. I. THat the Ministers of the Country form themselves into Associations,
that may meet at Proper times to consider such things as may properly lie
before them.
Answer. There is no doubt or question to be made but that the Ministers and
Pastors of Christ's Churches may meet in greater or lesser Numbers; for they are
Masters of themselves, and no more accountable how they spend their time than
other men are, but to meet at certain times and places, as Political
Incorporate Bodies, or in the form of Classes for the Exercise and Mannagement
of Government, this must be determined by some Precept issued from a
Legislative Power; and without this, such who give the advice and Exhibit the
Call, are very Dispotick and Arbitrary; and those who attend it are Servile in
their Submission; for that there is no man in his right Wits will take this
Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. The
Offer or Invitation bids defiance to our Constitution; for our Platform denis
the Classical State of the Church under Christ, Chap. 2. Sect. 5. Therefore
this is a Daring Article, in the Criminals Case; and as it strikes at the
Vitals of our Government, it must in the TRIAL bear weight accordingly.

Sect. And that each of these Associations have a Moderator for certain time,
who shall continue till another be chosen, who may call them together upon
Emergencies.

Answer.
1 st. What Limits shall be assigned for the Precincts of every distinct
Association? Or may we conclude the best model is to follow the Civil
Distinctions made by the Counties? And if so, then the Pastors of each Classis
are scattered through a Territory of Twenty or Thirty Miles Square, more or
less, and then it must needs follow that the Moderator, to discharge his duty,
must provide Messengers to Cite all these destinct Gentlemen upon any
Emergency; But the great difficulty is, what kind of Messenger it must be,
whether King Solomon's Tell-Tale-Bird may be trusted with matters of such
Importance? whether the Moderator must Re-imburse him? Or must he go on his own
cost, contrary to equity in the Law? 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes to War-fare on his
own charge? It is apparently an Error that care has not been taken to find
Horse and Man and Baiting-places for both on this Journey, otherwise for a
Legislative Power to prescribe Chargeable Offices and leave them destitute of a
Temporal Suport, they must of necessity dye to save Charges, or turn
mendicants, or hope in their Travel to meet with the Prophets Juniper-Tree; all
which are as disagreeing with good Reason as the Proposal it self.

2. The Moderater has an unlimited Power during the Prorogation of the
Assembly, (1.) He must Judge of Emergencies, that he may Summon the Members;
and being left vested with such a Prerogative, if after he has made his
Citation, he Recants, he can then Countermand his own Order, though the
Gentlemen should be all mounted, and ready to move. (2) If there chance to be
an Emergence of Common Concernment, If he finds his own Favorites involved in
the guilt and Danger, he then gives no notice, but stiffles the business, and
so cheats the Company. (3.) And upon any disgust, it is now at his Mercy to
null the whole Frame; for he must be in place till another be chosen, and how
will they get together, if he will not give the word? unless they are Creators
of themselves the second time, as they were the first. That to institute such
Charitable Designs without a Fund, and tie such Trust and Dominion on the
Shoulders of men after such a lax and careless manner, and leave them at such
loose Ends, as easily to make Fools of men, for my own part, I slight such
Methods in Government.

SECT. II. THat Questions and Cases of Importance, either provided by
themselves, or by others presented unto them, should be upon due deliberation
Answered.
Answer.
I suppose there is no intent to erect a young or Mock-Royal Society, Or that
all Questions and Cases of Experimental Philosophy be admitted; If it should be
so, I think this somewhat Touches upon the Prerogative of the Crown, and may
be called in Question, under the head of High Misdemeanors, if not Pro Crimine
lesae Majestatis; but howsoever, though there be no distinction made, yet we will
take it in a more Charitable sense, and that the Proposal (in Intent) is wholly
confined to Church matters; and if so, we must then enquire, How many deep
Questions can be found in our Country, grown moldy with the Gibeonites Bread,
for want of wise handling? Or can we find any such heaps of Gordian Knots, as
approbia Theologorum? The Reproach of Divines laid up against this Consistory
meet, to untie them, that we must needs molest our old Settlements for their
Solution? For my own part, I cannot Comprehend the Proposal, unless it be a
Plot to Introduce the Enemy, that is in the Rear. That is, by making show of
Great Illuminations, we may be dazeled with their Luster, and thereby the more
Easily taken in the Snare here laid. But however, to Conclude, as the wise man
says of things more Physical or Artificial, Eccl. 1. so I may say of Questions
and Cases, There are none New under the Sun. They have been all well spoken to;
Every learned Casuist, is full of them, etc. And Ames and Turrettinus, etc. for
a few Shillings will do more in a month, for an Inquisitive Mind, than this
Proposal can do in the tedious Apprenticeship of many years, then certainly,
Computing by Rules of Proportion, we can no ways expect that the clear gains
should Countervail the great Damage we shall sustain by swopping Governments
upon these Terms.

SECT. III. THat Advice be taken by the Associated Pastors, from time to time,
ere they proceed to any Action in their particular Churches, which may be
likely to Produce any Imbroylments.
Answer.
This is very Dishonorable, and also a very Unreasonable Incroachment upon the
Officers and Government of the Churches.

It Divests the Officers of the free Exercise of that Office-Authority, which
Gods Word and our Platform places in them; Read Platf. Chap. 10. Sect. 8, 9.
These are to feed and Rule the Churches, they are to receive the Accusations,
and prepare them for the Churches hearing. This Section of the Platform fixes
both Process and Judicature in particular Pastors and Churches, without any
Limitation? But the Proposal allows no Process to be Opened, till Letters of
License be obtained, from the Classes. But why may not all other Persons in
Office be thus Fettered, as well as the Pastors of Churches? are these the only
Studients of Wisdom and Righteousness, that are strangers to the nature of
Actions, to the Rule, and the application of it? All other Officers, in Trust
and Commission, who are wise and Loyal, execute the hardest Articles in their
Employ; and who may say to them, why do you so? Our Judges never stick to hang
a man, so long as their Commission and the Law will bear them out, and they
themselves are left, to be Interpreters of Both. And that this Proposal is a
Sanctuary for Officers against a storm; alas! the most that we can make of it,
is a Covering of Figg-Leaves, and may serve for a Harbor to Cowards and Fools
but not for men of spirit and Conduct. The Dream of an Imbroylment, can never
Counter-Poize Duty; If men are Trusted with Duty, they must consult that, and
not Events. If men are placed at Helm, to steer in all weather which Blows,
they must not be afraid of the Waves, or a wet Coat.

It is certain, it was no Dimunition for Timothy to carry St. Paul's Cloak and
Parchments from Troas, 2 Timothy 4.13. Yet for Particular Pastors in the
Mannagement of Church Government to do little more then to carry the Copies and
Parchments of Associations about the Country, and hang up their Decrees on the
Pillars of Churches, according to the Order of the Proposal, can never entitle
them to such a Tribute of Love and Honor as the Scripture does assign them, as
the purchase of their great Merits, 1. Tim. 3.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. such
Bequestments as these from the fountain of Honor, must signify more than some
such poor low servile Business (no ways too high for Jereboham's Priests to
execute) as is laid out in the Proposal, but especially if they have but some
one head man to Conduct and draw up the Conclusion.

Sect. That the Associated Pastors do carefully and lovingly treat each other
with that Watchfulness which may be of Universal advantage.

Answer.
1 st. Whether Watchfulness is proper, or a Term applicable to Persons so
Quallified, so Sacred, and in so high a function as those who are here intended?

2 dly. Whether to Institute Watchmen over Watchmen, be not the way to
Distribute the Clergy into Inferior and Superior Degrees, and so ad Infinitum
etc. or at least till the Churches of this Country (for you must know this is
one Proposal made for their Support) be Supported and well Ordered by
Suffragons, Metropolitans, and other great Pillars of those Churches, where
Clergymen in higher Orbs, inspect those in the same Order, who are beneath
them in trust and Dignity?

3 dly. But if you Intend honestly, only the Watch of one Brother over another,
as is the Duty of all Christian People, one toward another, then I cannot
understand the sense of the Word, as Applicable here, with the least good
meaning or Syntax imaginable.

1 st. For though there is a Design of New Moddeling of men and bringing
Clergymen into another Form of Society, yet there is no Intent Divulged, that
they shall Co-habit, Bed and Board together upon certain Charters, as the
Friars or Benedictines, in their Royal Monastaries. Indeed the Section might
have been Ingrost with the first Canons of the Dominicans or St. Bennets Laws,
when first entering upon their Monastic Life, but it no ways agrees with this
Constitution.

2 dly. For, as for the Occasional meeting of men eminently sober and virtuous,
what business can be supposed for a Watch, for about the space of 24. or 48.
hours, in such Examples? Very bad men will hold out longer then so, in a good
behavior under the awe of but some one venerable Person.

3 dly. And when these Eminent Persons, Members of the Association, are
dispersed to their own proper Precincts, the Proposal surely does not intend
they shall follw the Chargeable Example of Princes, who usually keep Spies in
each others Courts, to inform themselves, how things are managed there; for its
plain, the Charge and Expense in mannaging such a Watch as this, will Reduce
all Clergymen to this Dilemma, That they must either vote up the Sallary, or
vote down the Method. But then the thing it self is not fair; for it would seem
as though they watched More for the halting then the help of each other. But as
for the Proposal, a Riddle I found it, and a Riddle I leave it.

Sect. And that if any Minister be accused to the Association where he belongs,
of Scandal or Heresy, the matter shall be there Examined, and if the Associated
Ministers find just occasion for it, they shall direct a Calling of the
Council, by which such an Offender is to be proceeded against.

Answer.
I must Boldly and freely enquire, Whether this is an honest Answer to the
Question propounded in the head of the Proposals? or whether in Reality this is
the Supporting, Preserving and well Ordering the Interest of the Churches there
Meant? If you, mean as you Speak, I am sure there is either some Dishonesty or
some Misunderstanding between the Question and the Answer; for it cannot
possibly be otherwise, unless the parts of speech are lately become a Chaos,
and all words are not only of the doubtful Gender, but such unreasonable
Epiceens, that not only both kinds, but both Contraries are signified in them;
or thus, that to build, Plant, Repair, Pluck up, pull Down and Demolish, are
all now become Convertible Terms; for take away these high Prerogatives from
the Churches, and you take away their Being. These and such like Royalties, are
their Formalis Ratio, or the formal Cause ( per Quam Res est id quod est) by
which they are, what they are; and this will be very evident, if we do but Read
a short Lecture on the Churches Essence Anatomized, or let their Essential and
Constituent parts and Powers be Viewed in the History, and Philosophy of their
own Beings, and we shall quickly discern your Mistake; for that end read
Platform. Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Ordinary Church Power, viz. of Privilege belongs
to the Brotherhood, and may be Acted or exercised immediately by Themselves.
And More Directly to the Case in hand, Look into Chap. 10. Sect. 6. where there
we read If an Elder offend Incorrigibly, the Matter so Requiring, as the
Church, had Power to call him to Office, so they have Power, according to Order
(the Council of other Churches, where it may be had, directing thereto) to
Remove him from his Office; and being now but a Member, in case he add
Contumacy to his sin, the Church that had Power to receive him in to their
Fellowship, has also the same Power to cast him out, that they have concerning
any other Members.

Now herein we find an Essential Article in the Government and being of these
Churches, That they have and hold such Jurisdiction over their own Members;
That the Highest Tribunal Ecclesiastical on Earth, is There; and that their own
Delinquent private Members, and Public Officers are Tryable only there, and
there they must Receive the Definitive Sentence, and abide the Execution of it.

And if so, then I shall make bold to Revive my Query again, viz. Whether the
Proposal is either Honorable, Civil or honest, thus to Tumble down at one
Blow, this High Seat of Authority? and to break open our Prison Doors, and
Loose the Fetters of our great Offenders? and at the best, to take them out of
our hands, and make their Mittimus to Foreign Pastors to do Justice upon them,
and yet in the mean time, to Profess, they are doing us no other Injuries but
only Repairing and Mending our Churches? Again, Whether this is fair, and
work-man-like amongst honest men?

But to make a small Stop here, I must remind you, That this head is not to be
passed over Slightly; for this is the One Thing in the Essence of our Churches,
It is their Peculiar Infranchizement and Birthright, and we may not sell it
with Esau at a Cheap Market; If we Do, we undo our selves; for Indeed you must
know, here lies the Marring or Making of our Churches; here is laid up their
strength, and here hangs the Pick-Lock of their Treasure; for by this Key
stolen or wrinched out of their Hands, the Churches of Christ in the World,
have been Exposed and Plundered, for more then a Thousand Years, and many of
them have nothing at this day left them, comparitively, but a poor, starved,
shabbid, Implicit Faith, and a dull, saturnal, blunt and blind Obedience, that
a man would scarcely give a Groat for both of them. In a word, the Usurpations
of the Pastors, since the great Revolt, having unshackled one another, and
broke loose from the Restrictions they are justly subjected to, under the
Churches Power of Privilege, has utterly undone the Christian World, from This
Root of Bitterness, and Pride, from this Seed sprung up, the Man of Sin, as we
have it in an Anomulus Author, viz. the Eletherians, page 4. In words to this
purpose, Then a little Priest had an Opportunity to Establish himself, Then
there Appeared in the Temple of God that Antichrist, who calls himself the
Vicar of Christ. And then the same Author going on to discover the Original of
this Monstrous Birth, he says thus, Antichrist was Conceived in, by, and from
certain Affectations of Ecclesiastical Prehemincies. As though he should say, the
first Spawn or Embryo of that Insolent Hector, or Aspiring Nimord, (who first
Robbed the Laity of their Christian Liberties, and then Hunted down the
Potentates of the World, and Brought them as a Rich spoil into his Habitation
of Violence) took its Commencement from this Principle, viz. from the Clergies
assuming to themselves this Ecclesiastical Pre-heminence, viz. first their
obtaining an Exemption from the Cognizance of the Churches, for their Crimes,
and then in possessing themselves of the sole and absolute Jurisdiction (by a
dispotick Government) over the Churches themselves.

But however things have been hitherto, I shall no longer uphold the Debate, by
revising the Abuses that have been done to the Christian Churches by an
Ambitious Clergy, in the Ages past, which might more amply be discovered, by
tracing the Footsteps of the great Apostasy; But I shall end the whole Dispute
on this head, by drawing up a Protest, and denying the Jurisdiction of the
Court, erected and opened by the Proposals, as being perfectly Disagreeing and
Repugnant to our former Settlements and present Constitution.

SECT. IV. THat the Condidates of the Ministry undergo a due Trial by some or
other of the Association, concerning their Qualification for the Evangelical
Ministry; And that no particular Pastor or Congregation, Employ any one in
occasional Preaching, who has not been Recommended by a Testimonial under the
hands of some Association.
Answer.
To Monopolize (in the Great Articles of Trade) some very Rich Spice, and of
such use for the good of Kingdoms, that they must needs perish without it, or
be greatly Injured by excessive Sales, is accounted by good Common-Wealths-men
intolerable; for such Men or Companies, so invested, can, with Joseph in
Pharoahs Court, buy and Sell a Country at their own Prizes; even so, When these
Churches have delivered up the Right in their Condidates to the Classes, they
may then go a begging to their doors for their Ministers, and be contented to
take what they are pleased to put off, and at their own lay.

Obj. But you may Object, that Exomni Ligno, non fit Mercurius. Therefore the
Judicious must Determine and set their Mark upon what is Merchantable, and
throw by what is Refuse ware, or else there may be great Damage done for want
of caution. And thus we come to the Plain point in hand, which is to be debated
by Disputing this Question, viz.

Quest. Whether a Trial by Associations is Preferrible to the Old Custom of the
Churches, in promoting their Candidates for the Ministry to Public Trust?

Answer.
In the Reply, I shall, first, Consider our Candidates under Trial; as to their
Qualification, And ( secondly) Implead the Proposal on a Just Perjudice from
the Corruption of the Clergy.

1 st. We may consider our Condidates under Trial, as to their Qualifications,
(1.) As to their humane Learning; and here we absolutely object against the
Trial of Associations, as Booteless, Useless and perilous both to them and to
us.

1. To Them, it is no Diminution, or Trespass upon the Laws of Honor or Truth
to affirm, That the Settled Ministry in general (with some Reasonable
Exception) is less expert in Grammar and Points of Philosophy, then our learned
Children are at the Degree of Junior Batchellors, and that from dis-use, Proved
from all Experience, Nam usus Promotos facit; and also for the sake of more
divine studies, which Crowd out those first Ideas a great pace, according to
that Observation, on a learned Memory, Imago Imaginem Expellit, Aliisque Alice
Suceedunt, for as one Wave thrusts out another, so one Idea another. Therefore
it is pity to Expose such venerable Persons to the hazard in this Service,
least when they become Posers of others, they should be posed themselves. I do
Remember an odd story when I was at College, it was Retained as a Reproach on
a very Divine and worthy Person; though he was bred in England a good Scholar,
and also had been a Schoolmaster, and had taught the Grammar in his Young
times, but yet having laid by in a great measure, the use of such things, for
the sake of more valuable and Heavenly Speculations, being at the Solstice, and
one of the Corporation, ventured in the Hall to propose this Question, to one
of the Commoners, Quot Sunt Coela! To which the Lad with Sauciness enough, yet
with a gramatical Niceness, only Answered, Sed Audi.
Mascula Duntaxat Calos vacitabis et Argos.


That Prisians head will in likehood be kept bleeding from one Generation to
another, by reason of some unlucky Strokes, if this Form be Established, and
that to the great Detriment of those who strike the Blows.

2 dly. To US. Accedamical Learning we profess to be a very Essential
Accomplishment in the Gospel Ministry. It is introduced by the Ordinary
Blessing of God upon Humane endeavors, to Supply the place of the Cloven
Tongues, and those other Miraculous Gifts and Indowments of Mind Impressed upon
Christ's Ambassadors, whereby Fishermen Commence ( per Saltem) Doctors of
Divinity, and in an instant were stocked with such Principles of Religon,
Reason and Philosophy, that they were capable to dispute with Athens it self,
and Baffle the greatest Wits she could produce in defense and for the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, Act. 17.18

Thus it is very Reasonable that the Churches should be well assured of the
Sufficiency of the Learning of those Persons, e're they presume on the
Ministry; yet there is a fairer way in view, fuller of Honor and Safety, than
what the Proposal Directs to.

Our Accademy is the Storehouse of Learning, and this all Mankind will Assent
to. When you have lost the Company of the Muses, there they are found in their
Free-holds, where they hold the balance of Honor amongst the Learned. This is
the Place, if not of the Goddess Minarva or Apollo, yet the Bethel or Temple of
God himself; the God of Wisdom, where he, as chief Architect, with his
under-work-men, form Wise and Learned Men, and where you may have them wrought
off at the first hand: Then certainly here we are to secure our Credulity and
Confidence in this Affair; here we are to know whether they be or the Right
Stamp, Yea or No.

That of all men living, the best and most Infallible Standard for the
Philosophical Accomplishments of our Candidates, is the Judgment of the
Honorable President and noble Fellows of our Famous College; for this I am
sure must needs stand for a verity, that the Judgment of a real Honest and
skillful Artificer (keeping close to his Shop) concerning the Nature and
Qualities of an Edge-Tool which he has wrought, and hammered on his own Anvil,
out of its first Rude Matter, must certainly Excel him that has been long from
the Trade, that only takes it, turns the Edge slightly, or has but a Transient
view of it! So that hence we may fairly infer, that (as to humane Learning)
Harvards Commendamus is most valuable and sufficient, and justly Supplants
these Testimonials.

2. With respect to the more Evangelial Qualifications of the Gospel Ministry,
we shall be ready to honor the sufficiency of the Associates, yet must take
liberty to Object a few things.

1. Suppose we, that the Trial is made per Concionem ad Clerum, by Preaching a
Sermon in Audience of the Association, and I think this is the way proposed and
generally agreed upon, as the Square or Rule most agreeable with Gunter, to
take the Dimensions, Length and Breath of our Candidates by.

Reply 1. What can a Sermon do at deciding this Question? for that the most
sensible and valuable, who are usually most Humble and tender, are liable by
this Stupendous Examination, to be baffled by their own Timerity, and quite
dashed out of countenance by their own fear. Alas! upon their first Entrance
upon the Stage, to appear in so august and awful a Presence, this must needs
dis-animate and put their thoughts into a Ruffle, as having in their afrighted
minds the Resemblance of their going into the Spanish Inquisition, rather then
Dwelling amongst the Softer Measures of the Gospel? Luther himself, (that
unparalleled Instance of Spirit and Magnanimity (as I Remember of his Life)
hardly ever got over something of a Panick Fear attending him, through the
course of his Ministry; and indeed, Men of the quickest senses are most liable
to these Paroxisms. Then surely to put our Tyros to this Test, which may daunt
and dis-spirit the greatest Hero, is no ways Proportionable, especially seeing
they may under the Inspection of Learned, honest and Judicious Men, both
Pastors and Churches, and thereby under Covert of more Private Invitations
(with all their natural) creep into this noble Work, and keeping on, as their
Courage and Strength will bear the Journey, may, Gradatim, attain a just and
sufficient Probation, as our Learned youth have hitherto done.

Indeed, the Bold and Brazen, who can make a greater figure with half the
stock, by many shircking Tricks, and dissembling Artifices, defended and
supported with confidence and Delivery, may obtain the Euge Juvenis, that they
no ways deserve, as will be found, when they come to be Detected by a more
Dilatory Search, or a more tedious Analisis made of them. That, to conclude, as
the Proverb is, Vna Hirundo non facit Ver; one Swallow makes not the Spring; so
in this Trial one good or mean Sermon cannot Determine the man or umpire his
Case.

2. Suppose the Trial must be made, and the Question Determined by a Persons
Conversation. And this is a very great Article in the State of all Serviceable
men, and especially in the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4.12. 1 Pet. 5.3. being Ensamples
to the stock. Then Certainly a more Intimate Converse and Society, is a very
Invincible Plea. By the Laws and Costums of England, the Vicinage must be
allowed, as affording the Most Competent Judges, when Persons Reputation lies
at stake in Criminal Cases, because they are presumed to know somewhat
considerable of Persons and Cases of their own knowledge, and so more capable
of giving a Just Verdict. So in the Case, what do those Persons know of (...)
Learned Youth, who make up the Association? Our Candidates appear on a Certain
day, (...) blazing Stars once in an Age, and are gazed on* and then they
vanish) Now what Judgment can be made on a man's Conversation by such a
Transcient view? unless they must be handled in this Consistory, as Persons
that have been bound to the Peace, and in open Court are to be delivered from
their Recognizane by three Outcries?

3. Suppose the whole stock of Ministerial Qualifications must be enquired
into, and Judgment must pass by the direction of the Apostolic Law, 1. Tim.
3.2. Tit. 1^6.9. viz. Let them be Blameless, Sober, apt to Teach, etc. and add
what more you please, which the Scripture mentions, to fill up the Character of
an Evengelical Minister, to complete him in all his Gifts and Graces, either in
his beginnings, or in his Riper State, and it is most apparent, that our
particular Pastors and Churches, with the Learning, Experience, Grace, Wisdom
and Discretion they are Owners of, can make a more upright, judicious and
sollid Trial, and give a better account of our Candidates from their frequent
Converse with them, and their Occasional and Repeated Preaching amongst them,
then the Wisest Association in the World can do, and it is easier Dissembling
with the latter, than the former, unless the Association will take them home,
and both Winter and Summer them.

Now then, considering that their Degrees, with the express Testimony of the
College (when Perticularly desired) are sufficient Testimonials of their
Learning, and the Experience of their other good Gifts and Ministerial
Qualifications, obtained by Converse, and their Occasional Preaching, has been
the chief Test and Trial for our Candidates; and by these Methods they have
been approbated in order to Settlement in Office-Trust; and this has been the
Custum of the Country and Churches for near four score Years. Wherefore, to
conclude this Argument, I make this Proclamation, That if any Person or persons
disaffected with our old Settlements and Way in Churth-Conduct, will produce
one Example led into the Public Ministry by this Practice, which has justly
offended him, and he will or can evince this to be the blameable Cause, we will
then Surrender the Costum to your Mercy.

2 dly. I shall now Implead the Proposal on a Just Perjudice or Persumption of
Corruption in the Clergy, Though we are in Charity for the present, yet in this
way proposed, we have no assurance for the future against the Corruptness of
such Societies; and let any Sober man observe and he will find abundance of
poor Tools under the Mark of the Office, where these Measures, and such like,
are in force and form. How often is it Repeated, That poor Sordid Debauched
Wretches are put into Holy Orders, when as they were fitter to be put in to the
stocks or sent to Br^dwell for Madmen, then to be sent with their Testimonials
to work in Christ's Vineyard? How long have the Indies, the Seas, the Provinces,
and many other parts of the Empire Groaned under this Damnable way of cheating
God of his Glory and the World of Salvation?

Simony we know began almost as early as the Christian Church, and has
prevailed amongst Clergymen to a Prodigy. The Sacred things of Gods House have
been a Trade and Merchandise, which has beggared the Churches and filled the
Clergy in some Kingdoms with a Sacriligious and Exorbitant Pile of WEALTH, and
the World with a flood of Debauchees; and this Proposal puts us into the way to
open the Shop windows again, and expose the same Wares to Sale upon a little
Indulgence in our Country; for who can render a Reason that the same
Opportunities, the same Temptations, the same Corruptions, the same Nature, and
the same Power, would not produce the same effects? or that the same Climate,
Seed, Ground, and manner of Culture, should not Yield the same Grain at Harvest?

And what have we in pledge for our Security, more than the Fallacy and
fickleness of Humane Nature, when the Power is delivered out of our hands?

Obj. You may object, That our Candidates, Through their own Ambition, and the
Indulgence of particular Pastors, Thurst themselves into the Work too Young,
and this our way will Prescribe due Boundaries to them

Answer. 1. In General, St. Paul solves a worse Case, than can be found (Pick
whilst you are weary for an Example to quadrate with the objection, and render
it forcible) amongst all our learned Youth, who have hitherto adventured upon
the Ministry, Phil. 1.18 What then! etc. as though he should say, What Is that to
you, Sir? if Christ be Preached, all is well. And as to our Case, we may say,
Despise not the day of small things, all men must have a beginning, and every
Bird which is pretty well fleg'd must begin to fly. And ours are not of the
Nest where Icharus was hatched, whose Feathers were only glewed on; but these
belong to the Angelick Host, and their Wings grow out from their Essence;
therefore you may allow them, with the Lark, now and then to dart heavenward,
though the Shell or down be scarce off from their heads. And so we conclude with
our Charitable and Divine Apostle, What then! If Christ be Preached whether in
Pretense, or in Truth, either by Old or by Young, yet therein we do rejoice,
yea, and will rejoice, etc. to see our own Nazarites* so forward and well
disposed, it shall add to our Joy, and no ways increase our Horror, unless our
Ambition should Surprise us with Fear, that such young starts should outshine
us.

2. In Particular, Where will you six the Quando, and settle the Precise Era,
or Period of Time, for their Beginning?

1. There is no College or Statute Law yet Enacted, to decide this Question:
Then of necessity you must do homage to long and laudable Custom, as to a
Superior Authority, and honorable Ruler; and where that fixes the Time, you
must submit; for Custom, when full of days, and of Noble Examples, becomes the
Common Law of a Nation; and is as sovereign and Pleadable, as the Dictates of a
Parliamentary Power, at least, it shelters from Rebukes and Calumny: That for
any Gentlemen to Affront, Talk-high, and Frown at the Early Zeal and beginnings
of our Candidates, is but too much, in Imitation of the Great Mogul of India,
who after he has Dined, orders his Trumpets to be blown, to signify to the
Princes of the Earth, that they have liberty now to go to Dinner; and when he
has finished his Formalities, if they please, they may vail their Royal
Bonnets, and thank him for nothing; for where there is no Law, There is no
Transgression.

2. Under the Gospel, we have no Precise time, though there was under the Law,
when to begin and enter into the Ministry, the Gospel knows no Bar from Time,
where Persons are other ways meetly qualified. Days and Qualifications, are
diverse things, and the latter are the Essentials of a Minister of Christ. It is
not, how Old, but how Capable a Person is, which is the main point to be
enquired after here. Therefore where (in some good measure) there is an honest
Life, a Gracious Heart, an Orthodox Head, and a learned Tongue, There is no
reason to send such Youths to Jerico with David's messengers, Though their Beards
are not yet grown) to wait upon Time and Nature, for such an Accomplishment;
for certainly those Recited are the Principal in the Argument. It is a story in
the History of Persia, that when the Grecians sent some very young Noblemen
upon an Embassage to that Court, the Persians Reflected upon the Grecian
Republic for sending Beardless Boys on so Grave a Message to so mighty a
Monarch. To which the young Grecians very smartly Answered, That if state
Policy did consist in Beards, then He-Goats would do for Ambassadors, as well
or better then Men: I must confess, I am somewhat of their mind; and therefore
I think it is not, How long men have lived, but how Wise they are Grown: GOD
has ordained Praise out of the Mouths of Babes. Jeremiah pleads, he was a
Child, but that cannot null his Commission for the Ministry, Jer. 1.6. St. Paul
guards the Ministry of young Timothy, by Heavens Authority, to Defend him from
Censure, for Audaciousness. What! for a Child to teach Old Men their Duty!
Hold! says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy Youth. What! shall not
our great Lord Illustrate his Grace and Power in what Examples he pleases? Has
he not formed all the Powers of nature? and does he not furnish them with their
Distinct Virtues? etc.

Object. But you may say, Days are full of Wisdom, and Youth of Ignorance in
the great Affairs of Salvation.

Answ. Not always and universally so; as in the Examples just now Recited, and
in many others that may be named, called in at the third and sixth hour, Mat.
20. But however, if our Candidates must never begin till they are without
Ignorance, or not till they have gained all Points ( ad unquem) in the vast
studies of Divinity, then it may be said of all our Ministers, as Queen
Elizabeth was wont to say of Bishops, when she visited the Schools ( Study hard
Children, study hard, for) Bishops are Old Men. So of Necessity, all our
Ministers must be very Old Men. But I think that is more agreeable with our
Necessity and state, both in Nature and Grace, which one of the Ancients was
wont to say of himself, viz. That whilst he studied to Teach other men, he
Learned himself. That Considering Theology, as well as Art, is a long study,
and Life is very short, why may they not begin young? and also, considering
that our Churches are no ways over Cluttered with Candidates, there is no need
to serve them as Christ did the Money Changers, who with a Whip of small Cords,
he drove them out of the Temple; and especially they having hitherto acquitted
themselves in the main as men that need not be ashamed, and yet never any one
of them, to this day, has been Represented as Learned or virtuous, or any way
supported by these Testimonials.

SECT. V. THat they together be Consulted by Bereaved Churches, to Recommend to
them such Persons as may be fit to be employed amongst them, for present
supply, from whom they may in due time proceed to choose a Pastor.
Answer.
According to my Apprehension, this Proposal Insults very Daringly over the
Churches in two things.

1. By Ingrosing the Right of Jurisdiction, not only over the visible Freedom
and Liberties, but Conjugal and Secret Powers of Christ's Virgin and Widow
Churches. That it seems to me very Advisable (if this Proposal may stand for a
sound Precept) that forthwith another Office be erected, and put into the
hands and under the Government of a few men, exactly skilled in Phisiognomy,
and deeply studied in the Sympathies and Antipathies of Humane Nature, with an
absolute superintending Power to Control and direct all Wooers in their Choice
for the Marriage Bed; for that there is many a fond Lover who has betrayed the
glory of Wedlock, by making an unwise and unfortunate Choice; And why may not
particular Beds be Overruled, as well as particular Churches? both being for
the good and service of Mankind, and for that both parties, Husband and Wife,
Pastor and Church, by our sort of Government, are bound for Term of Life, or so
long as both shall live. Indeed, were our Constitution in Church Order under
the Superintendency of a Patron, or a Lord Bishop, who can send ( pro Tempore)
a Curate, etc. and then Recall him, and place another in his stead, the Project
might be very Advisable; but seeing these Churches are settled Congregational,
and by their Principles, the Ordination is, as it were, the Nuptials, or
Marriage Day of two Lovers, that nothing but Death, or a Bill of Divorce (for
betraying the Glory of their Union) can Part: It is then good and reasonable,
that they be left to choose as they best affect, and not forcibly be tied up to
a kind of Hobsons Choice, One of these, or None. This apparently puts too hard
upon the Churches Liberties, and overthrows the Government; for that our
Platform in Chap. 2. treating of the Nature of the Churches, asserts, Sect. 5.
That the State of the Visible Church since the Coming of Christ, is Only
Congregational; Therefore neither National, Provincial nor Classical; Then what
does this Proposal do here?

Also, our Platform asserts the free electing Power of the Churches, Chap. 5.
in these words, Ordinary Church Power is that of Privilege, such as belongs to
the Brotherhood whereby they design persons unto Office. So also in Chap. 10.
in these words, The Power granted by Christ unto the Body of the Church and
Brotherhood is a Prerogative or Privilege which the Church does exercise in
the Admission of her own Members, and in choosing their own, Officers. Now if
Christ has given these high Powers and Authorities to his Churches, he has
certainly furnished them with Skill and Wisdom to Manage them.

So we come to the Second Part of the Affront in this Proposal, and that is,

2 dly. By its making a plain Presumption of Incapacity in the Churches of
Doing their own proper work without their Graces help. It is as much as to say,
Alas! Alas! it is well known that the Churches are generally a sort of plain
men, little Skilled in deep Matters; That there is apparent Danger, if left in
their Elections to their own Conduct of Introducing very Illiterate Persons and
doleful Creatures, to preach in the Temple of God, as Officers there. Now this
is much agreeing with the old Arguments, against the Laity, who were described
by the Learned to be without the Knowledge of the Original Languages, and other
parts of Polite Learning, and so no ways fit to Interpret Scripture, therefore
it is very Rationally Enacted, That the BIBLE be taken from them, lest they
should study Heresy and not Holiness out of that Divine Book. But to pass by
all such Pleas, I shall come to the main point in plain Terms, and that is
this, Our Platform is our Settlement, and it has Secured to the Churches these
Prerogatives, and they are part of their Intailed Inheritance; and it is a vain
thing to pretend or plead the Incapacity of Right Owners and Rich Proprietors,
especially whilst there is a Competent Set of Senses left them. Indeed, when
any Gentlemen can show any Precept, and produce a Commission for the taking
into their hands the Estate of Ideot-Churches, they may then Cite their
Intellectuals to a proper Bar, and Verdict going against any particular
Example, they than, Ipso facto, become Gaurdians, and may enter into their
Worship. But in the mean time, as to our own Churches, and the whole
Constellation of them, and every Individual or particular Church amongst them
remains Compos mentis, and therefore must not be intreagued by such Officers as
these are.

But yet before I close this Argument, I shall a little further humor the
Presumption of Insufficiency here laid down; and therefore I shall desire, that
a Survey be made of the state of the Churches, and if their free Election be
found for this thirty Years last past (and we will go no higher) have by the
Major part of Voices introduced Insufficient Officers, Then let the Platform
be nulled, and the Proposal stand as a more vallid Cannon. And in this Inquiry
we would know, whether the Dictators will give leave (in drawing up the
Catalogue of defective elections) that they themselves be put on the back of
the Title Page, and there stand as the Errata of our Old Government? or whether
they themselves are the only exceptions?

But suppose we, when we have accomplished our search, we find their own, and
all other Elections, for the main, have hit Right; and if so, then whether we
ought not to pay a Veneration to the Practice, as having more of Christ in it
than we can in the Rufflings of Ambition presently find out, or perceive? And
whether after such long Experience and good Success it may not be our Wisdom to
keep this via Trita, which we have found to be via Tuta, That is to say, keep
the good old Way of our Blessed Predecessors, lest going into a new and
untrodden Path, we fall into some Ambuscado, and come off whith broken Bones
and Ruined Churches?

Quicquid Praecipiti via.
Certum Deserit Ordinem
Loetos non habet exitus boetious.
Rashly to leave the plain and good old way
Turns into Mournful night a Joyful Day.
SECT. VI. THat hereunto may be Referred, the Direction of Proceeding in any of
their particular Churches, about the Convening of the Councils, that shall be
thought necessary for the Welfare of the Churches.
Answer.
Query. Who must give the Direction, and Judge what Councils are Necessary for
the Welfare of the Churches?

Answer, The Association.

Reply, I thought as much; for the sole and whole Power, is, by these
Proposals, resigned to them, as their Indisputable and Undoubted Right,
insomuch that their* Beneplacito, the Elicit and free Resolves of their Will,
shall and must be the Absolute and uncontroulieble Rule of Conduct; that is to
say, the Churches are to be in Vassalage, and the Association is to Rule all by
Prerogative; so that forever hence forward, we may Inscribe cross the Door of
the Conclave (to Notify the Rule of the House) that Imperial Law, Sic Volo,
sit Jubeo, stat pro Ratione Voluntas.
We will and Doom, none now can us withstand;
Our Will is Reason; for the Churches in the Land.


Indeed, when great men turn Beggars for small Booties, with the famous General
Baziliareous, it signifies, the Ebb of Fortune runs low with them; But when
they ask an Ancient Inheritance upon Gift, it signifies either the Donor to be
in a Languishing Posture, and that his Estate is like to Escheat to the Crown,
through failure of natural (...), or else great boldness in the beggars. But
what should be the Meaning of this Demand, who can Divine? I hope they don't
reckon the Churches to be making their last Will, and design them for their
Heirs.

The Churches in New England are fairly Possessed of this high Prerogative, viz.
of Conveening Councils necessary for their own well being, they are also as
likely to continue as they were forty Years ago, unless their own Pastors
should betray them. And they are also as capable of managing all Instruments
devolved upon them by Christ, as they were in the days of their Youth. Then
what can we make of this Contrivement, viz. when the Churches shall have
Occasion to seek Relief by Council (as sometimes the Emperor has been Confined
at the Insolent Threshold of his Holiness, and upon his coming forth in his
Infallibility, this Pile of Temporal Glory has been his Horse-blok; and so
here) they must humbly wait at the Door of the Association, till they shall be
Informed When, What, Who, and Where they shall have one. But not to interrupt
the World with long Stories, we must again, here Demur upon Title.

Sect. That the several Associations in the Country maintain a due
Correspondence with one another.

Answer.
If the Platonic Notion concerning the Universal Soul of the World or Spirit
of Nature (whereby one Body is affected by the Operations of another at some
considerable distance) were Established for an Infallible Theorem, and these
Societies could circulate their Intelligence by the Power and Echoes of this
Mighty Essence, the design might then be practicable; or had we in all Corners
of our Country, Doves trained up to carry Males or Pacquets of Letters from
Country to Country, there might be some hopes for Supporting this Mighty
Correspondence, but to do it wholly by humane Means, the Charge plainly
threatens to eat out the Profit.

But we may suppose the Seat of these things shall be universally settled,
fully butting upon the Post-Road, and what a Mighty business is a Six Penny or
Four Penny Letter in such a good Cause? Nay, indeed there is no great matter in
it self, yet these Six Pennys or Four Pennys, are like the Sand on the sea
shore, a great many of them put together grow very heavy, especially where Wife
and Children are to be maintained upon 70 l. or 80 l. Income per Annum.

Wise men may do as they please, yet for my part, I can see no good Policy in
the Proposal, unless you can Court some Rich Potentate to espouse the Cause,
and Sacrifice Annually some part of his Royal Revenue to Support the Fantasy.

Sect. So that the State of Religion may be the Better known and Secured in all
the Churches.

Answer.
Religion (In its Infaillible Original the Wisdom and Authority of God! in its
Infinite Object, the Ineffable Persons and Perfections of the Divine Essence in
its means, the Gospel of Salvation in its Inspired Wakeful and Capatious
Ministry, in its Subject, the Inestimable Immortal Soul of Man, in its
trancendant Effects, (1) In Time, the charming Peace and joys of Conscience.
(2) In Eternity, the Joyful Retreat and shouts of Glory, is the Most
Incomparable Gift or Paladium, which ever came from Heaven amongst all the
favors of the Father of Lights, there is none Parallel with this; when
disclosed in its Beauty, it Ravisheth all the intellects of the Universe; and
Challenge may be made, that the Prerogatives and Glory belonging to all the
Crowned Heads in the World, do Bow and wait upon its Processions through the
Earth, to guard it from its Innumerable and Inveterate Enemies. Yet in Paying
our Veneration and Attendance, we must distinguish Right, and place every thing
properly, and the means must be proportionate with the end, and agreeable in
their Natures, or otherwise whilst we go about to Accomplish a good End, viz.
the Security of Religion by Improper Means, we may loose our Attempt, and have
no Thanks, but be blamed for our pains; for we must not do evil, that good may
come.

It is Certain that the Church of Christ is the Pillar of Truth, or sacred
Recluse and Peculiar Assilum of Religion, and this sacred Guest, Religion,
which came in the Worlds Infancy from Heaven, to Gratify the Solitudes of
miserable Man, when God had left him, has long kept house with us in this
Land, to sweeten our Wilderness state, and the Renowned Churches here, are her
Sacred Palaces. Then certainly it is not fair for her Lovers, under pretense of
maintaining her, welcome in greater state, to desolate her pleasing
Habitations, though they stand somewhat low like the Myrtle grove, Zach. 1.8. etc.

Sect. And particularly it is thought necessary to the well being of these
Churches, that all the Associations in the Country meet together, by their
Respective Delegates, once in a year.

Answer.
This is a great a Thesis; and who-ever was the Father, the Womb of it is very
fertile and bigg with Articles of Moment, it Comprehends a large Territory, and
a great Treasure; we must therefore Survey it by Cosmography, and then nextly
by the Laws of the Church Stock.

1. The Country contained in this Proposal, by a just Consequence, and from the
nature of the Design, must extend so far as we can find any Gospel Churches
Planted, or to be Planted within the English Dominion on the firm Land or
Continent of America, there is no Restriction made to Exclude any; and Charity
is a grace that would have every one Virtuous, and equally Privileged with
means for that End; so that we may begin our Lines of Latitude in the South,
somewhat Northward of the Capes of Florida, and then Extend them to the
North, to some parts of Nova Scotia, if not to the Bay of St. Laurence, and
from those points on to the Atlantic, we must stretch our Lines over-Thawrt,
keeping equal Longitudes, till we meet with other Princes Dominions* Now this
is a noble Territory, enough for an Empire, and all English; and why may we not
be thus Extensive for the good of the Churches therein Planted? Other Countries
have sent their Delegates near as far as this comes to, to wait upon the
Conventions of his Holiness. But, the Mischief is, The Revenue will not hold out.
But I have Thought of one way, and that will do, if we can but obtain, though I
acknowledge it is somewhat Chimerical, or Whimsical; Yet, though it be, the
Proposal has no reason to repine or find fault, for that it is Its near
Kins-Man.

The Project is this, viz. Upon the great Settlements which we hope for,
between the two Crowns, I advise that Petitions be made (if the Articles of
Settlement will allow of it) That either the Rents of Toledo, or some good
stout Gold Mine in Peru, be reserved wholly to the use of this Design, and if
you are pleased to keep or settle within narrower Limits (when we know your
Territory) we can by Rules of Proportion and Substraction, compute the Charge,
and if there be any Overplus, when your own Charges are Defrayed, the rest may
be assigned to the next Province for such Good Uses. But however, let the
Petitions go for-ward; for you will have want enough of your Share; for I am
sure, your present Supplies are not full enough for your Daily Bread and these
Contingent and unexpected Charges, especially seeing they were never thought
of, or Provided for, in your first Settlements.

SECT. VIII. ANd Finally, That Ministers disposed to Associate, endeavor in
the Most Efficacious Manner they Can, to Prevail with such Ministers, as
Unreasonably* neglect such Meetings with their Brethren in their Proper
Associations, that they would not expose themselves to the Inconveniences that
such Neglects cannot but be attended withal.
Answer.
This Proposal seems to be founded upon the Epecurian Doctrine of Atoms; for by
the Scheme which Atheistical Atomists give concerning the Beginning of the
World, by their Account, it was after this lucky manner, that is to say, There
was before time, a vast Pile of Incoherent Atoms, which Globically hung
Sleeping upon a Centre-Atom, without the least Grain of sense, through the vast
Eternity, a Perte Ante; But at last, and no body can tell how, they were
inclined to throw off their present Posture; but being neither of one Form,
Inclination nor Propension, quickly great heaving and shuffing (from various
Sympathies and Antipathies) began to be amongst them, that a Chaos is presently
Rolled together, and in a little time this Magnificent and curious World, which
you look upon, came out of the horrid Womb of this distracted heap of Atoms,
and that without any help from a Creating Power, but only by a wonderful good
Chance. Thus far you have the Doctrine of Atoms, which I could not well avoid,
because of so much Noble Matter Pre-existing, and represented in various Shapes
and Forms, with a sound of Motion and various Sympathies and Antipathies
appearing, and represented by the Proposal; but yet, can hear of no
Superintending Fiat, or any Creating Voice to Overruled, or say, Let it Be. But
only if Persons are Disposed, or Indisposed, the Business must be managed as
Wisely as you Can; and if it should so Chance, that some fine thing, (never
before seen in the Country) should be made out of these Materials, without the
help of a Creating Power, the World would be a great Debtor to the Accident,
and the Churches may they not be Justly stripped of their being, to make Room for
it, and maintain it?

But to be more Distinct, and somewhat more close in my Answer, I must remind
you, That our Blessed Lord Commands us to Pray, Math. 6* Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc. Lead us not into Temptation, But Deliver us from Evil. And if
sincere, he has Promised, To stablish us and keep us from Evil. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
From these Divine Principles, the Question is, Whether those Pastors are the
stable or Unstable, the Reasonable, or Vnreasonable-Men, viz. Either those who
have Promoted this Design in the Country, or those who have withstood it? And
also where has Temptation Prevailed MOST? And to put this Debate under a
brighter Light, I will make bold to recite a brief History of this matter, till
we bring you to the Nativity of these Proposals, and to the day wherein they
were Born, with some Present Improvement of the History.

About Thirty years ago, more or less, there was no Appearance of the
Associations of Pastors in these Colonies, and in some Parts and Places, there
is none Yet. But after the Country had suffered much in the slaughters and
depredations committed by the Heathen, and by many other Afflictions, the
Neighboring Ministers, in some Counties, met to Pray together, etc. and for no
other Intent, that I ever knew or heard of. But after they had continued their
Meetings for some years, and others following the Example, began to Converse
together and communicate Cases, as best suited Each Person, and at last
perceiving they were almost gotten in to a Classical Form, before they thought
of it, They began to give their Meetings the Specious Titles of Classes
Associations, And Ecclesiastical Conventions, etc. as Securely as though these
Titles were a Fruit naturally growing out of our own Constitution; and by
Degrees began to dream that they were Really, and De Jure, what their new
Titles and (...) Custom had made them only de Facto, and Time increased their
Inclinations and Purposes to Compass a more formal and complete Settlement. It
is certain their Opportunities were Considerable, the Keys of the Church
Treasures being put into their hands. And the more the main Point is studied,
the more glory appears to feed men's Ambition, like the impression by the Eye,
on our great Parents in Paradise Genesis 3.8. The Tree was Pleasant to the Eyes, a
Tree to be desired. Alas! Alas! Empire and supreme Rule is a glorious thing!
Par core subjectis and debellare Superbas, is a very Royal business. Now this
Conceit did begin Pretty much to Predominate, especially in some Gentlemen that
were inclined to Presbyterian Principles, Men of Worth and Learning, who
improving their Advantages of sense and Influence, to Intreague others of a
lower set of Intellectuals, etc. brought the business so near to a Conclusion,
as you find it in the last recited Proposal, wherein you have the main of this
History contained, like Homers Illiads in a Nut shell. But to make short, and
Conclude my Story, when they had thus far advanced and Ripened their design,
out comes these Proposals like Aarons Golden Calf, the 5th day of November. 1705.

Thus you have a short Account how things have been carried on, Relating to
Associations; and having a convenient Crisis, I shall improve the History, to
Promote my Present Design in a few perticulars.

1. By Considering the Present Duty of our Erring Pastors. 2. The Justice to be
done on these Proposals. 3. Make some small Astrological Remarks Relating to
the Date, which the Clew of our History has brought us to.
1. As to the Duty of such as are Involved in the Charge, whether or no (upon a
Presumption that this History be true) They ought not to cease Exciting others
to wander from their Proper Post, and they themselves (if not by the open Acts
of the Churches Authority, yet) by the good Government of their Own Wisdom,
Prudence and Grace, be Remanded within their Proper Boundaries, and there
Continue as Stars within their own Orbs, to Influence and Act, Tum in Modis
Quam in statu Quo Prius. according to former usage, and the nature of their
trust, and no more go beyond their own Line 2. Cor. 10.16.

2. Whether These Proposals here offered to view, be not like Aaron's Golden
Calf? And whether they ought not to be served, as Moses dealt with that ( Exodus
32.20) when he took it and burnt it in the Fire, and ground it to Powder, for
that it is very Evident, That though it be But a Calf now, yet in time it may
grow (being of a Thristy Nature) to become a sturdy Ox that will know no Whoa,
and it may be past the Churches skill then to subdue it.

For if I am not much mistaken (and Pareus too) That great and Terrible Beast
with Seven heads and ten Horns, Discribed in the Revelations 1^. was nothing
else a few Ages ago but just such another Calf as this is. It was indeed finely
Shaped and of Neat Limbs, when it was first Calved, insomuch that the Great
Potentates of the Earth, were much Ravished with its Aspect and Features: some
offered to Suckle it on the choicest Cows amongst all the Herds of Royal Cattle
(that it might be large) hoping to stock their own Countries with the Breed,
and when it was grown to a Considerable Magnitude, to Render it more shapely
and fair, they put Iron Tips on to its Horns and beset its Stupendous Bulk
with very Rich Ornaments, that they might make it the more Aweing to All
Beholders, And (if possible) by such Artifices to Add to the Natural Pride and
Choler of the Creature.

But alas, Poor men! They have paid dear for their Prodigality and Fondness;
for this very Creature, that was but a Calf when they first begun to feed it,
is now grown to be such a mad Furious and Wild Bull, that there is scarce a
Christian Monarch on Earth, unless the great ANNE, their Swedish and Prusian
Majesty's, and their High Mightinesses, with this Exception) there is scarce a
Potentate in the World, the Best Horseman or Hunts-man of them all, that dare
take this Beast by the Horns, when he begins to Bounce and Bellow. Indeed the
Emperor within these few Years, has Recovered so much Courage that he took him
by the Tail, to drive him out of Royal Granges, being quite Angry and weary
with his Cropping and Brouzingon the Flowers of his Imperial Crown. But
otherways the Beast generally goes at large, and does what he will in all
Princes Dominions, and keps them in awe. Therefore to conclude, and Infer,
Obsta Principiis! It is Wisdom to nip such Growths in the Bud, and keep down by
early Slaughter such a breed of Cattle. Nam omne Malum nascens facile
opprimitur.

3 dly. In all the Astrological Remarks I have made, I find its Nativity full
of favorable Aspects to English Churches. The 5th day of November has been as
a Guardian Angel to the most Sacred Interest of the Empire: It has rescued the
whole Glory of Church and State from the most fatal Arrest of Hell and Rome.
That had I been of the CABAL, or Combination, which formed these Proposals, so
soon as I had seen and perceived the date (as I Imagine) my heart, with King
David's would have smote me, and I should have cried out Miserere nostri DEVS:
The Lord have Merry upon us; this is the Gun-Powder-Treason day; and we are
Every Man Ruined, being Running Faux's Fate! Why, Gentlemen! have you forgot
it? It is the day of the Gun-Powder-Treason, and a fatal day to Traitors.

Our Measures Certainly intend the Blowing up the Churches, as Faux's did the
Parliament; That for my own Part, I have such an Awe upon my mind of this very
day, That I have made a Settled Resolution, That of all the Days of the whole
Year, I will never Conspire Treason against my natural Prince, nor Mischief to
the Churches on the 5th day of November.

And so Farewell, Gentlemen, for I dare not join with you in this Conspiracy.

PART. II.
SECT. I. THat these Associated Pastors with a proper Number of Delagates from
their several Churches be formed into a standing and Stated Council, which
shall Consult, Advice and Determine all Affairs that shall be proper matter for
the Consideration of an Ecclesiastical Council within their respective Limits,
Except always the Cases are such as the Associated Pastors judge more
Convenient to fall under the Cognizance of other Council.
Answer.
Seeing it is the first Time we have in these Proposals heard of a Standing
Council for these Churches, and though the Whole Doctrine of it is not precisely
or in Terms contained in this Section, yet that they may pass over what remains
more briefly, when I come upon each following Section, I will therefore make a
stop here, and discourse this Subject in its seveal Distinct Branches, and make
but one work of it; and I shall thus Methodize the Business.

1. I shall observe the seeming Favor to the Lay-Delegates here offered to
them in this Proposal. 2. Survey the nature of the Council. 3. Inquire into its
Original. 4. Take an account of the Work which is assigned it. 5. View the Time
appointed, certain and uncertain. 6. Inquire for the Place where it is to meet.
7. And Lastly, discourse its Maintenance.
1. We must observe the seeming Favor the Lay-Delegates or Fraternity of the
Churches are Treated with in this Proposal; for at the first Tender they seem
very Honorably to be invited into the Association, as though they were to be
established Members of this Council, were to be equal sharers in the Authority
and Government in it; yet do but mind the Connection of both Parts of the
Proposition, and you will find there is nothing of this nature Intended for
them. But only a Specious show, they are invited to establish the Associations
on their Tottering Basis, and that is soon done, if all parties are agreed, and
from the Fraternity, there is no need of any more formalities, than paying
Homage to their Authority by this Act of Submission and Obedience here
Proposed; and so soon as this is done, you shall find the Fraternity very
fairly Released at the door of the Sessions, every man Repairing to his own
home. It is an observation, on the Monarchy of Bees, that the Drones formerly
supposed to be not only a lumpish, but a useless Be, yet is of that nature,
and so Essential a Member of that Common Wealth, that it is Really the
Male-Bee, and does Imprignate the Females, who are the Sole Laborers in that
Kingdom, but when that Crisis is over, the poor Drones are by common Consent
Banished, as a great Incumberment; so in our Case, Alas! what can be expected,
when the Laye-Delegatees have done the former Job, but that they shall be laid
by, for their Wisdom and Capacity is no ways Admired in these Proposals. And it
has always been found that the Laity are a Clog to Clergymen, when they begin
to soar a-loft, or above their proper Sphere; and if you will but view the
Proposal again, in the hindermost part of it, you will see a Backdoor very
Artificially finished and left upon Latch, for their Exclusion; for though they
are called to be Members of the Council in the first part of the Proposal, yet
by Exception made in the last part, they are to sit upon no Case but what the
Associates please; and seeing it is at their dispose, you may Rationally and
forcibly conclude, That those who have made it their business to unpin the
whole Tabernacle, and have but this Chair to Do, and then all is their own,
will now finish their Work with a wet Finger, upon the foresaid Compliance. For
you must Note, that after they have Admitted the Brethren, and viewed the
Certificates of Election from the several Churches, containing some
Congratulatory Complements, to Honor the new Constitution and Government, (as
is usual in all States) and having also treated the Delegates with the
Civilities of the House, and also with a long and tedious Harangue of the
Mighty Blessings these new Settlements plainly Predict and Promise the Country,
etc. the Delegates are then advised, There is no Case at Present Depending fit
for their Cognizance, but what is upon file; The Associates have already
Considered about it, and Referred to some other Council best known to their
Graces. And so, good Brethren, you are now with many Thanks for your obedient
Attendance, Released till Latter Lammas, or till the Greek Calends come about.

And here we may dig a Grave to bury all our Ancient Privileges in, and Hang
our Harps upon the Willows, and when we are thus wasted, should you call us in
once more to sing one of the Songs of Sion, all our Notes must be Elegy and De
tristibus, yet the Broken Accents, and lowly Murmours of our Sorrow will serve
for Elahs and Sweet Diapasans, in the Conquerours Song of Triumph.

2. We must, Nextly, survey the Nature of the Council, which cannot be sooner,
and with better Advantage (to Represent the true Idea of it to every man's
understanding) than in a brief Definition, Thus, The Council is to be standing
and stated, To meet once in the year at the least, and at other times as each
Association shall please to Determine, To Inquire into the Condition of the
Churches, and Advise such things as may be for the Advantage of our holy
Religion. Thus you have the nature of it laid out in Terms very Concisely.

But if a longer Description, according to the Genuine sense of Expressions in
the Proposals, will better suit you, and give a better impression of its Nature
upon your thoughts, we may then Describe it Thus,

It is a Council of Humane Invention, stated and Settled to Convene once in the
Year, Yearly, during the Revolution of the Heavenly Bodies, and at other
certain Times of the year, so as to keep its Course Parallel with our High and
Superior Sessions of the Peace, if the Creators please to Consult, Advise and
Determine all Affairs within the reach of Ecclesiastical Councils, and
Especially, etc.

And thus, we being a People swiming in such Plenty, that all our Chargeable
Measures, both Domestic in our Private Families, and Public in Church and
Common Wealth, being not near sufficient, to take off our Waste, and
Superfluous Streams, and our Riches and stores so plainly over-loading us, we
have here formed a Creature, that will help to sup up all, and feeding upon our
full Baskets, we shall find, that the further we go with Esop's Load, the
lighter we shall grow; Then who will not Admire the Wisdom of the Invention!

3. Our next Task is to Examine the Original of this Council, which Inquiry may
be resolved into this Disjunct Proposition, viz. This Council is the Result of
the Will, Obeying the Understanding in its last Dictates, Erring or not Erring.

The Question being thus stated, it is at every man's Liberty, to take the part
in the Disjunction which best likes him. I suppose the Proposal Arrested and
brought to Trial, will plead, Not Erring, or Not Guilty, as is usual with all
Criminals, when Indicted; and therefore seeing you expect to be Cleared by the
Jury, you must give us an honest account, Who set you on Work, and what Rule
you were guided by to Assure us that your Intellectual Powers were free from
Error in forming this Council, and we will give you Room enough in your own
Defense. For,

1 st. If you can produce Evidence from the Cannon of Scripture, in express
Terms, or by sound Consequence, and prove New England Churches are obliged to
form a standing and stated Council, or that you are to do it for them, etc. we
will submit. But no such Cannon can be found. The Proposals then Incur a heavy
Praemunire for making so Bold with a Settled Government, and no Text to warrant
the Attempt.

2. Is it by any Authority, derived from the Civil Government of the Country by
Law, or Practice, that this Council is here Erected?

1. By Law, If there be any such Law, you have Liberty to Plead it in your own
Defense.

2. By Practice, Has the Civil Government ever set such an Example? Have they
ever Intrencht upon the Privileges of the Churches in the least Degree? And in
their own Orb, are they not more Exemplary? Don't all men keep to Commission?
Are they not Curious in maintaining all Settled Forms, as the Limits and
Boundaries of all men's Actions and Interests? Nay, is not the Exalted Head of
this Body Politic in his whole Ministry, Careful to Steer all his Actions by
his Commission, and the Precept of Law? Is not the least Error (though made by
Jealousy, and not found in Reality) that looks but like an Arbitrary Action
presently drawn into complaint, as a great Greivance, and Common Neusance? If
it be but in Dream, that the Exchequer appears Touched, without a precept, or
the Wings of our Civil Liberties Clipped, or so much as a Feather be plucked from
them, is not the Country here and the Court at home filled with Complaints?
what means all this? And yet must these Churches, formed by Principles of Piety
and Honor, and under the Steerage of a wise and just Government, bear whole
Cart Loads of Injuries, and have all their Liberties Violated? And at last have
a Stated Antichristian Arbitrary Council, that can cut their Throats for all
the wise Regulation, that is in it, be thrust in upon them? and both Scripture
and the Wise Fathers of the Common Wealth, no Patrons to it? and what must we
Swallow all this? This must needs be a very heavy meal to Digest!

Vt opes et Lamentabile Regnum -- Ereverint?
They spoil our Kingdom, and our Courage Dash,
They take our Wealth, and leave us naught but Trash.
3. Is there any Certificate, Orders, or Vote, from the Churches, as the Womb
of this Council? If there be, the Proposals shall then Pass for the Innocent
Midwife, and no harm shall come. But, alas! if we search all Church Records,
the Pursuit is Blankt! Therefore it must stand for a Daring Intrusion upon the
Churches Power of Privilege.

It is and will be acknowledged, with great Justice and Satisfaction, that the
Pastors of the Churches are in a high station, as they Represent the great
Shepherd, and their Trust is Noble and Great; They are Rulers, and to Conduct
all Transactions, etc But yet must never Infringe the Churches Power of
Privilege in any Branch of it? It becomes the Holiness, Wisdom and Honor of
the Ruling Officers at a Crisis, when the Churches are in exercise of this
Power, not to allow themselves to dictate Too Imperiou^^y: They must never,
indeed, in all their Ministration, talk with such an Elevated Language, as in
the 3 d Section of the 2 d Part, in these Words, viz. That each Church Choose
and Depute one or more (Private Members) to Attend their Pastor in their stated
Session, etc. As though the high Commission Court was Returned from Exile, and
now opened, and some of your Graces were to be the Lord Chancellor, This
Plainly carries too high a Crest. What! to consider your selves as a Distinct
Estate from the Churches, and to send out of your Higher House your Orders to
be Obeyed in the Lower House, etc? But, I say, this is not Right, for in
Convening and calling of Councils, the Churches are your Superiors; and upon a
severe Interpretation of their Canons, They may, if they please, leave you at
home. For though you have been Elected once into Office, yet in the Exercise of
this their Power, you stand but Competitors with other Principal Persons, for
their Choice and Election, to Determine you Members of an Ecclesiastical
Council: Possibily this Doctrine may seem to be but a very Crude Dose. But yet,
I assure you, it is Approbated by a College of very able and Learned
Physicians; and I hand it to you as I find it made up in the Churches Chest of
Medicines, Platform Chap. 16. Sect. 2. The Efficient Cause of Ecclesiastical
Councils, or Synodical Assemblies, next under Christ, is the Power of the
Churches sending forth their Elders and other Messengers, etc. Sect. 3.
Magistrates have Power to Call a Synod, by Calling to the Churches to send
forth their Elders and Messengers, for the Constituting of a Synod, in a Church
Act, Sect. 6. Because none are or should be more fit to know the state of the
Churches, nor to advise of ways, etc. Therefore it is fit, that in the Choice
of the Messengers for such Assemblys, they have Special Respect unto such, viz
Elders; That certainly if you expect your Council shall escape Condemnation,
you must then produce the Probatum Est of the Churches, or else it Perishes
under this Trial.

Can you show any Patent from the Emperial Chamber of our Mighty Monarch, to
take into your hands (that you may new Model) these Churches (the Royal
Demesnes of Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace) as an Escheat to the Crown? Or,
have you Commission, with Instructions, from thence, to erect within the
Province, such Costly and Formidable Assemblies, as are here projected? Nay, if
you can find or pick up amongst the Old Statutes, that are not quite worn out,
or produce one venerable Precept or Example through out the whole English Empire,
for the Government of Church or State therein, we will state your Case, and
grant you one Imparlance (with Due Time) if you can make any Reasonable
Presumption, it may be had for your Justification; and in the mean time, I
shall venture to Recite a few Principles of the English Government, that are
like the Vena Cava, or great Arteries in Nature, which Circulate the Blood and
Spirits through the Imperial Body; and if they don't all with a joint Voice (like
a Jury in their Return, where no mandissents) Condemn your Council and whole
Scheme, you shall still have a Jail-delivery, and be set free.

Principle I.
There is no one of the Three Estates of the Empire, can make a valid Act to
bind the Subject, or institute any New Forms of Government.

It is Certain the Parliament, that Supreme Court, by an United Voice, is very
Transcendent; It makes Null, Enacts, and Abrogateth all Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances concerning matters Ecclesiastical, Civil, Martial, Maritime, etc.
Therefore all Acts, Institutions, Creations of Trust, Corporations and Offices,
either Originally and Immediately, or by a fair consequence, derive from this
Fountain, the Imperial Crown, inricht with many great Prerogatives, and adorned
with many ample Flowers, they were there Planted by the Creating Power of the
Nation, and no English Monarch can at pleasure Enlarge that Garden with a New
Species. That to meet with such things as these now under Debate within an
English Province, etc. Query, Whether they are Enacted by single men, or small
Factions, Or by the United Voice of the Kingdom? If not by the latter, they
must Dye Traitors to the Empire, as Transgressing against the Essentials of its
Constitution, and Liberty of Conscience is no City of Refuge Here.

Principle II.
All English Men are Privileged by, and strictly Bound to the Law; that is the
fruitful Reason of all good and Rule of Duty. To be bound to the Peace, or the
good behavior, is to be bound to the Law, that is every man's Master and Guide.
Query, whether these Proposals, and this Council, have not put a slight upon
this Dominion?

Principle III.
The Vengeance or vindictive Justice of the Nation flames (in the sanction of
the Law) against all Transgressors.

Every one that breaks the Law, breaks from the Rule of his Duty and Trust, and
in a degree violates the Power of the Nation, and Usurps the whole Legislation;
therefore in the Execution of these Direful Sanctions and Penalties affixed to
the Statutes, the Omnipotent Power of the Nation Revenges the Glory of its own
Independence and Unaccountableness upon its Insolent Subjects, according to
that, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou Eatest thereof* thou shall Surely dye.
Therefore I may say to this Council, MEMENTO MORI!

Principle IV.
Every great Person is under the Awe of the Law, either as Directive or
Co-ersive.

It is the saying of those who are skilled in the Law, That Rex in Regno Suo,
Superiores habet, DEVM et LEGEM, The King has in his Realm too Superiors, GOD
and the LAW, though he is only under the Directive; but all his Great Subjects
are under the Co-ersive Power of it. The Nobles and Great Ministers in Church
and State look upon the Law, as the watchful Eye of some Direful Numen. The
Superior Clergymen, the great Bishops of the Kingdom, though they appear
Masters of such Prerogatives, yet they have nothing but what they Derive from
the Law; and the Laws are their Boundaries, saying, Hitherto ye shall go, and
no further at your Peril. That those Great men might as well have undertaken
with Archimides, to have Removed the Earthly Globe (upon Condition) as to have
done such a thing as this. What! to Alter the Constitution of Church
Government, which is Established by the Statute and Canon Law of Church and
Nation? This is to Blow the Kingdom. Ergo, Put out your Matches, and Dissolve
your Trains.

Principle V.
All English men live and dye by Laws of their own making. That they are never
pleased with upstart Lawmakers.

Principle VI.
That English Government and Law is a Charter-Party Settled by mutual Compact
between Persons of all Degrees in the Nation, and no man must start from it at
his Peril.

Query, Whether these Proposals have kept to the Articles of this Great
Covenant?

Principle VII.
English men hate an Arbitrary Power (Politically Considered) as they hate the
Devil.

For that they have through Immemorial Ages been the Owners of every fair
Enfranchizments and Liberties, that the Sense, Savor or high Esteem of them
are (as it were) Extraduce, Transmitted with the Elemental Materials of their
Essence from Generation to Generation, and so Ingenate and mixed with their
frame, that no Artifice, Craft or Force used, can root it out. Naturam Expellas
furca Licet usque Recurrit. And though many of their Incautelous Princes have
endeavored to Null all their Charter Rights and Immunities, and Aggrandize
themselves in the Servile state of their Subjects, by setting up their own
Separate Will for the great Standard of Government over the Nations, yet they
have all a long paid Dear for their Attempts both in the Ruin of the Nation and
in Interrupting the Increase of their own Grandeur, and their foreign
Settlements and Conquests.

(...) the late Reigns, before the Accession of the great William and Mary to
the Throne of England, but taken the Measures of them, and her Present Majesty
in depressing Vice and advancing the Union and Wealth, and encouraging the
Province and Bravery of the Nation, they might by this time have been capable
to have given Laws to any Monarch on Earth; But spending their time in the
Pursuit of an absolute Monarchy (contrary to the the temper of the Nation, and
the Ancient Constitution of the Government) through all the Meanders of
State-Craft, It has apparently kept back the Glory, and Dampt all the most
Noble affairs of the Nation. And when under the Midwifry of Machiavilan Art,
and the Cunning of a Daring Prince, this Monster, Tyranny and Arbitrary
Government, was at last just born, upon the holding up of a finger or upon the
least Signal given, ON the whole Nation goes upon this HYDRA.

The very name of an Arbitrary Government is ready to put an English man's Blood
into a Fermentation; but when it really comes, and shakes its whip over their
Ears, and (...) them it is their Master, it makes them stark Mad; and being of
a Mimical Genius, and Inclined to follow the Court Mode, They turn Arbitrary
Too.

That some Writers, who have observed the Governments and Humors of Nations,
thus Distinguish the English.

The Emperor (they say) is the King of Kings, the King of Spain is the King of
Men, the King of France the King of Asses, And the King of England the King of
Devils, for that the English Nation can never be bridled, and Rid by an
Arbitray Prince. Neither can any Chains put on by Despotick and Arbitrary
Measures hold these Legions. That to conclude this Plea, I find not amongst all
the Catalogues of Heroes, or Worthy things in the English Empire, Peers to
these undertakers, Therefore we must needs range them with the Arbitrary
Princes of the Earth, (such as the Great Czar, or Ottoman Monarch) who have no
other Rule to Govern by, but their own Will. And therefore under this Branch of
our Discourse, and their Arbitrary Measures, I shall venture to annex the
following Thesis, as Conclusions fairly deducted from the Premises, and leave
them to consideration.

1. Thesis.
They have out King'd all Kings on Earth whose Prerogatives are Bounded, and
their Kingdoms Governed by Law.

2. Thesis.
They have out Bishop't all Bishops of Great Britain, Whilst they themselves
have acted with such Lawless Liberty, and left the Bishops fettered in the
Statutes.

3. Thesis.
They have out-Pope't the Pope himself, who is head of an Hierarchy supported
by certain Laws, Acts and Ordinances for the maintaining an Harmony or Union
between Head and Members. So in the next Place,

4. We came to Survey the Work cut out for this Council.

Cato, that Great and grave Philosopher did Commonly Demand (when any new
Project was propounded unto him) Cui Bono? or what good was like to ensue? Now
in this present Business, the definition Pretends to make a Satisfactory Answer
to such a Question, viz. in the Employment of this Annual Council, and that is
to enquire into the Condition of the Churches, and advise such things as may be
for the advantage of our holy Religion.

It is certain, considering the Nature of the Creature here formed, there had
need be some Herculean Labor Assigned. Those who are Purveyours, and must
provide Quarters, will find it very Chargeable, That it had need do very
Extraordinary Business. As once King James the 1st* said to a big-Limb'd
Country Fellow, who came to Court to be a Porter; some that knew him, told the
King how many Bowls fall, and Quarters of Mutton he would eat at a Meal, etc.
Says the King to the Fellow, You Sirrah, that Eat so much more than other men,
If you cannot do so much more Work proportionably than other men, by my So'l
(Says the King) I Will hang ye. So here, there had need go a handsome Stock of
small Cattle, and other Expenses to Maintain one Sessions; That if it has
Confidence to meet, and is Treated with an Ordinary allowance, If it cannot do
abundance of Work, it will be waste Charges, and great Incumberment.

Now, if this be all that is here Proposed (in my Opinion) the Creators are
very Defective in their Propositions; For though the Work Mentioned is in it self
good Work, But it is all Done already to their hands, There is nothing of this
Nature Neglected in N. England Churches, at the least, no Means or Methods
wanted, but as God says, Jer. 5.4. What could have been done more for my
Vineyard, that I have not Done in it: may Properly be applied to the Churches
here, and all for the Advantage and Good of our Holy Religion; that, in a word,
there is no want in this Country, unless it be the want of good and honest
Hearts; and I suppose you have none of those to Bequeath.

Upon the first view of this stupendous Business, I was ready to fancy,
whether or no you had Dreamed of or seen King Henry the Eighth a coming with
his old Case and Question which involved the Pope, his Conclave and all the
Accademies in Europe, and whether you were getting a Mighty Casuist ready to
take the Kings Conscience into Consideration? Or whether you had news of the
Old Arian War, its Breaking out again, that you should in such haste, (without
Citing other Estates for the Defense of the Kingdom, but only by virtue of your
Prerogative) Run up such a formidable and Costly Redoubt? But if it be all come
to this, and there is no more to do, then what every Pious and Wise Man does
every day, every Week, and every Sessions, it is even another fit or Paroxism
of the Mountains bringing forth, as the Poet says, Parturiunt Montes, etc.

But to Humor what would seem Serious in the Proposal, I shall consider both
parts of the Work Distinctly.

The first is, To Inquire into the Condition of the Churches.

Answer.
Now, whether this Precept, so full of Sweat and Servitude, may not vie it for
merit, as equal in Pains what any of the great Prelates in Europe, in their
Laborious visitations, who when they come into some Capital Town in the other
Part of their Diocese, and being Treated with the Solemn Formalities of
Sumptous Feasts by the Nobility and Gentry in the Neighborhood, and having
spent the Bigest part of their Pastoral Visit in Glutting themselves with
Honor and full Tables, at last begin the other part of their Work, and Inquire
(Possibly) How many Parishes in this great Town, and whether there be any
Surgeons, Physicians, or Schoolmasters that do good to their Neighbors with
out License? Or whether there be any new Golgotha's to be Dedicated, for the
securer Retreat of the Dead to that Place? Or whether the Parish Curates Read
Service well, and observe to time their Particular Lessons, with the Canonical
Days? and especially whether the Bells are kept in good Tune and Order, etc?
All which makes up a Noble piece of Service, to Requite a Crown or Kingdom for
the Revenues of a Barony! and, Whether it may be thought, that our Great and
yearly Council, will come a whit behind the aforesaid Ministry in the first or
last part of service Mentioned? And whether if they do but equal them, we may
not be thought to have made a wise Settlement? But notwithstanding we shall
grant, the Proposal makes mention of a Christian Duty, for that it becomes all
men, who bear a love to Christ, to enquire into the state of his Churches, both
for their Manifesting their love to men, and directing their Prayers and
Gratitude to GOD.

Therefore,

1. As to their outward and Temporal state, we may inform our selves, by virtue
of Neighborhood, by Christian Travelers and Public Letters of Intelligence;
and thus we may Rationally, and with very good moral Certainty know the state
of the Churches, both in other Countries and our own; and thus good Nehemiah
informs himself at Shushan, how it fared with his Brethren at Jerusalem, Neh.
1.2.3.

2. As to their Moral State (which consists in their Profession, Faith, manner
of Worship, Discipline and Conversation) this is discovered particularly, by
their Directories, Confessions of Faith, Plat-forms, Rubric, Liturgies, and
other Canonical Systems made Public for that end, etc. And considering, that
whatever of this nature is necessary for the advance of Religion, is well
adjusted in this Country, it must needs be but a vain Repetition, or sensles
Tautology for a Council to meet yearly or quarterly for this end, viz. To
Inquire what News, or whether New-Englands Confession of Faith is the same this
Year, as it was Last? Or whether all the Churches, their Manner of Worship, is
this Sabbath as it was the other? And as to their Conversation (which may seem
to lie most out of sight) sufficient Provision is made by the Principles of our
wise Platform (for Upholding the Communion of Churches) for our Inquiry and
Information here also. And Thus we come to the other part of this good Work,
viz.

2. To Advise such things as may be for the Advantage of our Holy Religion.

Answer.
Query. Whether or no there ben't Published weekly from the Oracles of God (and
that with great Soundness and Zeal, more Truth in a day than all New England
can practice in a long time after? And whether all the Churches and the whole
Land are not Honored and Addressed, from week to week, in such Measures by
infallible Truth, if not by Infallible Men? whether or no these Methods don't
Divulge the whole Mind of God to each Plantation?

Or, whether these Gentlemen have any secrets of Wisdom, not yet made Known? Or
whether they Intend to serve the Churches, as some great Philosophers and
Profound Artists in Medicine Serve the World, viz, such who carry some great
Inestimable Catholicon to the Grave with them?

And whether they will be thus hard hearted in Religion, as the other are in
Philosophy, unless we will gratify them with this Piece of Prodigality here
Exacted? I must Ackowledge I have little Patience toward these things, that
under such a specious show and Pretense such a direful Catastrophy should be
Shrouded! I must needs say, Its plainly some of Joab's Friendship, when he
spoke quietly and peaceably to Abner, smiled in his face as his Friend, But
stabbed him to the Heart, under the fifth Rib, that he dropped, and Dyed.

But however, I shall endeavor, to Rescue my self from all Impatience, and
with Deliberation Sum up my Answer, in an appeal to your own Reason concerning
those several Created Trusts, which GOD estalished, and Clothed with his own
Authority, every one of which is acted with great Vigor of Success. And
whether you think you can do more then all these for Religion? Or perscribe
something New which they never thought of.

1 st. Civil Authority, in two great Branches*

1. Legislative Power (that Civil Omnipotence) is doing very great things for
Religion, by their Proclamations, and all Paenal Laws enacted for the Crushing
of Immorality and Vice, and in all their wise and exact Precepts for the
Support of Justice and Piety. They are opening many civil Channels, whereby
they are Conveying Judgment, Justice and Righteousness down our Streets, from
the great fountain. Nay, this great and Dread Assembly puts Awe upon all
Mankind. And the more Daring and Desperate are kept within Compass, from a
sense of this most Terrible Seat of Thunder hanging over their Heads, and upon
every Affront ready to break in strokes of Vengeance and Woes upon them,
especially if they grow beyond the reach of Common Law.

And in Ordinary Cases,

2. The Executive Power, or Ministers of the Law, are like a Standing Camp to
awe, and a flying Army to beat the Enemy; They have their Spies and Scouts out
in every Quarter to observe his motions, and break his Measures, viz. in the
Innumerable Numbers of all sorts of Civil Officers; and thus by the Sword of
Justice they hunt down Sin, and Impiety in the Land. They are a Terror to Evil
men, and a Praise to them that do Well; for the Civil Authority, by their wise
and just Precepts, their personal and Noble Examples and Zealous
Administrations, outdo Plato himself with all his Moral Reasons; for they can
turn a Sodom into a Zion, and keep Zion to be Zion Evident by the History and
Chronicles of Several Governments of Gods Ancient People. Nam Regis ad Exemplum
Totus Componitur Orbis* for Chief Rulers, by their good or bad measures, can
make or mar, kill or cure a nation, in a moral Sense.

2 The Churches.

View once more, from some lofty Promontory or Pisgah, those Goodly Tents and
Tabernackles of Israel! Listen! is not God with Them, and the Shout of a King
amongst them? Are they not as Valleys spread forth, and as Gardens by the
Rivers side, which the Lord has Planted? And yet, notwithstanding, may we,
must we under your Conduct, break up their Fences, to give them another sort of
Culture? Nay, consider well! are not the Flowers better wed, and the Weeds more
kept down, than in most of the Enclosures in the World, belonging to the Great
Husbandman? And may you not (in Rekoning up of means) allow us peculiarly to
Ascribe to their Government, and other of their measures agreeing with the
nature of it in Dressing the Ground? But I will not enlarge this head; it is
obvious enough from their Ministry, from their Faith, Their Discipline and
Conversations.

3. The Nursaries of Learning.

1. The Inferior Schools, where the Leaven is laid, hid and kneaded in the
soft dough; Et Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros, etc.

2. The College (That Artillery Garden from whence we receive our most expert
Soldiers of Christ, and whence Christ's Troops are supplied with Chief
Commanders, who lead on to storm the strong holds of the Common Enemy, and
secure our great Alley, Religion) This is the Seminary of Learning and virtue,
and the Success is almost to a Miracle, unless for Humiliation we must Secret
the great Grace and Gifts of God which flow from that Fountain, and are
Dispersed through the Land.

Query. Were a Council called, of all the Learned heads of the whole Universe,
could they dictate better Laws, and advise better Measures for the Acquirement
of LEARNING the INCREASE of Virtue and good Religion than in that Royal
Province?

4. The Families of the Country with their Oeconomies, and family Religion; If
we take a Survey of the whole Land, we shall find Religion placed in the Body
Politic, as the Soul in the Body natural. Nam est Tota Anima, in Toto Corpore,
et Toto in Qualibet part; That is, the whole Soul is in the whole Body, and
whole in every Part. That were any other part of the Body Organized besides the
head, it would be capable to exercise Reason, etc. So Religion is placed and
exercised in its Principles, Virtues and Governments, Through the Families of
the Country, so many families so many little Sanctuaries.

I do acknowledge, there is no General Rule, but has its Exceptions; But under
this Caution I may ventre to affirm, there is no such Spot of Earth in the
Earthly Globe (so Belabored with family Devotion, Reading Gods Word,
Catechizing and well Instructing Youth, with neat and virtuous Examples, and
Divine Prayers, non ex Codice, sed ex Cord, not out of Books, but out of
Hearts, the Solemnizing Sabboths, and family Attendance on public means) as is
New England. And if so, then what need have we of this late invention?
Therefore to conclude, I shall, for my own part, with the Jealous Laocoon enter
Caution against taking down the sides of the City, or opening the Walls of our
ZION to let in this Trojan Horse; and let all Israel say, Amen! For, Blessed be
God, though we want to have our hearts Renewed daily, but as for means, though we
have no glut, we have Plenty enough, and want no new Institutions.

5. We Come now to measure, and find out the time Appointed for the Council.

1. Certain, viz. Once in the year, at the least, All the Associations in the
Country, and according to the most Plausible Interpretation of the Proposals,
one or more Lay-Deligates shall join and Meet yearly and Every Year in the
Great Assemblies.

Answer.
As Austin says of time, Nivo in Tempore, Loquor de Tempore, sed Nescio quid
sit Tempus, I live in Time, I speak of Time, But yet I know not what Time is.
So I do Imagine, the Dictators did not well weigh Time by an exact Balance, in
all its Contents, Sense and Meaning, when they Carved out such a large Portion
to this Illegal Claimer. Time is justly esteemed Precious, in relation to
Heaven and Grace, and also very valuable with respect to the interest of Nature
and this Life. Therefore, care should be had, that it ben't Squandered away
wastefully. Our natural Lives, Health and Honor, Families and Estates are all
very significant and Costly things, and their Dependence is much on the well
husbanding of Time, insomuch that in hard and penurios Climates, the
Inhabitants had need be very saving of Time for the support of all these great
Interests, and seeing there is so much time already set for Religion. As,

1. The Seventh part of Time is assigned by the wise Author of Time, and that
well Improved, will do much for the support of Religion.

2. There are great Proportions (out of the Time left to our dispose) frankly
bequeathed for the good of Religion, as in Courts, Churches, College, School,
Families, Closets, and in many other Sacred Intervals, breathing Spells, from
the hurry of Business, to render men more Sedate and Heavenly (called Time out
of Season) and all for the service of Religion; Then to add and make this
Offering also, without a Divine Mandate, is but a work of Superarrogation or
Superstition, and so will prove not only a needless, but a extravagant Victim.

And moreover, to add a just Aggravation or two, to set forth the Evil in the
Imposition, I shall, with them, conclude the Plea.

Aggravation I.
Is taken from the Great and Sufficient Care and Provision made by the 15 th
and 16 Chapters of our Platform, for the Convening of Occasional, and needful
Councils, for the service of the Churches, and Support of Religion upon all
Emergencies. Then what need we throw away so many years of Time at a venture,
as is here Tendered in the Proposal, before our Necessities or Occasions call
for the Expense; unless we would in Imitation of the Rhodian Coloss or Egyptian
Piramids erect a Monument of our vain Glory and Pride, more than of our
Prudence, Policy, or Duty.

Aggravation II.
Is taken from the great Affront, real and Rational, done to Empire.

1. Real, In making thus bold, with the Time and Estates of Loyal Subjects.

2. Rational; For let us but consider, that about three hundred Men (Gown-Men,
and Swordmen) with twice the Number of Attendants, which will make up near a
Thousand strong (and all well horsed and Provided) to be Mustered, no man
living on Earth can tell for what, cannot be well resented by Crowned heads,
those Admirers of Order: That the Project carried on, may breed Jealousies, in
the heart of our Prince, lest that Ket, Cade, Straw or Tyler have Pitched upon
an Oath of Reformation again, with an intent to over-hawl the Government, etc.
And especially seeing the Crown was never advised of any such thing (as is
Proposed) by the Regular Forms of Empire. There is danger of loosing our Time,
and the Credit of our Loyalty together, that all things considered, the best
way will be, for us to keep well, whilst we are well; and therefore let every
Man and Society be advised to Improve their Time wisely, keep in their Post,
and honestly study to do their own Business, which God, Law and Regular
Settlements has Instructed them with, and we may then hope things will go well
with us and our holy Religion.

2. Uncertain, viz. When the Creators please, and can agree, for the more
particular Time is best left to the Determination of each Association, as the
Proposal affirms. And thus we are left very Uncertain, When Where, or whether
it will Ever be; so that, I perceive, you have no great Dependence upon it,
neither must we: The Wisdom of Civil Government has another Sort of Conduct.
Such things are not left to Discretion, for that would be Indiscretion, and the
way to turn the World into a Bedlam, or the Dwelling Place of Madmen. And in
the Example before us, suppose the Arbitrators (when the Question for the Time
is propounded) should differ, and hotly dispute the matter, and some should
Plead, it was best to be in the Winter, and some in the Summer; some argue for
the Fall, and some for the Spring, according as every man's Temper leads him;
and at last, referring it to a Majority of Voices, should they (for want of an
odd man) lock it by an equal Vote, and so, keep it like a Game at Chess, for
several years on the Table, and neither side get the Mastery, we may then in
our Distresses Hollow whilst our Throats ache, and no help comes; for they have
voted themselves fast (like two Bucks in their own Hrons) and cannot stir for
our Relief.

6. We must, according to promise, make some Inquiry, Where this Council is to
meet, or for the Place of Meeting?

It is held in opinion that Castles in the Air and Immaterial Substances do not
occupy Place; Philosophy assigns them no more then a Vbi, where many may exist
in Puncto Indivisibli, or on the point of a Needle, and if this Council is (as
I Apprehend it) belonging to that Conjugation, or Catalogue of Beings, it will
then have this Privilege belonging to it, viz? There will be no house to
build, nor house Rent to pay.

7. We come now (in the last place) to consider its Maintenance, by three
Queries.

1st. Query.
Whether the Churches in their Expiring, must (as all Criminals do) Pay for
their own Execution, and their Estates be Confiscate, and reserved as a Fond,
yiedling a certain stipend per Annum, to support their Executioners?

2nd. Query.
Whether the Contingent Fees of the Sessions, Or the free and voluntary
Contribution of Clients, may be thought a medium sufficient? Or

3d. Query.
Whether it must not be here, as it is in some Civil Cases under the Cognizance
of a very peaceable and good natured Justice, that for the healing of a
Difference amongst Neighbors advises them to Agree, etc. and so let every man
bear his own Charges?

But how it is, or which way they intend to raise a Support for a standing
Council, Yearly, and every year, I cannot find out; there is no stipend
settled, or Provision made, in the Canons which give it being.

It is certain, in the History of Gods Works, be first makes his House, etc.
then furnishes his Table with great Varieties, and then invites his Guests, and
makes them welcome; and so it is with all Regular Created Efficients, both
Rational and Natural; But in this Scheme there is nothing done for the Support
of the new born Infant, but, like a Runaway Dam, you leave it to the Mercy of
the Heavens. But possibly the Relief is stored up in your Creating Power, so
that if the Charitable Churches will but find a Cradle for the first night, and
Naturalize it, you will by your Creating Fiat, soon find a Fortune, if all the
Tithes in the Province will do it.

Thus, according to Engagement, we have passed Through the several heads,
relating to the standing Council, and I think by the Analysis, it is
sufficiently Resolved into its first Nothing, and therefore what remains, I
shall be more brief in my Answer.

SECT. II. THat to this End these Associated Pastors, with their Respective
Churches, shall Consociate and Combine.
Answer.
There is plainly an Hysteron and Prot^ron (a praeposterous Speech or
misplaceing of Terms, Pastors and Churches) in this Section, and though in
Rhetoric it breaks no great Squares, yet in Politics, where the just
Boundaries of Governments are to be set out, the Mis-placing some great Words,
may Ruffle the whole Scheme, so that according to the mere wary Idiom of our
Church Government, it should be written thus, viz. The respective Churches,
shall Consociate and Combine, and their Pastors shall attend and Minister, as
their Duty does oblige them.

SECT III. ACcording to what has been by the Synods of these Churches
recommended, that they Act as Consociated Churches in all holy Watchfullness
and Helpfullness toward each other.
Answer.
Titus, the Roman General, is very honorable for his great pity to the
Israelites, in many Examples that fell into his hands; But all this while he
was in Seige of their famous Town and Temple, and Designed to rout them out of
house and home, or Subject them to the Mercy and Pleasures of a Conqueror.

So here, Though you smile upon us, in reciting some of the Principles of our own
Government (for which we thank you) yet still we must observe the noise of your
Mattocks, that we may meet with your Trenches, for you are still carrying or
your Works and undermining us.

SECT. IV. IT is Propounded, as that which from our Beginning has been
recommended, etc.
Answer.
You seem to Reflect upon our Beginings, with a Singular Air and Aspect, when
you find any Word or Passage, that falls in with your Design, as though you were
sensible those things were very Argumentative and Binding; and Indeed they are
so. Then why cannot you fall in with the whole Settlement, and say to your
selves, What need we stand Puzling our heads for New Schemes about Church
Government? there is one from our Beginings, That is Complete, being Adjusted
by the Laws of Honor, and assigns to all parties their Due, and gives to
Officers Rule, Power and Honor enough; Therefore let us, now we are met, order
a new impression, and so break up. For, Alas, Alas! What need you, like the
Thievesh Bird; pick here and there a straw or a Feather in our Yards, to Build
a new Nest? or now and then gather up a kernel, or a Grain out of our first
fruits? The whole Plantation and Crop is yours, if you please to make use of
it; and it will be your livelihood, as it has been hither to; only you must
Remember to pay the Quit-Rent, as honorable Tenants, and not take your selves
to be Lords of the Manor.

SECT. V. THat the Association shall Direct, when there is occasion, for this
Council to convene, on any Emergency, and shall Direct whether the Whole, or
only a certain Number of these Consociated Pastors and Churches shall convene
on such occasions.
Answer.
These Begged Prerogatives of Clergymen come so thick in this place, and smell
so strong of the POPES Cooks and Kitchen, where his Broaths and Restoratives
are prepared, That they are enough to strangle a Freeborn Englishman, and
much more these Churches, that have lived in such a clear Air, and under such
enlargements so long a time. For indeed, ( for sooth) Four score Years has
brought (not our Hogs, but) our Innocent Flock to a fair Market, if it is come
to this, that Clergymen may buy and sell them (as the Romans did the Jews)
thirty for a penny, or at least say, Pro and Con, at their pleasure, upon all
the high Immunities and Ancient Liberties of the Churches, Lyon-Like (who
claims the whole Prey, and leaves no share to his Allies, vel Actum est de
Amicitia) all is mine (says he) or Farewell Friendship.

SECT. VI. IT appears agreeable with the present Condition of our Churches, and
from our Beginning acknowledged, that no Act of the Council is to be reckoned,
concluded and Desicive, for which there has not been the Concurrence of the
Major part of the Pastors therein concerned.
Answer.
1. The Specificating Act, that Impowers any Member for an Ecclesiastical
Council, is the Churches Election or Deligation, according to our Government;
so that the Members Sent, are Invested with the Power, and represent those who
send them; The Officers have no More of this Power devolved upon them, than any
member, and therefore can Challenge no more Right (as Elders) in a Major or in
a Negative Vote, they any others, as is very apparent in all Representative
Bodies; therefore all Acts must be Determined by the Majority of the whole, as
in the house of Commons, though made up of Men of very Different Characters, when
in their own Countries, both as to their Trust, Learning, and Wisdom, and other
Distinguishing Qualifications, yet the meanest man there has as great a Force
and Power in his Vote or Suffrage, as the best man in the House, for that they
all equally represent the Nation, one Man as much as another; So in this Case;
For that the Churches and Officers were never yet Since New England stood, held
or accounted two distinct Estates, in an Ecclesiastical Council. Therefore,

2. Your Challenge plainly Defines your Intention, that is to Null the Power of
Churches, and set up your selves, as the Subject or Fountain of a
superintending Power. And then, if the Churches may have so much favor as to
Represent themselves by their Lay-Deligates, in a Council you shall see meet to
call, you must needs allow them to be a distinct House and Estate. And if so,
then you must grant them the Privilege of a Major Vote, as well as your
selves, and so nothing can be acted but by their Compliance also. But I must
acknowledge, I have no Plenipotentiary Power to settle Articles of Agreement,
for the Infringing any of the Rights of the Churches, and therefore must draw
up my Memorials or Complaints of Encroachments upon Ancient Lines and
Boundaries, and so leave them.

SECT. VII. THE Determinations of the Councils, thus Provided for the
Necessities of the Churches, etc.
Answer.
Let any man Read the 15 th and 16 th Chapters of our Platform, and then
judge, whether the Necessities of these Churches are so urgent as this
Proposal, with too much Falacy insinuates, or whether they are any ways in
Esau's straits, who thought he might Sell his Birthright for a mess of
Pottage, if not to save his Life, yet to gratify his Pievish and Distrustful
Hunger.

SECT. VIII. IF a particular Church will not be Reclaimed, etc.
Answer.
This whole long Section is the third way of the Communion of Churches, laid
out in the 15 th Chapter of our Platform, almost Totidem verbis, or, in so many
words. And whether or no the Annexing some of the Principles and Rules of our
Vindictive and more Public Justice to the Scheme, will Sufficiently Atone for
the Dissolution of the whole Frame, which is Intended by you?

CONCLUSION. THese Proposals were Assented to by the Deligates of the
Association, met according to former Agreement at B -- Sep. 13th, 1705. to be
Communicted.
Answer.
The Church of England has been wont to look upon us as men out ot our Wits,
therefore they Term us Phanaticks, or Madmen, but much more now. What! for men
to break from the Government they themselves have Established by Consent and
Practice, and Arbitrarily to Rally together, And draw up a Direful Sentence (if
not in Terms, yet Intent) for the dissolution of a Country full of the best
Churches of Christ in the World, and then (as it were) upon the bold sound of a
Trumpet, to excite others to Ratify the Dead Warrant, in order to Execution!
What can this Import or Signify in the thoughts of Considerate Men, but a
Vertigious Brain? We might have learned better, and more Caution, from that
Mother Church of the Nation, if not from Common Reason; For though out
Sovereign confides in the Loyalty of her English Clergy, Yet to maintain the
Grandeur of Government, and keep in good Repair that Common Fence, which Keeps
every man in his station, therefore, According to the Law and Custom of
England, The Convocation, both the Higher and Lower House of that Learned and
August Assembly, neither Debates nor Transacts any Matter whatsoever, But what
our Sovereign by Commission Expressly allows of, according to her Prerogative;
So that certainly to acquit our selves for Wise men you should have done no
less (in a matter of such weight and Moment) then have Petitioned the Public
Authority for Commission, before you had ventured this far.

Object. But possibly some may say, We have Petitioned Authority to Establish
our Councils, since we have drawn them up in form.

Answer. This is to be Prepostrous, and agrees with that illegal Way of Hanging
men and then Judging them; But however, it seems they turned a Deaf Ear to your
demands; and well they might, for they are too wise men to alter the Laws of
the Province, long Customs and orderly Settlements of the Churches to gratify
an Implicit Faith in the stark-naked Ipse Dixits of any man; That unless you
can Prove a Mandamus from the Crown, or a precept from a higher Court, which by
its Divine Authority shall awe and direct them, you may always expect such
Entertainment in your Precarious Addresses; for most certainly you beg at the
wrong door. You Beg without a Brief.

To be Commended to the several Associated Ministers in the several parts of
the Country, to be duly Considered.

Answer. And why not Commended to the General Court, as has been the Custom of
our Beginnings, etc. or why not Commended nextly to the several Churches? By
the Question proposed, the Comfort, Support and Well being of these Churches
was peculiarly pretended, Then why might not they be nextly advised with, for
their Approbation or Esteem? for if you Intend it for a new suit, or change of
Apparel, or a set of Armor for this Army in Banners, it must be the only way
to try it on, it being now so near finishing; and if it be done Work-man-like,
you will have the Credit and they the Comfort of it; but if it prove too
Strait-laced, or should they feel themselves as David in Readiness Coat of Mail,
and should shrug at it, and say, We cannot go in these, We have not proved
them; yet they may throw all by and keep to their own old Suit, which is not
yet half worn, and the Worst come to the worst, you may by any Lawful Writ
recover your Wages of those who set you on Work to blow at their Forge.

That so what may be Judged for the Service of our GREAT LORD, and his holy
Churches.

Answer. You acknowledge, and so do I, That these are holy Churches, and
(through the Grace of their great Lord) they being so, Then why should they be
Interrupted in their Government and Discipline, which has been a peculiar means
for the Advance and Promoting Holiness amongst Them? They are strict, in their
Government Curious, yet Charitable in their Admissions; in the Election of all
Officers they are Nice, Cautious, Judicious, and in the main hitherto very
Successful. They are Egle-Eyed in their Watch; Duly hot, and impartial in their
Process and Exemplary Acts of Justice; and so Dependent and free from
Arrogance, that they acknowledge themselves accountable under the Eye of
Consociation, for their Administration and freely and without Covin, Render an
account of their Actions, and are willing to receive advice etc. Then why
should you Disturb Them?

You acknowledge them to be Holy Churches and you may well! Then Certainly they
are the Bethels, where God dwells, and from his Grace and Presence, so
Illustrous in them, why may not we conclude, God has said, This is my Rest
for-Ever; here will I dwell, for I have Desired It? And will then any good man
have a hand in Pulling Down these Tabernacles of the Almighty? No! Rather let
every man Involved, say, as once Job did, I will lay my hand upon my Mouth;
once have (...) spoken, but I will not answer, yea, Twice, but I will proceed
no further, least I am found sighting against God; for it is most certain, all
men will find themselves over-matcht In such a War.

Be Proceeded in.
Answ. I think we are Proceeding in the best Method we can for the Present, for
the service of these Churches. That is to say, The Criminal Proposals Being now
at the Bar, and having been Indicted upon several Statutes, and Evidence for
proving Matter of Fact, being Legal and sufficient, the Case is now to be
delivered to the great Jury of Trials, viz, The Impartial Reason of the
Churches, and there having been no such Deed done, or seen, from the day that
this good People came up out of the Land, from the other side of the great Sea,
unto this Day, Consider of it, take Advice and speak your Minds, Judge. 19.30.

And upon due Deliberation, if under the Conduct of Law and Reason, you shall
bring in Guilty, Then I Petition for the Crown, That justice be done in this
following Manner, not by Banishment, Praemunire or Perpetual Imprisonment, But
that the Proposals be Sentenced to Dye the Death of Heriticks, and their Ashes
be Exposed to the four Winds; that the whole Scheme may, beyond all hope of
Retrieve, be lost in Oblivion. And let the Churches, according to their
Platform, Recover and Maintain their Authority, Liberties and Luster so long as
the Sun and Moon shall continue.

The Date, -- November the 5 ^h, 1705.

Answer.

Blessed! Thrice Blessed Day! Uphold and Maintain thy Matchless Fame in the
Calendar of Time, and let no Darkness or Shadow of Death stain thee; Let thy
Horrizon Comprehend whole Constellations of Favorable and Auspicious stars,
Reflecting abenigne Influence on the English Monarchy. And upon every Return,
in thy Anniversary Circuits, keep an Indulgent Eye open and wakeful upon all
the Beauties (from the Throne to the Footstool) of that Mighty Empire!

And when it is thy Misfortune to conceive a Monster, which may Threaten any
part of the Nations Glory, let it come Crippled from the Womb, or else Travail
in Birth again, with some Noble Hero, or Invincible Hercules, who may Conquor
and Confound it.

The Last Binding Vote. At an Association Meeting the foregoing Proposals were
Read, and Assented to.
Answer.

Whether for a small Juncto of Gentlemen, without being Orderly called (as a
Committee of Wise and Learned men, to survey an Old Government, and make their
Report) by any Supreme Authority, for them of their Own he^ds, to Meet and draw
up Articles against, and in Imitation of the Highest and Most Regular State on
Earth; To Vote up a Scheme of their own Inventing, and thereby sign the
Condemnation of) a grave Ecclesiastical Government, which has been Adjusted by
the Rules of Equity and Honor, and for the security of all Persons and Parties
Interested and Involved, and Regularly settled and Established by all the
Churches in the Province, and owned, Ratified, and Honored by the Civil
Authority of the Empire, And Eminently Blessed by GOD, through a long series and
succession of years* now whether such a Daring Action as this can be placed
under any of the Topics of Political, or Moral at Wisdom, either of the Fear
of God. Allegiance to their Prince, or Love to their Country? Or whether or no
they don't (for their Defyance to the Churches, in this bold and terrible Vote)
Rather merit a Page in the Chronicles of Time, and there in Capital Letters, be
written, Not an Association of Wise, but A Faction of Disorderly, etc. and
Impolitick Men?

The Introduction to personal Signing. Present, --
A Council of War (by Adjournment met, without Commission) Consulting the most
Plausible way to blow up the Walls of our Zion. But where the place was, or the
Persons who were Present in this Randivouze, shall never be told by me, unless
it be Extorted by the Rack. And though I have Endeavored with freedom of
Argument to subvert the Error, I will never stain their personal Glory, by
Repeating or Calling over the Muster Roll.

Therefore, as Noah's Sons cast a Garment upon their Fathers Nakedness so
(leaving them in the Crowd) their Names (for me) shall repose under a mantle of
honorable Piety and forgetfulness.

Yet Wishing they may never more harbor such Thoughts or Promote such a Design
as is Projected by these Proposals, but hereafter, when Temptation makes its
Signal, let them rather Trespass upon Gravity, following the Hounds in the
Forest, or by a more submissive and moderate Way (to Baffle the Enemy, and
wear off the Impression) let them write on the ground, or with famous Domitian,
spend the time in Catching flies, rather than Contrive how to subvert or alter
the Government in the Churches, by such Dispotick Measures, especially in an
Empire and Province so Charmed with such Enchanting Liberties as ours are. For
otherwise, they may chance to bring, if not an Old, a New House upon their
heads, according to that saying, Debile fundamentum, fallit Opus.

A Work, if done, and no Foundation laid,
Falls on the Work-Mens heads; Thus they are paid.
FINIS.

