THE Heinous Nature OF THE SIN OF Murder. AND The Great Happiness OF
Deliverance from it. As it was Represented in a SERMON at the Lecture in
Boston, Sept. 24. 1713. Before the Execution of one David Wallis.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Boston, N. E. Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the
BIBLE in Cornhill. 1713.

The Heinous Nature Of the SIN of Murder: And the great Happiness of
Deliverance from it.
Psalm LI.14. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, (...) GOD, thou God of my
Salvation* A^ my Tongue shall Sing aloud of (...) Righteousness.


THIS Psalm, as it was Compos^ by One of the Best of Saint upon one of the most
Sad O^casions that was ever know^ (...) ^reathes the most Consu^ (...);
Expressing in the (...) lively colors, and in the most affecting manner* the
Affliction and Distress, Humiliations, Fears and Desires of a Repenting Soul.
David had been guilty of one of the foulest Acts of Wickedness in the matter of
Vriah, which Sin he here bitterly bewails; and as a Testimony of his unfeigned
Sorrow, and that he might be as notorious an Instance of true Repentance, He
sends this Hymn to the Master of Music in the Tabernacle, to be there
perpetually used. In the Text, he names the very fact and bloody guilt, which
was Murder; that Enormous Crime, the Guilt of Blood, shed in a very base and
barbarous manner; for he Slew Vriah with the Sword of the Children of Ammon. He
cries to God for Mercy, and makes his Supplication to his Judge for Pardon.

Deliver me from Blood-Guiltiness: i e. Let me not Ly under the Guilt and
Condemnation hereby contracted, but let it be pardoned to me, and let me never
be left unto the like again. Deliver me from the punishment due unto this
Crying Sin: And Lord ever prevent and keep me from it any more, by thy
Restraining Grace. This Prayer he addresses to GOD, who only can Forgive Sin,
or Keep us from Sinning. He eyes him as the God of his Salvation; his Prayer
being for Salvation from the Dominion of Sin, and from the Condemnation due
thereunto. You may observe also a great Vehemence and Earnestness in this his
Supplication; he prays in the most ardent, fervent manner.

Finally. HE Makes his solemn Vow and Promise, that God should have the Glory
both of the Pardoning Mercy, and Renewing Grace: My Tongue shall sing aloud of
thy Righteousness. Righteousness is here used for Grace, Mercy, Clemency, Truth
and Faithfulness. This he would Sing of, Confess, Laud and Celebrate in Songs
of Praise, Thansksgiving and Blessing. And he would sing aloud of it; in the
most public manner he would proclaim the Infinite Goodness and. Faithfulness
of God to Returning Sinners.

GODS Righteousness is often put for his Grace in the great business of a
Sinners Justification and Sanctification* They meet together herein. This the
Penitent comforts himself in, and therefore Sings of it. And this he sings alo^
of, to acquaint and affect others there^ with.

There are two or three things to be observed in the words. 1. The heinous
Guilt of Murder. 2. That Deliverance from it is to be earnestly sought of God.
3. That God must have the Glory of such Preservation and Deliverance.

I. That Murder is a Sin of a very heinous and heavy guilt. So the Text speaks
of it; Blood-guiltiness, or the guilt of Blood. A deep Stain, and a deep Wound;
whereby the Conscience is gashed and defiled.

I will only look into the Law of God, and observe to you how it is forbidden
and condemned therein. It cries from the Ground, and brings down Vengeance from
Heaven. Cain was the first Murderer after the Devil, who was so from the
beginning. He was of that Wicked One, and slew his Brother. Then God the
Sovereign Judge said to him; What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers
blood cries to me from the Ground; and now thou art cursed from the Earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand, Genesis
4.10, 11. Murder is a Crying Sin; it cries in the dying words of Zachariah, The
Lord look upon it and require it: Or in those words of the Souls under the
Altar; How long Lord, Holy and True? The Heavens reveal this Iniquity, and the
Earth rises up against it, Lamech was one of Cains Accursed Race, and it should
seem of the same bloody and barbarous Disposition: Whether he had Murdered any
of the Holy Seed or no, yet certainly he owns himself to be a very fierce and
cruel man; and he glories in this his shame, as such fierce and bloody people
use to do: with a haughty Impenitence he presumes on, and challenges the
Protection of Providence. He had a galled but an unhumbled Conscience: I have
slain a man to my wounding, and a Young man to my hurt.

See how severely the Law of God forbids Murder, and makes it Capital. Genesis
IX.5, 6. And surely your blood of your lives will I require: at the hand of
every beast will I require it; and at the hand of man, at the hand of every
man's brother will I require the life of man. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed: for in the Image of God made by man. Numb. 35.31, 33.
Moreover, y^u shall take no satisfaction for the life of (...) murderer, which
is guilty of death: but (...) shall be surely put to death. So ye shall (...)
pollute the land wherein you are: for blood defiles the land: and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. Exo. XXI.14. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor
to slay him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, that he may die.
Prove. XXVIII.17. A man that does violence to the blood of any Person, shall
flee to the Pit, let no man stay him.

These Texts need no Comment; they utterly forbid the Concealment or the
Protection of a Murderer among a people; the Government may not Pardon this
Sin, nor People interceed for it; It may not be bought off by any Price or any
Favor, on the pain of Guilt on the Public: Gods Altar may not shelter him,
and much less any Humane Power or Pity.

Let no man think that this looks Cruel or Inhumane: The Justice of God has so
fixed it; Yea, his tender Mercies to Mankind do account for this His Righteous
Law and Judgment. Let us not presume to arraign the infinite Wisdom and Mercies
of God, in a partial respect to any natural tenderness or compassion of our
own: We shall so invade and sacrifice all Law, both Humane and Divine to our
own weakness.

No Humanity or Law of Mercy will allow us to desire or endeavor the saving
the life of him that is Convict of Murder. It is a wrong to Humane Nature in
the highest manner; and the mercy and protect^ of Humane Nature is utterly
forfeited; ye^, the Revenges thereof are incurred.

Murder is the greatest wrong to God; at whole Image the S^b is, and at His
Dominion. Life is the most precious of all the good gifts of God He is the
absolute Lord of it, and h^s reserved the dispos^ of it entirely to Himself.

The Magistrate is the Minister of God, and the Avenger to Execute wrath upon
him that goes Evil; God has put the Sword into his hands, to cut off Evildoers
from the Inheritance of the Lord, and he must not bear the Sword in vain.
Government among Mankind, is for this reason of the last n^^, and one of the
great Goods to the World. But for any Private Per^ voluntarily to take away his
Neigh^ Life, whether in Clandestine m^ner, or by Open violence, is the
extremest Injury to our Neighbor, and one of the highest Offenses against
Humane Society.

A man's Life is Invaluable to him, and it is not to be repaired, there is
nothing equal to it; not all a man's precious Substance. Skin for Skin, yea, all
that a man has will he give for his Life. Self-love, and Self-preservation,
are an Invincible Principle, and Law, implanted by God in the hearts of all men.

But then moreover, to take away the Life of any one, fixes his Soul for
Eternity in an Unchangeable State of Happiness or Misery: and so (as one says)
not only is all Temporal Good hereby at once ravished from a man, but his Soul
incurs infinite hazard, and it may be damage.

And as to Humane Society, the Sin of Murder strikes at the very Being, and all
the Comforts hereof. For there were no more living in any quiet or safety, if
this might be allowed, then there might be among the wild and savage Beasts of
the Woods, where the stronger and fiercer prey upon the weak and mild. So that
Societies must disband, and all the Rules as well as Blessings of it dissolve
together, if the Crime of Murder, were not held Capital, and unpardonably so
among men. As Jacob said of his two Sons, and all his Fatherly Goodness could
not reconcile him to them, nor cover their bloody Stain. Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
Simeon and Levi are brethren: instruments of Cruelty are in their habitations.
O my Soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor be
not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and its their self-will
they dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce: and their
wrath, for it was cruel.

Murder ordinarily comes of cruel and cursed passion. This does not excuse the
Fact; for the Law is made to govern men's passions, or to punish the Enormous
Outrages of them; 1 Timothy 1.9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of
mothers, for man s^yers.

There were two things in the Law of Moses, that were high Expressions of (...)
^inous Nature of Man-slaughtere^ (...), (...) ^ount of God: The one was, that
he that killed a man by Accident or Unawares was obliged to flee to some City
of Refuge, where he must remain in Banishment from his own House and Patrimony,
and in a kind of Prison there, until the death of the High Priest. By which it
is certain that God meant to teach us to conceive a dread and horror of the
Guilt of Blood; in that though the Fact were not Voluntary, nor done designedly;
though it were but Chance-medly, and Homicide per Infortunium, yet that the
Manslayer must incur so much danger, inconvenience and confinement. The other
Argument of the Criminalness of Murder was, that if a Brute Creature happened
at any time to kill a man, it was to be slain by the Hand of Justice, Exodus
21.28, 29. If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die, then the ox shall be
surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten: but the owner of the ox shall
be quit. But if the ox wore wont to push with his horn in time past, and it
has been testified to his Owner: and he has not kept him in: but that he has
killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and his Owner also shall be
put to Death. Here was another high Instance of Gods Care of the Life of Man,
and of his Detestation of the Sin of Murder. And indeed this was according to
that more Catholic Law given unto Noah, The Blood of your Lives will I require
of every Beast.

To Conclude, Na^ Con^ce has the highest resentment and horror against the Sin
of Murder, it is an universal and irresistible Principle in the Hearts of all
men. And famous to that purpose was that Law of the Commonwealth of Athens,
quoted by Mr. Hales of Eaton, and since by Dr. Towerson; that if only a Wall
had by chance fallen down and killed a man, the Judges of that Place were to
Sit upon and Arraign it, and upon Conviction, to throw the Stones thereof out
of the Country. By this they gave the utmost Testimony, how sacred a thing they
esteemed the Life of Man to be, and with what horror they looked upon the
shedding of his Blood.

The most Barbarous People and Places have a Conscience of the Vengeance due
to, and pursuing Murderers; witness what we read of the People of M^lita, who
when they saw the Viper fastening upon the Apostles Hand, cried out No doubt
this man is a murderers though he has escaped the sea, yet Vengeance suffers
not to live.

And ^ow to look back on all that has been said of the Heinous Nature of the
Sin of Murder; It should be improved by all that are here present, to deter
them from all Approaches, or tendencies toward this Crying Guilt; and People
should be warned against indulging the least appearance of it in Will, or Wish,
or Word; and also of all wicked passions or Customs that may but tend to draw
on the Fact, or provoke God to leave us to it.

At the same time you see the Government justified in their righteous Care to
Purge the Land of this Guilt; nor can they answer it to God, or their People,
to do otherwise: It is their Obedience on the Divine Law, and their Fidelity
and Tenderness to Humane Society, that constrain them to the Condemnation and
Execution of a Murderer.

(...) now let me with a Bleeding (...) Beseech you the poor Condemned (...)
here present, to lay to heart (...) Greatness of this your Sin, for (...) you
are this Day to Die. O (...) Great Penitence does such a Great Sin committed by
you, call for! How heavy should it Ly on your Conscience! With what Tears of
Blood should you confess it, and bewail it! I think you have been bowed down in
Soul under the Weight of it. And Blessed be God who has not left you destitute
of the outward signs and expressions of Penitence, Affliction and Sorrow for
this Heinous Fact; from the day (I think) that you committed it. You have in
words and signs been in some measure Mourning after Christ, after Repentance,
Pardon and Salvation; Be you excited and encouraged to do so more and more, to
the last of that few remaining Moments of your Life: And the Lord glorify his
Renewing and Pardoning Mercy on you.

II. I pass unto the Second Thing to be observed from the Text, which is* That
Deliverance from this crying Guilt of Blood is to be earnestly sought of God.
This is the very Petition in the Text* Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness (...)
then there is Deliverance from (...) we should be very earnest in (...) for it
unto God.

1. There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness to be obtained from God. And
that of two sorts. 1. To be kept from the Bloody Guilt. 2. The Pardon and
Forgiveness of it when contracted.

1. We may by the Divine Restraining Grace be kept from the Commission of the
Sin of Murder; and this is a blessed Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness. We are
through Grace all of us (I trust) one only excepted, free of this Guilt; and ever
shall be so. But then it is God that has kept, prevented and delivered us from
it; and He must hereafter keep us, or we shall fall into it. For we are
Incident to it through the horrid Corruption that is in our Nature; and the very
best of us are by no means our own Keepers. There is no Sin, but what the vile
and cursed ^ture of man is prone to, and capable of; and the same vile Naure is
^mon to us all. Esau had Murder (...) his heart, when he came out against his
Brother Jacob; and so had Joseph's (...) when they cast him into the (...) God
kept them however from (...) GOD left David to fall into it, to (...) him the
wickedness that was in^ (...). GOD left Simeon and Levi, Joab and Absalom, and
others to fall into it, on one temptation or another. Are we Better by Nature
than they? No, but God has kept us from their Temptations, or Restrained us
when tempted. When the Prophet of the Lord told Hazael the Syrian of the
Murders, Cruelties and Barbarities which he would in time commit against
Israel; He answered with detestation, But what? is thy Servant a Dog, that he
should do this great thing? such abhorred and enormous wickedness: Yet he did
it afterward; like a dog he rent and tore and devoured; He proved as much a
brute and beast of prey, how impossible soever he beforehand though it it of
himself. And indeed the Angers, Passions, and Wraths of men are so violent;
that it is a wonder of the Divine Restraining Grace, and a mavelous Instance
of the Power and Providence of God that there are not many Murders to one
committed in the World. How does Madness and Rage and mortal Hatred glare out
in men's looks, and words* and gestures? How easily do they grow Outrageous, and
strike or draw? From whence come blows Fightings, and Duels and Stabbing (more
base and cruel tha^ all the rest) but from men's lusts which war in their
Members? So that the Sin is in our Nature; though by the Divine Mercy so few
are left to it.

We see a Miserable Person present, whom God has left to the great Sin of
Murder, while you and I are kept from So? but who makes thee to differ? Are
^ou better than he? Is not thy Nature as bad as his? Have not thy Passions
(...) as violent as his? How often in thy (...) have thou also been on the
Brink of this Sin? But God has had Mercy on (...), and not suffered thee to act
thy own cursed. Will* O adore the Sovereign Providence of God! Behold, the
Goodness and Severity of God! to him that is ^llen, Severity, but to thee
Goodness! Is ^e a greater. Sinner, than some of us? ^^^ll thee nay, but except
you repent, you ^^^ll all likewise perish.

Other great Sins do expose and lead to ^s of Murder; by debouching, harden^ing
and soaring the Conscience; and by ^king God to give people up to their (...)
lusts and passions* But to return, (...) blessed deliverance from Sin to be
(...) ^o^ it; to have the guilt and the ^s of Repentance prevented; and the
present Shames, Miseries and Ruin that do sometimes attend it.

2. There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltinses after it is Contracted, by the
Commission of Murder: i. e. The Merciful God has admitted Sinners to
Repentance, even in this Case. And there is forgiveness of it, and cleansing
from it, through the Blood of Christ. It has been repented of we see in our
Text, and it has been pardoned. 2 Samuel XII.13. And David said unto Nathan, I
have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has
put away thy sin; thou shall not die. Manasseh was a great Sinner and Murderer;
he filled Jerusalem with the Innocent Blood which he shed; yet was he afterward
an Eminent Penitent, and obtained Mercy.

The Mercies of God are Infinite, Free and Sovereign. He has mercy on whom he
will have mercy. The Merits and Virtue of the Blood of Christ are also
Infinite, and have purchased Pardons for the greatest Sinners upon their
Repentance. The Power of Renewing Grace is Infinite; Almighty Grace! I^ can
change the hearts of the greatest Sinners, and is often Glorified upon the
Worst. The Offers of Mercy by the Gospel, its Calls and Promises are unlimited;
to all, even the Chiefest Sinners. Mat. 12.31. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men. Isai. 1.18. Come now and let us reason together,
says the Lord,: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. 1 Timothy I.15. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Thus we read again; that
the Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanses from all Sin; and that whosoever
comes to Him, He will in no wise cast out.

Here is Comfort for thee, O miserable Malefactor, and Prisoner of Hope! and
how should it revive and cheer thy sad and wounded Soul, and cause thee to
admire and adore the Riches of the Mercy of God through Christ, his Grace
abounding to the chief of Sinners. There is Deliverance from Blood guiltiness.
There is pardon and forgiveness with God, even for thee, if thou do believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and with a repenting, bleeding Soul for this and all
thy other Sins, do find Grace to fly unto His Blood: I may then, and now do
promise you in the Presence, and in the Name of Christ, My Great Lord and
Master, our Common Savior and Judge, the free and full Remission of all your
Sins, how many or great soever they have been

O that it might please God to give thee, together with the most affecting
sense of the Heinous Nature of thy bloody Crime; to apprehend the freeness and
fullness of his Mercies by Christ Jesus; and thy Saviors Alsufficiency and
readiness to bestow both Repentance and Pardon on thee.

Hear it, and be astonished; hear it, and be thou ravished with the Grace of
God: God gave the Life of his own Son, Christ the Son of God gave his own
Blood, for the Redemption even of Murderers upon their Repentance. He died even
(...) his own Murderers, for them that (...) wicked hands crucified and slew
(...) Prince of Life: and therefore the Apostle Peter calls even upon them to
^pent, that their Sins might be blo^ out, who had themselves denied the (...)
Our, and the Just, and desired a M^ or to be granted to them.

^n ^hen Christ's Blood can (...) the Guilt of Blood; and Faith in the Blood of
Christ can both purify and pacify the polluted wounded Soul of a Murderer. It
is true that St. John tells us, That no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in
him. But the Apostle there is speaking of him that hates his brother, and has a
malicious murderous frame of spirit within him: Such an one abides in death;
and has no seed or principle of Spiritual Life, no beginning of Eternal Life
within him. How many such Murderers, haters of God and one another, there are
among us, under a more dreadful sentence then a present bodily death; He knows
that searches the hearts of the Children of men. But he that has truly repented
of all his Sins, and believes on the Son of God, though he may have been a
Murderer, yet he has Everlasting Life, and shall not enter into Condemnation in
the World to come; but is passed from Death unto Life. Thus then there is
Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness. This was the first Thing.

2. We should be very earnest in Prayer unto God for this Deliverance: That He
would keep us from it: that He would save us from the Condemnation due to it.

Let every one here present before the Lord, Pray to Him to be kept and
preserved by Him from this and all other great Transgressions. Keep back thy
servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: So shall I
be innocent from the great Transgression. It is an excellent and needful part
in our Litany; From Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all Incharitableness (and so
from Murder one frequent cursed Effect of them;) Good Lord deliver us.

But who is there that will not wish and pray to be kept from this Sin of
Murder! who would not deprecate the being left to it, if it were only in regard
of their Temporal Life? Surely we ought But then be sensible that thou need
the* Divine Keeping: Be sensible that thy heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked: Be sensible of the violence of thy own Lusts and
Passions: Be sensible that these (even all thy causeless wraths and angers)
render thee as a Murderer in Gods sight: Yea, let the Best remember with the
Apostle, Tit. III 3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

Remember that the Devil is a Murderer, and will not the malicious Spirit
inspire and stir up as he is able his own Venom and Malignity in thy Soul? to
make thee as like himself, and as odious to God, and contrary to Goodness as he
can? Remember that this Sin of Murder was the first Enormity and flagitious Act
after the Fall: The Devil hurried wretched Cain into This; He was of that
Wicked One, and slew his Brother. Thou art of that Wicked One, and only hate
thine, and art unreasonably angry on every petty occasion: O fear, lest some
time or other he push thee into the Overt Act of Murder. Beg of God to keep
thee.

And now I turn me again unto the Wretched Spectacle before us, whom God has
suffered to fall into this Crime. And need I call upon thee, O miserable David,
to Pray earnestly to God for the Pardon of This thy Sin. Every one of Us should
this Day Cry to God for the Forgiveness of all our Angers and Passions; The
pardon of our Malice and Hatreds. But O with what anguishes of Soul, and
agonies of Grief should You be Lying at the Feet of Mercy, Crying incessantly
for Pardon. I hope you have been doing so day and night, since the Fact, and
now you have but an hour more to do it in. O do it the more Fervently in thy
last Agonies. O with what care and fear, with what vehemence and importunity,
should you wrestle now! and we in Prayer to God for you. The Blood of thy
Murdered Brother cries against thee from the Ground, but the Blood of Christ
which is the Blood of Sprinkling, and speaks better things than that Blood of
Abel, Cries aloud for Mercy upon all Repenting Sinners. Wilt not thou go now
unto that Blood of the Covenant, the Blood of the Great Sacrifice for Sin, and
the Blood of Intercession; and by Faith therein, Cry unto God in Prayer for thy
own Soul? Wilt not thou Cry to thy God and Savior; Deliver me from this Guilt
of Blood, O God thou God of my Salvation.

And here let me tell thee; that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God,
the Crucified Jesus, is the God of thy Salvation; neither is there Salvation in
any other. He is the only Savior of Sinners, and He is an Alsufficient One. He
is a City of Refuge, a Rock of Salvation for thy poor Soul to flee unto, and be
safe from the Avenger of Blood, the Avenging Justice of God. O flee for Refuge
to the Hope that is set before thee. There is now no Condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus. Look to the Crucified Savior, and Beg of Him to Remember
thee, and Receive thee to His Kingdom. O may he say to thee, as he did once to
the Malefactor by him on the Cross: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

You have I hope been passing your last Weeks in Prayer for the Life of your
Precious and Immortal Soul. Now Die doing so. It is for your Life, and an
Infinitely better One, than this, which your Sins have lost. Be found now Lying
at the Feet of Christ, washing them with your Tears, and wiping them with the
Hair of your Head. There ly with utmost Grief and Self-loathing for your
Scarlet Sins; there ly Confessing and giving Glory to the Justice of God; There
Ly Admiring Free Grace, and trusting in Christ, as able to Save unto the
uttermost, all that come unto God by Him. While the Sorrows of Death compass
thee, and the (...) of Hell get hold on thee, and thou find sorrow and
trouble; Then Call that upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord and Righteous; yea, our God is Merciful.
There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness, and it is earnestly to be sought
after, from the God of our Salvation.

Which was the Second Thing observed from the words.

III* And Lastly, the Last Observation is, That God must have the Glory and
Praise of this Preservation and Deliverance. My Tongue shall sing aloud of thy
Righteousness. Thy Mercy, Compassion, Grace and Faithfulness.

If God prevent and keep us from falling into Sin, the Glory and Praise is to
be Ascribed to his Preventing Grace (...) It is the Lords Doing, and should be
Mavelous in our Eyes. So it will be, if we are sensible of our own, Desperate
Wickedness. It is the Greatest Good, Kindness and Benefit that God can do ^s in
thi^ (...) to his bestowing Sanctifying (...) some resp^ (...) of Sin (...) a
Greater (...) Pardon of (...) upon Rep^ (...) who (...) ^er Sinne^ (...) and
bl^ for this reason* (...) and Sa^ls are, who^ the Ang^ (...) over (...) their
Rep^tance

Moreover, God Owes us not his Grace, but it is what we ^ve continually ^een
forfeitin^, (...) the wicked a^ of it provoked him times with (...) ^umber, to
take it (...) us.

If then God has kept (...) from any (...) ^ven the worst T^sgression, to (...)
Name be the G^ Psalm. CI.^, 7. (...) Lord is thy Keeper: The Lord is thy (...)
upon by right hand the Lord shall ^reserve thee from all (...) shall pre^erve
thy Soul. 116.^, 9 Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, (...) Lord has dealt
bountifully with the. For the ha^ ^elivered my soul from death, m^ (...) tears,
and my feet from fall^ (...). verse 24. Now unto him (...) (...) you from
falling, (...) ^less before the pr^ (...) Glory with exceeding J^y. To the only
wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and
Ever. Amen. Thus let us Sing aloud of Gods Righteousness, because that he has
graciously kept us from Blood-guiltiness.

AND now David, If it may please God to Deliver thee from the Guilt of that
Blood which thou have shed, thou will f^r ^ver Praise and Sing of his Pardoning
Mercy.

O the Glory of Divine Grace in pardoning such Guilt as thine is! O the Glory
that may redound to GOD for ^ver in thy Salvation! The Glory of ^^ee H^ting
Love unto the Chief of Sinners! The Glory of Christ the Savior, through whom it
is that the Grace of God is thus Magnified to Sinful Man! The Glory of the
Divine Holiness in the Forgiveness of Sin through the Blood of Christ, the
Justice of God having received full Satisfaction thereby; So^ (...) God can be
Just, and yet the justifi^ of all them that Believe! The Glory of the Power
also of Renewing Grace, whereby God is able to sul^ all things to himself; and
to Soften, Sanctify, and Change thy Heart! And finally, the Glory of Gods
Holy, Wise and Terrible Providence, and yet most tender to thee and merciful,
in whatever Methods it may use, and make them Effectual Means of thy Conversion
and Salvation! Ah, If thy very Sin may bring thee unto Christ, and into the way
of Divine Awakenings, Instruction and Conviction; how should thou in thy
very Chains, and on the Gibbet Sing aloud of Gods Righteousness.

If thou have any Hope that God has pardoned thy Sin, I Am sure thou must needs
adore and bless, extol and magnify the Mercy of God in Christ. O cherish
Admiring Thoughts of free Grace in pardoning great Transgressions; and let them
arise from the sight of the Greatness of thy own Sins. Let Christ be Glorious,
Admirable, Excellent and Precious to thy Soul. ^t O beware of presumptuous
hopes in^ and Reliance on the Divine Mercy Let ^hy hopes therein increase
infinitely in ^e Humiliation, Sorrow, Abasement and Self-Abhorrence for thy
Sins. O the Astonishment it should beget within thee to think of finding Mercy
with the Holy God! How humbly should you hope for it! How should it break thy
Heart, and melt thy Soul within thee! And while it does this, -- how should it
raise, ravish and transport thy dejected Soul.

Let me then Call upon you this day, and in this last hour of thy Life, My Son,
Give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and own publicly his Righteousness and
Justice in this thy miserable End. Make Confession of thy Sins to God and man;
justify both: Take shame and confusion of face to thy self; for thou have
sinned against both* Will thou not fear God under thy Condemnation, and say
with the penitent thief on the Cross, and I indeed justly, for I rece^ but the
due desert of my deeds. God is Holy in judging thus: His throne is spotless;
thou convict before him must be speechless. Confess then his Righteous and
terrible Providence, and fly to his Mercy. Say with repenting David in the
Context. v. 2, 3, 4. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from
my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions: And my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: That
thou might be justified when thou speak and be clear when thou judge.

Again, give Glory to God by warning others. Preach to them in thy Dying words,
in more affecting Ones than I can speak to thee. God can help the to do so; for
who has made man's mouth? Have one word for God before thou die! Warn Young
people of thy Sins, and call o^ careless profane Sinners to learn by thy
Example to fear God and turn to him, that so Iniquity may not be your ruin.
How know thou but that before thou die thou may be instrumental to turn
some one from the Error of his way, and save a Soul from Death and cover a
multitude of Sins; or to prevent to some or other the like Sins and the like
Temporal Destruction. God grant thy Sufferings may be Sanctified thus for
saving Good to others. So shall thou teach Transgressors Gods ways, and Sinners
shall be converted unto him. The Lord in Mercy open thy lips, and thy mouth
shall show forth his Praise,

To Conclude, Give Glory to the Righteous and Faithful God, by laying hold on
his Free Grace in Christ Jesus. God and his Righteousness are Glorified in
Christ. God has Glorified his Son Jesus, to be a Prince and Savior. Thy Faith
in Christ shall Glorify God in the best manner that a Sinner can do it. So the
Malefac^or on the Cross turned his face to his Crucified Savior, and said,
Lord, Remember me. So do thou look unto Jesus, the Author of thy Salvation. And
God grant thee a Sight of him, at the Right hand of God, and Faith to Cry to
Him, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

O that God would Purge thee and Pardon thee; and make thee to hear the voice
of Joy and Gladness, that thy broken bones might rejoice! That He would hide
his face from thy Sins and blot out all thine Iniquities! That He would create
in thee a clean Heart and renew a right Spirit within thee! The Lord cast thee
not away from his presence; nor deny his Holy Spirit to thee! The Lord give
thee the Joy of his Salvation, and uphold thee with his free Spirit!

The Lord Enable thee to Expire in suitable apprehensions and praises of his
Righteousness and Mercies through Christ to all penitent Sinners And God, the God
of thy Salvation, bring thee to Sing thereof for ever among Redeemed Souls in a
better Life.

FINIS.

