A SERMON Preached by the Reverend, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Teacher of the First
CHURCH in Boston in New England. Delivered at Salem, 1636. To which is
Prefixed, A Retraction of his former Opinion concerning Baptism, uttered by him
immediately Preceding the Sermon here Emitted.

He dyed on the 23. day of December, 1652. Entering on the 68 year of his Age.

1 Cor. ii. 4, 5, 6. And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: That
your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to naught.

Boston: Printed in the Year, 1713.

By the Reverend, Old Mr. JOHN COTTON, At Salem, June, 1636.
HAving been moved by your Reverend Elders, and some Others, to Speak a Word of
Instruction and Exhortation; I thought it meet to begin with some word of
Confession.

At the first coming over of some of our Honored Magistrates, it so fell out,
That they did Arrive at this Congregation, the Sacrament being near to be
Administered, and a Child being Born to one of them; they themselves could
neither be admitted to the Lord's Table, nor their Child to Baptism: When I my
self heard of this, I Wrote unto the Pastor of this Congregation (now Deceased)
doubting of the Lawfulness of that practice; Thinking then, That the Faithful
and Godly Men coming where the Seals were to be dispensed, and having right
unto the Covenant, had right also unto the Seals thereof, and so that their
Children had right unto the former Seal of Baptism Something I wrote to that
purpose, as I conceived, then requisite. It pleased God that he sent me a large
and loving Answer; but through the extremity of Sickness then upon me, I could
not Read it; and after-wards being shuffled among other Papers, I could never
find it to this very day: But what might have been for Instruction to me from
his Letters, the Lord has since showed unto me by diligent search of the
Scriptures.

So that however I apprehended the Matter at that time, there was just Reason
for what was done: And now lest I should seem to alter my judgment herein
without some weighty Cause, Let me tell you what prevailed with me, to cause me
to Assent to the judgment and practice of the Churches here.

The Reasons are Two.
Reas. 1. The first is taken from the Covenant unto whom it does belong. I
formerly conceived, That unto all the Faithful the Covenant did belong, and
unto their Seed also, not considering, that which since I have learned and
found, That the Covenant which is made to Me, and to my Seed, Is not made to
the Righteousness of Faith at large, But to them that are Righteous by the
Faith of the Seed of Abraham; that is, to such Believers as are Confederate
with Abraham. And therefore it was, That though Circumcision the old Seal of
the Covenant (answerable to our Baptism) was Administered to all the Seed of
Abraham, Yet not unto those godly Men that Believed in his Age: For Abraham and
his Family were then the only visible Church of God upon the Face of the Earth.
And though Melchizedeck lived at that time, who was an heir of the
Righteousness of Faith, yet not of the Covenant of Abraham, unless he will join
himself to the Family of Abraham. Nor Job himself, though he was a Man none
like him upon the Face of the Earth; nor his Friends; Men fearing God, in their
Generation, were yet incapable of Circumcision, unless they had joined
themselves to the Family of Abraham. And therefore you shall never read that
the Covenant belongs to Me, and to my Seed, unless I be of the Seed of
Abraham, or joined to the Family of Abraham. So we shall find it in the
Sanction of the Second Commandment, That the Lord shows Mercy to thousands of
the Generations of such as Love and Fear Him: That Commandment has respect to
God's Instituted Ordinances. Let Jonah go to Niniveh, and by the blessing of
God prevail with Thousands, then the Covenant of Grace belongs to them; but
What? to their Seed also? No, verily not, unless their Parents were Confederate
to the Seed of Abraham. So that if you desire Mercy to you, and to your Seed,
Keep then to the Ordinances, and to the God of the Ordinances, and so you shall
keep a constant intail of the Covenant to you, and to your Seed; for unless Men
enjoy the Covenant this way, it aoth not belong unto their Seed. This being not
considered, I fear, has brought great Mischief to all the Churches that have
not attended unto this Principle, and has been an occasion of much Mistake to
many godly Parents, who plead their Covenant for their Seed, and many times so
find little blessing; for though God has made a Covenant with them, yet it is
but as a Scattered Stone, not laid orderly in any building; so that truly they
may plead; but when God comes to Answer, He will make it appear, That He did
never open His Mouth for a Covenant with their Seed until they be Confederate
with Abraham.

And therefore seeing my Letter, as I understand, is in many of your hands, I
had rather make a Plaster bigger than the Sore, than that it should be pleaded
against my practice after my Departure.

Reas. 2. The Second Reason is this, Unto them that are not in Covenant, a
Minister may not dispense an act of Power and intrude himself, neither has he
any Power until he be Called; and then only over such as Call him: And
therefore if you should come to crave Baptism for your Children, or the Lord's
Supper for your selves, of a Minister whom you have not Called over you, he
has no Power, and therefore unto you he cannot dispense an act of Power: So
that although the hearts of God's People might be enlarged many times, to do
such things, Yet the Law of the Lords Gospel does Restrain them, until Men have
entered into Covenant, and not their own strait lacedness that keeps them back
from dispencing such things.

A Third Reason which is Coincident with the Second, and serves to amplify the
Point, That they have no Power over you, it will plainly appear from this
ground; They that have no Power to Excommunicate you, they have no Power to
Admit you to Communion with them; But till you join your selves in Covenant
with the Church, they have no Power of Excommunication; Therefore till then,
they have no Power to Admit you to Communion with them, for there is the like
reason of both.

Now having expressed this Word of Confession, together with my acknowledgment
of my dependence upon the Lord for grief and sorrow; I this desire, That if my
Letter Remain Written in any of your hands, you would not now look at it as my
judgment; though sometime it was, yet now you have heard it retracted again by
me, Professing also, that if any thing which I have since Written or Spoken,
God give me to see it, appear different from the Truth, I will retract it also;
in the mean time blame me not, if I do not retract it.

Jeremiah L. 5. -- Come, and let us cleave unto the Lord in a Perpetual and
Everlasting Covenant which shall never be forgotten.

Some Translations reads it: -- Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord in
a Perpetual Covenant that shall never be forgotten.


THese be the words which were foretold by Jeremiah, which the People of God
Returning out of Captivity of Babel should use for the encouragement of one
another to return to Sion, and there to bind themselves in Church Covenant with
the Lord; for so you read it in the verse foregoing: In those days (when the
Lord shall destroy Babel) the Children of Israel shall come, and the Children
of Judah together, going, and weeping as they go: and seek the Lord their God.
They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward saying, Come, and
let us join our selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant, that shall not be
forgotten.

In these words of encouragement or exhortation you may observe.

1. The encouragement to the Work, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord.

2. This joining is set forth.

(1.) By the means of it: by a Covenant.

(2.) That Covenant is here amplifyed by a double adjunct of a double Eternity.

1. Here is the Covenant it self, that is Perpetual.

2. Set forth not only by the durance of it, but by the Report and Memory of it
unto all Ages: that shall never be forgotten.

To speak to joining to the Lord at large, is neither the Principal intendment
of my Text, nor may it be so convenient to speak only to it. I shall have
occasion to open it in showing the way in which they do join to the Lord.

The Doctrine which I would Commend to your Christian consideration, is this;

DOCTRINE
That the Church Covenant, wherewith the People of Israel and Judah did join
themselves to the Lord, especially after their return from Babel; and yet more
especially under the days of the New Testament, was a Perpetual Covenant. Come,
let us join our selves to the Lord. Israel and Judah spoke this as they were a
Church, and as they were about to renew Church Fellowship; let us join our
selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant that shall never be forgotten. You
read the like Expression, Jer. 31, 31, 32, 33, 34. This shall be my Covenant
with the House of Israel, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be
my People. And verse 34. I will forgive their Iniquities, and remember their
Sins no more. It is therefore an Everlasting Covenant; and He does make the
main difference between this and the former Covenant to lie in this; whereas
they break that Covenant, v. 32. This Covenant shall not be broken. The Lord
made a Covenant with them before, but that Covenant they brake; and I regarded
them not, says the Lord: as it is repeated, Heb. 8.8. to 13. But in this
latter Covenant, He will remember their Sins no more, and therefore He does
speak of the Old Testament, as of that which does vanish away, but for the New
Testament, He will establish that; according to what is written, Jer. 32.40. I
will make an Everlasting Covenant with them, to do them good; but I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. The like we also
read, Ezekiel. 16 60. Though they have despised the Oath in breaking the Covenant;
nevertheless, I will remember my Covenant with thee in the days of thy Youth,
and I will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. And wherein does it
differ from the Old Covenant? I know not better how to explain it than by
laying both of them together, both the Old Covenant and this New Covenant,
which he does more renew in the days of the New Testament. In the Old Covenant
you may observe a fourfold act of God, and a double act of the People.

First. The Lord does prepare his People, and calls them to Mount Sinai, and
there reveals Himself in Thundrings and Lightnings, and flames of Fire, so
that the stoutest Spirits amongst them quaked; and Moses though a Man full of
faith, yet he says of himself, I exceedingly tremble and fear; and so did all
the People; and when they heard the voice of the Thunders, and saw the
Lightnings: Exodus 20.18. to 21. They said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we
will hear, but let not God Speak with us lest we die. Thus did the Lord prepare
them by breaking, for if the Lord do intend some real and serious work, He will
then shake the foundation of the stubborness of their hearts, and bring them to
see their own stubborness and baseness, for else they would despise it.

Secondly. The Second act of God is a Commandment which He does put forth,
wherein He does require an exact Obedience unto all the Commandments of the
Law, and to his Statutes and Judgments: Exodus 19.5. If you will obey my voice
indeed, says the Lord, and keep my Covenant; then you shall be my peculiar
treasure above all People. Now this Covenant of God consists of Moral Laws,
and Statutes and Judgments, unto all which He does require Obedience, even to
all that is written in the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.27.

Thirdly. The Lord does profess unto them all that should keep Covenant, That
they should Live by keeping Covenant. And this is the Grand and Principle
Promise wraping up all other, Lev. 18.5. And the Apostle does Interpret the
meaning of that Promise: Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith, but the man that
does these things shall Live in them: and this is the Promise of Life which God
gives to those that keep Covenant.

Fourthly. The fourth act of God in making this Covenant is, a heavy threatening
of a curse to any that shall break these Commandments, Deuteronomy. 27.22. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Law to do them.

Now there are two acts of the People.

1. They do profess universal Obedience unto all the Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Exodus 19 8. Twice they repeat it, All that the Lord shall say unto us, we will
bear it, and do it. Only consider this, They Promise it in some kind of opinion
of their own Strength, without any sense or feeling of their own Insufficiency;
like men under pangs of Conscience, they do believe that they shall be able to
keep and do all that the Lord shall say unto them. O that there were such an
heart in them! says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Or as the word is in the Original;
Who shall give them such a heart? But this they Promise.

2. They yield themselves to be accursed of God, if they shall not keep that
Covenant; and therefore when it was pronounced, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Law to do them, all the
People did say, Amen; and so their faith lay upon a curse: This is the Old
Covenant that God made with his People, and is called a Covenant of Works; the
Lord requires Righteousness and Works, He Promises Life to their Works, and
they say, Amen, to enter into a curse. Now this was a temporal Covenant; this
my Covenant they brake, says the Lord; and they did quickly turn aside from
the ways of the Lord, and therefore Moses when he comes and sees the Calf
which they had made, he brake the Tables of the Covenant.

Now for the Covenant that is Everlasting* we may observe therein also four
acts of God toward his People.

First. Look as He prepares the other by a Spirit of Bondage, so he does
prepare these for His Everlasting Covenant, by a Spirit of Poverty; and they
are Poor and Afflicted in Spirit, in sense of their own Unworthiness and
Insufficiency, that which the Lord does wish to the other, Deuteronomy. 5.29. He
works in these: Zeph. 3.12. There shall be brought home to Zion a Poor and an
Afflicted People: He means not in respect of their civil Estates, for there
was not a feeble People amongst them; but as they stood in their Spirits, they
were empty, and as they thought destitute of God, and therefore should seek the
Lord and his Face, and his Strength, like those that had lost both Church and
Covenant; unto those the Lord will have an Eye, and He will dwell with men of a
contrite Spirit, Isai. 57.15, 16. And therefore with a blessing unto these, the
Lord Christ does begin His Sermon in the Mount: Matt. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor
in Spirit. He does not only afflict them with a Spirit of Bondage; but when he
comes to make a Covenant of Grace, the People are insufficient to do all which
the Lord requires; and this is a Spirit of Poverty.

Secondly. When the Lord has brought His People to be Poor in Spirit, He does
then Promise them.

1. Christ: He gives Him for a Covenant: Isai 42 6. I have called thee in
Righteousness: I will give thee for a Covenant unto the Gentiles. When the Lord
makes a Covenant of Grace, this is the gift of God; this is the Principal
blessing of the Covenant, Isai. 49 8. And the Lord will not give Life in them
to keep, and by them to uphold, but Jesus Christ for both.

2. In Jesus Christ He does give Everlasting Communion with Him. Through Christ
He will take away the Stony heart, and give a heart of flesh; and He will bring
with Him Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. That is to say, Such Pardon of
Sin as He will never revoke more, that Justification which He will work in
Christ, He will never repent of; and therefore he says, Jer 31.34. He will
remember their Sins no more: and for their Sanctification He Promises, Jer.
32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
And so in all the blessings of the Covenant, the Lord will give an Everlasting
Union and Communion with Him, in the enjoyment of them.

Thirdly. These three things the Lord does require.

1. Faith: That is to say a yielding of the Soul to the Lord, as unable for
this work, and yet to wait upon Him for Righteousness: Ezekiel. 36.37. I will be
enquired for this of the house of Israel to do it for them. Not only to be
sought unto for the Mercy, but I will be sought, that is, They shall seek me,
they shall seek his face and his strength to do it all for them.

2. He does require the Obedience of Faith: and this is expressly called for,
Romans 16.26. That is, for such Righteousness, as none can work by any Graces of
their own; but which being wrought in them does put life and strength into all
their duties.

3. He does require of his People that they should be of a Melting frame of
Spirit, in regard of all their Whorishness, whereby they have profaned His
Name; they shall wail and bemone this: and therefore it is said of them in the
verse before the Text, That Weeping they should go, for all the Evils that they
have wrought in God's sight: And this is that which we read: Ezekiel. 6.9. They
that escape of you shall remember me among the Nations whither they shall be
carried Captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which has
departed from me, and with their eyes which go a whoring after their Idols: and
they shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed in all
their abominations. This does the Lord require of his People: but observe this
withal, that He does not require it in a way of a Legal command, but with an
alsufficient Virtue, whereby He will work in them what He does require; so that
does He require, that they should walk holily before Him, He Himself does also
work this, for in this Everlasting Covenant, the Commandments of God are
Promises; for this will I be inquired, even to do all that he does require:
Zeph. 3.12. They shall trust in the Name of the Lord. And so for the Obedience
of Faith: Ezekiel. 36.27. I will cause you to walk in my Statutes, and you shall
keep my Judgments and do them. He will make us able to do it, and willing to do
it, and so to do it. And this is the true meaning of all that the Lord does
require in the Everlasting Covenant; when He does Command He does Promise. Does
he require seeking of Him? He will put his Spirit within us: Does he require
weeping and mourning? He will pour down a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and
they shall seek him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him, Zeck.
12.10. So that this is the Everlasting Covenant. The Lord prepares the heart:
certain duties indeed he does lay upon them; as to believe in his Name, to
yield the obedience of Faith, and to mourn for him; and he does convey an
effectual Power to work them.

Fourthly. The fourth act is an act of Cursing belonging to this Covenant.

1. To them that do not receive it.

2. To those that do Apostate from it: To them that do not receive it: Heb.
2.2, 3. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience, received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if
neglect so great Salvation? The neglecting of it brings desperate Misery.

To those that do Apostate from it: Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer Punishment
shall they be thought worthy of who have trodden under foot the Son of God, and
have counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an
unholy thing, and have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace. This Covenant is
that which is spoken of, Deuteronomy. 29.1. beside the Covenant made in Mount Horeb:
and to this Covenant belongs a heavy curse: Deuteronomy. 30.17, 18. If thy heart
turn away that thou will not bear, but shall be drawn away, and worship other
gods, and serve them, I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely
perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the Land whither thou
passest over Jordan to possess it. And that it is the Covenant of Grace, we may
perceive by comparing, Deuteronomy. 30. v. 11. to the 14. with, Romans 16.6. So that we
may see the Lord does threaten a heavy curse to fall upon them that transgress
this Covenant.

Now for the Peoples part: Their acts are two.

1. They fall down before the Lord confessing their Unworthiness of any Mercy.

2. Confessing their own Inability and want of Strength; and this is that which
Joshua labors to possess the People with, Josh. 24.19. There he tells
them, Ye cannot serve the Lord your God; that they might not trust in their own
Strength: and therefore when the Lord does make this Covenat with Abraham, he
fell on his face, Genesis 17.3. in sense of his own Unworthiness.

Why this Covenant is such an Everlasting Covenant?

Reas. 1. Is from the Root and Fountain of it: Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee
with an Everlasting love, therefore with Mercy have I drawn thee. What moves
the Lord to be thus earnest and zealous in drawing men to Christ? No man can
come to me, says Christ, except the Father which has sent me draw him, Joh.
6.44. How comes this to pass? I have loved thee with an Everlasting love,
therefore have I drawn thee. Now He will carry his work an end in His with a
mighty Power, through all the backwardness of their own Spirits: And this is the
ground mentioned: Psalm 111. 4, 5, 9. The Lord as Merciful and full of
Compassion, He will be mindful of his Covenant for ever: He has sent
Redemption to his People, and commands his Covenant for ever. And how comes
this to pass? His Redeeming love is the cause of it; as the Covenant of works
springs from his Justice; and hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 7.12.
The Commandment is holy and just and good; if the Creature keep Covenant, the
Lord will reward; but if not He will punish; but to whom his Covenant is from
love and mercy, them he will draw with Everlasting Mercy.

2. Another principal Reason is taken from the Surety; though the Israelites
had Moses for a Mediator, yet they had him not for a Surety. Now Jesus Christ
is made the Surety of the Covenant, Heb. 4.6. A Surety is not for a Testament,
but for a Covenant; no need is of a Surety on God's part, He never brake
Covenant with any: but if a Surety be needful, doubtless it lies on our part;
and therefore it is said, I will give thee for a Covenant, even Christ Himself:
Isai. 55.2, 3. I will make an everlasting Covenant with thee, even the sure
Mercies of David: Behold, I have given him for a witness to the People. And
hence it is that all the Promises of this Covenant are made directly to Jesus
Christ; the Old Covenant was made to the People, but this is made to Christ. To
Abraham and to his Seed were Promises made, he speaks not of his Seeds, as of
many, but as of One even Christ, Gal. 3.16. And in Him the Promises are yea and
Amen to us; yea, that is affirmed, Amen; that is, confirmed: so long therefore
as this Church keeps her to Christ, and holds Christ for her Head and
Husband, the Lord does keep Covenant; and he has Promised to the Elect Seed,
That they shall keep Covenant, for he has said, They shall not depart from
Christ, and then they can never depart from the Covenant, and though they break
Covenant, yet if they keep close unto Christ, they have the Covenant, although
they break it. And though you read of a Temporary faith, that does endure for a
season, Matt. 13.20, 21. And so in the parallel place, Luke 3 13. You shall
read. That they are of the Stony Soil, that receive the word with joy, and for
a time believe; and so for a time receive sundry Spiritual gifts, and that with
joy; and some with fear and trembling also, as the thorny Soil, for they want
not depth of Earth, but are deeply humbled, and yet bring forth no fruit unto
perfection, because they are not brought to that faith in Jesus Christ by which
they are Sanctified. Now therefore so long as this Covenant is kept, and so
long as the Members of the Church keep close to Christ, so long this Covenant
is not broken. And hence it is that when the Jews had committed the greatest
Sin that ever was committed upon the face of the Earth, yet the Apostles did
not break Communion with them, notwithstanding that fearful injury of putting
to death the Lord of Life; because they might have done it of Ignorance, and
therefore, Act. 3.1. they went and joined with him in Prayer; why did not they
know that they had Crucified a just Man? and is not this a horrible
Profanation of the Covenant? No, no, Brethren, this will not break an
Everlasting Covenant. Father, forgive them, they know not what they do; our
Savior Prays for them, the Apostles keep Communion with them; here is the
Spirit of a Savior, and of his blessed Apostles: but when they do put away
known Christ Act. 13.45, 46. when they contradicted and blasphemed, then what
says the Apostles? It was necessary the word of God should first have been
spoken unto you, but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. And so also it was a dreadful
proceeding which they use in this case: Act. 19.7, 8, 9. He went into the
Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three months, disputing and
persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God. But when diverse were
hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude, he
departed from them, and separated the Disciples, -- So mark you what it is that
does dissolve this Everlasting Covenant; not this that they Kill the Messiah;
it was a horrible Murder; but yet they may not separate for Murder: What! if it
be the Eternal Son of God! You may not separate for that neither, so long (...)
you do not Sin against Knowledge; but when they do Sin against Knowledge, and
after they have been taught and convinced, do yet rebel, then is this
Everlasting Covenant broken, else it is not broken till they come to this
desperate extremity.

USE. I. The Use of this point in the first Place, may show us from hence, a
ground of that which some of us (yet but few) saw the truth of, in our Native
Country, namely the Necessity of a Church Covenant to the Institution of a
Church, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord: That which does make a
People a joined People with God, that does make a Church: What is that? The
Covenant of Grace does make a People* a joined People with God, and therefore a
Church of God; and therefore you shall find that when the Lord Establishes
Israel for a Church unto Himself. He makes this Covenant: not only that in
Mount Hareb, but He does make another Covenant with them in the Plains of (...)
Deuteronomy. 29 10, 17. And so by this means they come to be established to be a
Church unto (...) God.

For further (...) of this, consider this one Argument.

That whereby a Church is at first Established (...) a Church; That whereby
being fallen, a (...) restores, that which being (...)

But by this a Church is at first established, and by this it is restored when
it is fallen, and by breaking this, the Church is broken. This therefore gives
the being to a Church. By this a Church is at first established. You are here
this day that the Lord might establish you to be his People, Deuteronomy. 28.12, 13.
And how was the Church renewed, but by the renewing of this Covenant in the
days of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. And so in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, Chap.
9.38. Chap. 10 29. And afterward when the Lord would cast off his People:
Zech. 11.10, 14. He brake the staff of Beauty, and the staff of Bands: This now
follows, that so many of us, as have come to the Ordinances of God, and have
partaken of the Seals of the Covenant, and have not entered into a Covenant,
have violated the Seals of the Covenant which have not been given to the Elect
of God in general, but to the Church of God; and therefore look at the Covenant
by which you have entered here, as the ability of your State, which by no
changes you are for ever to be removed from, but may for ever keep it by
fellowship with Jesus Christ.

USE. II. In the Second Place, Let me provoke my Self, and all my Brethren, and
all the Churches to Consider, What kind of Covenant you have entered, or will
enter into: if you shall come hither into this Country, and shall here confess
your Sins, that you have profaned the Name of God withal, if you take Christ
for your King, and Priest and Prophet, and if you shall profess to walk in all
his ways, this may all be but a Covenant of works.

The Elders of the Church propound it, Will you renounce all your Sinful
Pollutions? Will you keep Covenant? And enter into a Covenant with the Church,
and take Christ, and promise to walk after all God's Ordinances? You Answer,
All this we will do; all this is no more than the Old Covenant: For you are
much deceived if you think there was no speech of Christ in the Covenant of
works. What were the Ceremonies but shadows of Christ? What was the laying the
hand on the head of the Sacrifice, but the laying hold upon Christ Jesus? What
was the blood of the Sacrifice? Was it not the blood of Christ? And what was
the Atonement by that blood? Was it not the Atonement which is by Christ? All
the understanding Israelites did see that these things did point at Christ.
Now, if we do enter into a Covenant to keep the Ordinances of the Law, of the
Gospel, and of the Civil State, (for that was the tripartive Covenant) all this
may be but a Covenant of Works. What then must we do? We must fall down before
the Lord in our Spirits, and profess our selves insufficient to keep any
Covenant, and profess our selves unworthy that the Lord should keep any
Covenant with us; as to say, Lord! who am I? Or what is my Fathers house, that
the Lord should ever look upon such a poor Soul as I am? What does the Church
lay hold upon duties, and there is an end? No, no, There are no true Servants of
Jesus Christ, but they must be drawn out of themselves by a Spirit of Bondage,
and unto Christ by a Spirit of Poverty; and then a Soul sees there is much in
Christ, but he cannot hope there is any thing for him: Now the Lord does draw a
man on to Christ Jesus, and calls him to believe in Christ, but yet he is not
able to reach Him. Now then, if the Lord draw the Soul to depend upon Christ,
and shall go forth, and not undertake any thing in his own Strength; so you
will keep it by the Strength of the Lord also; now the Lord will have Peace
with you, and the gates of Hell shall never prevail against you. Build a Church
upon any other foundation but Faith, and the profession of Faith, and it will
break into manifold distempers. But if the Church be built upon this Rock;
Storms and Winds will not so much as shake it, it being built upon Faith, and
Faith upon Christ Jesus: by this means the Covenant will keep us constantly,
sweetly, and fruitfully, in an everlasting kind of Serviceable-usefulness one
to another.

USE. III. The Use in the third Place, is of Direction, Upon what terms you may
Separate. Suppose the Church Promise never to defile themselves more with any
Pollutions of the Sons of men, but they do defile themselves, then Covenant is
broken; they did Covenant they would not come into false Assemblies, and that
they would have no fellowship with them, that did allow of false Assemblies;
but this Covenant comes to be broken: If this be your Covenant, it is but a
Covenant of Works, and then no marvel though it do break and fail, seeing it
stands upon duties, and keeping of duties; for being built upon the condition
of duties, and standing upon performance of duties, and being broken upon
neglect of duties, this is but a Covenant of Works; and yet you may be Married
to Christ in this. You come and resolve to walk in all Ordinances, and
undertake to reform both Church and Common Wealth; in such a Covenant the Lord
is content to take you by the hand and become a Husband to you, Jer. 21.32. And
what will a Husband do, he will rejoice with you, and you will find comfort in
duties; your heart has been refreshed that you may see you have Jesus Christ
in your bosom, He will also reveal Secrets unto you, he will cast in Seeds of
sundry good things among you, so that you shall Prophecy in his Name, and have
a Seed of Prayer, and many good things, and yet may want Everlasting love; you
may find much comfort, and yet you will find some or other to give offense, or
some or other to take offense, and you will break with breaking upon breaking,
until you be like Sheep without a Shepherd. This is not the Covenant, therefore
Brother, upon which thou and I must live in Church Fellowship everlastingly,
though herein thou have had comfort, and that unspeakable; such thou may have
and yet run upon a Covenant of Works.

2. A second branch of this use may be to teach us where-upon a Man may build
Separation Not upon breach of duty though they transgress, and prostrate their
Sabbaths, defiling themselves with unclean devices of men. Is the Covenant of
Grace broken? It is not broken until you have convinced this People of their
Sin, Act. 3.17. Because, if the Covenant be a Covenant of Grace, Jesus Christ
does step in, and all the breaches are fastened upon him. When then is the
Church of Christ broken from him? Not when she does Crucify Him, nor when she
does pluck the Crown of Sovereignty from His Head; these things she may do of
Ignorance: but when they are convinced that they have broken his Will, and
transgressed the rule of His Gospel: Now, if out of haughtiness of Spirit, they
will not see an error, but will have their own ways still; now it is no Sin of
Ignorance, no Sin of Infirmity. Now when men Sin not in Infirmity, not in Pang
of a Passion, as Peter denied his Master, nor in Pang of a Lust, as David when
he committed Adultery, but when in cool blood, Men do reject the word of Life:
Now, since they have put the word of God from them, you may break off from
them, and the blessing of Him that dwelt in the bush will be on your heads.
When it comes to this that the Church does separate from Christ, not from
Christ, but from known Christ, and not from known Christ in weakness of
Passion, or Lust, but in cool blood; now the Lord in Heaven will speak a
blessing to your Separation; but if you will separate upon any other ground,
you go upon a Covenant of Works: And if there have been any transgression of
this Nature, Return, and Return again unto the Church. And this let me further
commend unto you, Let the Church look to her Covenant, and let no Member come
in but he that Knows Christ, and that knows he is a Child of Wrath; and let
him go on, not in his own Strength, but in a depending frame upon Jesus Christ,
and then all the World will know that you have made an Everlasting Covenant:
hold Christ, and hold the Covenant and Promises, and Blessings of the Covenant.

USE. IV. The fourth Use may serve, to teach any Private Christian, whether
thou be-est joined to the Lord in an Everlasting Covenant. If thou buildest
upon a Covenant of works, the end of all thy faith will be to say Amen to a
curse, Deuteronomy. 27.21. If thou have entered into a Covenant of Grace, the end of
thy faith will be the Salvation of thy Soul, and this is the faith of the
Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.8, 9.

Quest. But how shall I know whether I have built upon an Everlasting Covenant,
or no?

Ans. 1. The Lord has drawn thee to make this Everlasting Covenant, thou did
not take it up upon thy own accord: Mind therefore what I say, The Lord draws
partly by a Spirit of Bondage, partly by a Spirit of Adoption: If you never
found your self a firebrand of Hell, if your Conscience were never afflicted
with your dangerous Estate by Nature, you were never yet in Jesus Christ. You
will say, I trust in Christ, and look to be saved by his Righteousness. Were
you ever afflicted with sense of your own unrighteousness? If you say, No, I
Pray you read, Joh. 8. 30, As he spoke these things, many believed on him. They
trusted on Him for Salvation. Did you then take the Covenant? see what
follows; Jesus says unto them, If you continue in my word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any
man: They were never acquainted with bondage; they hoped bondage belonged to
any rather than to them, and was more fit for Gentiles than for Jews. But what
says Christ? Whosoever commits Sin, the same is the Servant of Sin. If the
Son shall make you free, then shall you be free indeed. And afterward he
tells them, You are of your Father the Devil. For if a Soul were never yet
bruised with Sin, and with the sense of Sin, he never yet laid hold upon
Christ, with a true Justifying Faith; such an one will not continue in Gods
house for ever.

Object. You will say, Those that are brought up under Christian Parents, they
are not affected with such Terrors as others are, that have lived in roaring
distempers, of them, it is great reason that God should so bring them on by
showing them their fearful Misery; but these have been well trained up, and I
for my part, says one, cannot tell whether ever God did work this upon me?

Ans. If the State of such Persons be good, I profess, I do not know how to
Intrepret the Speech of Christ. These men are the Children of Abraham, and yet
if they do not see their bondage, they are not free by the Son; there is
difference in the measure of the Spirit of bondage; as there is difference
betwixt the Launcing and Pricking of a Boil, and yet both let out the
Corruption, the one with a lesser, the other with a greater issue: therefore if
the Lord does not cut thee off from all thy good Education, believe it, thou
art not yet in Christ, this faith of thine will fail thee, if thou so live,
and so dyest.

Object. But thou will say, I know the Pangs of Conscience, and the terrors of
it, and I have seen the error of my way, and have cast off my lewd Company; and
since I know that the Lord requires that I should seek him in Church Estate; I
have come some thousands of Miles for that end, and I could not endure to see
such things as are done by the devices of men: will not this hold?

Ans. I beseech you consider it, you have fallen upon this Reformation, you
have undertaken a Covenant, yet now you have failed, and what then have you
done? I go to Christ, and desire him to sprinkle me with the blood of his
Covenant. Is not this a safe Estate? Truly this is no more than the very
Covenant of Works, which the People of Israel entered into at Horeb, the Lord
shook the foundations of their hearts; upon it they entered into a Covenant; All
that God commands us, we will hear it and do it; and if they did offend, they
then go to the appointed Sacrifice; and what, says the Soul in such a case? I
thank God, I find some Peace to my Conscience. All this you may do, you may
reform your Selves and Families, and Churches; and when you fail at any time,
you may return to Christ, and He may give you some remorse, as he did to the
Israelites, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36. All this may be by a Spirit of Bondage: He in
Mercy forgave their Iniquities, and destroyed them not. So they may come to
have their Sins Pardoned, but this kind of Pardon, is but a reprievement; it is
not in everlasting Righteousness and Mercy: they Pray for Christ, and Mercy,
and He does sprinkle them, and then they see and find, that the Lord has been
Merciful unto them: but this will not do, the Lord will soon call back such
Pardon, as may plainly appear: Mat. 18.28. A certain man owed his Lord ten
thousand talents, but when he had nothing to pay, he fell down at his Masters
feet, and said, Have Patience with me, and I will pay thee all; his Master had
compassion on him, and loosed him, and let him go; was this in everlasting
Mercy? See what follows, This fellow would pay all; and thus it is with these
men, that have been under a Spirit of Bondage, they will cry hard for Mercy,
and Promise to pay all in time; and now in their dealings with their Brethren,
they are full of Sensoriousness, and will not bate an inch of any Covenant; and
they will take a man by the throat, though it be but for an hundred Pence: and
then what says the Lord of such a Servant? Oh! thou wicked Servant, I forgave
thee that great debt, should not thou have had compassion of thy fellow
Servant? he is then wroth, and delivers him up to the tormentors, until he has
paid the utmost farthing; even so shall my heavenly Father do unto you. When
men have received ease from God, and then are straight laced toward their
Brethren, then does the Lord revoke his Pardon, So that Reformation is no
assurance that God has made an everlasting Covenant with us. And mind you
further, All the Graces that you have laid hold upon, have sprung from your own
Righteousness. Thou have taken a Promise, Did it belong to thee? if not it will
fail you; you say you have been humbled, and come to Christ, and He has
refreshed you, mark where upon it is built; upon your humiliation? No, but I
come to Christ, Do you so? Who brought you to Christ? He says, No man can come
to me except the Father draw him. Now, come to such an one, and say, Go to
Prayer; says the poor Soul, I cannot Pray; Be humbled, I cannot be humbled;
apply Promises, they belong to any rather than to me: Such a frame of Spirit
there is in every one whom the Father draws: If you come to Christ by virtue
of any thing which is in you, it is but a legal work. And I pray consider, what
it will amount unto, you will find, that these men will breed distraction in
your Churches, such Members will make no choice how they hear, or how they deal
with their Brethren; look to it therefore carefully, when they come into the
Church, for otherwise you will find everlasting confusion, rather than an
everlasting Covenant.

2. Now then, does the Lord draw you to Christ, when you are broken in the
sense of your own Sins, and of your own Righteousness? When you look at duties
you are not able to do them, not able to hear or pray aright. If the Lord do
thus draw you by his Everlasting Arm, He will put a Spirit into you, that will
cause you to wait for Christ, and to wait for Him until He does show Mercy upon
you; and if you may but find Mercy at the last, you will be quiet and contented
with it. And whilst you do with Patience and Constancy wait, you are drawn with
Everlasting Love; now you have Christ in you, though you do not feel him: for
as the Earth is hanged upon nothing, Job 26 7. So now there is a Place for
Christ in the heart, when it is emtied of every thing besides; and such a man
has Christ, and is blessed, and the Covenant of Grace is his, you may safely
receive him into your Church fellowship; and though he do neither know Christ nor
his Covenant to be his, yet he will wait for him, knowing there is none in
Heaven but Him, or in Earth in comparison of Him. And you shall find such Meek
in Spirit and Merciful, and Mourning for Sin: These kind of Christians will
spring and grow, and will not profane the Covenant of God, nor the Covenant of
the Church by any unmerciful Separation. Such neither stray on the right hand
nor on the left; but when you do convince them, that they have Sinned against
Christ and his Church, they will go and complain bitterly of all the wrong they
have done to Christ, and his Church or Covenant, and Mourn for all the
Profanation of his Name: and for the grief that they have put upon the Spirits
of his Brethren; and these are true Israelites indeed, in whom there is no
guile. Now comes the Son with his Personal work, (as he says, Joh. 6.44. No
man knows the Father but the Son, and be to whom the Son reveals him:) in which
he does show the Soul, that all this former work was the mighty Hand of God,
whereby he has drawn the Soul unto Jesus Christ, and afterward does assure
and clear it unto the Soul in some measure, that this way is the way wherein
God leads all his Elect Ones. Now where the Son leads, the Holy Ghost
begins to work his proper work in the Soul, and Seals all this to the
Soul; for the Soul will not rest in a weak hope that Jesus Christ is his, but
does seek for more and better security of Jesus Christ. If he have a Promise
never so clear, yet it does not quiet his Spirit fully, it does stay him from
sinking, but not from searching. When Nathan told David, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord
has put away thy Sin, thou shall not dye; as plain a Promise as any could be,
and David knew that he spoke it from the word of the Lord. And what does he
now? Does that satisfy? No verily. But many men who had run upon a Covenant of
works, would have took it to themselves: If they had been humbled, and after
received; but a Child of God, though a Minister should so convince him, that he
could not deny but the Promise belongs to him, yet he searches further. And so
David, Psalm. 51.1. Does still beg for Mercy, Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, etc.
Why, had not David been told that the Lord had put away his Sins, (for this
Psalm was Penned when Nathan had spoken to him, as appears by the title:) What
would he have? Surely he saw need of further Mercy; Make me to hear the voice
of joy and gladness, and establish me with thy free Spirit: And thus he
wrestles with God and prays for it; according to what the Apostle speaks: Ephesians.
1.13. In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
Promise. And when the Soul has received this, then does he Sleep in quietness,
and has full contentment, and still he does yet depend on Christ Jesus,
fearing left he should grieve and quench the Spirit; and such a Soul it is unto
whom the Lord has made an Everlasting Covenant.

If this man have broken any Law of God, you shall soon bring him about to see
his Errors; and all this does show a man, he is a poor empty Creature; and this
Soul is brought lower and lower, and nearer and nearer to Jesus Christ. So if
we do wisely consider this, it may serve to give us a taste of discerning
whether we be in an Everlasting Covenant, or no.

USE. V. The Use in the fifth Place, is of Consolation unto all the faithful
Servants of God, whom God has made this Everlasting Covenant withal: You will
find that this will never be forgotten. You have entered into such a Covenant,
wherein Christ is yours, and the Covenant yours, and and all the Promises
yours, and all the Blessings yours, and the whole World yours; and that which
is the strength of the Consolation, they are yours Everlastingly, if the Lord
bring you out of your selves, by a Spirit of Bondage, and unto Christ by a
Spirit of Poverty; so that you wait upon him and cannot rest, until Christ has
revealed Himself to you by his Spirit here is your Comfort, the Lord has made
with you an Everlasting Covenant which shall never be forgotten. This was
David's comforts 2 Samuel 2.3.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet (...)
has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for
that is all my salvation and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.
Though my house do not flourish with Ordinances, not in Ruling justly, as the
Lord requires; though my House be out of order, and Common Wealth out of order,
yet he has made an Everlasting Covenant. God has laid hold upon Christ, and
Christ has laid hold upon me, and this is his stay, and comfort, although God
make it not to grow. And I beseech you consider it, all those that have
temptations to Separation, and some that have conceits of too much liberty: It
is not hearing that makes a man clean, as we may see, Act. 17.32, 33, 34. When
they heard the Apostles speak of the Resurrection from the Dead, some mocked,
and some said, we will hear thee again of this matter, and some clave to him
and believed; all that heard him did not cleave to him, but only some of them.
And if you have heard in England, you do thereby neither cleave unto your
Covenant, nor Order, unless you partake of the Seals of the Covenant, then
indeed you join unto them. Now, this is the nature of the comfort of an
Everlasting Covenant, though we fail in Families, and in Churches, yet if Christ
be ours, the Everlasting Covenant is ours. Indeed when Moses came and saw the
Israelites worshipping the golden Calf, Exodus 32.19. because he saw they had
broken Covenant with God, therefore he brake the Tables of the Covenant; to
show the Lord would have no fellowship with them; and if the Covenant had not
been renewed, they had perished. But come you to David's Covenant: Psalm. 89.28.
to the 34. verse. My Covenant, says the Lord, shall stand fast for ever: if
his Children forsake my Law* I will visit their transgressions with a Rod; but
my loving kindness will I not take from them. This Covenant does not stand on
keeping Commandments, but this is all our delight, That the Lord will not break
Covenant with us, nor alter the (...) that is gone out of his Lips. Consider
therefore, for here is a great deal of difference, your Covenant is not a point
of order only, but the foundation of all your comfort; and therefore look not
at it as a complement, for it is the well-ordered Covenant of God, even the
Security of your Souls.

Object. But some will say, This would indeed much comfort me, that has been
delivered, but if a man touch any Unclean things be is defiled, and if I touch
him that has touched any Unclean thing, I am defiled also, Numb, 19.13, 14.
Therefore sadness is upon me night and day for the Sins of the Church, and this
does eat up all my Comfort?

Answ. I Pray you consider it. I will but Interpret what it is to touch a dead
man, and to touch dead Ordinances. I cannot give you a better Interpretation,
than by that expression, which the Apostle uses: 2 Cor. 7.1. It is good for a
Man not to touch a Woman. If so be a Man touch a strange Woman, so as to be
familiar to plead for her, and to connive with her, this Man is defiled; and if
I now touch this Man so as to be familiar with him, and to keep fellowship with
him, I am also defiled. So in case the Church do tolerate these, that do defile
themselves with any Sinful Pollution, do not I make my self Unclean now by
touching this Church? God forbid, unless it be by touching them with familiar
connivance. But if I do now touch them, with a sharp reproof, this does indeed
touch the Church, but it is so far from defiling, as that it does hold forth
the Purity of his heart that touches them; and if you do forbear Communion
with the Church when you know the Church has defiled her self, if you shall
not come home to the Church, and bewail your Separation, your not touching the
Church has defiled you, Lev. 19.17. You see the Church lie in Sin, you will
not touch her, then you Sin against her, and have broken your Covenant, Will
you suffer your Brother's Ox to lie in the Mire? and will not pluck it out? And
are not Brethren more than Oxen And I beseech you consider another Place of
Scripture, (and the Lord be Merciful to those that have perverted the sense of
it;) in Hag. ^.12, 13. where it is said, They were all Unclean, as by the touch
of a dead man, both Prince and Priest, and People more Unclean Very Godly men
they were, yet so busy with the World, that Temple work was neglected,
expressly against the Commandment of God; for they did not only leave it off
when the King restrained them with a strong hand, but in the days of Darius
also (the Successor of Artaxerxes) they did forbear and cease from Temple work;
and therefore now they are neither accepted of God, nor prospered in the
outward man, they were all Unclean, as by the touch of a dead man: but do
Haggai and Zechariah now separate from them? No, no, Brethren, they touch them
to the quick, and so recover their Brethren, and deliver their Souls, though they
be dead and defiled; yet it is not for the People of God to say, we will touch
them; you shall be Unclean if you touch them not: Touch them, how? With
dallyance, and familiarity and closes with them: Not so, for that was the Sin
of old Eli, that he did bear with his Children too much, and touched them no
more sharply. But herein stood the faithfulness of these two holy Prophets,
that they did touch their Brethren, and that thoroughly, so that the Lord did
stir them up to set about Temple Work; and then He does Promise all that they
went about should be clean and pure. I Pray you therefore consider it: I am
marvellously afraid of Separation from Churches upon any breach of duty; they
who do Separate for such causes, think they are sprinkled with the water of
Separation: but believe it, they are Separated from Christ Jesus for ever, if
they so live and so dye. Therefore if you belong to Christ, He will show you it
is not the water of Separation that will serve your turn, but getting Christ
Jesus, and sitting closer to Him, and to your Brethren, by Admonishing and
Reproving them, if you see them defiled. This will keep you clean, and your
hearts clean, and your Souls comfortable: That the Lord has made an
Everlasting Covenant with you that shall never be Forgotten.

FINIS.

