Those Taught by GOD THE FATHER, TO KNOW GOD the SON; are Blessed. A SERMON
Preached at Boston Lecture, July 3d. 1712. By Solomon Stoddard, A. M. Pastor of
the Church of Christ at Northampton.

Joh. xvii 3 And this is Life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Joh. vi 45 It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God.
Every man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father, comes unto
me.

BOSTON in N. E.

Printed by B Green, for Benj. Eliot, at his Shop in King Street. 1712.

DIVINE Teachings, Render Persons BLESSED.
MATTHEW XVI. 17. -- Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.


WE Read, verse 13. That Christ came into the coas^ of Cesarea Philippi: Thi^
was not Cesarea where Phi^lip the Evangelist lived, o^ which we read, Act.
21.8. for that was it Syria; but this City was formerly called Paneas, and much
enlarged by Philip the Brother o^ Herod the Tetrarch, and called Cesarea
Philippi the first in honor of the Emperor, the latte^ in honor of himself.
Here Christ being desirous to draw forth Peter's confession: he first inquires
what the sense of men was concerning Him: Who do men say that I the Son of Man
am? They answer, v. 14. Some say thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and
others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. The Jews expected Elias from Heaven,
and possibly they thought that one of the Prophets was risen from the Dead; or
they might think with the Phythagoreans that there was a Transmigration of
Souls, and that the Soul of some dead Prophet was put into the body of Jesus:
Then Christ inquires what their sense was concerning him, v. 15. Whom say ye
that I am? To which Peter answers, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.
Where he acknowledges two things.

1. That Jesus was the Messiah, that was promised by Moses and the Prophets,
whom the People of the Jews had been long in expectation of.

2. That he was the Son of the Living God. Some have acknowledged Him to be the
Christ, that have not acknowledged Him to be the Son of the Living God: But if
He be One He must be the other; and Peter acknowledges both.

In this verse, we have the beginning of Christ's answer to Peter, Where first,
he pronounces him blessed. Sometimes men are called blessed, because some
special blessing is bestowed on them, or shall be bestowed upon them. Psalm.
41.1. Blessed is he that considers the Poor. Psalm. 84.4. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy house. Sometimes they are called blessed, because they are
heirs of blessedness; Matt. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the
Kingdom, etc. Thus Peter was a blessed man. Secondly, The reason why Christ
pronounces him Blessed, from the way wherein this was revealed to him. (1.)
Negatively, Not by flesh and blood; by flesh and blood we are to understand
Mortal man. Gal. 1.16. I conferred not with flesh and blood. 1 Cor. 15.50.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Peter was told of this first
by man. Joh. 1.40, 41. Andrew says to him, We have found the Messiah; but the
meaning is, it was not only revealed by flesh and blood. (2.) Positively, But
my Father that is in Heaven. This is not to be understood of the conviction by
Miracles, for many saw Christ's Miracles that were not happy, but of the
conviction by the Spirit of God. God who dwells in Heaven had taught him this.

DOCTRINE.
Those Men are blessed, to whom the Divinity of Jesus of Nazereth is revealed,
not by flesh and blood, but by the Father that is in Heaven. The Divinity of
the Messiah is abundantly taught in the Old Testament: That the Father has
begotten Him, Psalm 27. That he is David's Lord, Psalm 110.1. That He is the
Mighty God, and the Everlasting Father, Isai. 9 6. That He is Jehovah our
Righteousness, Jer. 3 36. That His goings forth have been from of old, from
Everlasting, Mic. 5.2. That He was the Man that was Gods Fellow, Zech. 13.7.
And this is abundantly declared in the New Testament, That Jesus of Nazereth is
the Son of God: He Himself gave witness to it, Joh. 9.37. And He accepted of
that confession from others: from Nathanael, Joh. 1.49, 50. from Peter in the
Text; from Thomas, Joh. 20 28, 29. And it is abundantly witnessed unto by
inspired men: so by John the Baptist, Joh. 1.29. so by the Apostles in their
Writings: this we all acknowledge. But there be a Number of men to whom this is
revealed by the Father that is in Heaven, and those are blessed men. They are
of diverse qualities and degrees; but whatever their enjoyments be, whatever
their calamities, their infirmities, their temptations, their iniquities be,
they are blessed Men. If this has been revealed by God to them, they shall
partake in Glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ. If God have revealed the
glory of Christ to them, Glory shall be revealed in them, if they partake of
this light they shall partake of the Inheritance of the Saints in light.

Three Propositions are here to be spoken to.

PROP. I. It is a difficult thing to be indeed convinced that Jesus of Nazereth
is God. The Jews deny this, and so do the Socinians in the sense that the
Scriptures teach it. It is easy to be convinced of some truths, because sense
and reason do teach them: but this is a thing known purely by revelation:
Natural reason makes no discovery of it, and carnal reason has many objections
against it. Men are naturally blind, and the Devil by carnal reasonings makes
them more blind, 2 Cor. 4 4.

1. There is a seeming impossibility in it. There is an infinite distance
between God and Man, and that they should be United in One is beyond our
comprehension. That God should be Man and Man should be God, seem to imply a
contradiction. There is a seeming necessity that if there be two Natures in
Christ, there must also be two Persons, and that if there be but One Person,
there is likewise but one Nature. It is absolutely impossible that the divine
Nature should be an humane Nature, or that the humane Nature should be a divine
Nature. And it seems impossible that the same Person should be both God and
Man. Hence there arose so many Heresies in the Primitive Church. The Manichees
and Arians denied the Divine Nature of Christ: some of them said, He was a mere
Man. The Marcionites denied the Humane Nature of Christ, they said He only
appeared in an humane Shape, as in the time of the Old Testament: and as the
Angels did often appear. The Eutychians denied Him to be distinct God and Man,
they confounded the two Natures, said He had one Nature made of a Divine and
Humane. Many Men have been confounded to conceive, That the Natures are
distinct and yet the Person the same. And the Socinians at this day, though
they acknowledge that Christ is God, yet do deny that He is the Eternal and
Increated God. Nestorius taught that Christ was two Persons.

2. There is seeming improbability in it. If it be granted that it is not
impossible, yet it seems improbable.

1. It seems improbable that God would so condescend. It is condescension for
God to have any Communion with Men. It was condescension for God to appear to
Abraham, and to be familiar with Moses. Man is but a worm, Job 25 6. And it
must needs be great condescension for God to be made flesh; to be manifested in
flesh. It would be matter of admiration, if a Prince should Marry a Poor Woman:
but this is more, God must stoop very low to do this: this was too much to
expect, before it was revealed: It would have been impudence to have asked it
of God. The Angels of Heaven did not imagine such a thing, if it had been
proposed to them, they would have thought, that it had been too much. God has
showed a great deal of kindness to the holy Angels, but there is nothing
parallel to this. It seems as if it would be an undervaluing, and forgetting
his own Superiority. It seems very unlikely that He would take upon him a
Nature made out of the dust, that is exalted but one degree above the beasts. A
Nature compassed about with Infirmities, a Nature inferior to the Angels, a
Nature liable to hunger and thirst, and weariness, and pain, and death. It
seems as if it were too much for love to do: That He would disdain to appear on
earth in a mean outward appearance: That it should be said when He appeared in
the form of a Servant, That this is God, This is He that you are to Worship and
Adore.

2. It seems improbable that He should be willing so to advance Jesus of
Nazereth. It was a great thing that He should advance David from being a
Shepherd to Rule His People Israel: he says, What am I, and what is my Fathers
house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18. It is a greater, that
God is willing to advance any of Mankind to heavenly glory, He puts great
honor upon them therein. But this is more, that it should be said of a Man,
that He is God; that He made Heaven and Earth, that out of the Mouth of Babes
and Sucklings God should ordain Strength, that He should advance a Man above
Principalites and Powers, and say of him, Let all the Angels of God worship
Him, and say to Him, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. It seems to be
too much for a Creature to be Personally United to the Creator. God is angry
with us when we Worship Wood and Stone, and Silver and Gold; and it seems very
unlikely that God should bid us Worship One that was made out of the dust, as
well as our selves. The honor that God puts on many men in the World is very
great, but it is amazing that God should put so much honor upon a Man, that He
should be Personally United to the Divine Nature: that the God of Heaven and
Earth, whom all the Angels adore, should take the Son of a poor Woman, Married
to a Man of mean occupation, into Personal Union with Himself.

PROP. II Yet many Men have some Persuasion of it, because it is revealed by
Men. There be Multitudes of Men that make a Profession of his Divinity, that
are but carnal men: for they are not obedient to him: Luke 6.46. Why call ye me
Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say. They are zealous in the
Profession of his Divinity, they Write in defense of it, they suffer
Persecution for it. If any Man among us should deny it, they would think he
were not worthy to live; they have a considerable persuasion of the Truth of
it, but it is because it is revealed by Man.

1. Because it is acknowledged by such a Multitude of Men. They have imbibed
this doctrine from their Childhood: and wherever they go they find others are
of the same persuasion; they hear that many great Nations do receive it: Wise
and Learned Men are of that persuasion, and they take it for granted that it is
so, and dare not call the thing into question. As the Ephesians were persuaded
that the Image of Diana fell down from Heaven. And as the Turks are persuaded
that Mahomet was a great Prophet. And as the carnal Jews were persuaded that
God spoke by Moses: so these men are persuaded that Jesus is the Son of God:
They think surely so many wise men in former Generations, and in this
Generation are not deceived. They don't think it strange that Ignorant Heathens
should be deceived, and that the Jews that are under great Prejudices should be
deceived. But they dare not harbor a thought, that such good and wise and
learned Men as make this Profession should be deceived. The restimony of the
Christian World is of great force with them, they say it is not to be imagined
that such Men would agree in such a Profession without ground. If there were
but few that owned it, that would be a terrible temptation to them, but it
would be unreasonable for them to question that which is so generally
acknowledged, they should render themselves abominable, and be contemptible and
vile in the Eyes of all about them, and make their lives miserable, if they
should give way to a Scrupulous Spirit about this doctrine.

2. Because there are so many arguments for it in that book, which Men say is
the word of God. There are many reasons drawn from the Scriptures to prove that
Jesus was the Son of God. It was foretold, that the Messiah must come before
the Scepter departed from Judah That he must come while the Second Temple was
standing; that he must come before Daniels Seventy Weeks were run out; and
there never was any yet in the World to whom the Characters of the Messiah did
in any probability belong, but only Jesus of Nazereth. The Miraculous
conception of Christ is a great evidence for him, Luke 1.35. The Voice of God
from Heaven was very evidential of His Divinity. The testimony of John the
Baptist has a great deal of argument in it. The Miraculous works that were
wrought by him, and by the Apostles in his Name, are very speaking arguments.
God bore witness to him by diverse signs and wonders and miracles, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.4. The Resurrection of Jesus on the third day according
to his Prediction, is a great Witness for him. The rejection of the Jews soon
after their Crucifying him, is a strong confirmation of this doctrine: These
things are plainly held forth in the Scripture, and it is generally
acknowledged that the Scripture is the word of God. The enlightened part of the
World are generally of a mind, that the Scripture was given by inspiration from
God. Men would count them out of their Wits, if they should not own the
Scriptures to be the word of God. They think they must yield that, not only
Orthodox Churches do own it, out the very Papists, and many other Heretics do.
Whatever differences there are among ^hen about the Explication of Scripture,
yet ^hey generally agree about the Divine Authority of it; and if that be
indeed the word of God, then surely Jesus of Nazereth is the Son of God.

PROP. III. They are blessed to whom this is revealed by the Father. The World
does admire the felicity of those that are great and noble, but these Men that
the Father has revealed Christ unto, are indeed blessed, these are objects of
Gods love, these are the heirs of the Kingdom of God. Death will put a Period
to the imaginary happiness of some men: but if men have this revealed to them
by the Father, at Death they will enter into happiness: for every such man does
believe on Jesus Christ. Some men complain that they cannot come to Christ; but
these men are able to come to Christ, and do come to Him. They do fulfill the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, Job. 6.45.

Argu. 1. Those to whom this is revealed by the Father, are convinced of the
sufficiency of his Death for Redemption. When awakned Sinners are invited unto
Christ, they are not convinced of the sufficiency of the blood of Christ, and
they are afraid to accept of the Invitation. They consider that their Sins have
been very great, and God is an Holy and a Jealous God: That he has threatened
everlasting destruction for Sin, and that the sufferings of Jesus Christ were
but for a few years, and the extremity of them for a few hours; and don't see
the redeeming virtue of his blood. They could as quietly depend upon the
Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, as the Sacrifice of CHRIST: They can take more
encouragement from the Tears that they shed, than the blood that Christ has
shed. But when they are taught of the Father the Divinity of Christ, they are
convinced of the sufficiency of his Death: when the Father does teach them the
Divinity of Christ, then they do indeed see his Divine Glory; than they say,
God has purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Then they say, The
blood of Christ who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, does purge the Conscience from dead works, Heb. 9.14. They have such a
sense of the dignity of his Person, that they are satisfied that his sufferings
are a sufficient price of Redemption. That though his sufferings were but for a
little time, yet they abundantly answer for those Eternal Punishments that they
have deserved. That God has received a full recompense for the wrongs which
they have done him: now they cannot count the blood of the Covenant a common
thing. They say, Christ has redeemed us from the curse, being made a curse for
us. Gal. 3.13. They can have no low thoughts of the Sacrifice of Christ; they
say it was the Mighty God that Suffered, He whose goings forth have been from
Everlasting, He whose Glory fills Heaven and Earth, He who is the brightness of
his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

Argu. 2. They are convinced of the Divinity of Gospel Invitations. Awakened
Sinners are not satisfied in the divine authority of the Gospel call: They know
that the Minister Invites them, and they know not but that the Gospel calls are
Gods calls, and they are inclined to think that the Gospel is the Word of God.
But when God opens their Eyes and shows them the Divinity of Christ, He always
at the same time convinces them of the divine authority of the Gospel: When
they are taught by the Father that Jesus is the Son of God, they see at the
same time, that all that doctrine which is taught in the Gospel is divine, they
see that the sending of Christ into the World, was the Work of God, that the
Command to believe, is Gods Command, and the Promise made to believing, is Gods
Promise; and so the Word comes with mighty power upon their hearts. 1 These.
2.13. When we received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not
as the word of Man, but as it is indeed the word of God, which effectually
works in you that believe. Before they were at a loss whether the Word was
the word of God, and they thought in case it should be so, that God might not
intend them, God might be willing to Save others, but not willing to Save them;
but now when God opens the Eyes of Men, they are at no loss about the
Invitation, they hear the Voice of God calling them, and so they are not afraid
to come to Christ. Before they were afraid it would be Presumption, they feared
they should be more bold than welcome, they feared that it would be a
provocation for such as they to obtrude themselves on Christ. But when God
reveals to them the divine Glory of Jesus of Nazareth, they are at no loss
about their liberty to come to Christ: They see their Warrant, and nothing will
scare them from coming to Christ, if their offenses had been more, if every Sin
were ^en, they would come. Joh. 6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of
the Father comes unto Me.

USE, I. Hence it follows, That Men don't know who are blessed. If Riches and
Dignities, or Morality, or Baptism, or Church fellowship would make men
blessed; we might be able to pronounce many men so: But if it depends on the
Fathers revealing Christ to men, then we are under an uncertainty. Christ knew
that the Father had revealed him to Peter, but we don't know who he has
revealed him unto. It is difficult for some good men to know it concerning
themselves, but much more difficult to know it concerning others. We may have
grounds of strong persuasion concerning some; but we must not pretend to an
infallible knowledge respecting any other men.

Consider, 1. If Men profess the Divinity of Jesus Christ, we don't know that it
has been revealed to them by the Father. There be a Multitude of People in the
World that make a Profession of this, and they do it seriously and zealously;
but they be but sew that have this revealed by the Father. Tradition and
rational conviction, are the foundation of many men's Profession: for indeed
there are but few that are taught of God Matthew. 20.16. Many are called and few
are chosen. Christ charges some that make a Profession, with Spiritual
blindness. Rev. 3.17. Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. And many men that make a great Profession, are destitute of Saving
Grace. The foolish Virgins had no oil in their vessels: Some that have a Name
to live are dead. All that are taught by the Father will make a Profession of
Christ: but there be many that make that Profession, that are not taught by the
Father. There is a great difference between the visible Church and the
invisible. Multitudes will be rejected at the last day, that made a great
Profession. Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many shall say to me, have we not prophesied in
thy Name, etc. And then I will profess unto them, I know you not, aepart from
me ye that work iniquity.

2. If Men tell that they had a very affecting discovery of Christ, we don't
know that it is any more than common Illumination. Many men have great
illuminations that are never Converted: Natural Conscience is capable of a
great deal of light; a Natural man may have an affecting discovery of hell.
Isai 33.14. They say, Who can dwell with devouring fire? who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? He may have an affecting discovery of Heaven: So we find
when Christ had been speaking of the Resurrection of the just, Luke 14.15. One
that heard him, said, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.
So he may have an affecting discovery of Christ, and of the Gospel. They may
hear the word and anon with joy receive it, Math. 13.20. They may be so
affected, as to look upon the doctrine of the Gospel to be a blessed doctrine,
Gal. 4.15. They may be enlightened and taste the good word of God, Heb. 6 4, 5.
Common illuminations, may beget as strong affections as Spiritual
illuminations, Men may be much affected with Christ, yet not be convinced of
his divine Glory: in the days of his flesh many had such a persuasion as is
called faith, yet it was not faith of the right kind. Joh. 2.23, 24. Many
believed on his Name, but Jesus did not commit himself to them; because he knew
all men. So Joh. 12.42, 43.

3. If they tell us that immediately upon that discovery they came to Christ,
we cant tell but that they were mistaken. Many men will give that account that
upon the coming of some Gospel Promise to them, and a discovery therein of the
Alsufficiency of Christ, they cast themselves upon him: And generally we have
reason to believe that they speak the truth in their heart: But how can we tell
that they are not mistaken? for many men take that for coming to Christ that is
not coming to him. There be images of faith, as well as of other graces Jam
2.14. What does it profit, if a man say he has faith? Some hope that Christ
will Save them, and they call that faith. Some depend partly upon the
Righteousness of Christ, and partly upon their own works, and they think they
believe in Christ. Some men don't rightly understand the nature of faith, they
have had experience of those workings that they call faith: and some don't
understand the actings of their own Souls; they can give a right description of
faith, but they greatly mistake in the application of it to themselves: There
was something like faith, and they hope it was faith.

USE, II. Of EXAMINATION.
Whether you have been taught the Divinity of Jesus by the Father that is in
Heaven. You make a Profession of the divinity of Jesus, but this don't make you
blessed. There are two sorts of Persons that make this Profession, some have
only been taught it by flesh and blood; they are far from being blessed: and
there be some to whom this is revealed by the Father; that is it that makes men
blessed. If you be not more happy than many Persons that make a Profession of
Christ; if you be not more happy than many Persons that are zealous in the
Profession of Christ; if you be not more happy than many Persons that walk
outwardly according to that Profession, you are far enough from blessedness.
You say it was by the good Providence of God, that Christ was revealed to you.
So all things come to pass by the Providence of God: but this you must inquire
into, Whether God by his Spirit has indeed taught you the Divinity of Jesus
Christ! For if you do not know this, you don't know that you are Godly, you don't
know that your Sins are Pardoned, you don't know what will become of you when
you die: therefore examine this matter.

Two things make this Examination difficult.

1. Some men that have not been taught by the Father, have had great
illuminations Some men have been satisfied at the time that the Sun of
Righteousness has risen upon them with healing in his Wings: But afterward
they have considered that Balaam had great illuminations; that those who say
they Prophesyed in Christ's Name, and in his Name had cast out Devils, and those
that cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, Hosanna in the Highest, must needs be
much enlightened: They are at a stand what to think of themselves: they are at a
loss what difference there is between their illuminations, and those which some
carnal men have had: it seems hard to determine, that the light which they have
received, has transcended the light that others have had: Others have had great
confidence as well as they, others have been greatly affected as well as they,
others have escaped the Pollutions of the World as well as they: They are at a
loss to find out any thing peculiar and distinguishing: They were not troubled
with any doubtings at first, but they forget in time, and cant tell exactly how
things were with them; and are afraid that they have had no more than some
Hypocrites have attained unto.

2. Some that have been taught by the Father, have had but a small degree of
light. There are diverse degrees of light: The light that some have is like the
Morning light. The light that others have is like that at noon day: The light
that some men have is very clear, things are made exceeding evident to them.
The light is more explicit and distinct than in others; they have a larger and
fuller discovery of the Glory of Christ: yea the light that some have is more
frequently repeated: They have many times had discoveries of Christ: And these
men that have but a small degree of light, are under great disadvantage,
because the light is small, they cannot give so distinct account of what they
see; it is not so easy to distinguish that light from common light; and besides
they are under great temptation to suspect the revelation that is made to them.
They hear other Christians speaking of their experiences, and they tell what
discoveries they had, and with what wonderful comfort and joy their hearts were
filled: and this proves a great exercise to them. They doubt whether the
discoveries that they had, were any thing more than common, because they sell
short of what some other Saints have.

Signs are,

1. Such as have been taught by the Father, have seen themselves utterly blind,
just before that revelation. Christ Jesus came into the World, that they which
see not might see, Joh. 19.39. Every man is blind by Nature, and he shows them
this blindness just before he puts this light into them. Some men say, They
were never at any loss about the divinity of Jesus of Nazareth, they always
believed it; they may be assured that it has never been revealed to them by
the Father. Some others say, They have many times seen their blindness; truly
there be partial convictions of it very frequently, and yet men remain blind.
But it is the manner of God just before he lets in this heavenly light, to make
a thorough discovery of this natural blindness, then he gives light to them
that sat in darkness, Luke 1.7, 9. He don't convince men of their blindness a
Twelve month before, and suffer them to loose the sense of it, and then reveal
Christ to them: but he makes them sensible that they are in Egyptian darkness,
that no teaching, nor arguing, nor consideration is sufficient to inlighten
them, and in this extremity God makes the Sun of Righteousness to arise on
them: and they are delivered out of the Kingdom of darkness, and translated
into the Kingdom of Christ.

2. They see God testifying to the Divinity of Christ, in the Old Testament.
There be several characters of the Messiah that are applicable to none but
Jesus of Nazareth; and in the New Testament it is plainly laid down, that Jesus
is the Son of God. These men have read them hundreds of times, and had a common
persuasion of them; but now they see God testifying to them, their
understandings are enlightened to see such a glory in the Gospel, that they know
it to be the word of God. It can be no other than the word of God. The
declaration of the Gospel comes with a divine authority upon them; they hear
the Voice of God in the Gospel: the word is not an uncertain report, but there
goes a glorious light along with it: They don't look upon it to be an
imagination, or a conjecture, but the true sayings of God. They are not in the
dark about it, whether the Gospel be a cunningly devised fable, and an humane
invention. They are not of a doubtful Mind, but they plainly see a divine
signature, and the character of divine authority in it. They see in it the
manifestation of the Grace and Wisdom, and Righteousness of God. 1 These. 2.13.
Ye received it not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God,
which works effectually in them that believe.

3. They do at the same time see all other things that are necessary, in order
to their coming to Christ. In order to men's coming to Christ, they must see
many other things, they must see that Jesus is appointed by God to be a
Mediator, that he has born the Punishment of our iniquities: That there is
Saving virtue in his blood and righteousness, that the Mercy of God is free,
that they are invited by God, that God is faithful to fulfill his Promise in
the Gospel. And when the divinity of Christ is revealed by the Father, they see
all these things. If all impediments were not removed out of the way, they
would not dare to come to Christ. Indeed the Soul in its first coming to Christ
has not the particular distinct consideration of all those things; for the
work is wrought at once, as it were in the twinkling of an eye, but there is
that light let into the Soul, that a man sees abundant encouragement to cast
his Soul upon Christ; and is satisfied in the truth of that Evangelical
doctrine, that he has been instructed in: He says, as Joh. 6.68. Whether shall
we go? thou have the words of Eternal Life. And if any thing be suggested to
him about the freeness of Gods Mercy, about the fidelity of God, about the
universality of the Gospel call, he is prepared to assent to these things. The
word of Salvation by Jesus Christ is cleared up so unto him, that all obsticles
are taken out of the way, and he can with freedom of Spirit embrace the call of
the Gospel, and joyfully betake himself to Christ for refuge.

4. This revelation does immediately made a Spiritual change in the Soul. Some
of these men long before the revelation was made to them, carried it orderly,
were religiously disposed, were zealous against Sinful ways, had an affection
for the People of God, were sorry for their Sins, strove to do duties for the
glory of God, were very watchful against temptations, sometimes had great
inlargements and meltings in Prayer. But upon this revelation, they have quite
another Spirit than they had: Now they love God, God has their hearts: they
desire the glory of God. They say with Paul, Now to the King Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, and only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever, 1 Timothy
1.17. Now they have godly sorrow for their Sins; this discovery works a spirit
of Repentance in them; and they say as Job, Now we abhor our selves, and repent
in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. This discovery puts life into them. Joh. 5.25.
They hear the Voice of the Son of God and live. And though the old Spirit does
return again, and gather strength, and sometimes much prevail, yet the tokens
of this change do abide in them: The spirit is lusting against the flesh, Gal.
5.17. And they have a continual warfare; and many times there be sensible
workings of a Spirit of Grace, they are rejoicing in Christ, panting after God,
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, loving those that are godly,
longing for the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, waiting for the breathings of
the Spirit, hating all the works of darkness.

USE, III. Of WARNING.
Be not at rest till the Divinity of Jesus be Revealed to you by the Father
that is in Heaven. Some men have lived all their days in darkness, they have
got literal Knowledge, and they are able to prove the Divinity of Jesus Christ:
But they have never been taught it of God, and yet the men are not in pain, or
in distress of Spirit. Some have only now and then a gird of Conscience, but
ordinarily it is no great burden to them, their Spirits are taken up about Meat
and Drink, and Clothes, taken up about News, and appearances of outward
Afflictions. But one would think you should have no rest Day or Night, till
this Sun of Righteousness rise on you, with healing in his Wings. One might
expect that your hearts should be as heavy as lead: and that you should be
crying out with Bartimeus, Lord, that we may receive our sight! It is wonderful
stupidity, not to regard this miserable condition that you are in. Give not
sleep to your Eyes, nor slumber to your Eyelids, if it be possible till you
have this revelation.

1. If you have not this, you will surely perish. Your Salvation don't depend
upon the degree of the revelation, but it does depend upon the revelation. A
man may be ignorant of some things without any damage. There be some other
things that if he be ignorant of, he is exposed to some inconvenience thereby;
but if the Divinity of Jesus be not revealed unto you, you will perish. You
think it a dreadful thing to be damned, yet thus it will be with you, if this
be not revealed to you. Joh. 8.24. If you believe not that I am he, you shall
are in your Sins. If God don't teach you He will not save you. If you have not
the light of Grace, you will not have the light of Glory. If God leaves you to
darkness, you must go to outward darkness. How is it possible for you to
believe on Jesus Christ, if his divine glory have not been revealed to you?
Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me, draw him.
Exhortations and Warnings wont prevail without this revelation, you will not
dare to come to him. Flesh and blood can never prevail with you to come to
Christ. Christ was revealed to Paul before he was Converted, Gal. 1.15, 16. Men
must be taught of the Father, before they come to Christ, Joh. 6.45. If men
hear that there is Saving virtue in the blood of Christ, that he has redeemed
us from the curse, that God is willing to bestow Salvation, upon His account,
that Christ is the author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, that there
is enough in Christ for the expiation of all their Sins, if they were ten times
as many as they be, they wont really believe it, till the Divine glory of
Christ be revealed to them. When they see Him to be God, they will easily
believe that He has purchased the Church with His own blood.

2. A great deal may be done by you in order to this. You say men are passive
in receiving this revelation, not active in working of it. You abstain from
vicious ways, you Read, you come to Meeting, you Pray: God is a free Agent, you
cannot force Him, there is no compelling God to make this revelation to you.
But yet, you can do a great deal more than you do, in order to this. You can
obstain from such reasonings and methods wherein you are wont to harden your
hearts, you are able to reform your selves more thoroughly: You may abstain
from Sins of Ominion, as well as Sins of Commission: You may ponder a great
deal more upon your misery, than you do. You hurry your selves in the World,
and spend a great deal of time in idle Talk; and let your thoughts run upon an
hundred Vanities, whereas in that time you might be Meditating upon the
uncertainty of your Lives, on your Appearance before God, and the Torments of
Hell, upon your loss of Time, the blindness of your Minds, the enmity that is
in you to that which is good, upon the awful dispensations of God to you, that
He has not given you Eyes to see, or Ears to hear unto this day. You might be
looking Backward, and take notice of your Transgressions, looking Inward, and
take notice of the Plague of your own hearts, looking Forward, and take notice
of the Grave, and the Bottomless Pit. You may cry mightily to God. Paul when he
was blind, Prayed after another manner than he had been wont to do, Acts 9.11.
Some Pray as if they asked a denial, and designed to provoke God to deny them;
you can Pray with importunity; and follow God with earnest Supplications. Many
men are striving earnestly for the World, they are Working, they are Riding,
they are Ploding, they are watching Opportunities; why can you not do so for
your Souls? If men were seeking more earnestly, they would have more Success.
Matthew. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force.

FINIS.

