The EFFICACY Of the fear of HELL, To restrain Men from SIN. Showed in a SERMON
Before the Inferior COURT in NORTHAMPTON, December. 3d, 1712. Together with the
Benefit of the Gospel, to those that are wounded in Spirit. Showed in several
SERMONS, from Luke 4th. 18, 19. On the Occasion of a more than Ordinary pouring
out of the Spirit of GOD.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by Thomas Fleet, for Samuel Phillips, at the
Three Bibles and Crown in King Street, 1713.

THE EFFICACY Of the Fear of HELL, To restrain Men from SIN.
Job 31.23. Destruction from God was a Terror to me.


IN the foregoing Verses Job makes a solemn Protestation of his Innocence: And
Ver. 22. utters a terrible Imprecation against himself in case he was guilty.
Then let mine Arm fall from my Shoulder Blade, and mine Arm be broken from the
Bone. And in this Verse he gives the reason why he did not carry himself
Wickedly. Destruction from God was a Terror to me.

In the Words mind, 1. How Job was affected. Terror notes great Fear:
Destruction from God was Terrible to him. 2. With what he was affected.
Destruction from God: Heb. of God. The Genitive Case noting the Efficient, not
the Subject.

Q. How came Job to be afraid of Destruction from God, seeing he was not only a
good Man, but, as appears by many Passages of this Book, had the assurance of
his Salvation?

A. There be Temporal Destructions that good Men are in danger of. The
Destruction of their Estates, of their Children, and of their Lives. If they
carry it Rebelliously, they have no security that such Destruction shall not
come upon them. 2. Godly Men have reason to be afraid of Hell. Only here
distinguish there is a Slavish fear of Hell, rising from a sense that Men are
in a state of Condemnation. Thus they should not fear Hell. And there is a
Cautious fear of Hell: That makes them to avoid those Paths that lead to Hell.
This ought to be in godly Men, that conditional Proposition is true of godly
Men. Romans 8.13. If you live after the Flesh, you shall die. And therefore godly
Men should have an Awful fear of Hell, and a due care to avoid it. Mat. 10.28.
Fear Him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell: It is a laudable Thing for
godly Men to fear Hell.

Doctr. The fear of Hell is a powerful Restraint from Sin. There are such
strong Inclinations in Men to Sin, and so many Temptations, that the World
would be more wicked than the old World, were there not something that had
considerable power to restrain Men, and a principal Thing to restrain Men is
the fear of Hell. There be several other Things that are of use to restrain
Men, as the fear of the displeasure of Parents, of the justice of Rulers, of
Divine Vengeance in this World, but the fear of Hell is much more powerful than
these. The misery of many Men is, that they do not fear Hell, they are not
sensible of the dreadfulness or danger of Damnation, and so they take a great
liberty to Sin: But if they were afraid of Hell, they would be afraid of Sin.
When their Lusts were as Spurs to stir them up to Sin, this fear would be as a
Bridle to curb them in. Men are informed in the Scriptures of the Miseries of
Hell on purpose to debar them from Sin; Mat. 5.29, 30. If thy right Eye offend
thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for thee, that
one of thy Members should Perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast
into Hell. And if Men be thoroughly afraid of Hell, it will have that effect
upon them, to restrain them from Sin.

Q. How is the fear of Hell a powerful Restraint?

A. The fear of Hell discovers the dangerous Nature of Sin. Hell is threatened
in the Scripture as the punishment of Sin; Mat. 13.41, 42. They shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do Iniquity, and cast
them into a Furnace of Fire. Sinful carriages bring Destruction; hence the Man
is afraid of Sin, as that which will sink him into Hell. Men are afraid of
Poison and the Plague, because they think they will kill them; so they dread
Sin, as that which will destroy them: Though they love it, yet they dare not
practice it, because of the doleful Consequence of it. They say they shall
bring a Curse upon themselves: They see Death in it; hereby they see an
unanswerable Argument against Sin. A Man says as he, If I should Sin, I should
work falsehood against my own Life. 2. Sam. 18.13, This makes the Temptations to
Sin to loose their Power. Men are urged to Sin for their Profit; but they say,
what Profit shall I have if I be Damned? Math. 16.26. What is a Man profited if
he gain the whole World and loose his own Soul? They are urged to Sin for their
Pleasure; but they say, we shall have Pain instead of Pleasure. Prove. 5.4, 5.
Her end is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword. Her Feet go down to
Death, her steps take hold of Hell. They are urged to Sin for their Honor; but
they say, This is the way to bring our selves to Shame. Dan. 12.2. Some shall
rise to Shame and everlasting Contempt.

2. The fear of Hell helps Men to see somewhat of the baseness of Sin. When Men
are afraid of Hell, they are thereby made sensible of the terrible Anger of God
for Sin; and may rationally conclude that Sin is an exceeding great Evil. If it
were not, God would not be so angry as to send Men to Hell on that account.
Would God inflict eternal Punishment for it, if the Evil of it were not
exceeding great? There is a great deal of Light in Hellfire, discovering that
Sin must needs be an abominable Thing, if we should see Persons burnt at a
Stake under a righteous Government, we should conclude that they had been
guilty of horrible Crimes. So in this Case; Besides when Men are afraid of
Hell, that leads them to consider the Nature of Sin; it brings them into a
ponderous frame of Spirit, and makes them to weigh Things more Judiciously, and
when they do so, though they have only natural Conscience, yet they may
perceive a great deal of Filthiness in evil Carriages. They can easily discern
that there is in their sinful Carriages a great deal of Folley, much corrupt
Affection and Filthiness, and baseness against the light of Nature, Natural
Conscience does condemn many Sins, Romans 2.15.

3. The fear of Hell helps Men to see what Practices are Sinful. When Men are
not afraid of Hell, many times they don't suspect many of their sinful
Practices; and if they be told that they are Evil, they stand up in the
Justification of them, and have a great deal to plead for them. It is almost
impossible to convince them, but if the terror of Hell take hold upon them,
they will easily fall under Conviction, that many things are amiss, which
formerly they saw no Evil in. Conscience is enlightened, and they are sensible
of their danger; Now the Word is as a sharp two-edged Sword, Heb. 4.12. They
dare not give way to a cavilling Spirit as before, they consider the rule more
Impartially than they did; they know that Figleaves and sorry Pretenses and
Excuses will not serve their turn when God shall judge them, and they condemn
such things as they justified before.

1 USE. See the Reason why there is so little Reformation in this Land. This
Work of Reformation has been mightily clogged, and a very little Matter has
been effected; the Country has been prosperous in other Designs: There has
been an endeavor to promote Clothing, and it has been prospered; so there
has been a design to promote Learning and Merchandise, and there has been
Success; but there have been great endeavors to promote Reformation; Laws have
been enacted, Sermons have been preached, Covenants have been made, but all
endeavors have had a miscarrying Womb; there has not been one Sin generally
reformed these twenty Years. Instead of growing better and better, the Country
grows worse and worse. Many seem to be Incorrigible and Obstinate in their
Pride and Luxury and Profaness: The reason of it is, they are not afraid of
Hell; they are afraid of Poverty, and afraid of Sickness, but not afraid of
Hell; that would restrain them from sinful Practices, Destruction from God
would be a Terror to them.

1. Fear of Punishment from Men, will not make the Land Reform. The fear of Man
is of considerable Use: Were it not for this, the World would be far more
wicked than it is: They that don't love Virtue, fear Punishment: Rulers are a
Terror to Evil doers, Romans 13.4. The benefit of Government in this respect is
very great, but will not make the Land Reform, for abundance of the Sins that
bring down the Wrath of God upon the Land, don't fall under the Cognizance of
Authority. There is a great deal of Pride and Murmuring and Worldliness, and
profaning of the Sabbath, that is not punishable by Law. The Laws of Men reach
more gross Iniquities; but there are many Transgressions that are breaches of
the Laws of Men. Parents may fail extremely of their Duty, so may Officers in
the Church and Commonwealth, yet no Law take hold of them; there may be
abundance of Iniquity found by God among a People, who are yet Innocent in the
eye of the Law.

2. Experience of public Judgments will not make them to Reform. Public
Judgments are monitors of Obedience; God speaks audibly and sensibly in them;
and sometimes they have an Efficacy on the Consciences of Men. Psalm. 78.34, 35.
When He slew them, then they sought Him, etc. But many times the Physic is not
strong enough for the Disease: Judgments destroy their outward Comforts, but
don't destroy their Sins. Cleanness of Teeth will not cleanse away their Sins. Am.
4.6. The Barrenness of the Land will not make them Fruitful, V. 9. The Pestilence
will not cure the Plague of their Hearts, V. 10. When they were scorched with Fire
from Heaven, their Consciences were seared, V. 11. Ten Plagues were not
sufficient to work upon Pharaoh. Judgments will not deliver a People from their
hard Hearts. Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have refused to
receive Instructions; they have made their Faces harder than a Rock, they have
refused to Return. Sometimes Judgments make People worse; many times Men are
not convinced what Judgments come for, and when they are past, they are soon
forgotten: Men had rather bear a pretty deal than part with their Sins.

3. Fear of Shame among Men will not make them Reform. Sinful Carriages are a
Shame to Men. When Men Sin, they degrade themselves, and act beneath the
dignity of their Nature. Sin is unreasonable, and shows a baseness of Spirit;
it brings a Reproach upon a People, Prove. 14.34. And hence some particular
Persons are affected with it, and scorn to make themselves a Reproach. They are
not willing to be as the Fools in Israel, and so avoid those Sins that bring
Ignominy. But when a People are become Corrupt, many sinful Practices are not
counted Shameful. Many things that are Provocations to God are vindicated; the
commonness of a Practice makes it to be accounted Lawful. Men may practice
things that are provoking to God, yet live in Reputation among Men; they may be
accounted Saints, they may be advanced to places of Honor, yea sometimes among
a corrupt People, that which is indeed a Shame, is counted an Honor, and they
glory therein. Phil. 3.19. Whose Glory is in their Shame.

4. Sense of Mercies and Deliverances will not. A corrupt People are wont to
have much Mercy mingled with Judgment, and sometimes God gives great
Deliverances to them: These things should lead Men to Repentance, and sometimes
they are much affected with the goodness of God. God's Mercies melt their
Hearts, and they promise to amend their Ways; but such things seldom make a
People Reform. After a while the Pang is over, and they forget the goodness of
God. Psalm. 106.12, 13. They sang his Praise, but soon forgot his Works. V. 21.
They forgot God their Savior, that had done great things for them. The
thoughts of the Deliverance grow a stale thing after a while, and they loose
the sense of God's Mercies; yea the Mercies that God bestows upon them prove a
Snare to them. If God bestows Plenty on them, they grow more Coveteous, and the
more they have the more they crave; he that loves Silver will not be satisfied
with Silver, and they swell with Pride, and forget their dependence upon God,
and think much to be controuled. Prove. 30.9. Lest I be full and deny thee, and
say, Who is the Lord? And many times they grow Voluptuous, and live the lives
of Epicures. Am. 6.4, 5, 6. They lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their Couches, they eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves out of the
midst of the Stall; they chant to the Sound of the Viol, and invent to
themselves Instruments of Music, like David; they drink Wine in Bowls, and
Anoint themselves with the chief Ointments.

2. We see hence, it would be a great benefit to many Men, if they had more of
the fear of Hell. It is worthy our Observation, That of all the Preachers that
we Read of in the Scriptures, none was so frequent in warning the People to
avoid Hell, as JESUS CHRIST; He was often telling them of their Danger, and
persuading them, if it were possible, to avoid Damnation. Sometimes He tells
them, That the Chafe shall be burnt up with unquenchable Fire; Sometimes that
it is better to enter into Life with one Eye, man having two Eyes to be cast
into Hellfire: Sometimes of their being cast into a Furnace of Fire, where
there is Wailing and gnashing of Teeth. Sometimes he asks the Scribes how they
could escape the Damnation of Hell? Sometimes He minds His hearers of the
Sentence that shall be pronounced on the Wicked at last, viz. Depart from me ye
Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. From hence
we may learn, That the Consideration of the Pains of Hell, is singularly Useful
for the promoting of Holiness, and it would be greatly beneficial to carnal
Men, if they had more of the fear of Hell; it would make them more Solemn, more
Prayerful, more loose from worldly Enjoyments, and more cautious how they did
behave themselves. And it would be a great benefit to godly Men, if they had
more of the fear of Hell; it would help them against a Lukewarm and Slumbering
Spirit, and strengthen their Hearts against many Temptations that they are wont
to be outbid by. Job 31.33. Destruction from God was a Terror to me.

1. It would be a great benefit to Parents. One of the great Miseries of the
Land is, That Children are not well educated; they are bred up to Work, but are
not well instructed: Parents don't teach them, warn them, govern them, give
good Examples to them: Hence many Children are Ignorent, and Rude, and
Profane. This Unfaithfulness brings many Parents to eternal Ruin, and their
Indulgence is the cause of the Damnation of their Children. Eli's Indulgence
had an influence into the Destruction of Hophni and Phineas. If Parents were
more careful that they might not go to Hell themselves, they would be more
Laborious in teaching their Children, and in bringing them up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord; and if they were more careful that their Children
might not go to Hell, they would not connive at their Sins, and countenance
them in their Worldliness and Pride; they would warn them more solemnly,
restrain and govern them more thoroughly. Prove. 23.14. Thou shall beat him with
the Rod, and deliver his Soul from Hell.

2. It would be a great benefit to Ministers. Ministers may fail of their Duty
many ways, in not convincing Men of their Sins, not setting sufficient Light
before them for their Conviction; in not bearing a due Testimony against their
Iniquities; in not searching Men thoroughly whether they be in Jesus Christ,
suffering them to deceive themselves with false Imaginations of Peace with God,
by complying with the Sins of the Land, by Preaching like the Scribes without
Authority. But if they had a sense of the dreadfulness of Damnation, and a due
care of their own Salvation, and the Salvation of their People, they would be
more through in their Work. Paul urges Timothy by this Consideration: 1 Timothy
4.16. Take heed to thy self and to thy Doctrines, continue in them, for in so
doing, thou shall both save thy self, and those that hear thee. A sense of the
Terror of the Lord would be a great help to them. 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the
Terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men. The solemn Thoughts of this would make
them careful of their Preaching, and their Example. 1 Cor. 9.27. Lest by any
means when I have Preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway.

3. It would be a great benefit to Rulers. It is a rare thing that God is
provoked with a People, but the Rulers have some Hand in it. Rulers may miss it
many ways: When in their private Conversation they are not good Examples, that
emboldens other Men to Transgress. They may miss it by being backward to
promote Religion, when they are Gallio like, Not caring for those things. When
they don't strengthen the Hands of Underofficers, by not making use of their
Information, suffering things to drop without due Examination. They may be very
Faulty by not punishing Vice duly, having an indulgent Spirit toward those
that are guilty of Misdemeaners; by not stating the Case right unto the Jury,
speaking in favor of those whose Case is naught, by not cutting of the
occasions of Sin. Where there is much Temptation, there will be much
Provocation, by being intimate with Men of vicious Conversation: This is a
discredit to them, a way to harden dissolute Persons. It is very profitable for
Rulers to have a cautious fear of Hell. They that Judge others must be judged:
They that sit upon the Bench must stand at the Bar; all acts of Judgment must
be called over again, and have a second Hearing. It is good for them that sit
in Judgment to remember the Day, wherein they must appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ: It is good for them to ask that Question, Job 31.14.
What shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer
him?

4. It would be a great benefit to Underofficers. The Work of some
Underofficers is, To inform themselves of the breaches of Law, and to give
Information to Rulers. They may fail of their Duty by neglecting to get
Knowledge, lest they should be counted Busybodies; and by neglecting to give
Information, either from Friendship or from Fear, or to prevent Trouble. There
be other Underofficers who are to judge in Causes Civil and Criminal. Their
Work is to give a Verdict; a Verdict is Verumdictum, a true Sentence: And
though they are under a necessity to bring in a Verdict, yet they are in no
Snare, to act against their Consciences. If they be all of a Mind, their way is
fair; if they cannot be all of a Mind, they must in Civil Cases bring in for the
Defendant: In Criminal they must bring in Not Guilty, for those are Negative
Verdicts: The meaning is, They cannot agree to give the Case to the Plantiff, or
to Condemn the Prisoner. But these Men may fail much, when some for quietness
do comply with the Judgment of others against their own Light: So likewise when
they bring in a wrong Verdict, from Friendship or Bribery, or Credulity,
depending on the Infallibility of the Lawyer that Pleads the Case, it would be
very Serviceable for these Men to remember the Judgment of the last Day, and
the Punishment that will be inflicted on ungodly Men. Underofficers may bring
a Woe upon themselves, Isa. 10.1. Underofficers may prevent much Injustice,
Joh. 7.46.

5. It would be a great benefit to Buyers and Sellers. There is abundance of
Iniquity in Sellers; as when they put off that which is not Merchantable. Am.
8.6. They sell the refuse of the Wheat. So when they take advantage on the
Ignorance and Necessities of Men, to exact unreasonably from them, when they go
beyond the bounds of Truth, in commending what they would Sell, or in telling
what it stands them in. There is also abundance of Iniquity in Buyers, in
running down the worth of what they would Purchase, in telling that they have
bought much Cheaper, and that they know they shall loose by it. Prove. 20.14. It
is naught, it is naught, says the Buyer: but when he goes away, he Boasts.
Some not paying faithfully: Sometimes they promise what they cannot see their
way to perform. Sometimes they neglect to Pay when they could, because they can
make advantage of their Money, they defraud their Creditours. Equivocation is
interwoven in the very act of Trading. If these Men were afraid of Hell, they
would quickly leave off such Methods: Were they sensible what it is to be
Damned, they would not lie upon the Catch, and be so injurious one unto
another. They should remember, That their Gains will eat their Flesh as Fire,
Jam. 5.3.

6. It would be a great Benefit to young Persons. Many young Persons take a
licentious Liberty; some of them give way to a wanton Spirit; they addict
themselves to dalliance, don't attend Family Orders, spend the Sabbath in a
Profane way; they are devoted to their Pride, give themselves up to Mirth and
Jollitry, and neglect the opportunities of Salvation. The Counsels of Parents,
and warnings of Teachers don't sink into their Hearts; they hate to live a
Moping Melancholy Life, to be confessing their Sins, and crying to God for
Pardon; but if they were afraid of Hell, that would make a mighty change in
their Carriage, a sense of Hellfire would soon scare them out of those
Humors; they would not dare to do what now they are bold to do; they would
have no Heart to prosecute their carnal Designs; they would be deaf to
Temptations; no Arguments would prevail with them, they would as soon be
persuaded to handle an Iron burning hot, as to practice their former Ways: They
would be soon weaned from the World, and take up the Practice of Religion. Ecl.
11.9. Rejoice, O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the
Days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes, but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment.

3 USE. Of Exhortation, to be afraid of Hell. Man is a frightful Creature, apt
to be afraid of many little Evils, yet by reason of Sin, Men are so
hard-hearted, that they are not much afraid of Hell. Christ Jesus directs us to
be afraid of Hell, Mat. 10.28. Fear him that can cast both Body and Soul into
Hell. Especially those that are in a natural Estate, have reason to be afraid
of Hell. Isa. 33.14. Sinners in Zion are afraid, Trembling takes hold of
Hypocrites: who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? who among us can dwell
with everlasting Burnings? Some Men are much to blame, that they put away the
fear of Hell; they shun and avoid it what they can, but consider seriously,
whether you have not abundant cause to fear Hell.

Consider two Things. 1. The Miseries of Hell will be exceeding great. The
Miseries that have been endured by some in this World, have been amazing: It is
hard to grapple with the hearing of them, and it must be much harder to bear
them; but the Miseries of Hell are far greater. Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. The Appostle speaking of the
Glory of Heaven, calls it, A far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory, 1
Cor. 4.17. So we may say of the Misery of Hell, it is, A far more Exceeding and
Eternal weight of Misery.

Mind here these three things.

1. The Persons will be in Distress, they rest not Day nor Night; their Misery
will be overbearing to them; there will be no room for any Comforts; they will
have no ease to Comfort them; they will have no hope to Comfort them; they will
have no peace of Conscience to Comfort them; they will wish they had not been,
they will wish they could cease to be; their former Enjoyments will be no
Refreshment to them; their Companions in Misery will be no Refreshing; they
must endure suitable Revenges for all their Rebellions, and the Contempt that
they have cast upon God, they will be standing Monuments of the Vengeance of
Heaven. Romans 2.8, 9. God will render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish. If their Strength were the Strength of Stones, or their Flesh of
Brass, they could not endure their Misery. They will have Anguish of Spirit,
not know what in the World to do; there will be dreadful Wailing, Mat. 13.42.
They will lament their Sins, they will bewail the loss of Opportunities; they
will condemn their Folly, they will curse themselves, they will wish they had
never seen such things as now their Hearts dote upon; their cry will go up to
Heaven; they will wish they had no Senses; their Hearing and Seeing and Feeling
will be their Misery, their Memory, their Understanding, their Conscience will
be their Torment; they will wish they had no Bodies, and wish they had no
Souls, their Bodies and Souls will be Vessels of Wrath.

2. These Miseries are set forth by doleful Comparisons. No Comparison can
fully set forth the Miseries of Hell, because those Miseries do exceed all
others; but some other Miseries may in an affecting manner represent to us,
somewhat of the Miseries of Hell. Hell is compared to a Dark Dungeon, Mat.
8.12. The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast into outer Darkness. So Jud.
13. we read, That the Blackness of Darkness is reserved for ungodly Men.
Jeremiah the Prophet was in a sorrowful Condition, when cast into the Dungeon:
It was a dark miry Hole, for he sunk in the Mire, Jer. 38.6. When Persons are
in a Dungeon, they are confined, and have no Liberty; it is always dark and
black Night, they are cut of from all pleasant Enjoyments, they dwell in the
shadow of Death. A Dungeon is next to a Grave; there the Light is as Darkness.
Again, it is compared to Sodom, when it was all on a light Fire. Rev. 21.8.
They shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the second Death. The People were in a miserable Condition, when
streams of Fire and Brimstone fell from Heaven upon their Houses, and upon
their Ground, and upon their Bodies, Men, Women, Children, all like light
Torches, their Bodies blazed, how did they Scream out and Roar in that
Extremity? So Hell is compared to the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, where they
burnt their Children to Moleck. Hence Hell is called Gehenna, the Land of
Hinnom. Mat. 5.29. So it is set forth by Tophet, Isa. 30.33. which was the same
Place. There they burnt them as Sacrifices to the Devil, and made a noise with
Trumpets and other Instruments, that they might drown the noise of the Cries of
the poor Children, they could not bear their Roarings. Hell is worse than all
these.

3. Whatever the Miseries in Hell be, they will be Eternal. These Miseries will
never have an End: Life will have an End, this and that Kingdom will have an
End; the Captivity of Babylon had an End; the Rejection of the Jews will have
an End, and the World will have an End. Mat. 25.36. These shall go away into
everlasting Punishment. Mar. 9.44. There the Worm dies not, there the Fire is
not quenched. The duration of their Misery cannot be measured: We may measure
the breadth of the Earth, and the circuit of the Heaven, but cannot measure
Eternity. Add Thousands to Thousands, and multiply Millions by Millions; fill
Quires of Paper with Numbers, and you cannot measure Eternity: It cannot be
divided into Days, or Years, or Ages; make never so many Parts of it, one will
be Eternal: When Men have suffered never so long, there is an Eternity
remaining: It don't grow shorter and shorter. This makes every part of their
Misery Infinite, their Pain will be Infinite, the Terror Infinite. If Miseries
End, there is an opporttunity for Comfort afterward; but Eternity cuts off
opportunities for Comfort: Men may well say, Who can dwell with everlasting
Burnings?

2. Consider, It is a difficult thing to escape Hell. It may be avoided, and
there be a number of Men that do escape it, but they are but few. It is a
difficult thing to bear Damnation, and a difficult thing to attain Salvation.
God has made a way to escape, but very few will comply with it. It is very
cross to Nature; it suits the Glory of God, but it don't suit Men's Humors.
Math. 7.14. Few there be that find it.

1. Many that take Pains to escape it do not. Many Men make attempts to escape
it, but are not successful. Men are like Prisoners bound with Chains and cannot
make their escape themselves. Many went out of Egypt that never reached Canaan.
Some that endeavor to escape, meet with Disappointments and Difficulties, and
are discouraged; they are scared with the Anakims and high Walls, and grow
Heartless. Some of them get into a wrong way, they get a dead Faith and Hope,
that that will serve their turn: They have samewhat like Conversion, and take
it to be Conversion; it passes among Men, and they hope it will stand when they
appear before God. They have got a Righteousness, but it does not exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. Some others there be, that after
they have put away their Sins, and reformed their Lives, do return to their
Vomit again, and some go on seeking till they are surprised with Death. Death
comes upon them before they have got through their Work: There is great odds in
the number of them that seek, and of them that find. Luke 13.24. Many seek, and
are not able to enter.

2. Many that think they have escaped it, will not. Many Men are Ignorant, Rash
and Foolish, and so not very capable to pass Judgment on themselves; their
Judgment is worth very little in an hundred other Cases: But indeed wise Men
may easily be deceived; partly because of the similitude that is between false
Grace and true. I have read of a Painter, that pictured Grapes so exactly, that
the Birds were deceived by them, and took them for real Grapes. There is indeed
a great difference between true Grace and false; but there is also such a
similitude, that wise Men may be mistaken. Men are frequently mistaken in
Silver and in Jewels, so if they look upon Persons at a distance, they are
easily mistaken in them; so especially when they look upon religious Actions
that have been performed formerly. One great thing that exposes Men to judge
amiss is, That they are some way or other Prejudicate; partly from Pride,
partly from Fear, partly from love of Ease, partly from a dependence on the
Opinion of others, and many are deceived. Prove. 30.12. There is a Generation
that are pure in their own Eyes, yet are not cleansed from their Filthiness.
Rev. 3.17. Thou say thou art Rich, and increased in Goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art Poor, and Miserable, and Wretched, and
Blind, and Naked.

3. Many whom the World blesses, as if they would escape it, will not. Men are
not competant Judges of others: Men may have Foundation enough for a judgment
of Charity, but they have no Foundation for a judgment of Certainty. Men may be
very Censorious of real Saints, as Job's Friends were; they may judge hardly of
Saints, because of their Infirmities, and because of their own Prejudices. So
many have the Reputation of Saints, that are not Saints. Rev. 3.1. Thou have a
Name that thou live, and art dead. Men have nothing but External things to
judge by, which are seperable from Grace. Sometimes they take Gifts for Grace;
but many have the Gift of Prayer, that have not the Spirit of Prayer. Sometimes
Men take Common Grace for Special. Zeal and Affection may be in Men destitute
of Grace. Sometimes they take a Religious Conversation for an Holy
Conversation: All that they judge by, are but probable Signs, and twenty
Probabilities will not make a thing Certain. Probabilities may make a thing
legally Certain, but not Infallibly so. Where there be but Probabilities, there
is a possibility of the contrary. Many Probabilities make a thing more
Probable, but they do not amount to a Demonstration. Some of the wisest of Men
have been mistaken: David was mistaken in Ahitophel, the Disciples in Judas,
the Church of Jerusalem in Nicholas of Antioch; No Man can look into the Heart
of another, and see there a Spirit of Love and Faith. 1 Samuel 16.7. Man looks
on the outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart.

Luke 4.18, 19.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to Preach the
Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted, to Preach
Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of Sight to the Blind, to set at
liberty them that are Bruised, to Preach the acceptable Year of the Lord.

The First Sermon.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me.
THIS is a Text Jesus Christ himself preached upon at Nazereth, which was the
Place of His Education. It is taken from Isai. 61.1, 2. where there is but
little Variation as to the Words, but a great agreement as to the Intendment of
them. The Sermon that Christ preached is not upon Record; but we have the
Preface, V. 21. This Day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears, which gives
us some Light, and shows us that the Prophecy does relate unto himself. In
these Words is a Prediction of the Spirit's coming upon Him.

Q. What is meant by the Spirit?

A. The Third Person in the Trinity.

God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one and the same spiritual Substance. But
here the Third Person is understood. Sometimes He is called the Spirit of the
living God. 2 Cor. 3.3. Sometimes the Spirit. 1 John 32. I saw the Spirit
descending from Heaven. Sometimes the Spirit of Christ. Phil. 1.19. The supply
of the Spirit of Christ. Sometimes the Holy Spirit. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the
holy Spirit of God. Sometimes the Spirit of Grace. Heb. 10. And have done
despite to the Spirit of Grace.

Q. Why is the Spirit said to be upon Him?

A. It is all one as if the Spirit was said to be in Him.

The same Expression we have, 2 Kin. 2.15. The Spirit of Elijah does rest on
Elisha. And Isai. 11.2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him. It may have
a respect to the Spirit's visible descending on Him. Math. 3.16. He saw the
Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon Him.

This is amplyfied by the Reason, Because the Lord has anointed me. The
Priests were separated to their Office by this Ceremony, Lev. 8.12. He poured
of the anointing Oil upon Aaron's Head, and anointed him to sanctify him. So
the meaning is, That God had separated and ordained him to this Office, to
Preach the Gospel.

DOCTRINE. Ministers had need have the Spirit of the Lord upon them, in order
to the reviving of Religion among his People. There are some times of
Degeneracy and Declension in the Church. Sometimes Commonwealths are in a
languishing way. Sometimes the Estates of a People are under Decay. So,
sometimes Religion is in a withering Condition; but there are means that are
serviceable for the reviving of it: And this is one special means, when the
Ministers have the Spirit of the Lord upon them. The Spirit of the Lord must be
poured out upon the People, else Religion will not revive. But when the Spirit
is upon Ministers, it is a very hopeful Sign. Mal. 4.5, 6. I will send you
Elijah the Prophet, and he shall turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children,
and the Heart of the Children to their Fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth
with a Curse. This was accomplished when God sent John the Baptist, who was
filled with the Holy Ghost. So after the Apostles were filled with the Spirit,
much was done by their Ministry, for the advancing of Religion.

Q. How does the Spirit's being upon Ministers, conduce to the reviving of
Religion?

A. Two Ways especially.

1. The Spirit gives them a Zeal for God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls.
When the Spirit of God is upon them they will be much concerned for God's
Glory. So it was with Elijah, 1 Kin. 19.10. I have been very Zealous for the
Lord God of Hosts. They will not be indifferent whether God's Kingdom flourish
or not; their Hearts will not be upon the World, but their Hearts will be
engaged for God's Honor, So for the Salvation of Men's Souls. They will take a
great deal of Care that their Hearers do not Perish. 1 Cor. 10.33. Not seeking
my own Profit, but the Profit of many that they may be saved. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20,
21, 22. I have made my self a Servant to all, that I may gain the more, etc. I
am made all things to all Men, that by all means I may save some.

1. Hereby they are disposed to Study and Preach such things as do especially
tend to the reviving of Religion. There be several other Truths, that in their
Season must be studied and Preached. Ministers must not decline to Preach the
whole Counsel of God; no part of the Word of God is in Vain. But when they are
zealous for God's Honor and Men's Salvation, they will set themselves to revive
Religion; they will dwell upon those things that do more directly tend to the
furtherance of Men's Salvation. Such things as will take with the Consciences of
Men. Ecl. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable Words. They will
consider the Necessities of People, and strive to relieve them. So it was with
Paul, Act. 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks,
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Corruptions of the Land will stir up their Spirit. Act. 17.16. While Paul
waited for them at Athens, his Spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City
wholly given to Idolatry.

2. Hereby they are prepared to declare the Word of God Powerfully. The Word of
God is as an Hammer, and Men must smite with Strength to make the Nail Enter,
or the Rock to Break. If the Word of God be preached in a dull dead Way, it is
not like to have much Efficacy. Men will be in danger to think that the
Preacher himself don't believe it, or that he lays no great weight upon it. But
when they have an holy Zeal, that makes them to be Boanerges, Sons of Thunder,
they will be earnest and fervent. That was the Commendation of Appollos, That
he was fervent in Spirit. Act. 18.25. So Christ taught. Math. 7.29. He taught
as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes. And this made his Doctrine the
more Affecting. V. 28. The People were astonished at his Doctrine. This was
foretold of Christ. Mic. 5.4. He shall tread and feed in the strength of the
Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God. Zeal will inflame the
Heart, and make Men declare the Word of God, so as to awaken others, and not
lull them to sleep. Such Men will speak in the heat of their Spirits. When Men
are sensible of the breaking out of Fire, or the approach of Enemies, they will
cry out earnestly. So the Prophet directed, Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not,
lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People their Transgression, and
the House of Jacob their Sins.

3. Hereby they are filled with Courage to dispense the Word of God faithfully.
There is danger that some Men will be provoked, if they be told plainly of
their Sins, if their Confidences be shaken, and they be dealt plainly with. And
if Ministers have not a Spirit of Zeal, they will be in danger to neglect
speaking what they should; be apt to speak too tenderly: But if they have a
Spirit of Zeal, that will make them faithful, Jer. 20.9. His Word was in my
Heart as a burning Fire, shut up in my Bones, I was weary with forbearing, and
I could not stay. They ought to speak whether Men will hear or not. Ezeck. 2.7.
Thou shall speak my Words to them, whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear. And Zeal will make Men faithful, though others be angry. Act. 2.36.
Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made this same Jesus
whom ye crucified both Lord and Christ. Zeal strengthens the Heart against
Fear. So the Prophet dealt plainly with Asa, and John the Baptist with Herod.

2. If the Spirit be upon Ministers, that gives them Understanding and Wisdom
for their Work. The Spirit of God makes them Studious, busy in Reading and
Meditating, and thereby they get Understanding. The Spirit suggests suitable
Thoughts to them, and thereby they get Understanding. The Spirit of God opens
their Eyes, gives spiritual Discoveries to them, and thereby they get
Understanding. All Wisdom comes from God. Men are led by the Spirit into the
consideration of Providence, and so they get a great deal of Experience. God
gave Solomon Wisdom in a more than ordinary Way; and he has his Ways to give
Wisdom to Men for their Work that he calls them to. It was foretold concerning
Christ, That God would give Wisdom to Him. Isai. 11.23. The Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, and
shall make him of quick Understanding in the fear of the Lord. God by his
Spirit, furnishes Men with Knowledge to be Serviceable.

1. Hereby he makes them able to discover Men's Iniquities to them. Many Men
practice Things that are Evil, under a Notion of Liberty. Through Custom, and
carnal Reason, and their dependence upon the Judgment of others, they stand in
the Defense of sinful Ways; they have a great deal to say in the Vindication of
them, and some times don't suspect them to be Evil: But God by giving
Understanding to Ministers, does enable them to lay convincing Light before
them, and make it plain from the Word of God, that those Ways are Evil. That is
required of Ministers, that they do convince Gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. So Christ
Jesus laid abundance of Light before the Scribes and Pharisees, to show them
their Iniquities. And Paul laid abundance of Light before the Gentiles, to show
them their Vanity and Sin in Worshipping of Idols. And Apollos laid Light
before the Jews, to convince of their Sin in rejecting Christ. Act. 18.28. He
mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures,
that Jesus was Christ.

2. Hereby they are made able to speak Terror to the Consciences of Sinners.
If the Consciences of Men be terrified, that makes way for their Conversion.
Terror of Conscience makes way for Men's coming to Christ. Gal. 3 24. The Law
was our Schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ. And the Spirit of God, by giving
them Understanding, fits them for this Work, thereby they are enabled to
represent in an affecting Manner, the dreadful Miseries that Sinners are in
danger of. So did John the Baptist, and the People of the Publicans, and the
Soldiers were much affected, and enquired what they must do. Luke 2.10, 12,
14. Ministers hereby are enabled to find out several Considerations to evidence
to Men, the certainty of their Ruin, if they do continue in a natural
Condition; and to show the truth of that, Mat. 5.18. That not one jot or tittle
shall pass from the Law, but all shall be fulfilled. And they are able to
convince Men what danger there is that they will never be Converted: To lay
open the wretchedness of the Heart, and its mighty Opposition to the Gospel,
the great advantages of Satan to Seduce; the many bypaths that Men are wont to
take; the uncertainty of God's giving Repentance to them, as the Apostle
teaches, 2 Timothy 2.25. If peradventure God will give Repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth.

3. Hereby they are able to discover to Men, the Deceits of their Hearts. Man's
Heart is full of Deceit. Jer. 17.9. The Heart is Deceitful and desperately
Wicked, who can know it? Men are wont to make plausible Pretenses for their
Sins. They have many Things to say in way of Apology for themselves, excusing
their Sins. They pretend that they are willing to know their own Hearts. They
pretend that they do see their own Insufficiency. They pretend Love to God, and
Faith in Jesus Christ: But God by his Spirit, inables Ministers so to lay open
the Deceitfulness of their Hearts, that they are brought to know themselves. If
Men could hold their Deceits, they would live and die in Hypocrisy: But God
helps Ministers to unravel their Hearts, and so he leads them into an
Understanding of themselves. 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our Warfare are not
Carnal, but Mighty through God, to the pulling down of Strong Holds. Heb. 4.12.
The Word of God is quick, and powerful, sharper than any two-edged-Sword,
dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the
Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.

4. Hereby they are made able to direct them in the right Way. Men that are
distressed in Conscience, are many times at an utter Loss what to do; and are
prone to run into Bypath, and take very improper Methods for their help. They
are contriving in what way to get Pardon and Grace; and they would undo
themselves, but God by his Spirit, helps Ministers to guide them in the right
Way. Mal. 2.7. The Priests Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his Mouth. Ministers are to be their Guide. It is their Work to direct
them, that they may not quench the Motions of the Spirit; to direct them that
they may not grow Secure, that they may not settle on their own Righteousness;
that they may not get a false Faith; that they may not be discouraged; that
they may have no Prejudices against God and his Ways, that the Work may be
hastened, and that they may be led to Christ. Samuel tells the People, That he
will teach them the good and the right Way. 1 Samuel 12.23. So when God gives the
Spirit to his Ministers, they are fitted to lead Sinners in the right Way to
Christ.

1 Reason. Men are so Blind and Corrupt, that it is very difficult to Work upon
them. Men by Nature are in Darkness. Rev. 3.17. Thou art Blind. They have
wholly lost their spiritual Sight, and their natural Conscience is very
defective: It is very slow to conceive of those things that it can conceive of.
Men are subject to abundance of Delusion; they are under the prevailing of
carnal Reasonings, easily deceived with Appearances and Shows, subject to
flatter themselves; they become Vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish
Hearts are Darkened. Romans 1.21. And through Heedlessness and Forgetfullness,
they are very Ignorant of what they might know. Tit. 1.15. Their Mind and
Conscience are defiled, and the Hearts of Men are very much depraved. They are
violently set upon their carnal Interests. Jer. 50.38. They are mad on their
Idols. They are exceedingly addicted to the Love of the World: They are set for
Profit, and Pleasure, and Honor: Their business is to advance their own
Interest. They cannot endure to Reform their Lives. They say as Jer. 2.25. They
have followed after Idols, and after them they will go. They are full of Enmity
to God and his Ways. Romans 8.7. The natural Mind is Enmity to God, is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Hence, if they have but
little Means, ordinarily they take very little Impression. Men that are fast
asleep, will not be awakened with a little Noise. More gentle Means will not do
with naughty Children. Small Blows will not break a Rock; gentle Physic will
not do for a stubborn Disease. If Ministers be Ignorant and Sluggish, there is
little likelihood that much Good will be wrought.

2. Reason. Yet Men have so much Conscience and self Love, that it is difficult
to withstand powerful Means. Though sinful Men are like the Beasts that Perish,
yet they are not Beasts. They have a Conscience in them, and that tells them
that there is a God that made Heaven and Earth; that he is to be served; that
his Anger is Terrible, and that his Word must needs be true. The Gentiles
showed, That the Work of the Law was written in their Hearts. Romans 2.15. And
they have likewise a principle of self Love in them; they are craving
Happiness. Psalm 4.6. Who will show us any Good? They dread Misery, and abhor
Destruction. From these two Principles they are capable to be wrought upon.
When the Wrath of God is set before them in a lively Manner, their Consciences
will echo to it. This rouses up those sparks of Light that are in Conscience,
and Conscience adds its Testimony. Hence the Men are afraid, they Tremble lest
God should execute Vengeance upon them; they would fain get their Sins
Pardoned. When they hear the clear Reasonings, and powerful Dispensations of
the Word, they cannot but fear: And they think, What shall they be profited, if
they should get the whole World, and loose their own Soul? So when they hear
searching Preaching, that leads Conscience into the Examination of their Hearts
and Ways, and puts them upon it to labor after the power of Godliness. A
Workman may bring rude Timber into Form. A Skilful Physician may be a means to
remove a stubborn Disease. Dull Consciences may be frighted: Proper Means may
by God's Blessing, revive Religion.

1 USE. The Case of the Christian World is very Sorrowful. A great part of the
World makes a Profession of Christ; but there is little sincere Religion; very
little of the power of Godliness: And it may be said, not of some particular
Persons only, but of some Nations, as Rev. 3.1. They have a Name that they
Live, but are Dead. There be great Pretenses to Religion, but God is but little
honored, and few Souls are saved. Religion does not flourish in many Places,
for the Ministers have not the Spirit of God upon them.

1. Some are Heretical. There were abundance of Heresies in the Days of the
Apostles, and there be many in these Days. The Papists hold Justification by
Works, that it is lawful to have Images in Worship: That the Pope is
Infallible, and has power to forgive Sin, etc. The Socinians deny the Doctrine
of the blessed Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, and that He bore the Curse for
us. The Arminians hold universal Redemption, Election from Faith foreseen, the
Power of Freewill, and falling from Grace. And they be Ministers especially
that do propogate these Opinions, and beguile Ignorant Men. They pervert the
Scripture, and wrest it to their own Destruction, and the Destruction of many
others. Learned Men are the great Seducers that promote damnable Heresies.
These Men hinder the flourishing of Religion. They Increase unto more
Ungodliness. 2 Timothy 2.16. Men are led Captive by them. 2 Timothy 3.6.

2. Some are wicked Livers. They that should teach others to keep the Law of
God, break it themselves. So it was with Hophni and Phineas. 1 Samuel 2.22. They
lay with the Women that assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. So it was afterward, Isai. 43.27. Thy Teachers have transgressed
against me. So the Scribes and Pharisees under the pretense of long Prayers,
did devour Widows Houses. Math. 23.14. And so it is at this Day, in many
Places of the Christian World. Many that should lead Men to Heaven, are guilty
of debauched Practices: They are Swearers, Drunkards, Unclean, and Prophaners
of the Sabbath. Religion is not like to flourish under the Influence of such
Men. Such Teachers take a Course to root Religion out of the Places where they
Dwell. They that teach Wickedness by their Practices, are like to do little
good by their Doctrine.

3. Some are Ignorant, Many that are set up to Teach, have knowledge to Read,
and that is in a manner, all the Learning that they have. Jeroboam did not
matter who he made to be Priests. So it is with many others. God complained of
Old, of the Ignorance of Teachers. Isai. 56.10. His Watchmen are Blind, they
are all Ignorant. Men need a great deal of Knowledge, to be able to Instruct
others. But some Teachers are Ignorant of the Principles of Religion; are not
able to vindicate them. They are not versed in the Scriptures. These Men will
be poor Helps to the Souls of others. Blindness is a very bad Property in a
Guide. If the Blind lead the Blind, both will fall into the Ditch. Math. 15.14.
When Teachers are Ignorant, the People will be destroyed for lack of Knowledge.
Hos. 4.6.

4. Some want Experience. Some Ministers have good Learning, a good
Conversation, and Religious Affections, and so they may do some Good: They may
be means to restrain some Men from Sin. Yea, they may be Instruments of
Conversion; but such a Ministry is not like to revive Religion in a Land as
have not Experiences. The Condition of such a Country is very Sorrowful. Jer.
2.8. They that handle the Law, know me not. It is a great Blessing, when People
have such Ministers as are able to Comfort others with that Comfort, wherewith
they themselves have been Comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4. Men that have had
Experience of Temptation, and Relief under them, of their own Hearts, and of
Jesus Christ, are most likely to be Instruments of the reviving of Religion.

2 USE of Direction to People, what Ministers to choose. It is of great
Concernment to have Religion revived. God uses great Means in order to it: He
brings great Judgments and Calamities in order to it. But a special Means to
obtain this, is, To have such Ministers as have the Spirit of God upon them. In
Jeroboam's time, they did not care who were Priests. 2 Chronicles. 13.9. Whosoever
comes to Consecrate himself with a young Bullock, and seven Rams, the same may
be a Priest of them that are no Gods. But if you desire the flourishing of
Religion, get such Men for Ministers, that it may be said of them, as God said
of Joshua, Numb. 27.18. Take Joshua the Son of Nun, a Man in whom is the
Spirit, and lay thine Hand upon him.

But there is a double Difficulty in this.

1. Some that are to Choose, don't regard this. In some Places the care of this
Matter belongs to the Patron; and many times such have little Regard to Present
those that are fit for the Work: And where the People have a Liberty to choose,
they are careless of making a good Choice. Some are Purse-ridden, and don't
matter who they have, so they can have him upon easy Terms. Micah got one on
easy Terms, and satisfied himself that he had a Levite to be his Priest. Judge.
17.13. Some love one that will Prophesy smooth Things, and nourish them in
their vain Hopes of eternal Life. Isai. 30.10. They say to the Seers, See not?
and to the Prophets, Prophecy not right Things, speak unto us smooth Things,
Prophecy Deceits. Some would have one that is a chearly Companion. Some would
have one that would please their itching Ears. 2 Timothy 4.3. After their own
Lusts they shall heap to themselves Teachers having itching Ears. People that
have but little Religion, are in danger to take up with Ministers that have not
the Spirit.

2. Some don't know where to find them. Some would be glad to get such an one,
but they know not where to suit themselves. We are not come to that pass that
is spoken of, Am. 8.11, 12. I will send a Famine in the Land; not a Famine of
Bread, nor a Thirst of Water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. And they
shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East, they shall
run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it. But yet
there is no great plenty of such Men as have the Spirit of God upon them. It is
a Mercy that People may find those that have good Learning, and that are
Orthodox in their Principles, and of a good Conversation; but there be not many
that have the Spirit. People must take up with such as they can get; that that
is wanting cannot be numbered.

3 USE of Exhortation, to Pray for the Ministry. It is the Duty of Ministers to
Pray for the People; and it is the Duty of the People to Pray for their
Ministers. The Ministers are bound by their Office, to Pray for the People; and
the People are bound by their Interest to Pray for their Ministers. When they
Pray for their Ministers, they Pray for themselves. Moses Prays for them, Deuteronomy.
33.8. Of Levi he said, Let thy Thiummim and thy Urim be with thy holy One. We
find Paul several times begging the Prayers of the Church. Ephesians. 6.18, 19.
Praying with all manner of Prayer and Supplication, for all Saints; and for me,
that Utterance may be given to me, that I may open my Mouth boldly, to make
known the Mystery of the Gospel. So 2 These. 3.1. Finally Brethren, Pray for us,
that the Word of the Lord may have free Course, and be glorified even as it is
with you. Heb. 13.18. Pray for us. This should move the People of God to Pray
for their Ministers, because if the Spirit rest upon them, that is a
Preparation for the reviving of Religion. It is a Burden to the Spirit of all
godly Men, that there are such decays of Religion; that few are Converted and
that Iniquity does so abound: And therefore you should be longing after that,
that it may revive again.

Consider 1. If Religion don't revive, the Country will become more Wicked.
Pride and Wantonness, and Worldliness and Profaneness do abound in the Land.
There be many bad Examples; there is a great deal of the breaking out of Sin.
In many Places they have a very ill Name on the account of their Iniquities.
Many People do declare their Sin at Sodom, and hide it not. And how shall a
stop be put to it, unless Religion do revive? unless Men be awakned and
convinced? Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you
shall be Clean; from all your Filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. A new Heart also will I give unto you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you, and I will take this stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give
you an Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes. Some think Family Government may put a stop to Sin. Some
think the Zeal of Rulers, and Faithfulness of Officers may put a stop to Sin.
But how shall these things be come at, if the Spirit of Religion do not revive
among us?

2. If Religion don't revive, Multitudes will Perish for ever. If Religion
don't revive, how shall Men get to Heaven? The Form of Godliness will not bring
Men to Heaven. Coming to Meeting, going to Lectures, joining to Churches will
not secure Salvation. What will become of the Posterity of the People of God,
if Religion don't revive? Morality will not prepare Men for Dying. Joh. 3.3.
Except a Man be Born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. If Men be
Converted, their Sins will be forgiven. Act. 3.19. But if they be not
Converted, they will not be forgiven. Unregenerate Men are very Charitable to
one another, but they will go to Hell, Math. 8.12. The Children of the Kingdom
shall go into outer Darkness.

3. If Religion do not revive, there will be great Judgments. We have had many
sour Calamities Year ofter Year; and there has been a great deal of
Consideration how to be delivered from the Wrath of God: And something has been
done for the preventing of Wrath, but yet God's Anger is not turned away, but
his Hand is stretched out still. One Judgment is scarce over, before another
comes. We Pray, we Fast, make Laws, and dispute about Reformation, but yet we
are in Affliction, and the Hand of God goes out against us: And so it will,
unless there be a reviving of Religion. Mal. 4.5, 6. He shall turn the Hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the Hearts of the Children to their
Fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth with a Curse. The Curse of hardness of
Heart will not go alone: If God leave us to an hard Heart, that will be
attended with other Curses.

The Second Sermon.
Luke 4.18. To Preach the Gospel to the Poor.


IN these and the following Words, is set forth the Work that Christ was
anointed for. First to Preach the Gospel to the Poor. Here mind, 1. What he was
to Preach; that is, the Gospel. In Isaiah it is good Tidings. And so the Greek
Word signifies, so our Word Gospel signifies. It comes from two Saxon Words.
God, that signifies Good; and Spell, that signifies a Word. There be other good
Tidings, but the Gospel is so by way of Eminency. The Gospel brings Tidings of
the love of God to Men, and of a Glorious way of Reconciliation and Salvation.
They are much to blame that slight the Gospel, and reject it. They carry as if
the Gospel were not good Tidings. 2. To whom he was to Preach, viz. To the
Poor. There be two sorts of Poor. 1. They that are low in the World: That are
destitute of Riches; and the Invitations of the Gospel are sent to them as well
as others; and they that receive it, are more generally of that sort. 1 Cor.
1.28. God has chosen the base Things of the World, and Things that are
despised. Jam. 2.5. Has not God chosen the Poor of this World, Rich in Faith,
Heirs of the Kingdom. And Christ Jesus principally preached to such. Math.
11.5. The Poor have the Gospel preached unto them. 2. Those that are Poor in
Spirit; that are sensible that they have nothing to purchase Heaven; that are
sensible that they have no Money nor Price for their Salvation: And they are of
two sorts. 1. Such as are legally Poor. As they, Math. 11.28. That Labor and
are heavy Laden: That are convinced of the wretchedness of their Hearts, and
that God may justly Condemn them. 2. Such as are Evangelically Poor in Spirit.
Such as have the Grace of Humility, and live upon the Mercy of God in Christ.
Spoken of, Math. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven. Those that are called Poor here, are called Meek in Isaiah, C. 60.
V. 1. Their Hearts are meekned, either by Conviction or by Grace. I don't
exclude the Later, but it seems to have a particular Respect to the Former.

DOCTRINE. The Gospel is especially to be preached to the Poor in Spirit: They
are particularly to be invited. Consider here these two Propositions.

1 Proposition. The Gospel is to be preached to all. Though there be no
expectation that all will receive it, yet it is to be preached to all.
Ministers are not bound to Preach it to every one in the World, for that is
impossible: But they are to Preach to all as they have Opportunity. They may
not designedly hide the Gospel from any. There be many Differences among Men,
in respect of their Estates, Age, Covenant, Interest and Sinfulness: But the
Gospel is to be preached to them all. Christ did forbid his Disciples to go
into the Way of the Gentiles, or to enter into any City of the Samaritans.
Math. 10.5. But this was a temporary Command: But now the Gospel is to be
preached unto all. Mar. 16.15. Go into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to
every Creature. That is, every humane Creature. Act. 20.21. Testifying both to
the Jews, and also to the Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus. All are to be instructed in the Gospel, and to be invited to Christ.

1 Reason. Because the Promise is to all. There is a conditional Promise made
to all that believe in Christ. There is no exception of any that do believe in
Christ. The Sin against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven. But the
conditional Promise is true of them, and no Man knows that he has committed
that Sin. The offer of the Gospel is made to Men without any Exception. It is
propounded in general Terms, so as to comprehend all. Act. 10.13 Whosoever
believes on him, shall have Remission of Sins. Men are ready to except
themselves, but God makes no Exceptions. Sometimes the Promise is ^^pounded
Indefinitely. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life.
But sometimes it is propounded Universally; for there is no other Condition
joined to this; and not only so, but the Notes of Universality are added to the
Promise; as whosoever. Joh. 3.16. So all. Act. 13.39. And any. Rev. 3.20. And
therefore it must be preached to all.

2 Reason. They that are not Poor in Spirit, may receive Benefit by the Gospel.
The Gospel is many Ways useful to make Men Poor in Spirit. Preparation for
Christ is carried on by the Law and the Gospel in Conjunction. When Men hear
that there is a way of Salvation by Christ, that makes them more willing to see
their Danger, and not altogether so opposite to receive Conviction. It
encourages them to Pray to God to show them their Misery. When Men hear that
Christ died for our Sins, that makes them sensible that God is very angry for
Sin; that he will execute Vengeance. This is an evidence of the Justice and
Severity of God. Men may learn from thence, that Sin is a great Offense, and
must be punished. Luke 23.31. If they do such things in a green Tree, what
shall be done in a dry? When Men hear, that God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son to suffer for them, that discovers the vile Nature
of Sin, whereby Men abuse a God of such Grace. Psalm. 130.4. There is
Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. When Men hear that Christ
has redeemed us from the Curse, that may convince them that their own Works
cannot save them. Gal. 2.21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is
Dead in vain. When they hear the Command to believe in Christ, that convinces
them, that though they be Civil and Religious, yet if they believe not, they
are Rebellious, and in a miserable Estate.

3 Reason. Because they that are not Poor in Spirit now, may be Poor in Spirit
afterward. If Men hear the Gospel, and don't make a right Use of it now, yet
they will retain the Knowledge of it, and it may do them Service afterward,
though they be not sensible of their lost Condition now; but are Senceless, and
carnally Confident, yet they may be Poor in Spirit hereafter; and then what
they have heard may come to Mind, and become powerful upon their Hearts. It may
be, when they have not an opportunity to hear the Gospel, they will call to
Mind what they have heard some Years before, and ponder on what has been
preached to them formerly. It is possible they may be made Poor in Spirit, when
they are in Captivity among the Papists, or Heathens. When they have no
opportunity to hear the Gospel, or they may be made Poor in Spirit, when they
lie upon a sick Bed, and cannot hear the Word preached; and then what they have
formerly heard, may work effectually on them. Manasseh would not hearken to the
Prophets when they spoke to him. 2 Chronicles. 33.10. But afterward when he was a
Captive in Babylon, he remembered what he had been taught, and repented. V. 12.
When he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Fathers.

2 Proposition. The Gospel is especally to be preached to the Poor in Spirit.
It is fit that Ministers should make particular Application of the calls of the
Gospel to them. It is true, they may do so to young Men, to ancient Men and to
great Sinners: But there is peculiar Reason to make particular Application to
them that are Poor in Spirit. These Persons are in a particular Manner invited
in the Scripture. Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that Thirsts, come ye to the
Waters and he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, buy Wine and Milk
without Money, and without Price. They are Thirsty that are parched up for want
of somewhat to quench their Thirst. The like we have, Math. 11.28. Come unto me
all ye that are Weary and heavy Laden, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls.
They are Weary and heavy Laden that are oppressed with the weight of God's
Wrath. So, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that is
athirst, Come: And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. God
is here teaching Ministers to have a particular Regard to such. The Invitations
are not confined to these, but they are to be particulary applied to these.
Some others have special need to have the Terrors of the Law preached to them:
But the Invitations of the Gospel are especially to be propounded to those that
are Poor in Spirit.

The Reason of this, is, Not from any Excellency in this poverty of Spirit.
There is nothing of Spiritual Goodness in this. It is indeed a reasonable
Thing; it is according to the dictates of right Reason, but there is nothing of
Piety or love to God, or godly Sorrow in it. It is a mere forced Thing, and
accordingly it is not acceptable unto God. The first good Act that is done by
the Soul, is believing in Christ: And accordingly there is no Promise made in
the Scripture to this legal Poverty of Spirit. No Man is under any Promise of
Salvation till he comes to Christ. It is probable that God may give Grace to
all those that have this Poverty of Spirit; but there is no Promise in the Word
that he will. Indeed there is an inconsistancy in it, that there should be any
Promise made to it. For when a Man is Poor in Spirit, he owns that it is in
God's liberty to do with him as he pleases: And he continues sometime in this
Frame, and continues to acknowledge it. But if there were any Promise of
Salvation to it, then after the first Act of Submission, it would not be in
Gods liberty to do with him as he pleased; but he would be bound to bestow
Grace upon him, and he might challenge and lay claim to Faith,

But the reason is, Because such Men are prepared to receive the Gospel. This
Poverty of Spirit brings Men near to Christ; so that it is very hopeful that
they will except of him. The People of the Jews needed the Ministry of John to
prepare them to receive the Messiah. Mar. 1.2. I send my Messenger before thy
Face, to prepare thy Way before thee. So particular Souls need a Work of
Preparation to make way for their accepting of Christ. So Paul was prepared.
Act. 9.6. He Trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? So the Jailour, Act. 16.30. He said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And
when Men are thrown out of their own Confidences, and made Poor in Spirit, now
they are in a fair Way to receive Christ; Now they are sensible that Pardon and
eternal Life are the free Gifts of God, and therefore Christ to prepare the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, convinces him that he was Poor, and Wretched,
and Miserable, and Blind, and Naked. Rev. 3.17. Yet those Men don't accept of
Christ, until they have another Work of God upon the Heart. They are not fully
prepared by this legal Poverty of Spirit. There needs another Work of God,
further to prepare Men before they will come to Christ. If a Man were Poor in
Spirit seven Year together, that will not prevail with him to come to Christ;
but further to prepare him, his Eyes must be opened to see the Divine Authority
of the Gospel. 1 These. 2.13. When ye received the Word of God, which ye heard
of us, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is indeed the Word of
God, which effectually works in you that believe. Until they see the Glory of
God and Christ, they will not believe. Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name,
will put their trust in thee. But when they are Poor in Spirit, they are
prepared to receive the Gospel, and give Entertainment to Christ.

1. Now they see a want of Salvation. Men that are seeking their Felicity in
the World, and have not a sense of the Wrath of God, don't mind Christ. They
take more Notice of the Market, and worldly Opportunities, than of gospel
Invitations. Math. 22.5. They made light of it, and went one to his Farm, and
another to his Merchandise. But when they are Poor in Spirit, they are like
Thirsty Men, that are even parched up. Rev. 22.17. Let him that is athirst
come. They Tremble as Paul did. Act. 9.6. This is some Preparation.

2. Now they see that they can get Salvation in no other Way. If Men have hope
to Work out their Salvation themselves, they will not come to Christ. If they
can cure their own Souls, they will not come to this Physician. If the Prodigal
thinks that he can earn his Living, he will not return to his Father. Luke
15.15. He went and joined himself to a Citizen of the Country. But he that is
Poor in Spirit, has tried all Conclusions, and every thing fails him. He sees
himself a dead Man. Romans 7.9. Sin revived, and I died. So he sees greater
Necessity. This is a farther degree of Preparation.

1 USE. Hence see, That those that are not Poor in Spirit, do especially need
to have the Law preached to them. It is useful to all sorts of Men to hear the
Preaching of the Law. Saints stand in need of it to keep them Humble, to put
them upon it to renew their Faith in Christ, and to make them Thankful: But
especially such as are not Poor in Spirit. They need to be brought to Mount
Sinai, and to hear the Thundrings, and see the Lightnings. Secure Sinners don't
love to hear the Terrors of the Law. They had rather be entertained with some
more comfortable Doctrine; but they are in great Necessity to hear the Law. If
there had been no Law, there would have been no Necessity of the Gospel: And
Men that are not sensible of the Terrors of the Law, will not regard the
Invitations of the Gospel. Such as are not Poor in Spirit, need to hear the Law
often, that they may be prepared to receive the Gospel; that their Hearts may
be broken and humbled. Gal. 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us to
Christ.

1. That they may be sensible of the Terribleness of Damnation. Many Men are
not aware what a terrible Thing it is to be Damned. They have a deeper Sense of
Poverty and Reproach, than they have of Damnation. They look upon Hell as an
uncomfortable Place: They think if it must be their Portion to go to Hell, they
shall bear it as well as others; they are not like to go thither alone: They
seldom think of it. They look upon it as a remote Thing at a great Distance,
and it don't terrify them; but the Law discovers that it is Intolerable. Psalm.
11.6. Upon the Wicked God will Rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest. Isai. 30.33. Tophet is prepared of Old, he has made it deep and
large; the Pile thereof is Fire aad much Wood; the Breath of the Lord, as a
stream of Brimstone, does kindle it. Math. 25.41. Depart ye Cursed, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Math. 13.42. He shall
cast them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be Weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
Hence many Men are exceedingly terrified, and see a necessity of Deliverance.
Isai. 33.14. Sinners in Zion are afraid, Trembling has surprised the
Hypocrites: Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? Who among us can dwell
with everlasting Burnings? If the sense of the terribleness of Damnation sinks
into their Hearts, they will not regard the World, they will not stick at their
Pains; they will not think much to part with their Sins: They had rather undergo
any Sorrow than be Damned.

2. That they may be sensible of the great danger of Damnation. Men are wont to
sooth up themselves that God will not send them to Hell: He is Kind, and
Gracious, and they Pray to him, and they are in Covenant, and enjoy
Privileges: They live Orderly, and are sorry for their Sins, and so they hope
they are in no great danger. But the Law shows, that Sinners are under a
Sentence of Condemnation. Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death. That God is
very Angry with ungodly Men, Psalm. 50.21, 22. I will Reprove thee, and set thy
Sins in Order before thee. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
to pieces, and there be none to deliver. The Law shows, that the Threatening
must be executed. The Law must take Place, that the Faithfulness of God is
engaged for the fulfilling of the Law. Math. 5.18. Not one jot nor tittle shall
pass from the Law, but all shall be fulfilled. Hence many Men are afraid they
shall not escape. They say as Mic. 6.7. Will the Lord be pleased with Thousands
of Rams, or ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? They are afraid there is no Mercy
for them. They have a Fearful expectation of fiery Indignation. They have a
dreadful Sound in their Ears, as Job 15.21. And their Hearts are Meditating
Terror. They Confess, they Reform, they Cry, they Plead, but yet it Rings in
their Ears, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Book of the Law to do them.

3. That they may be sensible of the danger of sudden Destruction. There is an
Inclination in Men to put far away the evil Day, and then they think they may
have a long Opportunity to enjoy worldly Comforts. Men see that God exercises
Patience toward others, and they flatter themselves that he will be Patient
toward them. But by the Law, they see that God will destroy many Sinners
suddenly. 1 These. 5.3. When they say Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction
comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not
escape. And the Law shows them, that God is very Angry; that he sets their
Iniquities before him, their secret Sins in the light of his Countenance: And
so they are afraid God will not wait upon them. In the Evening they are afraid
they shall die before Morning. If they find any bodily Indisposition, they are
afraid they shall die. If there be a Thunder-Storm, they are afraid they shall
be killed: Their Hearts shake at the report of Sickness that prevails: They
tremble at the shaking of a Leaf. It is with them as Deuteronomy. 28.66, 67. Thy Life
shall hang in suspense, and thou shall fear Day and Night, and shall have none
assurance of thy Life. In the Morning thou shall say, Would God it were
Evening: And at Evening thou shall say, Would God it were Morning; for the fear
of thine Heart wherewith thou shall fear.

4. That they may be sensible of the justice of their Damnation. Men have
abundance of Objections against the justice of God. They argue that Sins don't
hurt God; he is happy for ever, notwithstanding their Sins. They object, that
they could not prevent their Sins; they are according to the Decree of God;
that the Sin of Adam, that they did not consent to, was imputed to them, and so
they were conceived in Sin, and born in Iniquity. They object, that they have
done Service, and that the Pains of Hell are intolerable. But the Law shows
that their Damnation is just. Romans 3.19. Whatsoever Things the Law says, it
says to them that are under the Law: That every Mouth may be stopped, and all
the World may become Guilty before God. It is very evident from the Law, that
Men have deserved Destruction; that they are worthy of Death, for they have
broken an holy Law, and according to the Sentence of it, which is a Rule of
Justice, they have merited Damnation. It is evident, that they are the proper
Causes of their own Sins, and they have therein run upon the point of the
Sword, and have thrown themselves into a Gulf of Misery. Hos. 13.9. O Israel,
thou have destroyed thy self.

2 USE. Of warning to Sinners: Be not afraid to see that you are Poor. There is
that makes himself Rich, yet has nothing. Prove. 13.7. So it is with some in
this Case. Rev. 3.17. Thou say thou art Rich, and increased in Goods, and
have need of nothing, but art Poor, and Wretched, etc. Men miserably deceive
themselves by such Imaginations. Gal. 6.3. He that thinks himself something
when he is nothing, deceives himself. It is Awful for Men to see themselves
Poor: It is Frightful, but if you be Poor, it is best to see it. The Case of
such Men is Doleful, but not Desperate. Such have no Foundation to trust in
themselves; but they have Ground of Encouragement, for the Gospel is especially
to be preached to them that are Poor in Spirit. In the Invitations of the
Gospel, he has a singular Regard to them. Luke 4.18. Your Condition is not the
more Dangerous, but the more Hopeful, for seeing your selves Poor.

Consider, 1. You are wholly empty of Goodness. Some of you have considerable
shows of Goodness. There is an Appearance of good Desires, gracious Sorrow,
love to Ordinances and Sabbaths, and there is care to avoid Sin; but there is
nothing of Goodness in all this. It cannot be said of you, as of Jeroboam's Son,
There is some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel. All that you do is in
Hypocrisy. You are acted in your Religion by a Spirit of Self-love: Fear of
Hell and hopes of Heaven are the great Principles that influence you. You are
acted by a Lust of Self-love in all your Religion. Psalm. 78.36. They flattered
him, and lied to him with their Tongue. Their Heart was not right with him. You
make a considerable Profession, but God may say of you, as of them, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
O that there were such an Heart in them. All that ye do is for your selves.
Hos. 10.1. If you be Swept and Garnished, yet you are Empty. There is some
similitude of Faith and Love, but no reality. There is not one spark of
Goodness in your Heart; though Corruption be restrained, yet it Reigns; and so
long as Corruption Reigns, there is a total want of Goodness. Faith is the
first good Thing that is wrought in the Heart. You are afraid of Judgment; so
are the Devils. Jam. 2.19. The Devils believe and Tremble. You are much in
Prayer, so would the Devils be, if they had hopes of Deliverance.

2. You have no Power to do any Good. You have Power to do all manner of
External Duties, but you have no Power to keep the Law. Romans 8.7. The natural
Mind is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. If you have the
help of Ordinances, of Afflictions, of Deliverances of Examples; yet you cannot
work up any gracious Frame in your own Heart. If there were a seed of Grace in
your Heart, by being cherished, it might grow and flourish, but there is none.
A Man that is in a Swound, may be brought to be sensible, and to Walk and Work,
but a Man that is Dead cannot: Thus it is with you. You are Dead in Trespasses
and Sins. Ephesians. 2.1. A Watch, or a Clock, by Springs and Weights may move
Briskly, but it has no Principle of Life. It is quite beyond you to do any
spiritual Good. You cannot receive the Gospel. There is Encouragement enough set
before you, and it would be exceeding Profitable to you to receive it, but you
cannot. You have not an Heart to receive it. Joh. 6.44. No Man can come unto
me, except the Father that sent me draw him.

3. God is not bound to change your Heart. God is absolutely free, he may help
you, but if he will not, he is blessed for ever. It is true, he may help you
without any Wrong to himself, but that lays him under no Necessity. It is in
his Choice, whether he will Glorify his Justice or his Mercy on you: He may
pass over you and take another Romans 9.16. It is not of him that Wills, nor of
him that Runs, but of God that shows Mercy. God is under no Constraint to
change your Heart; His Justice don't necessitate him. You have deserved
Condemnation, and your Prayers and Tears lay no Bonds on the Justice of God.
His Faithfulness don't necessitate him. He has promised to Convert some, but
there is no absolute Promise to any natural Man. His Mercy don't necessitate
him. The merciful Nature of Man, does many times force him to pity and help
others, but God is wholly Voluntary in the Exercises of his Mercy. God is not
of such a tender Heart, that he cannot bear to see Men in Misery. God can take
Pleasure in the Exercises of Justice. Isai. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of mine
Enemies, and avenge me of my Adversaries. His Henour don't necessitate him to
Convert you. It would have been as much for his Honor to have converted Esau
as Jacob, Judas as Peter, Saul as David. If he don't Convert you, he will be
glorified for ever. You cannot bring God under any Necessity to Convert you. If
he does not, he does you no Wrong: You are in his Hands. He is the Potter, and
you are the Clay; He may make you a Vessel of Honor or Dishonor. Romans 9.21.

3 USE. Of Exhortation to them that are Poor to receive the Gospel. If it were
not offered to you, it would be Obtrusion and Presumption, a thrusting of your
selves upon Christ, it would be an impudent Thing. But God offers Mercy to you;
yea in an especial Manner; as the Message concerning Christ's Resurrection was
sent in a particular Manner to Peter. Mar. 16.7. Go tell his Desciples, and
Peter. So he charges his Ministers to make a particular Application of the
Gospel to you. Luke 4.18. Isai. 55.1. Rev. 22.17.

Consider 1. It is not beyond his Mercy to Pardon you. Salvation is a great
Work. If your Sins had been fewer in Number, and smaller in their Nature and
Aggravations, it would require great Mercy to Pardon and Save you. But as great
as your Sins are, it is not beyond the Grace of God. You must beware that you
don't limit the holy One of Israel. God is rich in Mercy. Ephesians. 2.4. His Grace
is like the Ocean. It is sufficient to cover all your Sins. Ephesians. 3.18. To
comprehend the Breadth, and Length, and Height, and Depth of the Love of
Christ. There are Three Dimensions that belong to Bodies: Hers are Four
ascribed to Mercy. Thickness may be measured Downwards, so it is Depth; and
Upwards, so it is Height. Mercy brings Sinners from deep Misery, to the Pinnacle
of Happiness. God's Mercy is greater than Man's. God can find Mercy for such as
Men cannot find Mercy for. Hos. 11.9. I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for
I am God and not Man. Isai. 55.9. For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth,
so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts. God's
Mercies are greater than your Sins. Men think if they had not sinned so much,
or so long, their Sin would not have been beyond God's Mercy. But God's Mercy
can Conquer all their Provocations. Grace may prevail over all. Romans 5.21.
Grace reigns through Righteousness, to eternal Life. The Mercy of God is greater
than we can conceive of. The Understanding of Man is large: We can conceive how
many Minutes there be in a thousand Years; how many Inches it is to the Center
of the Earth, but we cannot comprehend the Love of Christ Ephesians. 3.19. The Love of
Christ passes Knowledge. We cannot comprehend the Bitterness of the Cup that he
Drank for our sakes. We cannot comprehend the Duration of his Love. We cannot
comprehend the great Good that he has procured for us.

2. God has designed to save many lost Sinners. It is the purpose of his Heart,
to bring many poor Sinners to heavenly Glory. If he had taken up a Resolution
against it, Men might well be discouraged; but he has not resolved against it,
neither is he at a loss what to do; he is not loath to do it: but it is his full
Determination; he is resolved in his Way, and he purposes to break over all
Objections, and Conquer all Oppositions. He is set in his Way, and will not be
put out of it. 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you to Salvation. Gal. 1.5. Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ. And he has done
a great deal in order to the Salvation of such Sinners. The Price of it is
paid. Sin laid a Bar in the Way, but that Bar is removed by the Death of
Christ. There is no need of any Contrivance how to satisfy the Law, that is
done already by Christ. God has sent Christ to save us. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse, being made a Curse for us. And God makes a Proposal
to you, and gives you liberty to be saved, if you will accept of Jesus Christ.
He don't tell you that his Heart is hardened against you; but he tells you, that
you shall be welcome, if you will come to Christ. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will,
let him take the Water of Life freely. Yea, he does beseech you to come for
Salvation. God is of infinite Majesty, yet he intreates you to be saved. He
condescends to your Infirmity, and stoops so low as to plead with you; He
becomes as it were a Petitioner to you: He begs of you to come, and urges it as
a Courtesy to come, with tender-heartedness prays you to come. 2 Cor. 5.20. We
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

3 This is a principal Way, wherein God Glorifies himself. The end of all
Things is God's Glory; and he has done many great Things for his Glory. He
made the World for his Glory, that his Power and Wisdom might be manifested. He
preserved the holy Angels from Sinning, for the Glory of his Goodness. He gave
the Law for the Glory of his Holiness. He drowned the old World, saved Israel
out of Egypt,, destroyed Sodom, brought Judah from Babylon for his Glory. But
this is a principal Way wherein he Gloryfies himself, in working out the
Salvation of Sinners by Christ. There is a great Manifestation of the Trinity
of Persons in the Godhead. There is a Manifestation of the Power, of the
Justice, and of the manifold Wisdom of God, and of his unsearchable Grace. In
this way he is greatly exalted. Mic. 5.18. Who is a God like unto thee,
pardoning Iniquity, and passing by the Transgression of the Remnant of his
Heritage, because he delighted in Mercy? Rev. 5.12, 13. Worthy is the Lamb that
was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Strength,
and Glory, and Blessing. And every Creature which is in Heaven, and in the
Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in
them, heard I, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him
that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

The Third Sermon.
Luke 4.18. He has sent me to Heal the Brokenhearted.


THESE Words are an amplification of the Former; showing the Effect of
Preaching the Gospel to the Poor. Where 1. The Persons to be benefited, the
Brokenhearted. The Brokenhearted, that is, those that are distressed because
of Sin. This may be either from godly Sorrow, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh
unto them that are of a Broken-heart, and saves such as be of a Contrite
spirit. Or, from a sense and apprehension of Misery and Danger. Prove. 15.13. By
Sorrow of Heart, the Spirit is Broken. Prove. 17.22. A merry Heart does good
like a Medicine, but a broken Spirit dries the Bones. And here it seems to
have a respect to those that are in Distress of Conscience. 2. The benefit he
was to bring to them, healing of them. There are two Cases wherein Men stand in
need of Healing. One is in Case of Sickness and Diseases. Psalm. 103.3. Who
heals all thy Diseases. The other is, in Case of Wounds. That is the Case
here. Their Consciences are wounded. In Isaiah it is, To bind up the broken in
Heart. That is the manner of Surgeons in order to Healing.

DOCTRINE. There is Virtue in the Gospel to Heal wounded Consciences. As the
Body of a Man, so the Conscience of a Man may be wounded in diverse Degrees; but
sometimes the Wounds of Conscience are very Dreadful. And it is a great Service
to a Man to have those Wounds healed. This cannot be effected by other Means.
Many Men have made trial to little Purpose, but the Gospel is powerful that
way. The Law Wounds the Consciences of Sinners. 1 Cor. 15.56. The Sting of
Death is Sin; and the strength of Sin is the Law. But the Gospel Heals their
Consciences. The Gospel is of exceeding great Use otherwise; as it sanctifies
the Hearts, and gives Men Power over Indwelling-Sin. And this way it is very
useful; that it Heals the Conscience, it frees the Conscience from Grief, and
the Terror of Hell, and brings inward Peace and good Hope of eternal Life. Let
the Wounds of Conscience be never so deep, yet by the Gospel they may be
healed. God is the Author of Healings. Psalm. 147.3. He heals the broken in
Heart, and binds up their Wounds. But the Gospel is the Means. Romans 15.13.
The God of all Hope fill you with all Peace and Joy in Believing. 1 Pet. 1.8.
In whom, though now you see him not, yet Believing, ye Rejoice with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. Hence the Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace.
Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the Feet of them that Preach the Gospel of Peace,
that bring glad Tidings of good Things! Ephesians. 6.15. And your Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. The Gospel is a means of Peace with God,
and so of Peace of Conscience. Here I shall Premise two Distinctions.

1. Between a stupifyed Conscience, and an healed Conscience. Some Sinners have
no Anguish in their Consciences. This rises from a stupid and senceless Spirit.
They are under the Power of an Atheistical Principle. They have no sense of
Eternal Things. These Men know, that they are Corrupt, and Unregenerate; and
that if the Scripture be true, they are Miserable. But they are besotted and
benumbed, and don't feel inward Pain. Romans 11.8. God has given them the Spirit
of deep Sleep and Slumber. This Conscience differs from a Conscience that is
healed: For a Conscience that is healed, is very sensible of Judgment, and the
Wrath of God against Sinners, and the truth of the Threatenings, and the Reason
of its quietness is not from Unbelief, but because his state is changed, and he
is brought in to a state of Reconciliation with God. He perceives that God is
at Peace with him, and so he Rejoices in hope of Glory. Romans 5.1, 2. Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ. By
whom also we have access into this Grace wherein we stand, and Rejoice in hope
of the Glory of God.

2. Between a flattering Conscience, and an healed Conscience. Some Men have
quietness in their Consciences, from false Imaginations that they are at Peace
with God. They have hopes of going to Heaven, and Apprehensions that Gods is
reconciled to them, either from false Principles; So Papists, and Quakers, and
Arminians, they think such things will bring them into a state of Peace, as
will not. Or from false Apprehensions that they are converted, and have Faith
and Love. Prove. 30.12. There is a Generation that are pure in their own Eyes,
yet are not cleansed from their Filthiness. The Wounds of their Consciences are
skinned over, and when they are enlightened, the Wound will open again; but when
the Conscience is healed, Men are not under a Mistake; they have a good
Foundation for their Hope. 2 These. 2.16. God has loved us, and given us
everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through Grace. Many Men find religious
Affections, and a Conscienscious Care to please God, and get considerable
Victory over Temptations, and have some superficial Joy in the hearing of the
Gospel, and so they flatter themselves that the bitterness of Death is past.
But when Conscience is healed, it is from an Application of the Blood of Christ.

Q. What must be done by the Man, in order to the Application of this healing
Virtue?

A. 1. He must believe the offers of the Gospel to be true. Multitudes hear and
read the Gospel, that have no benefit of its healing Virtue, because they don't
believe it to be true. Heb. 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. If the Gospel were not true, it
would be no Foundation of true Peace, and many are at a loss about the truth of
it. Their Minds are blinded. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this World has blinded the
Minds of them that believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should shine unto them. They have Objections against the Gospel, and don't
discern the truth of it, by the Testimony of God. But in order to the healing
of their Consciences, they must be convinced of the truth of the Gospel, that
Christ Jesus is the Son of God, that his Sacrifice has satisfied Justice, that
God offers Mercy through him. The Word must come with a divine Authority. Men
must hear the Voice of Christ. Christ must be revealed by the Father. 1 These.
2.13. Ye received the Word, as the Word of God. Joh. 5.25. The Dead shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God, and live. Math. 16.17. Flesh and Blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father that is in Heaven.

2. He must receive these Offers. It is the Duty of Men to receive the
Invitations of the Gospel, and that is necessary in order to Peace of
Conscience. For if a Man don't receive the Gospel, the Word speaks Terror to
him. Mar. 16.16. He that believes not shall be damned. Romans 2.8, 9. To them
that are Contentious, and obey not the Gospel, but obey Unrighteousness, God
will render Indignation and Wrath. 2 These. 1.8. Christ will come in flaming
Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. If Men do not receive the Gospel, they are not at Peace with
God. Whatever commendable Qualifications they have, they are not reconciled to
God: And if they have not Peace with God, they cannot have true Peace of
Conscience. The Office of Conscience, is to echoe to the Voice of God. Men must
receive Christ. Joh. 1.12. To them that received him, gave he Power to become
the Sons of God. That brings them into an estate of Justification. Receiving of
Christ is the Condition of the Gospel Covenant. The Redemption of Christ brings
no saving benefit to them that don't receive him. Men must believe on him, that
so they may have an interest in his Blood. God don't force the benefits of
Christ on any Man, they must come to him. Math. 11.28. Come to me all ye that
are Weary, and heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. These two Particulars
always go together: Those that do believe the Gospel, do always receive Christ:
The Mind and Will act in Conjunction.

3. He must discern that he does receive the Gospel. Peace of Conscience rises
from an understanding of the truth of the Gospel, and that he himself has
closed with it. Men are capable to perceive that they have received it, and
Conscience is very observant at such a time. It is a thing that the Heart is
much concerned about; and generally they do take notice of it, and observe the
very time. Some times they can roundly speak up to it. Joh. 9.38. Lord I
believe. Others do perceive it, though under more Uncertainty. The Consciences
of Men have a reflecting Power, and may discern their own Actions. Conscience
discerns Unbelief, and so Accuses; and it discerns Faith, and so speaks Peace.
Men are afterward subject to diverse Temptations; but generally they take some
Notice of the Change that God has made in them; that they have been persuaded,
and after much Opposition, have yielded to the calls of God. When God has
said, Return ye backsliding Children, and I will Heal your Backslidings, they
have answered, Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. As
Jer. 3.22.

2. Q. How does the Gospel apply its healing Virtue?

A. 1. It manifests, that God has justified and accepted him. This is the
plain Conclusion from the Premises. The Gospel testifies, that he that believes
is justified. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets Witness, through his
Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive the forgiveness of Sins. God is
reconciled to all believers. God that has authority to Pardon Sin, that is the
Judge of the World, declares that he will be reconciled to believers; and
Conscience affirms, that he does believe in Christ; he has betaken himself to
Christ for Refuge. Sometimes this is more clear to him: He can say as Psalm.
13.5. I have trusted in thy Mercy. And so he concludes that God is reconciled
to him. He is delivered from Condemnation, according to that, Joh. 5.24. He
that sees the Son, and believes on him that sent him, has everlasting Life,
and shall not enter into Condemnation, but is passed from Death to Life. So he
concludes that God is his Father, that his Sins are cast into the depths of the
Sea; that God will bestow heavenly Blessedness upon him; his Conscience echoes
to the Voice of God, and pronounces him an Heir of Glory; and so he rejoiceth
in hope of the Glory of God. Romans 5.1.

2. The Gospel manifests, that it is agreeable to the Law, that he does
justify. Formerly he he was dreadfully scared with the Law. 1 Cor. 15.56. The
Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. He considered that
the Law must be fulfilled. Math. 5.18. Not one jot or tittle must pass from the
Law, but all must be fulfilled. But the Gospel gives a clear Account that
Christ has satisfied the Law. That the Law did allow a Mediator. Gal. 3.17.
The Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
Hundred and thirty Years after, cannot disanul, that it should make the Promise
of none effect. That the Curse of the Law was executed on Christ. Gal. 3.13. He
has redeemed us from Curse, being made a Curse for us. Christ Jesus suffered
for our Sins. 1 Cor. 15.1. Christ died for our Sins, according to the
Scriptures. Isai. 53.6. He was wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for
our Iniquities. Hereby the Soul is satisfied that God may save him without any
Contradiction to the Rule of Justice. All the Challenges of the Law have been
answered by Christ, so that now the Threatenings of the Law are not a Terror to
him. He sees the Debt is paid, the Account is cancelled; it is according to a
Rule of Righteousness that he should be saved. The Law lays no Bar in the way.
Romans 3.26. God is Just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Romans
3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea, we establish
the Law.

1 USE. Hence learn the Preciousness of the Gospel. The Gospel is called
Glorious. 2 Cor. 4.4. It is called the Word of God's Grace. Act. 20.32. I
commend you to God and the Word of his Grace. It is called the good Word of
God. Heb. 6.5. Have tasted the good Word of God. The Promises of it are called,
exceeding great and precious Promises. 2 Pet. 1.4. And truly on this Account,
the Gospel is precious, that it heals wounded Consciences. The Balm of Judea is
counted precious, because of its healing Virtue. So the Gospel is to be prized
because of its sanative Power, that it heals the Wounds that Sin has made in
the Conscience. There be a great many that hear the Gospel, that are not
healed, but thousands have been healed by it. Every Man that does receive it,
is healed thereby, whatever their Terrors were.

1 Consider. These Wounds cannot be healed any other way. Some other things can
stupify the Conscience, and skin the Wounds over, but nothing but the Gospel
can cure them. Mic 6.6.7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my
self before the high God? Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, or
Calves of a Year Old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? If a Man should Weep Day and Night, that will not
do. If he should give all his Goods to the Poor, that will not do. If he should
walk in Print, that will not do. These Wounds do reject all other Medicines.
Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law, shall no Flesh living be justified in his
Sight. If a Man should with Anna, serve God with Fastings and Prayers Night and
Day; if he should with Paul, go Preaching the Gospel from Jerusalem, round
about unto Illyricum, if he should with Elijah be very jealous for the Lord of
Hosts; if he should confess his Sins with Tears of Blood; if he should give his
Body to be burned, it would not do. The biting of the fiery Serpent could not
be healed, but by looking to the brazen Serpent. So there is nothing can allay
the Venom of these Wounds, but the Gospel. Many Men try many Conclusions, but
their Wounds Stink and are Corrupt. There is no Soundness in their Flesh,
because of God's Anger, nor any Rest in their Bones, because of their Sins.
Their Bones wax Old through their Roaring all the Day, and their Moisture is
turned into the drought of Summer, till the Virtue of the Gospel is applied
unto them. Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you: Not as
the World gives, give I unto you. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself to God, purge your
Consciences from dead Works?

2. These Wounds are full of Anguish. Many Men have such Wounds in their
Consciences, as are exceeding hard to bear. Their Sins are like Ghosts, gashly
to behold, when God sets them in order before Men. The Wrath of God is hard to
bear: It lies like a Mountain of Lead upon the Soul; and Terrors take hold of
them like Waters, when the Arrows of the Almighty are within Men, the Poison of
them drinks up their Spirits, and they have a dreadful Sound in their Ears. Job
15.21. Their Hearts are as heavy as Lead, their Sorrows pierce them as with the
piercings of a Sword. The Wrath of God searches like Fire; they are in an
amazed Condition. Other Afflictions are hard to bear, these are harder. Men may
bear up under other Sorrows, but these sink the Soul. Prove. 18.14. The Spirit
of a Man can sustain his Infirmity; but a wounded Spirit who can bear? They cry
out in Distress. Isai. 33.14. Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? Yet
the Gospel can heal these Wounds, and turn their Mourning into Dancing, and
turn their Sorrow into Joy, that they shall Sing for Joy.

3. If these Wounds be not healed here, they never will be healed. There is
great necessity that Men's Consciences should be healed now in this World. It is
a doleful Thing for these painful Wounds to continue several Months; more
Doleful for them to continue, as sometimes they do, some Years. But there lies
great necessity upon Men to get these Wounds healed quickly, for if they be not
healed here, they never will be healed. If Men go with the Wounds out of this
World, they will abide for ever. Their Guilt will remain for ever, and the
Wrath of God will be poured out on them for ever. What can heal them in the
other World? The Punishment that they sustain, will not take away their Guilt.
They will never be able to pay their Debts, and satisfy divine Justice; for
they deserve everlasting Punishment; for that they will be sentenced unto.
Math. 25.41. Depart ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire. And as long as their
Guilt continues, their Wounds will continue. Yea, their Wounds will be fuller
of Anguish then, Conscience will be much more sensible then, than it is now.
Now they have many outward Enjoyments that do help to stupify Conscience. Now
they have abundance of carnal Reasonings and flattering Hopes, that give them
some ease. Now their Understandings are more Dull; but in the other World,
these Wounds will be fuller of Anguish than now; they will have more
Understanding then of the greatness and Majesty of God; they will be stripped
out of all their carnal Enjoyments; they will know and remember all their Sins:
They will have Experience of Divine Vengeance; they will Drink of the Wine of
God's Indignation. There will be more Revelations of his Wrath to them, and
they shall be utterly without Hope, and see an impossibility of Deliverance.
Mar. 9.44. There the Worm dies not.

4. These Wounds are so healed by the Gospel, that they shall never prove
Mortal. The Gospel does the thing effectually. It is with these Wounds indeed,
as it is with bodily Wounds and broken Bones; after they are healed, they
sometimes Ache against change of Weather, but yet they shall not prove Mortal. A
Man whose Conscience is healed, shall never die of his Wounds. If the Wounds of
Conscience be not healed, they will issue in Ruin; but if the healing Virtue
of the Gospel be applied to them, the Men are delivered from Destruction; they
may have Pain sometimes, but their Life is safe. Col. 3.3. Your Life is hid
with Christ in God. Joh. 5.24. They are passed from Death to Life. Romans 8.1.
There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. If Conscience be
healed, and acquits from their Guilt, their Sins shall never be charged upon
them, and shall never prove a Discouragement to them, so as to make them
forsake Christ, nor fall into a way of Unbelief.

2 USE. Of Examination, whether the Wounds of your Consciences have been
healed. Some Men's Consciences are more quiet than they were. There was a time
when you were mightily terrified; you could not rest Day nor Night; your Sins
were set in order before you, and the Wrath of God was terrible to you; the
Terrors of the Almighty set themselves in array against you, and you had
amazing Fears: Some times you feared that your Day of Grace was past; sometimes
that the Spirit of God had left you; sometimes that you had committed the
unpardonable Sin; sometimes that you should die before Morning. It was Dreadful
to think of Dying, and the end of all Opportunities, of going in your Sins
before the Judgment Seat; of lying among Devils; of unquenchable Fire. You were
amazed to think how you should spend the Day, and then how you should wear out
the Night, and how you should grapple with eternal Misery; but now the case is
altered, and you are not under such Fears; you live quietly and hope to go to
Heaven. The thoughts of Death are not such a Terror to you as they were: But
there may be ease of Conscience where there is no Healing. Some Men's
Consciences are not healed, but stupefied. The Wounds of some Men's Consciences
are only skinned over, not cured. You may know it by this: When they are indeed
healed, they are always healed by the Gospel.

If it were by the Gospel, then you were convinced that nothing else would Heal
you. Before Men feel the Efficacy of the Gospel, they must be beaten off from
all false hopes. Men may see that their Hearts are very bad, and a great deal
of Rottenness and Hypocrisy in themselves, and much of the insufficiency of
their own Righteousness, yet not be prepared to receive the offers of Christ,
and depend on his Righteousness. There be particular Convictions of the
wretchedness of Men's own Hearts, for Months going. They may see more and more
of the desperate Wickedness that is in their Hearts, and yet they not be
brought out of themselves. But before they come to Christ for healing, they
must be convinced of the incurableness of their Wounds by any other Medicine.
If they can help themselves by Prayers, Desires, Sorrows Inlargements, they
will neglect Christ. They will never come to Christ, till they are reduced to
Extremity. If they can make a shift to ease their Consciences with their
Privileges and Performances, they may counterfeit Faith in Christ, but they
will neglect him. They must see themselves Dead. Romans 7.9. Sin revived and I
died Their strong holds must all be thrown down. 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of
our Warfare are mighty, to the pulling down of strong holds. Men must be empty
of themselves, and all Refuges must fail them, before they will come to Christ.

2. If it were by the Gospel, it was by the spiritual Discovery of the Grace of
God, and the Virtue of Christ's Blood. There is a twofold common Discovery of
the Virtue of Christ's Blood: One is from the strength of Reason. Men can argue
from many Topics that it must be so, from the Miracles that he wrought, from
his Resurrection, from the consent of the Old Testament, etc. And thus the
generality of those that are called Christians, have some persuasion of it.
Like them, Joh. 2.23. Many believed on his Name, when they saw the Miracles
that he did. The other is by more than ordinary Illuminations. Some carnal Men
have a superficial Illumination. Heb. 6.4. Some that have been enlightened fall
away. Math. 13.20. They receive the Word with Joy, but have not Root in
themselves. This Illumination is like a flash of Lightning* it affects Men at
present, but wears off after a while: But when their Consciences are sealed by
the Gospel, their are indeed convinced. There is a spiritual Discovery of the
saving Virtue of the Blood of Christ. They see his Glory, as the Glory of the
only begotten of the Father. Joh. 1.14. So Christ was revealed in Paul, Gal.
1.16. God gives the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of him.
The Blindness of the Mind must be removed before Men will receive the Gospel.
Men must hear God calling them, before they will come to Christ. And such
Persons have not only a spiritual Discovery of Christ, when their Consciences
are first healed, but afterward they are wont to have further Discoveries
thereof, whereby they are helped to renew their Dependence on the Blood of
Christ.

3. If it were by the Gospel, then the Diseases of their Hearts are healed
also. When the Gospel is received, it has not a great power over the Conscience
only, but over the Heart also. As it delivers the Conscience from the guilt of
Sin, so it delivers the Heart from the power of Sin. It does not only Comfort,
but it Purifies the Man. The Gospel teaches us to deny Ungodliness, and worldly
Lust; and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly, in this World. 2 Tit. 11.12.
And wherever the Gospel is indeed received, it has a mighty Efficacy to renew
the Heart. Those that know the Grace of God, and Excellency of Christ, are
thereby inclined to carry Holily. Some Men get a false Peace by common
Illuminations, and that occasions strong Affections, Sorrow for Sin, delight in
Ordinances, care of their Conversation for a time; but before it be long, their
Corruptions revive like Snakes in the Spring. Luke 8.13. For a while they
believe, and in time of Temptation they fall away. But if the Conscience is
healed, the Diseases are cured. The Heart is changed; the Man has a Spirit of
Love to God; he has such a sight of God and Christ, as gives Life to him. 2
Cor. 5.17. If any Man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature: Old things are
past away, and all things are become New. As the sight of God and Christ
inclines the Soul to trust in him, so to Love and Fear him. Joh. 5.25. The Dead
shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and live.

3 USE. Of Direction what Course to take, that your Consciences may be healed.
Some Men are distressed by reason of the Wounds of their Consciences. Prove.
18.14. A wounded Conscience who can bear? And they are willing to take a great
deal of Pains in order to their healing. They would be contented to bear bodily
Pains, to part with a great deal of Money, if that would effect the thing; to
give Thousands of Rams. Mic. 6.7. The Papists take great Pains, Torment their
Bodies, are at great Expense: And many among our selves, Reform their sinful
Carriages that were dear to them; are very laborious in seeking God, and
striving with their own Hearts; but the way to get your Consciences healed, is
to receive the Gospel. There must be Reformations and Supplications, but the
principal Thing is to receive the Gospel, and yet the Blood of Christ applied
to the Soul. It is the Blood of Christ that washes away Sin. 1 John 1.7. The
Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses us from all Sin. This is the
price of our Redemption; receive therefore the offers of the Gospel.

And in order to this,

1. Despair of getting a Cure in any other way. There is a great endeavor in
Men to get something of their own to pacify the Anger of God. They are sensible
that they cannot perform the Condition of the Covenant of Works: They cannot
perfectly keep the Law, yet they hope to get something of their own to commend
them to God's acceptance. They hope that their Sorrow, and their Desires, and
Affections, and Reformations will moderate the Anger of God, and contribute
somewhat to the pacifying of his Anger. They think God cannot but delight in
those things, and cannot be so Angry with them as he was. They hope that their
own Obedience does take something with God, and incline his Heart toward them,
and render them more acceptable to God than they were. They go about to
establish their own Righteousness; but you must be convinced of the Vanity of
this Confidence; all their strong holds must be thrown down, that your Tears
and Affections will do nothing, that they cannot incline God to pity you; you
must find by Experience, such Defects and Corruption in all your Services, and
such Wretchedness in your Heart, as shall make it evident to you, that you
cannot help your self. Your Conscience must speak as God speaks, that it is
fair for God to cast you off; as Righteous to reject you, as if you had never
made a Prayer or shed a Tear for your Sins* That whatever you have done, you
have laid no bonds on God to save you. That you can do nothing to force God to
save you; but you are after all at God's free Disposal. You must see that you
are without Strength, Romans 5.6. That God is the Potter, and you are the Clay.
Romans 9.21.

2. Consider, That it is God that offers healing to you in the Gospel. You hear
Men inviting and encouraging you to come to Jesus Christ; and you are persuaded
that they are Men of Understanding, and that they do judge in their Hearts that
is a sufficient way of Salvation; but you cannot depend on the Judgment of Men,
that will not satisfy your Conscience, that Men think there is healing Virtue
in the Blood of Christ: But God does testify to it, Dan. 9.24. Christ will
finish Transgression, and make an end of Sins, and make Reconciliation for
Iniquity. Rev. 5.9. Thou have redeemed us to God by thy Blood. And he freely
offers this unto you, and is ready to pardon all your Sins through Christ
Jesus. Do but believe that it is God that speaks in the Gospel, and you will
see Encouragement enough: Then you will be satisfied in the Mercy of God; then
you will be satisfied in the Faithfulness of the Promise; then you will be
satisfied in the sufficiency of Christ's Redemption, and not be afraid to trust
in him. 1 These. 2.13. Ye received the Word, not as the Word of Men, but (as it
is indeed) the Word of God, which effectually works in them that believe.

The Fourth Sermon.
Luke 4.18. To Preach Deliverance to the Captives.


HERE is another Expression of the Work that Christ was anointed for. Where
mind, 1. The Persons that he is to be Serviceable to. The Word Captive is from
Capio, to take. They are such as are taken in War. Aichmalotos is from Aichme,
Spear or Sword, and Alotos, taken in War. This sets forth the state of Sinners.
They are by the just Judgment of God, delivered into Satan's Hands, and they are
his Captives. 2 Timothy 2.26. They are taken Captive by him at his Will. 2. What
Service Christ was to do for them. To Preach Deliverance, to Publish or
Proclaim it. His Office was not merely to Condole their Captivity, but to
Proclaim Deliverance to them. He does not Proclaim that they are delivered, but
he Proclaims an Offer of Deliverance. He declares that there is a way of
Deliverance, and makes a tender of it upon Terms.

DOCTRINE. God offers Deliverance to those that are in spiritual Captivity.
Deliverance to them that are in bodily Captivity is a great Privilege; but
Deliverance to them that are in spiritual Captivity, is a far greater
Privilege. As it is more Costly, so it is more Comfortable and Profitable; but
this is freely offered by God. He does not force their Deliverance without
their Consent, but he makes a tender of Deliverance unto them. They cannot
force their Deliverance, neither can they purchase their own Deliverance. What
shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Math. 16.26. But God does freely
offer it to them. He does not at present make an offer of it to all the World.
There be great Nations that have not heard of it; but where he sends his
Gospel, he makes an offer of it. There be many in such Places that are not
delivered from this Captivity, and indeed never will be delivered; but it is
not for want of an offer, but for want of their Acceptance. Some that are in
Captivity are delivered, and Deliverance is offered unto others.

Q. Why are Sinners said to be in spiritual Captivity?

A. Because their Condition is resembled by the Condition of Captives.

1. They are made to serve with Rigor. Thus the Egyptians dealt with the
Israelites. Exodus 1.14. They made their Lives Bitter with hard Bondage, in
Mortar and in Brick, and in all manner of Service in the Field. All the Service
wherein they made them serve, was with Rigor. So Satan puts his Captives to a
great deal of Drudgery. He keeps them continually at Work. He hurries them from
Service to Service. He makes them do a great deal of base Work, that is beneath
the Dignity of Men. He makes them to Idolize the World, and to make Gods of
their Bellies. Phil. 3.19. He makes them Lie, and Steal, and be Profane. He
makes many of them to be like the Beasts that Perish. He drives them sometimes
to do things that will be a Reproach to them, that they are as the Fools in
Israel. 2 Samuel 13.13. He makes them to do such things as undo them in this
World. Prove. 6.33. A Wound and Dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach shall
not be wiped away. He compels them to do such things as are utterly
Unprofitable, and forces them to do things that displease God, and bring down
his Wrath. He hurries them on to do things that Wound their Consciences. He
will not allow them time, nor suffer them to serve God. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Ye walked
according to the Course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of
the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience. Among
whom we had our Conversation in times past, in the Lusts of the Flesh,
fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind.

2. They are miserably provided for. Sometimes it is so with Captives among
Men. Deuteronomy. 28.48. Thou shall serve thine Enemies, which the Lord shall send
against thee, in Hunger, and Thirst, and Nakedness, and in the want of all
things. So Isai. 20.4. So the King of Assyria shall lead the Egyptians
Prisoners, and the Ethiopians Captives; Young and Old, Naked and Barefoot. Thus
these Men's Souls are in a starved Condition; they have nothing to satisfy them;
they are like the Prodigal, Luke 15.16. He would fain have filled his Belly
with the Husks that the Swine did eat, but no Man gave unto him. They have no
Heavenly Manna; they don't eat of the Tree of Life, spoken of, Rev. 2.7. They
have not that which is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed. They have insatiable
Desires after Happiness; but they have nothing to live upon, but that which is
Course, and Bitter, and Unsatisfying. They have Desires after Satisfaction, but
cannot find it. They are kept in an Hungry and Starved Condition. While other
Men are entertained in God's Chambers, they are kept out of Doors. They come
into the Meeting House, but not into the Chambers of Communion; and their Souls
are miserably Clothed, while others are Clothed with change of Raiment, and
their Beauty is Perfect through that Comeliness which God has put upon them,
and are adorned with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness. These poor Captives
have nothing but rotten Rags to cover them, while their Bodies are finely
adorned, their Souls are Naked and Filthy: They are Polluted in their Blood.
Ezekiel. 16.6. All their Righteousness is as filthy Rags.

3. Satan is leading them to his own Territories. That is the manner of
Conquerours when they have taken Captives, to lead them away to their own
Country. So Zedekiah was dealt with. Jer. 52.11. The King of Babylon bound him
with Chains, and carried him to Babylon. Thus Satan is dealing with these Men.
The Devil himself is cast into Hell. 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that
Sinned, but cast them down to Hell. And though they be suffered to Ramble about
the Earth, yet Hell is their Home; and thither it is that they are leading
their Captives. The Devil is leading them in those Paths that go down to
Destruction. 1 John 3.8. He that commits Sin is of the Devil. He leads them
on in the Practice of Iniquity, which is the very way to Hell. He leads some in
the way of Profaneness, others in the way of Voluptuousness, others in a way of
Pride and Worldliness, till he brings them down to Hell. The Devil deceives
them, Rev. 20.10. He destroys them, Rev. 9.11. And he is busily endeavoring to
hinder them from getting out of this way. When they hear the Word, he is
careful to take it away. Math. 13.19. Then comes the wicked One, and catches
away that which was sown in his Heart. He mightily opposes their Conversion.
He is showing them the Glory of the World, and blinding their Eyes that they
may nor believe the Gospel. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this World has blinded the
Eyes of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.

2 Q. What is it that is offered to these Captives?

A. Not a Mitigation of the Extremity of their Captivity, but Deliverance. It
is a Mercy to poor Captives, to have some Pity showed them in their Bondage.
Psalm. 106.46. He made them to be pitied of all those that carried them Captive.
And indeed there is some difference among those that are Satan's Captives. Some
are made to do abundance more Drudgery than others: They are made to blast
their Names, and wound their Consciences more than others, and they go along
faster in the way to Destruction than others: But the thing that God offers to
Men in the Gospel, is not a Mitigation of, but Deliverance from Captivity.
Christ Jesus is raised up to be a Deliverer, to be a Savior, and he does
deliver Men. His Work is to deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all
their Lifetime subject to Bondage Heb. 2.15. And this is that which is offered
in the Gospel. He offers to make them Happy that were Miserable, to save them
from the power of Satan. Act. 26.18 To turn them from Darkness to Light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. To deliver them from the power of Darkness,
Col. 1.13. He offers to set at Liberty, those that were in Bondage.

1. He does not offer Deliverance hereafter only, but present Deliverance. God
offers the Glory of Heaven to Sinners in the Gospel; but this is not to be
enjoyed at present, but they must go through several Calamities before they
come thither. 1 Pet. 5.10. God has called you to his Eternal Kingdom and Glory
after ye have suffered a while. They may have some fore-tasts of it now, but
they must not enjoy it till they Die. But there is a present Deliverance
offered, he that is effectually called, is the Lord's Freeman. 1 Cor. 7.22.
Satan's Dominion is immediately taken away. The Man is delivered from servitude
to Satan. 1 John 5.18. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that
wicked One touches him not. The Devil may hurry him into some Transgressions,
but his Lordship is taken away, and the Man walks in a way of Holiness, and has
a right to the Tree of Life. Satan is cast out, and the Man is made an Heir of
Heaven, and God is leading him in the way to Glory. Romans 6.22. Ye have your
Fruit unto Holiness, and the End everlasting Life.

2. He don't offer Deliverance for the present only, but Eternal Deliverance.
Men that are delivered out of Captivity here, may after a while go into
Captivity again, and be in as sad a Condition as before; but this Deliverance
is Eternal. When once they are delivered, they are never brought into such a
Captivity again. Paul says indeed, that the Law in his Members brought him into
Captivity. Romans 7.23. The meaning is, That Sin did get some Advantage, and
Tyrannize over him a while, that he was at times like a Captive; but not as he
was before in his natural Condition. He never was a Servant to Sin any more.
The Devil may try to recover his Dominion; he acts Craftily, and makes many
Assaults, and brings the Heart into bad Frames, and leads it into actual
Transgressions, but he has no power over him to make him walk in the way of
Destruction. Such Persons being the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God.
Romans 8.14. Satan is very much restrained by God, and all such Persons are kept
by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.

3 Q. On what Terms does God offer Deliverance from this Captivity?

A. 1. Not upon the Condition of their laying down the Price of their
Deliverance. We cannot lay down any Price of our Redemption. Money will not
Redeem us, if it should be laid out in Works of Piety or Charity. Math. 16.26.
What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? Men have no Works to Redeem
them; all the Works that they do before their Deliverance, are Sins. They run
in Debt, and don't pay their Debts thereby, until they are delivered. They are
by all that they do, purchasing Damnation, and not Salvation. They are said to
have no Money, Isai. 55.1. Nothing that will pass in Heaven, as Money does upon
the Earth.

2. Nor upon Condition of their Recompencing God for it afterward. When he
delivers Men, he expects that they should serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of their Lives. Luke 1.74, 75. But this is not the
Condition, but part of the Mercy that is offered. Men that are sensible of
their Captivity, are ready to promise, That if God will deliver them, they will
be very Obedient, and show forth his Praise: But God don't regard their
Promises, nor deliver them because they promise fairly. He expects no Reward
from them, as in that Case. Isai. 45.13. He shall let go my Captives, net for
Price nor Reward, says the Lord of Hosts. God requires Obedience as a natural
Debt, and likewise in a way of Thankfullness for their Deliverance, but not in
a way of Recompense.

3. But on Condition of accepting it as a free Gift through Christ. Deliverance
is a free Gift as to us, but Christ has purchased it. Romans 6.23. The Gift of
God is Eternal Life, through Christ Jesus our Lord. And we must accept it as
such. The Invitation is, to come and take the Water of Life freely. Rev. 22.17.
And we must take as it is offered; we must make no Alteration in the Terms: God
will have his own way: He will not sell Deliverance to us but he will give it;
but he will not give it absolutely without respect to any Price, but with
respect to the Death and Righteousness of Christ. And we must receive it as he
offers it. 1 Pet. 1.21. Who by him do believe in God. Heb. 7.25. He is able to
save them to the uttermost, who come unto God by him. We must depend on the
Grace of God, as the moving Cause, but on the Blood and Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, as the meritorious Cause of our Salvation.

4 Q. To what purpose is this offer made to Sinners, seeing they have not Power
to accept of it? Joh. 6.44. No Man can come unto me, except the Father that
sent me draw him.

A. 1. It is no ways fit that Salvation should be forced on them without their
acceptance. In this way they put a great deal of Honor upon God: They Honor
the Grace of God, and his Faithfullness, and his Authority. Romans 4.20. Abraham
was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God. It is a Testimony for God, and a
practical Acknowledgment of his Attributes; and in this way they put a great
deal of Honor upon Christ. It is a Confession that he is the Son of God, and
the only Mediator between God and Man; of the Sufficiency and saving Virtue of
his Death and Obedience: It manifests that the Man prizeth Christ. 1 Pet. 2.7.
To them that believe Christ is Precious. And in this way there is a Foundation
for a great deal of Comfort. God is bound now by Covenant to bestow Salvation,
and they are secured from Apostasy: That they shall never fall into a state of
Condemnation. Joh. 5.24. He that sees the Son, and believes on him that sent
him, has Eternal Life, and shall not enter into Condemnation. The Heirs of
Promise hereby have strong Consolation.

2. They can do a great deal in order to their accepting of Deliverance. They
can Pray earnestly for it. Prove. 2.3. They can cry for Wisdom, and lift up
their Voices for Understanding. God says concerning Paul, Behold he Prays.
Act. 9.11. They can Reform their Lives, and leave off the Evil Practices that
they have been addicted unto. So they are directed to forsake their ways, Isai.
55.7. They can addict themselves to ways of Obedience, duties of Piety, and
Charity, and Justice. They can resist Discouragements, and discern that there
is no sufficient Foundation for them; they are able to examine their Hearts,
and to discern the Falseness of those Pretenses that they make to Godly Sorrow,
Love and Faith; they are capable to discern their Carnal Confidence, and to
find out the Pride and Stubbornness of their Hearts: They are able also to
justify God, and under a sense of their own Insufficiency, wait upon God for
his Mercy.

3. When they do what they can, God generally makes the offers Powerful. When
they are prepared, God's manner is to open their Eyes. When they have gone as
far as they can, God's manner is to put Strength in them, and he will accompany
the Gospel with a Divine Power. The Gospel does become his Power unto
Salvation, Romans 1.16. He teaches them in that way, and makes them to come to
Christ. Joh. 6.45. Every one that hears and learneth of the Father, comes
unto me. In this way God is Breathing into some the Breath of Life. These
offers of the Gospel are not in vain, for God does persuade many thereby. I
Cor. 4.15. I have Begotten you through the Gospel.

1 USE. See here the great Mercy of God to many Sinners. He offers Deliverance
to them from Spiritual Captivity. Bodily Captivity, especially among barbarous
People, Indians or Turks, is a great Misery; but this Spiritual Captivity is
much greater. Their Wants are very great; they live a miserable Famished Life,
they are destitute of those Spiritual Comforts that the Nature of Man craves.
They are very much Debased, they live in such a way as is beneath the Dignity
of Mankind. They endure abundance of Sorrows, and Wounds in their Consciences.
They are exposed unto great Dangers: God pities them in this Condition, and
offers Deliverance to them, when none else could do it. He is making a gracious
Offer unto them. You are utterly incapable to deliver yourselves; you have no
sufficiency to procure your own Liberty. Some that have been Captives to Men,
have got their Liberty by Running; some by being Victorious over them; some by
promising Money for their Redemption, but you are under an utter Incapacity to
procure your own Liberty. You must continue for ever in a miserable Condition,
if God do not set you at Liberty: And in this Extremity God offers Deliverance
to you. It would not be so strange, if your Deliverance would be any Advantage
to God, but he gains nothing by it. It is indeed for his Honor to Deliver you;
and so it would be for his Honor if he should refuse to Deliver you: But it is
no profit to him, he is Blessed for ever, whatever becomes of you. Yet he is
freely offering Deliverance to you.

1. This is offered to you, though you brought your self into this Condition by
your Rebellion. Many Men that are in Captivity, are to be pityed under that
Consideration, That it was not their fault that they are Captives: It was not
from any Perverseness or Indiscretion of theirs, that they are in such a
Condition, but your Captivity is the fruit of your Rebellion. Man was made in
an estate of Freedom, but we cast our selves into this Bondage by breaking
God's Law. We might have lived happily if we would have obeyed, but ventured
for the sake of the Forbidden Fruit, to go abreast against God's Law, and
plunged our selves into this Misery. Romans 3.23. Man has Sinned, and fallen
short of the Glory of God. God might have said, Seeing they would be Miserable,
let them be Miserable: They should have known when they were well; their Misery
is no more than they deserve. Seeing they would serve the Devil, let them be
his Bondmen, let them find by Experience, the fruit of their own Folly. But
such is his Mercy, that he has overlooked the Provocation, and says, as Hos.
13.9. Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy Help.

2. Though it has cost him much to make this Offer. The generality of the great
Works of God have not been costly to him. When he was to make the World, he
spoke and they were Created; he Commanded and they stood fast; but our
Deliverance was costly. 1 Cor. 6.20. We are bought with a Price. Men are
willing to Redeem others out of Captivity, if they can have it for a moderate
Sum; but this Deliverance cost the Blood of the Son of God. In order to it, the
Son of God must take our Nature: That was great Condescension; he stooped very
low, to take a Nature made out of the Dust; and in this Nature he suffered the
Curse of the Law. It would have been a great Misery for us to have suffered the
Curse of the Law; and it was a great kindness for the Son of God to suffer that
Curse for us. Though the Divine Nature did not suffer, yet it was God that
suffered. Act. 20.28. God has purchased the Church with his own Blood. If that
Nature had not been taken into Union with the Son of God, it would not have
been such love for God to inflict Sufferings on it; but being United to the Son
of God, it was unspeakable Love for God to deliver it to Death. Romans 5.8. God
commends his Love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ died
for us. God was at great Expense for our Deliverance.

3. He offered this to you before you asked him. Some Men would think it time
enough to offer Men Liberty when they are sought to, and would make that an
Objection, that Men never asked them for such a Favor; but he has prevented
you, he did not wait to see whether you would fall before him upon your Knees,
and with Tears in your Eyes beg Deliverance of him; but he laid the Foundation
of this Deliverance before you were Born; sent his Son to Die for you, many
Ages before you came into the World, and in early Days offered Deliverance to
you, before you had any Thoughts about it. He called on you, before ever you
called on him. It would have been an exceeding Mercy to have hearkened to you,
and made you such an Offer, after you had with Prayers and Supplications, with
strong Crying and Tears sought unto him for it. But God has been beforehand
with you, and before you ever thought of any such thing, has sent the Gospel
to you* you have no Occasion to say, Who shall ascend into Heaven (to bring
Christ down from above) or who shall descend into the Deep? But the Word is
nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. God has brought the
Gospel to your Doors.

4. He offers this to you, after many Refusals. You have been greatly Guilty,
in blowing on the offers of the Gospel. You have been like the Deaf Adder. God
has called and set many Arguments before you, and after time of Consideration,
has renewed his offers; but you have rejected them. Prove. 1.24. I have called,
and they have refused: I stretched out my Hand, and they have not regarded. You
have delayed him, you have denied him, you have affronted him; yet he persists
to make the offer still. He stands at the Door and Knocks. Rev. 3.20. He might
have said, They should have known when they were well offered; let them learn
by their Sufferings, what it is to despise such Grace. This is not a Mercy to
be trampled on, seeing they will not have Life, let them have Death. He might have
been discouraged from making any more offers to you. He might have said, It is
in vain to call upon them; they are in love with their Servitude and will not.
What could I say more than I have said? They are stubborn willful Creatures,
I Will wait no longer on them, the Kingdom shall be taken from them. But
notwithstanding all Provocations, he is still offering Deliverance. After so
long a time he is saying, To Day while it is called to day, harden not your
Hearts.

2 USE. Of Reproof to those that don't accept the offer of Deliverance.
Accepting the offer is a secret Thing, and I don't pretend to know who has not
accepted; but if we be not better than the Jews, few have accepted. Christ
Complains of this, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that you may have Life.
Luke 14.18. They all with one Consent began to make Excuse. And there be many
Evidences against some Men, that Affront to God, that you don't accept. He
might well expect that you should accept it with Thankfullness. Christ makes
great Complaint of them, Mat 23.37. I would have gathered thy Children
together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not.

1. In some, it is because they are not afraid of the Misery that Satan is
leading them unto. Some Men are not much afraid of Damnation. They have cause
to be afraid; multitudes of such as they, are gone to Hell. The Sinners of the
Old World are there; they were Disobedient in the Days of Noah, and now their
Spirits are in Prison. 1 Pet. 3.19.20. God threatens them with Damnation. The
Chaff shall be burnt up with unquenchable Fire. Math. 3.12. Many others have
been afraid. Isai. 33.14. Sinners in Zion are afraid, Trembling takes hold of
Hypocrites. The Devils are afraid. Jam. 2.19. The Devils believe and Tremble.
It is a dreadful Thing to loose Heaven, and all the Good of that, and endure
the Pains of Hell. It is strange that Men that cannot bear the Aching of a tooth,
make light of going to Hell: But many through Atheism and Flattery, are not
afraid, and so they don't regard the offers of Deliverance, but are casting
horrible Contempt upon the Grace of God.

2. In some, it is from love to that Drudgery that Satan puts them to. They
love their Sins; they love to serve the World; they love to indulge their
Lusts: Their Lusts are like a Right Eye: They say as they, Jer. 2.25. I have
loved Strangers, and after them I will go. They have little Reason to be fond
of their Service; it is base and low, beneath Rational Creatures. They do
bereave their Souls of Comfort: It Wounds their Consciences; it exposes them to
Wrath. They might live Pleasantly, and Honorably, and so as is agreeable to
Conscience. The benefit of serving God is very great. Psalm. 19.11. In keeping
thy Commandments is great Reward. But they don't know how to part with their
Sins; they are bewitched with the World, and their Life is bound up in Carnal
Enjoyments, and they are not willing to be delivered: they are naturalized to
their Sins, and it is like Death to part with them.

3. In some, it is from their not believing that God will deliver them. Some
cry for Deliverance, but don't accept the Offers. They are Fearful and
Unbelieving. Rev. 21.8. They scare themselves, because of the Anger of God;
they scare themselves, because of the Threatenings of the Word, and because of
the badness of their Hearts. They hear that Christ has satisfied Justice for
Sin; that God is willing to be reconciled to Sinners, but they dare not
adventure themselves on Christ; they think if their Hearts were better, and
they could Bleed freely for their Sins, and had a more fervent Spirit of Love
to God, his Heart would be mollified toward them, and he would be more
inclinable to give Salvation to them: But as they are, they dare not accept,
they think it would be Presumption; without all Reason, they call in Question
the Word of God. One would think God's Word should satisfy them. Psalm. 12.6.
The Words of the Lord are pure Words. But they dare not depend upon Gods Word:
They doubt that we don't understand the Meaning of it, and that it is to be
understood with some Limitations that we are not aware of.

3 USE. Of Exhortation to those that have accepted this Offer, Rejoice in this
Deliverance that God has bestowed on you. You have received and do receive the
Offer, and God has done according to what he offered, and you are delivered:
Rejoice in this.

1. You are delivered from servitude to Satan. He is Tempting of you still, and
leads you into a great deal of Transgression, as he Tempted David to Number the
People of Israel. Yet you are not his Servants, his Dominion is taken away, and
he is under Restraint, and cannot Govern you as he did. It is a dreadful Thing
to be a Slave to Satan. Thus it is with all Ungodly Men; they are the Seed of
the Serpent; they are the Children of the wicked One. Math 13.38. The Tares are
the Children of the wicked One; they are of their Father the Devil, and his
Lusts they will do. Joh. 8.44. But you have changed Masters, and now serve the
living God. You are now delivered from the power of Darkness, and turned from
Satan unto God. Act. 26.18. And do maintain a Warfare against the power of
Darkness. Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual Wickedness in High Places.

2. You are well provided for. Many Men having nothing to Refresh their Hearts
but Carnal Things, they are in a starved Condition; they are Pining for want of
Satisfaction; but the Case is altered with you. You draw Water out of the Wells
of Salvation, Isai. 12.3. You can sit under the shadow of Christ with Delight,
and his Fruit is Sweet to your Taste. As Cant. 2.3. God has made satisfying
Provision, and you are at times feeding on that. The Flesh of Christ is Meat
indeed, and his Blood is Drink indeed; and you have a great deal of Comfort in
that. And while other Men have nothing to cover them but the rotten Rags of
their own Righteousness, your Souls are beautified and adorned with the Robes
of Christ's Righteousness; and Christ Jesus says of you, as Cant. 4.7. Thou art
all Fair my Love, there is no Spot in thee. And God says of you, Ezekiel. 16.14.
Thy Beauty is perfect through my Comeliness which I have put upon thee, says
the Lord God.

3. God is leading you unto Glory. You are on this side Heaven, and have many
Temptations, but your Salvation is secured. God is conducting you to Glory, and
will without fail bring you thither. The Glory of Heaven is very great; it will
bring Satisfaction; it exceeds all the Glory of the World, more than the Light
of the Sun does the Light of Rotten Wood: And God will not suffer you to fail
of this. Your Expectations as to some Worldly Enjoyments may fail, but God will
lead you in the very way to Glory. Psalm. 73.24. Thou will guide me by thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. Christ Jesus has prepared a Place
for you, and he reserves it for you. 1 Pet. 1.4. You are Begotten unto an
Inheritance Incorruptible, Undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you. Abundance of People are Dying continually, and they all need to
go to Heaven, but they shall not prevent you: There is a Place prepared, and it
is reserved for you.

The Fifth Sermon.
Luke 4.18. And recovery of Sight to the Blind.


IN this Clause mind 1. The Charecter of those that he is to Preach to, viz.
Those that are Blind. There is 1. A Bodily Blindness, which arises from
several Causes, when Men are not able to discern Bodily Objects, either through
the want of Organs, or the Indisposition of them. Sometimes they cannot see
from the want of Light, or from the Interposition of some Opake Body; But
Blindness rises from some Default in the Body. 2. A Spiritual Blindness, when
Men cannot see God, or any Spiritual Thing. Thus it is with Ungodly Men. 3.
Epist. Joh. 11. He that does Evil, has not seen God. Rev. 3.17. Thou art Poor,
and Blind, and Naked. This Blindness may be the greater, by reason of
contracted evil Habits, and the Temptation of Satan. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of
this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not. 2. What he was to
Preach, viz. Recovery of Sight. Adam had Spiritual Understanding, but we have
lost it, and must have our Sight recovered. Q. How was he to Preach the
Recovery of Sight? He was not properly to offer it to them, though he offers
further degrees of Sight to his People. Rev. 3.18. I Counsel thee to buy of me
Gold tried in the Fire, white Raiment, and to anoint thy Eyes with Eye Salve,
that thou may see. Yet he must see before he can come to Christ. Men must
come to Christ Understandingly. Joh. 6.45. Every one that has heared and
learned of the Father, comes unto Christ. But that which he Preaches, is, That
there is an Opportunity to have the Sight recovered: They were under an
advantage to have their Eyes opened.

DOCTRINE. They that live under the Preaching of the Gospel, have an
opportunity to have their Eyes opened. It is one of the great Miseries of
Mankind, that they are Blind; and it is a great Privilege to recover their
Sight. There is opportunity for this, by the Preaching of the Gospel. Those
that live in Heathenish Darkness, have no opportunity to have their Eyes
opened. They that belong to the visible Kingdom of Darkness, do also belong to
the invisible Kingdom of Darkness. But they that have the Light of the Gospel
shining among them, have an opportunity to have their Eyes opened. All that
live under the Preaching of the Gospel, have not the like opportunity. In
Christ's time, they had a greater opportunity than before. The more clearly and
powerfully it is taught, the greater is the opportunity: But where it is
taught, there is an opportunity. People are under an Advantage to have their
Eyes opened. Act. 26.18. I send thee to open their Eyes, to turn them from
Darkness to Light. Col. 1.3. He has delivered us form the power of Darkness.

The Demonstration. 1. They have those Truths revealed to them, that they
should see. Where the Gospel is Preached, Spiritual Truths are brought to
Light. Act. 11.14. He shall tell thee Words, whereby thou and all thy House
shall be saved. God and Christ, and the way of Salvation are made known by the
Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10. He has brought Life and Immortality by the Gospel to
Light. The Gospel teaches those Spiritual Doctrines that are necessary to
Salvation. There is a clear Explication of the Properties of God's Nature, of
the lost Estate of Man, of the Work of Redemption by Christ; his Person, his
Offices, his Humiliation, and his Exaltation, and of the Covenant of Grace, and
the Condition of Salvation. 1. Cor. 2.10. God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit. Yea, these Things are not barely told, but there is a great deal of
Evidence and Demonstration of them: So that hereby Men come to have a Literal
Knowledge of them, even of all things that are needful to Salvation. 2 Timothy
3.15. The Holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto Salvation. Yea, Men
have such Conviction of them, as makes them concerned to get a spiritual
Understanding of them. This is one great Help: The Object that they should see,
is fairly presented before them in the Gospel.

2. They have a Conviction set before them, that they are Blind. In the Gospel,
there is a Declaration of Man's Blindness. There is a Divine Testimony that Men
are Blind. Men naturally are Ignorant of it, but God gives Witness to it. Ephesians.
4.18. Having their Understandings darkened, being alienated from the Life of
God, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their
Heart. Besides, there they may learn how they come to be Blind, that by the
fall of Adam, their whole Nature is Corrupted. Romans 3.23. Man has Sinned, and
has fallen short of the Glory of God. And as the Will is depraved, so the Mind
likewise. It is made Evident also from hence, that God has made great Provision
that we may recover our Sight. He has made it the Office of Jesus Christ, to
give Light and Understanding to us. Isai. 49.6. I will give thee also to be a
Light unto the Gentiles. Joh. 9.39. For Judgment came I into the World, that
they that see not, might see. He shows our Blindness by the sorrowful Effects
of it, living a Sinful and Corrupt Life. He teaches us, That they that know
him, will trust in him, love and obey him; and that they that do live
otherwise, do not know him. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him. And hereby he shows us
our Blindness, in revealing things that our Reason and Consciences tell us must
be so. And yet we cannot see nor believe them. There is such Evidence, that we
must say, it cannot be otherwise: And yet we are not able to give Entertainment
to them. We are silenced, yet not convinced.

3. They are directed what to do, that they may see. We are taught, that we
must Pray to God to open our Eyes. A seeing Eye, and an hearing Ear, the Lord
is the maker of them both. Men are ready to think that they shall get the
Knowledge of God and Christ, by improving their Natural Reason, by Study and
Consideration; that they can argue themselves into the Knowledge of Spiritual
Things: But it is quite beyond them, and they must be brought to beg it of God.
Prove. 2.3. They must cry for Wisdom, and lift up their Voice for Understanding.
The Gospel shows that it is Gods Work to give Understanding. Ephesians. 1.17. That
God would give you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of him.
Again we are directed to wait upon the Preaching of the Word, To wait at the
Gates of Wisdom. Prove. 8.34. So we are taught, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by
Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God. We are directed also to submit to the
Sovereignty of God. It is plainly told us, that God has Mercy on whom he will
have Mercy. Romans 9.15. He is not bound to any particular Person; he is at
liberty either to leave them to Blindness, or to open their Eyes. They can
bring God under no necessity to give Light to them: And accordingly it is their
Duty to submit to his sovereign Pleasure.

4. They are under an Indefinite Promise of having their Eyes opened. After
all, this is needful, that God should convince Men of the certainty of
Spiritual Things; and God has made Promises of that. He is not under Engagement
to particular Persons, but he has promised that Christ shall be a Light to the
Gentiles. Isa. 49.6. That is saving Light. So he has promised it to Ministers,
to encourage them in their Work. Math. 28.20. Teach them to observe all things
that I have Commanded, and lo, I am with you always to the end of the World.
Joh. 16.8. The Comforter shall convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and
of Judgment. Act. 26.17 18. I send thee to open the Blind Eyes (...) them from
Darkness to Light. Yea, he has promised this Mercy to his Church. Joh. 6.45.
All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. Heb. 8.10, 11. This shows, that
he is engaged to bestow this Mercy upon a Number, where he does set up his
Ordinances; and accordingly it is the manner of God, to give Spiritual Light
and Understanding to some; and this shows, that they that live under the means
of Grace, have an opportunity of recovering their Sight. They are under an
hopeful Advantage to enjoy this Mercy.

1 USE. Of Reproof to those that don't improve this Opportunity. It is great
Folly, not to improve Opportunities. It is the Wisdom of Men to watch for
Opportunities. 1 Kin. 20.33. The Men did diligently observe whether any thing
would come from him, and did hastily catch it. And it is great Foolishness to
neglect them. Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is there a Price in the Hand of a Fool to
get Wisdom, when he has no Heart to it? It was Jezebel's fault that she
neglected it. Rev. 3.21. I gave her a space to Repent, and she Repented not. A
Season for Worldly Advantages should not be lost through Carelessness and
Sloth. Opportunities for Peace, and Health, and Liberty should not be lost. So
Opportunities to get Spiritual Wisdom and Understanding. Those that don't
improve them, are Adversaries to themselves. They don't consult their own Good:
They will bewail the loss of them, and cry out of their Madness in not
improving them. That will be one Aggravation of the Misery of Men hereafter,
that they had glorious Opportunities, but did not improve them. Other parts of
their Punishment will be the greater, and the Reproaches of Conscience will be
the more.

1. They that don't cry to God to open their Eyes. Some Men for Form-sake, put
up such Requests to God; but they don't cry Earnestly, nor follow God with
secret Prayer. God may say of some Men, Isai. 43.22. Thou have not called upon
me, O Jacob, thou have been weary of me, O Israel. And Complain of many as he
does, Isai. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee. These Persons may thank themselves, if they
remain in Darkness. God may well say, If Light be not worth Praying for in
their Esteem, let them go without it. These Men are unsensible of their Misery:
If they were Sensible, they would cry Earnestly to God, as he, Luke 18.38. He
cried, saying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy on me. These Men have not
only Blind Minds, but hard Hearts. They are under the power of a stupid and
insensible Spirit. They have not only a great deal of Blindness, but they have
contracted a great deal of Blindness. They want common Illumination. God gives
many Blessings to Men without asking; but they shall ask for this Mercy before
they do receive it. It is a Contempt upon God, and an Undervaluing of the
Blessing, not to ask it of him. If they hold their Tongues, God will hold his
Hand. These Men are Blind at present, and that is their Misery; and they will
continue Blind, and that is a greater Misery

2. Such as will not be convinced of their own Blindness. It may be, they do
pray to God to open their Eyes; but they are not convinced how Blind they be.
They are told, that they must become Fools, that they may be Wise, 1 Cor. 3.18.
But they say as, Joh. 9.40. Are we Blind also? They are not convinced that they
are totally Blind; they think they see somewhat of the Evil of Sin, and of the
Faithfulness of God, and of the Divinity of Christ. They are not convinced that
they cannot recover themselves. They hope by Degrees to Work it out; and by
Reading and Study to force it: But in very deed, you must see your Misery
before you find the Remedy. Men that are Blind, are incapable of a Spiritual
Conviction of it, while they do remain Blind; but they must have an
Experimental Conviction of it. If you depend upon your own sufficiency to get
Sight, God will say, Let them do it if they can. His way is to convince such
Men of their Blindness before he helps them. Rev. 3.17. He says, Thou art
Blind: And then V. 18. Encourages, that he will anoint their Eyes with
Eye Salve that they may see.

2 USE. See hence, that the Preaching of the Gospel is a very great Blessing.
Some Persons have no great esteem for it. It is Chargeable, and it does
disquiet their Consciences, and they never got any Spiritual Good by it: But
indeed it is a very great Blessing. It is a Mercy to hear good Tidings, and the
Gospel is so, Romans 10.15 How beautiful are the Feet of them that Preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good Things! David was very Thankful
for the Word of God, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He has showed his Word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation,
and as for his Judgments, they have not known them, Praise ye the Lord. And the
Apostle cries up this Privilege. Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage then has the
Jew, and what profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way: Chiefly, because
unto them were committed the Oracles of God. The state of many Nations is
Doleful, because they have not the Gospel. And it is not without Cause, that
many Bless God for the Gospel. It is to be prized upon this Consideration, That
Men have an Opportunity thereby, for the recovering of their Sight. In this way
it is very Serviceable.

1. This is Pleasant. It Is a delightful thing to have the Eyes open. Ecl. 11.7.
Truly the Light is Sweet, and a pleasant Thing it is for the Eyes to behold the
Sun. It is pleasant to see Palaces, and Navies, and Cities, and Armies; it is
pleasant to an Hungry Man to see Bread, to the Thirsty to see a Fountain of
Living Water, to a pursued Man to see a Castle. When Men's Eyes are opened, they
see things that are Wonderful. Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine Eyes, that I may
see wondrous Things in thy Law. David longed to see more. Psalm. 63.2. To see
thy Power and Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. The Sight of
Christ, is a Glorious Sight: So the Sight of the Mercy and Faithfullness of
God; no Worldly Objects are to be compared unto them. It is worth the while to
go through a great deal of Trouble, for a Sight of Jesus Christ. The Angel
sends Word to the Disciples, that Christ would go before them into Galilee, and
there they should see him. Math. 28.7. It is worth the while to take a great
Journey for a Sight of Christ. Phil. 3.10. Paul's Heart was in it, that he
might know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
Sufferings. When the Wise Men saw the Star that directed to Christ, they
rejoiced with exceeding great Joy. Math. 2.10. The Sight of Jesus Christ is a
beautiful Vision. The very Reason why Mortal Man cannot see God and live, as it
is said, Exodus 33.20. is because such a Sight of God as Saints have in Heaven,
would occasion so much Joy, as would be outbidding to the Nature of Man. The
greatest Delight of Man, must needs lie in the Exercise of his superior
Faculties, Understanding and Will, upon the most glorious Objects. It is a must
pleasant Thing, to enjoy spiritual Light.

2. It Sanctifies the Heart. You complain of an hard Heart, a rebellious Heart,
a worldly, and an envious and stubborn Heart, but the opening of your Eyes will
help you. The Sight of God and Jesus Christ has a great deal of power to
Sanctify you. When you see God, you will trust in him. Psalm. 9.10. They that
know thy Name, will put their trust in thee. The reason that Men are so
backward to trust in Christ, is not because they know themselves to be so bad,
but because they are Ignorant of God and of Christ. When they see God and
Christ, they see the Foundation of Faith; what abundant Encouragement there is
to put their trust in him. When they see God, they will love him. The
Excellency of God has a magnetic Power to draw the Heart. Before they see him,
they cannot love him, whatever Arguments are used with them: and when they see
him, they will love him, whatever Temptations they have. Psalm. 91.14. Because
he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on
high, because he has known my Name. If your Sight be recovered, you will see
the reason of all spiritual Duties. When Men see the hatefulness of Sin, they
will hate it. The knowledge of God will make Men Upright. Psalm. 36.10. Stretch
forth thy loving Kindness to them that know thee, and thy Faithfullness to the
Upright in Heart. Then Men are Upright, when they serve God for his own sake,
and that they will do when they see his Worthiness.

3. It secures Eternal Life. If a Man be secure of Eternal Life, that will make
Afflictions easy; that will make Enjoyments more sweet; that will make Duties
pleasant; that will make Death Comfortable and Profitable, and if Men's Sight be
recovered, Eternal Life will. They will not always have the Knowledge of it,
but they will be in a safe Condition. Blind Men will not find the way to Heaven;
but when their Eyes are opened, they will see the way. They that have the Light
of Grace, shall have the Light of Glory. The Light of Grace and Glory are of
the same kind, though not in the same degree. Those that God makes spiritually
Wise, are Wise unto Salvation. They that have this Vision will not Perish. If
God shows Men the Path of Life, they will be brought into his Presence, where
there is fullness of Joy, and to his right Hand, where are Pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16.11. Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that
gets Understanding. Joh. 17.3. This is Eternal Life to know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

3 USE. Of Examination, whether you have received this benefit of the Gospel.
You are Thankful to God for the Gospel, and many times in your Prayers bless
God for it. And you pity those that have not the Gospel, but what are you the
better for it? Have you recovered your Sight? You have got abundance of
Knowledge by it, and are able to Discourse very Understandingly about it. You
increase continually in Rational Knowledge; this may be, and yet you may remain
spiritually Blind. There are but a few that are recovered. There are but a few
that are bodily Blind, and there be but a few but are spiritually Blind. It may
be you have Illuminations, and yet are Blind.

Signs are, 1. Common Illumination is affecting, but when the Eyes are opened,
Men are convinced. Common Illuminations do sometimes greatly affect. Men are
glad and taken with them, and they are Thankful. Math. 13.20. He that received
the Seed into stony Places, is he that hears the Word, and anon with Joy
receives it. Gal. 4.15. Where is then the Blessedness you spoke of? for I bear
you Record, that if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own
Eyes, and have given them to me. But these Illuminations don't convince, them
of the Truth of the Gospel, and of the sureness of the Grace of God: But when
Men's Eyes are opened, they are convinced: They are indeed affected, but that is
not all; but God teaches and shows them the Path of Life. Psalm. 16.11. They are
taught of God, and learn the truth of the Gospel. Joh. 6.45. They have the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. Ephesians. 1.17. The Father that is in Heaven
reveals Christ to them. Math. 16.17. The Word comes with a Divine Authority,
and they receive it as it is indeed the Word of God. 1 These. 2.13. They don't
see a probability, but a certainty in the Doctrines of the Gospel.

2. Common Illumination discovers one particular Thing, but when the Eyes are
opened, they see all the Foundations of Faith. In common Illuminations, they
see sometimes that God is Gracious. Sometimes they have a sense that Heaven is
Glorious. Luke 14.15. One that sat at Meat, when he heard those Things, said,
Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God. Sometimes that there
is a great Savior. Math. 13.20. Anon with Joy he receives it. That the
Tidings of Salvation are Pleasant. Gal. 4.15. But when their Eyes are opened,
it is Light all about them. Then they see that there is an Eternal God; that he
is of free Grace, and that his Word is Faithful; that Christ Jesus is the Son
of God, the only Mediator; that he has satisfied Justice; that he is able to
save to the uttermost; that he invites the Soul; that in him all Fullness
dwells. The Soul is satisfied as to the whole Doctrine of the Gospel. He cannot
think of all things at once, but he sees that this is the very way of
Salvation. He knows God and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. He receives the whole
Gospel. The Light that he has, is the Light of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4.

3. Common Illumination many times works a Confidence, that works a Dependence.
When Men have common Illuminations, they don't work in that way to make them
rely on the faithful Offers of God, and roll themselves on Christ. But on that
Occasion they say, God is theirs, and Christ is theirs, and they promise
themselves Heaven; but they don't accept the Calls and Invitations of the
Gospel, and relinquish all their own Righteousness, and trust in Christ, as
offered to them, but catch at some Promise as if it were theirs. They are
Thankful to God, but when the Eyes of Men are opened, they see an offer of
Mercy and accept of it. They see God calling and inviting them: They see an
open Door set before them, and that God is sending a Message of Mercy to them.
He shows them the way of Life, and the proposals of Mercy, and they consent to
the Invitation, and close with God's Proposal, and yield Obedience to the
Command of the Gospel. They see an Offer made to them, and they are required to
receive it, and the Will is bound to close with it, as that which is Safe and
Glorious. There is an Assent of the Understanding, and a Consent of the Will.
The Man relies on Christ, as a Man would venture his Life in a strong Castle.
So he makes Christ his Refuge. He flees for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope
that is set before him, Heb. 6.18. After this, he reflects on what he has seen
and done, and thence there arises a Confidence. The Call of God works first
Dependence, and afterward a Confidence. Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God.

4. Common Illumination sometimes makes Men to depend in part on Christ; but
when the Eyes are opened, they depend upon him alone. Men receive some common
Illuminations, and they think that Christ is sufficient for such Penitent
Humble Sinners as they, and so they depend partly upon themselves, and partly
upon Christ. They trust partly in the Law, and partly in the Gospel. They
depend partly on Works, and partly on Christ. The Apostle declares against
that; he says, Romans 11.6. If by Grace, then it is no more of Works: Otherwise
Grace is no more Grace. If of Works, it is no more Grace: Otherwise Work is no
more Work. Such as have only common Illuminations, take their first
Encouragement from themselves, and hope that the Righteousness of Christ will
make up their Defects. But those whose Eyes are opened, do trust in Christ
alone. Phil. 3.3. We Rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the
Flesh. They see a sufficiency in Christ Jesus, and make that, together with
God's Grace and Faithfulness, the whole Foundation of their Faith. Romans 4.5.
They believe on him that justifies the Ungodly. They have no Dependence on any
thing of their own.

4. USE. Of Advice to those whose Eyes are opened, to use this Mercy well. God
has blessed the Gospel for the recovery of your Sight, and thereby has laid a
Foundation of Blessedness in you. God has made you more Happy, than many Men
that make a greater Figure in the World than you do. In the Day that God opened
your Eyes, he opened a Door to you to such Blessedness, as cannot enter into
the Heart of Man to Conceive of. He has bestowed many other Enjoyments upon
you, but they are not to be compared with this. Let it be your care to use this
Mercy well.

Particularly, 1. Don't Darken your Eyes again Indeed you cannot put out your
own eyes. 1 John 2.27. The Anointing that you have received of him, abides in
you. Yet you may much Darken your own Eyes. There be two ways wherein you may
do it: One is by carnal Reasoning. Sometimes Men become Vain in their
Imaginations, and so their foolish Hearts are darkened. Sometimes they argue
from the greatness of their Sins; as if their Sins were too big or too many for
God to Pardon. They limit the Holy One of Israel, as if their Sins did exceed
God's Mercies; as if God could not find in his Heart to overcome their
Provocations; or as if Christ's Blood were not of Value enough to expiate their
Guilt. Sometimes they argue from the Justice of God, as if he must avenge
himself upon them; as if their Sufferings would give better Satisfaction to the
Law, than the Sufferings of Christ: As if it would be a deluding of the Law to
acquit them on the account of the Death of Christ. Sometimes they argue from
the greatness of Heavenly Glory, as if it were too much for God to be willing
to bestow. Sometimes they argue from the fewness of those that are saved, as if
there were no likelihood that they should be of that Number; and so they set
their uncertain Reasonings against the infallible Word of God. They set
Appearances and Conjectures against the sure Word of Prophecy. The other way
wherein Men Darken their Eyes, is by Unbelief. God Encourages them to come to
Christ, but they don't know that it is God that speaks: The Word does not come
with a divine Authority upon their Heart. They are not sensible that the Words
are the Words of a Faithful God. They don't know the certainty of what is
spoken. Christ upbraids his Disciples for this, Luke 24.25. O Fools, and slow
of Heart to believe those Things that the Prophets have Written. They don't
know what to make of the Encouragement of the Word. They loose the sense of the
Glorious Faithfulness of God, who speaks in his Word. Unbelief brings a Mist
before the Eyes. You must maintain the exercise of Faith, as David when he
says, The Words of the Lord are pure Words; like Silver tried in a Furnace of
Earth, purified seven Times. Psalm. 12.6.

2. Get your Sight increased. As the Morning Light increases more and more unto
the perfect Day, so you must be careful to grow in spiritual Knowledge. 2 Pet.
3.18. Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
And there be two ways of increasing it, both hinted in Ephesians. 1.17. That God
would give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of
him. One way is spiritual Reasoning and Arguing. There be many Arguments
whereby we may be established in those Truths that are the Foundation of Faith.
Many things that clear it up, that the Scriptures are indeed the Word of God;
that Christ Jesus is the Son of God; that his Sufferings satisfy for our Sins;
that we shall certainly be saved in a way of Beliving; by Musing and
Considering these things, we may be further established in the Truth, and be
confirmed in the belief of the way of Salvation by Christ. As carnal Reasonings
strengthen Unbelief, so Spiritual Reasonings do strengthen Faith. The other way
is by special Discoveries. This is called Revelation: Not such as the Prophets
had, but sometimes the Spirit of God breaths in with much Light into the Heart;
the Curtain is drawn, the Vail is laid aside, and there be raised Acts of
Faith, whereby he sees both the Reality and Glory of Gospel Truths. Sometimes
God discovers, that God delights to save Sinners by Christ; that he is free to
accept the Soul; that Christ is now in Glory at the right Hand of God; that the
Promises of the Gospel are True and Faithful. This David has respect to, Psalm.
119.18. Open thou mine Eyes, and I shall behold wondrous Things in thy Law. The
Sun of Righteousness does appear to them, with Healing in his Wings. Mal. 4.2.

3. Walk as Children of the Light. This is required, Ephesians. 5.8. You were
sometimes Darkness, but now are you Light in the Lord: Walk as Children of the
Light. God may well expect it that you should walk according to the Light that
he has given you. If Things be indeed as you have seen them, what manner of
Persons ought you to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? If God be
Glorious as you have seen, Powerful, Merciful, Faithful, then you should trust
in him in all your Difficulties, and not give way to a discouraged Spirit, but
be Rejoicing in the Covenant of God. If Jesus Christ be an All-sufficient
Savior as you have seen, you should not be afraid to put your trust in him,
but should Rejoice in him, when you have the sense of your own Unworthiness and
Sinfulness. If God be such a Glorious Portion as you have seen, you should be
weaned from the World, nor have a craving, violent Spirit after outward
Enjoyments, like Men that have nothing else; but you should have an Heavenly
Conversation, and be taken up in the Consideration of the Glory of another
World, and be thirsting after the Presence of God. If God be so great and
Glorious as you have seen, you should be very obedient to his Voice. If there
be such wonderful Grace in the Gospel, you should be quickened to all Duties of
Obedience, deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; and live Godly, Righteously and
Soberly in this present World. It is a great Provocation to God, for Persons
whose Eyes have been opened, to carry as others. 1 These. 4.5. Not in the Lust
of Concupiscence, as other Gentiles that know not God. God was Angry with
Solomon, because he forsook the Lord that had appeared unto him twice. 1 Kin.
11.9. spiritual Knowledge leads to spiritul Practices. The Doctrines of the
Gospel do greatly advance Holiness.

4. Seek to God, that the Eyes of others may be opened. When a Man's Eyes are
opened, he should long that the Eyes of many others should be opened upon a
double Account. One is, that the Gloriousness of God and Christ Jesus may be
seen. It is a sorrowful Thing, that Men should have such low Thoughts of God
and Jesus Christ, who deserve so much Esteem. Men have dishonorable Thoughts
of them, and cast a great deal of Contempt upon them, without any Reason. It is
greatly to be desired, that they judge aright of them. The other is the
Experience that he has had, what a miserable Condition Men are in that are
Blind. Some are Sottish and Senceless: Some are Tormented in Conscience, and
both sorts in danger of eternal Ruin. These Considerations should make such a
Man to be in Pain for others, for Children and Neighbors: And there is great
Reason to be imploring of God, that he would open their Eyes. There is a great
deal of Encouragement in the many Promises that God has made. There be Promises
to Christ, and Promises to the Church, and Promises to Ministers. These Things
should be pleaded with God. God has done great Things in Answer to the Prayers
of his People. It is a Thing pleasing to God, that his People have this upon
their Hearts. Let this be often remembered when you come before God, that the
Preaching of the Gospel may not be in Vain, but that many among us, Children
and others, may recover their Sight; as the Prophet Elisha Prays for his
Servant. 2 Kin. 6.17. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord I pray thee open his
Eyes that he may see.

The Sixth Sermon.
Luke 4.18. To set at Liberty them that are Bruised.


HERE is another Metaphor, whereby the Service of Christ is set forth. Where
note, 1. Whom he is to help. viz. Them that are Bruised. In Isaiah, it is them
that are Bound. Men that are Bound with Fetters, are many times hurt and galled
with them. Psalm. 105.18. Speaking of Joseph, the Psalmist says, Whose Feet they
hurt with Fetters, he was laid in Iron.

2. How he is to help them. viz. By setting them at Liberty. In Isaiah it is,
the opening of the Prison. He is to free them from their Bonds; to give Liberty
and Enlargement unto them. In Isaiah he is said, to Preach the opening of the
Prison; but here he is said to set at Liberty. So that he does not only offer
Liberty, but by the Gospel effect the Liberty of them that are Bruised.

DOCTRINE. The Gospel does set many at Liberty that were in the Condition of
Prisoners. Many Men are not the better for the Gospel, but the worse; but it is
very Profitable unto some. They are naturally in a very sorrowful Condition;
they are like Prisoners: But by the Gospel they are set at Liberty. Such
ungodly Men as are Dead, are in Prison. 1 Pet. 3.19. And such ungodly Men as
are Living, are in Prison also. But God by the Gospel, has set many of this
latter sort at Liberty. Some that are sensible that they are in such a
Condition, take other ways to get their Liberty, but they will miss their
Expectation. But by the Gospel, many Prisoners have been set at Liberty. Isai.
42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the
Gentiles; to open the blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison,
and them that sit in Darkness, out of the Prisonhouse.

Q. How are Sinners in the Condition of Prisoners?

A. They are Guilty of many Crimes.

When Men are shut up in Prison, it is generally either for Debts or for
Crimes; so ungodly Men are very Criminal: They are Transgressors of the Law;
they came Sinners into the World. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity,
and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. And as they grow up, they become more
Guilty. They are Guilty of Sins of Omission, and Commission: Of Sins in
Thought, Word and Deed. They are Guilty of Sins by Perpetration, and by
Participation with others: Sins against the Law, and against the Gospel. They
are very Guilty, and liable to the Condemnation of the Law. They have been led
away with Temptation. The Corruptions of their Hearts work very Powerfully in
them. Romans 7.5. When we were in the Flesh, the Motions of Sins which were by
the Law, did work in our Members to bring forth Fruit unto Death. And though some
of them are under great Restraints, yet their Hearts are Fountains of Iniquity.
Job 15.16. How much more Filthy and Abominable is Man, who Drinks in Iniquity
like Water? Jer. 6.7. As a Fountain casts out its Waters, so she casts out
her Wickedness. Men's Sins are more than the Hairs of their Heads. The most
moral Man is far from being Innocent. God has a great deal to charge upon
them. They Sin daily, and their Iniquities are infinite.

2. They are reserved to Judgment. The Evil Angels are reserved in the Chains
of God's Providence to the Judgment of the great Day. Jud. 6. As Prisoners are
kept in Durance, that they may be forth coming at the Assizes, so these Men are
bound over unto Judgment, and preserved that they may appear when God calls for
them. They are preserved from Annihilation, and kept by God unto that time.
They are not discharged from their Guilt, but God has them in hold, that they
may be brought forth when he calls for them. Some of them could be glad to be
turned into their first nothing, but that will not be allowed. They are kept by
the Providence of God, ready to appear at God's Tribunal at the first Call. Men
that are kept in Prison, are ready to be brought forth at any time when the
Judge calls for them. They are not suffered to wander about that they cannot be
found; so these Men are kept in a readiness to make their Appearance. There is
an appointed Time to them, Job 7.1. God calls for some of them in younger Days,
Job 36.14. They Die in Youth, and their Life is among the Unclean. And some in
elder Days, they are never to seek, God has them always in hold.

3. They are secured from making their Escape. Prisoners are wont to be in
Chains, Psalm. 105.18. He was laid in Iron. So Peter, Act. 12.6, 7. Peter was
Sleeping between two Soldiers, bound with two Chains. -- And his Chains fell
off his Hands. So Paul and Silas were secured, their Feet were made fast in the
Stocks, Act. 16.24. So Sinners are under such Bonds, that they cannot make
their Escape. The Law binds them over to Punishment. 1 Cor. 15.56. The Sting of
Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. And they cannot free
themselves from that Obligation. If they could satisfy the Law, they might be
at Liberty, but they cannot. Wealth will not do it. Math. 16.26. What shall be
given in Exchange for the Soul? Their Works will not do it. Romans 3.20. By the
Works of the Law shall no Flesh living be justified in the sight of God.
Calamities and Sufferings will not do it. They are but the beginning of Sorrws.
Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death. And they are fettered with their own
Corruptions. There is a way to escape, if they could believe in Christ they
should be delivered; but they are shut up in Unbelief, Romans 11.32. They are
like a Man bound down, that he cannot stir Hand or Foot. They are not able to
make use of their Opportunity. They are wholly under the Power of their
Corruption. Joh. 5.44. How can you Believe?

4. They are committed to a Jailor. Prisoners are committed to the Custody of
the Keeper of the Prison. Genesis 39.21. And the Jailor many times keeps the
Prisoners at Work. Judge. 16.21. Samson did Grind in the Prisonhouse. And many
times he uses them hardly, Act. 16.24. So ungodly Men are committed to Satan as
their Jailor, and he is suffered to Tyrannize over them. He keeps them hard at
Work, and Rules over them. He is a Prince over them. Ephesians. 2.2. They are
Servants to him. He makes some of them to walk in ways of Debauchery. They Lie,
and Steal, and commit Whoredom. He makes others Drudges to the World and their
Pride. He keeps them busy at Work, and many times Afflicts them, and Frights
them with Imaginations of Poverty and Disgrace, and Losses, and Calamities; and
if they are laboring after their Escape, he Torments them. Sometimes he
Terrifies them that their Day is past; that they have committed the
unpardonable Sin; that God has given them up to hardness; that if they
entertain Convictions, and mind eternal Things, they will be Distracted, or so
Distressed, that they will be forced to lay violent Hands on themselves.

Q. How does the Gospel set them at Liberty?

A. 1. The Discoveries of the Gospel do encourage Sinners to accept of the
Liberty that is offered. God is offering Liberty in the Gospel; and these
offers by the Blessing of God, do prevail upon many Souls. 1 Cor. 4.15. I have
Begotten you through the Gospel. Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us by the
Word of Truth. Men are wont to make many Objections against the Calls of God;
but when they have the spiritual Discovery of the Gospel, it prevails upon the
Heart, and conquers all the Opposition of the Soul, and the Men come to Christ.
Whenever Men are convinced of the Glory of Christ, and of the Truth of the
Gospel, their Will is gained, and they are not afraid to come to Christ. Joh.
6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me.
There is Encouragement enough in the Gospel, and when their Eyes are opened to
see it, they cannot tarry away from Christ. They will come without any delay.
They see that they may safely come. The Gospel banishes the Fears that they
were under. When they see the Gospel, they prize Christ; they love to come; it
pleases them to depend upon him. Then they are afraid to stay away, and
neglect their Opportunity any longer, they should be Enemies to their own Souls
if they should. Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, to
every one that believes.

2. The Sentence of the Gospel does discharge them from their Bonds. When the
Sinner has accepted the offer, he has performed the Terms of the Covenant, and
now the Sentence of Condemnation is taken off. Romans 8.1. There is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The Debt is cancelled, and all
his Sins are pardoned. Act. 10.43. And to him give all the Prophets Witness,
that through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of
Sins. The Law looks on him as Innocent; the Man is brought into an estate of
Justification and Adoption. Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace
who God. Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, gave he power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. They are declared Heirs of
Life, Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life. Now the
Man has Security under God's Hand, that he shall be saved. His Obligation to
suffer the Wrath of God is taken off. The Word of God gives Judgment for him,
that he is not Guilty. God don't deny to Pardon him. God don't leave the Matter
in Suspense whether he shall be pardoned or not. He don't defer to do it, but
in the same Minute gives him an Acquittance from all his Guilt. Act. 13.39. All
that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. And then God delivers them from the power of
Satan, they are no longer under his Custody; he is not their Jailor; he Tempts
them still, but they are not in his power as they were. Satan is laid under
greater Restraints than formerly, and not suffered to Tyrannize as he did. They
are committed to the Guardianship of the holy Angels. Hebr. 1.14. Are they not
all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister to them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation?

1 USE. Of Reproof to those that don't make this Use of the Gospel, that they
may be set at Liberty. Some take Notice of their Opportunity, and are
bestirring of themselves that they may be set at Liberty. They are not
discouraged, though they find Difficulties in the way, and are sensible of the
uncertainty of the Event, but take a great deal of Pains. If they should obtain
it, they will be happy Men; but this is not the Case with all: Some don't
regard to make Improvement of their Time: They are very much to blame. It is a
great Privilege to be set at Liberty. This was Purchased with a great Price, as
he says, Act. 22.28. With a great Sum obtained I this Freedom. Christ Jesus was
Anointed of God to Preach this. Isai. 61.1. But some Men don't make Use of the
Gospel to get Liberty, but make a very contrary Use of it.

1. Some make Use of it only to get Notional Knowledge. Some read the
Scriptures, hearken to the Preaching of the Gospel, study the Controversies
that are in the World about Matters of Religion, that they may get Notional
Knowledge; and they are puffed up with that. 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffs up.
They take delight to know what Men say, to be able to Discourse about those
Things, and to dispute against Errors. They love to be able to give an Account
what one Party and the other has to say for their Opinions. They are like the
Greeks that sought after Wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.22. They are not willing to be
Ignorant of the Scriptures: They are willing to see the Reason of what is
taught, and to be able to vindicate their Profession, but don't regard to get
this Liberty. They neglect the great design of the Gospel: They don't answer
God's end in sending the Gospel. Can they imagine that God's design was to fill
the Heads of Men with Notions, and to gratify an inquisitive Humor? Surely
God's design was to deliver Men from Misery. These Men neglect that which makes
the Gospel Profitable: They cast off the care of the Welfare of their Souls,
and neglect blessed Advantages to be Happy. It is just as if a sick Man should
dispute about the Composition of a Medicine that will Cure him, and neglect to
take it and so die. Or as if a Man should Labor to satisfy his Curiosity about
the Dimensions and Materials of a Castle, and neglect to put himself into it,
and so Perish. All those that don't receive the Gospel will surely Perish. Heb.
2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

2. Some make Use of it to harden their Hearts in Sin. This is the way of many
Men; they hear that God has a design of Grace; that he has sent Christ to
suffer for our Sins; that great Sinners may be pardoned; that the Threatenings
are only Conditional in case of final Impenitency; and they take occasion to
harden their Hearts in Sin, Jud. 4. They turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness. They think there is no great danger; they are not afraid of the
Justice and Jealousy of God, because he offers Pardon to them; they think that
he loves them, because he freely offers Pardon to them; they think there is not
much Evil in Sin, because God offers Pardon, they think he will continue so to
do, and he will wait upon them, and so they harden their Hearts, and are bold
to indulge themselves in Sin, and in no have to turn to God. This is
unreasonable. David says, There is forgiveness with God, that he may be feared.
Psalm. 130.4. But these Men say, There is forgiveness with God, therefore he is
not to be feared. But though there is a way of Salvation, yet many that hear
it, are never the better for it. Multitudes go from under the Light of the
Gospel to the Blackness of Darkness. 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost. It is a Savor of Death unto Death to many Men. 2
Cor. 2.16. The Mercy of God will not Affront his Justice. Men shall have no
occasion to Reproach that, Exodus 34.7. Though he is Gracious and Merciful, yet
he will by no means clear the Guilty. These Men turn the Gospel into Poison to
them; and if they continue to harden their Hearts in Sin, they will as surely
Perish, as if there were no Gospel, as if Christ had never come into the World.
What will the Gospel signify to them that reject it? The Blood of Christ will
not Heal, where it is not applied.

2 USE. See how great a benefit the Gospel is to many Men. Indeed there be a
great many Men that are not the better for it; they have bought Bibles, and
have Read often in them, and heard the Gospel preached, but they are not the
better, but the worse for it. It had been better for them, if they had never
heard a Sermon, never seen one Leaf of the Bible, if they had lived in Turkey.
Math. 11.22. It will be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the Day of
Judgment, than for them. But it is very beneficial to others: It is more
advantage to them, than all the Wealth of the World would be. They are set at
Liberty thereby. Luke 4.18. It sets at Liberty those that were Bruised. Such as
were in the Condition of Prisoners.

1. They are delivered from the danger of Condemnation. Woe to those Men that
shall be condemned at the last Day. They shall be cursed with a Witness. You
have the Sentence, Math. 25.41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and, his Angels. But these Men are out of the reach of
that Curse. They are in danger of some smaller Calamities, Pains, Sickness,
Reproaches, Losses, but not of Condemnation. The Day of Judgment will be a
Glorious and Comfortable Day to them. That is a time of Refreshing from the
Presence of the Lord. There shall not be one Hair of their Head singed, nor the
smell of Fire pass upon them. There is abundant Security that they shall not be
Condemned. They are made meet for Heaven; they are become the Children of God:
They are interested in the Righteousness of Christ: They have the Covenant of
Grace to secure them: Death will do them no hurt; they shall be absolved in the
Day of Judgment. Joh. 5.24. They shall not enter into Condemnation, but are
passed from Death to Life.

2. From the Expectation of Condemnation. Many Men are in a dreadful Condition,
because of the Expectation of Condemnation. They are a Terror to themselves.
Job 15.21. A dreadful Sound is in their Ears. They are under an Expectation to
hear Christ saying, Depart from me, I know you not. They are afraid by Day and
by Night; afraid when they Work and when they Eat. This takes away the
sweetness of all their Enjoyments: Nothing that they have is any great Comfort
to them. But those Men that are set at Liberty by the Gospel, are delivered
from these Expectations: They have their Hours of Temptation, and long for more
Assurance, but their Consciences are healed. Romans 5.1, 2. Being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we
have access by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and Rejoice in hope of
the Glory of God. They have a great deal of Comfort under their Afflictions,
under this Consideration, that God has delivered them from Wrath to come. And
sometimes they can say as Job, Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that though Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh I shall see
God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, etc.

3. They are delivered from Satan's Government. He is permitted to Afflict
them, and Tempt them, and cast in fiery Darts, yet his Government is taken
away, he is cast out. They are rescued out of his Hands, turned from the power
of Satan, Act. 26.18. They are delivered out of the Kingdom of Darkness, that
is Satan's Kingdom. Col. 1.13. And God will tread Satan under their Feet
shortly. Satan is under greater Restraints than he was, and they are fortified
against his Temptations more than they were; and they are committed to the care
of the holy Angels, who are doing many good Offices for them. Heb. 1.14. They
are ministering Spirits to them.

3 USE. Of Examination, whether you be set at Liberty by the Gospel. Some Men
need not trouble themselves to make any narrow search, for it is a plain Case
that they are not set at Liberty; but there are two sorts that need to examine
this Matter. Some Men have some Fears and Jealousies of themselves, yet have
preponderating Hopes: And some Men are not without Hopes, yet have
preponderating Fears. It concerns both these sorts accurately to examine the
Thing. Men may hear the Gospel, yet not be set at Liberty by it. Many that hear
the Word deceive themselves. They may have a large understanding of the Gospel,
yet not be set at Liberty by it. Men may be affected with it, yet not be set at
Liberty by it. Men may be stirred up to reform their Lives, yet not be set at
Liberty. There be but a few comparatively that are set at Liberty by it,
therefore examine.

Signs, 1. Have you seen the Divine Authority of the Gospel? God is said to be
the Author of the Gospel, and therefore it is called the Gospel of God. Romans
1.1. Separated unto the Gospel of God. It is established by the Faithfulness of
God. The Declarations of it are Gods, and the Promises of it are Gods; and you
are able to evince it by several Arguments that God is the Author of it; but
have you seen the Divine Authority of it? Men never see it to be infallibly
true and certain, until they see the Divine Authority of it. They cannot indeed
believe it, whatever Persuasion they have of it, till they hear the Voice of
God in it; then they see the Divine Authority of it, when they receive it not
as the Judgment of Wise and Good Men, but as it is indeed the Word of God; and
they are convinced that it is the Word of the Faithful God. 1 These. 2.13. Ye
received it as it is indeed the Word of God, which works effectually in you
that believe. Joh. 5.25. The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God and
Live. When the Authority of God in the Gospel is seen, then Christ appears
Glorious and promises Certain.

2. Have you felt a divine Power with the Gospel? There is a divine Power going
with the Gospel to some Men. 1 Cor. 1.23. Chirst is the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God. Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the power of God unto Salvation. The Gospel where it sets Men at Liberty, has a
Power to draw Men to Christ. Some Men complain that they are not able to come
to Christ; they would do it but they have not Liberty; but indeed there is a
Power to draw the Heart: It has a prevailing Power over all Fears and
Objections. Joh. 6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me. If the Arm of the Lord be revealed Men will believe. Isai.
53.1. When Men's Eyes are opened to understand Christ and his Death and
Resurrection, those Doctrines come with Power upon the Heart. Phil. 3.10. That
I may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection. 1 Pet. 1.3. He has begotten
us to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead. So there is a
regenerating Power in the Gospel, it does powerfully dispose their Hearts to
love and fear God; and they will hate their Sins, and cast off the Works of
Darkness, and live all their Days in a way of Obedience.

4 USE Of Exhortation. Labor in it, that you may be set at Liberty by the
Gospel. If there were no Hope of being set at Liberty, it would be a vain Thing
to strive in it; but though it be Hopeless for Men that are damned, yet it is
not Hopeless for you. It is uncertain whether you will ever attain Liberty, but
yet there is Hope of it. Sometimes the Thing appears very Dark to you; but
whatever Difficulty there be in it, yet it is possible. You have taken several
Methods that you might be set at Liberty, but hitherto you have been
disappointed; and indeed you must never expect it by any other Means but only
by the Gospel. Labor therefore that you may be set at Liberty by that. You say
your present Condition is Doleful, and you dread to continue in it, but there
is Hope of Deliverance by the Gospel. Christ Jesus has purchased Deliverance;
he has paid a sufficient Price for your Redemption. He gave his Life a Ransom
for many. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a Price. And God offers Deliverance
to you through him. Isai. 61.1. He Proclaims the opening of the Prison to them
that are Bound. And God has promised that some shall be set at Liberty by him.
His Work is, To bring out the Prisoners from Prison, and them that sit in
Darkness out of the Prisonhouse. Isai. 42.7. Yea, many Persons have been set
at Liberty Formerly and Laterly by the Gospel. There has been a great deal or
Experience of the Efficacy of the Gospel this way. Col. 1.13. He has delivered
us from the power of Darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son. Let then this be your Care, that you may be set at Liberty by the Gospel.

DIRECTIONS, 1. Don't seek slightily. This is the fault of many Persons,
intimated, Luke 13.24. Many seek, and are not able to enter. That is complained
of, Isai. 64.7. There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
Some Men seek, but it is with too much indifferency of Spirit. The Violent take
the Kingdom of Heaven by force. Math. 11.12. But many Men are dull in their
Prayers; they are not Earnest and Importunate with God; they are not Diligent
in Reading and Hearing, that they may learn Advantages and take them; that they
learn their Disadvantages and avoid them. They don't watch against Temptations;
they comply with some Practices that are an hindrance to them: They excuse
themselves many times from that which might promote their Conversion. Though
they desire Conversion, yet their Hearts are much upon the World; they lay too
much weight on worldly Things; their Hearts are divided between God and Mammon.
It is no great Wonder that such Men don't obtain; lazy Seekings issue in
Disappointments: Lazy Seeking will not conquer Difficulties. Yea, when they
seek slightly, they provoke God to deny them. God may say, It will not break
their Hearts if they be denied. The Reason why many People seek after a slight
Manner, is because they are not much afraid of going to Hell. Either they want
a sense of the Dreadfullness of Damnation, or flatter themselves as if they
were in no eminent Danger of it. If they were thoroughly scared, they would be
more earnest in their Endeavors; Senselessness begets Slightliness. If their
Consciences were so wounded that they could not bear it, they would be more
violent in their Endeavors. The Pretense that they make for their Dullness,
is, that they are afraid there is no Hope for them; they fear their Case is
desparate, and that weakens their Hearts, and makes them to be dispirited; but
the true Reason is not that they want Hope, but they want Fears. If the
Terrors of Death did compass them about, and the Pains of Hell get hold upon
them, they would not say, There was a Lion in the Way, but would be forcing
their Way through all Discouragements and dark Appearances.

2. Don't imagine that you must get some Excellency to prepare you for Christ.
Men among us are principled in that, that Faith is the Condition of Salvation,
and the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, is the meritorious Cause of it: But they
imagine that they must get some Excellency to prepare them for Christ. They
think they may not come to him till they have make their Hearts better. They
must love God, and be sorry for their Sins, and make the Glory of God their
End. They must delight in Sabbaths, and so they are striving to make their
Hearts better, and if that were attained, they hope that God would not be so
Angry with them; he would be more inclinable to pity them, and save them
through Christ; and they labor to dress up their Hearts, and to get lovely
Qualifications to draw God's Heart toward them. They think it would be a
presumptious Thing for them to thrust themselves on Christ, and on the Grace of
God until they be better, and so they strive to make themselves better. They
hear that there must be Preparation for Christ, and that there must be a Work
of Humiliation before Faith, and they strive after such an Humiliation as has
an Excellency in it to commend them to God. They quite mistake Humiliation; but
if ever you would obtain Christ, you must see the badness of your own Hearts.
As long as you are reaching after any Excellency in your selves, you will
reject Christ. You must see your self Poor, Rev. 3.17. Before ever Paul came to
Christ, Sin revived and he died. Romans 7.9.

3. Don't give way to an objecting Spirit against the Gospel. We Read of some
that the Gospel was hid unto: That the God of this World had blinded their
Minds. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. And we Read, that Christ Crucified, was to the Jews a
Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. 1 Cor. 1.22. One great Thing
that keeps Men from Christ is, that Satan and their own Hearts are filling of
them with Objections against the Gospel. Sometimes they argue as if God had not
Mercy enough to Pardon their Sins. Sometimes they are arguing as if it were
uncertain whether the Scriptures were the Word of God. Sometimes they argue
from the differing Opinions that are in the World about the way of Salvation.
Sometimes they are stumbled at the Afflictions of those that believe on Christ.
Sometimes from the Falls of those that make a great Profession. Sometimes from
the outward Meaness and Sufferings of Jesus Christ. Such Reasonings of Heart,
are a great hindrance to Men's receiving of the Gospel. While Men entertain such
Objections, they strengthen their Unbelief, and keep themselves from a
preparedness to entertain the Gospel. Men that do indulge themselves in a Lust
of objecting against the Gospel, do hinder themselves from receiving it. Paul
describes Unbelievers, that they are Contentious, and obey not the Truth. Romans
2.8. Unbelief is naturally Blindness, but if Men give way to an objecting
Spirit, they thereby contract further degrees of Blindness, and are more
opposite to the entertaining of the Gospel.

The Seventh Sermon.
Luke 4.19. To Preach the acceptable Year of the Lord.


HERE is another Expression of the Service of Christ, viz. to give Notice of
the acceptable Year of the Lord. This seems to be an Allusion to the
Proclaiming of the Year of Jubilee, spoken of, Lev. 25.9. Then thou shall cause
the Trumpet of the Jubilee to Sound on the tenth Day of the seventh Month.

Q. What is to be understood by a Year?

A. Sometimes a Year is taken properly for that time wherein the Sun is
fullfilling its Course, 365 Days. But sometimes it is taken for an indefinite
Time, be it longer or shorter. Isai. 34.8. For it is the Day of the Lords
Vengeance, and the Year of Vengeance for the Controversy of Zion. So a Day is
sometimes taken for an indifinite Time. Isai. 2.12. For the Day of the Lord of
Hosts shall be upon every one that is Proud and Lofty.

Q. Why is it said to be the acceptable Year of the Lord?

A. Epiphanius takes it to be a Year wherein the Lord was acceptable unto Men,
and says, That the first Year of Christ's Ministry was pleasing, but afterward
they took Offense. But this is a Mistake; for they took Offense this very Day.
Luke 4.28, 29. All that were in the Synagogue when they heard these things,
were filled with Wrath, and and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and led
him unto the brow of the Hill whereon their City was Built, that they might
cast him down Headlong. But the Meaning is, The Year of God's good Pleasure and
Favor, with the respect to the Preaching the Gospel to the Poor, the healing
the Brokenhearted, etc. the clear Preaching of the Gospel, and the saving
Efficacy of it.

DOCTRINE. There are some special Seasons wherein God does in a remarkable
Manner revive Religion among his People. God does not always carry on his Work
in the Church in the same Proportion. As it is in Nature, there be great
Vicissitudes; there is Day and Night, Summer and Winter; the Moon Waxes and
Wanes, the Sea Flows and Ebbs, and as it is in the civil State, there is a time
of War and a time of Peace, times of Plenty and times of Scarcity, times of
Health and times of Sickness, so it is in the Church. There are sometimes when
the Hearts of Men are made hard. Isai. 63.17. Why have thou hardened our Hearts
from thy Fear, and made us to Err from thy ways? So there be times wherein
there is a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit of God, and Religion is in a more
flourishing Condition. Math. 11.12. From the Days of John the Baptist, the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force. Isai.
44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing on thy Offspring.
Ezekiel. 11.19. And I will give them one Heart, and I will put a new Spirit within
you, and will take the Heart of Stone out of your Flesh, and will give you an
Heart of Flesh. The like we have, Ezekiel. 36.26.

Q. How is it with a People when Religion is revived?

A. 1. Saints are quickened. It contributes much to the flourishing of Religion,
when Righteous Men flourish in Holiness, as it is foretold, Psalm. 92.12. The
Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree, they shall grow like the Cedar in
Lebanon. There be times of Temptation, when godly Men are in a flourishing
Condition. Math 25.5. While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and
slept. They grow Worldly, and Proud, and Formal, and don't maintain much of the
Life of Godliness. And there be times when their Hearts are lifted up in the
ways of God, as is said of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. When the Weak are as
David. When their Souls are in a prosperous Condition, and they are in gracious
Frames of Spirit, going on from Strength to Strength. Sometimes they run the
ways of God's Commandments, because God enlarges their Hearts. Psalm. 119.32. It
is as with them, 2 These. Your Faith grows exceedingly, and the Charity of
every one of you all toward each other abounds. This mightily increases
Holiness among a People.

2. Sinners are Converted. God makes the Gospel at times to be very Powerful.
So it was in the Primitive times, Romans 15.29. I am sure when I come unto you, I
shall come in the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ. The Gospel
was written for the End that Men might believe and be saved. Joh. 20.21. And it
is preached for that End; and sometimes God gives great Success to it. Act.
26.18. I send thee to open the blind Eyes, to turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. So John's Preaching was very much
blessed. Mal. 4.6. He shall turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, and
the Heart of the Children to their Fathers. This is Old and Young. There is a
mighty Change wrought in a little Time: They that were Dead, are made Alive,
and they that were Lost are Found. The Gospel is made a savor of Life to many.
Sometimes there is great Complaint for want of this. Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord, for
the godly Man cease; the Righteous fail from among the Children of Men. So
Isai. 53.1. Lord, who has believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the
Lord revealed? At other times the Number of Saints is greatly multiplied. Act.
9.31. The Churches were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and the
comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied.

3. Many that are not Converted, do become more Religious. When Israel went out
of Egypt, there was a mixed Multitude that went with them. So when God is
pleased to Convert a Number, there be many others that have a common Work of
the Spirit on their Hearts; they are affected with their Condition, Reform
their evil Manners, and engage in Religious Duties, and attain to considerable
Zeal, and are full of Religious Affections. So it was in Christ's time; there
was great flocking about him. So by the Preaching of John many were affected.
Luke 3.10, 12, 14. The People said, What shall we do? And the Publicans what
shall we do? And the Soldiers what shall we do? When God works savingly upon
some, it is frequent that others have common Illuminations, whereby great
Reformation is wrought, and the Reputation of Religion advanced, and People are
disposed to keep the external Covenant; and so much Wrath is prevented.

Concerning this Work of God in reviving Religion, you may observe these Four
Things.

1. Observation. This reviving is sometimes more General and sometimes more
Particular. It is more General, when it is throughout a Country, when in all
Parts of a Land there is a turning to God. That was prophesied of, Ezekiel. 36.25,
26, 27. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from
all your Filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you, etc. So it was
about Luther's time, when some Nations broke off from Popery, and embraced the
Gospel. Sometimes the Country does generally Decline. Gal. 3.1. O Foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? But
sometimes this reviving is more Particular, when in some particular Towns
Religion does revive and flourish. So 2 These. 1.3. Their Faith grew
exceedingly. Rev. 3.8. Thou have a little Strength, and have kept my Word, and
not denied my Name. At the same time Sardis and Laodicea were in a declining
Way: As sometimes it Rains upon one City, and does not Rain upon another. Am.
4.7. So it is with God's Raining Righteousness. There is many times a great
difference in the same Country; There is a Blast upon Corn in one part of a
Land, when it flourishes in another: So it is in this Case.

2. Observation. This reviving is sometimes of longer, and sometimes of shorter
Continuance. Sometimes Religion flourishes in a Country for a great many Years
together. So it did for twenty nine Years in the Days of Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles.
29.1. So when God pours out his Spirit, sometimes the Work continues many
Years. It began in John the Baptist's time, and continued several Years after
the Death of Christ. Math. 11.12. From the Days of John the Baptist until now,
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence. Compare this with Joh. 5.25. The time
is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God and
live. But sometimes it is for a less space. We have reason to think that there
was much of the converting Presence of God in Corinth for the space of a Year
and half. Act. 18.9, 10. Sometimes it is not so long. There is a great stirring
for a little time, and then it fails. Though the same outward Means continue,
yet there is not that Blessing going along with them.

3. Observation. God is very Arbitrary in this Matter. The People of God are
Praying and Waiting for this Mercy Hab. 3.2. O Lord, revive thy Work in the
midst of the Years, in the midst of Years make known; in Wrath remember Mercy.
Psalm. 85.6. Wilt not thou revive us again, that thy People may Rejoice in thee?
But God will take his own time for this Mercy. As the Angel stirred the Waters
of Bethesda, at some certain Seasons, and they waited for that time, Joh. 5.4.
so it is in this Case. There is a stated time for the rising of the Sun, and
for the setting of the same, and so for the return of the Spring; but the
returns of the Spirit are very Arbitrary. Sometimes God puts his People to wait
longer for them; sometimes not so long: It is in this Case, as it is with the
inward Consolations of godly Men. God takes his own time to Refresh their
Hearts, and Seal them up to the Day of Redemption. No Man can tell beforehand
when the Work of God shall Prosper in this or that Place. Act. 1.6, 7. It is
not for you to know the Times and the Seasons that the Father has put in his
own Power. When God hardens a People, none can tell how long that shall be.
Isai. 6.11. Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the Cities be
wasted without Inhabitant, and the Houses without Man, and the Land be utterly
desolate.

4. It is beyond us to determine what particular Design God has in it at this
or that time. When God Converts a considerable Number among a People, we know
that the design is to prepare them for Salvation. Act. 3.19. Repent and be
Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of Refreshing
shall come from the Presence of the Lord. But what his particular Design is in
that Work we cannot tell. It may possibly be to prepare the Place for some
great Temptation, that they may stand in a time of great Trial that he may
bring upon them; that they may be strengthened and not deny his Name: Or it may
be to prepare them for some Affliction that he intends to bring upon them, that
they may carry the better under it: Or it may be to lay a Foundation for Mercy
for the next Generation, that there may be a Number that may uphold the power
of Godliness in time to come. Or it may be to gather in his Elect, before he
removes the Means of Grace, and takes away his Ordinances.

1 USE. Learn from hence, that the Church of God is subject to great Changes.
Sometimes Religion flourishes, and sometimes it languishes. It is indeed so
with particular Souls: Sometimes they go on from Strength to Strength, and
their Hearts are lifted up in the ways of God. They are like Green Olive Trees
in the House of the Lord, they flourish like the Palm Tree, they grow like the
Cedar in Lebanon. And at other times they are in a slumbering Condition; they
are like sick Men that are unfit for Service, like Trees in Winter. So it is
with the Church of God; there is but little of the presence of God among them;
there is a great scarcity of Godly Men; Iniquity abounds, and the Love of many
waxes Cold. At other Times Religion is the great thing that is minded; Men are
taking the Kingdom of Heaven with Violence: They honor their Profession, and
their Light shines before Men, so that they Glorify their Father that is in
Heaven. Religion is in great Reputation, and there goes a great Blessing with
the Ordinances of God. It is as Cant. 2.11, 12, 13. The Winter is past, the
Rain is over and gone, the Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the singing
of Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; the
Fig Tree puts forth her Green Figs, and the Vines with the tender Grape give
a good Smell: Arise my Love, my fair one and come away.

1. When the Church is in a flourishing Condition, we must not lot upon it that
they will always be so. If it be a time of Plenty in a Land, yet the Case may
be much altered after a while, as it was in Egypt, Genesis 41.53, 54. If it be a
time of Health, there may be after a while a sickly Time. So if Religion
flourishes, it does not follow that it will always do so. There may come a
Time of Hardening: God may withdraw his Spirit: Many Temptations may arise:
There may be a Change of the Generation, and Religion may be buried in the
Graves of old Men. A Field that was wont to flourish with Corn, may come to be
overgrown with Thorns. A fruitful Land may be turned into Barrenness. Psalm.
107.34. Religion flourished in the time of Jehoshaphat, but it withered in the
time of Jehoram. It flourished in the time of Hezechiah, but it withered in the
time of Menasseh. Many times there rises up another Generation that know not
the Lord. Judge. 2.10. The People embrace corrupt Principles, and addict
themselves to bad Practices, and the Spirit of Religion is much lost in a
little Time.

2. When the Church is in a withering Condition, we must not conclude that it
will be always so. If Iniquity prevails much among a People, and they don't
regard the threatenings of God's Word, don't make Improvement of Judgments, but
go on every one in his own way, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, the
Gospel is made light of, and Profaneness and other Wickedness increase in the
Land, and the whole Head is Sick, and the whole Heart Faint, yet it does not
follow that it will be always thus, and that Religion will be lost, and the
Kingdom of God be taken from them. Sometimes it is so, but it does not from
thence appear that it will be so: All that are Sick don't Die; Religion may
recover; Holiness may get up again; there may be a flourishing Summer after an
hard Winter. Religion revived in the Time of Josiah, and in the Time of John
the Baptist. There may in a little time be another Face of Things; God may
raise up Instruments, and bless their Endeavors for the recovery of Religion.
Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. I will be as the Dew unto Israel; he shall grow as the Lilie,
and cast forth his Roots as Lebanon. His Branches shall spread, and his Beauty
shall be as the Olive Tree, and his Smell as Lebanon. They that dwell under his
Shadow shall return, they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine; the
Scent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon.

2 USE. We should beg of God, that Religion may revive in this Land. We have
Occasion to go before God for many Things: We have need to beg Peace, and
Health, and Plenty; but especially we have Reason to be earnest with God for
this Mercy. This is a Thing of greatest Consequence. When God pours out his
Spirit on his People, they are Days of great Mercy. Isai. 54.11, 12, 13. Oh
thou aflicted and tossed with Tempest, and not comforted, I will lay thy Stones
with fair Colors, and lay thy Foundations with Sapphires. I will make, thy
Windows of Agates, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of pleasant
Stones. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the Peace of thy Children. Hereby the Land is secured from Degeneracy. Many are
fitted hereby to keep God's Covenant: Hereby a Way is made for outward
Blessings: Hereby a Foundation is laid for Salvation. Men should not Pray for
this in a formal Way, but with Groanings that cannot be uttered. Psalm. 90.16,
17. Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children.
And let the Beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the Work
of our Hands, yea, the Work of our Hands establish thou it.

Consider, 1. There is great need of this. For want of this, the Land is
mightily Corrupted, and Sin prevails greatly in all Places, and the Profession
that Men make is dishonored. Strangers are ready to say, Is this the City that
Men call the Perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole Earth? As Lam. 2.15.
For the want of this, there is so much Injustice and Oppression, many are like
Birds and Beasts of Prey. For the want of this, there is so much Luxury and
Voluptuousness. For want of this, there is so much breach of Promise,
Sabbath-breaking and Profaneness. If Men fear God, it would not be so. Jer.
32.40. I will put my Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart away from
me. For want of this, there are so many Judgments. Judge. 2.10. And there arose
a Generation that knew not the Lord. And V. 14. And the Anger of the Lord was
hot against Israel. And for want of this, many lie in a perishing Condition.
Joh. 3.3. Except a Man be Born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

2. This is very acceptable to God. God delights to hear such Prayers. When Men
Pray for that that is more directly for his Glory, and for the good of Men's
Souls, God is pleased with it. When Solomon prayed for himself, That he might
have a Wise and Understanding Heart to Govern his People according to the Will
of God, the Saying pleased the Lord. So when Men Pray that God's Will may be
done in the Land, God is pleased therewith. This has been the Spirit of holy
Men. Many times People are earnestly crying for outward Mercies, and God
dispises their Prayers. Hos. 7.14. They have not cried unto me with their
Hearts, when they howled upon their Beds: They assemble themselves for Corn and
Wine, and they Rebel against me. But it is very acceptable to God, when his
People are seeking to him for this Mercy. This is the main Thing that he has
taught us to Pray for. Math. 6.9, 10. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. Paul begs Prayers on this
Account, 2 These. 3.1. Brethren Pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have
free Course and be glorified, even as it is with you.

3. There is Encouragement to beg this. There be Encouragements in the Word of
God. We have Promises, That Christ Jesus shall save many. Isai. 49.6. And
Religion had need to be revived, else few will be saved: But the Children of
the Kingdom will go into outer Darkness. Yea, there are Promises, That the
Spirit shall go with the Word. Isai. 59.1. And then the Word will Prevail. And
though these Promises don't speak particularly of this Land, and this Time, yet
they are Ground of Encouragement. They show that God will do such Things many
times for his Church, and that he would have them to plead for this Mercy.
There is Encouragement also in the Providence of God. He has many times
revived his Work in Israel formerly, and we should take Notice of God's Mercy
to our selves, once and again, and now a third Time.

3 USE. It is very Doleful, when Persons at such Times are overlooked. There
are special Times, when in particular Towns there is a Noise among the dry
Bones, and many are made sensible of their natural Condition, and are laboring
after a part in Christ; when one and another are enquiring what they must do to
be saved, and some have obtained Mercy; and at such times there be a Number of
senseless Sinners, that are not concerned about their Souls, that mind nothing
else but the World and their carnal Delights, while some are crying out, What
shall we do to be saved. They are enquiring what they shall Eat, and what they
shall Drink, and wherewithal they shall be Clothed. Such a Spirit is Doleful
at any time, much more at such a time when then there be a cloud of Witnesses,
a great many good Examples. They have as much need to seek as others; they have
provoked God as much as others; they are as near the Grave as others. For Men
to be regardless at such a time, is a great Sin, and a black Sign. When Men are
like the Barren Heath in the Wilderness, that sees not Good when Good comes,
it is much to be feared they will sleep the sleep of Death.

Especially 1. When they are of suitable Years. It is not so much wonder, if
young Boys and Girls that are Giddy and Inconsiderate, don't mind the state of
their Souls; Such Persons have little Knowledge and Experience; though they
have need to remember their Creator, yet Childhood and Youth are Vanity, and
they are not come to the Maturity of their Judgment. But it looks more Darkly,
when at such a time, Persons that are grown to Men's and Women's Estates, are not
thoughtful of their eternal Condition, when many of their Standing are going
toward Heaven. For them to be going toward Hell, it looks Awfully upon them,
as if God did design to cast them off. When God makes the Arrows of his Word
pierce the Hearts of others, and suffers them to fly over their Heads, it has
a look as if God had no design of Mercy to them. Math. 24.40. Then shall two be
in the Field, one shall be taken and the other left.

2. When they have been overlooked formerly at such a time. Some of these Men
have seen such Days formerly over and again. When others have been flowing to
the goodness of God, God has made many to press into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
they have not partook of that Mercy. The Prophet told him, 2 Kin. 7.2. Behold,
thou shall see it with thine Eyes, but thou shall not Eat thereof. So it has
been with these Men; the Opportunities have passed over, others have stepped in
and been healed when the Waters were troubled; but these have not been healed.
If it should be so again, there would appear very little hopes of them. If all
the Arrows are suffered to fly over their Heads, their Condition is exceeding
Dangerous. It is not very often that there is a great stirring of the Spirit in
one particular Town, and if Men have been overlooked twice or thrice at such
times, it is much to be feared what will become of them. There is considerable
Danger they will be Dead before there is such another Opportunity. Or if not,
yet past that Age wherein God usually Works savingly on Men.

3. When Men are left to a contrary Spirit. It is bad, that when some are
taking Pains for Salvation, that others are Idle. That when some are taking the
Kingdom of Heaven by Force, others are not concerned about their Souls whether
they Sink or Swim. But it may be, there be some that are like Ismael, that are
Scoffing at the Work of God; that make a Derision of the Convictions of the
Spirit. These Men are in the very high Way to Hell, and it would be no Wonder
if God should bring such Judgments on them, that all Israel might Fear and
Tremble. Such profane People are far from the Kingdom of God. They Laugh now,
but the time will come, that they shall Mourn for Sorrow of Heart, and Howl for
Vexation of Spirit. They have Cause to fear that it will be with them as it was
with Esau, Heb. 12.17. Afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing,
he found no Place for Repentance, though he sought it carefully with Tears.

3 USE. Persons should be very careful at such a time, that they do nothing to
quench the Spirit. As we must be careful that we don't provoke God to take away
his Spirit, so we must be careful that we don't quench the Spirit. 1 These.
5.19. Quench not the Spirit. As we may not quench it in our selves, so we may
not quench it in others. It is a singular Mercy that the Spirit of God is
striving among us, and it is the fruit of Prayer. Many Souls may have occasion
for ever to bless God on that Account; and we should make it our great Care
that we do nothing to drive away the Spirit. Cant. 2.7. I charge you, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of the Field, that ye stir
not up, nor awake my Love till he please. If we would quench the Spirit, it may
be long before he will return.

1. By slighting this Work. Some Men out of an irreligious and profane Spirit,
are Deriding those that are in trouble of Mind; as if the Persons were overrun
with Melancholy, and were more afraid than they have any reason to be, as if
they were full of Fancies, and scared themselves needlessly: And some are apt
to throw it upon them as if they counterfeited Trouble, and would have the
World believe that they were more Religious than they are; as if they had a
mind to get Reputation by having recourse to Ministers, and to be thought
better than they were. This sometimes has an ill Effect, and discourages
Persons. It was foretold of Christ, That he would Encourage and Nourish the
least Beginnings. Isai. 42.3. A Bruised Reed shall he not break, and the
smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he bring forth Judgment unto Victory.
But these Persons that slight this Work, do quench the Spirit; they tempt
others to smother Fears and Convictions that are in their Hearts; and they
prejudice other Men that they don't consider their dangerous Condition as
otherwise they might. Such Troubles are looked on as Rediculous, and so are
Opposite.

2. By making a worldly Cry. Ever and anon Men are making a great Cry;
sometimes about some new Place; sometimes about some Commodities that are in
Demand; and there is abundance of Discourse about those Things, and the Cry of
the World drowns that Cry, What shall we do to be saved. When there is a great
Cry about the World, and Men are Discoursing of that in all Companies, this
stirs up Men's worldly Affections; they are taken with the World, and they
forget the Things of the other World. Worldly Discourses have a worldly Savor
upon Men's Hearts; hereby their time is taken up, and the World drinks up their
Spirits. Hence they grow Heartless in Duties of Religion. The World is a great
Enemy to Religion: They cannot serve God and Mammon. This is like casting Water
on the smoking Flax. Jam. 4.4. The Friendship of this World is Enmity unto
God: He that will be a Friend of the World, will be an Enemy to God.

3. By Contention. Sometimes Men raise some Strife about the World; sometimes
about Religion; and there is a great deal of siding; they heat one another
Spirits, fret and anger one another, their Discourses with those that side with
them, and their Discourses with them that side against them take up a great
deal of Time. They spend Hours together in such talk, and their Spirits are
raised, and they reflect one upon another, and Reproach one another. This eats
out the power of Godliness. They will be so engaged in Contention, that
Religion will be but a Thing by the by. When their Spirits are raised, Fear is
driven away. Their Thoughts are so swallowed up, that there is little room for
Religion. They will be likewise great Temptations one to another. They will be
more inclined to do that which will be a Provocation to God, than to do that
which will bring them into a state of Reconciliation. Men that are at Strife
with their Corruptions, had need have no other Strife. A Contentious Town is
not like to thrive in their Religion. Jam. 3.16. Where Envying and Strife is,
there is Confusion, and every evil Work. Contention puts the Spirits of Men out
of Frame. They that are engaged in Contention, have too much Work; they have
not leisure to follow Religion to Purpose.

5 USE. Such Sinners as live in such a Time and Place where Religion is
reviving, should put in for a share. It is a Matter of Joy, to hear that others
are Convicted, but much more to be Convicted your self. And it may well be
expected, that you should be crying out, Bless me also. You should Pray David's
Prayer, Psalm. 106.4, 5. Remember me, O Lord, with the Favor that thou bear
to thy People: O visit me with thy Salvation: That I may see the good of thy
Chosen, that I may Rejoice in the Gladness of thy Nation, that I may Glory with
thine Inheritance.

Consider, 1. There is more hopes of obtaining now. Now there is a great
Opportunity: Now God is on the giving Hand. It is the acceptable Year of the
Lord. Luke 4.19. There is a great deal of Encouragement in the Providence of
God. If God be about to Convert many, there is hope he may pity you among the
rest. And you are under special Advantage by the Example of others, that may
provoke you to Emulation. There be not such bad Examples to be a Snare to you.
You should be ashamed to come behind others.

2. It is more Dangerous to neglect now. If Men will neglect when they have
more Helps and Advantages, it is to be feared, they will neglect when they have
fewer. If Men are Hard-hearted when others are terrified, what will they be
when others are Hard-hearted? If Men will not be stirred up at such a time when
there is less Temptation, what will they do when there is more? Jer. 12.5. If
thou have gone with the Footmen, and they ha^^ ^earied thee, how will thou
contend with Horses? And if in the Land of Peace wherein thou trustedst, they
wearied thee, how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

FINIS.

