Grace Defended. A CENSURE ON THE Ungodliness, By which the Glorious GRACE of
GOD, is too commonly Abused. A SERMON Preached on the Twenty fifth Day of
December, 1712. Containing Some SEASONABLE Admonitions of Piety. And Concluded,
with a brief DISSERTATION on that CASE, Whether the Penitent Thief on the
Cross, be an Example of one Repenting at the LAST HOUR, and on such a
Repentance received unto Mercy?

By Cotton Mather, D. D.

Isai. lviii. 1. Cry aloud, Spare not. BOSTON Printed by B. Green, for Samuel
Gerrish, at his Shop in Marlborough Street. 1712.

Grace Defended. On the Twenty-fifth of December, 1712. BOSTON-Lecture.
JUDE 4. Ungodly Men, turning the Grace of our God into Wantonness.
WHat? And so Early, such Unhappy Men and Things Creep into the Churches of
God! It seems Christian Churches cannot Easily be too much cautioned against
Sly-Adversaries, and Swift-Apostasies. OURS, I am sure, are Old enough to be
so; In Age gone beyond those who were now immediately Written to. And it is to
be done, as with a mighty Thunder from a flaming Mountain!

I take the Writer of this Epistle, to be, not that Jude the Apostle, who was
in the Syriack Dialect called Thaddaeus, and from the Place to which he
belonged, Lebbaeus: but the Jude, who was one of the Four, that are called, The
Brethren of our Lord: The Sons of His Mother, from whom He Suffered the
Grievous Humiliation of being treated as an Alien, till probably His
Resurrection from the Dead, brought them into the Number of Believers on Him.
He now presumes not on such a Style, as that of, A Brother; but he takes one,
than which the Highest Archangel in Heaven knows none more Glorious; A Servant
of JESUS CHRIST. Behold him now doing a Service, very proper for, very worthy
of, such an One. Behold him Warning and Arming the People of God, against the
Errors which began betimes to infest the Churches of the Lord.

The Antinomians made a very Early Appearance, I see, among the Depravers and
Subverters of the Faith once delivered unto the Saints. There are indeed very
few New Errors broached in our Later-Dayes; the most of them, which now disturb
the Churches of the Faithful, are only from I scarce know what Enchantments,
raising the Ghosts of such as were Dead and Damned many Ages ago.

The Impious, and Mischievous Men, against whom the Inspired Writer is now
Engaged, have their Impiety here declared. First, The Ungodly Men stand charged
with Filthiness. They were, that I may use the most agreeable Term, which the
French Translation Leads me to, A very Dissolute Generation. I take notice by
the way, that the Greek Term, here used for, Lasciviousness, or Wantonness, is
derived from the Name of the Town Selga; a Place infamous for such Dissolute
Practices. It makes me wish, that no Town of ours, may in our Days, have any
Vice abounding in it, so as with a lasting Infamy to derive a Name unto it. I
am loathe here to Explain my self too particularly! I go on with my Remarks, and
say; That I would not be so unacquainted with Church History, ^n^to think, the
Gnostics to be the Ungodly Men peculiarly intended here, though a well-known
Interpreter, with an Oddity not unlike many more in him, with which he has most
shamefully injured the Sacred Scriptures, ridiculously enough runs every where
upon it. There were Other and Older Heretics, which this Iniquity might be
charged upon. And indeed, it is well known, and from Authority much better than
Epiphanius, that the Heretics of those Days were noted for Indulged
Impurities. But then, secondly; To our Astonishment, we find, what it was, that
the Ungodly men, made the Encouragement o^ their Filthiness. Astonishing! It
was the Grace of God, which they turned into Wantonness. by the Grace of God,
is meant, the Revelation which is in the Gospel brought unto us; what we have,
in [Act. XX. 24.] The Gospel of the Grace of God: A Revelation wherein, Grace!
Grace! the Glorious Grace of God, shines in its Meridian Glory, and with an
amazing Splendour on the Children of Men When it is said, They Turned it; there
is a Word used, that signifies, they ^^rested it, they Wronged (...), they
Transferred it from the right use of it, they horribly Abused it. I am stopped a
little. Whose Grace? We are told, The Grace of OUR God. Sirs, If we have any
Sense of an Interest in GOD, and if we rejoice in Him as OUR God, we shall have
a Zeal for Holiness boiling in our Souls. If we care not whether Holiness
flourish or no, we want a Good Mark, that the Holy God is OURS A^, Lord* If
thou (...) OUR God, we shall be loathe to see (...) Gospel abused with any
unholy Practices.

But you must now attend unto a DOCTRINE, that calls for a very Serious
Attention with you.

To turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, (...), Wantonly to Abuse the Grace
of God, is the Common Custom, and the Certain Symptom, of Ungodliness. There
is a great Number of Criminals, who are to Stand this day Indi^ed before the
Bar of the Glorious GOD. I shall have Time to do little more, than just call
over their Names, and let them know, That they have not the Fear of God before
their Eyes.

I am now to Enquire; Who are the Ungodly Ones, by whom the Grace of God is
turned into Wantonness?

In brief; All they that are not by the Favor of God, brought the more to Love
so Gracious a God, by whom they are so favorably dealt withal. In Sum; All
they that are the Worse, because they have so Good a God for to deal withal:
These are they, to every One of whom it may be said, Thou art the Man!

More particularly,

I. Ungodly Men they are, who from the Decree of God, Encourage themselves in
the Neglect of their Duty to GOD. We believe a, Predestination to Life, wherein
God with (...) Everlasting Purpose, has decreed by His Counsel, to bring those
whom He has Chosen in Christ out of Mankind, unto Everlasting Salvation. We
can Subscribe this Article, [The Seventeenth of the Church of Englands famous
XXXIX,] because we find the Sacred Epistles to the Romans and Ephesians,
Expressly asserting it. And when we have Subscribed it, we shall not then Deny
it, then Decry it, then Oppose it; We should Look on it, as a very Scandalous
Treachery to do so. This Election of Some to Everlasting Life, which
unavoidably implies a Rejection of Others, it is called, Romans XI. 5. The
Election of Grace. Oh! Sovereign Grace! Why has our God, Chosen us in Christ
before the Foundation of the World, and Predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children! The Praise of the Glory of His Grace, is designed in it; is displayed
in it. Why are Some Taken, to be Redeemed, Converted, Saved; when Others are
not so! It Is, because, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, says the
Infinite GOD, who gives none Account of His Matters. It Is all from Unaccountable
Grace. It Is, Even so, Father, because it pleases thee. Now, See what Ungodly Men
will do! They will be at No Pains to Turn unto God; No Pains to get the Chains
of Death Knocked off their Souls; No Pains to lay hold on Eternal Life. Why so?
Why, -- Si Salvabor, Salvabor; If it be Decreed that I shall be Saved, say
they, I shall be so, Let me do nothing at all about it, I shall yet be Saved,
if it be Decreed, I shall. And so, they will do nothing! Thus they turn the Grace
of God into Wantonness, and Idleness. These Idle Words, a Severe Account must
be given of them in the Judgment of God. But, O thou Slothful and Wicked
Servant, It is Untrue what thou say. Thou shall not be Saved, if thou do
not Work about thy own Salvation. We are directed, 2 Pet. I. 10 Give all
Diligence, to make your Calling and Election sure. God has Decreed the End and
the Means together. One Decreed for Life, will Strive to Enter the Strait Gate,
and be in Agony lest he fall short of Entering into Life. The Man who will not
give all Diligence to make his Calling Sure, and in that way his Election so.
cannot Inherit Eternal Life. There is no Decree of God, that will carry Such an
One into His Kingdom. Oh! Do not go on in a Sleepy Impenitency, Lest you be
found fore ordained unto -- What is to be trembled at? A Damnation that
Slumbers not.

II. Who but Ungodly Men are they, who from the Contrivance of their Salvation,
Encourage themselves, as if it gave them an Allowance for their Sinfulness.
That we have Such a SAVIOR as our IMMANUEL; Oh! the Riches of Grace discovered
in it! Oh! the Unspeakable Gift! We may and must cry out, God SO Loved the
World, and has been So gracious to us! The Motto to be written upon all that is
done for us, in and by our Savior, is in those Golden Letters; Ephesians. II. 5. B^
GRACE YE ARE SAVED. But what is the Use that Some do make of this Grace*
Because there is a Savior, I will Venture to be a Sinner: This ^s the
Language, how foaming, and how shameful! of Ungodliness* The New Covenant is a
Covenant of Grace. There is a shout of, Grace! Grace! to be made upon every
stroke! But (...) shall see how this Grace is played upon. In this Covenant, we
Merit nothing by doing any thing. Then says the Sluggard, I will do nothing.
Self is to be Annihilated in this Covenant; the Perpetual Projection of it is,
CHRIST is All! CHRIST is All! Then says the Sluggard, I have my self nothing
to do. It Is not by our Own Works, that we attain to Righteousness; but in our
Savior we have our Justifying Righteousness. Then, says the Sluggish Sinner,
It Is no Matter, though I be Careless about the works of Righteousness. We can do
nothing to any Good Purpose, except our Savior do Quicken us, do Assist us, do
Strengthen us. Then, says the Door upon its Hinges, I will stand still; I will
never try to stir; It Is to no purpose at all for me to do any thing. Our
Faithful Savior, who is Able to keep us from Falling has engaged for the
Preservation of the Saints; that they shall be Kept by His Mighty Power; that
None shall Pluck them out of His Hand. Then says one of them that would be at
Ease in Zion, Let me fold my Hands to Sleep; what need I to keep a Strong
Guard, and a Strict Watch upon my self? I stand, and why should I take heed
lest I fa^l? Ungodly Men, You stand in the way of a dreadful Thunderbolt. It
comes down upon you, from, Romans VI. 1, 2. What shall we say then? Shall we
continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? GOD FORBID. At this Rebuke, O F^ie from
your Slothfulness; At the Voice of this Thunder, O Haste away from your
Ungodliness. Let the Spirit of the New Covenant come upon you; and then Your
Habitual, Your continual Inclination will be this; A Glorious CHRIST He who
does all for me. Oh! Let me then Love Him, and Seek Him, and Glorify Him unto
the Uttermost; and be always afraid of disobliging Him.

III. Can they be any other than Ungodly Men, who from the Readiness of the
Divine Mercy for the Pardoning of Sin, Encourage themselves to be the Readier
in the Committing of Sin? Lord, Thou art READY TO PARDON! Who can hear such a
Word, and the Grace of it not melt the Heart of Stone within him? The Grace of
God, in Pardoning of Sin, it is Wonderful; It Is Wonderful! When we are
Justified, it is, Freely by His Grace. It is the Name of our God, Exodus XXXIV.
6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, and abundant in Goodness,
Forgiving Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin. For Monsters of Wickedness, to
be made Monuments of Pardoning Mercy; For Monstrous Menassehs, and Mary
Magdalenes, to be received into the Favor of God, and be favored by a
Reconciled God as much as if they had never Sinned against Him! For all manner
of Sin and Blasphemy to be forgiven unto men; and a Fountain set open, to which
the most abominable Creatures in the World, are invited, there to Wash and be
Clean: What but Infinite Grace can do such a thing! You shall now, but Oh! do
it not without Horror! See what Improvement Ungodly Men will make of such
Grace: An Improvement which one would wonder that any but a Devil should
presume upon! They will Venture to Sin, in Hope of a Pardon. Perhaps, they will
be so Senseless, and Sottish, and Exceeding Sinful, as to flatter themselves,
that a, God forgive me, or a, Lord, Have Mercy upon me, will at any time obtain
a Pardon for them. This Emboldens them to Sin, with a Prodigious Obstinancy; to
be Stout hearted, and far from Righteousness: They stick at no Abominations.
There is a God that will have Mercy, and will abundantly Pardon; So they will
hold on Sinning, and Sin abundantly. And because there have been Some called,
at the Eleventh Hour, and then found Mercy with God; therefore they will Sin
on, Sin with Many Transgressions and Mighty Sins, and put off till the Last
Hour, the necessary Addresses to Heaven for Mercy. They Persist in Enmity and
Rebellion against the Glorious God all their Days; they Presume, it is only to
Ask and Have a Pardon at the Last. Hideous Ungodliness! We read, Psalm. CXXXIV.
4 O Lord, There is Forgiveness with thee, that thou ma^st be feared. But now,
to say; There is Forgiveness with God, therefore I will cast off His Fear, and
Go on without His Fear; O Vile Perversion! To Sin from the View of a Pardon,
one would think, it should be very near, very near! Sinning beyond the Reach of
a Pardon.

IV. Will not all Heaven Pronounce those Ungodly Men, who because they take
themselves delivered from the Condemning Power of the Law, Encourage themselves
to shake off the Commanding Power of the Law? The Grace of God, has Delivered
us from the Curse of the Law. It is a sweet Advice brought unto us: Gal. III.
13 CHRIST has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.
The Punishment, which by the Law of God belonged unto us for our Sin, has been
inflicted on our Savior. Our Blessed Surety has Paid our Debt, by Suffering
for us, the Curse which belonged unto us. The Law of God has now no Demand upon
the Believer, that the Divine Justice may be Satisfied: Our (...) has given
Satisfaction (...) Grace of i^comparabl^ Sweetness. How Sweet, how Sweet, the
(...) unto the Taste of Piety! But now, the (...), which Ungodly Men will (...)
of (...) They suppose themselves rescued from the Curse of the Law. They make
it an Advantage for their Escape also from the Rule of the Law. Silly Ones; An
Escape, that is to say, into Chains of Darkness; into the most rueful Captivity
in the World. This Law, Man; it is the Law of Liberty! It Is an Enlarged Soul,
that is effectually in the Bonds and Ways of this Law! But the Slaves of Sin;
They will indulge themselves in gross Violations of the Law; but still their
In^ard Peace not Violated. No Breaches of the Law, will break the Peace into
which they have dozed their Minds. They will flatter themselves into a Great
Peace, though they do not Love the Law. Why, say the Hardened Wretches; We are
not under the Law; We must not fetch our Peace from the Law; Christ has
answered the Law for us! What an Affront is this, unto the Grace of God? We
read; Romans VI. 14. 15. Sin shall not have Dominion over you; for you are not
under the Law, but under Grace. What then? Shall we Sin, because we are not
under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid. Sirs, You are not yet under Grace,
but under the Law, if you can be content, that Sin should still have Dominion
over you. If you Sin, because you are not under the Law, it is very sure, you
are still under it, in the worse sense of being so. The Law does Condemn you,
if you will not let it Command you. If you shake off that Everlasting Rule of
Living to God, which His Law Prescribes, O Unholy and Unthankful ones, you
shall still hear the Thunder of its Wrath Cursing of you.

V. Is it possible for any but Ungodly Men, from Gods Delays in Striking of
them, to Encourage themselves to Delay, their Seeking to Him, their Serving of
Him. The Grace of God is very Bright, in His Patience toward the Provoking
Children of Wickedness. The Psalmist observes, [VII. 11] God is a Righteous
Judge, and is Provoked every Day; and has bent His Bow, and made it Ready. Yet
such is His Grace, that He does not presently let fly His Arrows; Deserved
Arrows, and Oh! how Destroying Ones! how torturous and worse than Lightning, to
the Spirits, which they Light upon! A Patient God spares wicked men: He does
not Strike them Dead; though they daily challenge Thunderbolts. O Peerless Grace!
Of a Provoked, a Righteous, an Almighty God; yet, Waiting to be Gracious. But
now, the use that Ungodly and Ungrateful men make of this Grace. What can be
more Malicious, what more Venomous, than that which you read! Eccl. VIII. 11.
Because Sentence against an Evil Work, is not Executed Speedily; therefore the
heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. Horrible Stupidity!
Because the Threatened Judgments of God, have not yet come upon them, for their
Crimes, they fancy, they will never come; the threatened folks, have still a long
white to Live. Because they don't yet feel the Evil. that is Pursuing of
Sinners, they comfort themselves, that such Evil will never overtake them. They
Live; Yea, they Thrive. God Wounds them not; For that very cause they grow
Secure, they grow Hardy, they go on still in their Trespasses. God has not yet
Cut them down for the (...) Fruits they bear; He Lengthens out their Time They
bear the more (...) Fruits for that; and the wicked men (...) worse and worse.
God gives them a Space to Repent; They do, for that very cause Delay to Repent,
and make it a Space to act more Wickedness, and with more of Greediness. But, O
Ye Brutish among the People; What are you doing? Shake before that awful
Thunderclap: Romans II. 4, 5. Despisest thou the Riches of His Goodness, and
Forbearance, and Long Suffering* not knowing that the Goodness of God Leads
thee to Repentance? But after thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, treasurest up
unto thy self Wrath against the Day of Wrath? Impenitents; Know you not, That
Abused Patience will at Length be turned into Terrible Fury? and that,
according to Speech usual in the Church of God. The Justice which has Leaden
Feet, will at length find Iron Hands, to do its Executions? Oh! Turn to God in
this Day of His Patience! Oh! Let the Long suffering of God, but make you Stay
no longer from accepting His offered Salvation. Because God seems to Keep
Silen^^. Do you think, He is even Such an One as your selves, and approves your
Doings? You will find it otherwise, when He shall come to Set your Sins in
order before you; to tear you in Pieces, and there shall be none to deliver you.

VI. It Is a thing of an Ungodly Aspect, for Men, from such Liberties as are
Lawful Ones, to Encourage themselves in taking such as are Unlawful Ones. There
are Great Liberties, which the Grace of God has granted unto Christians;
Especially now the Mosaic Yoke is taken off, by the Grace of a more Evangelical
Dispensation. But what says the Law of CHRIST? 1 Cor. VIII. 9. But take heed,
Lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a Stumbling Block, to them that
are weak. Mind this; When things are so Indifferent, that there is no Necessity
of them, and no Commandment of God obliges to do them, we should think; It Is
true, I may do this thing; But wont my doing of it, cause other People to Sin
against my Savior? In this Case we must forbear; Else we make a wrong use of
our Liberty. Luther had an Holy saying; Omnia Libera per Fidam, S^rva per
Charitatem. O Redeemed People of God; This is a Case that calls for a more
Frequent, and Solemn Consideration, than it commonly finds among you! Thus, the
Grace of God is also Trampled on, When we run into an Excess in the use of
Lawful Things. The Christian has from the Grace of God, A CHARTER, for the
whole Creation. I will show you my Charter. It runs in those Terms, 1 Timothy IV.
4 Every Creature of God is Good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with Thanksgiving. Well, But the Precepts of GOD, and the Maxims of a Godly and
Sober and Righteous Life, must set Bounds to us, in our using of our Charter. A
Man may Eat any thing: But yet he may not be a Glutton. A Man may Drink what he
will; But for all that, he must not be Drunk. To be Slave unto the use of an
Indian Weed, or any other Trifle, is beneath a Christian, who has Right
Thoughts of Liberty. He may use it; but not so, as to be in Pain, if he be not
always at it. Any Civil Modes of Apparel may be followed: but Vanity and
Luxury in Apparel; Habits that are the Ensigns of a Foolish Mind; Immoderate
and Exorbitant Gaieties; The Disciples of the Humble JESUS, must put off such
things. Liberty is turned into Slavery, when it runs into Extravagances. I
never Sin, but I Enslave my self.

VII. It Is a Branch of Ungodliness, for Men, from the Relation they bear to the
God of Heaven, to Encourage themselves in Miscarriages toward the Men on
Earth, whom they stand Related to. The Grace of God bestows mighty Privileges,
on them, whom He raises unto the Relation of His People, and His Children. But
what sa^s the Apostle? 1 Pet. II. 16 As free, not using your Liberty, as a
Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Through the Grace of God, my
Conscience is exempted from all Humane Empire; None but the Great GOD can
Command my Conscience; I may not Complement any Man, though he were a greater
Tyrant than him at Versailles, with a Subjection of my Conscience unto him. For
all that, I must make Conscience of Submitting to the Government, which is an
Ordinance of God. Paul writing to the Romans, cautio^s them of this; That they
should not on the score of their Christianity pretend an Exemption from the
Jurisdiction of the Magistrate; in the Things for which God has Ordained him.
So Nothing but the WORD of God, is to Order all things in the Church of God;
Things are never done Decently there, but when done according to that Order.
The Inventions of Men may not be imposed there; We are to Reject such
Schismatical Impositions; The Imposers, however Liberal they are in bestowing
the Term upon others, are to be looked upon as the true Schismatics. For all
this; the Church is to Pray for all that are in Authority; and its People are
to Lead Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. In the Church, the
Pastors must not Lord it over the Heritage. The People must have the Choice of
their own Pastors: The Pastors must proceed with the Consent of the People in
things of common concernment. This was the true State of Things in the
Primitive Church, and so they continued for some hundreds of years, and until
they were overwhelmed with the Usurpations of Antichrist. It is an Obstinacy
little short of a Miraculous Infliction, which they discover, who will at this
time of Day, Contradict things that are so notoriously demonstrated. Sacred and
Precious Liberties! But now, you (...); Gal. V. 13. Brethren, Ye have been
called unto Liberty; Only use not your Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh*
but by Love Serve one another. O dear Flocks of the Lord; You must not now
forget that word; Obey them that have the Rule ^ver you, and Watch for your
Souls. Nor forget that word; Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of
double Honor: Nor forget that word; Know them that are over you in the Lord,
and Esteem them very highly in Love. The Grace of God should indeed cause (...)
and People, to be always loading One another with Tokens of Mutual Affection.
In our Families, Humanity goes a great way, and Christianity much further, in
this; That a Servant becomes a Brother. But if the Servant shall now Despise
his Master, Insult his Master, Disobey the Master, which the Fifth Commandment
has bound him to; Let that Brother be beaten into better Matters; make him to
know his Inferior Condition a little better. He Saucily Pla^es upon the Grace
of God; and should be chastised for it.

VIII. It Is a flaming Ungodliness, when from the Gifts of God unto Men, their
Sins against God, are encouraged, are furnished, are nourished. The Grace of
God, grants Gifts unto Men; Oh, why should it be said, Unto the Rebellious!
Ungodly Men, they make the Gifts of God unto them, only a Furniture and a
Nourishment for them, in carrying on Rebellions against Him. Unrighteous Ones;
They fall into the Fault of Jeshuru^; Deuteronomy. XXXII. 15. He waxed fat, and
Kicked. Have they any Wit? Fools have the keeping of it; They are only, Wise to
do Evil. Have they Health and Strength of Body? It only renders them the more
Able, and the more Eager to Commit Iniquity. Are they Beautiful? They are Proud
of it: And with it, they Tempt the Simple ones, and those that are void of
Understanding. Do Riches increase upon them? All goes to feed, the Lust of the
Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. They do but the more put
their Trust in Uncertain Riches God has little Honor from their Substance. Are
they put into Commissions; or advanced unto Stations and Places of some
Dignity? It fills them with empty Conceits of themselves. They employ their
Opportunities, not so much to Do Good in the World, as that they (...) be made
Rich, and the Glory of their H^use increased. The XLVII Chapter of Genesis,
(...) me Exhibits an Example of such an Abused Advancement, which I must own, I
cannot with^^ Scandal, and Sorrow, and Wonder think (...) But how much imitated
in our Later (...)? Mavelous Disingenuity! To fight against the Blessed God,
with His Own Weapons, at such a rate* Thus to take His Corn, and His Wins, and
His Wool^; and only Serve diverse Lusts with them! Thus to take His Talents,
and only Trade for the Devil with them! With such Ungodly Men, how Suitably,
how Pungently may we use that Expostulation! Deuteronomy XXXII. 6 Do ye thus Requite
the Lord, O foolish People an Unwise! A Base Requital for the Grace of a Good
God! On! Blush, and be Ashamed of it.

IX. I have one word more to speak; and I may the more freely speak it,
inasmuch as the Cause of Godliness is Evidently Concerned in it. It is this,
It Is an Evident Affront unto the Grace of God, for Men to make the Birth of our
Holy Savior, an Encouragement and an Occasion for very Unholy Enormities. The
Grace of God never Shone out more Gloriously, than in that Occurrence upon
which an Angel flew from Heaven to tell us, Behold I bring you good Tidings of
Great Joy; That unto you there (...) born this Day a Savior. But if such an
Angel were this Day to Preach among you, do you think, He would not Thunder and
Lighten Wonderfully against the Vicious practices, in which this Grace of God,
and that Holy Savior, is this Day Affronted by multitudes of Ungodly Men in
the World I do not now propose any matter of Doubtful Disputation, but One,
wherein I shall have (...) Godly Persons of whatever different Persuasions
(...) things, Concurring with me. I do not (...) whether they who three or four
hundred (...) after the Birth of (...) first began the Festival of his Nativity
(I say, first began, for Vossius himself confesses it was not kept in the first
and second Century, and Chemnitius truly says, Apud Vetustissimos nunquam
Legitur!) did not mistake the Time of it. For they who say, Thou have given thy
Son to be born this Day, know not what they say; The Day is concealed; yea, it
is now beyond Contestation proved, that not only the Month but also the very
Year of it, has been Egregiously mistaken. The La^e most accurate Professor of
the Mathematics, in Cambridge, has in his Exquisite work about the Chronology
of the Bible, brought this Matter under such a Demonstration, that it is no
longer to be disputed of. The whole Process of the Demonstration, is too large
to be introduced here. But briefly; we are certain, that our Savior was born
before the Death of Herod, that horrible Tyrant, whom they call, The Great. We
have now discovered Irrefragable Proofs, that this Monster Expired, on the
Twenty-fifth of November, in the 4710 year of the Julian Period, which was,
Three years and above a Month, before the present Christian Era. Besides many
other unquestionable Accounts, concerning the Date of Herod's Reign, we have a
most infallible one, in the Eclipse of the Moon, which happened, as all agree,
on the thirteenth of March before his Death. By this infallible Mark, he died
in the 4710 year of the Julian Period, which was the 4001 year of the World.
And the Jewish Calendar has all along made the 25 day of November, an Holiday.
Because on that Day Herod the King died. Now the Birth of our Savior must be,
at least a Month before the Death of Herod And on the other side, we cannot
allow (...) more than a Month; because of the Time, which (...) now Easily
determined, for the Attendance of the Father of John Baptist at the (...) The
Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot and Some others, (...) place the Birth of our Savior
Two years before the Death of Herod, can by no means be (...) supported. It
must unavoidably be the Same Year; But then, it could not possibly be after
October. Nor, do I know, why it should not be, a^ many Learned men have judged,
about the Time of the Feast of Tabernacles, which was a glorious and elegant
Figure of it. The Conjecture, That October being really the Tenth Month, to
them who begin the Year in January, the Primitive Christians had a Tradition of
our Saviors being born on the 25 day of the Tenth Month; and this threw the
first I^stitutors of the present Holiday, into the Error which has ever since
been gone upon; I Know no need of Paying any Respect unto it. Upon the whole;
It is now determined, that the Christian Era, the Computation whereof was
first made by Dion^sius Exiguus, between five and six hundred years after the
Birth of our Savior, has misreckoned above three years; insomuch that we are
now truly entered into the Year of our Lord, 1716 And it is also determined,
that the Birth of our Savior was before the Month of November, in which the
Bloody Iduma^an, who sought His Death, found his own.
I do not now dispute, whether People do well to Observe such an Uninstituted
Festival at all, or no. Good Men may love one another, and may treat one
another with a most Candid Charity, while he that Regards a Day, Regards it
unto the Lord, and he that Regards not the Day, also shows his Regard unto
the Lord, in his not Regarding of it. Though this I will take leave to say: If
the Churches of NEW ENGLAND preserve the Religion of the LORDS DAY, it will in
the Day of Reformation that must come on, be judged (...) Dishonor to them,
that they have harmonized with their United Brethren in Scotland, in a Point
for which the last of their peculiar Kings once applauded their Purity, even
their not having a (...) observed among them. What I am going to animadvert
upon, is a thing, which there can be no doubt about. And there are some things
that render it highly Seasonable, to dispense those Admonitions of God our
Savior, unto our Children, which I am now to pour down upon them. The famous
Perkins long since complained; That the Feast of Christ's Nativity is spent in
Revel^ing. Dicing, Carding, Masking, and in all Licentious Liberty, for the
most part, as though it were some Heathen Feast, of Ceres, or Bacchus. Yea, the
zealous Martyr Latymer complained. That Men dishonor Christ more in the Twelve
Days of Christmas, than in all the twelve Months of the Year besides. All the
truly Religious People in the World, still make the Complaint with Lamentation
We also must Mourn in our Complaint, and make a Noise, upon it. My Concern is
now, with our own Children; and for such as we must faithfully Admonish in our
Ministry, as we shall answer the same unto GOD. Children, We lay the Charges of
God upon you; That if any People take this Time, for any thing of a Riotous
Tendency, you do not associate with them, in such Ungodliness. No, but let your
Answer to those Children of Folly be, The Grace of God in Sending us a Great
Savior calls for more Pious Acknowledgments. Let your Own Conscience be
appealed unto; the Preacher which every one of you has in his own bosom,
hearkened to! Can you in your Conscience think, that our Holy Savior is
honored, by Mad Mirth, by long Eating, by hard Drinking, by lewd Gaming, by
rude Revelling; by a Mass ^it for none but a Saturn, or a Bacchus, or the Night
of a Mohammedan Ramadam? You cannot possibly think so! At the Birth of our
Savior, (...) A Multitude of the Heavenly Host was hear^ (...) shall it be
said, That at the (...) our Savior for which we owe as High Praises to God as
they can do, We take the Time to Please the Hellish Legions, and to do Actions
that have much more of Hell than of Heaven in them? I must faithfully tell you,
This way of honoring the Blessed JESUS, who came to Redeem us from a Vain
Conversation, received by Tradition from our Fathers, it is a practical
Blasphemy upon Him; an Highhanded Blasphemy upon Him! It is to outrage the Holy
Son of God! It is to Expose your selves unto that Indignation of Heaven, which
they who take the Name of the Lord our God in Vain, ^ly open unto. If you will
yet go on, and will do Such Things, I forewarn you, That the Burning Wrath of
God, will break forth among you. All Persons, of any the least Godliness, will
approve my Faithfulness, in what I have now Spoken; If any Man Dislike it, and
Revile it, he only shows the Brand of an Ungodly Man, and a Contempt from every
Citizen of Zion, accordingly belongs unto him.

Upon the Whole: The EXHORTATION that now calls upon us all, must be that: 2
Cor. VI. 1. We beseech you, that ye receive not the Grace of God in Vain. Oh!
Don't Wantonnize upon the Grace of God. But upon every Instance of Grace, make
that Reflection. What shall I render to the Lord? In short, Remember this;
Obligations to Holiness, You are still to Read Them, in all that is ever done
by the Grace of God for a Sinful World. If GOD be Gracious, My Friend, thy
(...) from it must always (...) must be Holy; O my God, make me so! (...) in
the more, because of the Grace in our God; Verily, It Is the foulest Prophanity;
An attempt it is, to call in the God who is of Purer Eyes than to behold Evil,
and cannot Look on Iniquity, and render Him a Patron of all Evil, all Iniquity.
It Is the grossest Ingratitude; Evil rendered for Good, in the most odious manner
that ever was heard of: Evil will never depart from the Doer of it. And, What
will ye do in the End thereof? Endless, Endless Misery will be the End thereof!
I must say unto you, It is the blackest Note of a Reprobate Mind; a Soul
Forsaken of God! And it will pull down a Wrath unto the Uttermost. Sinner, If
Grace it self become thy Foe, what Friend can thou have in Heaven or Earth?
To Wantonnize upon it, is the way to make it so.

That Saving draws on a COROLLARY, which my Discourse may do well to Lodge in
the Conclusion of it. If it be an Ungodly thing, and a Dangerous, to turn the
Grace of God into Wantonness, You must Look on it, as the Same thing, to turn
the Wrath of God into Ridicule. The Truth is, These Two Things go together.
They who do the One, do the Other too. O you that are yet in your Sins;
Unbelievers, that have not made your Flight by Faith unto the Only Savior;
You, you are they, of whom it is said; Joh. III 36. The Wrath of God abides on
them. Certainly, You Ridicule that Wrath, or you could not continue in your
Sins; You could not but be in Agony, for a Deliverance from the Wrath to come.
You make light of that Wrath, which throws down Rocks, and whereby Mountains
are overturned: An Anger, which, O Lord, who knows the Power of! Miserable
Ones, yet walking in the Sinful Ways for which your own Hearts condemn you;
Ways that have Destruction and Misery in them: Oh! Break off your Sins, and
Accept and Embrace the JESUS who would Save you from your Sins. Otherwise, you
will anon feel the Wrath of God, but find the Force of it Irresistible, the
weight of it Insupportable, the Tortures of it in your Wounded Spirit,
Intolerable. You will roar out the Words, which a late famous Protestant
Apostatising to the Popish Idolatry, did in unspeakable Horror of Conscience,
Die withal; those words, Heb. X. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the Living God.

It ought rather to be an Ingredient of this Discourse, than an Appendix to it,
for me to treat you with yet another COROLLARY.

You have all this while seen the Word of God brandished against those Armies
of the Aliens, who turn the Grace of God into Wantonness. We hope, We are
better skilled at making Inferences, than those Men, whose Transgression says,
There (...) no Fear of God before their Eyes. I am sure, this is a Right One.
For men from the Word of God it self to Encourage themselves in things very
Contrary to that Holy Word; this is a very Wrong Thing. Yea, Let it come into
the Catalogue; and make up the Decad of the Ways, wherein Men turn the Grace
of God into Wantonness. That we Enjoy the Word of God, wherein the Day spring
from on (...) has Visited us, it is through the tender Mercy of our God. And it
is, The Good Word of His Grace, which this Tender Mercy of our God has bestowed
upon us. Now, to fetch from this very Word of God, which is all of it Written
that we may not Sin, the Plea's to Excuse, to Defend, to Embolden Sin; truly
this is to Sin Impudently, and with peculiar Aggravations. It Is to do what we
read, 2 Pet. III. 16 They wr^st the Scriptures unto their own Destruction. What
else do they do, who because we read, Take no Thought for to Morrow, give
themselves up to Slothfulness in their Business? What else do they, who because
we read, If any man provide not for his own, he is worse than an Infidel,
therefore will out of that Provision, spare little or nothing for the Pious
Uses directed of God? What else do they, who because we read, (...) that Eats
and Drinks at the Table of the Lord Unworthily, Eats and Drinks Judgment
unto himself, therefore Stay away Unworthily, and never Prepare to come
thither, as they ought to do? But this Ungodliness is never more Exemplified,
then in the Ungodly Inferences, drawn from the Scriptural Examples, of them who
have Sinned grievously, while they have had the Grace of God asleep in their
Souls, or have after Great and Long Sinning been through the Grace of God
received unto Mercy. Noah Sinned, Lot Sinned, Abominable things were done by
David, Peter did an horrible Thing. And, Why may not I venture to do so too?
This was an Ungodliness of old run into; Si Noah, cur non et Ego? Si David, cur
non et Ego? Alas, Children, These Examples are for our Admonition. Why do you
misapply them for your Depravation? They are to make you Afraid of provoking
the Holy One, to leave you unto your selves; Lest you Sin like them, and then
Endure such Broken Bones, as made them to Roar by reason of the Disquietness of
their Heart, under the Impressions of His dreadful Displeasure, when they did
the things which displeased the Lord. While you hearten your selves to Sin,
because these Men have Sinned, you wretchedly divert the Relation from the true
Purposes, for which the Pens of God have Written it; and you Forget the Sad
Hours, which the Sins of these Persons brought them to!

But of all the Examples in the Bible, there never was any wherein the Grace of
God has been so abused, as that of the Thief on the Cross. The Cross of that
Penitent Thief, has been a Stumbling Block to Millions of Ungodly Men. He it
seems, put off his Repentance to the Last Hour, and then, he found Mercy with
God. Therefore, says the Impenitent Sinner. I will do so too. I apprehend, it
will be a Service to the Interests of Godliness, that this case be a little
spoken to: and I will therefore, in a brief Dissertation, Conclude with it.

A Few Thoughts on that QUESTION; Whether the Penitent Thief on the Cross, be
not an Example of One Repenting at the Last Hour, and on such a Late Repentance
received unto Mercy?
I Am far from a Perempto^y Denial of it. I cannot prove, that we have not such
an Example here given unto us. Who can tell what Sovereign Grace may do? We
cannot Limit the Holy One from doing such a Thing. It Is a Possible Thing; And
the Glorious Lord may leave us in the Story a Room for such a Possibility, that
the Sinful Children of Men overtaken by their Last Hour in their Sins, may not
be abandoned unto a total Despair of Mercy. And that their Surviving Friends
may not Sorrow as those that have no Hope, on their occasion* But at the same
time, there are many things which render it Probable, that the Penitent now
before us, will prove no such Example, and that the Impious Procrastination of
Repentance, which is too commonly encouraged from this Example, will be found
utterly spoiled of all its pretended Encouragement. It has been a Matter of
just Resentment unto the Friends of Piety, that the Thief on the Cross, going a
Villian thither, and at the Last Hour finding Repentance and Forgiveness there,
has been the Goliahs Sword, and a sort of Enchanted Spear, by which the cause
of Persisting Impenitency, has been maintained in the World. I am willing to
Disarm the Enemy of his boasted Weapon.

Unto me, it seems not at all Improbable, nay, there appears an high
Probability for it; That the Malefactor now Repenting on the Cross, brought
thither the Saving Dispositions of Repentance with him, and had before now
begun upon him a Work of that Repentance, which is unto Salvation. For,

First, there is nothing in the Sacred History, to brand this Poor Man with the
Character of an Unrepenting Sinner, at the Time of his being brought forth to
his Execution. Two of the Evangelists, Matthew, and his Follower and Abridger
Mark, indeed Speak in the Plural Number, as if both of the Thieves at first
joined in the Reproaches of our Savior. And if it were so, it may remain a
Quere, How far a true Penitent heartily bewayling of all his Wickedness, and
believing in the Sacrifice of the Promised Messiah for the Pardon of it, might
yet be so circumstanced, as to be kept Invincibly Ignorant, that our Blessed
JESUS, was this Messiah? But then I concur with those more Judicious Writers,
who do by no means allow, that the Thief whom we now have our Eye upon, did
himself Reproach our Savior. Drusius is displeased at them who make this
objection of the Plural Number, and says, Apagi^^, qui non didicistis Liter as
Hebraicas. They are ignorant of the Hebrew Style. [See Judge. XII. 7.] It is
also observed as a peculiar, but perpetual way, taken by the Evangelist
Matthew, in his Writing, That where Several Persons are joined, and One Speaks,
and it is either in the Name of the rest, or the rest are Silent at it, he
refers the Speeches or Actions of that One, unto the whole Number present, [A
Notable Example, see Matthew. XX. 30 with Mar. X. 46. And another, Matthew. XXVI 8.
with Joh. XII. 4.] Thus, we read of Things Written in the Prophets, when only
One of the Prophets wrote them. Glassius will further satisfy you. It Is a
frequent Synecdoche. This is indeed an Ancient Observation: and it leaves us
cause to Suspect, as very Learned Expositors have conjectured, That the other
Thief alone Reproached our Savior, as Luke relates it, and this was wholly
Silent at the First, until the Violence of his Companions Language, and the
consideration of the astonishing Accidents than in his View, compelled him at
once to rebuke his Companion, and Confess his Redeemer. I am far from thinking
the Apostolical Constitutions, to be of that Antiquity and Authority which a
famous Arian in our Days would assign unto them. Yet some things in them, are
of such Antiquity, as to deserve that Reverence and Reception with us, which is
due to the Opinion of the Ancients. And it is a little Confirmation of my
Opinion in this case, that the Apostolical Constitutions do favor it. Jerome
also and Austin are of the same Opinion. A Syllepsis here, says Jerome; An
Enallage, says Austin.

But then,

Secondly; Without having Recourse to the Judgment of the Great Voetius, That
this Transgressor had the Beginning of a Regenerate State, before he was left
unto his Capital Transgressions; It is an Easy thing to Suppose, and there is
little Reason to question the Supposal; That this Thief had Opportunity, in the
Prison, for some while before his Execution, to come unto a Serious Repentance
of his Ungodly Life. His Miserable Condition, would naturally lead him to
Consider of his Ways. There were also Some Godly Men in the Town, whose
Charity might lead them to Visit him with their Instructions. We still have
some Footsteps of the Care, which the Godly among the Jews took of, The
Condemned. They would not Scourge, much less, would they Hang a Criminal,
without Instructing him from the Sacred Scriptures. He might also be long
before Instructed in those Truths of Religion, which the Spirit of God might
here bring home unto his Mind, with a Sanctifying Efficacy. It Is very possible,
and more than so, that this Man, might while in the Gaol, and many Weeks before
his Death, be brought, bitterly to Lament, and sincerely to Abhor, all his
wicked Courses, and heartily to Prefer a Life devoted unto the Service of God,
and rely on the Offering of the Son of God then Expected, for his
Reconciliation to the Glorious One, in whose Favor is Life; and be truly
desirous to Know and to Do the whole Duty of a Repenting Sinner. Yea, there is
nothing to hinder, but that he might have heard so much concerning the Fame of
the Wisdom of God in our Blessed JESUS, with his Ears, that the Destruction and
the Death to which he was near, might find him exceedingly disposed for the
Faith of this our JESUS too.

And;

Thirdly, that which very much Countenances the Conjecture, that it might be
so, is; The Wonderful Readiness of the Thief, at all the Expressions of this
Repentance, as soon as you see him exposed on the Cross. Every thing looks as
if he came thither Prepared with the Grace, which he so readily, and so notably
Expresses there. We have not the least Intimation of any Pains taken there to
Enlighten him, and Admonish him; Nor do the Torments then upon him, and the
Clamours of the People about him, seem to allow the Words of the Wise, then to
do much, at reaching of him. And yet the Grace Exercised by this Penitent, was
of so Various and Mavelous an Application, that one may say, He does in a few
Hours the work of some Years; and in a few Minutes runs through the whole Race of
Christianity! It looks as if he brought hither with him, a Broken and a
Contrite Heart; and the Humble Sense of his having deserved not only Death from
the hand of Man, but much more Hell from the hand of God, whereof he made now
such a Ready Acknowledgment. We Suffer justly; we receive the due Reward of our
Deeds! The words are dictated from an Heart, that seems to have been some time
deeply affected, with the sense of what is uttered in them. And, as Grotius
notes, Ma^n^m est P^nitentiae Signum, in Paena sua acquiescere. It looks also
as if he brought hither with him, a pretty clear and strong Persuasion, of
Things concerning the Messiah, which it is plain from the Gospel of John, the
Church in those days did more thoroughly believe, than some too disaffected
unto true Christianity in our Days, are willing to allow of. He is persuaded,
of a Future State; That in the World to come, the Children of Men shall be
Raised from the Dead: That the Messiah shall have a Kingdom in that World: That
there must be Two Comings of the Messiah: And that the Messiah will do those
things for His People, when He Comes in His Kingdom, which can be done by none,
but One who is God as well as Man. All these, and more than these Illustrious
Articles, are professed in the Faith of this Penitent. But what Opportunity
could he have to be Taught these Things, after he was Nailed unto the Tree? The
Spirit of God, it is true, now Excited the Exercise of his Faith, on these
Articles, after a Wonderful Manner. But shall we say, that the Idea's and
Impressions of the Things in these Articles were now, and never till now,
purely by an Internal Irradiation, produced in his Mind? This would indeed
Multiply the Miracles in this matter; but surely, Citra Necessitatem! And it
may be also said, Contra Utilitatem. There is no Need of such an Imagination;
and some have thought, the Good of it, has been as little.

Yet more;

It was not only a True Faith, which the Penitent here Exercises; but he looks
like one grown Strong in Faith, in giving such Glory to God. My Calvin says
truly upon it. Cert^ vix a Mundo condito magis rar^m et memorabile ^idei
Exemplum unquam ^^xtitit. Perceiving our JESUS to be that Son of God, on whom
he had Believed, he now makes a most Mavelous Confession of His Glory. He
ascribes to Him the Glory, which belongs unto the Promised Messiah, and that
Seed that was to bruise the Head of the Angel of Death. And, as it was of old
remarked, A Latrone victi sunt Apostoli, qui tun^ credidit, quando illi
defecerunt; He was the only Apostle our Savior now had cleaving unto him; I
had almost said, The only Visible Believer, in the World, at least, the only
Thorough paced One. He supplied the Room of Judas, (who was a Thief;) He
Preached Him on the Cross, whom Judas betrayed to the Cross. Yea, he was, as
one calls him, The Apostle of the Apostles. He declared his Faith, when it
could afford no Temporal Advantage at all unto him; He did it, when it would
rather augment the Shame and Scorn, which was now heaping upon him; He did it,
when as Austin says, His Confessing of a Crucified Christ, was in a Manner,
(quantum si fuisset pro Domino Crucifixus,) as much as if he had been himself
Crucified for Him, whom he Confessed.

Finally; The Labor he uses to convince his Companion of his Impiety, and
Reclame him from it, and Quicken the Fear of God in him; it looks as if he came
thither armed with a Zealous and Intense Desire to Propagate a Sense of God in
the Hearts of others. A Repentance has usually made a little Progress, before
it Comes into this Operation. One does not Per Saltum, come to this Degree.
Methinks, All these Things conspire, to Proclaim a Saving work of Repentance
begun in this Penitent, before his Last Hour came upon him. However, This I am
sure they do; and this is what I mainly aim at: they utterly destroy all the
Assurance, which any Presuming Sinner has, that this Man did not Repent until
his Last Hour was arrived unto him. They leave him therefore without any
Assurance, that ever any One in the World, who disobeyed calls to Repent until
the Last Hour, did it then Effectually, and found Mercy with God.

I do not affirm that my Arguments, for the more Early Repentance of my
Penitent, are absolutely Decisive, and infallibly Conclusive; but yet, I think
them enough to retund the Confident Prof^^^^ of them, who encourage the Delay
of their Conversion to God, from the Pattern of the Thief, Repenting and
Accepted on the Cross. And it may be further observed unto them, that the Holy
and Worthy Divines, who take up with the common Opinion, and Glorify God, in
the Highest Apprehensions of Miracle in the Sudden Producing and Ripening of
this Repentance, do still with mighty Energy Thunderstrike, that Profane Abuse
of the Example. They tell you, Ye Fools, That if it be a Pattern, yet it is a
Pattern without a Promise. And as One of the Ancients Expresses it, Ad
Consequendam Fidem non fuit illi Extrema Hora, s^d Prima; they tell you, That
it might more properly be said, He came in at the First Hour, than at the Last
Hour; for he had not Enjoyed the Means of Grace before, nor Sinned against
them, as they do, who embolden themselves to Sin, from what was done for him.
They tell you, The most you can make, if the Example be granted you, is, One
Example in all the Bible. But then Mr. Greenham smartly upbraids the Rashness
of them who hope for the like: You may as well Spur an A^s to make him Speak,
because Balaam's once did Speak with the Voice of Man. They also tell you, That
the Conversion of this Penitent was at a Season, the like to which will never
again occur in the World; It was an Extraordinary Time. As Mr. Fenner notes,
The Day of a Kings Coronation, sets Malefactors at Liberty, which at another
Time could not escape the Death which belongs unto them. The most astonishing
Expression of the Divine Mercy, that ever was given to the World, was now
Exhibiting. It is Congruous enough, that there should now in One Penitent be a
most astonishing Monument of it. Our Penitent stood close by the Great
Sacrifice. If there should be an Uncommon Experiment of the Virtue in the
Balsom, just as it was Preparing, it is not without some Congruity. Our Great
Redeemer was now Triumphing openly over the Powers of Darkness. If in the Field
of Battle, he actually rescued a Prey from the Mouth of the Adversary; the
Congruity was yet more beautiful. Mr. Beverly speaks well upon it. No Sinner in
the World, will ever see such a Time again! Briefly, It was a Time filled with
Miracles. One utters his Mind after this awful manner, on this occasion; You
may as well Expect Christ to be Crucified again, as Expect such another
Instance of such unusual Mercy I would not say, quite so. But certainly, to put
off Repentance upon an Expectation of being received at the Last Hour, because
One once in such rare circumstances was so; it is to do Presumptuously, and to
reproach the Lord

In fine; I should be as much offended, as the Martyr Bilney, to hear any one
discouraging an Old Penitent, from Hopes of Pardoning Mercy. But it is as great
an offense, to hear the folly and madness, and Egregious Nonsense of a Sinner
Delaying to become a Penitent, because there was a Thief, that at the Last Hour
found a Pardon. I break off with Saying. That if this Penitent might from the
Paradise where our Savior has Lodged him, now Preach unto us, we should
certainly hear him saying, I desire, that among them who delay their Conversion
to God, my Example may no more be for their Ungodly Purpose insisted on! --

FINIS.
This Vacant Page will be well-filled, with an Hymn of my excellent Friend Mr.
WATTS, Entitled, A Complaint of Ingratitude.
IS this the Kind Return,
And these the Thanks we owe?
Thus to abuse Eternal Love
Whence all our Blessings flow?
To what a Stubborn Frame
Has Sin reduced our Mind?
What Strange rebellious Wretches we,
And God as Strangely Kind?
On us He bids the Sun
Shed His Reviving Rays,
For us the Skies their Circles run
To Lengthen out our Days.
The Brutes obey their God,
And bow their Necks to Men:
But we, more base. more brutish things,
Reject His easy Reign.
Turn, Turn us, Mighty God,
And Mould our Souls afresh,
Break, Sovereign Grace, these Hearts of Stone,
And give us Hearts of Flesh.
Let Old Ingratitude
Provoke our Weeping Eyes,
And Hourly as new Mercies fall
Let Hourly Thanks arise.
THE END.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will Speedily be Published, a Book Entitled,
Practical Religion Exemplified, in the LIVES of Mrs. Mary Terry, who dyed
December 8 th. 1708. in the Eighteenth Year of her Age. And Mrs. Clissould, who
departed this Life the 12 th. of December, 1711. in the Twenty-ninth Year of
her Age.

By Thomas Reynolds: Recommended by Increase Mather, D. D.

Reprinted at Boston in New England Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop (...)
Marlborough Street, over against the South Meeting House. 1713.


