CHRIST's Forgiveness Of True Christians, is a Preceptive Pattern Of Christian
Fraternal Forgiveness. A SERMON on Col. iii. 13. Preached upon a Solemn
Occasion.

By Peter Thacher, A.M. Pastor of the Church of Christ in Milton, N.E.

Mat. vi. 14, 15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you. Mat, xviii. 32, 33. I forgave thee all that debt, because
thou desiredst me: should not thou also have compassion on thy
Fellow Servants, even as I had pity on thee? Boston: Printed by B. Green, for
Eleazer Phillips at his Shop at the Sign of the Eagle in Newbury Street. 1712.

Amicos diligere omnium est; Inimicos autem solorum Christianorum.

Tertullian. CHRIST's Forgiveness Excites to Christian Forgiveness.
COL. III. 13. -- Even as CHRIST forgave you, so also do ye.


THE Apostle having advised the Colossians to put off the old man with his
deeds, and to put on the new man, v. 9, 10. He exhorts them to put (...), as
the Elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering; forbearing one another; and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any. He that has put on the New man, ought to put on
the singular member, of the New-man, and to be Clothed with the Properties of
it; but these Virtues are (as it were) the Members and Properties of the New
man; and therefore you who have put on the New man, ought to exercise and
improve these Properties and Excellencies of the New-man. In this Verse in
which our Text is, the Apostle does show the Use, and requires the Practice of
the forementioned Virtues, viz. Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of
Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering: For what signifies it to have Virtues, and to
neglect to Exercise them? In these words we have three things.

I. Two Requisite Actions. 1. Forbearing one another. And 2. Forgiving one
another.

II. We have the Occasion of these Actions, viz. A just quarrel or complaint
against any.

III. We have the Rule and Obliging Motive of these our Actions, viz, Christ's
Example; even as Christ, forgave you, so also do ye.

1. Two requisite Actions: The One is, Forbearing one another; this is the
first act of the fore mentioned Virtues: Now he is said to forbear another, who
being hurt by another, either in words or deeds, does not forthwith seek to
revenge himself, or right himself; but endeavors in a spirit of lenity, love
and tenderness, to reduce the Offender to a right temper and disposition of
Soul; and this is the most Christian and Noble way of overcoming Injuries; for
in this way the true Christian overcomes and conquers himself. Prove. 16.32. He
that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he^ that rules his
Spirit, then he that takes a City. Yea, in this way the true Christian
overcomes the malice of his Adversary. We have a famous Example (...) in 1 Samuel
24.16, 17, 18. Yea, in this way the true Christian does not only overcome, but
he overcomes in the most legitimate way: He takes the method that God has
directed him to. Prove. 24.29. Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me:
I will render to the man according to his work. Romans 12.17. Recompense to no
man evil for evil. v. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

[And forgiving one another] In this Action there is more contained than in the
former: For there are some who sometimes tolerate Injuries, because they cannot
revenge them, or because they judge it not expedient: Yet Malice boils in their
hearts, and a disposition of revenge: Now this the Apostle would have true
Christians guard against, according to Christ's Precept. Mat. 18.35. We must
from our hearts forgive our brother his trespasses. Luke 6.27, 28. Love ye your
Enemies, do good to them that hate you, bless them (...) curse you, Pray for
them that despitefully use you. Tertullian tells us, That this was Religiously
observed by the Primitive Church, Amicos diligere emnium est ^ Inimicos autem
solorum Christianorum. It is the Property of all men to love friends, but it is
the Property only of true Christians to love their Enemies, that is, their
Personal Enemies.

2. We have the occasion on which these acts are to be exercised, viz. a just
quarrel or complaint; If any man have a quarrel against any: Here is to be
observed that all things are put indefinitely and therefore are to be
understood Universally; after this manner; If any man: that is, whosoever he
shall be, whether Superior or Inferior; has a quarrel: that is, whatsoever
just cause he shall have of complaining either in respect of Injury done him in
words, or in deeds; against any: viz. Whether friend or foe; he must know that
there is a necessity imposed upon him of Forbearing (...) ^giving, according to
Gospel Rule.

3. We have the Coercive and Directive rule of these our actions: viz. CHRIST'S
Example; As Christ forgave you, so also do ye forgive: CHRIST'S Example ought to
have with Christians the force of an Argument, to Persuade, and of a Rule to
Direct Christians in what appertains to forbearance and forgiveness of Brethren.

DOCTRINE.
Christ's forgiving of true Christians, should have the force of an Argument to
persuade, and of a Rule to Direct them to forgive others.
They that are wronged by others, must forgive their wrongs. As it is the Duty
of them that have wronged others to submit to them in the acknowledgment of it;
so they that are wronged, ought to forgive and receive them in that submission.
We must forgive, as we took to be forgiven, Mat. 6.12. We cann^ Pray
believingly, That God would forgive us the guilt of our Iniquity committed
against Himself, or others, unless we forgive others the injury which they have
done us.

I. PROP. CHRIST who is God and Man forgives true Christians their Sins and
Offenses. This is Expressed in our Text. Now forgiveness is an act of free
Grace, whereby our offended God freely, and without any Merit of ours, remits
the Sin, the Guilt, and Punishment. The Person offended is he only that can
forgive: Mark 2.7. Who can forgive Sins but GOD only. And forgiveness is an act
of most free Mercy; and there is nothing of Merit in the Person forgiven. Isa.
43.25 I even I am He, that blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and
will not Remember thy Sins. Misery, which is the Effect of Sin, is the Object
of Mercy; but it is not the Desert of it; especially when that very misery,
under which we are brought by Sin, is a misery wilfully contracted by our
selves; and not only so, but is still a Sinning-Misery; a Misery accompanied
with stupidity, and senselessness, with Aversion from, and Opposition against
GOD, and that very Mercy, that should deliver us. GOD commends the freeness and
fullness of his Goodness to us, by taking the Season to be Merciful, when our
condition is most Miserable, not because our Misery deserves His Pity. Ezekiel.
16.6. I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live: Yea, I said unto
thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live. This forgiveness is thus brought
about: Man, that was infinitely bound to love and obey the Author of his Being,
most ungratefully and unnecessarily Sinned against Him, and thereby deservedly
incurred the everlasting Curse of the most Just and True GOD, and forfeited his
own Being: Yet, though Man had destroyed himself, this Compassionate GOD, of his
own free Sovereign Will, and without any Motive, and by his own Infinite
Wisdom, contrived a Way, whereby his most exact Truth and Justice might be
satisfied, and yet his Creature saved, and his Mercy and Goodness thereby might
be evidenced unto Men and Angels: By an Everlasting Covenant between the FATHER
and the SON, the SON He must assume our Nature, and offer up One Great
Sacrifice for Sin, Heb. 10.12. This was that Mystery hid from Ages and
Generations; the Mystery that the glorious Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet.
1.12. The great Mystery of Godliness, is GOD manifested in the Flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16. And this Sacrifice thus freely given to our offended LORD, we have
Redemption, and the Remission of our Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. And Pardon thus
freely to us given by the FATHER and yet thus dearly bought by the SON, is with
abundance of Love and Grace, proclaimed and tendered unto all, in all the World,
that will bu^ come in, and enter into Covenant with GOD in CHRIST. Jer. 31.34.
I will forgive their Iniquity, and will Remember their Sin no more. And this
one Sacrifice of CHRIST, offered up once for all, is a full satisfaction for
all the Sins of his Elect, to the end of the World, accepted by Eternal
Contract; The Holy Spirit consenting to be Sent, (and certain Means appointed)
actually to apply it, and to make it effectual to us; And God gives us Faith to
lay hold upon it. So that the true Original of forgiveness is the free love of
God, which gave Christ, as the Sacrifice for Sin, and accepted that Sacrifice
as the true price of our Pardon, Joh. 3.16. The Meritorious Cause of
forgiveness is that Sacrifice of Christ, whereby Pardon is impetrated for as
many as lay hold upon Him by Faith. The acts which that Eternal Counsel
appointed to be the Means of the actual receiving of the Pardon thus offered
are Prayer and Faith, Joh. 1.12. Faith in Christ is appointed to be the
Instrument of an Actual or Effectual Application of forgiveness; and this faith
is the gift of God, Joh 6.44. Ephesians. 2.8. Prayer for Pardon, by faith in the
blood of Christ is a Means by Divine Institution to obtain Pardon actually to
be applied to the Soul. Hence it is our Duty and our Privilege, and should be
our Practice to apply by faith in Prayer to Christ for Pardon. If any man Sin
we have an ADVOCATE with the FATHER, 1 John 2.1. Now our Sins are many, and
daily, even after we have given up our Names to CHRIST. 1 John 1.8. If we say
we have no Sin, we deceive our selves; therefore we must confess our Sins and
repair to God in Christ for forgiveness. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive our Sins, etc. Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked man
forsake his way, etc. Jer. 3.12. Return thou backsliding Israel, and I will not
cause mine anger to fall upon you, etc. Only acknowledge thine Iniquity. Acts
5.31. Christ the Mediator is Exalted to give Repentence and Forgiveness:
Clearing us, upon our first Union to Him, in the Court of Vindictive Justice,
from our Danger of Eternal Death; and upon our new acts of Faith and
Repentance, also in the Court of Rectoral Holiness and Fatherly Discipline.

II. PROP. The Consideration of this, should have the force of an Argument to
Persuade, and of a Rule to Direct true Christians to forgive one another.
There Is Reason sufficient in Christ's forgiving us, and delivering us from the
Destructions that we have Deserved, for our forgiving of men that injure us,
and delivering them from our Anger and Revenge, which they might fear that they
had provoked. CHRIST has Merited the Divine Pardon for us, and humane Pardons
from us for our Brethren: His Examples both teach and move.

Here are two Conclusions.

1. Conclusion. The Consideration of this should have the force of an Argument
to persuade true Christians to forgive others. If CHRIST has forgiven them,
then they should forgive those that have offended them; because the Members
must be Conformed to their Head: for it is very inconsistent to have a Proud
and Wrathful Member under a humble Head crowned with Thorns and Patience.
Hence the Example of Christ is urged by Christ and his Apostles chiefly in
those things which belong to Charity and Humility. If I have washed your feet,
you ought to wash one another feet, for I have given you an Example, Joh.
13.14, 15, 16, 17.1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
Example, that we should follow his steps, V. 22, 23. Who when he was reviled,
reviled not again: when he suffered, be threatened not; but committed Himself
to Him that judges righteously. 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in
Christ, ought himself also so to walk, even as Christ walked. Christ having
shown most tender Respect to us, though we have been most faulty, 'twere a base
and unworthy ingratitude as well as Dissimilitude to Him if we should not show
a very tender Respect to His Members, though faulty.

2. Conclusion. The Consideration of this should have the force of a Rule to
Direct true Christians to forgive others. Christ's Example has the force of a
Rule in directing the true Christian in his Spiritual Life, as it contains a
perfect Idea of Virtue. Hence said Bernard, What have you to do with Virtues,
who are Ignorant of the Virtues of CHRIST? Where I pray you is true Prudence,
unless in the Doctrine of CHRIST? Where is true Temperance, unless in the Life
of CHRIST? Where is true Fortitude, unless in the Passion of CHRIST? But let us
show this in acts of forbearing and forgiving: In Christ's acts we have a most
perfect rule of Imitation, whether we behold what Christ did bear and forgive,
or from whom, or lastly in what manner Christ did forbear and forgive.

1. In Christ's Example of forbearance and forgiveness we have a most perfect
rule of Imitation, if we consider What CHRIST did bear and forgive. CHRIST was
treated with most bitter and heavy Revilings; He was called a Glutton, and
Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, Mat. 11.19. Joh. 7.20. Luke
11.18. They called him a Devil a Madman, a Blasphemer, an Impostor, and what
not? Nay, they did not only treat him with ill Words, but with ill Deeds; they
did spit upon him, they crowned him with thorns, they beat him with many
stripes cruelly, they crucified him: Yet these so many and so great Injuries he
bore Patiently and forgave them. Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive
them; for they know not what they do.

2. In Christ's Example of forbearance and forgiveness, we have a most perfect
rule of Imitation, if we consider the Persons from whom he received those
Injuries, viz. From the Rulers of the People, from the People themselves, from
those that were Ignorant, from those that were Malicious, from Strangers, from
his Acquaintance, from Jews, from Gentiles; In a word, CHRIST received Injuries
from all sorts of men, yet he bore them all Patiently, and forgave them all,
Luke 23.34. bearing no private Spleen against any.

3. In Christ's Example of forbearance and forgiveness, we have a most perfect
rule of Imitation, if we consider the Manner of his forbearance and
forgiveness. CHRIST did not do it through Infirmity, because he was not able to
Resist; but he did it through humble and voluntary Obedience, because he was
willing to suffer. Isa. 53.7. He was Oppressed, and he was Afflicted, yet be
opened not his Mouth: he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep
before her shearers is dumb, so be opened not his Mouth, Mat. 26.53. CHRIST did
not do it with a Deceitful and Dissembling mind, Meditating and desiring future
revenge; but Christ did it with a pure heart, and an Inflamed Charity, Praying
Earnestly to his Father freely to forgive them, Luke 23.34 Such has been
Christ's most perfect forbearance and forgiveness of Injuries! Concerning which
the Apostle says, As Christ has forgiven you, so do ye; therefore we ought to
write after this Copy, and though we cannot arrive at the Perfection of it, yet
we should Endeavor after an Imitation of it, as far as we can.

The USE is of EXHORTATION. Let us all apply to CHRIST for Pardon and
Forgiveness; and then let us forgive One another, as Christ has forgiven us.
1. Branch of the EXHORTATION. Let us all be Exhorted to repair to Christ for
Pardon and Forgiveness. Every one should labor to get his Sins Pardoned; This
is the peculiar concern of every Person in this Congregation, that has not
obtained a Pardon. You must have forgiving Grace or you are Undone through
Eternal Ages. You stand in an absolute indispensable necessity of forgiveness!
Else what will you do in time of Danger? In Sickness? In Death? In Judgment?
Oh! whether will you cause your shame to go? What unspeakable Misery will fall
upon you? How will you bear that last and dreadful Sentence, Depart from Me ye
Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels? Does not
enlightened Conscience tell you that you must be Pardoned or you must inevitably
Perish? Does not awakened Conscience inform you, That your Sins are grown over
your head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for you to bear? And that the
Wages of Sin is Death, Eternal Death? Romans 6.23. And that the least Sin being
against an Infinite God, deserves this Death and Condemnation.

Oh then!

Consider 1. That there are Terms of Peace and Pardon tendered to you:
Forgiveness is offered to such as you; Not to fallen Angels, not to those that
never had the Gospel, not to such under the Gospel as have Sinned the Sin unto
Death; nor to such as are already past out of this World in their Sins: But to
you is the word of this Salvation sent. Acts 13 38. Be it known unto you
therefore, Men and Brethren, that through this Man is Preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins. v. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have
set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for Salvation
unto the ends of the earth. So, Luke 24.47. Repentance and Remission of Sins
must be Preached in Christ's Name among all Nations. It is part of the work of
the Gospel Ministry to offer the Terms of forgiveness to Sinners that live
under the Preaching of the Word. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. We then as workers together
with him, beseech you also that ye Receive this Grace of God not in vain:
Behold now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of Salvation. Come to
Christ, Unite with Him and take your Pardon of Free Gift.

Consider 2. By whom these Terms of Peace and Pardon are Propounded unto you.
Even by the Great GOD Himself. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. -- God has reconciled us
to Himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto
Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, etc. It is by Christ, that He
calls Sinners to repair to Him. Joh. 7. 37. In the last day, that great day of
the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto
Me and Drink. And Christ incourageth poor Distressed Souls to come, by
promising to entertain them kindly upon their coming to Him. Joh. 6.37. All
that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me, and him that Comes to Me, I will
in no wise cast out. Yea, CHRIST ingageth Rest to them in this Way. Mat. 11.28,
29. Come unto Me all ye that Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will Give you
Rest.

It is also by the HOLY GHOST that those Terms of Peace and Pardon are
propounded to Sinners. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, come, etc. And
the Gospel Ministry are to Assure Sinners, That GOD the FATHER, SON, and HOLY
GHOST are in good earnest in this matter. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. Repent and Turn
your selves from all your Transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your Ruin.
Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby you have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will you die, O house of Israel?
For I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
wherefore turn your selves, and Live ye.

Consider 3. How and by Whom this Peace and Pardon is procured, even by the Son
of God Himself: It is by hi^ Humiliation and Obedience unto Death; Christ shed
his most precious blood to procure this forgiveness Heb. 9.12.14. and 10.10. He
offered up Himself an offering once for all. It is by his stripes that we are
healed, Isai. 53.5. Yea, Christ lives to make intercession for all that come
unto God by Him, Heb. 7.25.

Consider 4. For whom this Peace and Pardon are provided, and to whom this
Peace and Pardon are offered: It is to Sinners to the chiefest of Sinners, that
live under the dispensation of the Gospel, and have not Sinned the Sin unto
death: There is yet a door of hope set open unto them; in that there is a
Savior born, whose Officework it is to Save his People from their Sins: And
this Savior tenders himself and forgiving-Grace to them, which is matter of
great encouragement and hope, Luke 2.10,11. Paul accounted it so. 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a Faithful saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. When Sinners feel
indeed that they have nothing to pay, and so fly to Christ alone by Faith,
whether the debts be more or less, then is Christ's special season frankly to
forgive them, Luke 7.41, 42. Here I must resolve a great Case of Conscience.
viz.

Question: How shall I know that my Sins are forgiven me?

Answer: Sincere love to Christ is an infallible Evidence that the Sins of that
person in whom it is are forgiven, how many so ever they have been, Luke
7.47,48. Her Sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much.

Let me here show,

1. What an Evidence is and the sorts of them?

2. What this sincere love to Christ is, that is an Evidence of forgiveness?

3. Whereby it will appear, That this love is an infallible Evidence of this
forgiveness?

4. Whence it is that this love is such an Infallible Evidence of forgiveness?

Quest. 1. What an Evidence of forgiveness is? Answ. An Evidence of forgiveness
is something that is fit to make it known to, and convince the judgment of it,
That such an one's Sins are forgiven; unto whom it was a secret before, and a
doubt or question. As here, Her love to Christ was fit to prove her forgiveness
by Christ.

Now for the sorts of Evidences. Evidences are either Probable or Necessary and
Infallible.

1. A Probable Evidence draws an Assent of the Understanding unto it, only as
an Opinion that such an One's Sins are forgiven, which is therefore called the
judgment of Charity, if it concerns others, as distinguished from the
judgment of Certainty; Now there are Arguments that bind us to this judgment of
Charity that another Sins are forgiven: As Profession of the true faith, and a
Subjection to the order of the Gospel, when there is nothing against it in the
Life; these are outward acts which ordinarily proceed from gracious Habits; and
yet do not necessarily conclude Saving Grace and the forgiveness of Sin,
because they are Arguments only probable, they do only infallibly Evidence
common Grace, not saving Grace: A visible Saint in certainty, is a real Saint
in charity, not always in certainty; many of which fell away in the days of the
Apostles, and do also in these our days.

2. A necessary or infallible Evidence, is when there is a necessary connection
between the forgiveness of Sin, and that which does argue it^ so that the one
cannot be without the other. And of these infallible Evidences there are two
sorts.

(1.) That which is inherent in the Pardoned Sinner, and that is, a gracious
qualification wrought in the heart, which brings forth fruit in the Life: which
the Apostle calls something accompanying Salvation; such is Love, Heb. 6.9, 10.

(2.) That which is Adherent, and consequent, and that is a Divine Testimony.
Thus Christ Testifies and says, Her Sins which are many are forgiven; so Mat
9.3. Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee: Both these are
infallible Evidences, and the Witness of the SPIRIT is never without the
Evidence of some saving work in the heart, but always follows it in order of
Nature.

Qu. 2. The Nature of Sincere Love, what it is? I shall lay it down in these
five Particulars.

1. The Object of this Sincere love which infallibly evidences forgiveness, is
Christ, considered in the Excellency of his Person, and of his Relation, and of
his Office, and Work. Christ is the special Object of this Evidencing love, He
lies next the Soul in this love; And it is the Excellency of his Person, that
draws forth this love of the Soul to Christ; he see's Christ altogether lovely,
Cant. 5.10. -- 16. He beholds all created and increated Excellency in Christ.
Yea, the Excellency of Christ's Relation, and of his Office wherewith he is
invested, as personally united to our Nature, and called of God, to be the
great high Priest of our Profession, and that One only Mediator between God and
us, this moves the Soul to love Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 5.5, 6. The Soul looks
not only on Christ as able, nor only as willing, but also as obliged and
engaged by His Fathers call, and his own voluntary engagement, to save to the
utmost all that come unto God by Him, Heb. 7.25. And the Excellency of Christ's
work for Sinners, in his double State of Humiliation and Exaltation moves him
to love Christ.

2. The Act of this sincere love to Christ is a deliberate free full and
earnest choice of Christ as the most Excellent and Desirable One, Josh. 24.15.
Deuteronomy. 30.15 -- 20. [Please to turn to the place.] The heart is set upon getting
Christ as the Principle thing, Prove. 4.7. The Soul is willing to suffer the
loss of all, to part with all for Christ, Phil. 3 7, 8, 9.

3. The inward Principle and Spiritual virtue whence this sincere love flows,
is the New Creature, or a gracious frame: Love is a Grace that in its frame
comprehends all Graces; and therefore is a gracious frame set on work by Faith,
created together with it, by the Holy Ghost: For love is the fulfilling of the
whole Law, Romans 13.10. Love to God, and to Man, and to God-Man, M^t. 22.37.
Love, again, is the Image of God, for God is Love, 1 John 4 7, 8. Therefore
love fits and prepares the Spirit of a Christian to the whole work of practical
Christianity; and therefore contains in it, a body of gracious qualifications,
disposing and inclining the Soul effectually to be for Christ alone, Psalm.
73.25.

4. The End this sincere love aims at, and which it is carried out after, is
Union to, and Communion with CHRIST, and with GOD in Christ by the HOLY GHOST,
and that it may glorify Christ in all the privileges and duties of the New
Covenant.

5. The seat and subject of this love, it is the whole Soul, yea the whole Man.
This holy frame animates the whole man, and carries it out to Christ, and for
Christ; not only the Head to know him, and the Heart to make out after him, and
take up its full contentment in him, but the whole man to be his for ever, Body
and Soul. Hence the Spouse so often Expresses her love thus, I am my Beloveds,
and my Beloved is mine.

Qu. 3. Whereby may it appear, Tha^sincere love to Christ is an infallible
Evidence of forgiveness?

Answ. 1 In that the Scripture frequently refers to it as such, Ephesians. 6.24 Job.
14.21, 23.1 Cor. 8.^. Especially in that our Lord Christ Himself, the true and
faithful witness, ^th positively declared it, in using it to demonstrate
forgiveness, Luke 7.47, 48.

2. In that this love is proper unto the New creature, and therefore to those
that are forgiven. This sincere love to Christ is an inseparable property of
the New Creature; It belongs to all forgiven ones, only to forgiven Persons,
and always to those that are forgiven.

3. In that, love distinguishes a living and a dead Christian, a living and a
dead Faith, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Jam. 2.5, 8.

Qu. 4. Whence it is that love is such (...) infallible Evidence of forgiveness?

Answ. 1. Because it is an infallible Evidence of our calling according to the
Divine purpose, Romans 8.28. and therefore it demonstrates that we are
predeslinated and chosen; for we are chosen unto love, Ephesians. 1.4. Now whom he
has called he has also justified, Romans 8, 29, 30. Those that are justified
have their Sins pardoned, and are eternally freed from condemnation, Romans 8.1.

2. Because sincere love to Christ, is one of those better things than common
gifts, even those things that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.9, 10, 11.

3. Because hereby infallibly appears their saving Interest in the Covenant of
Grace, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Heb. 10.16, 17. Would we then know whether our Sins are
forgiven? Let us Examine whether we love our Lord Christ in Sincerity? Many are
deceived with such Evidences as are not infallible, but may deceive them: so
there is a false and hypocritical love that will not Evidence Pardon, but
deceive those that conclude their Pardon from it; and no evidence will secure
us that we are forgiven, without sincere love to Christ. Let us therefore
Examine, whether our love to Christ be sincere?

Now sincere love to Christ springs from the Souls thro'-conviction of its own
utterly lost condition, by reason of its own Sin, and Gods Wrath revealed in
the Curse, and also from a due sense of the ability and willingness of Christ
to Save to the Utmos^ all such as come unto Him. Thus it was with the poor
Woman of whom Christ said in, Luke 7.47, 48. Her Sins which are many are
forgiven her, for she loved much: The Israelites, their being stung with the
fiery Serpent indeared unto them the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.8, 9. Let us then
ask our own Souls, Whether we have been Evangelically sensible of our Spiritual
Sicknesses, and Soul-maladies, and of Christ's Ability and Willingness to heal
our Sin sick Souls? Oh then ^ Christ the Physician of Souls is exceeding dear
to us. Mat. 9.12, 13. The whole have no need of the Physician but the Sick.

Also if we have sincere love to Christ, our love is grounded also upon some
sight of the Personal Excellencies of Christ. Thus it was with Thomas which
made him say, My Lord and my God! Joh. 20.28. This love to Christ is laid as
the foundation of all Obedience, Exodus 20.2. Mat. 22.37, 38. Do our Sou^s choose
Him and God in Him, as our chief good and last end, and take Him as our only
way unto the FATHER? Is Christ our All, and most precious to us above all
preciousness? 1 Pet. 2.7. Yea, do we choose Him, because of those Excellencies
that are in Him? in his Person, Office, Work, and Benefits, as the only
Mediator between God and us, as One that being Equal with God, humbled Himself
for us? Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.

If we are sincere lovers of Christ, Then we embrace Christ, and Exalt Christ
in all his Offices, Of Prophet, Priest, and King, and Subject our selves unto
Him in respect to each of them.

Do we then Exalt Christ, and Subject to Him in the Office of a Prophet? Do we
love to learn of Him, and to be His Disciples? Are we sensible of our own
Ignorance and Folly, and our extreme necessity to be taught by Him, that we may
^^^n the truth as it is in Jesus? Ephesians. 4.21.

Do we Exalt Christ and Subject to Him as our great High Priest, depending upon
Him for our Atonement and Acceptance with the Father? Heb. 7.25. Do we apply
to Christ as our Advocate with the Father? 1 Job. 2.1, 2.

Do we Entertain Christ in his Kingly Office, and delight to Obey Him? Do we
seek the enlargement of his Kingdom in the World, and in our own hearts? Do we
love to know his Will, that we may obey Him; do we love to obey, that we may
please and honor Him? Do we cry to Christ for more Grace, and delight in the
Multiplication of Christ's Subjects, and the enlargement of his Kingdom? Are we
grieved for the Rebellion we see against Christ, and long for his glorious
Appearance? Do we say, Come, Lord Jesus! Come quickly, Rev. 22.20.

If we have sincere love to Christ, we make Christ's Interest our own; yea,
more than our own; be it Joy or Sorrow, Honor or Dishonor. Are we then
heartily grieved at the dishonor put upon Christ, by our selves, by Saints,
and by Sinners, especially by the Oppression of the Truth, and by the
Persecution of the Faithful People of God? Do we take singular contentment in
Christ's Exaltation, and in his Coming in Glory? And in the mean time do we
grieve especially for our own unsuitableness of Spirit to Christ, and of our
carriage toward Him?

If we have sincere love to Christ, we are heartily willing to condescend to
the meanest Services for his sake, whereby we may glorify him, or promote the
comfort of his People, Psalm. 84.10. Are we willing to be door keepers, in the
House of God, so that thereby we may Serve God? Are we willing to wash the
Saints Feet, so that we may Glorify Christ thereby? Joh. 13.14, 15.

If we love Christ in sincerity, we take observation of our Happiness or
Misery, of our Joy or Sorrow, by the nearness of Christ to our Souls, or his
departure from us. Psalm. 30.7. Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain
to stand strong: thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled.

If we love Christ in sincerity, our love to Christ is extended to all that are
his, and that belong to Him. This is the indearing Argument, they belong to
Christ, 1 John 4.20, 21.1 Joh. ^.1, 2.

If we love Christ we love his Presence, Company, and Communion in all the ways
and means thereof, in Holy Duties, and Holy Ordinances, and in Holy Fellowship
with his People in both, 1 John 1.3.4. Sincere love to Christ is earnestly
solicitous about his love, and most fearful of being deceived, Comt. 8^6. The
Soul cannot bear (without heart-trouble) any Eclipse of his Face, Psalm. 30.7.

If we are sincere lovers of Christ, we hate heart-wandrings from Christ, Psalm.
119.104, 113. Romans 7. last part.

Sincere love to Christ is deliberately willing, and glad to do, to suffer, and
to part with any thing for Christ, and his Truth sake, that it may cleave to
him, enjoy him, and glorify him.

In a word, This sincere love is impartial in his care to walk with Christ, and
to keep all his Commandments. Joh. 14.15. If ye love me keep my Commandments.
Thus we have this great Case of Conscience resolved, how we may know that our
Sins are forgiven us.

II. I now proceed to the Second Branch of the EXHORTATION. Let us forgive one
another, as Christ bath forgiven us. Our Forgiveness of others deserves not
Gods forgiveness of us: Nor can it make God a Debtor unto us: But God has been
pleased in Christ, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen, by his own free
promise to engage himself unto his Creature. Psalm. 18, 25. With the merciful,
he will show himself merciful. We should evidence our mercifulness by our
forgiveness of those that have injured us. Mat. 6.14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your Heaven^ ly Father will also forgive you.

Here I shall resolve that Case of Conscience:

Quest. Whether this forgiveness of my Brother be not inconsistent with my
dealing with him in a Church Way, when be has given me just Offense?

Answ. I answer, No, in no wise; the one ought to be done, the other ought not
to be left undone, both are incumbent Duty, being Commanded by the Lord of Life
and Glory, in whose Commands there is no contradiction: As for our forgiving
others, it has been already proved to be a Duty: And as for Church dealing with
a Brother that has justly offended us; it will appear to be a Duty, if we
consider, That Church dealing is a duty of Brotherly Love and Charity;
therefore it is said, If thy Brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone, Mat. 18.15. The neglect of this Church
Dealing involves us in the guilt of other men's sins, and of their perishing in
them. 1 Timothy 5 22. Ephesians. 5.7, 11. Here take a few Rules.

Rule 1. Church Dealing is not only a Duty of Obedience unto God, and
Subjection unto Christ, but of Righteousness toward man. Hence it is set down
amongst Duties which we Owe to man. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother
in thine heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin
upon him. And thus it is Commanded in the Fifth Commandment.

Rule 2. Though it be a Duty of Righteousness toward man, yet it is limited
unto men standing under Church Relation one unto another. Because it is a
Church Duty, and we owe it to all in Church Relation, both hypocritical and
sincere; yea, we owe it to them as Church Members; for it is a Church Ordinance
to be managed in a Church way.

Rule 3. Hence it is a Duty of Church Love and Charity. It is to be performed
toward all with Church Love and Charity; that is, that Charity which arises
from, and is grounded upon Church Relation. 1 Pet. 2.17. Love the Brotherbood.

Rule 4. There is a peculiar exercise of this Church Love and Charity, between
those that are truly gracious, and in that Relation each unto other, arising
from their Invisible-Church-Relation to Christ, and one to another. This Church
Love and Charity ought to be regular; there are standing Rules of this Church
Love and Charity, whereby it is to be regulated; and by those Rules we are to
judge of Repentance or Impenitency; those Rules must be Conscienciously
observed, and upon the right improvement of this Judgment of Church Charity,
according unto the right Rules of it, depends much of the regular and orderly
improvement of Church Dealing: We must shun both Extremes, either being too
remiss, or too strict, etc.

Rule 5. We are to proceed unto and throughout the whole course of Church
Dealing, by this Church Love and Charity, in the sincere, fervent, and
religious improvement of it from first to last. That is, we ought to exercise
it with utmost sincerity, both toward God, and one toward another, for God's
Glory, and one another Good and Salvation; and with utmost fervency, that is,
of Holy Zeal of God's Glory, and man's Salvation, and that with a religious
respect of Duty unto God, and one toward another. Indeed, the life and spirit
of Discipline, it is from the Exercise of this Spiritual Gracious Love and
Charity; because this Spiritual Love and Charity is that spiritual and gracious
Principle, whereby the Duty is performed. There is indeed need of the Exercise
of Faith, Humility, Self denial, Zeal, Meekness and Patience, and all Grace,
unto the right performance of this Duty; but Love and Charity is the most
proper Principle, which sets and keeps all other Graces on work; and therefore
we should not intermeddle in Church Dealing without true Christian Love and
Charity. It is true, that it is our duty to intermeddle with Church Dealing,
and we cannot without great sin omit it; but it is as true, that we shall
greatly profane Holy Discipline, if we want this Love and Charity. Oh then! let
us take heed that we do not intermeddle with Church-Dealing, with a contrary
Spirit unto Christian Love and Charity; that is, with a spirit of Prejudice,
Envy, Malice, Anger, Wrath, Bitterness, or with a spirit of carnal Self-love.

Rule 6. and last. This true Christian Love and Charity, will move and dispose
those in whom it is, to Desire to forgive Others, as Christ has forgiven them.
It will teach them to recompense to no man Evil for Evil, nor to be overcome of
evil, but to endeavor to overcome evil with good, Romans 12.17, 21. It will
reach them, to love their Enemies, to do good to them that hate them, to bless
them that curse them, and to Pray for them that despitefully use them, Luke
6.27, 28. And therefore it will move them to use all suitable and proper Means
[Church dealing is one agreeable Means and Method to be used] to recover their
Souls from the Error of their way; and thereby to Evidence their sincere love
to the glory of God, and the Spiritual and Eternal good of the Soul of their
offending Brother. Now it will Appear to be our duty to forgive those that have
injured us, as Christ has forgiven us If we consider,

1. That there should be a conformity in our Nature to the Nature of Christ our
Head. He is slow to Anger, and of great Mercy, Psalm. 145.8. Mic. 7.18. And
Christ is come in the flesh to renew the broken Image of GOD i^ man, and to
renew him after the Image of HIM that created him, and Christ does enjoin and
imprint this part of the Divine. Image upon all that by faith receive him: Luk
6.36. Be merciful as your Heavenly Father (...) merciful: and Mercy in the
heart is that Excellent habit whence forgiveness does proceed; and hence it is,
that where the Spirit of Christ comes, He assimilates their Nature to that
disposition, Gal. 5.22.

2. Consider, That that great Command enjoined by GOD in the Moral Law, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Obliges true Christians to this
forgiveness. And that this is much more enforced under the New Covenant, Even
to the love of our Enemies^ Mat. 5.44. and consequently to forgive our Enemies;
for love is that affection that produces Pardon, and this injunction lies upon
us under the same Obligation whereby we are bound to love our Brethren: for the
^ve we owe to God in Christ is that ^and Obligation that binds to whatsoever he
commands, Job. 14.15. Therefore if ye love me, love and pity and pardon your
Enemies, for my ^ake.

The consideration of the proportion of Gods and Christ's dealing with us does
in Equity and Reason oblige us to forgive others. Man 18.32. I forgave thee all
that debt, because thou desiredst me: should not thou also have had
compassion on thy fellow Servant, even as I had pity on thee. Therefore thus
Reason with thy self; God freely forgave me, when there was nothing in me to
enjoin, enforce, or deserve, or so much as to seek it, and is it not reasonable
that I should forgive my Brother, that (it may be) Seeks my pardon? But, if he
does not, our common Lord and Master enjoins it?

3. Consequently upon the former, the not observing of this Duty, does most
justly and reasonably deserve that such should not be forgiven. If I can so
boldly and unthankfully encounter a command of GOD, standing upon such just and
reasonable grounds; with what face can I expect a Pardon from Him a^ my
request, when I refuse to Pardon my Brother at Christ's command (...) New
Pardons are not given to Sinning Saints from their Fathers Court for a time, on
this Account.

4. The forgiveness of my Brother is no Meritorious cause of Christ's forgiving
me. The breach of any command is a Meritorious cause of Punishment; but the
observation of one duty cannot deserve the Pardon of the violation of another.
Christ requires me to forgive my Brother; and when I have done so, I have done
but my duty; and have not deserved my pardon; and therefore when I say, Forgive
me, for I forgive others; I make not the Pardon I ask, the wages for the Pardon
I gave: for as my Brothers offense against me holds not proportion with my
offense against GOD; so neither does my forgiveness of him, hold proportion
with Christ's forgiveness of me.

5. Nor consequently is my forgiveness of Others the Measure of that
forgiveness I beg of GOD. The offenses committed by my Brother against me are
not in truth so much offenses committed against me, as against God. My offense
against God is against an infinite Obligation, and against an infinite Glorious
Being; but my Brothers offense against me, as it relates to me, is but of
finite Relation and Obligation, and against a finite Person; and therefore the
Measure of the thing forgiven by me is too short, and too narrow to fit and
suit commensurably with that whereof I beg my forgiveness at the hands of
CHRIST.

6. Yet this noble Exercise of Grace in forg^ving Injurious Brethren for
Christ's sake is an Evangelical Qualification which the Lord is w^nt to crown,
in His Saints, by giving them fresh hopes and joys on account of it, of their
being out of Danger of Eternal Damnation, and being in a state of Justification
in Christ Jesus; and by vouchsafing to them New Pardons for their New committed
and repented Sins, and New Peace with their offended Father's Rectoral
Holiness; the fruits whereof are a sweet freedom from such hardness of heart
and plagues of Conscience, and falls, and buffettings, and with-drawments of
Divine Influences, and hazzards of falling short of the higher Degrees of
Glory, and from such Stings of outward Affliction (...) Churlish Revengeful
Christians guiltily expose themselves unto.

II. USE is a Word of Consolation to your selves, Dear Brethren! that have a^
cording to CHRIST's Pattern and Precep^ forgiven one another those offenses that
in an hour of Temptation have been given and taken by you. As we have desired
to Mourn for, and to be bumbled under the due sense of the Sins that have been
committed in this time of Division, amongst you; so we rejoice with you, and
give thanks to God for you, and for the Grace of God in you and with you,
whereby you have been ina^ bled from the heart to forgive one another as Christ
has forgiven you: Our dear Savior now Seal to your Souls the Scripture.
Evidence of his forgiving of you, in this Mark of it, [ viz. your forgiveness
of you^ Brethren,] according to his good Promi^ Oh! Remember His Words, in Mat.
6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men their Trespasses, you^ Heavenly Father will
also forgive you; But (...) ye forgive not men their Trespasses, neither wi^
your Father forgive your Trespasses.

THE END.
HOLY STRIVING Against Sinful STRIFE The Indispensable Duty of Godly Brethren.
Evidenced by the Holy SCRIPTURES. Also Love and Unity Encouraged, and
Contention and Division Dissuaded, in a POEM.

By JOHN DANFORTH, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Dorchester.

Boston: Printed for Eleazer Phillips. 1712.

The Priests -- Shall keep My Charge, and shall Teach My People the Difference
between the Holy and the Profane, and cause Men to Discern between the Unclean,
and the Clean,

Ezekiel. 44.15, 16, 23. Holy Striving against Sinful STRIFE.
GENESIS XIII. 8. And ABRAM said unto LOT, Let there be NO STRIFE, I Pray Thee,
Between ME, and THEE, and between My Herdmen and Thy Herdmen; For We are
Brethren.


DIVINE is the Record, Inspired and Renowned the Person, and most Gracious and
Exemplary the Speech not Presented unto you; and by you to our Joy and to the
great Glory of the God of Peace, practically Repeated, and graciously
Exemplified giving a blessed Demonstration that you are the Genuine Children of
Abram.

The famous Patriarch Shem was yet alive, (who was Abrams Great Grandfathers
Great Grandfathers Great Grandfather) When Abram (the Tenth from Shem) was
Called forth to be both Priest and Prophet of the most High GOD, and was Owned
and Blessed by Melchizedeck as Heaven's Special Favorite; and acknowledged by
the Hittites to be a Mighty Prince, Itinerant among them, having no less than
three hundred Trained Soldiers (Victorious Warriors) in his Princely
Household; having also a plentiful Herd for the Sustenance of his Numerous
Family.

In Abram, we see that a man may have much of the World, and yet not be a
Worldly man; He may be Laden, for Wealth, and yet Winged for Heaven; he may be
a mighty Prince among men, and yet be a mighty Prince with GOD. God lost
nothing by the Honorable Maintenance he bestowed upon his Prophet-Eliezer was
not a more faithful Stewerd to Abram, than Abram was unto GOD: Abram's Purse
was full, yet his Heart was free; he was not poor in the World, yet was he rich
in Faith: and, Whosoever has an Abraham's burden of Wealth upon him, he has
need of an Abraham's Faith to support him from sinking and breaking under it.
Abram's Heart was not lean, by Faith continually feasting on the Promises;
although his Herds were fat, being put to Forage upon the Commons of the
Canaanites; who were not so Churlish (as too many nowadays) to deny a Prophet
of God (differing from them in Religion) what they could spare from themselves;
for their Iniquities were not yet full.

Abram had his Crosses as well as his Comforts. The God and Father of the
Fatherless had made Abraham a Father unto Fatherless Lot, and for many years
they had much solace one in another. Satan envied this Comfort to Abraham, and
the Bountiful God designed him a greater: Lot must be Dis^is'd (he not being in
the Line of the Promised LORD MESSIAH) and must not be Abra^ms Heir. That so
Isaac (the Son of the Promise) might be Embraced. Abraham's and Lots Herdmen
quarrel about Pasturage: This was a dangerous Trap for their Godly Masters;
Abraham was aware of it, and dreaded to be taken in it; he would not fall into
a Sinful Strife with his Godly Ne^hew for all the World; it went very near his
heart to think of parting with his dear Kinsman and Companion, but the
ODIOUSNESS of Strife, and the abhorrence and horror which he had of it, put
him upon it. Farewell Lot, rather than farewell Love and Peace; He and Lot had
better Separate than Altercate, better part asunder, than quarrel together; far
better live and love at a distance, than live together at Sinful Variance.

In our Text Abraham manifests his dear Respect unto Lot, and his dreadful
Aversion unto Strife. He Ushers in his Treaty with Entreaty; [I pray ^e,] He
introduces his motion for parting (which immediately follows) with that which
was the only reason for his making of it, viz. His An^pathy to Strife, and
Resolution against it: All Sinful Strife was abominable to him; he could endure
none of it; [ Let there be NO Strife between me and thee, etc.] And he
justifies his Reason by alleging their mutual Relation, (which ought to be
preserved inviolate, and not be profaned by Strife) [For we are Brethren] We
are near in Blood, and nearer in Religion: If we live in Strife, as Carnal
Idolaters do, our Sin will be much greater than theirs; we shall dishonor God
more than any others, and disparage our Holy Religion; and shall do greater
mischief by the perniciousness of our wicked Example: Sinful Strife is bad in
all men, but will be most vile, odious, and atrocious in us: Surely we ought in
a most holy manner to strive and endeavor against this most sinful Strife of
Godly Brethren.

DOCTRINE.
Sinful STRIFE of Godly Brethren is a very Odious Thing, and the Saints have
and ought to have an extreme Dread of it, and Antipathy to it, and to be holily
striving against it.
Three things we shall here endeavor as the Lord shall help us, viz.

1. To show what Sinful Strife is.

2. To Open and Demonstrate the Odiousness of it, on the account whereof it
ought to be dreaded by the Children of God. And,

3. How they may and ought to be striving against it in an holy manner.

I. To show what Sinful. Strife is. And forasmuch as there is an Holy Strife
and Contention; see Jude v. 3. Where we are Commanded to Contend earnestly for
the Faith; and for^smuch as Rectum est index sui et Obliqui: That which is
strait is the Ind^^ whereby we discover what is Straight, and (...) is Crooked
(...) and forasmuch as whatsoever is Sinful, is morally Defective, Know
therefore, that Strife is Sinful, if it be defective, if it want any of the
choice Ingredients that go to the making of Godly Strife; and there are no less
than Eight of them, viz. Good Principles, Good Ends, Good Frames, a Good Cause,
a Good Call, a Good Time, a Good Manner and Degree, and Good Instruments, When
all these are Good, then Strife is Good, but if any one is Evil, the Strife is
Depraved thereby and made Evil.

I. Strife in an Evil Cause is Sinful. How Good soever it is to be zealously
affected always (even unto an holy striving) in a thing that is Good, Gal.
4.18. It is as wicked to stand in an Evil Thing, and much more with both hands
to strive for it, Eccles. 8.3. Mic. 7.3. Thus to have a man's Bow bent for lies,
(to strive for Errors, Will worship, Idolatry) and not to be valiant for the
Truth (but against the Truth, and against God's Holy Ways and Ordinances) is
very sinful, Jer. 9.3. Thus also to strive for an Office and Employment which
God has (by withholding due Qualifications and Abilities to Capacitate a man
for it) forbidden a man to meddle with, is Sinful, and an unlawful Tempting of
God, Mat. 4. Romans 12.3. It Is also sinful and directly against our Lord's
Direction, in Luk 14.8, 9. to affect a Superior Seat, and to Contend for it;
and yet how many Congregations and Assemblies of Sion have been in Convulsions
for this Cause! It Is also a Sinful Strife, when a man contends to have his Will
and Humor, in the Management of Affairs, against Order, Rule and Counsel. It Is
a Wilfulness and Headiness of an horrid Character and Heinousness, 1 Timothy 3.4.1
Cor. 6.3, 4. Acts 15.1 -- 6.23, -- 29.2 Sam. 20.18. And inasmuch as the Glory
of God, and Good of Mankind make it necessary, that Convicted Criminals should
not escape without meet Discipline and Punishment, Exodus 21.24, 27. Lev. 24.20.
Deuteronomy. 19.21. Josh. 6.13. -- 15. Therefore' it is a Sinful Strife when men, through
Partiality and forbidden Pity, strive to rescue either themselves or others,
when scandalous Offenders, from due Domestical, Ecclesiastical or Civil
Discipline; nor is it the less flagicious, because frequent and common, to the
great obstruction of Good Government and Reformation. Also when a man is
lawfully under Government in Family, School, Church, Province or Kingdom, then
against right to strive to cast off the Yoke, it is a sinful Strife for Liberty
and an atrocious Rebellion, Romans 13.2.

It Is also very Sinful to strive against the Payment of Just Taxes and
Tributes, Romans 13.6, 7. Mat. 22.21.

Strife to Get or to Hold what belongs to another, and to with hold from the
Right Owner his Goods and Possessions is sinful and unrighteous Strife, Judge.
11.23.1 Joh. 5.17.

Sinful also is a Strife of Tenaciousness of what is a man's own; when a man
will struggle and contend to the last, before he will part with, or relinquish
his private legal Claim and Right in any thing, although his holding of it
hazard the Peace and Safety of the Community, wound the Spirits of Godly
Brethren, and directly expose some Neighbors to commit Sin, and to ruin their
Souls. See Romans 14.15, 20, 22. Romans 15.2.1 Cor. 8.13. And forasmuch as our Lord
has shown us, that a blow or two ought to be patiently born and put up, and a
Suit at Law, (Commenced against us) also overlooked, and a Coat and Cloak too
be readily Resigned and Sacrificed for the prevention and remedy of grievous
Strife, Mat. 5.39. Therefore for a man (when in little things his proper
demands and demonstrations of his Right prove unsuccessful) to pursue and vex
his Neighbor with hot Strife for small Trifles unto the Contracting to
himself, and inflicting on his. Neighbor great vexation of Spirit, and to the
hazarding of the committing of much Sin, is wickedly to violate the Laws and
Rules of Holiness and Charity: That man is not only a Transgressor, but also a
lover of Transgression, who so far love Strife, Prove. 17.19.

Strife is also Sinful when a man fears that perhaps his Neighbor is in the
right, and he himself in the wrong: His Strife then not being of Faith, (but
waged with a doubting, fearing Conscience) is Sin, Romans 14.23.

II. Strife is Sinful, when its Principle and End are not Gracious, but Carnal.
A Godly man is two men; he has two contrary Principles in him, viz. Grace and
Sin, continually at War, one with another. Now if a man's Strife is, in a Good
Cause from an Evil Principle, and for Vicious Ends: His Strife is Ungodly, and
makes work for Repentance.

So, to strive for Religion, and for the Defense of the Truth, and Confutation
and Suppression of Error, from a Principle of Vain Glory; (a man's Aim and End
being to make to himself a great Name) it is exceeding loathsome in the sight
of God: God requires that we bring no strange Fire for his Holy Altar, but that
our strivings for him, and all our actings before him, be fired with the
Heavenly Flames of pure Zeal for his Glory, and not our own Vainglory, 1 Cor.
10.31. Gal. 5.26. Phil 2.3.

To strive for Victory over our Antagonists, for Victories sake, and not for
the sake of an higher End, and a better Good than Victory, is culpable of
Impiety.

Also because a man is like to be out-shone by his Neighbor, therefore to Wage
Strife with him, to prevent or eclipse his envied Felicity or Glory, is to
commit Iniquity, and shamefully to violate the Divine Law, that injoins us to
desire, pursue and rejoice in our Neighbors Good, as really and constantly as
our own, without Envyings, 1 Pet. 2.1. 1 Cor. 13.4. Jam. 3.14, 16. Gal. 5.26.

And forasmuch as not the misery of the Offender, but his reclaiming, not his
shame, but the Glory of God, not his ruin, but the Public Safety, and the
warning of, and prevention of the Sin of others, are to be aimed at in the
Punishment inflicted upon him, according to the Rules of Christianity, and of
Humanity; and for a man to hate his offending and punishable Neighbor in his
Heart, is absolutely forbidden: ( Prove. 17 5. and 24.17. Lev. 19.17. Gal 5.20.)
therefore to Strive against a man to bring Mischief on him for Mischiefs sake,
and to Strive for his Punishment (though he has injured us) to gratify our
Passion, and to manifest and give vent to our own vexation and rage, (a thing
too too common among Christians, in their Prosecuting of Offenders in Courts
and Churches,) is to strive sinfully, spitefully, barbarously. Verily not to
inform against, and prosecute and punish Scandalous Offenders, is a Cruelty to
all Societies, and traitorous against the Public Weal, and highly provoking to
God; and so also never to inform against them, but when (on account of personal
Injuries) a man has a mind to show his anger and resentment, and to vent the
same spitefully by revenge, is to commit Iniquity in seeking to punish it, and
to testify against Scandal, with a greater Scandal.

Again, To Strive against a Neighbor, from a love to Strife, and because a man
delights in Contending, is wicked with a witness; for he loves Transgression
that loves Strife, Prove. 17.19. And the more delight there is in Strife,
there is the more Sin in it.

To strive against a man, without being heartily grieved, that a man has cause,
and is necessitated so to do, and without heartily wishing, Oh that it were
otherwise! and without endeavoring to put an end to Strife, as soon as may be;
and to strive from a lust after, and pleasure in Quarrelling, is not God-like
and Saint-like, but Diabolical, Psalm, 68.30. Prove. 2.14.

Again, If the lust of inordinate Worldliness be the Principle that animates a
man's Strife with his Neighbor; and if his secret end in striving for a
temporal supposed Right, be to gratify that Lust, although no illegal course
be used in the management of the Strife, yet is the strife vicious; and the
Holy GOD, who^ looks into the inmost thoughts, abominates the wicked mind (as
well as the wicked hand) and Dete^ whatsoever is produced from i^ 1 King. 8.39.
Prove. 21.27.

III. Strife is Sinful when it is managed in a sinful manner. And thus a man may
strive in a Good Cause, from a good Principle, upon a good Call, and for a good
End; and yet his Strife be very Evil, culpable and unjustifiable: An Error in
the Manner, once cost the meekest man upon Earth, an Exclusion from the Land of
Promise, (though not from Heaven) for he spoke unadvisedly with his lips,
(Psalm. 106 33) at unawares, and said, Hear ^e Rebels, Numb 20.10. and struck
the Rock that he should have spoken to: giving an Admonition to the best of
mere men on earth to fear greatly, when they must engage in Strife, and to fly
to Heaven for guardance, where they are in such ^tream danger of missing it in
the ^nner and measure, to the great ^ischief both of themselves and of others.
Now the Manner of Strife is ^inful, and the Strife sinful, when in ^e strife,
near Relations and dear fellow members miss of, and are robbed of that singular
Tenderness and Kindness and Respect that is ^ue unto them, and which to
withdraw from them, is horrible Iniquity, Mic. 7.6. Isa. 9.19 Romans 1.31.2 Tim.
3.3. Deuteronomy. 15.9. As also when, in Strife, Superiors in Family, Town, School,
Church, Province and Realm, are any of them treated irreverently, saucily,
malapertly, or rebelliously, without due Respect and Obsequiousness, contrary
to the Fifth Com^andment, Exodus 20.12. Lev. 19.32. Romans 13.7.1 Pet. 2.17. Ephesians.
5.33. So also when Strife is managed in a way of Insolency toward Equals, and
of Imperiousness toward Inferiors, with a slighting or despising of them,
Luke 18.9. Contrary to the great Gospel Rules, in 1 Pet. 5.5. Romans 12.10. Phil.
2.3. of esteeming each other better than our selves, and of being subject one
to another, i^ honor, preferring one another; and forasmuch as Christians are
commanded to be courteous, 1 Pet. 3.8 therefore to be uncourteous in Carriag^
or Language in Strife, incurs guilt and if a defectiveness of Decency and
Civility therein are intolerable, wha^ shall we think of Scurrility and
Reviling? (calling bad Names, etc. These shut a man out of Heaven and run him
into Hellfire, Mat. 5.22.1 Cor. 6.10.

And verily it is a crying Crime t^ strive with a Neighbor vexatiously
exasperatingly, and with unjust provocations to his Spirit, 1 Samuel 1.6, 7 and
2.3.9. Gal. 5.26. Ephesians. 6.4. Exo^ 22.21. Lev. 19.33. There is also certain
excessive stiffness, pertinaciousness and obstinacy that is forbidden, Psalm.
75.5. Moreover the Strife forbidden and sinful, that is carry on without due
meekness and moderation, and pushed forward without gentleness and Christian
forbearance, Gal. 5 23. Col. 3.12. But undue and violent heats, passionateness
and furiousness render the strife abominable, Jam. 1.20. Prove. 21.24. and
14.29. and 22.24. and 29.22. So also do D^eg-like uncandid suspiciousnessess,
and hard, wrong, and false insinuations in Strife, 1 Samuel 22.8, 9, 10. Psalm.
55.3. and 52.1, 2, 5.1 Cor. 13.5. Yet very rarely is there any great strife
without them, to the unspeakable prejudice of holy Brethren, not to be
recovered again, for many years, if ever in this World. Very faulty also is
Strife, by reason of its being managed and carried on by Tatling, Talebearing,
Whispering, Reporting, Repeating, Aggravating, what Brotherly Charity binds a
man to overlook, and conceal, Romans 1.29. Prove. 18.8. and 11, 13. and 17.9. and
26.20. and 20.19. Lev. 19.16.2 Cor. 12.20. Deuteronomy. 19.15. Thus as frequently, as
wickedly, are divu^ged, all the secret faults, that in their whole lives, men
have espied, in their Neighbors, to lessen their Reputation, weaken their
Interest, and disable them from managing their Cause, to Effect and Success.
That Strife also is not free from Sin that runs into Schism; as when a man
having Strife with a Brother, will not Sit down with him at the Lord's Table,
rending away from the Communion of the Church on that account unduly, Heb
10.25.1 Cor. 11.18 and 12.25. Or in a passion turning over to another Sect.
And, that Strife abounds with Transgression, that is managed by undue
Party-makings, and Party-taking, Sidings, Divisions, Factions; Effects and
Evidences of too far prevailing Carnality in Spiritual men, Hab. 1.3.1 Cor.
3.3, 4. And the bane of Churches. Striving is catching, and it aggravates the
Sin of some that they labor to inflame others, (as the little angry Dogs do
set on the great Mastiffs) and make themselves guilty of other men's Sins, and
Ruins. All injurious striving is sinful because injurious: If a man strive in
a very good cause, yet ^s his strife sinful if he wrong his Neighbors by
striving in a wrong manner, Col. 3, 25. Again, inasmuch as Christians ought to
act reasonably and so as to convince and satisfy reasonable men, therefore
Strife is sinful when it is managed without producing solid arguments and
sufficient Reasons, Proofs and Evidences, Mat. 18.16. Deuteronomy. 19.15. Also a man's
strife is sinful, if in it he act Discomposedly and with too great a ruffling
of mind, such as makes him unfit for Prayer, and other Duties, and Ordinances,
and for Communion with the LORD in them, Luke 21.19. As also (...) a man has no
Patience but act untreatably, 1 Timothy 6.11. Prove. 14.29. Eccl. 7.9.1 These. 5.14.
And also if he strive with a sinful Alienation of Spirit from his Neighbor,
not loving him with a pure heart fervently, nor heartily Praying for him, for
his good, nor readily forgiving him, 1 Pet. 1.22. Mat. 5.44. and 6.14. Also
Disorderliness and Unruliness and Confusion manifested in the manner of
striving render the strife Sinful and Displeasing to the GOD of Order, Jam.
3.8, 16, 1 Cor. 14.33, 40.1 These. 5.14.2 These. 3.6. So does also Partiality
shown and acted in strife, Jam. 2 9. and 3.17. Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.31. And very
highly Provoking to GOD is all Subdolousness and Unfairness, all Falsehood,
Treachery, and base Under-hand-Dealing, when strife is really and dreadfully
continued and acted yet under false shows of Courtesy, Amity, and
Peaceableness, Lev. 19.11. Prove. 27.6, and 11, 18. Psalm. 51.21. Moreover the
strife is sinful that is managed with verbosity, with too many words; For in
the Multitude of Words there wants not Sin, Prove. 10.19. It Is yet more sinful
if managed Brawlingly and with Clamor, Ephesians. 4.31. Titus. 3.2. It Is yet more
sinful if managed with such fierce Threatenings as may produce terrible fears
and uneasinesses in the hearts of Neighbors, Ephesians 6.9.1 Pet. 2.23. Or if
attended with evil Wishings, and Cursings, Job 31.30. Psalm. 40.14 Rom 12.14.
And Invocations of the Devil? But how dreadfully sinful is it, when it comes to
Blows and Murder! Then it is unmerciful indeed and horrible. Romans 1.30. And yet
strife has filled Christendom with not only most bloody Wars, but also most
barbarous Massacres.

Again if strife of Neighbors be carried on irreconcilably perpetually,
endlessly, it is very sinful and abominable, Prove. 17.14.2 Sam. 20.18. Yet
furthermore there is a sportful Strife in Wrestling, Running, handling a
Weapon, etc. which grows sinful when too Intensely managed, and when it takes
away the heart from it is intenseness in matters of Religion and Virtue; and
instead of moderately Recreating of men's spirits, to fit them for serious
business, does really dull them and unfit them, and when it needlessly hazzards
life or limb, and wastes time, and estate, unprofitably, and perniciously,
Eccl. 11.9, 10.1 Cor. 10.7. Hos. 4.11. Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5. Isa 46.6. And as
too great eagerness in Ludicrous-strife is sufficient alone (though there were
not (as there often are) other evil ingredients causes and circumstances,) to
make that strife sinful, so too great indifference and carelessness in strife
about serious matters, and the using of lightness and slightness in striving
for the Truths of GOD, the Ordinances of GOD, the Cause of GOD, the Glory of
GOD, and the Kingdom of CHRIST, striving for them in a vain and profane manner,
without awful seriousness and heavenly zealousness, will render a man's strife
sinful and condemnable, Gal. 4.18.1 Tim. 6.20.2 Tim 2.16.2 Cor. 1.17 Col. 2.18.
Such a manner of striving for Religion becomes not GOD's witnesses, and Truths
Champions. Thus strife is sinful when it is managed in a sinful MANNER.

IV. The strife is sinful if a man want a good Call to an engaging in strife;
(if the strife no ways belongs to him, Prove. 26.17. If he has no Divine
warrant, to guard and fortify his Conscience, to justify his Action, to
encourage him to Pray over his Strife, and to believe and hope in the LORD for
the divine acceptance of it, and assistance in it, 1 Timothy 4.5.) Or if he go
beyond his call and line in the degree of his strife, whether he be an
Aggressor or a Defendant, an Original Party, or a Second, and do contend for
Spirituals or Temporals, Public interest, or Particular, (such a going beyond
a man's call and warrant, being a sinful presumption and tempting of GOD) Or if
his striving be out of season and irregular as to the time, if it be on the
Lord's Day, when men are called to Actions of another nature, if it be at a time
when it is evident that Satan will be much more gratified directly by the
strife, than GOD glorified, and apparent that Religion and the Souls of men
will lose and suffer much more than there is any likelihood of their gaining
thereby, Luke 6.29. Or if unlawful instruments are made use of in the strife to
the profanation of it, and Infidels engaged against Brethren. 1 Chronicles 12.19.
Isa. 8.12.2 Chron. 25.7 -- 9. and 19.2. Thus we have seen what sinful strife is.

II. We are now to open and demonstrate the Odiousness and Horridness of this
sinful strife, whence it deserves to be greatly dreaded and abhorred by the
Godly Brethren.

1. Strife has most odious Causes. Now that cannot but be it self odious, that
is the natural issue of that which is loathsome and odious. Evil strife is from
evil lusts, Jam. 4.1.11. Whence come Fightings (Quarrellings) come they not
from lusts that war in you. Indwelling sin in the Godly spawns forth many
odious lusts, and these lusts spawn forth strife.

1. Pride is an odious Lust, a most loathsome Thing; Prove 6.16. It Is an
abomination to the LORD. Prove. 8.13. Pride and Arrogance the Lord hates. Now
sinful strife is from pride, Prove. 13 10. Only by pride comes Contention. So
that all other causes of contention are beholden unto pride for their Efficacy,
for without the prime operation of pride, they could not produce it, Prove.
28.25. He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife: but the wisdom which is
from above, which is pure and peaceable, Jam. 3.17. Is with the lowly, Prove.
11.2. Who do in lowliness of mind esteem each other better than themselves,
Phil 2.3. And are yielding and submissive to one another, Ephesians. 5.21. Which
prevents strife: but it is odious Pride that boiles up in the scalding caldron
of strife.

2. Inordinate self love and love of the World are odious lusts; There Is most
detestable Idolatry in them, Col. 3.5. And the Lord abhors them, Psalm. 10 3.
Now sinful Stri^e is from inordinate Self-love, and love of the World. The
Times are Quarrelsome and Perilous, and men are dangerous and hurtful one to
another, when men are lovers of themselves and of the World, 2 Timothy 3.2. when
all seek their own things, Phil. 2.21. And when one tries to draw to his own
side, what another Strives to draw to his; and none will deny himself. or lay
down his Worldly Interest. A Worldly Interest is a dividing Interest: Self and
World are Idols where Brethren are set for Ciphers, to be incroached upon, and
striven with.

3. Envy is an Odious Lust. It Is not of the Spirit, but of the Flesh, of
Corruption; Gal. 5.21. And of the Devil, Jam. 3.15, 16. Where Envy is, there is
every evil work, Jam. 3.16. Such as are Judicially forsaken and abhorred of God
are filled with it, Romans 1.28, 29. full of Envy, Acts 5.17. and 13.45. Now
Sinful Strife is produced by Envy. When the Philistines envied Isaac, they
strove with him, Genesis 26.14, 15, 20. They that are full of Envy, are full of
strife and debate, Romans 1.29. Jam. 3.14. Such as grudge and are grieved that a
Neighbor is too happy, and out-shines themselves in Honor, Wealth, Wisdom, or
any other good thing; their Envy puts them upon a striving against him to
deprive him, Mat. 27.18. Acts 7.9. Ecl. 4.4. How odious and contrary to God is
this! Mat. 20.15. Is thine eye evil, because I am good?

4. Inordinate Angriness and Wrathfulness is an Odious Thing. It Is contrary to
the Meekness and Mercifulness Commanded in the Gospel; it is irrational and
brutish, Eccl. 7.9. Prove. 14.29. It Is Outrageous, Cruel, Murderous, and
Diabolical, and Accursed, Genesis 49.6, 7. Prove. 27.4. and 21, 24. It Is contrary
to the Spirit of God, and to Holiness, Gal. 5.20.1 Tim. 2.8. Now Sinful Strife
is produced by finful Wrathfulness, Prove. 15.18. The wrathful man stirs up
strife, Prove. 30.33. The forcing of wrath brings forth strife, even a strife
full of Unrighteousness, Jam. 1.20. An odious Daughter of an odious Mother.

5. Hatred is an Odious Evil. It is joined with Witchcraft, as a fruit of the
flesh, that is, of Original In^dwelling Sin, Gal. 5.20. It Is contrary to love,
which is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. and contrary to the new Command
of the Gospel, and to the Character of a Christian, Joh. 13.34.35. Now Sinful
Strife is produced by Hatred, Prove. 10.12. Hatred stirs up strifes. They who
hate their Neighbors are murderers in their hearts, 1 John 3.15. and will deal
hatefully, and strive wickedly, Ezekiel. 23.29. Isa. 66.5.

6. Impatience, Injuriousness, Implac^bleness, Spitefulness, Revengefulness are
Odious Things: (What are the men who are of a spiteful, mischievous,
irreconcilable Spirit, that will put up no Injuries, and that have no
Conscience of Righteousness, but the very Children of Belial, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7.
The man that shall touch them has need to be fenced with Iron) Now those Odious
Evils engender strife; for Injuriousness to others, provokes them, and begins a
Quarrel; and the other Evils mentioned, seek and have their first vent in
Strife to bring Affliction, and to execute vengeance (yet contrary to the
Gospel) upon ones Neighbor, who is mistaken for an Enemy: Thus the Scorpion
Maggots of Strife are bred of the Fruit that is forbidden, Romans 12.19. Prove.
24.17. and 25.21. and 20.22. Gal. 5.26. Prove. 3.29. Luke 6.37.1 These. 5.14.

7. Vain Credulity, Jealousy, and Evilsurmisings, Rashness, Headiness,
Disorderliness, and the ungovernable Disposition in Christians especially, are
Odious Evils, full of folly, Prove. 14.15.1 Tim. 6.4. full of Uncharitableness,
1 Cor. 13.5. and most contrary to God, who is the God of Order, 1 Cor. 14.33.
and contrary to the Weal of humane Societies, 2 Timothy 3.1, 4 and tending to
their Ruin. Now these Evils beget Strife, and the Peace of Brethren is broken
by them. When the Backbiting Slanderous Tongue meets with an over-credulous
Ear, and an Uncharitable Mind entertains Evil Jealousies of Neighbors, then
all their words, and actions are looked upon with an evil Eye, and taken in the
worst sense, and then Men will quickly suppose that they have found ground
enough of Displeasure and Debate, and their Spirits will be disposed to fall
out with their Neighbors, especially if Rashness, and want of due
Consideration be added to their evil Jealousy; and if their Headiness hinder
them from harkening to good Counsel, offered them by the Wise and Peaceable;
and if they refuse to observe the Rules of Order; then Peace will certainly fly
away; and Discord and Contention will come in its stead. Peace and Quietness
are the Genuine Product and Issue of Good Government and Order well observed, 1 Timothy 2.2. Judge. 21.25. and 20.14, and Strife and Broils of the contrary. Thus
in Seven particulars we have shown, that the most Odious and Loathsome
Corruptions and Causes have their foul issue and effect in Strife; They spawn
forth strife, they have their vile Activity in strife, they smite on the Anvil
of strife, the Coals of Sinful strife of Brethren are continually blown up by
the loathsome Breath of most Noisome and Noxious Lusts; And Belial Lusts are
very Rampant, and have a glorious time of it when they have produced strife
among Brethren. But the steams that issue out from a multitude of putrified
carcasses are not more odious and abominable to humane nature, than the steams
of sinful strife are unto Grace, that fume up from so many most loathsome
Carcasses, and horrendous Vulcano's of Lust.

So much for the First Demonstration.

II. That which has a most Sinful Nature and most Heinous Aggravations, and is
very Contagious, and causes Men to commit a Multitude of vile Transgressions,
is an Odious and Horrendous Evil, earnestly and zealously to be Striven against
by the Saints of God: But Sinful Strife of Brethren has a most Sinful Nature
and most Heinous Aggravations; It is very Contagious, and causes men to commit
a Multitude of vile Transgressions: It is therefore an Odious and Horrendous
Evil. The sweetness and excellency of the Divine Law of Peaceableness shows the
Odiousness of the Nature of the Unpeaceable Lust of strife. Strife is very
sinful and vile, if the Will of GOD be very Good and Holy; For it is the Will of
GOD that we meddle not with Contention; Prove. 17.14. That the Servants of the
LORD strive not; 2 Timothy 2.24. That Christians walk not in strife; Romans 13.13.
But that they live Peaceably with all Men, Romans 12.18. Especially, That they be
at Peace among themselves; 1 These. 5.13, And that they follow Peace with them
that Call upon the LORD; 2 Timothy 2.22. And Follow after the things that make for
Peace: Romans 12.18. Yea that, as much as in them lies they live Peaceably. We
see then that the Vice of Strife and the Will of GOD are contrary. Now to
Contradict the Perfect and Acceptable Will of GOD is Odious Again, That Is
Odious that is most Different from, and Unlike to the most Lovely Nature of
GOD; Now Strife is most Unlike to the Nature of GOD; and most Different from
the most Pacifick Perfections of GOD, most Different from the Love, Sweetness
and Goodness of GOD, from His Radiant Philanthropy, Benignity, Fidelity,
Equity, Compassion, Condescension, Clemency, Patience, Forbearance,
Long-suffering, and Indulgence, Qualities that demonstrate Him to be the God of
Peace, and not of a Contentious Nature. Again, That Is Odious that is contrary to
a Man's Glorifying GOD, as GOD; now it is contrary to a Man's Glorifying GOD, as
GOD, by Sinful Strife to be Unchristianly Quarrelling with, and discouraging,
Grieving, Vexing and Hurting of the Children of GOD, who bear the Image of
their Heavenly Father. Again, that is Odious to a Saint that separates him from
the Lord; Now sinful Strife does so; For as when a Man carries it Litigiously
and Abusively to a Neighbors Child, he scarce knows how to look his Father in
the Face; so a Christian by reason of his Rebellious, Abusive, Injurious, and
very Guilty Strife does grow Shy and Timorous, and is Staggered in his Hope and
Boldness, and has not his wonted Freedom in the Presence of GOD. Again, that is
an Odious Evil, and may well strike the Saints with some degree of horror, in
which they find themselves Rebels against the Light, and Covenant-Breakers with
God and Brethren, and acted by the Devil and Vilest Lusts, and Practically
justifying of the Ungodly in their Sins against the Brethren, and hardening them
therein; Now in their Sinful Strife with the Brethren they find themselves
Rebels against Light, Covenant-breakers, Sinridden, Devil-driven, and on the
side of those that Hate the LORD, with blistered and bleeding Consciences, a
Tattered and Sullied Livery, and a Blotted Character; Aggravations, (One would
think) sufficient to startle them, and to Terrify them from Meddling any more
with Strife against the Brethren. Verily the Nearer and more Frequent Communion
a man has with GOD, the less he has to do with this Iniquity, and the more he
does and will abhor and eschew it. Again, If an evil be Contagious, Spreading,
and Infectious, it is the more Odious and Horrid: Now the Plague of Sinful
Strife is Contagious and Infectious: It spreads quickly and over-spreads whole
Streets, Towns, Churches, Realms: It ferments like Leaven, Diffuses it self
like Volatile Spirits, Runs like the Lightning, and carries all before it like
the Devouring Fire. A few Strangers among the Israelites fall a lusting, and
strait way all the Congregation of Israel lust also, Numb. 11.4. And Corah
strives with Moses and Aaron, and presently the Chieftains, Dathan and Abiram
and their Companies take part in the Strife: and that man (Corah) Perished not
alone in his Iniquity, Numb. 16.1. Psalm. 106.17. One Righteous Man (in his
Error) blows the Trumpet of Strife against another Righteous Man, and bids him
Defiance; and perhaps at first a Duel only of Words is intended; yet presently
great Multitudes take the Alarm, and are Mustered in Strong Parties, into the
Partnership of their Error, Engaging in Fierce Battle; and among them, Many
that are not Saints but carnal; and though the Saints are Recovered of their
Wounds, by Sovereign Grace; yet Others dye and perish for ever, Psalm. 34.21.
filling up the Measure of their Sins, by their Opposition to the Righteous, in
which they manifest their Spite and Hatred against them, and against CHRIST in
them. Now the irrecoverable Perishing of Carnal Persons through the Infection of
the Example of Good Men's Strife, it renders the Sinful Strife of Good Men very
Odious in the eyes of such as desire Men's Salvation, and abhor to have a Sinful
hand in their Eternal Ruin. Again, That Is an Odious and Formidable Evil to the
Children of GOD, that Seduceth them to Commit, and Involves them in the Guilt
and Filth of a Multitude of Great Transgressions; Now Sinful Strife does thus
seduce and involve them: Strife opens the Catarracts and Sluices of Sin to make
an Universal Deluge: Prove. 17.14. Where this Strife is, there is Confusion and
every evil Work: James 3.16. Therefore he Loves Transgression that Loves
Strife, Prove. 17.19. Odious Omissions and Neglects of Known Duty, Odious
Obstructions of that which is Good, and Oppositions to it, and Odious
Perpetrations of Evil are from Sinful Strife. To Exercise Devotion toward GOD,
and to Worship GOD inwardly and externally are Great Duties, Sweet and Precious
Duties; But this Odious Strife is a Foe, and a Bar to the Well-doing of 'em.
The fumes of Adust Choler and the Pest^ferous Vapors that Spring from
Crudities and Indigestions do not more Obstruct and Annoy Nature than the
feculent and pestiferous Fumes of Strife do Obstruct and Annoy Grace; mightily
helping the bad Principle in acting of Evil, and hi^dring the better Principle
in a Saint that would be doing of good: For as an Odious Cancer by drawing that
which should be for the Nutriment of the Natural Flesh, unto its Self, does
consume the Flesh and weaken the Body; so sinful Strife by Employing and
Spending the very Life and Strength of the Soul in its own Service, it leaves
the Soul Listless and Unapt to Acts of Religion; it depauperates it so far,
that it becomes too feeble and infirm to Engage in, and Go^ through with the
Exercises of Intense Meditation, Fervent and Importunate Prayer, Seraphic
Thanksgiving, Right, Diligent Hearing and Improving of the Holy Word of GOD,
and Receiving of Sacraments, and Cuts off all Freedom of Spirit in Communion
with GOD; It so creeples the Soul, that it cannot raise it self up Heavenward,
as it was wont before, and it causes that the Saint shall have but Little Time
and less Heart for Acts of Religion, (that require the whole Heart, and
sufficient Time,) and too little Life, Power, and Vigor therein. The Iniquity
of Strife must be Suppressed or the Religion of Prayer will be Hindered, 1 Pet.
3.4, 7, 9.

Many of the Dear Children of God can give evidence to this heavy charge
against Strife from their own dear experience. Thus Devotion and Religion may
say to wicked Strife; Host thou found me O mine Enemy! and verily Justice and
Charity may each of them say so also; for this Strife is an odious Foe to them
both. This Strife will not allow a man to be his Brothers Keeper; nor permit
him to think worthily of his Brother, or speak peaceably to him, and
respectfully of him, much less to act profitably for him; but as to the
Admonishing of him for his good, with pity, kindness, meekness, sweetness and
wisdom, this cursed Strife most powerfully prevents and obstructs that. And as
for the Exercise of the Duty of Brotherly Forgiveness, Strife is like the made
Horse in the Chariot that pulls backward, and the sinful Striver must be forced
to say the Fifth Petition of the Lord's Prayer backward, or else he will Curse
himself; for if God should no otherwise Forgive him then he Forgives his
Offending Brother, he were undone. Yea, this Odious Strife will neither do good
it self, (and never did good for good's sake) nor will let others do it; hence
when one Party proposes and engages in any Enterprise tending to much Public
Good, the Evil Spirit of Strife stirs up the other Party to manifest an
Antipathy against it; and from Emulation, and through Jealousies and
Misprisions, and by Misrepresentations and other ill Practices to be putting of
insuperable blocks in the way, so that most excellent attempts, through the
malignant influences of Strife are rendered fruitless. Nor is Strife only faulty
for neglecting and obstructing that which is Good, but also for positive direct
Acts of Evil: For Multifarious and very Nefarious Perpetrations of Iniquity are
justly chargeable upon it: To profane God's Ordinances, (such as Praying,
Preaching, Fasting, etc.) is an Odious Iniquity: Yet this is done by Strife:
Christ says, Pray for Enemies much more for Brethren; Strife profanely says,
Pray against them: Christ says, Bless them; but Strife Curses them: and they
that fast for Strife, do Fast to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; and they
that Preach Christ of Contention, pollute their Offerings in God's Temple with
Sulphur and Wildfire, which God has forbidden, Phil. 1.15 Such Strange Fire is
loathsome to GOD. But though Strife carries on Religion and Temple Work with
odious and provoking Carnality, yet it impudently says (with Je^u) Come see my
zeal for the Lord of Hosts; which is not zeal but a tainted Passion, most
abominable to the Lord of Hosts. No man is fit to offer any Gift on God's Altar
in Sinful Strife; he had better leave it not offered; Mat. 5.23. Leave thy
Gift, etc. Also Strife makes men most scandalous even in their Exercising of
Discipline toward the Scandalous. Again, To profane Gods Providence, is an
Odious Iniquity; yet Strife does this also: Are Providence prosperous to the
Striver, the Spirit of Strife in him impiously proclaims a justication from
Heaven, and that Almighty GOD is of its Party, yea, its Patron, when as He
abhor^ it. Are Providence Calamitous to the Opposite Party; The Spirit of
Strife is glad at the Calamities (which yet is a provocation to God, Prove
17.5.) and profanely says, that its hard thoughts of, and wicked Censures it
has passed upon Brethren and Antagonists, are allowed and owned in Heaven. But
if the Divine providence work not for the Striver, and against his Opposite, as
the Spirit of Strife would have had it, the man is ready to treat Providence it
self, and the Lord of Providence, Sacrilegiously and abusively; and to charge
the Lord foolishly, and wickedly; Yea, to take grievous offense at Him, so as
to fall out with Him, and to fall off from him, and not easily to be Pacified
and Reconciled. Again, To profane and abuse God's Saints and Servants, is an
Odious Iniquity; for they bear the Divine Image, and they cannot be profaned
and abused without scandalous violations of the Great and Glo^ous Commandments,
in the Second Table of the Law, and of the precious Precepts of the Gospel, and
of the Grace thereof: But this Sinning and Sinful Strife does profane and abuse
God's Saints and Servants, violating both Law and Gospel. But to vilify the
Saints, to blacken 'em, discourage 'em, sadden 'em, weaken 'em, tempt 'em to
Evil and to treat 'em sordidly and unworthily, and to disown, and deny the
Grace that is in them, and the Good that is done by them; and to turn that
Light whereby they should shine before men, and Glorify their Heavenly Father,
into Darkness, is to profane and abuse Gods Holy Ones: Now Sinful Strife is
wont to do all this; violating the Divine Precepts, as well as hurting the
Brethren, by odious misp^^^ons, suspicions, alienations hatreds, ill-wishings,
revilings, jearings, scornings, irreverend carriage, disorderliness,
discourteousness, unkindnesses, clamours, affronts, injuries, and acts of
Revenge, Slandrous Defamations, Deceits, Over-reachings, (all of them works of
the Flesh forbidden) and by manifold unjust provocations of the Brethren; and
scandalous Miscarriages, odious to God and man: Not to mention Man-slaughters,
sometimes committed in Strife; nor the bloody, barbarous Wars of Christian
Nations. Oh thou Odious Strife! how do thou cause the Name of the Eternal God
to be blasphemed, and the Names, and Spirits, and Virtues of his Children to be
blasted; and how amazingly do thou multiply Transgressions among men!

III. A third and last Argument for Demonstration of its horrid Odiousness, (on
account whereof the Saints ought to hate and dread it, and strive against it)
is to be taken from the Consideration of the dreadful Punishments that it is by
the Holy Anger of God Recompensed with; and of the distressing, destroying Woes
and Plagues that it is the procuring cause of. That Evil which brings down the
Wrath of God, and dreadful Spiritual and Temporal Plagues is Odious and
Horrendous: But Sinful Strife is an Evil that brings down the Wrath of God, and
dreadful Spiritual and Temporal Plagues: Therefore Sinful Strife is Odious and
Horrendous. Sinful Strivers, and men of Contention are often punished for a
time, as the Experience of Saints and Churches does testify, with some degrees
of Blindness of Mind, and Hardness of Heart, and Searedness of Conscience, and
Withdrawments of the Spirit of God, with sad fears, with want of Restraining
Grace, with molestations from Satan, with decay of their Gifts, with disability
to near Approaches to God, and to Intimate Communion with Him; with loss of the
sense of the Love of God in Christ, with Diminutions of Confidence of being
Pardoned, and with Abdication unto vile Lusts; they find want of Joy in God,
little success of their Labors in Religion, little progress Heavenward, little
light of Gods Countenance, no sealings of Divine Acceptance of their Persons
and Works; they suffer under Blemishings of their good Name, and Frowns in
their Families and Estates; and for this cause many are sick, and some are
snatched away by Death. We judge not the Eternal Estate of all that joined with
Corah, in striving against M^ses, nor of the whole Congregation that strove
with him as well as Aaron and Miriam; yet though many of them we hope went to
Heaven, yet they suffered signally and dreadfully for their strife on Earth,
being Condemned as to Men in the Flesh. Fierce Contentions of Brethren have
been punished with terrible Persecutions from Heretical and Antichristian
Powers; and with the Sword of Barbarous Nations. And when Brethren will not
leave off their strife, but keep biting one another; God sometimes gives them
over to that fearful Judgment of being consumed one of another, Gal. 5.15. How
Odious and Horrendous is this Strife then that runs men into danger of all this.

III. But I pass to the Third Thing that was proposed, viz. To show how the
Saints may be striving against this sinful Strife in an holy manner; which may
serve for an Use of Direction, and with it I shall Conclude.

And here,

1. They will do well to make sure that they strive for Hol, Peace, and against
Sinful Sirife; they being in an Holy and Peaceful State, a state of Union with
Christ the Prince of Peace; a state of Peace with God through Jesus Christ; a
New Covenant state, a state wherein they have Right and Title to the Promised
and Purchased Blessing of mutual fraternal Peace, as a means of their
Edification in Holiness and Comfort in their Communion with God, and one with
another.

God may say to the man that strives for this Peace, without a Title, (as Jehu
once said, 2 King. 19.22.) What have thou to do with Peace? Get thee behind me.

Peace with God and Peace with Brethren are to be held by the same Title and
Tenure.

We should therefore pursue our Peace with Brethren, by assuring our Peace with
God in Christ. Let a man's heart be fervently engaged and employed in clearing
up, and renewing and confirming his Peace with God, and he will willingly and
easily drop his strife with his Brethren. May he but obtain the sense of the
Divine Love to himself, and a good assurance that his Sins are forgiven him, he
will with mavelous meekness, calmness, and sweetness, forgive and receive
offending Brethren.

2. The Saints should strive against Sinful Strife, from holy Principles, and
for holy Ends, and with holy Frames and Dispositions of Soul. He that finds in
himself that he is two men thorowout, may conclude assuredly, that he is a
Saint of God; if he is two in his mind, two in his wi^, two in his Conscience,
and Affections, etc. If he is still warring with himself, his good principles
against his bad principles, his good ends against his bad ends, etc. then is he
Renewed in part, in every part, and a partaker of Spiritual Life, Romans 7.22,
23. Now in his striving for Peace and against Sinful Strife, he must labor to
suppress all carnal principles, frames and aims, and awaken up, and strengthen,
and actuate, and make use of only those which are Spiritual and Holy; would he
strive holily, as a Saint, he must strive against Unbrotherly Fraternal Strife
as it is a Sin, a Contrariety to, a Rebellion against the Great Jehovah,
against the Father, who is the God of Peace, Love and Unity; against the Son,
who is the Prince, Purchaser and Donor of Peace, Love and Unity, and has
Interceeded with God for them; and most strictly enjoined and Required them in
the Saints; and against the Holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of Love and Peace
and Comfort, and seals them to the Saints, and is the Band of their Unity
together in Christ. Hence he must strive against it from gracious Principles of
Faith in God, Love to God, Fear of God, and hatred of Sin, and Holy Self-love,
and Love to Saints, with holy aims at the Glorifying and Pleasing of God, and
preventing the Dishonor of his Glorious Name, the disparagement of the Gospel,
the provocation of his Wrath, and the defeatment of the Saints of their full
enjoyment of the sweet fruits of Divine Grace. If a Child of God strive against
the strife of Brethren, under the Influence of Carnal Principles and
Dispositions; as his strivings will not be very pleasing to the Lord, so they
will prove lame, feeble, inconstant, and will carry him but a little way
toward the conquering of sinful Strife: but if he act under the influence of
holy Principles and Dispositions; his strivings against sinful strife will be
most conscientious, and spiritual, lively, vigorous, constant, indefatigable,
abundant and mighty through God. (For as a man's Principles, Ends, and
Dispositions are, so will his actings be;) The Saint warring against sinful
strife, under the power and influence of his best principles, will firmly
resolve and say, By the help of God, I Will have no strife with my Brethren, but
the strife of Love; I Will plainly and kindly rebuke 'em, and not suffer Sin upon
'em; but yet I Will embrace 'em, and not endure any strife with 'em; I Will bear
Contradiction from 'em, without making any irritating Retortions upon 'em; I Will
for peace sake, and on Christ's account, put up many lesser injuries at their
hands, since he has put up many greater at mine; I Will have no hand in leading
them or my self into Temptation and Transgression; I Will not injuriously offend
and grieve 'em, left I grieve the Holy Spirit of God in them; I Will heap coals of
kindness to warm their cold Charity; the more they whom my dearest Lord has
dearly bought, and dearly loves, are besides themselves, I Will pity 'em the more,
and not be bitter against 'em; I Will not beat up the Drum, nor fire the Beacon of
my Soul at the noise of every Pot-gun; I Will bear many a Squib, and to him that
has struck the one Cheek, I Will meekly offer the other, and send the Cloak after
the Coat, and deny my self, and blow away the loose corns of a little Money,
rather than by waging a wrathful strife with my Brother, to procure the
dishonor, and incur the wrath of the Immortal God; I Will not repay affronts and
injuries with revenge; and I Will venture my being called a Coward for it; In the
Name of God, I Will not be overcome of Evil, but I Will overcome Evil with Good; I Will
even leave my Gift at the Altar, that I may go to quench the unhallowed flames
of strife, if they have broken out; my Eyes shall be Water-spouts, and my heart
Rivers, to quench those Flames: I Will ply the Throne of Grace day and night, and
give the Lord no rest, and I Will ply mine own heart, and my Brethrens, and give
them no rest till the Pestilence of sinful strife be taken away, and the Glory
and Favor of God in Christ, and the Edification and comfort of his Children be
restored and secured. Hereof holy Paul was an eminent Instance and Example, who
labored and strove against strife, under the mighty influence of holy
Principles and Ends, invigorated by the Almighty Influences of the Eternal
Spirit.

3. In a special manner the Saints should strive against sinful Strife one with
another in the Exercise of mutual Holy Love, Meekness, Humility Forbearance,
and Condescension. The Holy wise Sovereign Providence of our LORD JESUS CHRIST
has so disposed that some Christians shall have more outward Means of light,
more abundant Instructions, more enlarged natural capacities and abilities of
understanding and conception of things, greater degrees of Knowledge and
Wisdom, and more of the divine Illuminations and Irradiations than others; though
all true Saints have sufficient to Bottom them upon the only saving Foundation,
viz. Christ Jesus, and God in Him, and it is the duty of all to improve their
outward helps and their inward abilities, with dependence on the divine Grace
and Aids, unto an increase in Wisdom and Knowledge, and unto a guiding of their
Thoughts, Affections, Words and Actions in all their duties toward God and
Man. But inasmuch as some have less Light and less Capacity of understanding,
and more Darkness and Weakness than others, it naturally follows, that they
should have a difference in their Apprehensions and Conceptions of things; and
their union in main Fundamentals being secured, their diversity of Opinions in
other matters may be permitted, nor has GOD promised never to permit the same;
only to secure their Peace and Union, he has given special order and charge for
their mutual Toleration, and Forbearance, in the things wherein they Differ;
and for an uniformity in Practice, so far as they have attained an unity of
Apprehension; and for a Patient Waiting 'till GOD shall reveal more to them, in
order to their better unanimity in other things, Phil. 3.15, 16. And also for
their constant exercise and expression of Honorable Respect, Profound
Submission, and Affectionate Love one to another, in the Bowels of CHRIST
JESUS, all their difference in Opinions, and in their Practices, concientiously
agreeable with their Opinions, notwithstanding, Romans 12.10. Ephesians. 5.21. And
finally for their setting up of men of Wisdom, by their Advice and Arbitriment
to end Disputes, to keep good Order among them, Acts 15.2.1 Cor. 6.4 -- 7. By
applying the General Rules, given in the Holy Word of GOD, unto particular
Persons, and Cases, according to their best Understanding; and for their
Submission to 'em in the LORD; All which by the Blessing of CHRSIT and
Influences of the Blessed SPIRIT on such as duly should attend the same, might
sufficiently guard 'em against the fatal Eruptions of Strife and Division, and
Preserve their Unity and Peace. Therefore among those who own and desire
Conscientiously to adhere and conform unto the main Fundamentals of Saving
Truths, according to the holy Scriptures, the Prime Rules of Religion and
Christian Practice, and of Righteousness and Equity; the grand and main
Principles of Prudence, and the Essentials of good Order; Strife is to be kept
down, by keeping up good Charity; Which passes over Transgressions, Prove.
19.11. And Covers a multitude of Sins, Prove. 10.12. and 17.9. And delights not
to discover men's Nakedness, (to expose them to shame, and provoke them to
indignation, Genesis 9.21. -- 25. Mat. 18.5, 15. Prove. 17 9. Which Charity also
Watches not for Iniquity, not makes a man an Offender for a Word, ( Isai.
29.21, 22. And takes not up Prejudices rashly, believes not ill reports easily,
Hates the Talebearer, and Back-biter, and judges not Censoriously, Psalm.
101.5. and 15.1, 2. Prove. 11.13. and 16.28. and 18.8. Mat. 7.1. James 4.11, 12.
But believes and hopes the best, 1 Cor. 13.4. -- 7. And is ready and easy to
accept of just Apologies, Josh 22.10 -- 20. Defers Anger, Prove. 19.11. James
1.19, 20. And lets not the Sun go down upon Wrath; Puts away all Spite and
Malice; Col. 3.8. Works no ill to ones Neighbor, Romans 13.10. Suffers long,
bears, and endures all things. 1 Cor. 13.4 -- 7. Puts on bowels of Mercy and
long-Suffering, and Gentleness and Goodness, Gal. 5.15, 22, 23, 26. Ephesians. 4.1,
2, 32. Col. 3.8, 12, 13. Banishes away all Bitterness, Clamor, and Evil
Speaking; Ephesians. 4.3 -- 6, 31.1 Pet. 2.1. Dreads to give any just cause of
offense and provocation; Avoids, (not Evil only, but also) All Appearance of
Evil, lest any should be Scandalized thereat. 1 These. 5.22. And Renders not
Evil for Evil, and Railing for Railing, but contrary-wise, Blessing for
Cursing, 1 Pet. 3.9. And if such as do Injury, were by Name never particularly
Prayed for, before they showed their distemperature in Opposing and
Persecuting; yet now it Prays for 'em heartily and fervently by Name; Mat.
5.44. And they are according to their folly dealt withal, not by an Acting like
unto 'em, but the contrary, Prove. 26.4. Not by being overcome of Evil, but by
overcoming of Evil with good, Romans 12.21. Not by committing Trespasses against
them in a way of Retaliation, but by forgiving them their Trespasses, in a way
of Liberality, Mat. 6 14, 15. and 18 35. both freely and frequently; and that
for CHRIST's Sake only who has deserved it, when men have not deserved that
they should be forgiven for their own sakes, Luke 17.3, 4. Ephesians 4.1, 2, 32. Col.
3.8, 12, 13.

Thus to keep up good Charity according to the Divine Commandments is the Way
to keep down Sinful Strife. Be not then over-rigid and severe in your
Resentments of the Actions or Words of fellow Christians that are grievous to
you; but make the best Construction of them, that a reasonable Charity can
Allow; Impute much to their Ignorance, Mistaken Apprehensions, Misinformations,
Temptations and mere humane Infirmities; Damn 'em not prefently as Persons of
Profligate Consciences; but treat 'em rather with meekness and gentleness,
patience and compassion as Persons hopefully Reclaimable; and suffer not the
Exercise of Private Spiritual Fraternal. Communion in Praying together and
conferring about the things of God to Cool or Fail by any means; Be often with
them, and Express your most hearty Love to them, in the bowels of CHRIST. All
Disposition in you and them unto Sinful Strife will be proportionably Weakened,
as your Mutual Love is Strengthened, and your Spirits sweetened by your Conjoined
Exercises of Religion and Communion with God. Make Conscience then of Approving
your selves one to another as most Sincere in Brotherly Love, as well as most
Upright and Steady in the Essentials of true Godliness, Righteousness,
Prudence, and Order, that you may get an Heart-Interest One in Another; and
then though your Minds are invincibly possessed with different Opinions leading
to some diversity in Practice, Yet considering that the things wherein you
agree are vastly more and greater than the things wherein you differ, and that
under Variety of Apprehension you Retain Unity of Affection, It Is not impossible
for you, by the Gift and Help of the Holy SPIRIT, so to manage Matters with
Wisdom, Forbearance and Condescension, as not to Contract the Guilt of being
disturbers of Mutual Peace: Those Incendiaries, Pride and Self Conceitedness,
Magisterial Impositions on one another, Impatience of Contradiction, Envy,
Self-Interest, Intrusions of New Opinions against fundamental Truths, Invasions
of Long Possessed Rights, Blind and Furious Zeal for lesser Points of Truth,
Order or Right, and all Gravaminous Mutual Reflections, being utterly Abandoned
and Abhorred by you. For then will you Discourse and Argue all things with
Sedate Minds; then will you be able to Hear Scripture and found Reason, as well
as Speak it; and to give Soft Words, and Sweet Arguments; then you will take to
heart your Neighbors Cases and Interests as well as your Own; and where
Conscience will suffer it, You Will be ready to meet 'em half way; Yea, so great
will your Self Denial be, that you will be Inclined to say as Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
19.26. Even let 'em Take all: Yea, you will not Assume to be your own judges, but
will willingly Submit to the Arbitration, Advice, or Judgment of Others; and
Ask at Abel, that so you may End your Matters? 2 Samuel 20 18. And you will not
grudge to part with a little inconsiderable Pelf, to purchase the very precious
and invaluable Jewel of Peace: Then you will humbly Resolve that that shall never
be gotten by strife that can be gotten by Peace: Then also 'twil do your hearts
good to behold the Good and Prosperity and Comforts of other men, and more good
to be the Instruments to procure'em: Then you will carefully avoid all undue
siding and Party-taking; but if you belong to ^ strong and difficult Party, and
have a Party strong and difficult against you and the Matter of Right contended
about, be very considerable, and Arbitrators and Judges are ^ivided in their
Opinions, and other ^rdinary means of issuing fail of ^uccess, then after much
Prayer to ^eaven; you will submit to a sacred ^ot, and by that Ordinance be
De^rmined, Prove. 18.18, 19. and 16.32, 33. ^ 17.1. Moreover you will count every
new injury done unto you to be a ^ew Probation that you are put upon ^y the
Divine Permissive and Overruling Providence, and will be more concerned to
acquit your selves well in Piety and Meekness and Charity under the Trial, than
to bring trouble on him that did you the injury; and you will account every new
injury to be a new call to some new act of Beneficence to the injurious person.
You Will count that when you provoke any Fellow Christians and Fellow Members, and
hurt them, that you hurt your selves, and you will your selves feel and be in
pain for every stroke and hurt that you inflict on others, which will make you
wary of dealing sharply with 'em; you will offer any thing for Peace, but to Sin
against God; you will not put by any really good motion out of prejudice to him
that makes it, through Indignation that he complies not with your Sentiments o^
outward Interest: You Will speak of others, as you would be spoken of your selves,
and speak to them as you your selves would be spoken to, and will do as you
would be done by; you will sanctify the Name of God, when he permits your
Brethrens falls, (when they sinfully fall upon you) and be more heartily
concerned in deep pity to them to obtain their Pardon and Recovery, than to get
any Revenge upon them for your selves; and praising God, that you yet stand,
you will be warned thereby to take heed lest you fall also. If any one be
overtaken in a Fault, you will endeavor to restore him in the Spirit of meekness;
considering your selves, lest you also be Tempted, Gal. 6.1. Also knowing that
Fructus liberat arborem, the Husbandman will not fell the Tree that is laden
with choice Fruit; you will labor that your Fraternal Peace be not exposed to be
cut down for its Laodicean barrenness; you will see that it be fruitfully
improved, as the Primitive Church's was; who having peace and rest, were
edified in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and multiplied, Acts 9.31. You Will
walk in, and work by the light of it, and not forfeit it by Security,
Sensuality, Worldliness, neglect of Ordinances, and Disobedience to the
Commands of Redeeming the Time, and working out your Salvation with fear, and
watching and preparing for the Coming of your Lord, and Exhorting one another
daily, while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the
deceitfulness of Sin.

And you will dread to dance after the Devil in the Enchanted Ring of Sinful
Strife, to the fatal hazard of all your best Interests for Time and Eternity.
Now the God of Peace help you to follow these Directions of His Holy Word, in
an Holy Striving against Sinful Strife; and give you Peace always by all means,
through Christ Josus, by His Holy Spirit; to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

LOVE and UNITY ENCOURAGED, AND Contention and Division DISSUADED, in a POEM.
THe Costly Nard, on Jesus Feet,
Was dutifully Placed:
Light fingered Judas vilely Cried,
What means all this Waste?
His Discontent at mild Reproof.
Shot forth in Wrath and Strife,
And Consultations of Revenge
Against the Lord of Life.
By Giving of the Pascal Sop,
The Traitor was detected,
The Supper of the Lord came on;
He being first Ejected.
Christ's Sufferings hastened on apace,
And He Prepared to Die:
His Will and Testament Declared,
And His last Legacy:
And thus Began; The Son of Man
Is Glorified Hereby;
And in Him, God is Glorified,
And shall Him Glorify.
My Children Dear! Says He, I go
Where yet you cannot Come,
(By Whom much Work is to be done,
Before your Martyrdom.)
Know All Me^, Ye are Mine: Let All
My NEW Commandment View,
That Ye must One Another Love,
As I have Loved you.
This New Command is Mine; This Test
If you Endure, when Tried,
And keep my Law, you in my Love,
And Favor shall Abide.
This Precept I Will Repeat, and say
My Love, that is wondrous Great
Unto you all, you labor shall
By Love, to Imitate.
Yea to my Friends, I Will say it again,
(Lest you Forgetful prove;)
I strictly do Command, That you
Shall One Another Love.
My Loves sweet Fruits, The Comfor^er
Shall then to you Impart,
A Life of Fruitfulness shall show
Your Heavenly Joyful Heart.
Abundantly when you shall Ask
The Father in My Name,
By all Our Truth, and Love, and Power,
We will Perform the same.
Much more He Spoke, Ending at length,
His Farewell Exhortation;
Then to His Father turned, and made
His Fervent Supplication.
O FATHER! Glorify thy SON;
WHO Glorifys Thee still,
And Gives to Men Eternal Life
According to Thy Will.
My Taught Apostles Sanctify;
From Evil keep them Free:
As Holy, FATHER! We are ONE,
ONE also Let Them be.
Not or the World, But Them I Pray,
And Such as shall Believe
On Me, by virtue of the Word,
They shall of Them receive,
As Thou ^t in Me, and I in Thee,
In Glorious Unity,
One in the Father and the Son,
That They may also be;
In Truth and Faith and Amity
That ever^ Christian Brother
Be Joined unto Me and Thee,
And All to One Another.
The World does Hate 'em, and will Strive
To Rob their outward Rest;
With God, with Conscience, and with Saints
My Peace shall make them Blessed.
My Peace to them I therefore give;
My Peace I with them leave;
May they Enjoy 't, till I shall them
Unto My Self Receive
To Purchase Love and Unity,
Dear Savior! Thou have bled.
And to pursue 'em, all thy Saints
Under strong bands have laid.
That these thy precious Legacies,
They surely may Inherit,
Inherent and Assisting Grace
Are offered, by Thy Spirit.
How is it then (since Thou have made
Such plentiful Provision,
For Love and Unity) we find
Contention and Division!
Those Blessings, if we don't enjoy,
The Fault and Blame's our own:
We Have shut up Heaven, if they descend
Not from that Glorious Throne.
The Means and End lie close Conjoined
In the Divine Decree:
Thou wait'st but till we use the means,
And well prepared be:
Thy Laws neglected, lose their Force;
Thy Promise is not Heeded;
Judgment on Murmurers takes Place;
So Grace is Superseded.
Our Meribabs are Multiplied,
As if we were Possessed;
Our Loose Affections soon Divide;
For Trifles, we Contest.
Our Honor's trampled under foot;
Our Crown is made Profane;
To many Souls, while Strife is rife,
The Means of Grace are vain.
The Storms grow long, the hopeful seeds.
Under the Clods grow rotten;
The Blasted Years of strife do make
The plenteous years forgotten;
By Hot Contention's Thunderbolts
Are Temples rent in twain;
Armies of Abels too, Advance,
Armed with the Clubs of Cain.
Battered and Shattered by such Storms,
Are best men's Reputations;
In vain they talk, while strife is loud,
of working Reformations.
And by strife's means, much Prayer is stopped
And much is turned to Sin:
It breaks all Dams; so Hells black Waves
Amain come tumbling in.
Setting aside the Fear of God,
And violently moved
By Instigation of the Devil,
Thousands of times (it is proved)
This wicked strife has broke the Peace
In Christian Families,
In Kingdoms, Provinces and Towns,
Churches and Colonies;
It has Eclipsed, to great Degree,
Each Radiant Quality,
That gave 'em greatest likeness to
The Eternal Deity.
Their Wisdom, Justice, Holiness,
Long suffering, Clemency,
Their Meekness and Indulgence too,
Love and Benignity,
God's Great and Glorious Name also
Strife vilely does Despise,
And what God's Soul Abominates
Does to Him Sacrifice.
The Halt and Sick and Mutilated
(Which God does not desire)
It does upon His Altar burn,
All with Vnballowed Fire.
An Enemy to the Vitals it is;
Seiz'ng both Heart and Head;
Many that seemed Alive before,
It Is Poisonous Breath strikes Dead.
To slay this fiery Dragon strife,
Where Is the Effectual Dart?
O Saints! God's Word's the powerful sword
That Stabs it to the Heart:
Let Faith God's Promises improve,
And Fear His Threatenings Weild,
And Conscience stand by His Command,
And Strife will soon be Killed.
And is it a Plague, then call for Prayer;
Our Churches often prove it;
No Hand but what inflicted it
Is able to Remove it.
Then set His Hand on work by Prayer,
Add Faith and Fasting to it;
If 't's possible to cast it out,
This Heavenly Course will do it.
Cutting Rebukes for to forbear
No such Forbearance is
As Christ will own, when milder means
Encourage the Disease.
Yet when Constrained to Cut and Lance,
Be sure you mourn and weep,
And tremble, lest by any means,
Your Lancet pierce too deep.
For things, in Notion, Disputable,
Not inconsistent with
Faith, Love, and New-Obedience,
Do not Strifes Sword Unsheath.
If you must needs come to Debate,
You greatly ought to fear it:
And for such Trial of Self-denial,
Bring a submitting Spirit,
Knowing your weakness, come (I say)
With some degree of terror,
Lest truth and right you would assert,
Should suffer by your Error.
Be not of Evil Overcome;
Be good invincibly;
That ill men by your goodness great,
At length may vanquished be.
Do Churlish Neighbors not deserve,
Your Pardons Peace and Kindness,
Yet Christ deserves; if you cannot see it
It Is owing to your Blindness.
Whosoever desires that He himself,
And others live at Rest,
Must Hear and See, with Charity,
And wisely say the best.
Be deaf to Tatling Tale-bearers;
Credit not all Reports;
Avoid the Charms of whisperers;
Forbear all sharp Retorts;
Would you not have the Sun seem Red,
Put by the Heliotrope;
If you would not hear the Clapper strike,
Then do not pull the Rope;
If you would not have the Blood burst forth,
The nose then do not wring;
Do not disturb the wasps or bees,
If you would avoid their sting;
Would you not have your Glass-house broke,
Then throwing stones forbear;
Would you prevent a Powder blast,
Then let no Coals come near;
Remove the Leaven you see laid
Before it be fermented;
Occasions of Disturbance, let
Be Carefully Prevented;
Forbear when Censures you receive,
Like Censures to return;
Of Fireballs make no Foot balls, lest
You Towns and Churches burn.
Are Spirits roil'd and blood inflamed
With Feavour to Convulsion;
Purge sharp and peccant humors well,
And make a quick Revulsion.
From he hot Caldron pluck the brands,
If you would not have it boil;
Would you not have the swelling burst,
Then supple it with Oil.
Although for outward quietness,
POWERS are and LOTS ordained,
Yet Lotts, and Lawsuits rarely use,
Lest they and Peace be stained.
Common Received Customs Good
R solve, not to oppose;
Nor violently to impose
What e're you shall propose.
In Doubtful Things and Difficult,
Be not too Peremptory;
Suspect, suspend your judgment then,
And be not Refractory.
Would you have good Peace and Unity
And Friendship with a Brother,
In Lawful Things let every one
Both serve and please each other.
Offenses neither give nor take;
Pray God to make you Wise;
Let Patience have its perfect work;
Meekness it is Exercise;
All Envy and Vexatious Wrath,
Well mortify you must;
Contention comes by Pride, this Pride
It must be ground to Dust;
Lastly, break not your Peace with God;
His Laws keep as your Life,
If you will secure your mutual Peace
And not be plagued with Strife.
Prove. 16.7. FINIS.

