The Sad Effects of Sin. A True Relation of the Murder Committed by DAVID
WALLIS, On his Companion Benjamin Stolwood: On Saturday Night, the first of
August, 1713. With his Carriage after Condemnation; His Confession and Dying
Speech at the Place of Execution, etc.

To which are added, The Sermons Preached at the Lecture in Boston, in his
Hearing, after his Condemnation; And on the Day of his Execution, being Sept.
24. 1713.

Boston, N. E. Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the
BIBLE in Cornhil. 1713.

The Unhappy Circumstances of a Young Man, whose Name was David Wallis, give
the Occasion for this Publication.
THIS Young man (...) at Boston-(...) near (...) rough, and had such a
Religious Education, as (...) more frequent there, (...) in many other Places*
When he was about Fourteen Years of Age, he broke away to a (...) faring Life,
in which he very much Lost (...) Good Impressions of his Earlier (...).

On Saturday, 1 d. 6. m. 1713. (...) the hours of nine (...) ten at night,
(...) board the Ship (...), to which he (...) (then in Boston Harbor, (...)
all the Day without any (...) well perhaps, if without any Drink (...) he was
angry because Benjamin Stolwood (...) not (...).

Benjamin Stolwood, was at this (...) in the place of (...) for the Ship, and
being asked, readily gave a good piece of raw Beef to them that came a board,
Wallis (having his knife in his hand to cut the Meat into slices) asked him.
Why he had got no Victuals for him? Stolwood made a proper and modest Answer;
but such as Wallis was not pleased withal: For he laid aside his Knife, and
struck Stolwood diverse blows with his Hand, and bid him, Be gone out of the
Cook (...). Stolwood returned nothing but a Gentle Answer; intimating, That he
would forgive him, on the score of his being a (...) his A^es. Hereupon (as was
(...) one of the Witnesses,) Wallis told (...) he would not be gone, he would
Stick him with his Knife. And then immediately struck his Knife at his open
Breast (as is deposed by two more,) before the Lad could well make any Escape;
he standing with his Back against the Bulk-head; the Knife entered (...) his
Left pap, with such a mortal stroke, that the poor Boy cried out, I am killed;
and removing his hand from the Wound, which at first he stopped with it, the
Blood plentifully gushed out, his Countenance changed, and in a few minutes he
died. One of the Witnesses hereupon telling Wallis, That he had killed
Stolwood, he only answered, If I have, I must answer for it. Next day, the
Coroner's Inquest Charged Wallis with the M^rder of Stolwood.

He was Tried at a Special Court of Assize, Held at Boston, on Wednesday the
Twenty Sixth of August; When the Jury found him Guilty, and so Sentence of
Death was passed upon him. The Judges, with the Jury. bestowed a most serious
Consideration upon the matter. The Law of our own Province is (...) for (...)
Murder (...). They (...), this the (...), I will stick you with (...) before
the stroke, was a sufficient (...) of (...). When (...) proceeds to Killing
(...) a Tool adapted for the purpose it cannot (...) suppose a criminal (...).
And the Threatening (...) yet (...) Evidently ^roclaime it. It was considered,
That it (...) a miserable (...), if our Lives might (...) Mercy of ever,
Murderer, c^ncer^ (...) it cannot be (...), that he had some day^ before
declared his (...) to commit hi^ (...). They considered how far also the Nature
of a Fact will make it Legally pass (...); and how far the Quality of (...)
which a strike is intended (...) pass in the Law (...) of God and (...) for a
Wilful Murder. They consider (...) Divine Direction; (...) XXXV. (...) to him
with an (...), he is a Murder (...) to Death. (...) Direction of the (...),
says, To the (...) Killing Men on (...) is in the Time (...) or Displeasure,
(...) contrary to the Common (...), may be restrained (...) every (...) who
shall (...), that (...) not then any Weapon (...). So as the Person so Stabbed
or Thrust shall thereof Dye within the space of six Months then next following,
although it cannot be proved, that the same was done of Malice Forethought (...)
the party so offending, shall suffer (...). They considered, That besides the
Direction to be fetched by Christian Nations, from the Judicial Laws of Moses,
concerning what is to be Esteemed a Capital Murder, Long before those Laws,
there was (...) Law of God, given unto Mankind Genesis IX. 6. Whosoever sheds Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; for in the Image of God, made he Man: A
Law Anteriour and Superior to all Humane Laws, and forever and every where in
Force, whatever may be the Humane Laws. And so the Sentence proceeded.

The Honorable Judges, that they might Extend all possible Clemency to him,
fixed not the Time of his Execution until the Twenty fourth of September. In
this Time, His Excellency the Governor had some occasion to consider, how
(...) might be proper to propose the Prisoner as an Object for the Queens
Mercy. But upon the most Mature Deliberation with Persons of understanding, and
as Mercifully disposed as any, but not for such Tender Mercies to some as would
prove Cruelties to all; the Nature of the Crime appeared such, as to bring the
Criminal within the Statute of Heaven, Prove. XXVIII. 17. A man that does
Violence to the Blood of any Person, shall flee to the Pit, let no Man stay him.

The poor Young man, before as well as after his Trial, was in such a pensive
Condition, as was agreeable to one under the Expectation of what was now coming
upon him. And he Expressed himself upon this purpose, That he had sinned, and
he deserved to suffer, and he expected it; It belonged unto him; and he should
patiently submit unto it; If he might (...) get into good Terms with Heaven
before he died, this was all that he had to be concerned about.

In this Time, the Ministers of the Town, with all suitable Compassion and
Assiduity, Visited him, and Instructed him, and Prayed with him; and not only
used more private Endeavors to prepare him for his Death but also pursued the
same Intention (...) publicly, when he had Liberty which was readily granted
him, to attend in our public Assemblies.

Under these Cultivations, he was brought unto such Thoughts and Frames, and he
took his opportunities to declare such Things, as the Reader will find related
in the Ensuing Sermon. He also declared, That he could not without wonder now
Look back on a very odd thing in his former Life; which was, That he had
abundance of Times, when only sporting with the Young man, he had (...)
Murdered, let fall these words to him, (...) I shall one day be hanged for
(...); God (...) me for saying (...) (...) could give no (...) of the
Impression; but now found himself Extremely astonished in the Accomplishment.

The Twenty fourth day of September arrived, when the poor Young man, having
been first instructed with a most Pertinent and Excellent Sermon, on Psalm. LI.
14. Deliver me from Blood ^^^tiness, O God, Thou God of my Salvation was
between the Hours of Two and Four in the Afternoon, carried unto his Execution.

A Minister of the Town, so far gratified the Importunity of his desire for it,
as to (...) him, for his Assistance in these last Minutes of his Life.

The Young man Expressed all the pious and proper Frames, that his best Friends
(...) have wished for him; and such as I hope, were a good Harvest, of the
Pains and Prayers and Tears, wherewith Good men had been Laboring for his
Welfare.

I will single out only Two or Three Passages, of what occurred in the
Conversation, (which could not be much) by the way.

The Minister asking him; With what Frame (...), poor David, with what Frame,
do thou (...) this grievous Afternoon? He answered: I Bless the Lord, I find
my Soul full of Sub^^ssion to the will of God.

Another time, the Minister asking him, Child what shall be Reported unto your
poor Father, if the grievous Tidings of this Afternoon (...) sent unto him? He
answered; Eat (...) ^ow, that I Dye full of Hope of the (...) my (...).

Another time, the Minister asking him, Is not the Terror of the Death just now
before you, too hard for you? He answered, No, not at all; my Hope in the Mercy
of God has overcome it.

He also declared, That his Hope was founded in the Blood of his Great Savior
shed for him, and in the Wonderful Mercy of God which allowed and invited the
chief of Sinners, to plead this Blood, and the Wonderful Mercy of the Savior,
who will cast out none of those that come to him: And that the Effect of this
Hope in him was, Hatred of all Sin more than ever, and a Desire to do all the
good that was possible.

He likewise declared, That the nearer he drew to his End, the more he grew in
his Hope.

Arriving at the Fatal Place, when the Noises produced on such occasions in the
vast confluence of People, were a little over, the Minister said unto him, The
desire of a Dying Man has brought me, what perhaps nothing else would have
done, to be present at this uneasy Spectacle, And now, David, you are come to
those last Minutes, which must be employed unto the best Advantage. You have
had set before you, the Nature and Desert of your Sins, and particularly of
that Crime for which you are now to suffer: And the contrition of Soul, with
which you are to acknowledge them. You have had the Tidings and the Tenders
(...) an Admirable Savior, who is Able and (...) to relieve you. You have been
advised (...) to Place your Faith in that (...), and then how to prove it in an
Hatred of Sin, and a Zeal for the Service of God. What remains is, That you now
Renew your Flight unto your Savior; And, Oh! What a Lively Flight in a Dying
Hour! And that you testify to the People of God, who have so much desired it,
the Repentance that God has (...) you: My poor (...), I put thee over into
those Gracious Hands that will save thee to the uttermost. Oh! May the Glorious
Grace of God shine forth on this mournful occasion!

He then made a short Speech unto the People, wherein he Justified both God and
Man (...) all that was come upon him; and (...) all the Spectators, to beware
of ungovernment Passion, and Sabbath-breaking, and Profane Swea^^ (...) Hard
Drinking, and ever doing any thing (...) should be grievous to their Parents,
which things, he said, had brought him to this (...) what he spoke at all
times, was usually pertinent enough; yet he was all along, (...) but very few
words. And so they (...) but few words, which he now uttered, (...) very
audible: To supply this, (...), That a paper, which he had given (...) days
before unto the Minister, might be (...); which was done accordingly.

Boston-Prison. 22. d. 7. m. 17^3.
Desiring to leave behind me some Expressions of the (...) with (...) the
World; I do first of (...) the (...) which has Condemned (...) Though I had not
Lodging in me a Long Hatred and Malice against the Young man whom I have
Murdered, nor a Long purpose of Killing him; yet my Wicked Passion was raised
unto such an Height at the Time of the Murder, and I had so much Intention of
mischief to him, though it was but sudden, that I freely acknowledge, I deserve
to Dye for what I have done. And I would Earnestly warn all People, to beware
of giving way to their Passion, and Rage, when they are provoked. They see, by
sad Experience, they know not what it may bring them to.

I give Thanks to all that have Expressed their good Will to me in my sad
Condition; and particularly, to the Honorable Judges, who have given me so
Long a Time to prepare for my Death, when I gave so Little to my poor Brother,
to prepare for his.

I would admire the Providence and Compassion of God unto me, for casting me
into a Place, where I have enjoyed such Wonderful Means and Helps, to carry on
the work of Repentance. And I hope the Lord has blessed Endeavors for my
Good. I have some Hope of his Pardoning Mercy, and some Hope that the Holy
Spirit of Grace (...) Visited me in my Prison, and has drawn (...) to my
Savior. I have given up my self as well as I can, to my only Savior, and
begged that His Blood may Cleanse me from all my Sin, and that he would give me
a New Heart, and bring me home unto God. I cast my self into his Merciful
Hands; and my Hope of his Mercy Encourages me to do all I can for the Good of
others. I would warn all people to beware of an ungodly Life; which I now find
to be more bitter then Death. And I would warn Young people especially to
beware of Disobedience to the Instruction of their Parents, and of doing any
thing that may be grievous to their Parents. Nothing is now more grievous to
me, than my not minding the Word of God and the Calls of the Gospel in my
Youth. I wish that my Example may provoke Young people to come into such a Life
of Godliness, as I would now give a thousand Worlds, that I had sooner-chosen.

And Oh, the bitterness of Soul, with which I now wish, that I had never
trampled on the Name of the Glorious God, by the Profane Oaths, which my wicked
Mouth has utterd; and that I had never allowed my self in the Dangerous
Wickedness of Drunkenness; and that I had never polluted my self with vile
Unchastities. For such things my poor Soul is wounded and bleeding to Death.
And I cannot have Peace in my Soul, without warning and begging all the People,
as they Love their own Souls, to beware of such Iniquities. Let them not go on
in them, lest such miseries as they Little think of come upon them.

And now, O my Savior, the chief of Sinners, Leaves himself in thy Merciful
Hands, for thy great Salvation.

David Wallis,
Signed by David Wallis, declaring every clause of it to be from his Heart, in
the Presence of us. Seth Smith. Robert Petton.



A Deputy Sheriff then demanded of him, whether he owned this Instrument, and
would have it. Looked upon, as truly Expressing the sentiments of his Heart. He
replied, with a certain Air of Alacrity, Yes, with all my Heart! Or, to that
Effect.

Hereupon the Minister proceeded unto such a Prayer, as the occasion called for
a Wherein after the horrid Things done in every Sin, were confessed and
bewailed, the Justice of the Holy God, in all the evil that, had come, or could
come upon any of us, was acknowledged, and very particularly (...) if that
worst of Evils, To be left unto (...) Sin, had been our Misery. It was (...)
unto the case of the poor Malefactor; and, at the same time, it was deplored,
That an Heart full of Murder, set us all, in some sort, on the Level with him,
though we had not, been left unto the Capital Acts of it; wherein the Free Grace
of Heaven was to be wondered at: And it was desired, That if any of us had any
Malice or Hatred in his Heart against his Neighbor, such Tendencies and
Approaches toward Murder, might be heartily Repented of, and Graciously
Pardoned. The Divine Proclamation of a Pardon, for the chief of Sinners, was
then laid hold upon; and the Fountain open for Sin and for Uncleanness, was
repaired unto. The Dying Young man was carried thither. Thanks were given to
the Glorious God, for the comfortable Symptoms, which we saw, of a genuine
Repentance produced in him; And that the People of God, who had with such
fervent Supplications been concerned for him, had Hope that God had heard the
voice of their Supplications It was importunately begged, That it might be
found a Real, Thorough, Saving Work, and an Hope that will not make ashamed;
and the several Articles of it, were particularly, and with some Importunity
insisted on. The Compassion of good Men for the Young man, was expressed; and
it was declared, that Obedience to the Law of the Holy God, which forbad any
Satisfaction to be taken for the Life of a Murderer, was that which (...)
brought on the sad Work of (...) Afternoon. But it was pleaded, That though there
was no Pardon to be had for this Life, yet the Young man might be Pardoned for
a Better Life. And since there is Joy in Heaven among the Angels of God over a
Repenting Sinner, it was prayed, that this might be found such an one, and
presently fall into the Hands of good Angels Rejoicing over him, and Gloriously
Triumphing in What Sovereign Grace may fetch from Dungeons and from Gibbets.
And since our dear Savior said unto a Malefactor on the Day wherein He died,
that He would not only Remember him when He came in His Kingdom, but also give
him to be That Day in Paradise, it was prayed, that the Soul of this Youth,
might This Day Enter into an Heavenly Place and Rest; now the Sorrows of Death
compassed him, and the Pains of Hell threatened to get hold on him and he called
on the Name of the Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee, Deliver my Soul! It was
prayed, That his poor Father might be supported under the Heavy Trial, if he
should Live, to hear of what had befallen (...) of his Family. And, Finally, it
was prayed, That the numerous confluence of People there, and especially the
Young people, might be Effectually warned by the awful (...) before them, to
shun the paths of the Destroyer. and not by persisting in Sin, provoke the
Holy one to Leave them unto such things, as they now little imagined.

These and some other such things, were in that prayer insisted on; which had
not been here at all mentioned if the mention thereof had not been by some
desired.

After this, the Young man himself (...) down in the Cart, upon his Coffin, and
made a short, but pertinent and pathetick prayer; confessing the demerit of his
Crimes, committing himself into the Hands of his only Savior, and Expressing
his Hope of the Mercy of God unto him.

He then rose up, and the Execution was proceeded in; wherein, and from the
Beginning, to the End he Expressed the least Reluctance, that has ordinarily
been seen in Circumstances like to his; and a Desire of Death, rather than an
Horror of it. People at a distance, interpreted it as a sort of Stupidity; but
unto them who were better acquainted with his condition, it seemed the Effect
of a better principle. There is good Ground for Hope, that the means of Good
which he had enjoyed, were not lost upon him; and that he now Sings the
Righteousness and Benignity of God the Savior, who may have delivered him from
(...) guiltiness:

The Curbed Sinner. A DISCOURSE Upon the Gracious and Wondrous Restraints Laid
by the PROVIDENCE Of the Glorious GOD, On the Sinful Children of Men, to
Withold them from Sinning against Him. Occasioned by a Sentence of DEATH,
passed on a poor YOUNG MAN, for the Murder of his Companion. With some
Historical Passages referring to that Unhappy Spectacle.

By Cotton Mather, D. D.

Job XXXVII. 14. Hearken to this; -- Stand still, and Consider the Wondrous
Works of God. Boston, N. E. Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the
Sign of the BIBLE in Cornhil. 1713.

Restraints Merciful and Wonderful. Boston-Lecture, 10. d. 7. m. 1713.
Genesis XX. 6. I Withheld thee from Sinning against Me.
A Most astonishing Favor of Heaven! Too little acknowledged, not near enough
Celebrated, among the Sinful Children of Men. We have many Calls to take a
thankful Notice of a Mercy, wherein we are so highly ^avoured; Very mighty
Calls, when we see what horrid and bloody Sin, some of our Brethren are Left
unto; What fearful Ruin some have brought upon themselves, by the Sin which
they have been Left unto. It Is what the Lamentable Object we have now before us
does very Loudly Call us to; it is the most proper Use to be made of such a
Spectacle!

It is a strange Occurrence that my Text refers unto. The Father of the
Faithful, once and again falling into the Errors of Unbelief. His Life was
filled with Trials; But in them all, the Faithfulness of the Glorious God unto
His Promises, was marvellously illustrated. The Blessed God, had once and again
promised, That He would be a God unto the Offspring of Abraham. And yet this
famous Patriarch, did (...) and again after some sort Alienate the Promises,
and by his own Act, exposed his Wife to such Hazards, that he had lost the
Fulfillment of the Promises, if God had not in a way of Sovereign Grace
marvellously stepped in for his Deliverance. Formerly in the Court of Egypt, and
now in the Court of G^rar, our Patriarch dissembled his Relation to his Wife,
apprehending that his Life might be in danger among so debauched a people, if
it had been known, how he was related unto her* It is not now a Time, nor is it
here a Place, to declare at large, the Judgment which the Ancients, as well as
the Moderns, have passed upon this Action of Abraham; an Action Looking so like
a prostitution; how severely some have Condemned it, how plausibly some have
Defended it. Were (...) Empannel'd on the Jury, I should not consent that
either the one or the other draw up the Verdict; with my Consent, my dear
Calvin should (...) Foreman, though I am aware, how (...) Jesuits reproach him
for his Verdict upon it, which after all the Cand^^^ he can use, yet says, When
we had done all, we must own, (...), he was really Guilty of (...) Unbelief,
not relying so much on the Providence of God, in a way of plain dealing, as he
should have done. The Compassion of God unto His Poor, Frail, Distressed
Servant on this occasion was wonderful! Had the Intention of Abimelek to Marry
this Lady, been accomplished, he had been plunged into a Criminal Adultery; A
Crime whereof, as much a Pagan as he was, he yet owned, It would have been a
Great Sin upon him, and upon his Government. But while the Sin was yet only
intended, and under the alleviating Circumstance of, A mistake of the Person
too, God smote Abimelek with a Fit of Illness, and his Court also with Plagues
which had in them something Extraordinary. While he was in much concern about
these things, God in a Dream informed him of the Cause why these Plagues were
come, and of the way to remove them. In the XXXIII Chapter of Job, you have a
large Paragraph, concerning a Dream wherein God withdraws a man from his
purpose; And I suspect, that this History of Abimelek might be therein referred
unto. The only Clause of the History, now to be insisted on, is, that Passage
in the Speech of God, unto the Awakened Soul of the Prince now in a Dream,
wherein He spoke once, yea, twice unto him; He says, I withheld thee from
Sinning against me. It is mentioned as a Singular Kindnss, a Special Kindness
of God unto him. The Trouble that he suffered, was it seems a vast Kindness, in
that it withheld him from Sinning, against the Glorious God* It was, as Elihu
speaks, in the Text I told you of, To keep back his Soul from the Pit, and his
Life from perishing by the Sword.

The DOCTRINE then before us, will be this;

The most Gracious God, in an excellent manner displays his Grace toward the
Sinful Children of Men, in withholding them from Sinning against him.
To be preserved from Sin, it is to enjoy a preservation, that, my Brethren, we
cannot be too Thankful for.

Two things now demand a most affectionate Consideration with us; First the
Method, and then the Mercy, of this Happiness, I withheld thee from Sinning
against me.

I. The Method of our Good God, in Withholding us from Sinning against him;
This is various, and curious, and has many Wonders in it. We will take the
Surprising Subject into our Contemplation.

First; Our Good God Withholds the Temptations and Occasions of Sin; This is
one Method in which He withholds us from Sinning against him There is an Army
of Evil Spirits, united under one Leader, for which cause they all go under the
single Name of, Saran, or, The Devil. The Design of these Evil Spirits, is to
Tempt us unto Sin, that so they may by their Temptations bring us under their
Condemnation. Our Tempter, the Devil, goes about, seeking whom he may Deceive
into Sin, and by Deceiving Devour them. As our Lord said, Luke XXII. 31. Simon,
Simon, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you: So may it more or
less be said, about every man in the World; Sinner, Sinner, Satan the Tempter
has desired, that he may have thee, to Tempt thee unto some undoing
Wickedness. Indeed Satan must have the permission of God for it, before he can
fall upon us. But now our God very often does not permit Satan, to Tempt us
with such Fury, and such Success, as he would otherwise assault us withal. Our
God has the Tempter in a Chain; He holds in the Ty-'Dog. He withholds the
Tempter from Ensnaring of us, and thereby He witholds us from falling into the
Snare of the Wicked. There are People set upon mischief. It Is very strange that
they do no more. It Is because God Chains up the Devil, and will not let him
suggest unto them, what they may do. Our Indians had else done a thousand times
more mischief, than they have, to our Plantations. This World is also full of
those Things, which are the Occasions, the Incentives, the Inducements of Sin.
The Stumbling Block: of Iniquity do even fill the World. But our God withholds
us from Sin, by withholding from us, those things that would provoke us to
Sin. He takes the Stumbling Blocks out of our way, and so witholds us from
Falling into Sin upon them. Our God witholds us from the exorbitant
Out-breakings of the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride
of Life, by withholding from us the Objects, that are the Fuel of them. We say,
It Is opportunity that makes a Thief. Our God witholds many a man from many a
Th^^t and other Sins by this; He will not give him an Opportunity. He will not give
Riches to one man; and so the man is witheld from the Denying of God. He will not
pinch another man with Poverty; and so the man is witheld from Taking the Name
of God in vain. If God should order for man, some, Conditions, and some
Employments, and some Companions, which He witholds from them, Verily, they
would be drawn into abundance of Sin, more than they are.

Secondly, The Diverting of us from Sin, by the Good Hand of God, this is one
Method used by our Good God in witholding us from Sin. We should Sin more than
we do, but our God witholds us, by finding something else for us to do. One
gave this agreeable Account^ how he kept his Innocence; The Devil don't find me
at Liesure, to do what he would have me to do. Infuriated Saul would have
Embrued his hands in the Blood of a Servant of God, but God called him off! We
read, 1 Samuel XXIII. 27. There came a Messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee,
and come away: -- You know for what. Many such a Messenger comes unto us from
God, that calls us another way, when we are just upon some sinful
perpetrations. The Flood seems to have been as notable, as General, an Example
of this Observation. The Curse of the Flood, is in this turned into a Blessing
on the World. The more fructifying mould of the Earth, has been so damnified by
the Flood, that men live now with more Difficulty than they did before. No man
that knows the Heart of man, will deny, that a Flood of Wickedness is prevented
in the World, by men's being so necessarily taken up how to Live in the World.
What infinite Wickedness would men be hatching every where, if they had nothing
else to do! If the World had nothing but Fruitful Plains in it, it would soon
be an Entire Sodom, and fit for nothing but a Conflagration. Indeed our God
witholds us from Sin, when he Compels us to Work. For the most part, our God
plunges us into such indigent Circumstances, that the most of our Thought, and
our Time, goes to the Earning of our Bread. By Engaging us in our daily
Occupations, without which we and our Families would starve, Our God withholds
us from Sinning against Him. And sometimes when our Vocations are not enough to
Engross our Care, and withold us from Sin, our Vexations must; God finds out
for us Vexations that shall. One man is hampered with such a Malady; another
man is Embroiled with such an Enemy; a third man is taken up with such an
Inconvenience. Why so; The Voice of the All-wise God unto us in these things
is, Thus I witheld thee from Sinning against me!

Thirdly; Interest, Interest; That is a Surprising Method of God; That is a
strong sort of a Curb, wherewith our God Witholds us from Sinning against Him.
The Metal which the Curb is usually made of, is well known in the World. We
say, Interest will not Ly; though it will often make men do it. Every man is True
to that, which he takes to be his Interest. This is a most Exquisite Policy of
Heaven, as I may call it, in the Government of the World. Humane Society, would
be Damaged, yea, Disbanded, if some Sins were not become very odious, which yet
men are naturally enough prone unto; It is Interest that has made them Odious;
men feel it is for their Interest that they should be so. God makes the
Transgressors feel that word; Hab. II. 9, 10. Woe to him that Coveteth an Evil
Covetousness; Thou have consulted shame to thy self. God makes men see, that by
such and such Sins, they shall bring a Mischief on themselves; This witholds
them from Sinning against Him! There is a Detestable Generation of men, who go
under the Name of Deists. These Dangerous Wretches pretend unto a kind of Moral
Virtue; Their Moral Virtue is this; A man expects the Civilities of his
Neighbors; his Condition would be insupportable should his Neighbors count
him unworthy of their Civilities. Now, that a man may not Lose the Civilities
of others, he must then treat them with Civilities. These are all the Bonds of
a Good Behavior, that these Baptized Infidels are sensible of. This is all,
that keeps the Dangerous Monsters, from Stealing, and Lying, and Murder. Our
God witholds men from Sin, by making them see, that their Neighbors will else
withold their Civilities from them* It Is the Hope of Gain, by their show of some
Godliness, that witholds many men from the Grossest Efforts of Ungodliness.

Fourthly. There is the Method of Conscience; Our God witholds us from Sin, by
the Control of Conscience, which He has placed as His Deputy in our Souls. Men
durst not Sin as they would, because of what the Candle of the Lord shows unto
them; they cannot Sin except they put out this Candle. A Conscience which tells
them, That they who do such things are worthy of Death; The Conscience which
causes a Wicked man, to do what no other man could bring him to; Act. XXIV. 25.
To Tremble at the Thoughts of a Judgment to come. That stands in the way of
many a man, like an Angel with a Flaming Sword, and stops him, when his Way is
perverse before the Lord.

And our God, by ordering a Good Education for us, keeps our Conscience in a
more Wakeful and Active Plight; so that we cannot get over the Checks which it
gives unto us. This Light within, though it be so darkened that it is not a
sufficient Guide unto Life, yet it shows us, many Fair Things, and like a Fire
it scalds us if we do any Foul ones. The Supreme Governor of the World holds
the World in order by this Golden Engine, and witholds men from very much of
the Disorder which else they would rush into. Many a man would Murder his
Parents, Destroy his own Wife, Debauch his Neighbors, Blaspheme God, Burn down
the Town, and run a muck among the people, if some Conscience did not withold
men from Sinning at such a rate of Outrageous Madness. The men who proclaim it,
that they have shaken off the Regards of Conscience, and suppressed and
smothered its Admonitions, they are but so many Beasts of Prey let loose upon
the World; It is from the Curse of God, when such Increase and Multiply.

Fifthly, and Finally. I can show you a more Excellent Way, than all of this.
There are those whom a Good God Witholds from Sin, by infusing into their Souls
a Principle of Grace, which is contrary to Sin; A Principle under the power
whereof, men cannot Sin like other men. A Principle of Piety does God shower
down from Heaven, into the Souls of some; (...) Principle of Respect unto all
the Holy and Just and Good Laws of Heaven. By such a Principle the Dispositions
to Sin in the Hearts of Good men are Mortified; and the Considerations which
deter from Sin, are Entertained, with a most Lively Efficacy. Under the force
of such a Principle, a man cannot but hate Sin, and Loath Sin, and refuse to
Sin; and if he be pressed unto: Sin, he will say, Genesis XXXIX. 9^. How shall I
do this Wickedness, and Sin against God? O admirable way of being Witheld from
Sin! To be inspired with an Antipathy to every known Sin. The New Nature in a
Child of God says to him, No, Thou shall not Sin; Oh! Do not the Abominable
Thing, which is hated by the Soul of God! This lays a Glorious Restraint upon
him. Oh! that we were more commonly Restrained so! But now,

II. The Mercy of our Good God, in thus Witholding us from Sinning against Him;
This is what we are to wonder at; and what exceedingly bespeaks our Praises
unto Him. This will appear immediately. For,

First. We shall fall into Sin, yea, into all manner of Sin and Blasphemy, and
such as would never be Forgiven too; if our God Withold us not. We are every
one of us Depraved with Original Sin; and this our Original Sin is the Original
of Every Sin; it contains in it a propensity to every Sin. We must every one of
us all confess, Behold, I was ^hapon in Iniquity. We must every one of us make
that Confession, The whole Imagination of our Heart is only Evil continually.
Our First Parents whom God justly made the Representatives of all Mankind, were
made Mutable. And it was no unjust Thing in the Sovereign One to make them so:
Immutability is the Prerogative of none but the Infinite GOD. These our
Parents, abused their own Liberty, and brought upon themselves a most Sinful
Pravity; which cannot but be derived now unto us their Unhappy Children (...) A
Seed of Evil Doers, Children that are Corrupters! We are born with Hearts
whereof we read, Matt. XV. 19. There proceed out of them, Evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False witness, Blasphemies. There is
no Heart among us, but if God should not withold it, rapid streams of Sin would
burst from it, and whole Torrents of Iniquity. Bring in a Catalogue of all the
Crying Sins found any where among the Children of men, there is no Heart among
us, but what would soon carry us into the worst of them all, if God Withheld us
not. And if God should allow Satan to fill this Heart, an Heart that is of it
self so desperately wicked, no man alive can imagine to how a desperate a
Degree of Wickedness we should be carried, and with how vehement an
Impetuosity! An Evil Spirit not forbidden by God, will go forth, and persuade
an Aha^, an^ prevail also, to any thing in the World. If God should not
Withhold our Adversary from hurting of us, his Devices would soon be too
cunning for us: The Charms and Chains of Hell would soon bring the last
Confusion upon us.

Secondly. We are very Unworthy that God should withold us from Sinning against
Him; our Frequent Sinning has Left us in the greatest Unworthiness of such a
Mercy! By our former Sins, we deserve to be left unto further Sins. The
punishment of Sin with Sin, is no uncommon proceedure in the tremendous
Dispensations of God. Men Sin with Delight; They signalize their Love of Sin,
their Choice of Sin. The Justice of God then passes this Doom upon them, Let
them go on to Sin! They be not willing to be hindered! When people will not
Hearken to the Voice of God, it is but a Righteous Thing with him, To give them
up unto the Lusts of their own Hearts, and let them walk in their own Counsels,
which you may be sure, will he bad enough The Righteousness of God never shines
brighter than in that black Event of wilful Sinning; Romans I. 26. For this
cause, God gave them up to vile Affections. If we are witheld from any Sin,
that ever (...) fell into, we must say, Lord, This is (...) not worthy of! It Is,
Mercy, Mercy, that witholds us from Sin; for we can plead no Merit of our own
for such a Blessing. In begging to be witheld from Sin, our Style must be that;
God be merciful tome a Sinner! It Is to be very Mercifully, that is to say,
Undeservedly dealt withal.

Thirdly, It Is a Great Mercy sure, to be Witheld from the Greatest Evil; If we
are not Witheld from Sinning against God, we fall into the Greatest Evil in the
world. Sin, it is the Greatest Evil. Our Savior, who is the Good One, has called
it, Joh. XVII. 5. The Evil. A (...) Escape from some Extreme (...) of
perishing, we so with a shuddering Horror, look back upon it. We give a start,
when the Thought of it suddenly darts into our minds; We almost (...) away,
when we Think what we (...). My Friend, When (...) Witheld from Sin, it is an
Escape, which thy Soul may be well amazed in Reflecting on. Thou ma^st with a
Transport of Joy cry out, My Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowler: Oh! the Mercy, Oh! the Mercy of it! When our God says, I have witheld
thee from Sinning against me, He does in Effect say, I have witheld thee from
throwing thy self into many Sorrow^; I have witheld thee from wronging thy own
Soul; I have witheld thee from the worst thing that could have befallen thee.
To Sin, It Is to Deny the God that is Above. It Is a sad Thing to be left unto so
vile a Thing. To Sin, It Is to do that for which the Wea^h of God comes. To be
Witheld from Sin, it is to be witheld from stepping over a dismal Precipice;
from tumbling down into a Devouring Fire, and Everlasting Burnings. O thou
Saved of the Lord, Witheld from Sin, thy Song may be that; Lord, Thou
deliveredst my Soul from Death, my Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from Falls. The
Mercy cannot be too highly spoken of!

APPLICATION.
I. There are some Occurrences in the World, that are very much to be wondered
at; But we now see the Reason of those Wondrous Occurrences. I will entertain
you with the Mention of Two or Three Things, whereof we must now say, These are
the Doings of the Lord, and they are mavelous in our eyes. If there were not
a Good God, who witholds men from Sinning against Him, the World would not have
such a Respite from such Wonderful Miseries, which I shall now tell you of.

First. We may Wonder that some Destructive Wickednesses are not ever now and
then done in the World, by people that are Wicked enough to do them. There are
people, who have nothing within them, to withold them, from such Things as are
too horrible to be spoken of. People there are, who would Stick at nothing,
that they could see themselves able to do, that they may ruin others, and
Enrich themselves. People there are, who if it came into their Minds, what they
are capable of doing, and yet might Ly Concealed after all, and it may be Roast
their own Eggs into the Bargain, would soon be the Actors of direful Tragedies!
Many an honest man, is aware of Ways to do incredible Mischief, which if some
Wicked men should be as much aware of, they would be more perilous Creatures,
than the Dragon of Hetruria, whereof Dion tells us, that after he had made
fearful Devastations, he was killed with a Thunderbolt. The men are Devils, and
very cunning and subtle Devils too; but they have Chains of Darkness upon them.
They don't see what they can do: And would if they saw it. Prudence will
direct, that I should not go too far in Explaining my self. -- But this I may
say; There are People that would make a very Light matter of a Perjury; they
would make nothing for a small matter to Forswear themselves. It Is a wonder,
that no more Naboths are Sworn out of their Lives, or at least out of their
Vineyards, by them that have no Yoke upon them. It Is very strange! And so is
another thing, that I will venture to speak of. He that is willing to throw
away his own Life, may easily be master of Another man's. And yet, you have
known many people set upon throwing away their own Lives. But you scarce ever
knew one of these desperate Suicides disposed unto the killing of any besides
themselves. What is the Reason of this? Our Good God has acquainted us; I
witheld them!

Secondly. We may wonder, That this World is not an entire Aceldema, and that
it Swims not with Blood, even up to the Horse-bridles. There are cursed Fires
Latent in the Souls of men; Fires that have sometimes broke out, and burnt all
round about, burnt unto the very Foundations of the Mountains, burned down all
before them. A very Little Thing will serve sometimes, to blow up these Fires;
Maxima odia ex Levissimis causis! And then a whole Nation becomes a formidable
Volcano; no more habitable than a Vesuvie. Our Apostle speaks, as if every man
had the Heart of a Murderer in him; and Romans III. 15, 16. Feet swift to shed
Blood; Destruction and Misery in their ways. We see some Commit bloody
Murders. Why don't they grow as common, as they did a little before the Final
Catastrophe on Jerusalem! The Venomous Hearts of Men, have in them the Root,
which all Murders grow upon. Sometimes a Cup of poison to be trembled at, has
been put into the Hands of Nations; Then the Intoxicated Nations have run mad;
have been furiously set upon destroying one another; have sheathed their Swords
in one another bowels, with a Rage that has reached up to Heaven. The Passions
have been of old called; The wild beasts of the Soul. if those Wild Beasts are
once let loose, they make fearful Depredations* they turn Populous. Regions
into a Wilderness! When a Kingdom is divided against it self, what Ad^nyes,
what Opiates are they, that keep under the worst of all Phrensies, that would
soon bring all to Desolation! When Distracted People think themselves
oppressed, what is it that keeps under the Massanello's, or keeps things in the
Calm, which it is said, the French Salvages told a greater than themseves, was
the thing which of all they had seen, they most admired at? Who is it that
Stills the Noise of the Seas, and the Tumult of the People? Our Good God has
acquainted us with the Reason of this; I witheld them!

Thirdly. We may wonder, That there is any True People of God Left in the
World; and that the Burning Bush is not Consumed. Our Lord-Redeemer has through
all Ages, a Church visibly Existing on the Face of the Earth; His Willing, and
His Holy People. The Generation of them that seek Him: A Generation which
Condemns the World, and Offends it, and (...) it, and must not marvel, if it be
(...) of the World Satan, who is the God of this World, and the Spirit that
works in the Children of Disobedience, fills his Children with an implacable
Aversion and Antipathy for this People of God. They will grant not only
Liberties, but also Preferments, to Devils Incarnate (...) yea, though they may
differ very much among one another. But they will turn every Stone, that the
Children of God may be Discouraged, and even Exterminated. The Persecution of
Dissenters, has been in all Ages carried on; Always with most Unreasonable
Barbarities, and sometimes, to an Extremity of cruel Dissipations; even such an
Extremity, that the Dioclesians on the Thrones of Iniquity, have boasted, of a,
Superstitione Christiana deleta; That there was no more Christianity ^eft in
the World. But still the Church of our Lord, Our-lives the Attempts of all its
Adversaries, yea, gains ground, grows great, and improves by those Attempts;
and having Obtained Help from God, it continues to this Day. The Song of the
Church in all Ages has been that; Psa. LXXVI. 10. Surely, The wrath of man
shall praise thee, the Remainder of that Wrath shall thou Restrain. We can
hardly tell whence it is, That though the Wolves bring forth many more at a
Littter, than the Sheep; and we seldom hear of a Wolf killed, when the Sheep is
every day Led into the Shambles; yet there are a thousand times more Sheep
known in the World than there are of those ravening Devourers. But I now
propound a much stranger thing than this. The Faithful People of God, are
Counted like sheep for the slaughter all the Day long. They are but a Little
Flock, a very Little Little Flock; The Wolves, they, as it was of Old said
about a Syrian Herd of them, Fill the Country. Now, Whence is it, that the
Church is not utterly cut off; and the Name of it, no more had in Remembrance!
Why have no Days of Purim, and of Bartholomew, nor Irish Massacres totally
Extinguished it? Our Good God has acquainted us with the Reason of it; I
witheld them. Oh! Let us now Give to our Good God, the Glory of such Wonderful
Dispensations.

II. A Lesson of Wondrous Thankfulness is to be now taught unto those, whom God
has Witheld from Sinning against Him. Sirs, You are Thankful, no doubt, that
you have been Witheld from Things that would have brought Sicknesses upon you,
or Things that would have wounded you with incureable Reproaches; That you have
been Witheld from Wants and Straits, by which your Lives would have been
Embittered; That you have been Witheld from grievous Deaths, by frightful
Accidents which have threatened them. You are very much to Blame, if you are
not very Thankful for such Deliverances; Unholy, if Unthankful! But are you
Thankful that you have been Witheld from Sinning against the Glorious GOD?
This, O Redeemed Ones, This is a greater Cause for Thanksgiving, than any of
the rest. It may be, some of you have been all your Days hitherto upheld, and
witheld from doing any Thing, of a Scandalous Aspect; Like the Young man in the
Gospel, You have been kept from your Youth up, from every Thing that may be
called, Scandalous. Oh! Be very Thankful, for so rare a Mercy; so rich a Mercy!
Or, if not so, yet you have been witheld from such Scandals as you have seen
Others fall into. God has not Left you to make your selves Prodigies of Sin;
God has not hanged you up in Chains, among the Monuments of his Wrath; Others
no worse by Nature than you, have been so. Even in This, you have Ground of
Thankfulness. It Is a Mercy of God; And a mere Mercy it is! Yea, My Hearers, I
believe there are very few of you, but what may call to mind, that you have
been at some Time or other, just upon the point of doing some very horrible
Thing! You have been very violently pushed on, to do some horrible Thing, which
if it had been done, you had been the most Undone Things in the World; Undone
for Both Worlds! You may make that Report; Psalm. LXXIII. 2. As for me, my Feet
were almost gone, my steps had will-nigh, slipped. But God stepped in, and saved
you. O fall down before the Lord, and thankfully admire so obliging a Mercy;
and say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul; I bless thee, O my God, for thou have
delivered my Soul, in delivering my Feet from the Falls I have been so near
unto!

I will make Two Remarks on the Gratitude which is now called for. The One is
this; In this thing it may so fall out, that you may give a shining
Demonstration of your Sincerity before the Lord. It may be, it is by some sore
and sharp Affliction upon you, that God has Witheld you from Sinning against
Him. Well, Can you now so far heartily give Thanks to God for this Affliction;
and can you heartily say, Lord, I bless thee, that thou would rather, bind
me in Affliction and Iron, and bring down my Heart with Labor, then let me run
Loose in the broad way that Leads unto Destruction! He was a Saint of God, who
could say; Psalm. CXIX. 67, 71. Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now I
have kept thy Word. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted; that I might
learn thy Statutes. O Thou Sin-hating Soul; This would be a mark of Sincerity,
that would have no less than on Evident Token of Salvation in it. The Other is
this; You must not fall into a Dream, that a Negative Religion, will be enough
to secure your Blessedness. Many men, because they have been Witheld from such
Things as many others are chargeable withal, they fancy they have Religion
enough. They can say, I am not as other men, or as this Publican, and they
fancy here is Religion enough to put them in Good Terms with Heaven. A very
Grand Mistake! You read; Matthew. III. 10. Every Tree that brings not forth Good
Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire. It Is not enough, that you bring not
forth Evil Fruit; You must bring forth Good Fruit; and by a Regenerating Work
of God upon you, be made Good Trees in order to it; You must not only be
Witholden from Sin, but also be Converted from Sin; else you go into a Fire to
be trembled at! Not only Sins of Commission, but also Sins of Omission, will
expose you to it.

III. Certainly, it becomes us to do what we can, that Others as well as Our
selves, may be Witheld from Sinning against the Glorious God. This is very
plain; If the Mercy of God be great, in Witholding men from Sinning against
Him, Then they who Seduce or Invite others to Sin, are the worst Enemies they
can have in the world. Yea, it is a Mercy to be Delivered from such Unreasonable
men; to be kept out of the Paths of such Destroyers! I will first say this; My
Son, If Sinners Entice thee to be and to do like themselves, Oh! Consent thou
not; Fly from them, as thou would from the worst of Enemies; Make no
Friendship with them, lest thou Get a snare to thy Soul. But O you, Enticers,
what will be your Doom from God? What shall be given to you, or what shall be
done to you, or, What shall be said of you. O ye Mischievous Ones? An Apostle
of God once fixing his Eyes on one of your Tribe, said, O Full of all Mischief,
Th^^ Child of the Devil! Were such a Man of God now to speak, he would surely
tell you, Wretches, The Devil is your Father; you do his work. You shall be
punished with your Father, and they who will Curse the Day th^^ ever they (...)
you, will give a dread (...) Aggravation to your punishment. On the other side;
Shall not we do what we can, to With^ld Others from Sin? It Is God-like: A most
amiable Imitation of God; And, Oh! how acceptable to the Holy Lord! But what
shall be done? Public Officers may do very much in the Execution of their
Offices. These are Masters of Restraint. And Oh! that all such would (...)
themselves to think, What may I do, (...) Sin may be more discountenanced? God
forbid, they should fall under that Blame, They have overpassed the Deeds of
the Wicked. But Private Christians may also do much by their Faithful and
Loving Admonitions. Oh! Let us Call upon one another, and Exhort one another
daily, lest any be hardened, through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Our Warrant, it is
unquestionable; Lev. XIX. 17. Thou shall Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer
Sin upon him. And, if we all owe this Duty to one another,; if none but the
Children of Gain will say, Am I my Brothers keeper? O Parents, How much do you
owe this Duty unto your own Children, To Withold them from Sinning against God?
Those Children of yours, (...) like the Wild Asses Colt, and as Wild and M^^d,
into what Sin will they run headlong, and headstrong, if you do not Withold
them? And can you bear to see them Sinning against your God, and Theirs, and as
Possessed Ones keep cutting and wounding themselves among the Monuments of the
Dead? Oh! Be concerned for them. Instruct them; Advise them; Lay the Charges of
God upon them; Enquire into their Manners; Do not suffer them in any Evil
Manners; nor with Companions that may Corrupt their Good Manners. Have you
forgot the Vengeance of God, on the House of Eli, when his Children made
themselves Vile, and he Restrained them not! If they do any Vile Things, from
which you can Withold them, Verily, you make their Guilt your own; and be it
known to you, God will do such Things upon both of you, as your Ears might well
tingle at the hearing of. I will now say but this; If the Children must go on
as Children left unto themselves, and you will not Withold them, they will
bring you to Shame, and themselves to Hell, and your Indulgence that will not
allow you to make them sensible, that it is an Evil Thing and a Bitter, to Sin
against God, will be found, Bitterness in the Latter End.

IV. But what if we have not been Witheld from Sinning against the Holy God,
who is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and who cannot Look upon Iniquity?
On! Let us then mourn exceedingly before the Lord, and not withold our Tears
upon on Occasion so very deplorable! My Brethren, Let us look back on what is
past, and Con^ider our Ways. It may be, we shall find, that we have
grievously, and heinously, perhaps notoriously Miscarried, in our Time What
shall we now do, but Walk softly all our Days in the Bitterness of our Soul,
from the Remembrance of our past Miscarriages. We would not have the Holy One
to do it against us, but let us Remember against our selves, our Former
Iniquities; and upon the Review thereof, Let our Lamentations be those; Lam.
III. 19, 20. Remembering the Wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still in
Remembrance, and is humbled in me. Have we been Left unto such as I may call.
Sins of Distinction? It is a most humbling Remark that we have to make upon it.
Other Dealings of God with us, be they never so Bitter Ones, may be but
Paternal Chastisements after all. But when God leaves us to Sin against Him,
This looks as if he dealt more Vindictively with us, Alas, Herein* He has
wounded us with the wound of an Enemy, and with the Chastisement of a very
Angry One. O dreadful, O dreadful, Indignation of God! We may now cry out, O
Lord, Thou have rebuked me in thy wrath; with wounds that stink and are
corrupt, because of my Foolishness. The Wise man says concerning the Sins of
Unchastity; They are the Abhorred of the Lord, that fall into them! I may say
unto you, Sirs, To be given up to Sin, it is a plague for a Devil! Oh, Plague a
thousand times more horrible than the Pestilence that is the Terror of the
Night: How can we be free from Ter^or, when we see our selves thus horribly
plagued, and in so hot a Displeasure of God!

And now, What remains to be done in this most Lamentable Case? What, but this?
We must make our Flight unto our Great Savior, and His Great Sacrifice, and
for the Pardon, of our Sin, plead that Blood which Cleanses from all Sin. This
must be done with a Repenting Soul: A Soul full of Contrition for Sin; full of
Indignation against our selves for our Sin; full of Resolution to watch against
all Return to our Sin. We must not lay the least Blame on the Holy God, for not
Witholding us from Sin, but with an unspeakable Remorse blame our selves for
not Looking up unto Him to Withhold us. This Repentance must never be Laid
aside; it must be often Renewed; it must be always Maintained; it must Live to
the Last; never be laid aside until we Die. The Penitential Psalms, and the
Records of our Sins, that call for our Penitentials, the very Curtains of our
Deathbed, as I may say, should have these written upon them. We must hereupon
Study to Excel in such Virtues, and such Virtuous Actions, as are very directly
contrary to the points wherein we have more Egregiously Sinned. We should set
our selves to think; What Good Thing shall I labor to be and to do, that I may
Glorify God, in the way that is most contrary to that wherein I have
dishonored Him? Upon this, All our past Sins will ^e before the Lord, as if
they had never been at all. A God ready to pardon, will now say of us, I will
Remember their Sins no more. However, with us they should not be so. We should
always Remember them. I am now preparing, A Treacle out of a Viper. Since we
have not been Witheld from some very Enormous Out-breakings of Sin, by this
very ^^ing, we may and should be Witheld from One Sin which is very offensive
to the most High God; such an Offense, that He knows them, and throws them afar
off, and makes Rejected Lepers of them that are under the power of it; PRIDE is
that Sin. It may be, our Pride caused our Fall; And now our Fall may cure our
Pride. It may be of Use to Withold Pride from us. It may inspire into us, a
most Abasing, a most Beautiful Humility. After we have so fallen, methinks, we
should never be Lifted up with Pride any more. If a proud Thought begin to rise
in our Minds, we should presently retund it, with such a Stroke upon it; What!
Such a Wretch as I, ever be proud of any thing! When we meet with any
Contemptuous Treatment among our Neighbors, we should now bear it very
patiently. Think, My Sin has made me a Contemptible Creature! And let this
Thought produce a perfect work of Patience in us; Being Reviled, now Revile not
again. And, when we see oothers Overtaken with a Fault, with what Compassion,
with what (...), with what Clemency, should we (...) dulcify the Reproofs,
which we (...) give unto them! Considering our selves, how we have been
Tempted! Here the Riddle of, Meat out of the Eater, will be accomplished
admirably!

But I see one in this Auditory, who has very peculiar cause to be Attentive
unto these Things; and I suppose, he does give such an Attention, as can be
expected from no one else in this Congregation of God. A Young man, who has not
been witheld from a Sin, for which now he must not be witheld from the Pit; he
must hasten to the Pit, and (...) one may stay him. This Youth has with some
Expression of Amazement at it, signified unto me, some sense of the Strange
Ways, which the Holy One takes to bring home his Elect unto Himself. Had he
not been Left unto the Capital Crime for which he is now to Die, he thinks he
had probably gone on Sinning, and Stupid, and Secure, and Slept himself into a
Damnation that Slumbreth not. But his Capital Crime has bro't him into such
Awakening Circumstances that (...) he shall be Effectually bro't (...) unto
God. Ah, poor David; (...) I wish, We all pray, That thou (...) find it so! I
need not now Rep^^t unto you, the Directions for a Sound Repentance, which the
Ministers of God in this Town, are charitably and continually inculcating upon
you. There was a David, who had the Guilt of Innocent Blood upon him; With the
Strains and the Cries, and the Tears, of the Fifty first Psalm, he found Mercy
with God. I know something of the price you set upon that admirable Psalm. Do
so still; and present before God, the Blood of a dear JESUS, for the Expiation
of your Bloody Murder, and of all the Sins, which have so provoked the Holy
One, that He has not witheld you from it. That Blood is an Open Fountain; yea,
Open for a Menasseh, and for a Murderer! A Countryman of yours, Executed for
Murder, after his Flight unto that Soul-cleansing Blood, went cheerfully to his
Execution; and often used those words; God is a Great Forver! God is a Great
Forgiver! Verily, A Repenting David will find Him so.

I will inform the Auditory. This poor Young man tells me; He uses all his
power to turn unto God; but he finds he has no power, in himself; He looks up
to God for power, and owns himself unworthy that God should give it him. He
tells me, He sees his Heart full of Corruption, and his Life all Iniquity; but
he looks on all Sin as most odious, because it is an Offense unto God. He tells
me, That a Savior appears to him, the best thine in the word; and an Interest
in Him worth a thousand worlds. He tells me, That he desires the Savior to
Reconcile. God unto him, and also to humble him, and give a New Heart unto him,
and fill his Heart with the Love of God. He tells me, That the Hope he has of
Mercy from God, breaks his Heart for him; and makes him think, What he shall do
for God. Particularly, He desires, that his Sins may be known to all the World;
and that all the World may be warned from him, and witheld from Sinning against
God. If all this be Hearty, it is well. Repentance in Distress, is often so
Deceitful, that, Young man, you cannot be too jealous of your own Heart, in
yours. But, I shall proceed unto another Article of work, that is now provided
for me.

V. Learn where to go, Learn what to do, that we may be Witheld from Sinning
against our God. Oh! It Is a Mercy, no Tongue is able to declare how Desirable;
more to be Desired than Gold, than much fine Gold! And one may shake to think,
what they who are not very Desirous of it, may be Left unto.

There are especially Three Counsils, which I am now to tender you.

First. You must not be too Confident; you must beware of rash Confidence.
Don't Confidently presume upon it, That there is any One Sin, from which you
can Withold your selves. I tell you truly, There is no One Sin more certainly,
and more awfully corrected, by a man's being Left unto some very flagrant Sin,
than this Vain Presumption. The best Advice that can be given us, is that; 1
Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks, he stands, take heed lest he fall. When we
see any one fall into the most Atrocious Crimes that can be found among the
Sons of Men, whose Hearts are fully set in them to do Evil; it becomes us to
Reflect with one of the pious Ancients; Ille heri, Ego hodie, Tu cras. He fell
yesterday, because Left unto himself; I shall fall To Day, and, you, my
Brother, will fall To morrow, if God Leave us, as He di^ that Fallen Sinner.
Don't say within your selves, (I use the Term within your selves, because few
have so little Wit, as to speak it audibly;) Well, I am sure, I shall never do
so Base a Thing, as I have seen done by such a man. Man, my Heart aches, to hear
thee say so. When David had his Heart smiting him, for a small Disrespect shown
unto a Father-in-law, had any one told him, Sir, You shall one Day fall into
very filthy Adulteries, and when you have done so, instead of taking an easy
way to cover them, you shall fly to treacherous and barbarous Murders for the
Covering of them, and the whole world shall in all Ages be astonished at what
you will be Left unto! Doubtless, he would have derided the praediction; He would
have said, It is impossible! When Peter was told, that he would within a few
Hours, Deny, Renounce, Forswear the Lord, whom he thought, he loved above a
thousand Worlds; did he believe a word of it? But all the World have with
Astonishment seen the Consequences! David Wallis once thought as little as
another man, that he should ever come, to what we now see him come to. Oh! Work
out your own Salvation with fear and trembling, of what you may be Left unto.

Secondly. Prayer to God, with Faith in the only Savior, who is Able to keep
you from falling; This is a most necessary Course, that you may not Fall to the
breaking of your Bones; Fall into the horrible Pit. Our dear Savior, has
undertaken to keep His people, from the Falls into Sin, that might Separate
them from the Love of God. All the Grace that is needful to keep us from any
Falls, it is Lodged and Laid up in our dear Savior for us. When we come into
the Covenant of Grace, it is with a Consent, That our Savior shall be our
Keeper: This incomparable Nazarene. We say to Him, Lord, thou art He that keeps
my Soul! And we Lay Hold on that word, The Lord shall preserve thy Soul. But
then, frequent must be our Supplications unto the Lord. Supplicate at that
rate; Oh! Let not my Heart be inclined unto any Evil Thing! Supplicate at that
rate; Oh! Do thou hold me up and I shall be safe; and I shall have Respect unto
thy Statutes continually! Supplicate at that rate? Consider me, O Lord my God,
Le^t my Enemy say, I have prevailed against him! It Is a most suitable petition
for you; Psalm. CXIX. 116. Lord, Uphold me, according to thy Word. Souls, you
are not so much urged unto that Prayer, Lord, Withold me from a state of
Poverty: For one may be poor in this* World, and Rich in Faith. You are not so
much urged unto that Prayer, Lord, Withold me from a Disgraced or a Despised
Name. For one may have their Honor here Laid in the Dust, and yet have a Name
written in Heaven. You are not so much urged unto that Prayer, Lord, Withold me
from Sicknesses; For one may be Sick, and yet be one whom Jesus loves. But
this, this is the Prayer I urge you to; Lord, Withold me from Sinning against
thee. Think a thousand times on that word, Woe unto them, when I depart from
them!

Thirdly. Take the Warnings of such as have not been witheld from Sin; Be
warned, Be warned, against Sin, when you see what their Sin has brought them to.

Especially, Let our Young People now take heed, that they do not slight the
warnings of God. Methinks, I overhear the merciful God, saying over the Young
People in this Place, How shall I give them up! And He therefore multiplies
unto them those warnings, on which every one might Reasonably say, Surely, They
will now fear God, and receive Instruction, that so they may not be cut off.
Among those whom God has employed for the warning of the Young People in this
Place, that they may be witheld from Sinning against Him, here is a poor Young
man before you, that is just going to the Dead. God is this day holding up a
Young man in Chains, that all the Young People of New England, may take warning
from him, and be witheld from Sinning against the God of their Fathers. When
Asahel had been smitten by Abner, we read, 1 Samuel II. 23. It came to pass, that
as many as came to the Place where Asahel fell down and died, stood still.
Behold here a poor Young man smitten to Death; You are come to the place where
a Young man falls down and dies, in the Violent pu^^ suit of many Sins. Young
men, will not you stand still at this Bleeding Spectacle By a Young man thus Lying
in his Blood, ^e witheld from going on any (...) in such Sins, as you now hear
hi^ (...) with the Groans of a Deadly Wounded Man complaining of! He desires
(...) and it is a Token for Good upon his that he does so; To make use of (...)
Tragical Example, for the saving (...) others, from such Sins, as have destroy
(...), and Murdered him, and (...) brought him unto the Death (...). I am to
tell you, (...) Things that Ly Heavy upon (...) he is the more willing (...)
have them told, because he hopes, a merciful Savior who has called such
Heavy-Laden Sinners unto Him, has taken off the heavy Loads: The sad causes of
Heaviness.

First; His Disregard unto Parental Instructions; This Troubles Him. He was
bred in a Family, that had in it the Exercises of Piety, and he was there
Instructed in his Catechism. These Early means of Good, had no Impression on
him: And so he proves one, whose Father has no Joy. [ Good God, (...) thou and
support his Distressed Father, when the Tidings of this Day arrive unto him.]
The Trouble for such unfruitfulness makes ^ow a great Impression on him. We
read of some who had been well counseled by their Father, but proved vicious
Young men: I pray, what came they to? We read, 1 Samuel II. 25. They hearkened not
unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would s^ay them. Children,
Hearken to this, Your Parents give you their counsils, To Converse much with
the word of God, and, To uphold the Religion of the Closet, and, To shun Wicked
Company. Will Not you Hearken to them? It Is because the Great God has a dreadful
Thing to do upon you. You now make nothing of Troubling your Parents. Be
assured, God will Trouble you for your Impiety. And when you are in your
Troubles, your outcry will be, How have I not obeyed the voice of my Teachers,
nor inclined my Ear to them that instructed me! It is a Thing, which I wish you
would more think upon; Very few come to the Gallows, but what make that outcry
there; My undutiful carriage to my Parents, has Laid the Foundation of all the
Confusion that is come upon me! And the more of a Religious Education the
Children have had, the more it may be expected, that the Holy God will appear
as a swift Witness against them, if they do not answer it. I suppose there are
many Young men, who have been more Extravagant and Rebellious Prodigals, than
this Young man; who yet has been Bad enough. But no doubt, his Education, This
has hastened the Judgments of God upon him, has Ripened him for the Judgments
of God. Children of a Good Education, If you do Wickedly, the Judgments of God,
will cut you off, more fearfully, and speedily, than any in the World.

There is another thing, that this Young man very much lays to Heart; that is,
Ungoverned passion, Inordinate passion: This at last, brought a Stabbing Fury
upon him; You see what it has cost him. The Discretion of a man, will defer,
and abate and allay his Anger. Choleric People, will be Indiscreet; cannot but
often speak and act very Indiscreetly. Passion will betray the wisest Men, into
inexcusable Folly. They are first Blind, then Mad, that are under the furious
conduct of it. A Moses himself in a Passion, will break both Tables of the Law.
If the Angry Children of Dan will not run upon me, I would advise them; When
you find a fit of Anger come upon you, presently think, There will nothing be
so well spoke or done in Anger, but what would be much better out of it.
Presently think, The Wrath of Man will not work the Righteousness of God. Utter
not a word, until you have lift up your Hearts to God; O my God, let me have
the Meekness of Wisdom now adorning of me! Unbridled Anger, will certainly
hurry you on to Things, that must be Repented of. I must Entreat you
particularly to beware of Rash Words in your passion; God hears them; and those
words may return in Wounds upon you, which you little think of. This Young man
who now stands before you, too often, and very rashly in his former vain
Conversation used that Expression, I Will be hanged if -- not so and so. It Is
impossible for him to Express the pain of Soul with which he now looks back
upon it. I will go on to tell you, If there be Hatred, if there be Malice,
invenoming of your Anger; if you really wish Ill to them that you are Angry
with; I must say, Cursed is the Anger, for it is raging, it is Hellish; and the
Wrath, for it is Cruel, it is Devilish. There is a Murder in it: It it a
Murder in the Egg of the Cockatrice. It will render a Man, that Murderer whom
Eternal Life does not belong unto.

The Young man mourns for another Thing, which too often breaks out, as the
smoke of the Bottomless Pit, from a a Soul raging in his Folly. It Is this;
Because of Swearing his Heart mourns: The profane Swearing and Cursing,
wherewith sometimes he struck at the Glorious and Fearful Name of GOD. This now
recoils upon himself; It Is a Dagger at his Heart, now God has made his Plagues
Wonderful. A most Senseless Iniquity! All the sense of it, is, to declare, an
open Defiance of GOD. The Transgression of the Wicked Swearer,serves only to
declare, That there is no Fear of God before his Eyes. The Great GOD, who is
the Creator, and Preserver, and Governor of the whole World, of all Worlds;
and on whom we all have our continual Dependence for every thing; For an
insolent worm, to count it a Decency, and a Bravery, in him, to (...) Contempt
on this Almighty GOD! A Senseless Villian, that has nothing to plead for this
outrage of Wickedness! There can be neither pleasure nor profit in it. It is a
Daughter of the Devil disposed without any Dowry! Christians, we have too Light
Thoughts of it. If the Fear and Love of GOD had not very much left the World,
the Fine for this Crime would be much greater than it is, and it would be more
Zealously Executed; and they that are in it, would be so (...) to us, that we
should even disdain to look upon them. A famous King in France punished
Blasphemers by Searing the Lips of the Blasphemers with an hot Iron. It was
Executed on a rich Citizen in Parts, for which they cried out upon him a^ a
Tyrant; which when he heard of he made this Reply; I would to God, that with
Searing my own Lip^, I could banish all Blasphemers, and all Wick^^ Oaths,
(...) of my Kingdom. It will signify Little, for any of your Ministers to say,
We could be content never to speak any more, if that would purchase a Silence
for that Hellish Language that is often heard among us. But this I will say, A
Tongue b^^ed with an hot Iron, would be a less Evil than a Tongue so set on
Fire of Hell. Whither are you Traveling, O you that have learned the Language
of Fiends; It cannot but be down to the Torment of Fiends: A Torment where such
a Tongue will be gnawed for Pain, and a Drop of water to Ease the Scorches of
it, will in vain be roared for. I bring that passage of the Divine Oracles,
What Man is he who desires Life, and Loves many Days! Keep thy Tongue from
Evil. Alas! I bring it with a Lively Commentary; I must say, with a Deadly
Commentary!

There is yet another Introduction to all mischief, which this Young Man does
now in sober sadness bestow his ^ears upon. I cannot hear that he was a Common
Drunkard; but if he had no^ been somewhat in Drink, at the Time of it, (which
he had been, alas, at other times) it is probable he had never done the Fact
for which he sees the cutting off of his Days, and is deprived of the Residue
of his Years. Nor is he the only one, that has been Executed in this Place, for
things done by them, when Strong Drink had Enraged them. Tell them therefore,
Thus says the Holy One, I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no
more use it as a proverb in Israel; That Lying proverb, A Drunken man gets no
Harm. I thought, you had seen Harm, enough to follow upon Drunkenness, in the
Ignominy, which it fixes upon them that wallow in it; Harm enough, in the wast
of Substance that arises from such Beastly Living; Harm enough in the Diseases,
in the Dis^sters, in the untimely Deaths which it Leads unto: And, what? No
Harm in the Wounds which the Slaves of the Bottle bring upon all the Faculties
of their Souls* Truly, it is a very great Significancy, which I find in the
Language of ^^doustan; It Is a copious Language, and yet it uses but one word for
A Drunkard, and A Madman. But if this be not enough, certainly, to be brought
to the Gallows is Harm enough. O Lovers of Strong Drink, There is Death in that
Pott, that Cup, with which you are intoxicated. Never give over crying to God,
until he has delivered you, from the Vice, which thus drowns you in Perdition.

But I am informed of one thing, which will perfectly Shock every Sober
Christian that shall hear of such a thing. I remember our Tertullian, in his
Apologetick relates, how severe the Ancient Romans were, against their Women,
if any of Them were found hankering after Strong drink. I suppose, he took his
Relation out of Pliny. And indeed he, and Cicero, and some other Roman Writers,
report such severities used on that occasion, that I do not care to mention
them, lest abused Husbands under their irritations take too much Advantage of
it. So much I will say; Drunkenness in a Woman, was as Criminal among them as
Adultery. But now, it is said; That there are Women in this Place who are no
Strangers to the Sin, and Trade of Excessive Drinking. The Town has had cause
to know the Truth of this; Ah! Miserable Women: The Blemish of their Sex: And
such as the Country may call, as one did his Daughter, the Ulcers of it! I can
tell the Name of a Pious Woman, who was unjustly suspected of being in Drink.
That Handmaid of the Lord, in her Vindication cried out, No, I should be a
Daughter of Beliel, if I should be guilty of such a thing. To them who cannot
so well Vindicate themselves as Hannah could, I will say; How long will thou be
drunken? Put away thy Strong Drink from thee! If thou art a Woman of a
sorrowful Spirit, instead of pouring in Strong Drink, Oh! Much rather, pour out
thy Soul unto the Lord.

I think, the Young man is willing, that I should from him also tell you, That
when a Man comes to Dye, the Sins of Unchastity, will be Felt as more bitter
than Death unto him. One of old who had Experience enough, Pronounced them so.
I can at this Hour show you another, who does it. Sins they are, that leave
Cursed stings behind them. There is one thing which I have more than once or
twice observed; and I have heard that the famous Mr. Perkins, also, who dealt
much with Condemned Prisoners, observed it. Adultery was Capital in the old Law
of Israel, and is so at this Day in the Law of some other Nations. It Is not so
in our Law; yea, This Adulterous Generation makes a Trifle of it. But very many
of them who come to a Capital Execution for other things, cry out, God has set
my secret Adulteries in the Light of His Countenance; my Secret Adulteries, I
see God has known them, and been a Witness of them. O you that pursue any
Unlawful Amors, Give over; God will Judge you, if you go on any further in
them. Let the Harlots of this Place also be afraid, and fearfulness surprise
the Lewd Women of the Town; The Houses where some of them dwell, are too well
known; Brutish Ones, You are going to dwell with a Devouring Fire, with
Everlasting Burnings.

One thing more: My poor Young man does Lament the Temptations, and the
Wretchednesses of the Seafaring Life exceedingly. He ran to Sea Ten years ago,
when he was about fourteen Years of Age, without and against the mind of his
Father; Though he has been since Reconciled unto his Father, yet he has found the
Ill Effects of so leaving him. The Sea, that ever that Element should be so
poisoning, so polluting! Truly, Our Seafaring Tribe, do call for a most
extraordinary Concern and Pity from us!

You, Our Brothers, are under many Obligations to be the Best of men. But I
hear that you are much otherwise, and I partly believe it. Yea, It is commonly
Reported, That the Sailours are sensibly degenerated in the Last Ten or a dozen
years; Though God knows, there was Little Reason for their Degeneracy! Ah, What
shall we Do for you? We Love you, We Value you, we Rejoice in you, we Pray for
you, we wish you well, our So^ls are Travailing for your Welfare. We long to
see your Vessels a sort of Little Churches for the Worship of God practiced in
them, and for the Abhorrence and Avoidance of every Wicked Thing aboard. We
Long, we Long, to have it said of our Mariners, The Men fear the Lord
exceedingly. Others have given you many Solemn Calls, to Repent, and Return,
and become a Generation that may comfortably look for the Blessings of God.
Behold, One of your own Tribe, in his Fetters here calling upon you; Oh! Take
warning by me; Live Religiously; Ly no longer in the Gall of Bitterness, and
Bond of Iniquity^ God grant, that these Calls may not be Lost upon you. Few of
you Live to be Old; some of you Die in your Sins, and for your Sins, and very
miserable. Oh! That you, yea, and all this Auditory, would now come to this
Conclusion; Lord, I have thought on my ways, and I have turned my Feet unto
thy Testimonies.

But the vast Body of Young People in this Auditory, and throughout the
Country, are those who are once again, to be moved with Fear in hearing the
Tremendous Warnings of God. God has here taken another YOUNG MAN and Exhibited
him for all the Young People in the Country to tremble at the Spectacle.
Herein, Lo, God sends out His Voice, and that a mighty Voice! The Youth also
from his Chains, does utter his Cries; Oh! Look on me, Young People, and Learn
of me, what will become of you, if you so disoblige the Glorious God, that He
shall not withold you from Sinning against Him! That so many of our Young
People, after all the Warnings, which the Great God has given unto them,
continue still Unconverted unto God, and Serious Piety, and Go on still in
their Trespasses by which they bespeak the Wounds of His Irritated Wrath; It Is,
a Lamentation, and it will be for a Lamentation. There are Multitudes of Young
People, who remain Strangers unto Conversion to their Savior, and unto the
Religion of the Closet, wherewith a True Conversion always begins, and is for
ever accompanied. And there are some who abandon themselves unto the most
abominable Courses, in which they fortify themselves by the Force of Evil
Company. I am verily persuaded, There is an Oracle of the Great God, which many
of our Young People are very deeply concerned in. Hearken to it, O Children of
Incorrigible Folly; Hearken to what is from the Sacred Place of Thunder to be
now uttered among you; Hear attentively the Noise of the Voice of God, and the
Sound that goes out of His mouth; and Let your Hearts also tremble at it. It is
that; Prove. XXIX. 1. He that being often reproved, hardens his Neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. I am afraid, I am afraid, I am
afraid, That before many Months are Expiredan (...) God, will no longer Extend
His (...) Patien^^, but single our some Young people, (...) accomplish this
terrible word upon them. How happy would it be, for some of our Young people,
if an Hand of Heaven would condescend so far, as to appear unto them, and Write
that Sentence on the Wall before their Eyes! It were well if it could be (...)
written on the Walls of those Houses, I (...) say, those Pest-Houses, where
they resort, for Gaming, and for Drinking, or for B^^dy Entertainments, and all
the purposes of Evil Company. But, whether the Sentence be (...) those Walls or
no, it stands Written by the Hand of Heaven in the Book of God. Methinks, it
should make your looks Change, your Thoughts to Trouble you, and your Knees
(...) smite one against another^ For it will be (...) fully accomplished! It is
a remarkable passage; Heb. VI. 8. The Earth which bears Thorns and Briars, is
nigh unto Cursing, its End is to be Burned: That is to say, The End of the
Briars and Thorns that grow upon it: The Children of Belial, whereof David long
ago said, They shall utterly be consumed with Fire. Mark what I say;
New England is a Field of God. Many Good, Rich, sweet Fruits have grown in this
Field; and being bound up in the Bundle of Life are Transplanted unto the
Celestial Paradise. O Children of New England, If you prove Degenerate Things;
(...) and Thorns, and Loathsome Weeds, and hurtful (...) in this Field; you are
Nigh unto Cursing: The Curse is not yet Executed on you; God waits one year
after another, to see what you will prove. But the Execution of the Curse, it
is Nigh, it is Nigh, to you; The Day is ^ear, it is near, and it hastens
Greatly. God will make a Quick Work of it. It will not be long before you are
thrown into the Fires for which the Tares are to be burned. An End^e^s Fire
will be the End of such Briars and Thorns; and the End is very Nigh to them,
when their secure Souls do least of all imagine it, and put far away the Evil
Day. O Children of New England, Be a fraid of coming to such an End.

The first Counsil to you, must be that, which if you take it not, no Good
Counsil will take any place upon you. It Is, Forsake the Foolish and Live. It Is,
Do not sit with vain Persons. It Is, Break off your Familiarity with such wicked
Creatures, as you may perceive by their Shibboleths, their Mocking at Religion,
their Scoffing and Railing at the Ministers of God, their not bridling of their
Tongue, to be the Children of Wickedness. It was an Imperial Sentence, Malas
consociationes putamus proximas esse Criminibus; Evil Companions will soon
bring Men to Evil Practices. Oh! Take your leave of them, in those Terms; Psalm.
CXIX. 115. Depart from me, ye Evil Doers; for I will keep the Commandments of
my God. A Person of Quality, who Ended his Days at the Gallows on Tower Hill,
used those Pathetical words; If I had hearkened unto the Hundred and nineteenth
Psalm; and the Hundred and fifteenth Verse, I had never come to this. That I
will say to you, If you will not hearken unto the Hundred and nineteenth Psalm,
and the Hundred and fifteenth Verse, no man can say, what you will come to: To
no Good, you may be sure of it. But if this point be gained, Then I hope, you
will go on to Embrace your only Savior, and study His Beaut^es and obey His
Commands, and say unto Him. O Lord, I am thy Servant! I am thine, Save me. I
hope, I leave you all, in the Frame that you find Exemplified; Psalm. CXIX. 57.
Thou art my Portion, O Lord, I have said, That I would keep thy Words.

But unto you, O poor Young man, who are now to Dye in Youth, because your Life
has been among the Unclean; and to Dye before your Time, for having been*
especially in one point, Wicked overmuch, all that now remains for me to add,
after all the many Instructions which the Servants of God have bestowed upon
you, is this. Though your Sins are what they have been, yet Return unto me, says
the Lord. You are a Prisoner of Hope, to find Mercy with that God, who says to
the Returning Sinner, I will have Mercy, and I will abundantly Pardon. In the
Proverbs of Israel, [Chap. XXXI. 6.] We read about, Giving Wine to them that
are of heavy Hearts, because ready to perish. Accordingly among the Jews, there
was that which they gave unto Criminals going to be Executed. It may be called
by Amos, The Wine of the Condemned; and some think, it is what is called by
David, The Wine of Astonishment: (...). Man; I am not going to bring unto thee,
a potion to Stupify thy Senses; No, I give thee the most Solemn Caution in the
World; Awake, Awake, O Soul on the Brink of Eternity: And be afraid of nothing
so much as a Stupefied Soul; be afraid of nothing so much, as l^st a Spirit of
Slumber sieze upon thee, after the Serpent has bitten thee, and lest a Deceived
Heart in thee take up with a Defective Repentance. But I bring thee a Cordial
of that Wine, which, O Soul ready to peri^^ thy Heavy Heart may justly esteem
above a thousand Worlds. I have known a poor Malefactor, here Executed for a
Murder, but (...) some hopeful Appearance of Repentance (...) that word, for
his last, and (...) Dye withal; A word that I (...) leave with you, for you in
your Dying Moments to Live upon; That is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance: (...) Christ Jesus came into the World, to Save Sinners; of whom I
am Chief.

THE Heinous Nature OF THE SIN OF Murder. AND The Great Happiness OF
Deliverance from it. As it was Represented in a SERMON at the Lecture in
Boston, (...) 1713. Before the (...) one David Wallis.

By Benjamin Colman, (...) a Church in Boston.

(...) N. E. Printed by John Allen, (...) Boon, at the Sign of (...) BIBLE in
Cornhil. 1713.

The Hainous-Nature Of the SIN of Murder: And the great Happiness of
Deliverance from it.
Psalm LI. 14. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, thou God of my
Salvation: And my Tongue shall Sing aloud of thy Righteousness:
THIS Psalm, as it was Composed by One of the (...) of Saints, upon one of the
most Sad Occasions that was ever known; So it breathes the most Consummate
Repentance; Expressing in the most lively colors, and in the most affecting
manner, the A^^iction and Distress, Humiliations, Fears and Desires of a
Repenting Soul. David had been guilty of one of the foulest Acts of Wickedness
in the matter of Ur^ah, which Sin he here bitterly bewails; and as a Testimony
of his unfeigned Sorrow, and that he might be as notorious an Instance of true
Repentance, He sends this Hymn to the Master of Music in the Tabernacle, to be
there perpetually used. In the Text, he names the very fact and bloody guilt,
which was Murder; that Enormous Crime, the Guilt of Blood, shed in a very base
and barbarous manner; for he Slew Uriah with the Sword of the Children of
Ammon. He cries to God for Mercy, and makes his Supplication to his Judge for
Pardon.

Deliver me from Blood-Guiltiness: i e. Let me not Ly under the Guilt and
Condemnation hereby contracted, but let it be pardoned to me, and let me never
be l^^t unto the like again. Deliver me from the punishment due unto this
Crying Sin: And Lord ever prevent and keep me from it any more, by thy
Restraining Grace. This Prayer he addresses to GOD, who only can Forgive Sin,
or Keep us from Sinning. He eyes him as the God of his Salvation; his Prayer
being for Salvation from the Dominion of Sin, and from the Condemnation due
thereunto. You may observe also a great Vehemence and Earnestness in this his
Supplication; he prays in the most ardent, fervent manner.

Finally. HE Makes his solemn Vow and Promise, that God should have the Glory
both of the Pardoning Mercy, and Renewing Grace: My Tongue shall sing aloud of
thy Righteousness. Righteousness is here used for Grace, Mercy, Clemency, Truth
and Faithfulness. This he would Sing of, Confess, Laud and Celebrate in Songs
of Praise, Thansksgiving and Blessing. And he would sing aloud of it; in the
most public manner he would proclaim the Infinite Goodness and Faithfulness of
God to Returning Sinners.

GODS Righteousness is often out for his Grace in the great business of a
Sinners Justification and Sanctification. They meet together herein. This the
Penitent comforts himself in, and therefore Sings of it. And this he sings
aloud of, to acquaint and affect others therewith (...).

There are two or three things to be observed in the words. 1. The heinous
Guilt of Murder. 2. That Deliverance from it is to be earnestly sought of God.
3. That God must have the Glory of such Preservation and Deliverance.

I. That Murder is a Sin of a very heinous and heavy guilt. So the Text speaks
of it; Blood-guiltiness, or the guilt of Blood. A deep Stain, and a deep Wound;
whereby the Conscience is gashed and defiled.

I will only look into the Law of God, and observe to you how it is forbidden
and condemned therein. It cries from the Ground, and brings down Vengeance from
Heaven. Cain was the first Murderer after the Devil, who was so from the
beginning. He was of that Wicked One, and slew his Brother. Then God the
Sovereign Judge said to him; What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers
blood cries to me from the Ground; and now thou art cursed from the Earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand, Genesis 4.
10, 11. Murder is a Crying Sin; it cries in the dying words of Zachariah, The
Lord look upon it and require it: Or in those words of the Souls under the
Altar; How long Lord, Holy and True? The Heavens reveal this Iniquity, and the
Earth rises up against it, Lamech was one of Cains Accursed Race, and it should
seem of the same bloody and barbarous Disposition: Whether he had Murer'd any
of the Holy Seed or no, yet certainly he owns himself to be a very fierce and
cruel man; and he glories in this his shame, as such fierce and bloody people
use to do: with a haughty Impenitence he presumes on, and challenges the
Protection of Providence. He had a galled but an unhumbled Conscience: I have
slain a man to my wounding, and a Young man to my hurt.

See how severely the Law of God forbids Murder, and makes it Capital. Genesis IX.
5, 6. And surely your blood of your lives will I require: at the hand of every
beast will I require it; and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's
brother will I require the life of man. Whosoever sh^ddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed: for in the Image of God made he man. Numb. 35. 31, 33.
Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is
guilty of death: but he (...) surely put to death. So ye shall not pollute the
land wherein you are: for blood defiles the land: and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it. Exo. XXI. 14. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to s^ay
him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, that he may die. Prove.
XXVIII. 17. A man that does violence to the blood of any Person, shall flee to
the Pit, let no man stay him.

These Texts need no Comment; they utterly forbid the Concealment or the
Protection of a Murderer among a people; the Government may not Pardon this
Sin, nor People interceed for it; It may not be bought off by any Price or any
Favor, on the pain of Guilt on the Public: Gods Altar may not shelter him,
and much less any Humane Power or Pity.

Let no man think that this looks Cruel or Inhumane: The Justice of God has so
fixed it; Yea, his tender Mercies to Mankind do account for this His Righteous
Law and Judgment. Let us not presume to arraign the Infinite Wisdom and Mercies
of God, in a partial respect to any natural tenderness or compassion of our
own: We shall, so invade and sacrifice all Law, both Humane and Divine to our
own weakness.

No Humanity or Law of Mercy will allow us to desire or endeavor the saving
the life of him that is Convict of Murder. It is a wrong to Humane Nature in
the highest manner; and the mercy and protection of Humane Nature is utterly
forfeited; yea, the Revenges thereof are incurred.

Murder is the greatest wrong to God; at whose Image the Stab is, and at His
Dominion. Life is the most precious of all the good gifts of God * He is the
absolute Lord of it, and has reserved the disposal of it entirely to Himself.

The Magistrate is the Minister of God, and the Avenger to Execute wrath upon
him that does Evil; God has put the Sword into his hands, to cut off Evildoers
from the Inheritance of the Lord, and he must not bear the Sword in vain.
Government among Mankind, is for this reason of the last necessity, and one of
the great Goods to the World. But for any Private Person voluntarily to take
away his Neighbors Life, whether in Clandestine manner, or by Open violence,
is the extremest Injury to our Neighbor, and one of the highest Offenses
against Humane Society.

A man's Life is Invaluable to him, and it is not to be repaired, there is
nothing equal to it; not all a man's precious Substance. Skin for Skin, yea, all
that a man has will he give for his Life. Self-love, and Self-preservation,
are an Invincible Principle, and Law, implanted by God in the hearts of all men.

But then moreover, to take away the Life of any one, fixes his Soul for
Eternity in an Unchangeable State of Happiness or Misery: and so (as one says)
not only is all Temporal Good hereby at once ravished from a man, but his Soul
incurs infinite hazard, and it may be damage.

And as to Humane Society, the Sin of Murder strikes at the very Being, and all
the Comforts hereof. For there were no more living in any quiet or safety, if
this might be allowed, then there might be among the wild and savage Beasts of
the Woods, where the stronger and fiercer prey upon the weak and mild. So that
Societies must disband, and all the Rules as well as (...) of it dissolve
together, if the Crime of Murder, were not held Capital, (...) unpardonably so
among men. As Jacob said of his two Sons, and all his Fatherly Goodness could
not reconcile him to them, nor cover their bloody Stain: Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7.
Simeon and Levi are brethren: instruments of Cruelty are in their habitations.
O my Soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor be
not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will
they dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce: and their
wrath, for it was cruel.

Murder ordinarily comes of cruel and cursed passion. This does not excuse the
Fact; for the Law is made to govern men's passions, or to punish the Enormous
Outrages of them; 1 Timothy 1. 9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of
mothers, for man sla^ers.

There were two things in the Law of Moses, that were high Expressions of the
Heinous Nature of Manslaughter in the Account of God: The one was, that he
that killed a man by Accident or Unawares was obliged to flee to some City of
Refuge, where he must remain in Banishment from his own House and Patrimony,
and in a kind of Prison there, until the death of the High Priest. By which it
is certain that God meant to teach us to conceive a dread and horror of the
Guilt of Blood; in that though the Fact were not Voluntary, nor done designedly;
though it were but Chance-medly, and Homicide per Infortunium, yet that the
Manslayer must incur so much danger, inconvenience and confinement. The other
Argument of the Criminalness of Murder was, that if a Brute Creature happened
at any time to kill a man, it was to be slain by the Hand of Justice, Exodus 21.
28, 29. If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die, then the ox shall be
surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten: but the owner of the ox shall
be quit. But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it
has been testified to his Owner: and he has not kept him in: but that he has
killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and his Owner also shall be
put to Death. Here was another high Instance of Gods Care of the Life of Man,
and of his Detestation of the Sin of Murder. And indeed this was according to
that more Catholic Law given unto Noah; The Blood of your Lives will I require
of every Beast.

To Conclude, Natural Conscience has the highest resentment and horror against
the Sin of Murder; it is an universal and irresistible Principle in the Hearts
of all men. And famous to that purpose was that Law of the Commonwealth of
Athens, quoted by Mr. Hales of Eaton, and since by Dr. Towerson; that if only a
Wall had by chance fallen down and killed a man, the Judges of that Place were
to Sit upon and Arraign it, and upon Conviction, to throw the Stones thereof
out of the Country. By this they gave the utmost Testimony, how sacred a thing
they esteemed the Life of Man to be, and with what horror they looked upon the
shedding of his Blood.

The most Barbarous People and Places have a Conscience of the Vengeance due
to, and pursuing Murd^rers; witness what we read of the People of M^lita, who
when they saw the Viper fastening upon the Apostles Hand, cried out, No doubt
this man is a murderer; whom though he has escaped the sea, yet Vengeance
suffers not to live.

And now to look back on all that has been said of the Heinous Nature of the
Sin of Murder; It should be improved by all that are here present, to deter
them from all Approaches, or tendencies toward this Crying Guilt; and People
should be warned against indulging the least appearance of it in Will, or Wish,
or Word; and also of all wicked passions or Customs that may but tend to draw
on the Fact, or provoke God to leave us to it.

At the same time you see the Government justified in their righteous Care to
Purge the Land of this Guilt; nor can they answer it to God, or their People,
to do otherwise: It is their Obedience to the Divine Law, and their Fidelity
and Tenderness to Humane Society, that constrain them to the Condemnation and
Execution of a Murderer.

And now let me with a Bleeding Soul Beseech you the poor Condemned Person here
present, to lay to heart the Greatness of this your Sin, for which you are this
Day to Die: O what Great Penitence does such a Great Sin committed by you, call
for! How heavy should it Ly on your Conscience! With what Tears of Blood should
you confess it, and bewail it! I think you have been bowed down in Soul under
the Weight of it. And Blessed be God who has not left you destitute of the
outward signs and expressions of Penitence, Affliction and Sorrow for this
Heinous Fact; from the day (I think) that you committed it. You have in words
and signs been in some measure Mourning after Christ, after Repentance, Pardon
and Salvation; Be you excited and encouraged to do so more and more, to the
last of that few remaining Moments of your Life: And the Lord glorify his
Renewing and Pardoning Mercy on you.

II. I pass unto the Second Thing to be observed from the Text, which is, That
Deliverance from this crying Guilt of Blood is to be earnestly sought of God.
This is the very Petition in the Text, Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness. So
then there is Deliverance from it; and we should be very earnest in Prayer for
it unto God.

1. There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness to be obtained from God. And
that of two sorts. 1. To be kept from the Bloody Guilt. 2. The Pardon and
Forgiveness of it when contracted.

1. We may by the Divine Restraining Grace be kept from the Commission of the
Sin of Murder; and this is a blessed Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness. We are
through Grace all of us (I trust) one only excepted, free of this Guilt; and ever
shall be so. But then it is God that has kept, prevented and delivered us from
it; and He must hereafter keep us, or we shall fall into it. For we are
Incident to it through the horrid Corruption that is in our Nature; and the very
best of us are by no means our own Keepers. There is no Sin, but what the vile
and cursed nature of man is prone to, and capable of; and the same vile Nature
is common to us all. Esau had Murder in his heart, when he came out against his
Brother Jacob; and so had Joseph's Brethren, when they cast him into the Pit;
but God kept them however from it. GOD left David to fall into it, to show him
the wickedness that was in his heart. GOD left Simeon and Levi, Joab and
Absalom, and others to fall into it, on one temptation or another. Are we
Better by Nature than they? No, but God has kept us from their Temptations, or
Restrained us when tempted. When the Prophet of the Lord told Hazael the Syrian
of the Murders, Cruelties and Barbarities which he would in time commit against
Israel; He answered with detestation, But what? is thy Servant a Dog, that he
should do this great thing? such abhorred and enormous wickedness: Yet he did
it afterward; like a dog he rent and tore and devoured; He proved as much a
brute and beast of prey, how impossible soever he beforehand though it it of
himself. And indeed the Angers, Passions, and Wraths of men are so violent;
that it is a wonder of the Divine Restraining Grace, and a mavelous Instance
of the Power and Providence of God that there are not many Murders to one
committed in the World. How does Madness and Rage and mortal Hatred glare out
in men's looks, and words, and gestures? How easily do they grow Outrageous, and
strike or draw? From whence come blows Fightings, and Duels, and Stabbing (more
base and cruel than all the rest) but from men's lusts which war in their
Members? So that the Sin is in our Nature; though by the Divine Mercy so few
are left to it.

We see a Miserable Person present, whom God has left to the great Sin of
Murder, while you and I are kept from it? but who makes thee to differ? Art
thou better than he? Is not thy Nature as bad as his? Have not thy Passions
been as violent as his? How often in thy Rage have thou also been on the Brink
of this Sin? But God has had Mercy on thee, and not suffered thee to act thy
own cursed Will. O adore the Sovereign Providence of God! Behold, the Goodness
and Severity of God! to him that is fallen, Severity, but to thee Goodness! Is
he a greater Sinner, than some of us? I tell thee nay, but except you repent,
you shall all likewise perish.

Other great Sins do expose and lead to this of Murder; by debauching,
hardening and searing the Conscience; and by provoking God to give people up to
their own (...) and passions. But to return, It is a blessed deliverance from
Sin to be kept from it; to have the guilt and the sorrows of Repentance
prevented; and the present Shames, Miseries and Ruin that do sometimes attend
it.

2. There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltinses after it is Contracted, by the
Commission of Murder: i. e. The Merciful God has admitted Sinners to
Repentance, even in this Case: And there is forgiveness of it, and cleansing
from it, through the Blood of Christ. It has been repented of we see in our
Text, and it has been pardoned, 2 Samuel XII. 13. And David said unto Nathan, I
have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has
put away thy sin; thou shall not die. Manasseh was a great Sinner and Murderer;
he filled Jerusalem with the Innocent Blood which he shed; yet was he afterward
an Eminent Penitent, and obtained Mercy.

The Mercies of God are Infinite, Free and Sovereign. He has mercy on whom he
(...) mercy. The Merits and Virtue of the Blood of Christ are also Infinite,
and have purchased Pardon for the greatest Sinners upon their Repentance. (...)
of Renewing Grace is infinites. Almighty Grace (...) it can change the hearts
of the greatest Sinners, and is (...) Worst. The (...) of Mercy (...) the
Gospel, its Calls and Promises are unlimited; to all, even the Chiefest
Sinners. Mat. 12. 31. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men. Isai. I. 18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord,: though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool. 1 Timothy I. 15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners; of whom I am chief. Thus we read again; that the Blood of Jesus Christ
our Lord cleanses from all Sin; and that whosoever comes to Him, He will in no
wise cast out.

Here is Comfort for thee, O miserable Malefactor, and Prisoner of Hope! and
how should it revive and cheer thy sad and wounded Soul, and cause thee to
admire and adore the Riches of the Mercy of God through Christ, his Grace
abounding to the chief of Sinners* There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness.
There is pardon and forgiveness with God, even for thee, if thou do believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and with a repenting, bleeding Soul for this and all
thy other Sins, do find Grace to fly unto His Blood: I may then, and now do
promise you in the Presence, and in the Name of Christ, My Great Lord and
Master, our Common Savior and Judge, the free and full Remission of all your
Sins, how many or great soever they have been.

O that it might please God to give thee, together with the most affecting
sense of the Heinous Nature of thy bloody Crime; to apprehend the freeness and
fullness of his Mercies by Christ Jesus; and thy Saviors Alsufficiency and
readiness to bestow both Repentance and Pardon on thee.

Hear it, and be astonished; hear it, and be thou ravished with the Grace of
God: God gave the Life of his own Son, Christ the Son of God gave his own
Blood, for the Redemption even of Murderers upon their Repentance. He died even
for his own Murderers, for them that with wicked hands crucified and slew him
the Prince of Life: and therefore the Apostle Peter calls even upon them to
Repent, that their Sins might be blotted out, who had themselves denied the
Holy One, and the Just, and desired a Murderer to be granted to them.

So then Christ's Blood can wash away the Guilt of Blood; and Faith in the Blood
of Christ can both purify and pacify the polluted wounded Soul of a Murderer.
It is true that St. John tells us, That no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in
him. But the Apostle there is speaking of him that hates his brother, and has a
malicious murderous frame of spirit within him: Such an one abides in death;
and has no seed or principle of Spiritual Life, no beginning of Eternal Life
within him. How many such Murderers, haters of God and one another, there are
among us, under a more dreadful sentence then a present bodily death; He knows
that searches the hearts of the Children of men. But he that has truly repented
of all his Sins, and believes on the Son of God, though he may have been a
Murderer, yet he has Everlasting Life, and shall not enter into Condemnation in
the World to come; but is passed from Death unto Life. Thus then there is
Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness. This was the first Thing.

2. We should be very earnest in Prayer unto God for this Deliverance: That He
would keep us from it: that He would save us from the Condemnation due to it.

Let every one he^^ present before the Lord, Pray to Him to be kept and
preserved by Him from this and all ^other great Transgressions. Keep back thy
servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: So shall I
be innocent from the great Transgression. It is an excellent and needful part
in our Litany; From Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all Uncharitableness (and so
from Murder one frequent cursed Effect of them;) Good Lord deliver us.

But who is there that will not wish and pray to be kept from this Sin of
Murder! who would not deprecate the being left to it, if it were only in regard
of their Temporal Life? Surely we ought But then be sensible that thou need
the* Divine Keeping: Be sensible that thy heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked: Be sensible of the violence of thy own Lusts and
Passions: Be sensible that these (even all thy causeless wraths and angers)
render thee as a Murderer in Gods sight: Yea, let the Best remember with the
Apostle, Tit. III 3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

Remember that the Devil is a Murderer, and will not the malicious Spirit
inspire and stir up as he is able his own Venom and Malignity in thy Soul? to
make thee as like himself, and as odious to God, and contrary to Goodness as he
can? Remember that this Sin of Murder was the first Enormity and flagitious Act
after the Fall: The Devil hurried wretched Cain into This; He was of that
Wicked One, and slew his Brother. Thou art of that Wicked One, and only hate
thine, and art unreasonably angry on every petty occasion: O fear, lest some
time or other he push thee into the Overt. Act of Murder. Beg of God to keep
thee.

And now I turn me again unto the Wretched Spectacle before us, whom God has
suffered to fall into this Crime. And need I call upon thee, O miserable David,
to Pray earnestly to God for the Pardon of This thy Sin. Every one of Us should
this Day Cry to God for the Forgiveness of all our Angers and Passions; The
pardon of our Malice and Hatreds. But O with what anguishes of Soul, and
agonies of Grief should You be Lying at the Feet of Mercy, Crying incessantly
for Pardon. I hope you have been doing so day and night, (...) the Fact, and
now you have but (...) hour more to do it in. O do it (...) more Fervently in
thy last Agonies. O with what care and fear, (...) what vehemence and
importunity, (...) you wrestle now! and we in Prayer to God for you. The Blood
of (...) Murdered Brother cries against (...) from the Ground, but the Blood
(...) Christ which is the Blood of (...), and speaks better things than the
Blood of Abel, Cries aloud for Mercy upon all Repenting Sinners. Wilt not thou
go now unto that Blood of the Covenant, the Blood of the Great Sacrifice for
Sin, and (...) Blood of Intercession; and by Faith therein, Cry unto God in
Prayer for thy own Soul? Wilt not thou Cry (...) God and Savior; Deliver me
from this Guilt of Blood, O God thou God of my Salvation.

And here let me tell thee; that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God,
the Crucified Jesus, is the God of thy Salvation; neither is there Salvation in
any other. He (...) only Savior of Sinners, and He is an Alsufficient One. He
is a City of Refuge, a (...) of Salvation for thy poor Soul to (...) unto, and
be safe from the Aven^^^ of Blood, the Avenging Justice of (...). O flee for
Refuge to the Hope (...) is set before thee. There is now (...) Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. Look to the Crucified (...), and Beg of Him to
Remember (...) and Receive thee to His Kingdom. (...) he say to thee, as he did
once to the Malefactor by him on the Cross: This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

You have (...) hope been passing your last Week (...) Prayer for the Life of
your Precious and Immortal Soul. Now Die doing so. It is for your Life, and an
Infinitely better One, than this, which your Sin^ have lost. Be found now Lying
at the Feet of Christ, washing them with your Tears, and wiping them with the
Hair of your Head. There ly with almost Grief and Self-loathing for your
Scarlet Sins; there ly Confessing and giving Glory to the Justice of God; There
Ly Admiring Free Grace, and trusting in Christ, (...) able to Save unto the
uttermost, all that come unto God by Him. While the Sorrows of Death compass
thee, and the Pains of Hell (...) hold on thee, and thou find sorrow and
trouble; Then Call thou upon ^he Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord and Righteous; yea, our God is Merciful.
There is Deliverance from Blood-guiltiness, and it is earnestly to be sought
after, from the God (...) our Salvation.

Which was the Second Thing observed from the words.

III. And Lastly, the Last Observation is, That God must have the Glory and
Praise of this Preservation and Deliverance. My Tongue shall sing aloud of thy
Righteousness. Thy Mercy, Compassion, Grace and Faithfulness.

If God prevent and keep us from falling into Sin, the Glory and Praise is to
be Ascribed to his Preventing Grace: It is the Lords Doing, and should be
M^rvellous in our Eyes. So it will be, if we are sensible of our own Desperate
Wickedness. It is the Greatest Good, kindness and Benefit that God can do us in
this Life, next to his bestowing Sanctifying Grace upon us. Yea, in (...)
respects the Prevention of Sin is a Greater Mercy than the Pardon of it upon
Repentance. As Angels who never Sinned, are more happy and blessed for this
reason, then Sinners and Saints are, whom the Angels Rejoice over in their
Repentance.

Moreover, God Owes us not his Grace, but it is what we have coutinually been
forfeiting, and by the wicked abuse of it provoked him times without number, to
take it from us.

If then God has kept us from any one, even the worst Transgression, to His
Name (...) the Glory, Psalm. CI. 5, 7. The Lord is thy Keeper: The Lord is thy
shade upon thy right hand. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall
preserve thy Soul. 116. 7, 9. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with thee. For thou have delivered my soul from death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. St. Jude. verse 24: Now unto
him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before
the presence of His Glory with exceeding Joy: To the only wise God our Savior,
be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and Ever. Amen. Thus let us
Sing aloud of Gods Righteousness, because that he has graciously kept us from
Blood-guiltiness.

AND now David, If it may please God to Deliver thee from the Guilt of that
Blood which thou have shed, thou will for ever Praise and Sing of his Pardoning
Mercy.

O the Glory of Divine Grace in pardoning such Guilt as thine is! O the Glory
that may redound to GOD for ever in thy Salvation! The Glory of free Electing
Love unto the Chief of Sinners! The Glory of Christ the Savior, through whom it
is that the Grace of God is thus Magnified (...) Sinful Man! The Glory of the
Divine Holiness in the Forgiveness of Sin through the Blood of Christ, the
Justice of God having received full Satisfaction thereby; So that God can be
Just, and yet the Justifier of all them that Believe! The Glory of the Power
also of Renewing Grace, whereby God is able to subdue all things to himself;
and to Soften, Sanctify, and Change thy Heart! And finally, the Glory of Gods
Holy, Wise and Terrible Providence, and yet most tender to thee and merciful,
(...) whatever Methods it may use, and make them Effectual Means of thy
Conversion and Salvation! Ah, If thy very Sin may bring thee unto Christ, and
into the way of Divine Awakenings, Instruction and Conviction; how should
thou in thy very Chains, and on the Gibbet Sing aloud of Gods Righteousness.

If thou have any Hope that God has pardoned thy Sin, I Am sure thou must needs
adore and bless, extol and magnify the Mercy of God in Christ. O cherish
Admiring Thoughts of free Grace in pardoning great Transgressions; and let them
arise from the ^ight of the Greatness of thy own Sins. Let Christ be Glorious,
Admirable, Excellent and Precious to thy Soul. But O beware of (...) hopes in,
and Reliance on the (...) Mercy Let thy hopes there ^^^crease in^^nitely in
thee Humiliation, Sorrow, Abasement and Self-Abhorrence for thy Sins. (...)
Astonishment it should beget (...) thee to think of finding Mercy with the Holy
God! How humbly should you hope for it! How should it bre^^ thy Heart, and melt
thy Soul within thee! And while it does this, -- how should it raise, ravish
and transport thy ^^jected Soul.

Let me then Call upon (...) ^his day, and in this last hour of thy ^ife, My
Son, Give Glory to the Lord God of (...), and own publicly his Righteousness
and Justice in th^^ thy (...) End. Make Confession of thy Sins to God and man;
justify (...): Take shame and confusion of (...) thy self; for thou have
sinned against both: Will thou not fear God under thy (...) nation, and say
with the (...) on the Cross, and I indeed justly, (...) receive but the due
desert of thy (...). God is Holy in judging thus: His throne is spotless; thou
(...) before him must be speechless (...) Confess then his Righteous and
terrible Providence, and fly to his Mercy, Say with repenting David in the
Context. v. 2, 3, 4. W^sh me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from
my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions: And my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, (...) only have I sinned, and done (...) evil (...) sight: That
thou might be justified when thou speak and be clear when the judge.

Again, give Glory to God by warning others. Preach to them in thy D^ing words,
in more affecting (...) than I can speak to thee. God can help the to do so;
for who has made man's (...) Have one word for God before thou die! Warn Young
people of (...), and call on careless profane Sinners to learn by thy Example
to fear God and turn to him, that so Iniquity may not be your ruin. How
know thou but that before thou die thou may^st be instrumental to turn
some one from the Error of his way, and save a Soul from Death and cover a
multitude of Sins; or to prevent to some or other the like Sins and the like
Temporal Destruction. God grant thy Sufferings may be Sanctified thus for
saving Good to others. So shall thou teach Transgressors Gods ways, and Sinners
shall be converted unto him. The Lord in Mercy open thy lips, and thy mouth
shall show forth his Praise,

To Conclude, Give Glory to the Righteous and Faithful God, by laying hold on
his Free Grace in Christ Jesus. God and his Righteousness are Glorified in
Christ. God has Glorified his Son Jesus, to be a Prince and Savior. Thy Faith
in Christ shall Glorify God in the best manner that a Sinner can do it. So
(...) Malefactor on the Cross turned (...) face to his Crucified Savior, and
said, Lord, Remember me. So do thou look unto Jesus, the Author of thy
Salvation. And God grant thee a Sight of him, at the Right hand of God, and
Faith to Cry to Him, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

O that God would Purge thee and Pardon thee; and make thee to hear the voice
of Joy and Gladness, that thy broken bones might rejoice! That He would hide
his face from thy Sins and blot out (...) thine Iniquities! That He would
create in thee a clean Heart and renew a right Spirit within thee! The Lord
cast thee not away from his presence; nor deny his Holy Spirit to thee! The
Lord give thee the Joy of his Salvation, and uphold thee with his free Spirit!

The Lord Enable thee to Expire in suitable apprehensions and praises (...)
Righteousness and Mercies through Christ to all penitent Sinner^ And God, the God
of thy Salvation, bring the^ to Sing thereof for ever among Redeemed Souls in a
better Life.

FINIS.

