The Best Way of Living; Which is to Die Daily: Very briefly Described and
Commended in a plain DISCOURSE, Made at a Time, when the AUTHOR had newly seen
Repeated Strokes of DEATH, on his own FAMILY. And the PUBLISHER had his Family
also Struck with a SUDDEN DEATH upon a Vital Part of it.

22. d. IX. m. 1713.

By Cotton Mather, D. D.

2 Cor. VI. 9. As DYING, and behold, we LIVE.

Boston, Printed by J. Allen, 1713.

TO THE Reader.
IF he that has this brief ESSAY now in his hand, be indeed the READER of it,
he will find himself there sufficiently informed of the occasion. The
Bookseller having his Family wounded, by a sudden Death upon his nearest
Relative, the Evening before the SERMON was Preached, he was willing, as to Get
Good himself, so to Do Good unto others, on the Occasion, by publishing what he
thought suitable, not only unto himself, but also unto all that can cast an Eye
upon it. It was a very short Sermon, delivered when the Preacher was Confined
unto such an One by a very Cold Season; But if the Blessing of God accompany
this Exhortation of a Few Words, and very Right Ones, he knows, the Publication
will not be Repented of*

The Best Way of Living; Which is to Die Daily: BOSTON. 22. d. IX m. 1713.
1 Cor. XV. 31. I Die Daily.


ONE who Lives in the midst of Deaths, may find cause to say so. One who feels
within him, that which bids him reckon his own among the many Deaths without
him, cannot but say so. One who has in less than Two Weeks, had Five Deaths in
his Family, would be very senseless, if he should not say so. May it now be
said by every One of us, in so Significant and so Religious a manner, as it
ought to be.

Our Apostle speaks it, because he was Daily Exposed to Death, and Daily
Expecting of it. His Dying Daily, was his being Daily willing to Die, and his
Daily Laying himself open in the Cause of Christ, unto the utmost Hazards of
Death. God Enkindled and Preserved this Piety in him, and his Fellow Soldiers,
with the persuasion of a Resurrection from the Dead. A persuasion productive of
so much Piety; and having a Tendency to such an Holy Life, and such a Triumph
over the Fear of Death, is doubtless of GOD. Such a persuasion doubtless is no
Delusion. We may therefore go on persuaded of a Resurrection from the Dead; We
shall not be Deceived in it. Our Apostle is proving the Resurrection with it.
Q. E. D. This is what our Apostle upon the Demonstration of.

The Doctrine, which I will present you withal, shall be this; There is a Dying
Daily, which true Christians Live in the practice of.

Dying Daily, will be, as the Condition of every Christian, so, the Exercise of
every Lively Christian. Dying Daily is a Mystery of Practical Christianity,
which we ought all to Live in the Study of.

It Is not so much that which is our Condition, as that which is to be our
Endeavor, that I shall insist upon.

The Case to be insisted on, is this; What is the DYING DAILY, which a
Christian is to Live in the practice of?

I. A Lively Sense of our Daily Progress to our Death, yea, a Daily Sense of
it, revived on all occasions, this will be in our Dying Daily. We must never
Lay aside, a Sense of our Mortality. To Lay that aside, is Folly in its
Exaltation, Madness in its Extremity. It Is most certain, That we are Dying: It
is the Thing appointed for us; It is unavoidable. The Whole World of Mankind
Unites in the Accomplishment of that word; Psalm. LXXXIX. 49. Who is that man
that shall live and shall not see Death? To Go to the Grave, is to go in the
way of all the Earth. The Grave, O man, It Is Whither thou art Going. There is no
man alive, whom this Advice may not be addressed unto* Oh! Let this
Apprehension be continually kept alive in our minds: Job XXX. 23. I know that
thou will bring me to Death, and to the House assigned for all the Living.
Every Time the Sun sets, we should be sensible, we are one Day nearer to our
Death, than we were when it rose. And every Time the Clock strikes, we may be
sensible, we are one Hour nearer to our Death, than we were sixty minutes ago.
Yea, It Is a Quick progress that we are making to our Death. We shall Quickly
arrive unto it. Our Life is a Race very Quickly run. We are upon the Wing unto
the Grave. It Is very Livelily set forth unto us; Job IX. 25, 26. Swifter than a
Post, yea, as the Ships of Dispatch, yea, as the Eagle which flies after the
Prey. With what Haste, Oh! What Haste are we Dispatching the Course of our
Life! The Psalmist said unto the Lord, Remember how short my Time is! The Lord
says unto the Christian, Do thou Remember how short thy Time is. If our Days
are but as an Hands-breadth; And if the progress of our Days be that of a
Weavers Shuttle; Then say, O Dying Man; How near thou art unto thy Death.
Truly, The Day is near, it is near, and it hastes greatly! To Die Daily, is to
do that wise Thing; the thing so ardently wished for; Psalm. XC. 12. So to
Number our Days, as to apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Now, in Dying Daily, it
is requisite, First, That we have some Daily Meditation on our Death; yea, that
in our Meditation, we look on our Death, as both Certain and Speedy too. Oh!
Don't put far away the Day! This will render it an Evil Day! Not one Day should
pass us without some* Thoughts of this Importance, I am a Dying man, and it
cannot be Long before I am Dead! Yea, it is requisite, Secondly; That the
Occasions which Daily occur to Blow up this Meditation, should not pass
unobserved with us. Every Day brings to us fresh Monitors, to put us in mind of
this, That we are to Die in a very little while. We should not be Deaf to the
Admonitions: On our Tables, we are fed by the Dead. We should infer, ' This
Food will not keep me 'always from Death. In our Habits we are clothed from
the Dead. We should infer, I am covered with the Shadow of Death. We attend
upon Funerals, and follow the Dead. It should be with such Thoughts as these; I
am shortly to follow, my Turn is coming; It will not be long before I am carried
unto my Long Home. Every Bell tolled for the Dead, should ring such a peal as
this in our Ears. When the Night comes, we should often think; My Night is
coming! When we put off our Garments, we should often think; I am shortly to
put off this Earthly Tabernacle! When we Ly down in our Bed, we should often
think; My Grave will shortly be my Bed! We Die Daily, when we keep up such a
Daily Sense of this, That we are to Die Quickly!

II. In our Dying Daily, we are Every Day to keep Alive a prudent, perpetual,
reasonable Suspicion, That this may prove our Dying Day. There is a Maxim of
Wisdom, which we ought to Live under the Daily power of; Prove. XXVII. 7. Thou
know not what a Day may bring forth. It is very sure, we must see our Last
Day. And we are sure of no Day that comes, That it will not be our Last. We
should often think in a Morning, 'For ought I 'know, I may Die before the
Evening. We should often think in an Evening, 'For ought I know, I may Die
before the 'Morning. When we take our Leave of a Friend, we should often think,
For ought I know, we may never see one another again. When we hear a Sermon, we
should often think, For ought I know this is the Last Sermon I shall hear among
the People of God. When we make a Prayer, we should often think, For ought I
know, this is the last Prayer I shall make before my Breath be stopped! Such
Dying Tho'ts as these, are extremely countenanced, by our Circumstances in the
World. Our Circumstances are tho; Jam. IV. 14. What is your Life? It Is a vapor
that appears a little while, and vanishes away. Those, Eccl. IX. 12. Man
knows not his Time. All Ages are Liable to the Stroke of Death! They that are
under Six, are as Likely to Die, as they that are beyond Sixty: And more Die so.
At this very Time, there Lies Dead in our Neighborhood, An Aged, Pious, Useful
Servant of God, an Elder of a Church, near Fourscore; Elder John Copp.
And an Infant that was yet in the Cradle. The Stroke of Death, is also given
sometimes very Suddenly. Persons are well one day, Dead the next. Last Night,
an affecting Instance of it. A Young Woman Mrs. Mary Boon.
well one hour, tending her Sick Son; the next hour Dead, and Leaving her
Tender Husband in Tears. A Last Day must come; And there comes no Day, but, for
ought we know, may be our Last. For us, to be moderately, and rationally,
Suspicious, of Every Day! This may be my Last! Verily, There is an incomparable
Discretion in it. For us, to make provision accordingly, would be very
discreetly done. Such Thoughts, how much would they Mortify our Vanities,
Animate our Devotions, Regulate all our Behaviors, if they had a due Efficacy
upon us! We Die Daily, in such Thoughts as these; And we take a Course to Live
unto God.

III. Dying Daily will imply, that we should every Day be Ready and Willing to
Die. Our Apostle having said, We stand in jeopardy every Hour; then adds, I Die
Daily. A man Dies Daily, when his Life is in daily Jeopardy, for the Cause of
Christ, and of His People. A man that ventures his Life, that he may Serve a
Good Interest, is One who Dies Daily. We should be always Ready and Willing to
Die, whenever the Great Lord of our Life shall call us to it; and say, Psalm.
CXIX. 109. My Soul is continually in my Hand. Q. D. My Soul, and my Life, I
stand Ready and Willing, to make an Offering of it. The Spirit of Martyrdom, is
ONE thing that belongs to Dying Daily. We ought to suppose, that we may be
called unto, the Death of a Martyr, in bearing a Testimony to the Truths of
God: That we may not Love our Lives unto the Death, nor hold them till they may
terminate in a Natural Death. Supposing that we may be put upon Dying by the
Fist of Wickedness, for our Disposition to Live Godlily, we must have a mind
that shall be daily Resolved for it. To Die Daily, is to be in a Daily and
fixed Resolution, to undergo whatever Sufferings, our Fidelity to the Kingdom
of our Savior may bring upon us. We must be Daily of that mind, Act. XX. 24.
None of these things move me, neither is my Life precious to me, so that I may
but finish my Course with Joy. But then, If the Lord of our Life put us upon
Dying only in the way of His Common Providence, and in the manner and method of
Nature in its Decays; This is Daily; and Readily, and Willingly to be submitted
to. We ought every Day, to keep in a Dying Frame; Ready and Willing to
Entertain our Death with all possible Resignation, if this be the Day, which
the Lord of our Life has ordered for it. Our Daily Frame should be this; Lord,
My Life is entirely at thy Dispose; And if thou will have this Day, to be the
Day of my Death, I will not Rebel against thy Order. Thy Will be done! A man
does, what he Consents to do. He who Consents every Day to Die, if God shall
please to say, I will have this to be the Day! Such an one dies Daily. To Die
Daily, is every Day to say with him; Luke II. 29. Lord, Now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace. The Language of a Soldier in his weary Station, ready
to Draw off, whenever His Great Commander shall give the word for it.

IV. To Die Daily, is to Do Daily those Things, which must be done, by every
one that would Hope to Die Safely. Dying Daily, is Living in a Daily
preparation for Death. It is demanded of us; Mat. XXIV. 44. Be ye Ready. We
prepare for Death, and so for the Coming of our Savior to Raise us from the
Dead, by Doing those Things, of which the Divine Oracle tells us, They are the
things that accompany Salvation. To Do such Things Daily, that so our Death
whenever it comes may find us prepared for it, this is to Die Daily. My
Hearers, I now demand of you, the greatest Attention, that ever you gave to any
thing in the World* Oh! Hearken to me, that God may hearken to you another Day.

There must be first, an Habitual preparation for Death. And one who Die Daily,
is one who is Daily doing of something toward this preparation: Daily giving
some Good Strokes at the Work which must be done, by all that would propose to
Die in Good Terms with Heaven. You shall have it set before you. One Thing is
this. He that would be prepared for Death, must be Righteous. We read, Prove.
XIV. 32. It is the Righteous who has Hope in his Death. At our Death, we are in
an Hopeless, Undone, Forlorn plight, if we are not furnished with a perfect and
spotless Righteousness, wherein we may stand before the Judgment Seat of God.
We cannot obtain such a Righteousness, but by Accepting of, and Relying on,
that Righteousness, which our Savior has in His Obedience as our Surety unto
God, provided for us. Well then; We must by faith make our Daily Flight unto
the Righteousness of God. It must be our Daily course, Thankfully, Joyfully,
Heartily to Receive the Righteousness of the Blessed Jesus, as the Free Gift of
God, that we may lead it as our Title to Everlasting Happiness. It must be our
Daily care that we do not continue under the Guilt of Sin, and the Cause of
God, but present before God, the Sacrifice of our Blessed Jesus, for our (...).
Thus it is to Die Daily. Another Thing is this. He that would be prepared for
Death, must be Holy. We read, Heb, XII 14. Without Holiness, no man shall see
the Lord. Holiness, will be the Mark by which all that at their Death, enter
into the Strait Gate, will be distinguished. Holiness, which Lies in a mind
Renewed with a principle of Grace infused into it: Holiness, which Lies in an
Heart principled with the predominant Love of God: Woe to us, if we are
Strangers to this! Well then; It must be our Daily Study to get our Enmity to
God all subdued. We must be Daily Learning to Fear God, and Prize Christ, and
Hate Sin, and perfect Holiness in the Fear of God. We must be Daily Laboring
to get the Image of Satan melted out of our Souls, and the Image of our Savior
gaining and growing in us. This is to Die Daily. A Third Thing is this. He that
would be prepared for Death, must be able to give up a Good Account unto God,
in the Judgment that comes after Death. We read, Rom* XIV. 12. Every one of us.
shall give an Account of himself unto God. There is a Work which our Lord has
assigned us to do in the World. Our Work is, To render and procure
Acknowledgments unto God. We shall after Death, be called to an Account
concerning our Work. It must then be our Daily Concern, by Repentance to get
the pardon of all our Miscarriages about the Work of God; and by Diligence in
this Work, to be capable of Giving up our Account with Joy, and not with Grief.
This it is to Die Daily. We have a Term of Time allowed unto us up on Earth; A
Time, which Flies away like the Shadow of a Bird upon the Wing; which is the
Chaldee Paraprase, for, Our Days are as the Shadow. We shall after Death, be
called to an Account how we have spent our Time. It must then be our Daily
Concern, to Lay out our Time in such Purposes, and Actions, that we may not be
thunder struck from our Judge, with, O Slothful, and Wicked Servant! This is to
Die Daily. We are betrusted with Talents from our Lord. We are Talented with
various Blessings; with Opportunities to Do Good. After Death, our Talents must
be Accounted for; how much, how well, we have improved them. It must be our
Daily Concern, To Glorify God with all our Talents; To project, and pursue all
imaginable ways for the Glorifying of Him. This it is to Die Daily.

But then, there must be likewise an Actual preparation for Death, And one who
Dies Daily, is one who is Daily doing of something toward this preparation
also. To be Actually prepared for Death, is to be Daily employed in such points
of a Godly Life as are pleasing to God. It is in a Daily Exercise to keep a
Conscience void of offense. It is in a Daily compliance with the Famous
Direction, Be thou in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long. We read in Luke
XII. 43. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when He comes, shall find so
Doing. To be Actually prepared for Death, is to be Daily doing of that, which
if our Death should come this Day unto us, it would be no Damage unto us, to be
found so doing. My Fellow Travelers; Keep your Assurance for Heaven so fair
and clear, that the Approach of Death may not make you afraid with any
amazement. Keep your Souls in such an Heavenly Frame, that the Advance of Death
may not find you indisposed for a Translation to a Better World. Be Daily
Engaged in such Services, that it may be no Disadvantage for you, to be found
so Engaged. This it is to Die Daily. One thing more: Every Night a man who Dies
daily, will bestow some Thoughts on that Question, If I Die this Night, is all
well with me? If I Die this Night, am I sure of a Better Life! Do I fall Asleep
this Night in the Arms of a Faithful Savior. Non prius in dulcem declinent
Lumina Somnum.

V. We are to Die Daily, by Dying to the World every Day, and becoming Dead in
respect of our Worldly Inclinations. To Die Daily, is to proceed every Day in
the Work of Mortification to the World: Every Day to be at that Work; Gal. VI.
14. I am crucified unto the World. A man who Dies Daily, is one who has in him
such Sentiments of this World, as Dying Men use to have. Come to a Dying Man,
and ask him, How this World appears to him? His Answer will be; It Is a Vain
World, a False World; It is a miserable Thing to be put off with a portion in
this World: He is a very foolish and wretched man, who makes it his main
Business to Lay up a portion in this World. The Favor of God, and an Interest
in a Great Savior, is a thousand times more valuable than all this World; is
worth ten thousand Worlds. To Die Daily, is to Live under the Force of such
Sentiments; To Think of this World, as Dying Men do, and Live in this World as
Dying Men wish to have done. But then, there is this in it: A Death upon our
Dispositions for this World. It is true, And, Oh! When shall we have the Skill
to place things in their due Subordination! O thou glorious and liberal Giver
of Wisdom, Do thou give this Wisdom unto us! -- I would say, it is true, So far
as the Enjoyments of this world, may be Subordinate unto God, we are to Love
them, and Seek them: So far as the Command and Service of God will direct us to
do so, we are to Love and Seek the Enjoyments of this world. There is the Love
of God in it, when we mind this world but in a Subordination unto GOD. But any
further than we may Obey GOD, and Honor GOD, and be Led unto GOD, by this
world, we must be Dead unto it. This Dying to the World, is the same with the
Dying to Sin, which is required of us: For our Sin lies in Departing from God,
both to and for the World. A Death, A Death, upon our Dispositions, for this
world; This is a Thing to be Daily maintained, a thing to be Daily studied; And
therein, we are to Die Daily. The Dead, how are they Disposed for this world?
We read Eccl. IX. 6. Their Love, and their Hatred and their Envy, is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is
done under the Sun. Such a Death we should have on, and give to, our Passions
for this world; An Holy Indifferency or all the Enjoyments of this World. There
should be a Death upon our Esteem for this world. We are to look upon this
World, as a Despicable Thing; the Pleasures of it, as Polluting Things; the
Riches of it, as Deceitful Things; the Honors of it, as Empty Nothings. There
should be a Death upon our Desire for this world. We are no more to be so
Hungry and Thirsty after this World, as carnal minds use to be: Our Appetite
for it, this must be palled, and lost, and gone: We must see no charming Beauty
in it. There should be a Death (...) our Delight in this World. This World
should not be any part of our Glory: The Things of it, we should reckon as
Toys only for Children to be pleased withal; not for Strong men in Christ:
Such Toys, too low, too mean, to be our Joys, while our Spirit may rejoice in
God our Savior. There should be a Death upon our Expectation from this World.
We should not promise to our selves, a Satisfaction in and from a World, which
is but a Lump of mere Vanity. Dream not, that it will prove any other than a
Dream, any better than a Shadow. Despair of ever finding any Content in any
Creature. Lay aside the Hopes of any Happiness from such a world* Finally. Our
Irascible Affections for this World, must also have a Death upon them. We must
not be very much Displeased at those men, and those things, that hinder us from
getting the Great Things of this Little World: Be not sensible of any mighty
Harm done unto us, when we are Clogged in our Attempts to grow Great in this
World. Swell not with Malice and Envy at them who stand in the way of our
Advancement. Baulk no Duty to get this World; Let no Snares be run into,
because we will be Rich; Break not our Hearts with Worldly Sorrow, when we Lose
this World; Bear Losses, Easily, Patiently, Suitably. Whatever Grievous Things
befall us in this World, we must be but moderately Grieved for them. The Temper
prescribed unto us, is that, 1 Cor. VII. 30, 31. They that weep, should be as
though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and
they that buy, as though they possessed not. This it is to Die Daily. Such Dead
men, are in reality, the only Living Ones. These Dead, O Lord, What Wonders
will thou show unto them!

VI. We are to Die Daily, by Daily meeting with Afflictions, and by Daily
Bearing of them. To Die Daily, is the same that our Savior speaks of, when He
says; Luke IX. 13. Let a man take up his Cross Daily. Our Afflictions belong to
the Death, which is come upon us, by and for our Sin. We Die Daily, in those
Afflictions, which are, as I may call them, The Van-Couriers of our Death; the
Forerunners of our Death. A man who Dies Daily, is one who Daily Encounters
with Afflictions; and may say with him, Ps. LXXIII 14. I am scourged all the
Day long, and chastened every morning. In Dying Daily, we are Daily to look for
Troubles: and have so much prudence, that when our Troubles come, we shall be
able to say, These were not altogether unlooked for! Every Day we should arm
our selves, for Unknown Troubles; as knowing that we daily Ly open to many and
heavy Troubles: When the Light of the Day first salutes us, think; Who can tell
the Troubles, which I may see, and into how much Darkness I may be brought,
before this Day be done! We must get an Heart Established, Confirmed,
Strengthened, against any Troubles, which we may be called unto an Encounter
withal. So the Good man, Ps. CXII. 7, 8. He is not afraid of Evil Tidings; His
Heart is established. And, when we Encounter with our Daily Troubles, it should
be, how patiently, how quietly, with what a lovely Resignation! We Die Daily,
in making Daily Sacrifices; in Daily submitting to the Death of those Comforts
which we are most fond of, and which are the Desire of our Eyes. Then does a
man die indeed, when his Will is Dead. We Die Daily, when we Entertain our
Daily Troubles, with a Will entirely swallowed up into the Will of God. We Die
Daily, when our Daily Troubles find us willing to Drink whatever Cup our Father
shall give us to drink of. We Die Daily, when we bear our Troubles, with a
sweet Submission to our Savior; believing that His Intention is entirely to
make us partakers of that Holiness which we have besought Him to Enrich us
withal; and to make us more meet for our Heavenly Inheritance. After this
manner we are to Receive our Troubles; O my dear Savior, I will submit with
thy Help, unto whatever Cross thou shall order for me.

I know, thou will not appoint any Cross for me, but what shall make me Wiser
and Better, and bring me the more to Glorify God. I will acquiesce in all thy
Dispensations. Return to thy Rest, O my Soul; for the Lord will deal favorably
with thee! You see how much goes to Dying Daily: And yet one thing more.

VII. To Die Daily, and to Good purpose, is to Look Daily, upon what is to come
After Death. When we Die, we pass into Another World. The Testimonies and
Recognitions of this, which our God multiplies unto us, methinks, they should
have some Regard paid unto them. Yea, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings
God has Ordained them. I am to morrow to attend the Funeral of a Child Little
JERVSHA MATHER.
which was Two years and seven months old; A Child of uncommon Ripeness, and
for which, I confess, I had too Engaged a Fondness; -- having lain Speechless,
under the Arrest of Death, for a Day or Two, her Speech returned a few moments
before she died and the very minute that she died, she said She would go to
JESUS CHRIST. And wi^^ Older People now be insensible, that when they are
Dying, they are Going to JESUS CHRIST, or where, -- Oh! how can we do any other
than Tremble to Think upon it If we Die Daily, we Daily Converse with Another
World. It is a Thing that should have a Daily Impression upon us; That God has
not done with us, when we have done with this World. We shall Exist, and our
longest Existence will be in another world. In Dying Daily, we shall do that
thing; 2 Cor. IV. 18. Look not unto the things which are seen, and are
Temporal, but unto the things which are not seen, and are Eternal. But let us a
little Enquire; For the Glorious Redeemer, who is the True Witness, and the
Deliverer of Souls, has Enabled us to answer the Enquiry; What will there be
after Death? We are informed; Heb. IX. 27. After Death, the Judgment. And now I
will tell you, What it is to Die Daily? it is to have Daily, and Serious, and
Solemn Thoughts on the Judgment which is to come After Death. Every Day to
think suitably on the Day of Judgment, is, to Die Daily. It should be a Daily
Consideration with us; 'Am I Ready to appear before the Judgment Seat of the
Glorious Lord! What I am now adoing, will it be Approved, or will it be
Condemned from the Judgment Seat of the Glorious God? What shall I do, when God
rises up, and when He visits, what shall I answer Him? We should be awakened
Every Day to Fear God, and keep His Commandments, from this Consideration; God
will bring every work into Judgment.

Well; but what follows upon the Judgment? We are informed; Matthew. XXV. 46.
Either Everlasting Punishment, or, Life Eternal. And now I will again tell you,
What it is to Die Daily, It is Every Day to Look Downward into the Hell, which
the Wicked, and all they that forget God shall be turned into: To be driven by
that horrible Spectacle, unto the JESUS, who delivers from the Wrath to come;
To Consider, Oh! Who can dwell in a Consuming Fire and in Everlasting Burnings?
And, What a Fearful thing it is, to fall into the Hands of the Living God! It
is Every Day to Look Upward, unto the Heaven, where JESUS Sits at the Right
Hand of God: To be Quickened from the View of the Recompense there set before
us, in Running the Race which is here set before us: To Consider, Oh! the Glory,
and Honor, and Immortality of the Eternal Life, which by patient continuance
in well-doing, I shall reach unto! To Live in such Contemplations, is, To Die
Daily.

And, my Brethren, let me assure you, Thus to Die Daily, will take away the
Bitterness of Death. We shall not Live the less while, for so Dying Daily. It
will not Hasten our Death: But it will Sweeten it. Thus to Die Daily, is the way
to Live Wisely; To Live Piously, Watchfully, Fruitfully. Yea, It Is the Way to
Live Eternally.

FINIS.

