Grata Brevitas.

An ESSAY Made in a FEW WORDS, To demonstrate that a Few Words MAY HAVE Much
comprised in them. WITH The most Weighty Matters of RELIGION, offered in
several ABRIDGMENTS, as particular Demonstrations of it.

A WINTER Sermon Preached at BOSTON Lecture 27 d. 9 m. 1712.

By Cotton Mather, D. D.

N^^^^a L^ge^, quis^^^^ fu^ris Brevitatis Amator.

Mich. Verinus. Boston: Printed by B Green, for Samuel Gerrish at his Shop over
against the South Meeting House. 1712.

Much in a FEW WORDS.
HEBREWS XIII. 22. Suffer the Word of Exhortation, -- in a FEW WORDS.


THE Public Exhortation must be at this Time, confined unto a Few words: The
Time of the Year will have it so! And since I am to Discourse IN a few words,
why should it be Thought Improper or Indecent, if I do it also OF a few words,
and make that the Subject of my Discourse?

Though I shall not use more than a Few words before I come to my Doctrine; yet I
will be guilty of so much Anticipation, as to tell you before hand, it will be
of this Importance; That a Few words may have more than Few or Small Things
comprised in them.

Ere I come to a more direct proof of that. I will first observe, an Intimation
in the Text before us; That a Good Exhortation will sometimes go down the
better, because there are but a Few words Employed upon it. Suffer the
Exhortation, says the Apostle. One would think, it might have been said,
Rejoice in the Exhortation; Rejoice that you Enjoy such an Exhortation. It
seems, People are most unreasonably indisposed unto what would be for their
Good. Exhortations that have a Tendency to make them Good, and bring them to
Eternal Good, such Exhortations are a Burden and a Grievance to them. Oh! the
Folly, and Mischief of Sin! Original Sin, What a Depravation have thou brought
upon us! Our Apostle finds out an Argument why his Exhortation should be
tolerable. But there seems to be a Satyr upon Sinful Mankind in the Argument.
Says he; It Is but in Few words; Men begrutch the Time for long Exercises and
Entertainments of Religion. Brave Husbands of their Time! Of their Time, Two or
Three Hours at a Time, can go well enough to mere Impertinencies; but One Hour
in the Service of God; This is a Suffering. How many Hours of Useless
Conversation with a Friend are well enough! But One Hour to converse with GOD;
This is to Suffer Egregiously. An Hour or Two at the Table is well enough; A
Quarter of an Hour in the Closet, This is an Hardship, and hardly to be
Suffered. Rather a Thousand Days Elsewhere, than One in the Courts of the
Lord; Notable Redeemers of Time indeed! Well, The affairs of Religion, are, it
seems, to be Recommended unto the Children of Men, because they may be
dispatched in a Few words in a very Little Time. I confess, I do not think,
this is much for the Honor of the World!

But then, I see Something that may be for the Honor of Religion, and of them
that handle the affairs of it. It was always thought an Honorable Thing. To
say much in a Little, I need not quote Euripides or Menander for it. You shall
find, They that write the Maxims of Prudence, will all tell you, There is no
greater sign of Wit, and Sense, than to say much in a Little.

So did our Apostle. His Epistle to the Hebrews, is but a Short Epistle; it has
but a Few words. But there is a Great Deal in it. It is full of Mysteries. It
is an admirable System of the Christian Religion. There never was a Richer
Composure seen upon the Face of the Earth. When Four Excellent Volumns in
Folio, coming after a Library of other Expositors, have searched out the Truths
contained in it, there is work yet left for more than as many more. More
Treasures are still behind; unspeakably more* So that I can obtain this
Doctrine for you;

That much may be said in a Few words.

A Few words may have abundance of matter in them. A Few Drops of Expression,
may have an Ocean of matter in them.

We will in a Few words proceed unto the Demonstration of it.

I. The Great God has in a Few words comprised all the Duty, that He has
required of us. The Duty that we Owe to our God, it is very sure, as there is
much depends on it; Eternity depends on it! So, there is very much belongs to
it. Well, But as much as our Duty is, I can carry you, where you shall see a
Few words containing of it.

In the first Place; Ten Words are a Few Words. Now All our Duty is compriz^d
in Ten Words; You know what I mean; The Law of the Ten Commandments. The old
Romans had a famous Instrument among them, called, The Law of the Twelve
Tribes. They sent Ambassadors unto foreign Countries, to bring home an Account,
and a Copy of their Wisest Laws. Then they Employed a Number of their Wisest
Men, to Digest and Compile a Body of Laws out of these. The Extract, which was
a long while in making, was called, The Twelve Tables. When it was done, their
Orators admired it for its Excellencies; but especially for the, Mira Verborum
concinnitas; its admirable Expressiveness; its Expressing in a Few Words, the
Greatest and Bravest Things that ever were uttered. And yet, we have recovered
about an Hundred Laws that were in it; Many of them Foolish* many Trifling,
many Wicked Ones! Our Law of the Two Tables, does as much Exceed their Law of
the Twelve Tables, as the Sun does Exceed a Gloworm. In these Few Words, Oh,
how much is contained! Well might the Man of God say, Psalm. CXIX. 96 Thy
Commandment is Exceeding Broad Mind the Rules of Explication for these Few
Words, and you will presently be sensible of it

Remember* first; That the Law is Spiritual; It reaches to the Spirit; it calls
for the Obedience of the Inward Man, as well as of the Outward Man.

Remember secondly; That when a Duty is Commanded* the contrary Sin is
Forbidden; and when a Sin is Forbidden, the contrary Duty is commanded.

Remember, thirdly, That when any One Duty is Commanded, and when any One Sin
is Forbidden, all others of the Same kind are also Commanded and Forbidden.

Remember, fourthly; That when any Duty is Commanded, all the Helps and all the
Signs of such a Duty are also Commanded: And when any Sin is Forbidden, all the
Causes, and all the Occasions, and all the Appearances of such a Sin are also
forbidden.

Remember, lastly; It Is Exacted and Expected, that we are not only to keep the
Law our selves, but also do all we can, and use all Good Means, that others may
keep it.

Now say, Is not this Commandment Exceeding Bread? And have not a Few Words
Exceeding much Comprised in them? Truly, Brevius nihil est, nec Before istis.
--

Here we ought to make a Pause; and in a Few Words describe a Confession, which
we must all now be necessarily obliged unto.

Confess, That your have not kept this Law; You are daily breaking of it: In
many things we offend all. Confess, That your Transgressions of this Law cannot
be Numbered; Who can understand his Errors? Confess, That your Justification by
your own Righteousness, is for ever to be despaired of. But then, Pity. Pity
those Deluded Creatures, who have not Seen an End of all Perfection; -- but
Imagine themselves arrived unto a Sinless Perfection. Unto their Proud
Assembly, my Soul, Be not thou United!

I have shown you a World of Duty, yea, the whole of our Duty, comprised in Ten
Words. Well, but I will show it you in Three Words. Three are not Many. Tribus
Verbis, was an ancient Proverb for the greatest Brevity imaginable In so Few
Words you have it; Mic. VI 8. He has showed thee, O Man, the Good Thing. And
what does the Lord require of thee, but to Do Justice, and to Love Mercy, and
to Walk Humbly with thy God?

More Briefly yet* I will show it you in Two Words. Two Words are but Few
Words. But now, what think you of those Two Words? Matt. XXII 37. -- 40 Thou
shall Love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and
with all thy Mind. This is the First and Great Commandment. And the Second is
like unto it; Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hang all the Law, and the Prophets. How much, how much do these
Two Words carry in them! The very same, and it is a very Instructive Hint that
I give you, when I tell you, it is the very same! -- You have, 1 John III. 23 This
is His Commandment, That we should Believe on the Name of His Son JESUS CHRIST,
and Love One another, as He gave us Commandment.

Yea, What if I should show you, where it is all comprised in One Word? I can do
that! The Jews have a saying That there are Six hundred and thirteen precepts
in the Law; but that they are all reduced into that one Sentence; Heb. II. 4.
The Just by his Faith shall live. There is a World of Christianity in that
saying of theirs. There is much, much of the Gospel in it!

I can give another Instance of such an Comprehensive Sentence. It Is that Golden
Rule of our Savior; Matthew. VII. 12. All things whatsoever ye would, that men
should do unto you, Do ye even so unto them. A Rule acknowledged among the Jews
and Gentiles. The Jews have it in their Talmuds. It Is also in the Apocrypha.
Among the Gentiles, the Moral Writers cry it up, an Army of them. One of the
Emperors had it in his mouth continually; and made the Officers of the Empire
put it into public Proclamations. But, Oh; how Extensive in this Glorious
Rule! First; All the Duty we owe to one another, is comprised in these Few
Words. In all our Business, these Few Words, will Suggest All that we have to
do. And in the Relations that we sustain, do but mind these Few Words, and our
carriage will be marvellously Regulated, you will find it marvellously
applicable to the Government of all your Actions, and all your Passions. Yea,
Upon further Thoughts, I find this Rule of Reason Extendible beyond what I at
first imagined Our Duty toward our Creator may from this very Rule, receive
some Direction, For if we had power to Create, we should certainly demand from
our Creatures, all the Love, all the Honor, all the Service imaginable.

I will only add, You all know, our Lord gave his Disciples a Platform of
Prayer, which in a Few Words does contain the whole matter of all our Prayers.
Our Prayers may ask nothing of Our Father who is in the Heavens, (for so the
first clause ought to be translated,) but what this Exquisite Platform allows
and contains. It contains beyond all that we can ask or think!

I will in a Few Words, yea, in One Word, give you the Reason for this
Abbreviation of our Duty. Our Gracious God, has had Compassion on our Frail and
Weak Faculties in this Abbreviation: Particularly, on the Frailty and Weakness
of our Memories. We cannot Remember more than a Few Words. Our Duty must be
given us in a Few Words, that it may be the more Easily Remembered with us. If
it be not Remembered it will not be Practiced. I Remember a notable Word; Romans
IX. 28. The work, He will cut it short in Righteousness. Some understand it of,
The Gospel. The Gospel is that (...), that Abbreviated word. The Law was
Tedious: It had a Multiplicity of observances. But our Lord JESUS CHRIST comes,
with a more Compendious work, and requires none of those Long Undertakings. One
of the Ancients tells us, By the Short Word here, is meant, that Short word of
Faith; Act. XVI. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved.
God has thus in Righteousness, and with a sweet Kindness and Goodness,
considered our Capacities.

Having offered you this Intimation, I will offer you a very Short Inference
and Instruction from it.

Certainly, we may in Like manner Consider the Capacities of those that are
under our Instruction.

It is possible, we have poor Stupid Abject Negro's under our Charge. Oh!
Remember the Account you must give to the Glorious Lord, about the Souls of
those poor Negro's You complain, you cannot make them Learn. Well, But in three
short Questions well answered, you may have almost the whole Body of Divinity.

Who Made you and all the World?

The Great GOD Made me to Serve Him.

Who Saves the Children of Men from all their Miseries?

JESUS CHRIST, who is both God and Man, Saves them that Look unto Him

What will become of you when you Dye?

If I Obey JESUS CHRIST, my Soul will go to the Heavenly Paradise; and He will
afterward Raise me from the Dead. If I continue Wicked, I shall be cast among
the Devils.

It must be an extraordinary Sottishness indeed, if the Learning of these Three
Short Questions cannot be infused into them.

And thus, our Children. We may betimes get a whole Body of Divinity into their
Little Souls. We are furnished with Abridgments of it. The Abrigments we have
in our Hands, may be soon get into their Minds. Yea, Sometimes one Text in the
Bible, has All in it. Such an Epitome of Christianity, we have in the Sixteenth
Verse, of the III Chapter of John. You have it again Epitomized in the
Eleventh, Twelfth, Thirteenth, and Fourteenth Verses, of the II Chapter to
Titus. To teach them these would admirably Fortify them all their Days,
against the Error of the Wicked. Plutarch ingeniously compares this brief way
of Teaching our Children, unto the Mothers fastening with a Girdle about them,
the Fruits wherewith she furnishes them. I Leave the matter with your
Consideration.

II. I have yet a Few Words more to say There are Mysteries uttered in the
Oracles of God; vast Mysteries, contained in a Few Words very Concisely
uttered. The Great Apostle Paul having Written the Two Short Chapters that
begin his Epistle to the Ephesians, then says, Ephesians. III. ^, 4. I have wrote a
few words, whereby when ye read, you may understand my Knowledge in the Mystery
of Christ. In a Few Words, you shall have a Mystery given you, which you shall
spend all your Days upon, before you comprehend all that is in it; nay it will
afford you fresh Matter of contemplation to Eternal Ages. There is one Text in
our Book of Life; it is in the Beginning of the Book of God; and a very Short
one it is. It Is that, Genesis III. 15. I will put Enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed, and her Seed; It shall bruise thy Head, and thou
shall bruise His Heel. But a Few Words! And yet, all the Bible is but a
commentary on those Few Words. That rich Ingot of Gold, is beaten out, so as to
make all the (...) of the Bible. Yea, it would bear a Beating out, into more
Volumns, than there are in a Vatican, or a Bodleian Library. It is a wondrous
Thing, that we find out by our microscopes. In a little Body, more than a
thousand times smaller than a Grain of Sand, there lie folded up, all the parts
of a Plant, or of an Animal, which are afterward Evolved and Extended, unto
mighty Dimensions. Methinks, That Illustrious Text in Genesis, may be compared
unto such a little Body. It may be drawn forth into Thousands of admirable
Sermons The Fathers of the Old Testament were always Preaching on it, for Four
Thousand years together. But the Subject is not Exhausted; we their Children
are to this Day still upon it: still hanging on, still drawing at, that Breast
of Consolation.

There is that Mystery; 1 John V 7 There are Three who testify in Heaven, The
Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these Three are One. It is comprised
in a Few Words.

There is that Mystery; 1 Timothy III. 16 Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in Flesh. It is comprised in a Few Words.

But verily, There is more in these Few Words, than all the Men on Earth can
grasp; Yea, more than can be grasped by all the Angels in Heaven; Yea, though
they Study Millions of Ages upon it.

There is the Baptismal Covenant, which we are generally brought into. [Matth.
XXVIII 19*] To take the Great God, who is the Father, and the Son, and the
Spirit, for our God, and Portion; Wonderful, Wonderful Things are comprehended
it. O Baptized Ones, Think what you are obliged unto; Think what will be done
for you, if you are mindful of your Obligations! O you that lay Hold on the
Covenant, Think what you do, when these Few Words are offered you!

There are the Benefits of our Great Savior Proposed unto us in a Few Words; 1
Cor. I. 30. Ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Holiness, and Redemption. Christian, Meditate all thy Days
on those Few Words; Thou will never fetch out all the Sweetness, all the
Goodness, all the Glory of those Few Words. All the Days of Methuselah, would
not suffice to do it in.

It Is only a Scriptural Demonstration, which I have hitherto given you, That
much may be said in a Few Words. And such is the most Suitable Demonstration;
for a Preacher who would Seek out Acceptable Words. But then, for a more
General Demonstration, I need only refer you to the Rules of Implication One
Thing will Imply many Things. A Few Words will have many, many Things in them,
if the Rules of Implication be duly attended unto; And Wise Men will use to
attend unto them. The words of Wise Men have sometimes been called. Golden
Words. In Gold, much lies in a Little Room. Gold may be so drawn out, that on
Gilded Wire of Silver the hundred thousandth part of a Grain of it, shall be
visible to the Naked Eye. Such Golden Words may be Spoken, that when they are
drawn out by the Rules of Implications, they may reach further than could have
been imagined. There was a sort of Sentences, that of old were called
Laconisms. The Wise men of the Time and Place chose to Speak Laconically. They
were very Sententious. They gave a Demonstration, That much may be Spoken in a
Few Words. I do not know, why this may not be Practiced among other People, as
well as the Lacedaemonians. You Know, Vir Sapit; A Wise man will Speak Little;
but still much more Wise he that will Speak much in a Little.

But in a Few Words, Let a Twofold Exhortation arrive unto us.

I. The Art and Skill of Expressing our selves in a Few Words, especially on
Some Occasions; Let this be more Studied; The Folly of using too many Words,
Let this be Disliked, be Avoided.

It is first, in our Devotions, that such a Study must be maintained. In our
Prayers, there is especially One sort of Words, which we should beware of
having too many of them. Vows are such Words. Take heed, Sirs, of having too
many such. Thus we are advised, Eccl V. 2. Let not thy Heart be hasty to utter
any Word before God; Let thy Words be Few.

Our Savior has also left another Caution with us; That we should not think,
our Prayers will find the more Acceptance with Heaven, because of Many Words
used in them. He has cautioned us; Matthew. VI. 7. When ye Pray, use not Vain
Repetitions, as the Heathen do; for they think, they shall be heard for their
much Speaking.

I will add; Though there may be Occasion for us to be Long at Prayer; yet for a
man to use Tautologies in his Prayer; to use many Words, and come with one
thing over and over, on purpose to Spin out the Prayer; This is to take the
Name of the Lord thy God in Vain!

One thing more; We should not Slubber and Hurry over our Family-Prayers. They
should be made, as by Men, who do not know, but that this is the Last Prayer
that over they shall make in this World! Think so, my Friend, when Kneeling
down with thy Family. Yet it is for the most part an Inconvenient Thing, to
make those Prayers very Long ones. It may be no Service to the Interests of
Piety in the Family. In a word, Chrysostom observes it unto us, That CHRIST and
Paul, commands us, to make our Prayers, (...), Short and Frequent. Cassianus
mentions it, as the Universal consent of the Ancients; Vtilius censent, Breves
Orationes, sed Creberrimas fieri: They thought it best, to Pray Briefly; but
Very Often, Very Often, to be Engaged in it.

But then, We are to Watch against the Folly of Talking too much in all our
Conversation. Especially, when the Errors of other People, are to be taxed, or
when we are to Express our Displeasure, and Resentment of their Miscarriages
toward our selves; You are not ignorant of a common Aphorism, The least said
is soonest mended. And thus, to Talk of ones own Self, or Family, here, a
Nimietas in dicendo, the Fault which Epictetus decried; if we go beyond a very
Few Words, a Fault is fallen into. But at all times, Talkative People, or
People of many Words, do very much Expose themselves. They proclaim their own
Folly, to those, who if they had held their Peace, might have thought them
Wise. In multiloquio Stultiloquium. Those Foolish and Wordy and Windy People,
often impose upon the Company. They are guilty of Ill Manners; They do what
will not be done by a Sober Guest It is true, From the Abundance of the Heart,
the Mouth Speaks. But if there be Abundance of Speech in the Mouth, it often
shows, that there is not Abundance of Sense in the Heart: No, but that Folly
is bound up there; Abundance of that! But where shall I find a Bridle for these
Impertinencies? The Stores of Solomon will afford us One; Prove. X. 19. In the
Multitude of Words, there wants not Sin; but he that refraineth his Lips, is
Wise.

II. What remains, is to bespeak your Meditation, Your Serious, and Frequent
Meditation, on those Passages, especially of the Sacred Scripture, which will
in a Few Words lay Many and Weighty Things before you Oh! Bestow more than a
Few Thoughts upon them!

The Stewards in the House of God, will Endeavor, not out of Slothfulness, but
out of Discretion, at all times to Limit their Dispensations, and at some times
very Sensibly to Shorten them T'wil be discretely done of them, so to Measure
their Sermons, that no Wise Hearer shall say, What a weariness is it? When
shall it be over? But rather, that it shall be said of them, as it was of the
famous Orator, Pertimescebamus ne desineret; Or, It Were to have been wished he
had not done so soon! Indeed Long Sermons have sometimes been so full, and so
warm, that the Hearer says, He could gladly have Sat an Hour Longer! And, Non
sunt Longa quibus nihil est quod demere posses. But short Sermons are sometimes
needful for the Preachers, that will not over-do. The Rule for us is, Quiquid
Praecipies esto Brevis. They will call to mind what Elihu said, Suffer me a
Little, and I will show what I have to speak on God's behalf. They will not
make the Messages of Heaven Tedious and Irksome. They will Stand but a Little
while in delivering of them, when either Severe Cold, or Extreme Heat, shall
render it uneasy to attend upon them. They will be of Paulinus's Opinion;
Brevis Sermo, Dulcedinem simul et Vigorem verbi ^^^^estis tenet; That is to
say, Short and Sweet.

In conformity to this Maxim, I will now address the Auditory with a most
Various Application, but in as Few Words as can be imagined.

Sensus Divitias Verbi Brevitate Coarctans. First; O Unregenerates, The Misery
of your Unregenerate State is to be set before you. It shall be done in a Few
Words. Ah, Miserables, Take those Few Words into your Meditation; Ephesians. II. 1, 2
3. Dead in Trespasses and Sins; Walking according to the Course of this World,
and according to the Spirit which works in the Children of Disobedience:
fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind; and by Nature Children of
Wrath. Oh! What a Black Sea of Death, have these Few Words thrown you into!
Think of them; or Think of these Few Words; What am I doing? And, Where am I
going?

Secondly; We must now in a Few Words tell these Poor Slaves of Sin and Hell,
and Children of Death, What they shall do to be Saved. O Take into your
Meditation those Few Words, Mark XVI. 16 He that believes shall be Saved. The
meaning of those Few Words is This. Feel your selves Wretched; See your selves
Unable to get out of your fearful Wretchedness. Own your selves Unworthy that
God should help you to get out. Behold a Savior provided for you. Cry to God
for Help to Embrace that Only Savior. Plead the Sacrifice of your Savior,
that your Sin may be Pardoned. Plead the Righteousness of your Savior, that
you may have a Title to Life. Resign your selves up to the Holy Spirit of your
Savior, that He may Enlighten you, and Purify you, and Rectify you, and fit
you for, and bring you to, the Heavenly World. In these Few Words You have All!
That One Word, REPENTANCE, has a great deal, Oh! a great deal intended in it.
Sinners, It Is more than a mere Crying out, Lord, Have Mercy upon me. But this
One Word, and all that is in it, must be complied withal, by all that would
find Mercy with God.

But then, Thirdly; In a Few Words we are to show the Believer, What Life he is
to Lead; How he is to Live, that he may Dye with Safety and Comfort. Oh! Let
your Meditation be much on those Few Words; Eccl. XII. 13.14 Let us hear the
Conclusion [and so, the Contraction] of the whole Matter; Fear God, and Keep
His Commandments; For God shall bring every work into Judgment. Or, Take it in
Other Words; and those not very many neither. Spend your Time now, as those
that must give an Account unto God how you have Spent it. Now do nothing, that
you may justly apprehend will be Condemned in the Day of Judgment. Now do every
thing, that you may be justly apprehensive will in the Day of Judgment be
Rewarded. Now employ all your Talents, as Knowing, that in the Day of Judgment,
You must be Accountable for them. Or, if you would have all the Rules of Holy
Living in One Word. Even So you shall have them; and that One Word shall be
this; Live always as in the Presence of God; and, Act as having the Eye of God
always upon you.

Fourthly. Many People are under Discouragements, about the Guilt of their
Sins; Discouraged with Fears that the Day of Grace is over with them; Or,
perhaps, that they have Sinned Vnpardonably. I will take away all their
Discouragements, with a Few Words. They shall be those; Joh. VI. 37. Him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Ah, Discouraged Souls; These Few
Words from the Mouth of a Lovely JESUS; They are Enough to Silence all your
Objections. A SAVIOR: An Able and a Willing Savior; O all Flesh, be Silent
before Him.

Fifthly. There are many Afflictions which our Neighbors Encounter withal. I
will direct them in a Few Words, how to Behave themselves. They are those, Heb.
XII 5 My Son, Despise not thou the Chastning of the Lord; nor Faint when
Rebuked of Him. Or, in Other Words of the like Importance; Think whom thy
Afflictions come from; Think what thy Afflictions come for; And be more
Studious to Get Good by thy Afflictions, than to get out of thy Afflictions.
The famous Two Words of Epictetus, which were Sustine ot Abstine; that is,
Bear, and, Forbear; were not more important ones.

Finally; My Hearers; If you Slight the Few Words in which you have the Holy
Counsils of God, Let a Few Words tell you the Issue of it. Those words; Phil.
III. 19. Their End is Destruction, who Mind Earthly Things. But if you
Entertain these Few Words with a due Affection and Obedience, a Few Words will
tell you the Issue of that also. Those words; Jam. I 25. A Door of the work,
this man shall be Blessed in his Deed. SALVATION, is but One Word; Yet, my
Friend, it contains all that an Immortal Soul can wish for And it is all Thine,
if thou hearken to the Few Words in the Glorious Gospel of God.

I know, You Expect I should observe a Decorum, and not at this Time use Many
words. These Few Words may be sufficient, for the present Exercise, May the
Grace of God accompany them!

FINIS.

