THE Great Concernment OF GOSPEL ORDINANCES MANIFESTED From the great effect of
the well Improving or Neglect of them.

Delivered in a Sermon at the Ordination of the Reverend Mr. Jonathtan
Dickinson, at Elizabeth-Town, the 29th of September, 1709.

By Joseph Morgan, a Minister of the Gospel.

Isaiah 52.7. How beautiful are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings.

Acts 13.41. Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder and perish.

Printed by William and Andrew Bradford, in New York, 1712.

Christian Reader;
I Having been desired to assist at the Ordination of Mr. Dickenson, ^^e Task
of Preaching was ordered to me, whereupon I remembering the Scope of what I
offered at my own Ordination, nine years before, and thinking of no Subject
more suitable and profitable for the Occasion, I kept to the Matter and Method
of my former Discourse, so near as my Memory would serve. But I was so often
desired by one of the Ministers, to be very brief, because of the short Days
and long Work which must follow, that I was necessitated to omit many Things
which here I have incerted. But I had no thoughts of its being ever made
public, till near three Months after (for what reason I know not) I was very
earnestly desired by a man who lived far distant from that place, and was not a
hearer of that Sermon, to give a Copy of it, that ^^ might be printed.
Whereupon I not being afraid to own my Doctrine, but especially considering how
needful this Doctrine is in these parts, consented. And, Reader, I am sure this
Doctrine concerns thy Salvation; and that this Discourse may be a means to
further it, is the hearty Prayer and earnest Desire of

Thy Servant, For Christ's sake, Joseph Morgan.
Freehold, December 23d, 1709.
The Great Concernment of Gospel Ordinances, etc.
Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned.


GOD at first created Man Upright, after his own Image, able to keep the Law of
God perfectly, and to be sufficiently happy in so doing. But Man by sinning,
lost his ability to keep the Commandments of God, lost Communion with God, and
incurred his Wrath and Curse, and justly deserved everlasting Damnation: God
might justly have left all Mankind to perish in this state, without any
opportunity ever to be delivered; but it pleased God of his infinite Mercy, not
to suffer all Mankind to lie under their deserved Punishment; but (the first
way of Salvation by Works being lost, we being guilty of sin past, and can make
no amends, nor perfectly obey for the future) God sent his Son to do for us, in
our room and stead, what we cannot do for our selves, that now the way of
Salvation is by Faith, to apply what he has done for us. Now as God might
justly have left all the world without any opportunity ever to be saved, so it
pleased him to leave the most part of the world without the ordinary means,
viz. the knowledge of the way of Salvation, till the coming of Christ, Psalm.
147.19, 20. And as a token that he is the only Savior among all Nations, and
he that brings Salvation into the world, so after his coming (and that directly
so soon as his coming offering up himself was finished) not only Israel, but
all Nations are called to believe in him, Acts 17.30. But the first way of
Salvation which Man was created to, and created with a knowledge sufficient for
the performance of the Conditions of it, being lost, and there being a New Way
of Salvation come in the room of it, which is not natural, so the knowledge of
it is not natural, but must be acquired, and therefore is revealed in the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.21. which God at first revealed by his Prophets, and
afterward by his Son, Heb. 1 1, 2. and is committed to writing in the holy
Scriptures. But to help our ignorance of Gods Law, since the Fall, and our
total Ignorance of the New Way of Salvation, God has appointed Men to be
Officers in his Church, to instruct us in the way of Salvation, Ephesians. 4.11.
which is, by Gods appointment, become a necessary means, as by his help, may
further appear.

In this Chapter we have the account of our Saviors Resurrection, Appearing to
his Disciples, and giving them Commission to preach the Gospel, v. 15. to every
Creature, per synecdochen generis, for every human Creature, i.e. to all the
Children of Men, so far as they could, thro'-out the world; the effect whereof
shall be according as they receive or reject it, i. e. Salvation or Damnation:
No middle way.

I shall not at this time undertake to note every point of Doctrine and
Principle of Faith that may be learned from the words, nor how far Baptism is
necessary to Salvation, but thus far this Scripture, as it does not damn a
person merely for the want of Baptism, so neither does it promise Salvation
without. It seems the person that has opportunity, and does not use it, cannot
be assured.

But by openly speaking from this Scripture, I shall occasion some to read the
following words with the more observation, and therefore hold it to be my duty
to endeavor to prevent their mistake in the meaning of them, I say, thus much,
That as God does use us as rational Creatures, so what he requiers us to
believe (whether it be matter above our Reason or not) he upon the first
requiring it is Belief, gives a rational Proof by Miracles, which being
confirmed, the Miracles cease. Neither shall I insist upon showing what that
Faith is, that has the Promise of Salvation. It is not a bare assenting to the
Truth; for that the Devils do, and more, Jam. 2.19. but it is a Faith, that
being according to the Truth, operates upon the Will, and works a change in the
Person in whom it is, in his Love, Hope and Practice. His Love is changed, 2
Cor. 5.14 17 Mat. 6.21. etc. his Hope is not in any imaginary Innocence of his
own, or good Works, or any thing but Gods free Grace, free good Will and
Pleasure in giving us Justification in the alone Merits of Christ, Romans 4.5. He
labors after all Holiness of Life, not as a Cause of his Salvation, but as the
beginning of his Happiness, as his Duty to God, as a proof of his Faith, and as
a means or condition of its being increased. etc. Psalm. 40.8. Job. 14.15. Jam.
2. latter end.

Neither does the Text lead us to enquire who is the efficient Cause of saving
Faith, but it shows us the Instrumental Cause, which has the promise of a
blessing to him that diligently attends it, and which Christ has purchased, not
only for Israel, but for us Gentiles, of which this present Occasion is an
Effect, and therefore calls for our great Thankfulness

From what lies before us, viz. the Effect of the Preaching of the Gospel, or
rather the necessary Consequence of its being received or rejected (with
Baptism, implying the other Ordinances) as we have it in our Text, amongst
other profitable things, we may learn this

DOCTRINE,
That the Ordinances of the Gospel, and especially the Preaching of it, is that
wherein Men's Salvation and Damnation is concerned. A weighty! a frightful
Consideration! which we should concern our selves about with joy and trembling,
Psalm. 2.11.

This Truth is visible, needs no proof, but Improvement and suitable
Meditations, which it is now my endeavor, with Gods assistance to help you to.

But, first, If it be enquired, Wherein are the Ordinances of the Gospel,
things that concern the Salvation and Damnation of Men?

Answ. First, The Preaching of the Gospel reveals to us his Mind and Laws, who
rewards with Salvation and punishes with Damnation. All Lawgivers make Laws to
reward or punish, according to the Deed or Offense, and according to the
Authority of the Lawgiver. A King (if he see cause, and the crime deserve it)
punishes with Death, and his Wrath is as Fearful, Prove. 16.14. The King of
Kings has it in his power to punish with Damnation, and he only, Luke 12.4, 5.
and so much the more Terrible is his Fear, Psalm. 76.7, 12. A King gives great
Rewards: The Lord rewards answerable, as he is above Kings, with such Glory,
Honor and Joy, that in the least Saint shall surpass all the Glory of all the
Kings on Earth, 1 Cor. 9.25. not for any deserving of ours (for he needs not to
thank us) but of his mere Grace. But the nature of a Crime or Offense against
God deserves no less than Damnation. Justice must inflict it except it be taken
off by Christ. That done against the King may deserve Death, which against a
mean Man would be a small offense. Consider the Majesty of him whose Law is
broke, and he despised who made the Law, Luke 10.16. Consider the dreadful
aggrevation of evil, in preferring a small Pleasure before God and his
Authority, and Love! Zech. 11.13. A goodly price that I was valued at by them.
Consider his pure and infinite Holiness, Hab. 1.13. Of purer Eyes than to
behold evil. Consider his dreadful Threatening to every breach of his Law, Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Book
of the Law, to do them, which Curse is to hell, Mar. 25.41. and no wonder when
the Authority of God is despised; If there be one thing that a Person does not
continue to do, if at one time in one thing he transgress the Law, he is under
the Curse, and this Curse all lie under that are not released by Christ applied
by Faith. About these things the Gospel reveals Gods mind to us, and therefore
concerns our Salvation or Damnation.

2dly, The whole concernment of the Gospel and it is Ordinances, is about Men's
Salvation and Damnation, which is therefore concerned in it.

3dly, It is (especially the Preaching of the Gospel) necessary in order to
escape from the Wrath of God, due to us for Sin, (we are all till delivered)
under Gods Wrath and Curse which necessarily brings Damnation, Ephesians. 2.3 And
were by nature the Children of Wrath, even as others. Romans 3.19. That every
mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty before God. It is Christ
that Redeemed us from the Curse, Gal. 3.13. It is by Faith that we come to
Christ, this Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.13.14. All that call on the name
of the Lord, shall be saved, but how shall they call on him in whom they have
not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a Prea^her? verse. 17. So then Faith comes by
hearing, etc.

This plainly shows the necessity of a Preacher, in order to Salvation. But to
understand this, consider,

First, Man has necessity of a Revelation of more then he can know without
(since the fall) in order to Salvation, as has been showed, see also Hos. 4.6.

2dly, God does not want Men as Instruments, nor the help of any outward means
to make known to us the way of Salvation; He can, if he please, reveal himself
and his Son (whom it is eternal Life to know, John 17.3.) without the use of
any means, to one that never heard of his Name; but if he has not promised it
(as he has not) then it is Presumption, and not Faith) to believe he will,
especially seeing he says, it is his Pleasure (Mark, not his Necessity but his
Pleasure) by as foolish a thing as Men count Preaching (and as foolish a thing,
as incapable a thing as it is in it self) to save them that believe, 1 Cor.
1.21 And he that will venture his Soul, and the Souls of his Children upon a
mere persumption, believing what God has rather said he will not do, than that
he will do it, must fare according to his works, and have his reward where he
got his Faith.

3dly, It is not the virtue or powerfulness of the Man, nor his Arguments, that
makes the Word Preached effectual to conversion or edification, but it is
merely the blessing of God, 1 Cor. 3.6. So it is God and his Power that gives
the effect, and the outward means is to be used only because of his Appointment
and Institution, because it is his pleasure; As Moses lift up his Rod to work
the Wonders in Egypt, and divided the Sea. Had not Moses obeyed and used the
sign, it had not been done; yet what virtue had Moses's Rod to do it? So it is
the Institution of God, not the Virtue, Wisdom or Grace of the Man [the
Preacher] that causes the Blessing. And therefore our Savior bid the People
hear the Phraisees, and do their words because of their Office, sitting in
Moses Seat, and teaching Truth. And this, by the way, may serve to solve the
Question, Whether it be duty to hear a Wicked Man, while he holds the Office of
a Minister, and teaches Truth? The Priest, in our Saviors time was a Wicked
Man, and yet our Savior owned him in his Office, and sent the Man healed of
the Leprosy to him. The Sons of Ely were scandalously Wicked, and yet God
owned them in the holiest part of their Office, i. e. to carry the Ark, which
if another Man touched, he presently dyed; though God punished their
wickedness, as he had threatened before, 1 Samuel 2.34. It is another Question,
Whether a Wicked Man, that is found to be so, should be continued in the
Ministry? For certainly he ought to be turned out by those that have power to
do it. But while he stands in his place, he ought to be heard, provided he
teach the Truth; For false Doctrine is the Souls Poison, and ought not to be
heard (at least not in a way of Worship) St. Paul rejoices when the Gospel is
taught, though by Wicked Men out of Envy; but prays for a curse upon him that
teaches false Doctrine, though it be himself, or an Angel from Heaven, Gal.
1.8. Phi. 1.15.18.

4thly, No Man has power of himself (considered as a wise man, a learned man,
and a good man) to speak any thing to Edification, but as God who knows the
hearts and state of all Men, does by his holy Spirit guide, direct and assist
him, 2 Cor. 3.5. Which we are to seek, pray and wait for in the way of diligent
study, etc.

But in this, so well as the former, it is to be allowed, that study has a
proper Tendency, and public Preaching and private Reading and Discourse, have
a proper Tendency to persuade to duty, and convince of Sin, etc.

But, First, It is Gods Institution that makes it Warrantable to use them and
in that they are like Moses Rod.

2dly, The perverseness of man's Nature is, such, that this Tendency will not be
effectual, except Gods Grace incline the heart, and give the blessing, as to
Moses Rod.

3dly, When men are persuaded, it is yet a further work of Gods Mercy. Grace
that works a Change in the heart unto Conversion and Edification, which he ever
gives to an obedient seeking in his way, as he gave the wonders to be wrought
upon Moses, his obedience in lifting up his Rod, etc. Thus far at present
concerning the necessity of the Gospel preached in order to Salvation.

4thly, The Gospel preached, and its Ordinances administered, have always
influence upon the Souls of the hearers or receivers, bringing them nearer to
Salvation or to Damnation, increasing the one or the other, 2 Cor. 2.16. To the
one we are a savor of Death unto Death, and to the other a savor of Life unto
Life, Isa. 55.10. Our Food always does us either good or harm.

5thly, There were no occasion of the Ordinances of the Gospel, were it not in
order to our state in the next world.

In the second place, if it be enquired, How the Salvation and Damnation of men
is concerned in the Ordinances of the Gospel?

Answ. 1st, In respect of What is preached, and the manner of it.

2dly, In respect of what Improvement is made of it.

The second is intended in the Text. The first has relation to it.

As to the first, in respect to What is taught. 1st. In respect to the Truth or
Falsehood of it, our Souls are concerned. 2dly. In respect to the Nature of it,
whether it be of great concernment to be taught, or not? And also, Whether it
be that wherein the Souls of the hearers are much concerned, or not? For there
may be many things true, which will not do the hearers much good or harm; and
some things will do more good than others, and to some persons more than to
others, I mean, they have such a tendency, and some things are as life to the
Soul, when applied, Joh. 6.63, 68. Thus our Souls are concerned, not only in
the truth or falsehood of what is taught, but also in the Profitableness and
Usefulness of it. This seems to be partly intended, 1 Timothy 1.4.

3dly, In respect to the Manner of Teaching, it has a tendency to be more or
less profitable, as the Method, Arguments, Expressions, Fervency, Voice,
Gesture, and Examples of the Teacher, and also, the evidence of a Sense of the
Needfulness and weight of the Doctrine, and an affection to do his hearers
good: These things should be diligently striven for, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show
thy self approved unto God, a Workman, that needs not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth. But the latter of these things (especially) is out
of the power of Man, and depends purely upon the assistance and grace of the
holy Spirit ( I mean, to be affected) and he gives and with-draws as he
pleases, and that some times in Mercy, and sometimes in Judgment; sometimes for
encouragement and edification, and sometimes for chastizement, and that to the
Hearers, or to the Preacher, or both; therefore both ought to labor, watch,
pray, strive, and to the uttermost improve the Grace given.

But if any ask, Why is all this needful, seeing it is not the power or virtue
of the Man, or his Arguments, but the Grace of God that gives the Success?

Answ. 1st, Because it is the pleasure of God to require Means, as the
Condition of his Blessing, so the suitabler the Means are, the more they have
of the nature of Means in them, and it comes the nearer to the Institution.

2dly, God delights to give his Grace to the diligent seeker, but has promised
nothing to the idle person. But God does not tie his blessing wholly to the
strength of Means, but sometimes encourages humble diligent Endeavors with a
blessing upon weak Means, and sometimes he chastens or punishes Negligence or
carnal Confidence, by denying a blessing upon strong Means.

There is also special Influence upon the Salvation and Damnation of men, by
the Examples of others, especially of the Ministers of the Gospel, and that
especially in Ignorant persons.

Secondly, With respect to what Improvement is made of the Ordinances of the
Gospel by the hearers, their Salvation or Damnation is concerned, and herein
most of all, provided Gospel Truth be taught; and upon this lies the stress of
our Text.

He that has plain wholesome Food may live by feeding upon it, when he that has
the best Food in the world, will starve, if he do not use it.

The Ministers Work is to teach wholesome Doctrine, such as his hearers need, and
apply it as Food or Physic, according to the need, and if he neglect, the Soul
of the hearer dies, and his Blood is required at the neglecters hands, Ezekiel.
33.8.

But if the Minister do never so well, it yet depends upon the Improvement made
by the hearer. Many of our Saviors hearers did not profit; and of such we
read, Psalm. 58.5. who will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmers charming
never so wisely; and our Text tells us of such, that they shall be Damned. But
some think they believe, and are free because they assent to the Truth, and so
does the Devil; but 1 John 3.3. he that has this Hope purifieth himself.

And here I must endeavor to cut off an ignorant Delusion which undoes
Thousands. Because we have all Imperfections and Infirmities in this World,
many excuse themselves from necessary and practicable Duty, under the notion of
not being perfect. Say thy, That was a good Sermon, could I practice but the
half of it, I should be happy. Says another, Our Minister preaches excellent
well, he that does practice one quarter of it well, needs not fear, or it is
well with him.

To answer these, I must teach you to distinguish. There are some things
belonging to the Law which we must diligently endeavor to do, and strive
after, or we cannot be saved: There are things that we must do in part, and he
that does heartily strive to do them, and does really perform in part, and
follow after a greater measure, is forgiven, and accepted in Christ. There are
other things belonging to the Gospel, which we must certainly do, or we cannot
be saved, as Repentance, Faith, Prayer, Love, etc. Now if the Preacher rightly
divide the Word, laying down what is to be striven after, as such, and what
must surely be done, as such, and therein teach the Truth, then, I say, you
must surely practice all, or you cannot be saved; whatever your excuses are, if
you do not, you deceive your self, James 1.22. Be ye doers of the Word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves. You may build your self a hope, but
your building is in the Sand, and our Savior says it will fall, and great will
be the fall thereof, because you heard these Sayings of his and did them not,
see Mat. 7. and John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them; Not otherwise, but if ye do them.

Object. But who can remember all the Sermons that ever he hears, to practice
all?

Answ. Though you cannot remember all the Arguments, yet you may remember all the
Duties, and so much of the Arguments as may satisfy you in the Duty or other
Truth, and move you to follow it; and also, so much as to go away with your
heart affected, your convictions, hopes, etc. increased, your Love, Zeal,
Faith, etc. quickened. Our Duties are not so many, nor the Directions, how to
perform them, so many, but an ordinary Capacity may retain them.

Quest. What need we then so much to learn?

Answ. 1st, Because we are very apt to forget the Duties we know. 2dly, We are
very apt to forget the Need of them, and so need quickening. 3dly, It is Gods
appointment, and that ought to be reason enough for us. A living Man loves his
Food, and he that is alive from sin, loves to feed upon the Truth, and to be
put in mind of it, Psalm. 122.1. Only knowing, will not do, nor Practice,
unrenewed; see 2 Pet. 2.12. A Preacher's Work is not only to teach New things,
but To put us in mind of what we know already, although we be established in
present Truth. 4thly, What we do know, we may learn to know better.

Obj. But if it be God only that gives the Increase, to what purpose shall we
strive?

Answ. God does not give the Increase without us, but within us, and in and
upon our striving, Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling. For it is God that works in you both to will and to do,
of his own good pleasure. You know, that God works no increase in you by his
Word, if you do not practice, but disobey it. If there be need for the Minister
to preach, there is need for you to hear and practice; for that is all the use
of Preaching. And we see in our Text, that the Ministers are commanded to
preach, and in this case we are told, Luke 8.16. No man having lighten a Candle
puteth it under a Vessel, etc. Therefore it is as much a sin for you to neglect
to hear or practice, as for the Minister to neglect to preach.

Again, Men's being Saved or Damned does also much depend upon the manner of the
hearers attendance, 1st, According to what our Expectation is. If we expect
Edification, or not, expect it according as we esteem the Preacher, and so
rely upon the Instrument, and not upon the mere Grace of God, and his blessing
upon his Ordinance, it is a sad sign: We ought to seek the best means, but
trust in God alone, and believe he is able as well to bless the weakest as the
strongest means, and so thankfully attend the Means which he is pleased to
give, and not be carnally confident when we esteem the Preacher, nor discontent
when we esteem him not, lest God in his just Judgment leave us to his Curse,
and to be deluded by the Devil, and made to think what he please, Jer. 17.5, 6,
7, 8. Thus says the Lord, Cursed is the Man that trusts in Man; for he shall
be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see when good comes, etc.
Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord; for he shall be as a Tree planted
by the Waters, etc neither shall cease from yiedling Fruit.

2dly, If we attend with fervent Desire of Edification, it is a good sign, Mat.
5, 6, Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they
shall be filled: When it is thus with us, we receive the Truth, and Directions
for our help, etc, as sweet Honey, Psalm 19, 10, when the full Stomach loathes
the Honey Comb:

3dly, If with Patience we attend, willing to wait Gods time by diligent
striving, Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul
that seeks him, not a sitting still to wait, but a watchful patient waiting,
as you may see Hab. 2. I will stand upon my Watch, etc. Though it tarry, wait for
it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Psalm. 40.1.

4thly. If a Self-denying Frame we attend, willing to practice and believe,
though it be a cross to do it, Isa. 28.9 Whom shall he teach? Them that are
weaned, etc. When a person is not willing to deny himself, he is not in a
condition to receive the Truth, which always goes cross to our evil nature; and
this very thing causes some to oppose the Truth, and some only to oppose the
Minister of it, but keeps all that are ruled by it, from getting good, 2 These.
2.11. Because they received not the love of the Truth, God shall send them
strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be
Damned, etc.

5thly, If it be attended with a peaceable Frame toward our Fellow Creatures,
James 1.21. he that bears Malice or seeks Revenge cannot have his sins
forgiven, Mat. 6.14, 15. therefore God does not hear the Prayers of such, and
therefore does not edify their Souls by his Grace, nor bless to them his
Ordinances.

6thly, If it be attended with a suitable Performance of Duties before and
after, as Prayer, Meditation, and also with an attentive Mind in the time of it.

7thly, If it be attended with Constancy, upon this Condition the Blessing is
promised, Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily, etc.
By once missing to attend, when it was your Duty to hear, you may miss of
hearing the very words which God would have made the words of eternal Life to
you. I may here apply for once Mat. 24.42. Watch, for ye know not the hour,
etc. Some come and hear now and then, and get little good, as appears by their
coming so seldom. They observe, That it do^s them little good, and their
Observation is too true. Thus far they are right. But here the way parts, and
they go the quite contrary way; for the right is to reason thus, Why have I got
no more good? The ^nswer is ready, God has not promised it. But Why has he not
promised it? Ans. Because I did not attend with Constancy. This way of arguing
would bring a person ^o be a steady hearer, and might prove to be for his
Salvation; but they go as directly contrary as East from West; and because
they, by being no constant hearers, get no good, they, instead of mending, grow
the worse, and come the less, thinking it not worth while. And this proves to
be for their Damnation.

Here is too little said, but I must leave room for the Application, by way of
Information.

First,
Is it so, that the Gospel preached, and its Ordinances, concern Men's Salvation
and Damnation? Then surely the choicest, the ablest and wisest of the Children
of Men should be the Ministers of it. We use to take the capablest men for the
most difficult and dangerous Work. It is too great a work to be trusted in the
hands of an unskilful person. As God is pleased to make use of Men's Abilities
and Means, so a part of the nature of the Means consists in the Ability of the
Instrument. It is surely the greatest Work that ever Man was employed in; and
surely no man need account himself too great to be employed in it; for it
concerns the very end of our being, and the One Thing needful; and who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2, 16.

Secondly,
Is the Salvation and Damnation of Men concerned in the Ministry of the Gospel?
Then it is not a Work to be undertaken with a light Frame of Spirit. Who that
is sensible of it, can undertake it, but with Fear and Trembling. This and that
Man and Woman is like to be Saved or Damned, according to your Faithfulness or
Unfaithfulness, Prudence or Imprudence in the Work of the Gospel. He that
hears, to be instructed, has cause to Tremble, because his own Soul is
concerned; surely then he that teaches, because many Souls are concerned,
seeing also, the Blood of those that perish by his neglect, shall be required
at his hands. He that has not an awful Sense of this, is not fit for so sacred
a Work. This may serve for a lively Motive to pray to God for Grace,
Preservation, Faithfulness and Assistance in so weighty a Work.

Thirdly,
Is the Ministry of the Gospel so awful a Work? Then the Ministers of it ought
to be freed from all other Cares and Encumbrances, that they may have no
hindrance in attending that Work, which cannot be too well managed, and is
enough to employ the head and heart, and all the strength of the best, wisest
and ablest Man on earth. It is very displeasing to God, and a woeful wrong to
the Souls of the hearers, if the Minister, through Necessity, or Worldliness,
or Idleness, or any other hindrance, be prevented from making the Work of the
Ministry his whole Employment, 2 Timothy 2, 4, No Man that warreth, entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, etc. 1 Timothy 4, 15, 16, Meditate on these
things, give thy self Wholly to them, etc. In doing this thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee.

Quest. But seeing no man is able to speak a word in season, nor think a
thought of himself, to Edification, but as it is given him by the Spirit, What
needs all this devoting a man wholly to that Work, when by all his study he can
have no more than what ^ given him?

Ans. No more can we work in our selves Faith or any Grace; but God makes our
striving the Condition of his giving, yea, and the instrumental cause of it
too, in many things. We eat to live, but God gives us Life and Nourishment by
our Food, which if he deny, we languish and dye. And so necessary is diligent
study; see also Psalm. 127. Except the Lord build the House, the Workman
labors in vain.

Obj. It is said, Take no thought what ye shall say, etc. Luke 12.11.

Ans. 1st. That was only when they should be brought before Rulers for Christ's
sake* Not when they were to Preach.

2dly. It is said, but a little further in the same Chapter and discourse,
verse. 22 Take n^ thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, etc. The meaning is,
Do not distrust Gods mercy and care for you, though ye see no way to answer, or
to be provided for; your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these
things, and he is a faithful Father, and will not leave you while ye are found
in the way of your duty. This all believe to be the meaning of the letter, and
think it a sinful presumption to take it in the proper litteral sense, and
forbear labor; which is yet spoke in the same sense with the former. But other
Scriptures require a dutiful Industry in both, and to trust in God for his
blessing thereon. We are not to look that God will give us without Means, where
he has given Means to be used, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words.

Fourthly,
Is the Preaching of the Gospel of so great Concernment? Then it is a Work too
sacred for Men to undertake for a Livelihood, as their Motive, or for the sake
of Riches or Honor, if these are to be gotten by it, as they seldom are, but
on the other hand Reproach and Trouble in this world. Shall a man make this
World his Aim, when there is so great a Mark as the Salvation of Souls? He that
does it is not likely to obtain any thing higher for his pains. He is not fit
for the Ministry who does not make the great end of it his very Motive, Not for
filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind.

Quest. Why then must Ministers be maintained, and have their Livelihood for
their Labor?

Answ. Not properly as their Reward, but that they may be able to attend the
Ministry without worldly Cumberment, which otherwise cannot be, without a
Miracle; and we are not to look for Miracles, where God has given Means, and
this Means God has commanded, and expects it of the People, as an
Acknowledgment to himself; and it is for the Peoples good, with respect to the
great Reward which follows, as may be plentifully showed from Scripture.

Again, the Preaching of the Gospel, as it is too sacred a Work to be
undertaken for the honor of this world, so it is too sacred to be varnished
with excellent words of man's Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. As God has appointed proper
Means, so natural parts, and acquired parts by Learning have their proper
tendency to help men in Invention, Reason and Utterance; but he that strives to
show it when he is acting in that which concerns men's eternal Estate, seems to
have forgot the worth of men's Souls, or the dread of the Danger would drive
such small things out of his mind: Surely he that does so, is not sensible of
the greatness of his Work, and is so far unfit for it, and seems to have forgot
that he is to preach Christ, and not himself, 2 Cor. 4, 5, it is a grievous
prophaining of Gods Ordinance. Parts and Learning are of great use, but we must
not be fed with the Dish in which our Food is brought to us. Religion is of too
excellent a nature in it self, to be made more beautiful by Man's Wisdom. A Tow
Lace will not become a Silk Garment; it may be of use to spin and weave the
Silk, but spoils it if it be mixed with it. It shows an Ignorance of the
excellency of Religion, when Men think to beautify it so. And the ears of the
hearers being tickled with fine words, has a tendency to divert their Mind from
the sense of the weight of the Truth which they hear. Let plain intelligible
significant words be used in Religion.

Fifthly,
Is Men's Salvation or Damnation concerned in the Preaching of the Gospel? Then
we have need, for our Souls sake, to avoid all such things as hinder the
Success of it; for if it prove unsuccessful, it may cost you your Soul!
Therefore let all Worldly Recreations, visits and discourses be avoided when we
go to, but especially when we go from hearing the Word Preached, while it is
fresh upon our mind, which is the only time to make a sensible application of
it. We eat our food visibly, we digest it invisibly, if both be not done we
cannot live; so we learn for our edification openly and publicly; we really
get the good of it privately and secretly. Our Food is digested by the working
of nature, Our spiritual Food by the working of our Minds, which must take
time, and our mind cannot do it while diverted by other things. The Beasts
which did not chew the Cud after they had eaten it, were accounted unclean. And
the Person that only hears, and makes no further application, is Unclean in the
sight of God. Our Food begins to digest so soon as it is eaten, or not at all;
and experience shows that many a Person coming from a Sermon much affected or
awakened, but not improving it, presently has by the next day lost all the
sense of it, or at least so much that he remains as he was before. Thus Men
quench and grieve the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30. and so many loose their
Salvatian, not having the like return upon them again. Thus many do the work of
the Devil to their near Friends by entertaining them with such discourses after
a Sermon which quite puts out that spark of eternal life, that began to kindle
in them, and so occasion their Damnation. It was not for nothing that God
appointed the weekly day of his public Worship to be kept Holy from all
secular Employments. Application must be made that very Day. If our Salvation
be instrumentally procured by the preaching of the Word, and if Damnation comes
by the unsuccessfulness of it, then that which makes it unsuccessful, is in
that respect the worst of Evils. Other Sins are Pardoned when the Sinner
Repents and is Converted, but This hinders Repentance and Conversion. The end
of Religion is lost where the Word is unsuccessful. No wonder then if the Wrath
of God fall upon that Land where such things are a custom, as hinder the
success of it. But that the falling upon unnecessary worldly Discourse soon
after Sermon, or indeed any time the same day, has this woeful effect; is
dreadfully proved from matter of Fact. But because it is that which works
invisibly upon men's Minds, therefore few see it, and the blindness of mind and
hardness of heart, that it works in those upon whom it takes effect, hinders
their observation of it. Though Profaneness of life and want of Grace, where
the word is taught, is an open proof, but like a distemper or sickness,
procured by some Intemperance. The sickness is seen by all, but few (yea, the
Patient himself does not) know the cause. There is great complaint of
Profaneness (and cause enough) as that which brings Gods Wrath upon the Land;
but if the Word taught were effectual, that would be healed; Therefore while
such Customs are upheld, as make that Word ineffectual, that procures Gods
Anger, as the foundation cause. The Streams of Iniquity it is that overflows
the Land; but the way to stop them, is to begin at the Fountain. The Streams of
Reformation it is, that must heal the Land; but the way to procure them, is to
remove that which stops them in the Fountain. All the Counsels of Hell could
not have found out a more effectual way to destroy Religion, than the custom
that is in some places, of visiting on the Lords Day evening, and in some
places on the Lords Day it self, after Sermon; not but that Religious visits
are lawful upon the Sabbath Day it self; but after hearing openly, our work is
application secretly. Indeed if some discourse be used after a Sermon,
concerning its usefulness, and the need to apply and practice it, it may double
its effect upon many hearers; but still, Application is secret. And what excuse
is this for a discourse which hinders success? And if we find that we cannot
discourse with a Friend without so bad an effect, we are obliged not to trust
our selves by the rule which bids us pray that we be not led into Temptation.

But why may not People tarry at home as much as on other times in the week?
and each man keep his own house from being a Playhouse? and keep his Family at
home to mind good, and teach them? When is there a better time? But he that
cares for no Food for himself, desires none for his Family; He that is Dead,
desires no Life. But do you not know, that you are commanded to teach your
Family. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Diligently to teach them sitting in your House, lying
down, rising up, etc. And as God has set you the Watchman of your house, so if
any one perish through your neglect, their blood will be required at your
hands. He that answers for another life, pays for it with his own. How
Terrible is it then to have another Damnation to pay for! You work and labor
all day and daily for their Bodies; and can you not spend some pains weekly for
their Souls! which is a work much more difficult, and a Thousand Million times
more needful; and therefore we are required to make it our constant care,
Sitting in our house, walking by the way, etc. And not only Catechizing, and
Knowledge, but also Spiritual Improvement and Application of Knowledge is your
work to teach them; For otherwise all Knowledge of all Mysteries is nothing, 1
Cor. 13.2.

And how can you better do this, than by making them sensible of the Doctrine
preached, which is Gods appointed Ordinance for conversion; and when can you
better do it, than on the Evening after it was Preached? It may be you pray,
and repeat the Sermon with them; you do so far well; but do you know, that they
go alone, when you have done, to meditate and pray to God, to apply it by his
Spirit, and give them Grace to keep it, and to keep them from walking contrary
to this and that particular Truth which they now learned; which if they do not,
what are they the better for all? What Life is in them? But he that does not
thus himself, has no heart to recommend it to others. If by this practice you
win a Child to Repentance, you have got him a better Portion, than if you had
made him a King. But what of this is done, when all go into Frolicks! Is there
no time in the week for young People to see each other with Civility but this?
Is not such a Custom devised by the Devil, on purpose for his Defense against
the Sword of the Spirit, (the Word of God) which should overthrow his Kingdom?
But some are displeased with this Doctrine, and others do not much regard it. I
fear the reason is, because the Devil knows that the Custom it contends with,
is his strong hold. However, this matter concerns Peoples Salvation and
Damnation, mind it or not.

Sixthly.
By this Doctrine we may be put in mind That the work of the Gospel ought to be
attended with Diligence, both on the part of the Teacher, and also on the part
of the Hearers. For men's Salvation is concerned in it, as the Preacher should
make it his business to study suitable matter, to discourse with the afflicted,
and instruct the ignorant, to reprove and deal with Offenders, and convince
those that err, etc. Publicly and from House to House, Acts 20.20. So far as
his ability and strength and health will allow, so should the hearers as
dilingently hear, carefully observe, faithfully apply, and truly practice,
which is a work not easily done. Our Nature is so averse, our spiritual Enemies
so subtle and diligent, that few do escape Damnation, and obtain Salvation,
Mat. 7.13, 14. Now a work so difficult, and of so great Concernment, does
surely require diligence; and he that does not find it so, is surely a stranger
to it; and therefore we know where he is going! Therefore give diligence to
make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And take heed least the cares
of this World, or the deceitfulness of Riches, or the Lusts of other things
(whether ease, quietness, pleasure, or what) entering in, choke the Word, and
it become unfruitful, and you loose your Salvation, Mark 4.10.

Seventhly.
By his Doctrine, we may consider our Obligations to Love those that are by God
made Instruments of our furtherance toward receiving the benefit of the Gospel
Preached (whether it be faithful Ministers or Christian Friends) seeing that is
Gods appointed means for us to escape from Damnation, and obtain Salvation.

Eighthly.
Is the success of the Gospel Preached that whereon our Salvation depends? Then
it is a dreadful thing for any person to be the hinderance of the Success of
it: He is a Murderer of Souls, a Fighter against God, and a helper of the
Devil; and this many do, and never consider it. Some by Mirth or worldly
Business, at the time when the Word is to be meditated upon, and some by their
Examples divert others, when they were in a fair way to have been blessed by
applying the Truth. When your heart is awakened by the Word, this is Gods hand,
as if he called you by Name to be saved! It is that which you cannot have when
you will! If you improve it now, and follow on, you shall be Saved; but if you
put it off, you know not whether ever you shall have it again. You may think
you will mind it another time, but when that time is come, your heart is gone,
the sense of it is gone! and hence if you do something, you do it without that
presence of God, which you might have had. From hence it is that many rest with
false hopes, by patching up an insufficient Repentance, for want of Gods Spirit
(to guide them) which they did not improve while they had it. Their case is
like Sampson, Jud. 16.20. He said, I will go out, as before, and shake my self;
and he wist not that the Lord was departed from him. Woe to him that puts a
Person out, when his heart is touched? and Woe to him that is so put out of his
way. Again, some hinder the success of the Gospel by opposing the Minister,
vilifying or undervaluing his Doctrine, or his Person; this does more Mischief
than the doer is aware of, and destroys many Souls. When a Scale is near
turning, a small matter turns it quite either one way or the other, if the
weigh^ be never so great; so it is with a Man almost persuaded to Duty, to
Conviction, to Repentance, etc. Therefore we have need to tak^ need; thus many
become Murderers of Soul (especially of their nearest Friends) A man venting
his Anger by speaking reproachful of a Neighbor, may keep him out of Heaven
Psalm. 15.3. But how much worse is it, when, to ease his angry mind, he lays
snares for the Souls of his Brethren and Friends, making the Gospel
ineffectual to them? Suppose your case be just, you know not what mischief you
may do. Surely the Devil will stir men up, in such a case, with all his might;
and then one of his great Strategems is, to tempt the Minister to some
Imprudences, and some angry persons to take offense; and our Armor to fight
against it, is Prayer and Watchfulness.

Ninthly.
Is it so, that our Salvation or Damnation is concerned in the Preaching and
Ordinances of the Gospel (even so that our Salvation is occasioned by the same
well improved, and hindered by the want of it) Then the enjoyment thereof is a
very needful thing; It is the very thing which our Savior calls (with the good
Improvement of it) The one thing needful, Luke 10. Therefore he that enjoys it,
enjoys that which is better than a Kingdom without it; and he that brings up
his Children under the Gospel, and learns them to prise it, gives them better
than a Kingdom; but he that removes them from under it, for the sake of worldly
gain, does the work of a foolish Friend, and does, in effect, sell them to
Hell, and to the Devil, for nothing. He undoes them, because he loves them; And
what will it profit a Man if he gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul?
Mat. 16.26.

Were it not for the sense of this Truth, for my part, I would never take such
a poor troublesome way of living, as the Ministry usually proves to be, through
the opposition of the Enemy, and Men's want of Grace.

Here I must a little expostulate with such as think it no great matter whether
they live under the Preaching of the Gosple or no; and a less matter whether
they constantly attend or no. Have you a desire to be saved or no? If you have,
do you think to find it out of Gods way? It is his mere good pleasure if he
save us at all; and whatever our reason suggests for a good way, we must comply
with the way wherein it pleases God to save them that believe. Though we judge
it foolish and contemptible, Moses must lift up his Rod. To clear this, I will
give you a few Instances. Cant. 1. v. 7, 8. The Believer desires of Christ, to
know where he may find Edification for his Soul, and is sent to the Ministers.
Again, Acts. 10.5.6. When an Angel appears to Cornelius; surely the Angel could
speak as well as Peter, ^ut because Gods appointed way must be ^sed, he only
bids him send for Peter; yea, when Christ himself (after his Ascension) ^ppears
to Saul, Acts 22.10. and Saul says, Lord, what will thou have me to do? His
an^wer is, Arise and go into the City, and there (...) shall be told thee.
Could not our Savior ^ave told him [a Man miraculously con^erted to be a Man
extraordinary] but what ^he Lord pleases to institute, must be done, if ^aul be
saved. The Lords way is one way, and his Will should be reason enough for us;
and it seems he will have it so.

When the Lord spoke to Samuel, in order ^o make him a Prophet, he knew not
that it ^as the Lord, till he is told by Eli, the Minister, Gods Officer; and
why may not ^at ( John 16.13. of the Spirit not speaking (...) himself, but
what he hears, put us in mind (...) this also?

Therefore if you love your Soul, live not without the Preaching of the Gospel,
although ^ou live in the greatest Poverty for it. You ^ould willingly live in
Poverty to enjoy ^^fety for your Body, if you cannot have it ^^thout, and be at
any cost for Safety of life; and (...) you are asked, you will say, your soul
is of a ^^ousand times more value. Are you a rational Man? Then do not make
yourself a Bruit, by neglecting Reason. But Isa. 46.8 Remember this, (...) show
your selves Men. I must tell you, that to b^ converted and saved, is not so
easy a work, no^ in your own power; therefore that God of hi^ Grace may do it,
you must be found in his way The Spirit which does not testify to this, is not
o^ God. If you are willing to run the venture of it, o^ see not the need of
appointed means, I must tell yo^ that you are not in the way to be saved. Ou^
souls can ordinarily no more live without the word, in Gods appointed way, than
our bodi^ can live without Food.

Obj. This is so necessary only in order to Conversion

Ans. It is no sign of Conversion, when a Person is content to live without the
appointe^ means of Edification. Job, to prove the truth (...) his Grace, says,
he esteeemed the words of Go^ more than his necessary Food, Job 23.12.

Obj. We must have means to edify one another, (...) that may be done by
discourse.

Ans. So we must, but that is not all; Heb. 1^ 25. Forsake not the assembling
your selves togethe^ Psalm. 133. last, From mount Zion the Lord commands the
blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 87.2. His Foundation is in the holy
mountain, t^^ foundation of being born in Zion, i. e. conver^ed, Psalm. 84.10.

Obj. But public worship may be without a Minist^^

Ans. Not with so great a blessing, nor any (...) all, if a Minister may be
had, Isa. 30.2^ Thine eyes shall see thy Teacher, and thine ears hea^ etc, Romans
10 14.

Obj. But are not the Scriptures above any man's Preaching?

Ans. Yea, they are; But God has required of us more Duties than one, which are
necessary to Salvation. The Husbandman knows, that in order to a Crop, there
must be the Land, the Fence, the Tillage, the Seed, the Rain, the Sun and the
Reaping; and if one of these fail, the Crop is lost. So here, there is the
Scripture, the public Preaching, the private Meditations, the Practice and
Prayers; If one of these fail, the Soul is lost. There are also other things
helpful, as Discourse of Friends, Afflictions sanctified, etc. And sometimes
for want of one of these, the Soul may be lost.

Tenthly.
Is our Salvation so nearly concerned in the Preaching of the Gospel? Then it
is no strange thing if the Devil and his Instruments are Enemies to it. Hence
persecutiors are commonly against either the Scriptures being read, or against
the Gospel being faithfully preached; and hence the subtilty of Satan
prevailing upon men's Corruptions, causes so many Contentions in Churches and
Societies, to the hindrance of the effectual Preaching of the Gospel; and hence
Satan raises so many false Opinions in Religion, under fair Colors, thereby to
prevent the true being received, and hence many men will expend much freely for
superfluity in Apparel, and the like, and yet will not help their Minister with
so much as to be able to attend his Ministry, without encumbrance.

Eleventhly.
This Doctrine informs us of the happy estate of such as enjoy the Gospel, and
a heart to improve it. He that hears and receives it, shall be Saved. Do you
mourn because of Losses, Wants, Afflictions and Troubles? Have you the Gospel,
and a heart to use it? you are happy, Psa. 27, 4. One thing have I desired,
That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my Life, etc. And he
that wants this, is miserable, though never so prosperous in this world; he is
but as a beast fated for the Slaughter, Therefore esteem the Gospel above all
Riches, and answerably labor to make sure of the good effect of it, Psalm.
19.10.

Twelfthly.
By this Doctrine, it appears, that the Gospel is accidentally a dreadful woe
unto these that do not truly receive it; for if it bring not their Salvation,
it concerns their Damnation to whom it is offered.

Thirteenthly.
Is Men's Salvation or Damnation concerned in the Preaching and other Ordinances
of the Gospel? Then let every Christian see the need of earnest Prayer,
whenever we act any thing that concerns it, when you go to hear, when you come
from hearing, and when you speak of it; For your eternal Estate is concerned in
the Ministers Studies, Actions and Words, and in your own also; Therefore Pray.
Therefore our Savior going to choose his Apostles, continued all night in
Prayer. Luke 6.12. He thought the Success of the Gospel worth Dying for; and
will not you think it worth Praying for, or any other pains when it concerns
your Salvation or Damnation? And the Blessing is promised only upon Condition
of fervent Prayer.

FINIS.

