THE Believers Gain by DEATH: Opened and Applied In a SERMON.
Wherein is showed, Who are they that Live to Christ, and how Death will be
Gainful to all that do so. UPON The Death of a Valuable RELATIVE

By I. Mather, D. D.

Luk xii 43. Blessed is that Servant, whom when his Lord comes shall find so
doing.

1 Cor. xv. 55 O death where is thy sting.

Ejus est mortem timore, qui nolit ad Christum ire Cyprian. Dies Mortis, est
aeternae vitae Natalis. Boston, Printed by B. G for S Gerrish. 1713

The Believers Gain by DEATH.
Philippians I. 21. For me to Live is Christ, and to Die is Gain.


THE Apostle in this Chapter speaks of the sufferings and dangers which he was
exposed unto on the account of his Preaching the Gospel of Christ. His Enemies
were resolved if possible, either to cause him to cease Preaching Christ, or to
take his Life from him. He had an holy confidence that he should be saved from
what his Enemies designed against him. For which he mentions two reasons, in
the 19. verse of this Chapter. (1.) In that the Lords People were Praying for
him; and he was persuaded that God would hear their Prayers in his behalf. (2.)
Because of a supply from the Spirit of Jesus Christ. That Spirit would supply
him with Grace, which would make him courageous and constant in professing the
Truth against all the Opposition of his Adversaries. I know that this shall
turn to my Salvation, through your Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. He moreover declares, that as to himself, he was not much
concerned what should happen to him, whether Life or Death, Considering that if
he lived longer, Christ would be magnified by his Life, and if he should die a
Martyr in the cause of Christ, Christ would be magnified by his Death, and he
himself should be a gainer thereby; as he intimates in this with the preceding
verse. The latter part of this verse is a consequent from the former part.
Wherefore the Doctrine to be insisted on, is,

That those Servants of the Lord unto whom to Live is Christ, may be assured,
that for them to die will be Gain.

The Truth before us may be cleared by Answering two Enquiries. (1.) What are
the Characters of one unto whom to Live is Christ? (2.) How it does appear that
such may be assured, that Death will be their Gain?

Quest. 1. What are the Characters of one unto whom to Live is Christ? Who is
the Man that can truly say, for me to Live is Christ?

Ans. 1. He is One that Lives from Christ, and is very sensible that he does
so. There is a Principle of Spiritual Life in his Soul, and that Life is from
Christ. True Saving Grace is Life It is Living Water, a well of Water,
springing up to Everlasting Life. It is Christ that gives this Water, and
pours it into the Soul, Job. 4. 14. Christians have more or less Grace in their
Souls, according as Christ gives it them. Ephesians. 4. 7. To every one is given
Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. There is a Life of
Faith. The Just shall Live by Faith: That Life is all from Christ. Gal. 2. 20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. The life which I now live is by the
Faith of the Son of God. No man had ever had Faith, or any other Grace, if it
had not been for Christ. Jesus is the Author and the finisher of our Faith.
This, the Man for whom to Live is christ, is very sensible of. He feels himself
to be nothing without Christ: Therefore says, Not I but Christ. He cannot live,
or exert any act or motion of Spiritual Life, further than as he is assisted
and influenced by Christ. He is sensible that he cannot bear Afflictions, or
resist Temptations, or perform any Spiritual duty after a right manner, but by
the help of Christ. He gives to Christ the glory of all. Phil. 4. 13. I can do
all things through Christ which strengthens me. In himself he is nothing,
Christ is all, his very Life and all.

2. He is One that Lives for Christ, as well as from Him. Rev. 1. 8. Christ
says, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning, and the ending. He is so to the
Believer on his Name, the chief design of whose Life is, to Serve and Please
not Men but Christ. Gal. 1. 10. Do I seek to please Men? If I yet pleased Men,
I should not be the Servant of Christ. Men Live much according to what their
Ends and aims are: A man that Lives to himself makes himself his own last end:
In all that he does Self is his chief aim; nay, in his performance of Religious
Duties, he aims more at himself, than at the Glory of God, Zech. 7, 5, 6. When
you fasted and mourned (the like when they feasted) did you do it to me, was it
not to your selves. A Man that lives to the World, that which he chiefly aims
at, is the promoting of his Worldly Interests. Thus he that lives to Christ,
his chief design is to Serve Christ, and to promote his Glory in the World. For
me to live is Christ (says the Apostle) meaning that if he did live longer,
Christ should have his Life: He would devote his Life to the Service of Christ.
That man that can truly say that the Principal reason why he is willing to
Live, is that he may Serve and Glorify* Christ, may say, For me to live is
Christ.

3. He is one that makes the Word and Will of Christ his Rule by which, and
according to which he Conforms his Life. The holy Scriptures are the Word of
Christ. Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you. It was the Spirit of
Christ, that inspired the holy Penmen, who have written the blessed Bible. By
that written Word does the Man that lives to Christ* regulate both his Faith
and his Obedience. All that is contained in that Word he receives as Truth.
Act. 24. 14. Believing all things which are written in the Law, and in the
Prophets. Which was then the whole Scripture. Thus the Christian belives all
things which are written in the Old and in the New Testament. Nor will he make
any thing an Article of his Faith in matters of Religion, but what he has
Scripture light for, Isai 8. 20. To the law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. He makes
the Word also the Rule according to which he orders his Conversation in the
World. Thinks with himself, does the Word of Christ allow me to do such a
thing, then I will venture to do it, otherwise not. If Christ Commands him to
obey* although it may be the Commandment is contrary to his Natural inclination:
If Christ requires him to deny himself, he will obey as Abraham did. If Christ
will have him Sacrifice his Isaac, nay, his own Life; he will conform to the
Will of Christ. Let the Cammandment be what it may be, if it is Christ's
Command, he will do it. Joh. 15. 14. You are my friends, if you do whatsoever I
command you. That Is Living to Christ. And as for things forbidden in the
Scripture, he that Lives to Christ, stands in such awe of his word, that he is
afraid to do them. Psalm. 119 161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause,
but my heart stands in awe of thy word. He would not do any thing contrary to
that word, though he lost the favor of great Men, and was Persecuted for it.

4. Fidelity to the Interest of Christ is the Character of One that Lives to
Him. And this is in diverse ways expressed.

(1.) By constancy in the Profession of his Name and Truth, Heb. 10 23. Let us
hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering. To do so is
faithfulness to Christ. Thus did the Christians in the Church of Pergamus, show
their Fidelity to Christ, by their constancy in the Profession of his Name and
Truth. Rev. 2. 13. Thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my Faith.
They were exposed to Sufferings; and one among them dyed a Martyr: Nevertheless
they were steadfast in their holy Profession. Thus also did the Christian
Hebrews manifest their Loyalty to Christ: Their Estates were taken from them by
ungodly men, only because of their Religion and Christianity; and they took the
spoiling of their goods Joyfully, Heb. 10. 34. There were many Christians in
the Primitive Times that would rather part with their Estates, and with their
Lives too, than with the Truth. Rev. 12. 11. They loved not their lives to the
death. They might have lived many a fair day, if they would have renounced
their Religion, but they would die first. So in the latter Ages under the
Persecution of Antichrist; many have lost their Lives for the sake of Truth. It
was well spoken by the Martyr, who said, You may pluck out my heart out of my
body but you shall never pluck the Truth out of my heart.

(2.) We show our Fidelity to Christ, by bearing a due Testimony against these
things which are a dishonor to His Name, and displeasing to him. There are
Errors in judgment which if embraced by men, who call themselves Christians,
are very displeasing to Him. In the first Ages of Christianity, there were some
Antinomian Christians, who turned the Grace of God in to Lasciviousness; Others
that denied the Godhead of Christ; Others denied the Resurrection. The Apostle
and other Ministers of the Gospel, showed their Fidelity to Christ, by bearing
Witness against those Heretics, and Exercising the holy Discipline of Christ
on them. In after Ages, polycarp, Ireneus, Tertullian, and others of the
Ancients manifested their Zeal for Christ, in Testifying against the Seducers
that appeared in their Time. There are also Sinful Practices (as well as
Opinions) which are very dishonorable to the Name of Christ. If Men call
themselves by that holy Name, and yet live unholy lives; they dishonor and
offend Him more than others, Who are guitly of the same evils. Wherefore a
zealous Testimony against them, is Fidelity to Christ. Thus did the Angel of
the Church in Ephesus, approve his faithfulness, for which Christ commends him.
Rev. 2. 6. Thou hate the deeds of the Nicholaitans, which I also hate. The
Nicholaitans called themselves Christians, but (as writers inform us) indulged
themselves in Idolatries and Adulteries, Maintaining that there was no Sin in
such vile and abominable deeds. In Latter Ages, Antichrist has corrupted all
Religion with Heresies and Immoralities. It is faithfulness to Christ, to bear
a Testimony against all Antichristian Corruptions in doctrine or practice.
Christ calls those that do so, his witnesses, Rev. 11 3. My two Witnesses.

(3.) We show our Loyalty and Fidelity to Christ, by Endeavoring the
continuance and enlargement of His Kingdom in the World. When a Sinner is
Converted, Satan loses a Subject in his kingdom; and Christ Gains one. It is
said of Converts, That God has delivered them from the Power of darkness, and
translated them into the Kingdom of his Son, Col. 1. 13. When true Religion is
Propagated from Parents to Children, the Kingdom of Christ is thereby
continued. Parents do a great Service for Christ, when they Endeavor that
their Childrens Souls may be seasoned with Grace, that they may know God and
Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal. To this purpose does Hezekiah
speak: Isai. 32. 19. The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth.
When the Ministers of the Gospel Preach Converting Sermons, (the Lord setting
in with their Labors) they do great Service for Christ, by causing Kingdom to
be enlarged. There are especially two Considerations which should make us do
our utmost for the Conversion of Sinners. One is, that thereby we shall Save
Precious and Immortal* Souls from Eternal Death. Jam. 5. 20. He that Converts a
Sinner shall save a Soul from Death. The other is, That we shall cause the Name
of Christ to be magnified. Every Converted Sinner will glorify Christ
throughout the Ages of Eternity.

(4.) We manifest our Fidelity to Christ* when we Serve and Honor Him with
whatever Talents He bestows upon us. In the Parable of the Talents, it was said
to him that used his Talents well (whether they were more or fewer) Well done
thou faithful Servant, Math. 25. 23. The Lord does not commit Talents to us for
our own use only, but that we should use them to promote His Interest: We are
but Stewards, If we honor Him who is our Lord, with our betrustment, we shall
then be owned by Him as faithful Stewards Luk 12 42. Riches are a Talent which
some have committed to them. They that Live to Christ, will promote His
Interest with their Estates. They will Honor God with their Substance. Time is
a precious Talent. He that lives to Christ, will be very careful to spend his
Time as that he may be able to give a good account to Christ concerning it.
Health is a Talent: He will Serve Christ with his Health. An Eminency in Parts
Natural and Acquired A Strong Memory, a great measure of Knowledge and
Learning, are Talents. He that can say For me to Live is Christ, will Serve and
Glorify Him with his Time, Health, and all his Abilities. All shall be for
Christ. We proceed to the Second Enquiry. viz.

Quest 2. How does it appear that such may be assured that for them to dye will
be Gain?

Answ. They may be assured of it from the promise of Christ. He says, Be thou
faithful to death, and I will give thee a crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10 Continue to
be faithful to the End of thy days ( says Christ) and then when Death comes,
thou shall have a crown of Life: Is not that Gain? Is not a Crown, and a Crown
of Life, and that Life an Eternal Life, great Gain? Christ has promised his
Servants that when their work is done (as at death it is) they shall be
rewarded for what they have done for Him. The more work any man does for
Christ, the more wages, the greater will be the reward. Indeed, they shall not
receive their full reward until the Resurrection at the last day* Nevertheless,
they shall receive a blessed part of it, when they leave this World for the
Enjoyment of the heavenly World. Rev. 14 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them. They are no sooner Dead, but they are Blessed. When it is said, Their
works do follow them, the meaning is, That a reward for all their works, for
all that they have done or suffered for Christ, does then begin to follow them.
It is true, that there are some Servants of Christ, who will be greater gainers
by death than others shall. Some have had more Talents Committed to them, than
others have, and improved them faithfully, their Gain will be accordingly.
Death will be a gainful and a joyful day to such an one. He that had five
Talents committed to him, and industriously improved them all for his Masters
use, was gloriously rewarded. Sometimes one Servant of Christ does more Service
for Him, and brings more glory to His Name than a thousand others, who yet may
be His faithful Servants too. Now happy is that man that ever he came into the
World, and happy that he must dye ere long and be rewarded for all that he has
done for Christ. Nevertheless, Death will be very gainful to every true
Believer on Christ. The Apostle writes the Believers Inventory, and among other
Goods belonging to him, he mentions that of Death, 1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are
yours, Whether Life or Death; all are yours. If you live, the continuance of
your life, will prove some advantage to you, and if you dye, death will be so.

Quest. But what is it that they to whom to live is Christ, will Gain by Death?

Ans. 1. They shall Gain an happy deliverance from all the miseries of this
Life. The faithful Servants of Christ are as much subject to Afflictions in
this World as other men, and many times more. Job the best man in the World,
and the most afflicted man. If in this life only they had hope they would be of
all men the most miserable. They shall dye but once, and shall then at once be
delivered from all their sorrows. When they art got safe into the heavenly
Jerusalem, God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
for the former things are passed away. There is a promise made to the Israel of
God: Zeph. 3 15. Thou shall not see evil any more. That promise is made good to
every true Israelite, at the hour of his death. It Is true, That when wicked men
die they are freed from the miseries of this Life, but then they fall into other
miseries, and eternal ones a thousand times greater.

2. At the hour of Death the Believer will Gain what is infinitely better and
more desirable than to be delivered from all Affliction. For he shall gain a
perfect deliverance from all Sin. Never more be guilty of any Actual Sin, in
Word, Thought or Deed. Never speak an unprofitable Word, never have a vain
Thought in his Mind throughout the days of Eternity. For then he shall gain an
absolute freedom from Indwelling Sin, which began with the union of the Soul to
the Body, and will cease when that union shall be dissolved. Then will there be
no more remainders of Original sin. Romans 6. 7. He that is dead is freed from
sin. When I think of that Scripture, (and I often think of it) I cannot but say
to God, Is it so Lord? Is he that is dead freed from Sin! Then, Lord, let me
die as soon as Thou please. But the gain which the Servants of Christ shall
have at and by death, is not only Privative but Positive, they shall gain not
only deliverance from all Evil, but a full enjoyment of the greatest Good. They
Gain Heaven. They that exchange Earth for Heaven are mighty Gainers. He that
gains Heaven, gains Riches enough. Riches more valuable than all the Riches of
this World, ten thousand times told, Ephesians. 1. 18. That you may know what is the
Riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. This glory of Heaven does
the faithful Servant of Jesus Christ gain at the hour of his death. 2 Cor. 5.
1. For we know that if the earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. It
was said to the Penitent on the Cross, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Believers when in Heaven will gain a blessed Conversation with
glorified Souls, The spirits of just Men made perfect. The Jewish Writers give
to Heaven the Name of Gnolam N^phashoth, that is The World of Souls. There are
a World of holy Souls there. It is a great happiness to be among them, and to
join with them in continual Hallelujahs to God, and to Jesus Christ. There we
gain Communion with holy Angels, who have been Witnesses of our Fidelity and
Services done for Christ, their Lord as well as ours, at which they did
rejoice, and will gladly Conduct us to the heavenly World. It was said to the
Prophet, Zech. 3. 7. If thou will keep my charge, I will give thee Places to
walk among these that stand by. Who were they that stood by? They were holy
Angels. We shall walk familiarly with them in the Galleries of Heaven. The
Apostle gives a description of Heaven, when he says, We are come to the City
of the Living God, to an innumerable company of Angels, and to the Spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12, 22, 23. And which is a greater happiness, in
Heaven we gain a Soul ravishing, and a Soul-satisfying sight of Jesus Christ,
in the beholding of whose glory the happiness of Heaven does very much consist.
Being absent from the body we are present with the Lord. The departing Soul of
the Believer goes to Christ, He receives it. Therefore did Stephen says, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. Christ will say, Behold here is the Mansion which I
have prepared for thee: Here shall thou be with Me, until I go down to Judge
the World, and then thou shall go with Me.

We proceed to the APPLICATION of the Doctrine in several Inferences.

Inf. 1. We may by what has been spoken judge whether Death will be gainful to
us. As for the greatest part of men that dye, Death is not gainful but hurtful
to them. At Death they loose all their good things at once. It was said of the
rich Fool in the Gospel, who boasted of his having laid up goods for many
Years, This Night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and then whose will these
things be? Thine to be sure they will not be. And then a Second Death takes
hold on the Soul, then which there can be nothing more hurtful. Dives dyed and
was buried, and in Hell he lift up his eyes being in torment. His Purple
Clothes, and his Delicious Fare, he must no more have, but instead thereof
Flaming Torment. Then are we not concerned to know, Whether that for as to dye
will be Gain? If Christ is our Life, Death will be our Gain.

Quest. How may we know when Christ is our Life?

Answ. If Christ is our Life, He is our Love. I charge you, O you Daughters of
Jerusalem, that you wake not my Love, until he please. The Spouse calls Christ
her Love; as being the dearest Object of her Love. No creature in the world is
so Dear to the Believer as Christ. There is nothing so dear to men naturally as
Life. All that a man has, will he part with for his Life. But if Christ is our
Life, He will be dearer to us than our own Lives. He was so to the Apostle;
Act. 21. 13. I am ready not only to be bound, but to Die also for the Name of
the Lord Jesus. If Christ is our Love, we shall prefer His Interest above our
own: As we see in John Baptist, who when his Fame was diminished by the
increasing Glory of Christ, said, My Joy is therefore fulfilled. If Christ is
our Love, we shall be often Thinking of him, and that not only by Day, but also
by Night: Cant. 3. 1. By Night I sought him whom my Soul Loves. Such an one
will be often thinking with himself; What shall I do for Christ? How may I
promote His Interest, and cause His Name to be Glorified in the World. And if
Christ is our Life and Love, we shall be often speaking of Him; as men always
do of that which their hearts are most set upon. The high Praises of Christ
will be in our mouths. My beloved is the Chief of ten thousand, He is
altogether Lovely. The Name of Christ will be often mentioned by us, without
taking his Name in vain. It is Austin's observation, That Paul mentions the
Name of Christ in his Epistles, above four hundred and fifty times. That
Minister to whom to live is Christ, O how does he love to be Preaching Christ!
And Hearers of the Word, who live to Christ, think they can never Hear too much
of Him.

Inf. 2. The Servants of Christ ought not to be afraid or unwilling to Dye.
Death can do them no hurt, why then should they be afraid of it? O Death, where
is thy Sting? Christ has taken that away. What hurt can a Serpent do that has
no Sting, no Poison in him? Nay, Death is their good Friend. A French Martyr
that dyed lately by the bloody Cruelty of the French Galleys and Dungeons,
said, He considered Death as his Friend, and his greatest Comfort. Men do not
use to be afraid of Gaining. Why* then should the Servants of Christ be afraid
of Dying? Are we unwilling to go to Christ? It was well spoken by one of the
Ancients, Let that man be afraid of Death, who is not willing to go to Christ.
Are we not willing to go Home, to our Fathers House? This World is not our
Home: Our Home is in a far better Country than any on this Earth. Why should
we not have Longings to be there? It is said of the holy Patriarchs, That they
desired a better Country, that is an Heavenly, Heb. 11. 16 Sometimes it is a
very great favor of God to be taken out of this world: So it is when woeful
Days are coming on the place where we live. The Righteous is taken away from
the Evil to come. Josiah's Death was (though a dismal Judgment to the whole Land,
yet) a singular Mercy to him. For had he lived so long as according to the
Course of Nature he might have done, he must have seen the Ruin of his
Kingdom; therefore as a singular favor to him, he was laid in the Grave, that
so his Eyes might not be grieved with beholding those Ruins and Desolations.
It was a mercy to Austin, that he dyed a little before the barbarous Goths took
and destroyed the Town where he dwelt. It was a mercy to Pareus, that he dyed
before Heydelberg fell into the hands of bloody Papists. When a man's work is
done; when he is spent and past service, debilitated by age or painful
diseases, that he can do no more Service for Christ, then to be sent for Home
is a great favor of God. We find in the Scripture, that Aged Servants of the
Lord have desired Death. Did not Old Jacob do so, when he said, Now let me Die?
Did not Old Simeon do so, when he said, Now, Lord, let thy servant depart in
Peace? Nevertheless,

Inf. 3. The servants of Christ should be Content to live longer in this world,
if the Lord will have it so, that they may Serve and Glorify Christ with their
Lives. Although they should be willing to Die, and (with an humble Submission to
the Will of God) desire it, rather than a longer Continuance in this sinful
world. It becomes a Christian, Habere Vitam in Pattentia et Mertem in
desiderio. 2 Cor. 5. 8. We are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and
Present with the Lord. And the Apostle here says, I desire to depart and be
with Christ. Nevertheless, he was Content to live longer, out of love to
Christ, and that he might Serve His Interest among his People: Therefore he
says in the 24 th. and 25 th. Verses of this Chapter, That for him to abide in
the Flesh was more needful, for the Church of Christ; and therefore he believed
and was Content it should be so, that he should Continue with them for their
furtherance and joy of Faith. It was (as some compute) Eleven years before his
death, that Paul wrote this Epistle to the Philippians: He was Content to be
kept from partaking of the Joys of Heaven for Eleven years, that so he might do
Service for Christ on the Earth. It is only whilst we are Living, that we can
do any Service for Him. The Living, the Living shall Praise thee. One of the
Martyrs, the only thing that troubled him when he came to dye was this thought;
that now he should do no more Service for Christ: I am going (said he) where I
shall be always receiving Wages; but alas! I shall do no more Work for the
Lord. Some one may say, I am incapable of doing Service for Christ; I am an
inconsiderable Person, and have no great Talents to honor him with. I say,
There is not one amongst us all, but is capable of Serving Christ, if he has an
heart to Serve him. You may cause the works of your Civil Callings to be
Service for Christ, if you perform them, not merely to get a Livelihood for
your selves, but in Obedience to Christ, who has Commanded you to be diligent
therein. Yea, and you may in your Eating and Drinking serve Christ. A Christian
should Consider with himself, I will not eat and drink merely to satisfy my
natural Appetite, but that a Servant of Christ may be refreshed, and
strengthened for His Service. There is not the meanest Servant in a Family, but
may do Service for Christ. When he does what his Master Commands him, let him
remember that Christ has Commanded him to Obey his Master; and therefore do so
in Obedience to Christ. Let Servants remember, Ephesians. 6. 5. 6. Servants be
obedient to your Masters, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ. Not with
eye-service as men pleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart. Such Servants however Despicable in the world, are an
Honor to Christ, and Serve Him in thus serving their Masters. It was Luther's
saying, A poor Milk-maid Milking, if done in Faith, is a more glorious sight,
than Caesar or Alexander, in all their Conquests and Triumphs. Our Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping (as well as Working) will promote our Salvation, and add to
our Glory at the last day, if we have our eyes upon Christ in all that we do,
obeying Him therein.

Inf. 4. When Godly Friends and Near Relations are removed from us by Death, we
ought not to grieve Inordinately. The Consideration of their Gain, should
moderate our Sorrow. It may cause Joy in the midst of Sorrow. When Christ gave
his Disciples to understand that He was going from them to God in Heaven, they
were exceedingly troubled to think what a Loss they would sustain by His
absence from them; but he tells them that they should rejoice at the though it of
His Gain: Joh. 14. 28. If you loved me you would rejoice, because I go unto the
Father. I (says Christ) go where I shall be advanced to the highest degree of
Glory, where I shall sit down with my Father on His Throne: Love to Me should
cause you to rejoice in my Happiness. It is the nature of Love to rejoice in
the Good of the object beloved, as much (nay more) than in our own. So should
Love to our departed Friends, make us rejoice in the Happiness which they have
Gained. It is now a Sickly and a Dying Time among us: Many are Sick and Weak,
and some are fallen Asleep. Some among us have Buried their Infant Children:
Brethren, You that fear God, I will say this to Comfort you, There is no doubt
to be made of it, but that those Children are Happy; because of the Gracious
Covenant of God in which they were interested. Life is promised in the
Covenant; if then they not having Violated that Covenant, God takes from them a
Temporal Life, He gives them Eternal Life in a better World: And Christ has
said concerning the Infant Children of his People, Of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Some of us have been Bereaved of our Nearest and Dearest Relations. God
has taken from us the Desire of our Eyes. I have lately Buried several
Grandchildren, and a Daughter in Law, who was a very Virtuous Woman, an
extraordinary Blessing to the Family where God had set her. She has many near
Relations belonging to this Congregation, who cannot but be sensibly touched
with such a Stroke; but we should Consider that she is in the Paradise of God,
and would be loath to be here again. The though it of her Gain, should quiet our
minds in the multitude of our thoughts within us.

I had purposed to have insisted on a Use of Exhortation. But I shall not
enlarge.

O that every one of us might Live to Christ. We are under the greatest
Obligations to do so, that possibly can be It is said concerning Believers on
his Name, that he died for them all; that they which live should not henceforth
live to themselves, but unto Him which dyed for them, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Shall
Christ Die for us, and shall not we Live to Him? We owe Him who is our blessed
Redeemer, our Lives, our Bodies, our Souls, our All. If we had never so many
Lives, Christ deserves them all; nor can we spend them, waste them, loose them
better than in the Service of Christ, and in Glorifying His Name. A Martyr
said, If I had as many Lives as there are Hairs on my head, I would gladly
loose them all for Christ. And if we Live to Him, it will not be long before we
shall Live with Him. For He has said, Where I am, there also shall my Servant
be. When we depart out of this world, we shall be with Christ; and that is
infinitely better than to be in this World. The Good Lord hasten my being with
Him; and in the mean time help me to Live to Him. Amen O LORD.

Preached at Boston, November 22. 1713.
FINIS.

