An Act passed by the General Assembly of the Colony of New York the Fourth Day
of September, 1714. being the 13th year of the Reign of Queen Anne.
An Act for the Paying and Discharging the several Debts and Sums of Money,
claimed as Debts of this Colony, to the several Persons therein named; and to
make and enforce the Currency of Bills of Credit to the value of Twenty Seven
Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty Pounds, for that purpose. Also, To make void
all Claims and Demands made, or pretended to be due from this Colony before the
First Day of June, 1714. and to prevent this Colony from being in Debt for the
Future.
WHereas there are several Persons who claim Sums of Money as due to them from
this Colony, for Services formerly done, or Money and Effects advanced by them
for the necessary Service thereof, by directions from the former Governors of
this Colony, or those who have executed the Authority of the same, for many of
which Sums of Money, Warrants have been drawn by the said Governors, by and
with the Consent of the Council of this Colony, upon the Collector and Receiver
General, for the time being, payable out of such Fonds or Sums of Money as
have, from time to time, been raised and paid by the Subjects inhabiting this
Colony, for the Support of the Government of the same; which Warrants
ne^^rtheless have not been complied with, nor the Claimants paid, but great
part of the Fonds and Sums aforesaid Mis-applyed, and extravagantly expended by
some of the former Governors of this Colony, contrary to the true Intent for
which such Sums were raised; which Mis-application, Unjust and Extravagant
Expending of the Revenue given by the Loyal Subjects aforesaid, to Her Majesty,
and to Her Royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England, sufficient for the
Honorable as well as necessary Support of their Government here, ha^ in great
Measure sunk the Credit of the said Government, Discouraged and Disabled the
Subjects inhabiting therein, from raising such Supplies as they would otherwise
be inclinable to do, and has occasioned the Demands now made by most of the
Claimants aforesaid, for the Services done, and Sums of Money advanced by them,
which if not complied with, in some measure, will be the utter Rum and Undoing
of many of the said Claimants, and prove a great and irreparable Loss to most
of them. And although this Colony, in strict Justice, is in no manner of way
obliged to pay or discharge many of the said Claims. Having, from time to time,
provided Sums sufficient to have prevented most of the said Demands, had the
said Sums been duly applied; Yet in regard many of the Warrants drawn, as
aforesaid, have passed in the Nature of Bills of Credit, and many of Her
Majesty's Subjects would be great sufferers if not Relieved; Therefore in order
to Discharge the said Claims, Restore the public Credit, and fix it on such a
Foundation as will be most conducive to the service of Her Majesty, and Her
Royal Successors, as well as the good of Her Subjects inhabiting this Colony,
and to settle and quiet the Minds of the same, Bury all Strifes, Annimosities
and Divisions that might otherwise arise, for, about or concerning any of the
said Claims, as well as in tender Commiseration of the Condition of many of the
Claimants, who without an Act of General Assembly are wholly Remediless, Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted
by the Authority of the same, That the Sum of Twenty Seven Thousand six Hundred
and Eighty Pounds be by the Treasurer of this Colony, paid to the several
Persons hereafter (...) their Executors or Assigns, in such manner as is
hereafter expre^^ed. That is to say,

To Robert Walter, Esquire his Executors or Assigns the Sum of Two Hundred sixty
nine Pounds Eleven Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of three
Warrants, the first Dated the sixth Day of November, 1701. The second, the
14th. Day of April, 1702. drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, late Lieut. Governor of
this Colony, and payable out of the Revenue to the said Robert Walter, for
Firewood provided by him for His then Majesty's Fort at New York; And the
Third Dated the Twentieth Day of November, 1702. drawn by Capt. Nanfan,
aforesaid, and payable out of the Revenue aforesaid, to Barny Cosens, or Order,
for the said Nanfan's Expenses upon an Expedition to Albany, and Residence
there, in the Month of July, 17^^.

To Elias Peltreaux, his Executors or As^^^ns, the Sum of One Hundred Twenty
One Pounds Fourteen Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge
of two Warrants, the first dated the seventeenth Day of June, 1701. Drawn by
Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, and the second Dated the third Day of August, 1703.
Drawn by Edward Viscount Cornbury, late Governor of this Colony, both payable
out of the Revenue of the same, to the said Peltreau, for Candles provided by
him for the Fort at New York; Also, in full discharge for One Thousand nine
Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Candles provided by him for the Fort aforesaid.

To Lucretia Hegeman, the Sum of Twenty Five Pounds, in full Discharge of one
Warrant, dated the sixth Day of December, 1703. drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid and payable out of the Revenue aforesaid, to the said Hegeman, as a
Reward for three Years service and sufferings of her Husband during the last
War.

To Capt. Ebenezer Willson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Hundred
and two Pounds Seventeen Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for the full
Discharge of two Warrants, the one dated the sixteenth Day of June, 1702. drawn
by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, and payable to Rip van Dam or Order, for Three
Hundred Pounds advanced by him toward His Lordships Expedition to Albany, to
meet the five Nations of Indians there; and the other dated the Fifth Day of
August, 1703. drawn by Lord Cornbury aforesaid, and payable to Matthew Ling or
Order, for providing of Wine, Brandy and Sugar, etc. toward the said
Expedition.

To Capt. James Weemes, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Nine Pounds
Fourteen Shillings and seven Pence, in full Discharge of two Warrants drawn by
Lord Cornbury, the one Dated the Fifth Day of September, 1707. and payable to
the said Weemes or Order, for Money Disburs'd by him for Work done in Her
Majesty's Fort at Albany, The other Dated the seventh Day of September, 1708.
payable to the said Weemes for Money Disburs'd by him for mending the
Watercourse and Trenches in the said Fort.

To Capt Richard Willet, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Pounds,
for the full Discharge of one Warrant dated the seventeenth Day of June, 1701.
drawn by Capt. John Nanfan aforesaid, and payable to David Jamison or Order,
for his Sallary as Clerk of the Council.

To Mr. Phillip Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Seventy Five
Pounds, for the full Discharge of Three Warrants, Two of them dated the third
Day of July, 1705. And the Third, the Eighteenth Day of July. 1706. drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, and payable to Hilletje van Olinda, for her Sallary
as Interpretess to the Indians.

To Margret Stoaks, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty six Pounds
Fifteen Shillings and two Pence half Penny, in full Discharge for a Warrant
drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the third Day of August, 1703. and
payable out of the Revenue to the said Stoaks, for Provisions and other things
bought for his Lordships Expedition aforesaid.

To the Executor of John Cosaart or his Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred and One
Pounds Seven Shillings and Eight Pence, for the full Discharge of two Warrants,
the one drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, Dated the twenty first Day of
October, 1699. payable out of the Revenue to Robert Livingstone or Order, for
sundry Charges paid for entertaining the French Agents sent from Canada to the
Earl of Bellomont, the other drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, formerly Governor
of this Colony, Dated the seventh Day of August, 1700. payable to the said
Living stone or Order, for Charges expended and things provided for his
Lordships Expedition to the Indians at Onnondage.

To Deirk Benson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eight Pounds Fifteen
Shillings for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury
aforesaid, Dated the second Day of June, 1702. payable to Coll. Peter Shuyler,
or Order, in part of Three hundred ninety nine Pounds Fourteen Shillings and
two Pence, for Goods advanced by him and others, to the Indians of the five
Nations, in the Year 1688.

To Rachel Teller, Widow of William Teller, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum
of Ninety one Pounds Sixteen Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of
two Warrants, the one dated the twenty sixth Day of January, 1701. drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, the other drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid,
dated the third Day of August, 1703. both payable to William Teller or Order,
for the hire of his Sloop to Transport the said Capt. Nanfan, and the said Lord
Cornbury, on each of their Expeditions to the Five Nations of Indians, and
attending on them.

To the Executors of Capt. Johannes de Peyster, or their Assigns, the Sum of
One Hundred Fifty Five Pounds three Shillings and Four Pence, for the full
Discharge of Two Warrants, the one drawn by Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, dated the
eighth Day of January, 1701. payable to William Attwood, Esquire Chief Justice of
this Colony, or Order, for Sallary due to him from the Twenty Fifth Day of
December, 1700. to the twenty fifth Day of December, 1701. The other drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the twenty second Day of October, 1708. payable
to the said De Peyster, or Order, for providing Firewood for Her Majestys Fort.

To Capt. John D' Honeur, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Eight Pounds
Fifteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the second Day of February, 1702. and payable to the
said D' Honeur, or Order, for his Journey to Albany, and back again, being sent
Express by His Lordship, for the service of the Colony.

To William Bradford, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Thirty Pounds Eighteen Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for the full
Discharge of Nine Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, and one drawn by
the Lord Lovelace, when Governor of this Colony, payable to the said Bradford
or Order, for Sallary due to him as Printer, in the Years 1701, 1702, 1706,
1707, 1708. And one Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the first
Day of April, 1703. payable to Robert Walter or Order, for Firewood found and
provided by him for Her Majestys Carrison in New York and for the full
Discharge of an Account brought in by the said ^^adford, by which Account the
Sum of Twenty Five Pounds Five Shillings and ten Pence is claimed of this
Colony.

To Capt. Isaac De Reimer, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Eight Pounds Fifteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of three Warrants, two
of which are dated the second Day of April, 1702. and the third, the first Day
of May, 1702. drawn by Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, and made payable to himself,
for Sallary due to him, and payment for an Arrear of a Tax due to the said
Nanfan, and assigned by him to His then Majesty's Use.

To ^^^l Droillet, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds, for the
full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the
thirteenth Day of April, 1703. payable to Thomas Davis, or Order, for his
extraordinary Attendance at Jamaica, during the sitting of the General Assembly
in October and November, 1702.

To Coll. Peter Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Thousand
Five Hundred and Seventy Seven Pounds Seventeen Shillings and six Pence half
Penny, for the full Discharge of Thirty one Warrants, drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, one dated the first Day of November, 1704. Two dated the Fourteenth
Day of June, 1706. Five dated the Fourteenth Day of October, 1706. six dated
the seventeenth Day of July, 1707. Seven dated the 20th Day of November, 1707.
Ten dated the twenty sixth Day of October, 1708. All for providing Firewood
for the Garrisons of Albany and Schenectady; And Two drawn by Lieut. Governor
Ingoldesby, dated the twentieth Day of May 1709. and payable to the said Coll.
Peter Schuyler, or Order, for the providing Firewood for Her Majestys said
Garrisons, and in full Discharge for six more Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, one dated the Eighteenth Day of July, 1705. payable to the said
Schuyler for building a New Fort at Schenectady, one dated the second Day of
October, 1708. payable to the said Schuyler for his Journey to the Onnondage
Country in the Year 1703. One dated the twenty seventh Day of October, 1708.
payable to the said Schuyler for Candles provided by him for the Garrisons
aforesaid, One d^^ed the twenty ninth Day of October, 1708. payable to the said
Schuyler for his Journey to the Five Nations, and Expenses there; Two dated the
second Day of November 1708. payable to said Schuyler, the One for Out-Scouts
sent to the Lake, the other for building a Fort in the Mo^^ques Country.

To Margaret van Schaick, Executrix of Matthew Clarkeson, or Her Assigns, the
Sum of Twenty seven Pounds Twelve Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for the
full Discharge of Four Warrants One drawn by His Majesty's Council, Dated the
Fifth Day of May 1701. payable to Matthew Clarkeson, Esquire late Secretary of this
Colony, or Order, for Engrossing sixty eight Skins of Parchment; three drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the Eighth Day of May 1704. payable to the said
Clarkson for his Sallary, Paper, and other Incidents.

To Abraham Wendal, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds Five
Shillings, for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, dated the Fourth Day of May, 1704. and payable to William Hall, or
Order, for providing Firewood for Her Majesty's Garrison it Schenectady.

To Coll. Abraham De Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred
Sixty Eight Pounds Five Shillings and one Penny, for the full Discharge of Five
Warrants drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, one Dated the sixteenth Day of
January, 1699. another Dated the second Day of July, 1700. both payable to
William Bradford, for Sallary due to him, one dated the Fifteenth Day of Aug.
1699. payable to Robert Livingstone, sen. or Order, for Provisions delivered to
the Five Nations of Indians, another dated the twenty fourth Day of December,
1701. payable to the Lady Bellomont, for Sallary due to the late Earl of
Bellomont, as Governor of this Colony; Another dated the Thirteenth Day of
April, 1702. payable to the Lady Bellomont, for Money due to the aforesaid Earl
by Virtue of an Act of General Assembly of this Colony, entitled, An Act for
granting to His Majesty the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds.

To Mr. Bernardus Freeman, Minister, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One
Hundred Twenty Nine Pounds Ten Shillings, for the full Discharge of Eight
Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the twenty second Day of
March, 1702. payable to the said Freeman or Order, for his Sallary for
Instructing the Five Nations of Indians in the Christian Faith, and propagating
Religion amongst them.

To Capt. Lancaster Syms, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Hundred
Eighty Pounds and four Pence, for the full Discharge of six Warrants drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, One dated the twenty second Day of March, 1706. and
Five dated the twenty second Day of April, 1708. all payable to the said
Lancaster Syms or Order, for providing Firewood for Her Majesty's Fort at
New York.

To William Smith, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Forty
Nine Pounds nineteen Shillings and ten Pence, for the full Discharge of four
Warrants, One drawn by Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire formerly Governor of this
Colony, dated the fifteenth Day of October, 1696. payable to Gabriel Monvielle
or Order, for Money advanced by him to answer the Charge of an Expedition to
Albany, when the French and Indians made a Descent upon our Indian Country,
another drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, dated the Fifteenth Day of May, 1699.
payable to Gabriel Thomson, or Order, for his Sallary as Doorkeeper to the
Assembly, and for House-Rent, Firewood and Candles; another drawn and dated
(...) above, payable to Robert Livingstone, or Order, for providing of Two
Hundred and Fifty Stocks for Guns, to be given as a Present to the Indians;
another drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the third Day of August, 1703.
and payable to Robert Livingstone aforesaid, as one of the Executors of the
last Will of Gabriel Minvielle, deceased, for Strouds, Duffels, and other
things for Presents to the Indians, on His Excellency's Expedition to Albany in
the Year 1702.

To Henry Swift, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirteen Pounds Nine
Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, dated the twenty seventh Day of September, 1708. payable to the said
Swift, or Order, for Lodging and Entertaining the French Gentlemen that came
from Canada with a Flag of Truce, and for Entertaining an Indian Sachem and his
Company.

To Roger Mompesson, Esquire his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Thirteen Pounds Fi^teen Shillings and nine Pence, for the full Discharge of
Five Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Eleventh Day of
July, the thi^d Day of October, and the ninth Day of January 1706. the first
Day of July, and the thirtieth Day of September, 1708. payable to the said
Roger Mompesson, Esquire or Order, for Sallary due to him as Chief Justice of this
Colony; Also for the full Discharge of One Hundred and forty four Days Salary
due, over and above what was directed to be paid by the Warrants aforesaid.

To John Crook, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty One Pounds Eleven
Shillings and Eight Pence, for the full Discharge of Two Warrants, one drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, dated the Fourteenth Day of April, 1702. payable
to the said John Crook, or Order, for Turning of Powder, for Casks and Work
done in the Fort of New York, another drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the Fifth Day of July, 1705. payable to Coll. Caleb Heathcote, or Order, for
Firewood provided by him for Her Majesty's Fort at New York.

To May Bickley, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds,
for the full Discharge of six Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the Eleventh Day of July, the third Day of October, and the ninth Day of
January, 1706 the Fifteenth Day of April, the first Day of July, the thirtieth
Day of September, 1708. and one drawn by Lord Lovelace, late Governor of this
Colony, dated the thirteenth Day of January, 1708. all payable to the said May
Bickley, or Order, for his Sallary as Attorney General of this Colony; Also in
full Discharge of a Certificate under the Hand of George Clarke, Esquire for
Sallary due to the said Bickley, over and above the Warrants before mentioned,
till the twenty fifth Day of March, 1709.

To His Excellency Robert Hunter, Esquire Governor of this Colony, his Executors
or assigns, the Sum of Four Thousand Five Hundred and Ninety Pounds and Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of Eight Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, Five of which are Dated the Thirtieth Day of September, and two the
Fifteenth Day of December, 1708. payable to the said Lord Cornbury in part of
Sallary, as Governor of this Colony, endorsed by the Earl of Clarendon to His
Excellency; and one endorsed and drawn as above, Dated the Eleventh Day of
October, 1708. and payable to William van Allen, or Order, for attending his
Lordship with his Sloop to Albany; Also, for the full Discharge of Two Accounts
given in by His said Excellency, the one dated March the ninth Day, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twelve, the other the Eighteenth Day of May, 1714.
demanding Payment of this Colony for his Sallary, for providing Firewood and
Candles for the Garrisons of New York, Albany and Schenectady, for Repairs of
Her Majesty's Fortifications, for Journeys to Albany to meet the Five Nations,
for Expresses, and several other Disbursements for the public Service, as by
the said Two Accounts may more fully and at large appear.

To Charlotte Lady Lovelace, Her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
and Seventy Four Pounds One Shilling and Seven Pence, for the full Discharge of
Four Warrants drawn by Peter Schuyler, Esquire President of Her Majesty's Council,
Dated the Eighth Day of May, 1709. payable to the said Lady Lovelace for
necessary Expenses in relation to the Stores sent by Her Majesty for the Use of
the Garrisons of this Colony, for Incidents of the Government of New York
during his Lordship, Administration, for providing Firewood and Candles during
the said Time.

To Lewis Morris, Esquire Assignee of Robert Milward, Esquire second Judge of this
Colony, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, for the full Discharge of Five Warrants
drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the third day of October, the Ninth
day of January, 1706. the Fifteenth day of April, the first day of July, the
thirtieth day of September, 1708. payable to the said Robert Milward for his
Sallary as second Judge of this Colony; Also, for the full discharge of One
Hundred and Forty Four days Sallary, certifyed by George Clarke, Esquire Secretary
of this Colony, to be due to him for Sallary, over and above the said Warrants,
till the Eighteenth Day of May, 1709. and in full Discharge of an Account
offered by him for his said service, and his Sallary claimed therein from the
Eighteenth Day of May, 1700. until the Eigh^^enth Day of May, 1713.

To Rip van Dam, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Thirty Four Pounds One Shilling and Four Pence, for the full Discharge of Nine
Warrants, viz. Two drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the third Day of
August, 1703. payable to the said Van Dam or Order, for Wine, Brandy, Pipes,
Tobacco, and other things provided by him for his Lordships Expedition to
Albany and Presents to the Indians there, Three drawn by Capt. John Nanfan,
aforesaid, One dated the twenty seventh Day of October, 1701. payable to Jacob
Lucasse or Order, for his Journey with Capt. Bleaker to Onnondage; One dated
the fifteenth Day of August, 1699. payable to Robert Livingstone, or Order, for
sundrys delivered by him to the five Nations of Indians, One dated the first
Day of May, 1702. payable to David Provoost or Order, for the Use of himself
and the rest of the Commissioners of the public Accounts; Four more drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the seventeenth Day of October, 1706. and the
fifteenth Day of September, 1708. payable to Laurence Clasen, or Order, for his
Sallary as Interpreter to the five Nations of Indians.

To Adolphus Philipse, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Sixty Four
Pounds seventeen Shillings six Pence, for the full Discharge of Two Warrants
drawn by Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire formerly Governor of this Colony, dated the
twenty fifth Day of May, and the fifteenth Day of August, 1695. payable to
David Schuyler, for his pay as Lieutenant, and for a Journey to Canada.

To Robert Livingstone, sen. Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One
Hundred and seventy seven Pounds and eight Pence, for the full Discharge of six
Warrants, One drawn by the Earl of Bellomont aforesaid, dated the fifteenth Day
of May 1699. payable to the said Livingston or Order, for Money by him advanced
to the Officers and Soldiers Employed in the Expedition against the French in
the Year 1687. Four drawn by Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, One Dated the thirty
first Day of May, and Three the twenty first Day of October, 1699. another
drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, aforesaid, dated the third Day of August, 1700.
all payable to the said Livingstone or Order, for sundry Incidents and
Provisions delivered by him to the five Nations of Indians, and for sundry
disbursements for the use of the Fort at Albany, to the twenty Fifth Day of
March 1700.

To Anne Gravenraed, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Three Pounds
and Fifteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Thirtieth Day of September, 1708. payable to the
said Lord Cornbury, or Order, for part of His Quarters Sallary due the Twenty
Ninth Day of September, 1708*

To the Executors of the last Will of Derck van der Burgh, deceased, or their
assigns, the Sum of Four Hundred and seven Pounds five Shillings and Four Pence
half Penny, for the full Discharge of Nine Warrants, Four drawn by the Earl of
Bellomont, aforesaid, dated the third day of August, 1700. Four drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the seventeenth day of February 1703. All payable to
the said Derck van der Burgh, or Order, for Bricklayer-work done, and Materials
found and provided by him in and about the Buildings in Her Majesty's Fort at
New York; And one drawn by the said Lord Cornbury, dated the third day of
August, 1703. payable to van der Burgh, aforesaid, for his Sloop and Men's
attending His Lordship on his Expedition to Albany, for carrying of Stones for
the Building of Her Majesty's Fort Anne in New York, and for several other
services.

To Francis Win, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Ten Pounds Eighteen
Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the third day of April, 1704. payable to the said
Win, or Order, for Firewood by him provided for a Blockhouse and one Officer
at Albany.

To Ryer Schermerhoorn, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of seventeen Pounds
thirteen Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of Two Warrants, One
drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, Dated the Twelfth Day of November 1700. another
drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, dated the fourteenth Day of April, 1702. payable to
Ryer Schermerhorn, or Order, for Firewood provided by him for Her Majesty's
Garrison of Schenectady.

To Isaac Casperson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty one Pounds,
for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the the twenty sixth Day of April, 1704. payable to the said Casperson for
providing Firewood for a Blockhouse and Officer at Albany.

To Capt. Abraham Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Sixty Four
Pounds and one Shilling, for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Eleventh Day of May, 1704. payable to the said
Schuyler for the remaining pay of the Company of Scouts, with their proper
Officers.

To Lawrence Clawson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Nine Pounds Fourteen
Shillings and nine Pence, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Eleventh Day of October, 1708. payable to the
said Clawson for his services in the Indian Country.

To the Executors of the last Will of John Abeel, or their Assigns, the Sum of
Two Hundred Eighty One Pounds One Shilling and two Pence half Penny, for the
full Discharge of Eleven Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, One dated
the twenty second Day of April, 1703. payable to John Abeel, aforesaid, for
the Balance of One Thousand two Hundred and Twenty Four Pounds six Shillings
and four Pence, for which a Warrant Issued the twenty fifth Day of July, 1695.
One dated the Tenth Day of June, 1703. payable to Lawrence Clawson, Or Order,
for Journeys into the Mohaques Country and Onnondage; One dated the Fourth Day
of May, 1704. payable to John Abeel, or Order, for Waggon-hire, Iron-work,
Firewood, Sweeping Chimneys, Rum, Pork, etc. One dated the third Day of July,
1705. payable to the said Abeel or Order, for diverse expended by him on the
Frontiers of Albany; One dated the Thirteenth Day of October, 1705. payable to
Coll. Peter Schuyler, for Firewood provided by him for the Fort at Albany;
Four dated the Fourteenth Day of June, 1706. payable to the said Abeel, or
Order, for Repairing the Plat-Forms and Carriages of the Guns in Her Majesty's
Fort at Albany; One Dated and payable as next above, for Money and other.
Necessarys advanced and paid by him for Incidens of the Government; One dated
the Eleventh Day of October, 1708. payable to the said Abeel, or Order, for
Work done, and other Necessarys, for the Fort at Albany.

To Benjamin Fauniel, as Executor to the last Will of Ducan Campbell, deceased,
or his Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred and sixteen Pounds Eighteen Shillings
and One Farthing, for the full Discharge of six Warrants, Four of which were
drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, One dated the twenty sixth Day of June
1701. payale to Hendrick Hansen, or Order, for the Use of himself and Peter van
Brugh, for Firewood Provided for the Garrison at Albany; Two Dated the twenty
seventh Day of October, 1701. payable to David Schuyler for his Journey to
Onnondage, in June, 1701. and for sundry Expenses and Necessarys for the said
Journey, and for his Journey to Onnondage with Capt. Bleeker, by Order of the
Government; One Dated the Fourteenth Day of April, 1702. payable to Lawrence
Claweson for his Sallary as Interpreter to the Five Nations of Indians, and for
his Journeys to Oneyde and Onnondage; And two Drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, dated the seventeenth Day of May 1702. One payable to Cornelius
Schermerhoorn, or Order, for the passage of Soldiers to Albany, and other
Incidents, by Order of the Government, The other payable to William Hall, or
Order, for Firewood by him provided for Her Majesty's Fort of Schenectady.

To John van Nesse, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pounds Eleven
Shillings and three Pence, for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the thirteenth Day of May, 1704. payable to Coll.
Peter Schuyler, or Order, for the remaining part of the pay of the Company of
Fuzileers, with their proper Officers, posted at Albany, for the Defense of the
Frontiers in the Year 1703.

To Abraham Staats, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twe^^^ Three Pounds
Nineteen Shillings and Three Farthings, for the full D^^charge of one Warrant
drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, Dated the second Day of October, 1702.
payable to the said Staats, or Order, for the hire of his Sloop on his
Lordships Expedition to Albany.

To Mary Leaver, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Ten Pounds for the full
Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, Dated the twenty seventh
Day of April, 1702. payable to John Owen, or Order, for Work done by him in the
Fort at New York.

To Coll. Abraham de Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds Nine Shillings and Eleven Pence, for the full Discharge of three
Warrants, One drawn by His Majestys Council of this Colony, dated the Twenty
Ninth Day of April, 170^. payable to Cornelia de Peyster, or Order, on Account
of Jean le Chevalier, for his Work done in the Fort of New York; Two drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, dated the second Day of April, 1702. One payable to the said
De Peyster for Wine provided by him for said Nanfans Expedition to Albany,
Another payable to William Attwood, or Order, for a Quarter's Sallary due to
him.

To Thomas Davenport, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Two Pounds
six Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by the
Earl of Bellomont, Dated the second Day of January, 1700. payable to the said
Davenport, or Order, for the use of Thomas Ogden, for Freight of Stores of War
from the Kingdom of England to this Colony.

To Frederick Visher, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Seventy Five Pounds,
for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the third Day of August, 1703. payable to Nanning Harmense, or Order, for the
hire of his Sloop for his Lordships Expedition to Albany,

To Caleb Heathcote, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Fifty
Seven Pounds and Ten Shillings, for the full Discharge of Nine Warrants drawn
by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, One dated the eight Day of May, 1704. Five dated
the fifth Day of July, and three the thirteenth Day of October 1705. payable to
the said Heathcote for Firewood provided by him for Her Majesty's Fort at
New York.

To Cornelius De Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty One
Pounds Seventeen Shillings and Eight Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge
of three Warrants, One drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, dated the sixth Day of
November, 1700. payable to Deirk Wessels, or Order, for Nine Pounds Nineteen
Shillings and Nine Pence delivered by him to the five Nations of Indians, Two
drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Seventh Day of May, 1702. One
payable to Cornelius De Peyster for the use of H^rper Jacobs, for carrying of
Officers and Soldiers, Stores, Bedding and Clothing in his Sloop to Albany,
another payable to John Blecker, for Provisions and Presents to the Indians.

To Geertruyde van Cortlandt, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Thousand
Five Huudred and Sixty five Pounds One Shilling and Eleven Pence Farthing, for
the full Discharge of thirty Warrants, Ten of which drawn by Capt. Nanfan the
twenty second Day of December, 1701. payable to the said Gertruyde van
Cortland, or Order, for and on the Auditing of the Accounts of the public
Revenue, the Money having been advanced and paid to the Auditor by her deceased
Husband, Coll. Stephanus van Cortland; and Twenty of the said Warrants drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the sixth Day of November, 1703. Ten of them
payable to the said Cortland for Firewood provided by him for Her Majesty's
Fort at New York; Two of them payable as aforesaid, for sundry Gifts to the
Indians, and materials for Repairing the Barracks; Six of them payable as
aforesaid, for several Disbursements toward the New Buildings in Her Majesty's
Fort in New York, and for Materials and Beer, Two of them payable as aforesaid,
for Repairing the House of Coll. William Smith, for Lodging of the Soldiers
sent to this Co^ony, and for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by the
said Gertruyde van Cortland, by which account the Sum of Two Hundred and Eight
Pounds Eighteen Shillings and Two Pence three Farthings is claimed of this
Colony.

To Samuel Bayard, Esquire his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Seventy One Pounds
Two Shillings and Eleven Pence, for the full Discharge of three Warrants drawn
by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Eighteenth Day of February, 1702.
payable to the said Samuel Bayard, or Order, for Firewood found and provided
by him for Her Majesty's Fort in New York.

To Major Deirk Wessels, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Seventy One
Pounds Three Shillings and Four Pence, for the full Discharge of one Warrant
drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, dated the Fourteenth Day of October, 1689.
payable to the said Wessels, or Order, for sundry Necessarys delivered by him
to the Five Nations of Indians, and River Indians, and other Incidents to the
first Day of December, 1697.

To Nanning Harmense, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of sixty seven Pounds
Eight Shillings and eight Pence, for the full Discharge of Eight Warrants drawn
by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the twenty seventh Day of February, 1706.
payable to Nanning Harmense, or Order, for Sloop-hire on his Lordships
Expedition to Albany.

To Johannes Minderse, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Six Pounds Four
Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of one Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the seventeenth Day of October, 1706. payable to the
said Minderse for Iron and Work done for Her Majesty's Fort at Schenectady.

To Coll. Henry Beekman, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds six
Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury upon the Revenue, dated the Seventeenth Day of October, 1706 payable
to the said Beekman, or Order, for Freight of stores for the Fort at Albany,
and Money paid an Express sent by His Excellency thither in the Year 1705.

To Stephen De Lancey, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Thirty Pounds Five Shillings and one Penny Farthing, for the full Discharge of
Nine Warrants, Two drawn by Capt. John Nanfan, One Dated the twenty sixth Day
of June, 1701. another Dated the twenty seventh Day of April, 1702. payable to
Peter de Reimer, or Order, for making and mending Glass Windows in His
Majesty's Fort at New York; seven drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, One dated
the first Day of December, 1702. One dated the first Day of July, and One, the
twenty seventh Day of October, 1703. payable to Michael Hawdon, or Order, for
House-Rent, Fire and Candles for the House of Representatives, Two Dated the
twenty seventh Day of January, and the third Day of August, 1703. payable to
Stephen de Lancey, or Order, the first for Guns and Plains delivered the
Indians, The second for Rum, Pork, Indian-Blankets, Flints, Knives, and other
things for Presents for them; Two dated the second Day of June, (...). payable
to Coll. Peter Schuyler, or Order, for Goods advanced by him and others by his
Order, for the Service of the Crown.

To Major Myndert Schuyler, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Eleven Pounds
One Shilling and Eleven Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of three
Warrants, One drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, dated the second Day of October,
1700. payable to John Baptista van Eps, or Order, for the Interpreting for the
Five Nations of Indians at Albany, and for other public Services; Two drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, One dated the twenty seventh Day of October, 1701. payable
to Garret and Johannes Luykase, or Order, for their Journey to the Mohaques
Country, The other dated the fourteenth Day of April, 1702. payable to Thomas
Williams, Esquire for fetching back Monsieur Battle, a Frenchman who was going
to Canada without a Pass.

To John Baptista van Eps, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Ten Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, Dated the second Day of February, 1702. payable to the said Baptista
van Eps, or Order, in full for his Journey to Onnond^ge with Robert Livingston,
jun.

To John Bachand, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eighteen Pounds Five
Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of One Account, dated the
Fourteenth Day of January, 1712. The Total amount of said Account being Twenty
Nine Pounds.

To Capt. Roger Barton, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of
Eighteen Pounds Eight Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service
as Captain of a Company of Volunteers under the Command of Coll. Peter
Schuyler, on the Expedition against Canada, in the Year 1709. And to the
several Officers and Soldiers belonging to the Company then under his Command,
their Executors or Assigns, respectively, the Sum of One Hundred Forty One
Pounds Eleven Shillings, in such Proportions to each of the said Persons, their
Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by the Speaker of the
General Assembly of this Colony, and lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer of
the same.

To the Executors of Capt. George Lockhart, or their Assigns, the Sum of One
Hundred and Eleven Pounds Thirteen Shillings, being what remains due to him for
his service as Captain of a Troop on the Expedition to Albany, in the Years
1687. 1688. And to the several Officers and Soldiers then under his Command,
their Executors or Assigns, respectively, the Sum of Seven Hundred and
Seventeen Pounds Twelve Shillings and Two Pence three Farthings, in such
proportion to each of the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is
ascertained in a List signed by the speaker of the General Assembly of this
Colony, and Lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer of the same.

To Mary Tuder, Widow of Capt. John Tuder, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Twenty Nine Pounds Three Shillings and three Farthings, being what remains due
to her late Husband for his Service as Captain of a Company on the Expedition
to Albany, in the Years 1687. 1688. and to the several Officers and Soldiers
then under his Command, their Executors or Assigns, respectively, the Sum of
Eighty Three Pounds Eleven Shillings and three Pence Farthing, in such
Proportion to each of the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is
ascertained in a List signed by the Speaker of the General Assembly of this
Colony, and Lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer of the same.

To Coll. John Jackson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Two Pounds
Twelve Shillings Four Pence Three Farthings, being what remains due to him for
his service as Captain of a Company on the Expedition to Albany in the Years
1687. 1688. And to the several Officers and Soldiers then under his Command,
their Executors or Assigns, respectively, the Sum of One Hundred Twenty six
Pounds Eighteen Shillings and six Pence Farthing, in such Proportion to each of
the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List
signed by the Speaker of the General Assembly of this Colony, and Lodged in the
Hands of the Treasurer of the same.

To the Executors of Capt. Thomas Stillwell, or their Assigns, the Sum of Fifty
Five Pounds, being what remains due to him for his service as Captain of a
Company on the Expedition to Albany, in the Years 1687. and 1688. And to the
several Officers and Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of One Hundred
and Sixteen Pounds Twelve Shillings and six Pence, in such Proportion to each
of the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List
signed by the Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer
aforesaid.

To Capt. Thomas Higby, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Ninety Six Pounds
Three Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service as Captain of a
Company on the Frontiers, in the Year 1705. And to the several Officers and
Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of Two Hundred and Fifteen Pounds Two
Shillings and Ten Pence Three Farthings, in such Proportion to each of the said
Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by the
Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Capt. John D' Honeur, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eighteen Pounds
Eight Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service as Captain of a
Company on the Expedition against Canada; And to the several Officers and
Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of Sixty Seven Pounds Four Shillings
and Three Pence, to be paid in such Proportion to each of the said Persons,
their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by the Speaker
aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Lieutenant Daniel Sayre, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of seven Pounds
Fourteen Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service as Lieutenant
of the Company under the Command of Coll. Peter Schuyler, on the Expedition to
Canada in the Year 1709. And to the several Officers and Soldiers then under
the Command of the said Schuyler, belonging to the County of Suffolk, the Sum
of Two Hundred Forty One Pounds, Eighteen Shillings and Four Pence, to be paid
in such Proportion to each of the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as
is ascertained in a List signed by the Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the
Treasurer aforesaid.

To Capt. Wessel Ten Brook of Ulster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Sixteen Pounds six Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service as
Captain of a Company on the Expedition against Canada; and to the several
Officers and Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of One Hundred sixty
Eight Pounds Ten Shillings, To be paid in such Proportion to each of the said
Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by the
Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid,

To Capt. Wessel Ten Brook of Albany, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Eighteen Pounds Four Shillings, being what remains due to him for his Service
as Captain of a Company on the Expedition against Canada; and to the several
Officers and Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of One Hundred Seventy
Six Pounds One Shilling and Ten Pence, to be paid in such proportion to each of
the said Persons, their Executors or Assigns as is ascertained in a List signed
by the Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Captain Cornelius Willet his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eight Pounds
Eight Shillings, being what remains due to him for his Service as Captain of a
Company on the Expedition against Canada; And to the several Officers and
Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of One Hundred Seventy Four Pounds
Thirteen Shillings and Eight Pence, to be paid in such Proportion to each of
the said Persons, their Executors or assigns, as is ascertained in a List
signed by the Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Capt. Johannes Saunders Glen, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eighteen
Pounds Four Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service as Captain
of a Company on the Expedition against Canada, and to the several Officers and
Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of One Hundred Seventy Four Pounds
Seven Shillings, to be paid in such Proportion to each of the said Persons,
their Executors or assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by the Speaker,
aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Capt. John Adderly, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds
Twelve Shillings, being what remains due for his service as Captain of a
Company on the Expedition against Canada, in the Year 1709. And to the several
Officers and Soldiers then under his Command, the Sum of Sixty One Pounds
Twelve Shillings and Six Pence, to be paid in such Proportion to each of the
said Persons, their Executors or Assigns, as is ascertained in a List signed by
the Speaker aforesaid, and Lodged with the Treasurer aforesaid.

To Coll. Peter Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Five
Pounds Ten Shillings, being what remains due to him as Colonel of a Regiment on
the Expedition against Canada.

To Abraham Staats, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirteen Pounds Seven
Shillings and Nine Pence, being what remains due to him as a Surgeon on the
Expedition, in the Year 1709.

To Capt. Nicholas Tienoven, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen
Pounds, for the full Discharge of a Demand made by said Nicholas for Pyloting
the Hunter Galley on a Cruise against a French Privateer.

To Jacobus Wyngart, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Six Pounds Eleven
Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account, by which is
demanded the Sum of seven Pounds Ten Shillings for said Wyngart's Services as
an Out-scout.

To Mr. Bernardus Freeman, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred and
Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by
said Freeman, demanding the Sum of Two Hundred Twenty Five Pounds for
Instructing the Five Nations of Indians in the Christian Faith.

To John Le Chevalier, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Four Pounds
Five Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account by him
brought in for Joyners Work, demanding the Sum of Forty Eight Pounds Ten
Shillings and six Pence.

To Peter Garmoy, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Four Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by him, Demanding
the Sum of six Pounds for Carpenters Work in finishing the Fort at Wood Creek.

To Henry Swift, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty Pounds Three
Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by
him, Demanding the Sum of Thirty Four Pounds Ten Shillings, for Victualling of
Indians, and Provisions, when going to the Camp.

To Daniel Ebbets, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Twenty Four
Pounds Eleven Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account
brought in by him, Demading the Sum of One Hundred sixty six pounds Two
Shillings and One penny half penny, for Materials provided by him, and the
Wages of Masons and Laborers, for Repairing Her Majesty's Fort at New York.

To Rip van Dam, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and
Eighteen Pounds Fifteen Shillings, for the use of himself and the rest of the
Commissioners appointed for the stating of the public Accounts in the Years
1700. and 1701. and for the full Discharge for that Service, for which by an
account brought in by said van Dam the Sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds is
demanded of this Colony.

To Coll. Thomas Willet, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Forty
Seven Pounds Three Shillings and Six Pence, for the full Discharge of an
Account and Demand made by him of One Hundred sixty Eight Pounds Four
Shillings, for Two Hundred Ninety Seven Days Service performed by him in the
Expedition to Albany, from the fifth Day of October, 1687. to the twenty Eight
Day of July, 1688 as Major of the Troops on that Service.

To Robert Livingstone, sen^ his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Three Hundred
sixty Two Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of
an Account and Demand made by him of One Thousand Nine Hundred Seventy Three
Pounds Three Shillings and One Penny Three Farthings, of which the Sum of One
Thousand Four Hundred and Thirty Pounds was demanded for his Sallary as
Secretary of the Indian Affairs, The Sum of One Hundred and Fifteen Pounds Two
Shillings and Seven Pence for Goods taken from him by Order of Capt. Jacob
Leysler, and the Remainder for sundry Disbursements made by him for the use of
this Government.

To Capt. Phillip Schuyler, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Thirty Five
Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Eleven Pence, for the full Discharge of two
Accounts brought in by said Schuyler, demanding the Sum of Forty Pounds
Nineteen Shillings and three Pence, for Transporting of diverse Necessaries for
the Garrison of Schenectady, and diverse Disbursements made for the use of the
same.

To Arnout Viele, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of One Hundred and Eight
Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Eight Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of
one Account brought in by him, demanding the Sum of One Hundred Twenty Four
Pounds Seven Shillings and Eight Pence, for Services done by him, as
Commissioned Interpreter and Agent for the Government, to the Indians.

To Abraham Provoost, his Executors or assigns the Sum of Seventeen Pounds and
Four Pence half Penny, for the full discharge of an Account brought in by said
Provoost, demanding the Sum of Twenty Three Pounds and nine Shillings, for
Transporting Boards, Soldiers and Turff, by Order of the Government.

To Jacob Schermerhorne and Maria van Dyk, their Executors or assigns, each of
them the Sum of Seven Pounds thirteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of an
account brought in by him, by which is demanded the Sum of Twenty Pounds and
Eight Shillings, for Sixty Eight Days Service, as Surgeon to the Forces raised
in this Colony for the Expedition against Canada.

To Coll. Abraham de Peyster, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
Ninety Nine Pounds Nineteen Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of
an account brought in by him, in which is demanded the Sum of Two Hundred
Pounds for Money advanced by him for the beginning of the Fort at Albany.

To Herman Schuneman, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Pounds and Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an account brought in by him, demanding
the Sum of Three Pounds Eighteen Shillings for Fifty two Days service, over and
above the ninety Days fixed by an Act of General Assembly.

To Samuel Clowes, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds, for the
full Discharge of maintaining an Indian Interpreter, The other part of this
account for laying out Forts and Protracting a large Continent of Land being
disallowed.

To Johannes Minders, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings and Ten pence three Farthings, for the full Discharge of an Account
bought in by him, demanding the Sum of Four pounds six Shillings and nine
pence, for Iron and Work done for the use of the Fort at Schenectady.

To Abraham Staats, Surgeon, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen
pounds for the full Discharge of an account sent in by him, Certifyed by Coll.
Peter and John Schuyler, in which is demanded the Sum of Thirty Eight pounds
sixteen Shillings, for having served in the Station of Surgeon in the two
Companies of said Peter and John Schuyler.

To the Executor of William De Meyer, deceased, or his assigns, the Sum of
sixteen pounds seventeen Shillings and nine pence half penny, for the full
Discharge of an account brought in by him, by which is demanded the Sum of
Nineteen pounds six Shillings one penny, for a Journey to the Minissink and
Schawanonk Indians.

To Coll. Caleb Heathcote and Coll. Gerardus Beekman, their Executors or
Assigns, or either of them, the Sum of Eighty five Pounds five Shillings, being
what was demanded by them for Moneys expended for the public Credit and
service of this Colony.

To Deirk Valk, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pounds Four Shillings
Nine Pence, for his service as Store-keeper on the Expedition against Canada.

To Benjamin van de Water, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds,
for his services in the Year 1690. and 1691. on the Frontiers at Albany.

To Paul Droillet, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of seven Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand made by him of
Fifteen Pounds for several goods taken from him by Order of Capt. Leysler,
aforesaid, for the public Service of this Colony.

The Executors of Robert Saunders, or their Assigns, the Sum of Forty Three
Pounds Seven Shillings and Three Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account
and Demand made by him of Eighty six Pounds Fourteen Shillings and six Pence,
for three Journeys to Onnondage, and sundrys delivered to the Indians for the
public service.

To Ahasuerus Hendricks, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Seven
Pounds Two Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand made by him of Fifty Four Pounds Five Shillings, for Wine taken by him
by Order of Jacob Leysler, aforesaid, for the public Service of this Colony.

To the Midow Elizabeth Jourdain, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty
Five Pounds, for Lodging of Soldiers and entertaining the Gentlemen of Her
Majesty's Council when met at her House on the Affairs of the late Expedition
against Canada; a Claim of Thirty Four Pounds Four Shillings and Three Pence,
made by Her, over and above the Sum aforesaid, being due from the Mayor and
Aldermen of the City of New York, which demand the said Jourdain is not
debarred or precluded by this Act, from making of, or receiving from the said
Mayor and Aldermen at any time hereafter.

To Lieut. Henry Holland, Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Five Pounds,
in full payment for services done by him on the Frontiers at Albany.

To Charles Oliver, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds Tea
Shillings, in full payment for Firewood and Candle found by him for an Officer
at Albany.

To the Executors of John D' Brown, or their Assigns, the Sum of sixty Seven
Pounds three Shillings and One Penny, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand made by them of One Hundred thirty Four Pounds six Shillings and two
Pence, being for sundry Goods delivered by Order of Capt. Leysler, aforesaid,
for the public service of this Colony.

To Arthur Chandler, sen. and Arthur Chandler, jun. each of them, or each of
their Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Five Shillings, being what
remains due to them for their service on the late Expedition against Canada.

To John Willman, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Twelve
Shillings, being what remaind due to him for his Service on the late Expedition
against Canada.

To Daniel Hildreth, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Twelve
Shillings, being what remains due to him for his Service on the late Expedition
against Canada.

To James Harris, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Twelve
Shillings, being what remains due to him for his service on the late Expedition
against Canada.

To Isaac De Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Four Pounds Fifteen
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account and demand made by him of Nine
Pounds Ten Shillings and one Penny, being for sundry Goods delivered by him to
the Order of Capt. Leysler, aforesaid, for the public service of this Colony.

To Capt. Johannes Saunders Glen, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty
Five Pounds Eight Shillings and Eight Pence, for the full Discharge of one
Account brought in by him demanding the Sum of Forty Pounds Nine Shillings
Eleven Pence, for Money expended in Repairing the Fort at Schenectady.

To Coll. Peter Matthews, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Pounds for
the full Discharge of an Account, amounting to the Sum of Fifty Pound, Fourteen
Shillings, for the entertaining two French Officers, a Priest and an
Interpreter, at the house of John Collins, and paid for by said Matthews.

To Francis Win, his Executors or Assigns the Sum of six Pounds Three
Shillings four Pence half penny, for the full Discharge of an Account, by which
is claimed the Sum of seven pounds One shilling, for the passage of Forty seven
Men from Albany to New York.

To Cornelius and Martin van Alstein, their Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Twenty two Pounds, for the full Discharge for the Cutting and Carrying down the
Stream, in the County of Albany, six Hundred Stockadoes for the Fortification
of the City of New York.

To Jurian Claw, his Executors or Assigns, on the same Account of Stockadoes,
the Sum of Twenty two Pounds, for the full Discharge of the same.

To Coll. Peter Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fourteen Pound,
for the full Discharge of an Account, by which is demanded the Sum of sixteen
Pound, on account of Arrears due to him out of the several divisions of the
Additional Duty laid and made in the Year 1696.

To Major Myndert Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Three
Pounds Four Shillings and Ten Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of an
Account brought in by him, by which is claimed a Balance of sixty Pounds
Sixteen Shillings Ten Pence three Farthings, for Repairs of the Fort at Albany,
by sundry Persons, in October and November, 1711. The Fifty Three Pounds
abovesaid, being for the use of the sundry Persons employed in the said
Repairs, or their Executors or Assigns, who are to make Oath as in this Act is
afterward directed, and to the said Schuyler, the Sum of Seventy Pound
Nineteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of the Demand made by said Schuyler,
on the behalf of Fifty Persons employed in bringing down the Stores from the
Camp at Wood Creek.

To George Clarke, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred ninty
six Pounds Seventeen Shillings six Pence, the Sum of l. 25.12.6. being for the
full Discharge of Four Warrants, Two drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the thirtieth of September, 1708. and two by Lord Lovelace, dated the
thirteenth of January, in the same Year, payable to the said George Clarke, for
his Sallary as Clerk of the Council, and Secretary of this Colony; And the Sum
of Two Hundred seventy One Pounds Five Shillings, for the full Discharge of an
Account brought in by said Clarke, The Balance of which being Five Hundred
Twenty Two Pounds Eight Shillings, claimed by said Clarke for his Sallary as
Secretary and Clerk of the Council, and Incidents of his said Office,
engrossing Acts of Assembly, and Transcribing Minutes of Council.

To William Nicoll, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Four Hundred and
Fifty Pounds, for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by him, for his
Charge and Expenses when employed by this Colony to be an agent in the Court of
England.

To Lawrence Clawson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds
nineteen Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of an
Account brought in by him, demanding the Sum of Eighteen Pounds Five Shillings,
for his service in the Indian Country.

To Andrew Nack and Garret Roeloffe, the Sum of Eighteen Pounds Thirteen
Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Hundred thirty one Days pay, as
claimed by them in their Account.

To Barent Staats, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty six Pounds Four
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account brought in by said Staats for
One hundred thirty one Days service as aforesaid.

To Major John Schuyler, Hermanus Wendell and Lawrence Clause, their Executors
or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Two Pounds Seventeen Shillings and six Pence, for
their service in the Expedition against Canada, over and above the ninty Days
fixed by an Act of Assembly.

To Lieut. David Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns. the Sum of Twelve Pounds
Twelve Shillings, for the full Discharge and Payment of the said Schuyler, for
seventy one Days Service done by him, as aforesaid.

To the Executors of Gabriel Thompson, or their Assigns, the Sum of Sixteen
Pounds Twelve Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord
Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Fourteenth Day of April, 1702. payable to the
said Thompson for his Sallary, House Rent, Fire and Candles, during the sitting
of the General Assembly.

To the Executors of John De Peyster, or their Assigns, the Sum of Four Pence,
for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated
the twenty ninth Day of June, 1702. payable to the said De. Peyster, for a
Quarters Sallary as Surveyor of the Customs.

To Robert Crannel, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Twelve
Shillings six Pence, for the full Discharge of all Warrants yet unpaid, and
made payable to him, as Marshal of the Court of Admiralty, or Cock swain of
the Barges Crew.

To Rip van Dam, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Seven Pounds
Eighteen Shillings and one Penny half Penny, for the (...) Discharge of three
Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the twentieth Day of October,
1706. the eighteenth Day of October, 1706. and the nineteenth Day of October
1703. payable to Jacobus van Dyke, or Order, for his Sallary as Surgeon of Her
Majesty's Forces at Schenectady.

To Robert Livingstone, sen. his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty Seven
Pounds Ten Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by the Earl
of Bellomont the third Day of August, 1700. payable to the said Livingstone for
providing Four Hundred Wheel-Barrows.

To the Executors of John Abeel, or their Assigns, the Sum of Seven Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of One Warrant dated the twenty fourth Day of
October, 1704. payable to said Abeel or Order, for diverse Incidents found and
provided for the Garrisons at Albany.

To Henry van Dyke, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Two Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of five Warrants drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, two dated the eighteenth Day of July, and the eighteenth Day of
October, 1706. Three, the twenty first Day of October, 1708. payable to the
said Henry van Dyke, for his Sallary as Chyrurgeon to Her Majesty's Independent
Company of Fuzileers.

To Jacob Staats, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One hundred and Five
Pounds, for the full Discharge of seven Warrants, One drawn by the Earl of
Bellomont, dated the twenty third Day of October, One Thousand Seven Hundred,
and One by Capt. Nanfan dated the Nineteenth Day of February, 1701. Five drawn
by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, One dated the tenth Day of November, 1702. One
dated the nineteenth Day of October, 1703. One, the twentieth Day of October,
1704. One, the seventh Day of March, 1705. One, the eight Day of July, 1707.
All payable to the said Staats for his Sallary as Chyrurgeon attending Her
Majesty's established Companys at Albany.

To Coll. Abraham De Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Five
Pounds, for the full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury,
aforesaid, dated the first Day of May, 1702. payable to s^id De Peyster for One
Pipe of Wine given to the Soldiers, and two ^^^es of Wine and One Barrel of
Beer laid in by him against the ar^^^al of the said Lord Cornbury.

To Stephen De Lancey, his Execuors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty ^^^ee Pounds
six Shillings and Eight Pence, for the full Discharge of (...) Warrant drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, dated the twenty second Day of December, 1701. payable to
Gertruyd van Cortland, or Order, for Money paid by her late Husband Coll.
Cortland, for auditing the public Accounts of this Colony.

To Jacobus van Dyke, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Seven Pounds
Seven Shillings and Four Pence, for the full Discharge of two Warrants drawn by
Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the Fourteenth Day of October, 1708. payable to
the said van Dyke as Chyrurgeon of Her Majesty's Forces garrisoned in the Fort
of Schenectady.

To the Administrators of Peter de Lanoy, or their Assigns, the Sum of One
hundred and thirty Pounds three Shillings and Three Pence Three Farthings, for
the full Discharge of an Account amounting to the Sum of Five Hundred and
twenty Pounds Thirteen Shillings and Three Pence, claimed as a Balance due
from this Colony to said Delanoy.

To Mary Gansevoort, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Four Pounds
Seventeen Shillings and Seven Pence in full for 62 l. 14 s. 5 d. claimed by
said Gansevoort to be due to her Husband, Hermanus, Gansevoort, for which there
appears a Certificate under the Hand of Peter De Lanoy, deceased.

To Henry Swift, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Pounds Eleven
Shillings and six Pence three Farthings, for a Dinner provided by him on the
arrival of Lord Lovelace.

To Leonard Huygen de Kleyn, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds
Seventeen Shillings and Four Pence, for the full Discharge of an account,
whereby Fourteen Pounds Fourteen Shillings and one Penny half Penny is demanded
for Provisions and other things furnished by him for subsisting the Garrison at
Albany in the Years 1690. and 1691.

To Coll. Gerardus Beekman, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty One
Pounds Eleven Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account, wherein is
demanded the Sum of Seventy Pounds six Shillings and Eleven Pence, for what the
said Beekman advanced to sundry Persons sent by Capt. Leysler as Volunteers to
guard the Frontiers at Albany.

To Charlotte, Lady Lovelace, Her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred
Seventy Five Pounds, for the full Discharge of the remaining part of what was
Voted by the General Assembly of this Colony, in May, 1709.

To Jacob Phoenix, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds and seven
Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of an Account, by which is claimed the
Sum of Thirteen Pounds Fifteen Shillings, for Transporting of Forces and
Provisions for the security and subsistence of the Fronteer-Garrisons.

To the Executors of John Abeel, or their Assigns, the Sum of sixty one Pounds
three Shillings and Eleven Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account, wherein
is demanded the Sum of Eighty nine Pounds eleven Shillings and eleven Pence
half Penny, for sundry Disbursements for the service of this Colony, and for
Transporting of Captain Congrave and his Detachment to Albany, and back again,
and for a Voyage to Amboy.

To Capt. Wessel Ten Brook, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Seven
Pounds Thirteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of (...) Account sent in by
him, claiming the Sum of sixty Five Pounds Seventeen Shillings and Nine Pence,
for Lime provided by John Abeel, for Her Majesty's Fort at Albany.

To Capt. Phillip Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Pounds,
for Forty Barrels of Flower taken from him by Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler, in
the Year 1690.

To Barent Rynders, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty two Pounds Four
Shillings and Four Pence half Penny, for providing sundrys for His Majesty's
Fort, Boat, Yacht, by Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler, for which the Sum of Forty
Four Pounds Eight Shillings and Nine Pence, was claimed of this Colony.

To Anne Gravenraed, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty seven Pounds
three Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full Discharge and Payment for Goods
and Pork sold to Peter de Lanoy, as by an Account appears, the Balance of
which amounting to Fifty Four Pounds Seven Shillings and six Pence, was
demanded of this Colony.

To Nanning Harmense and Frederick Harmense, their Executors or Assigns, the
Sum of Twenty Pounds Five Shillings, for having Transported to and from Albany,
several Soldiers, Provisions and other Commoditys, in the Years 1689. and 1690.
by Order of Capt. Leysler.

To Johannes Cuyler, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eighty one Pounds
Seven Shillings and ten Pence three Farthings, for the full Discharge of an
Account brought in by the said Cuyler, by which is demanded the Sum of Ninty
Three Pounds and Five Pence, for Boards, Pease and sundry Merchandises and Sums
of Money advanced by Order, and for the service of the Government, from the
Year 1689. to the Year 1691.

To the Executor of William de Meyer, or his Assigns, the Sum of Forty Two
Pounds Two Shillings and two Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge and
Payment of an Account, by which is demanded the Sum of Forty Eight Pounds two
Shilling and six Pence, for Five Hundred and Fifty Tons of Lime delivered in
1703. for the Fort at Albany.

To Robert Livingston, jun. his Executors, or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty six
Pounds Ten Shillings, for his service as Store-keeper of Her Majesty's Garrison
at Albany.

To Peter van Brugh, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Pounds for
his Journey to Maryland, by Order of Capt. Leysler, then Commander in Chief, to
give an Account that the French and Indeans were gone to Attack some part of
that Government.

To Deborah Fielding, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Five Pounds,
for services done by her late Husband.

To Jacob Leysler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Thousand and Twenty
Five Pounds, for the full Discharge and Payment of a Demand made by said
Leysler, claiming of this Colony the Sum of Two Thousand seven Hundred Pounds
for diverse Disbursements and Supplys to Support the Government of this Colony,
and other Charges and Expenses disbursed by his Father in the late happy
Revolution.

To John Baptista van Eps, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixteen Pounds
Thirteen Shillings and Nine Pence, in full for his Service and Expenses in
quality of Interpreter to the Indians, and for his service when sent to Boston;
for all which services, by an Account given in, he has claimed the Sum of Fifty
Four Pounds Thirteen Shillings and six Pence.

To Robert Livingston, jun. his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Eight
Pounds and Three Pence Farthing, for his service in taking an Account of the
stone and Lime delivered for the building of the New-Fort at Albany, the
Carting, Masons, and other Laborers Work done, from the seventeenth Day of
August, 1702. to the first Day of October, 1703.

To Ariantje Wendell, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Three Pounds
Ten Shillings and four Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of an Account,
the Balance of which amounts to Forty seven Pounds and Nine Pence, claimed for
sundry Commoditys advanced by Order, and for the service of this Colony.

To Major Myndert Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
Forty Four Pounds Ten Shillings and Seven Pence half Penny, for the use of
several Persons, each of their Executors or Assigns, according to a List signed
by the Speaker of the General Assembly of this Colony, and Lodged in the Hands
of the Treasurer of the same, being for the full Discharge of two Accounts, the
Balance of one being Forty Pounds, claimed for building a New Blockhouse at
Albany, the other b^ing the Sum of One Hundred Forty six Pounds and ten Pence
half Penny, claimed for the Remainder of a Debt in the City and County of
Albany, for carrying up Provisions, etc. on the Expedition against Canada.

To Major Anthony Brockholts and Capt. Lancaster Simes, their Executors or
Assigns, the Sum of Ninety Pounds, for seventy two Barrels of Pork taken from
James Larkan and Major Brockholts, in the Year 1690. by Order of Capt. Leysler.

To Bartholomew Le Roux, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pounds Ten
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account amounting to Thirteen Pounds,
claimed for Pork and Beef taken from him in the Year 1690. and for making and
engraving a public Seal.

To Neeltje Ten Eyk, her Executors or Assigns the Sum of Nine Pounds Fifteen
Shillings, for the full payment of Freight for sundry Commoditys and Necessarys
carried to Albany in the Year 1702. for which was demanded the Sum of Eleven
Pounds three Shillings and three Pence.

To David Schuyler, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds Fifteen
Shillings, for the full Discharge of a demand made by him of the Sum of
Eighteen Pounds for his Journey to Onnondage, under the Command of Coll. Peter
Schuyler, when Chevalier Daw and four other French Men were taken.

To Henry Benslaer, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty Pounds
Eighteen Shillings and Eight Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account by him
brought in by which is claimed the Sum of Forty three Pounds Ten Shillings, for
Lime and Pitch-pine Boards.

To Johannes Hybon, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Pounds three
Shillings and Eleven Pence half Penny, in full for Materials found and provided
by him for the Repairs of Her Mafesty's Fort Anne, for which the Sum of Six
Pounds Seven Shillings and Eleven Pence was demanded by said Hybon.

To Jonas Dow, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty six Pounds Eight
Shillings, in full payment for Eight Hundred Thirty Two Tuns of Lime used
toward building Fort Anne in Albany.

To Capt. Ebenezer Willson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Seven
Pounds, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand made by him of Ninety
four Pounds for Timber, Stone, Bricks, Lime and Junk.

To Japie Hardenberg, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Five Pounds
Five Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account and demand made by him of
Fifty Pounds Ten Shillings, for sundrys said to be delivered to Capt. Jacob
Leysler for the public service.

To John Barborie, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty six Pounds three
Shillings and seven pence half penny, for the full Discharge o^ an Account and
demand made by him of Ninety two pounds seven Shillings and One penny, for
sundry Goods delivered Capt. Leysler, aforesaid, for the public service.

To the Executors of Miles Forster, or their Assigns, the Sum of Thirty Eight
pounds Fifteen Shillings and One penny half penny, for the full Discharge of an
Account and demand made by them of the Sum of seventy seven pounds Ten
Shillings and Three pence, for sundry Goods taken from said Forster by Order of
Leysler aforesaid.

To Coll. Jacob Rutsen, and Coll. Henry Beekman, their Executors or Assigns, in
trust for the Inhabitants of the County of Vlster, the Sum of Three Hundred and
Fifteen pounds Two Shillings, for the full Discharge of several Services done
by the Militar of the Country of Vlster, in marching to assist the Frontiers.

To Christopher Den, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred pounds,
for the full Discharge of an Account and demand made by him of the Sum of Two
Hundred Seventy Two Pounds Seventeen Shillings, for Materials provided, Work
done, and Wages paid to Workmen, for buildings and Repairs in and about the
Fort.

To Catherine Rutgress, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Nine Pounds seven
Shillings and ten Pence half Penny, for the full Discharge of an Account and
demand made by her of Thirty Seven Pounds Eleven Shillings six pence, for Beer
delivered to the Forces at Albany in the Years 1690. and 1691.

To Rip van Dam, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fight Pounds and six
pence three Farthings, for the full Discharge of an Account and demand made by
him of Nine Pounds Three Shillings and six pence, for his Disbursements on the
Expedition to Canada; And the Sum of Forty Pounds, for Pictures sold for the
use of the General Assembly of this Colony.

To Cornelius van der Hoof, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Sixteen Pounds
Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence, for the full Payment for a House of the said
van Hoofs, pulled down by Order of the Mayor and Aldermen at Albany, for the
better defense of that Frontier.

To George Clarke, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Three Pounds
two Shillings, being an Addition to what is before in this Act allowed the said
Clarke, being for Incidents of his Office, engrossing Acts of Assembly, and
Transcribing Minutes of Council.

To Johanna van Strye, Executrix of Barent Lewis, her Executors or Assigns, the
Sum of fifty six Pounds Eight Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account
and Demand made by Her of One Hundred Thirty six Pounds sixteen Shillings, for
the Service of said Barent Lewis, as Captain at Albany in the Years 1689. and
1690, and for sundry Goods delivered to Peter Bogardus for the public service.

To Cornelius Pos, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds Five
Shillings, for his being sent express from Albany to New York, and back again,
for the Public service.

To the Executors of Anna van Schaick, or their Assigns, the Sum of twenty
seven Pounds seven Shillings and six Pence, for the full Discharge of an
Account and Demand made by them of Fifty Four Pounds Fifteen Shillings, for
Goods taken in the Year 1690. by Order of Capt. Leysler, aforesaid, for the use
of the Government.

To the Executors of John Abeel, or their Assigns, the Sum of Thirteen Pounds
one Shilling and eight Pence Farthing, viz. The Sum of seven Pounds Eleven
Shillings and Two Pence Farthing, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand of sixteen Pounds nine Shillings and seven Pence half Penny, for Lime
delivered and Work done to the building of Her Majesty's Fort Anne at Albany;
and the Sum of Five pounds Ten Shillings and six pence, for the full Discharge
of an Account and Demand of Eleven pounds One Shilling, for sundrys delivered
to the French Messengers and their Servants, by order from the Commissioners of
the Indian Affairs.

To John Beekman, his Executors or Assigns the Sum of Two Pounds twelve
Shillings and six pence, for the passage and Provisions for seventeen Men from
New York to Esopus.

To Gabriel le Boteux, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred and
Four Pounds Nine Shillings and ten pence half penny, for the full Discharge of
an Account and Demand of Two Hundred and Eight Pounds Nineteen Shillings and
ten pence half penny, for sundry Goods taken from him by order of Jacob
Leysler, for the public service.

To Evert Bogardus, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Pounds Twelve
Shillings and six Pence, for the Passage of Twenty Men from New York to Esopus,

To Jannetje Adolph, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds Fifteen
Shillings and Five pence half penny, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand of twenty Five Pounds Ten Shillings and ten pence half penny, for sundry
Goods delivered by Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler, for the use of the Government.

To William Smith, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pence, for the
full Discharge of an Account and Demand of Three Hundred Fifty six Pound
seventeen Shillings and ten pence half penny, for Goods said to be taken from
Gabriel Minvielle, whilst Mr. Jacob Leysler had the Government in his Hands.

To Francis Win, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eight Pounds five
Shillings and four pence half penny, for the Passage of a Lieutenant and sixty
one Men of His Excellencys Company, from New York to Albany.

To John Parmyter, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Five Pounds, as
Messenger and Doorkeeper to the Council, from the thirteenth Day of June,
1710. to the thirteenth Day of June, 1713.

To Hendrick Bleeker, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds six
Shillings and six Pence, for his Service as Armourer of the Regiment commanded
by Coll. Peter Schuyler on the Expedition against Canada.

To Tryntie van Rologom, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pound Four
Shillings and Eight Pence Farthing, for Fifty seven Scipple of white Pease
delivered in the year 1691. for the Use of the Government.

To the Executors of Fredrick Phillipse, the Sum of Sixty Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings and Eleven Pence, for the full Discharge of the Sum of Seventy two
Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Eleven Pence, disbursed to Soldiers from the
County of West-Chester, that served on the Expedition to Albany in the Years
1687. and 1688.

To Coll. Jacobus Cortland, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixteen Pounds
Thirteen Shillings Eleven Pence Farthing, for the full Discharge of two
Warrants, one drawn by the Earl of Bellomont, dated the sixth Day of May, 1700.
payable to Johan Saunders Glen, or Order, for Repairing Barracks in the
Garrison at Schenectady, one Drawn by His Majesty's Council, dated the second
Day of May, 1701. payable to Capt. James Weems, or Order, for Candles and other
things provided by him for Her Majesty's Fort at Albany.

To Benjamin Ask, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Seven Pounds, for the
full Discharge of One Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, dated the
sixth Day of January, 1703. payable to Benjamin Ask, or Order, for Wine
provided by him, during his said Lordships Expedition to Albany.

To the Executors of Fredrik Phillipse, or their Assigns, the Sum of One
Hundred Seventy Eight Pounds, Seven Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full
Discharge of an Account and Demand of Five Hundred Thirty Five Pound, Three
Shillings and Three Pence half Penny, for sundry goods delivered by the Order
of Capt. Jacob Leysler, for the use of this Collony.

To Mary Sinclair, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Four Pounds One
Shilling Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand of Eight
Pounds Three Shillings and six Pence, for Goods delivered by the Order of Capt.
Leysler, aforesaid, for the Use of this Colony.

To Garret Viele, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum Forty Four Pounds One
Shilling and Six Pence, for his services on the Island Nassaw in getting
together and bringing the Indians to New York, that went thence on the
Expedition against Canada.

To Doctor Thomas Brain, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty Three
pounds Three Shillings Four pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand of Forty Nine pounds Fifteen Shillings, for quartering and Medicines for
Sick Men, on their return from the Expedition against Canada.

To Stephen De Lancey, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty pounds five
Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand of Eighty pounds Ten
Shillings, for Twenty one Cask of powder taken from him by Order of Capt. Jacob
Leysler, aforesaid, for the Use of the Government.

To William Apple, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Sixty pounds, for the
payment for one House pulled down by Order of the Mayor and Aldermen of Albany,
to render more easy the Defense of that Fronteer.

To James Harding, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eight pounds Fifteen
Shillings, for the full payment of him for his Transportting the Long Island
Forces over the Ferry.

To Anthony Pintard, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Eight Pounds
Fifteen Shillings, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand of One
Hundred Twenty One Pounds Four Shillings, for Beef and Pork, taken from him by
Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler, aforesaid.

To Roeloffe Kierstead, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Pounds Ten
Shillings, for Curing of a Soldier whose Feet were frozen.

To James Marlin, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Five Pounds, for
Payment for Twenty Barrels of Pork, taken by Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler,
aforesaid.

To Harbert Jacobse, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds seventeen
Shillings Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand of Eleven
Pound Fifteen Shillings and six Pence, for Passages of Soldiers and Freight of
Goods and Provisions to Albany in the Year 1690.

To Sarah Gravenraed, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds
Seventeen Shillings and Nine Pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand of Thirty One Pounds Fifteen Shillings and six pence, for goods
delivered by Order of Capt. Jacob Leysler, aforesaid.

To Johannis Hybon and Company, Carpenters, employed in Repairing the Fort, the
Sum of Forty Two Pounds two Shillings and six Pence, viz. To each of the said
Carpenter, each of their Executors or Assigns in such proportions as is
ascertained by a List signed by the Speaker of the General Assembly of this
Colony, and Lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer of the same.

To Susannah Boudinot, her Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pounds Three
Shillings seven pence, for the full Discharge of an Account and Demand made of
Twelve Pounds Seven Shillings and two pence, for Goods delivered by Order of
Capt. Jacob Leysler, aforesaid.

To Doctor John Garrean, his Executors or Assigns the Sum of six Pounds, for
his service as Surgeon on Board a ship Commanded by Coll. William Peartree, in
June, 1705.

To Jacob Vischer, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Four Pounds Nine
shillings and Eight pence Farthing, for the full Discharge of an Account and
Demand of Five pounds two shillings six pence, for Freight of Bails of Bedding
and Soldiers Clothes, and passages of Capt. D' Honeur and Capt. Fletcher
Matthews from York to Albany.

To Johannis van Allen, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three pounds
Eighteen Shillings and Nine pence, for his service in assisting Capt. Johannis
van Brugh to carry the Battoes to Albany.

To Coll. Richard Ingoldsby, his Executors or Assigns the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds, for his good service in the late Expedition against Canada.

To Roger Mompesson, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred
Pounds for Extraordinary services done and performed by him as Chief Justice in
Long-Issand, and elsewhere.

To Claa^e Ripse van Dam, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Eighteen Pounds
Twelve Shillings and Nine Pence, in full Discharge of an Account, by which is
Claimed Twenty One Pounds six Shillings, for Wheat, Pease and Tobacco delivered
by him to the Forces at Albany in the Year 1690.

To the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of James De Bois, the Sum of Four
Pounds Nine Shillings and Two Pence Farthing, in full Discharge of a Claim, by
which is demanded Eight Pounds Eighteen Shillings and four pence three
Farthings, for Lead delivered by him to the Expedition to Albany in the Year,
1690. as appears by a Certificate of Peter De Lanoy.

To Andries Colysman, Administrator of Barent Colysman, his Executors or
Assigns, the Sum of Nine Pounds One Shilling and one penny half penny, in full
Discharge of an Account, by which is claimed Eighteen Pounds two Shillings and
three pence, for Boards, Pease and Beer Delivered by the said Barent Colysman
for the Forces at Albany, in the Year 1690.

To Capt. Thomas Clarke, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Two Pounds Ten
Shillings, in full Discharge of what is claimed by him of this Colony upon his
own proper account.

To Mangle Janse Roll, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twelve Pounds three
Shillings and Nine pence, in full Discharge of an Account, wherein is claimed
Fifty pounds three Shillings and six pence, for sundry Services, from the year
1689. to the Year 1706.

To Barent Staats, Administrator of Jochem Staats, his Executors or Assigns,
the Sum of One Hundred Forty three Pounds Nine Shillings and Eleven pence Three
Farthings, in full Discharge of an Account and demand made by him of Three
Hundred and Ninty Pounds sixteen Shillings and Eight pence half penny, for the
service of the said Jochem Staats, as Captain at Albany, in the Year 1689. and
1690. and for sundry Goods delivered by him for the Public service.

To Martin Clock, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty six Pounds Two
Shillings, in full Discharge of an Account and Demand made by him of Fifty two
Pounds Four Shillings, claimed for Balance due to him as Lieutenant under
Capt. Barent Lewis at Albany, in the year 1689. and 1690.

To the Executors of Helena Rombouts, deceased, the Sum of Nine Pounds Eighteen
Shillings and Eight pence half penny, in full Discharge of an Account, whereby
is claimed Forty Nine Pounds Fourteen Shillings and Three Pence, for sundries
for the use of the Public, in the Years 1689, and 1690.

To Jurian Nagle, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of six Pence, in full
Discharge of an Account, whereby is claimed by him Thirty six Pounds Fifteen
Shillings and six pence, for his service as a Soldier at New York and Albany in
the Years 1689. 1690.

To William Sell, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds in full
Discharge of three warrants drawn by the Lord Cornbury, One dated the Ninth Day
of January, 1706 and two dated the Thirtieth Day of September, and the
thirteenth Day of January, 1708. for his service as Land and Tide-Waiter.

To Adolph Phillipse, Esquire Attorney to Godfrey Dellius his Executors or Assigns,
for the use of the said Dellius, the Sum of Thirty Pounds, in full Discharge of
a Claim and demand of sixty Pounds, for One Years Sallary to the said Godfrey
Dellius, for Instructing the Five Nations of Inatans in the Christian Faith,
and propagating Religion among them.

To the Executors or Administrators of John Lidius, late Minister of Albany, or
their Assigns, the Sum of Two Hundred and Twenty Five Pounds, for the full
Discharge of Five Warrants dr^wn by the Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, one dated the
twenty sixth Day of November, 1702. another dated the sixth Day of November,
1704. and three dated the twenty sixth Day of August, 1708. payable to the said
Lidius, or Order, for Instructing the Five Nations of Indians in the Christian
faith, and propagating Religion amongst them.

To Capt. Ebenezer Willson, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Three Pounds
Ten Shillings, in full Discharge of a Warrant from the Commissioners appointed
to purchase Prov^sions and other Necessaries for the Expedition to Reduce
Canada, dated the Eight of September, 1711. being for a Barrel of Pork
delivered to the said Commissioners, for the said Expedition.

To Coll. Gerardus Beekman, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds in full of a claim by him made for Officiating as President of Her
Majesty's Council of this Colony, from the Tenth Day of April, 1710. to the
Fourteenth Day of June, following, and for his Administration of the Government
during that time.

To Robert Walter, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty seven Pounds
Two Shillings and Five Pence Farthing, in full Discharge of a Warrant Drawn by
Capt. John Nanfan, aforesaid, dated the Fifteenth Day of April, 1702. payable
the said Robert Walter, or Order, for his Sallary as one of the second Justices
of the supreme Court of this Colony.

To Rip van D^m and Adolph Philipse, Esquire their Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Forty six Pounds Eighteen Shillings and Eleven Pence half Penny, in full
Discharge of the Balance of an Account for sundry Disbursements made by them
in Repairing the Buildings and Barrachs in Fort Anne in this City, and making
the same fit for the Reception both for the late Lord Lovelace and His
Excellencey Robert Hunter, Esquire

To Abraham D' Peyster, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fourteen
Pounds Two Shillings and six pence three Farthings, in full Discharge of a
Warrant drawn by Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, the Seventeenth of June, 1702.
payable to the said Abraham D' Peyster, or Order, for Wine on the Coronation
Day.

To the said Abraham D' Peyster, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Twenty
Seven Pounds two Shillings and Five pence Farthing, in full Discharge of a
Warrant drawn by Capt. Nanfan, aforesaid, dated the Fifteenth Day of April,
1702 payable to the said Abraham D' Peyster, or Order, for his Sallary as one
of the second Justices of the supreme Court of this Colony.

To the said Abraham D' Peyster, his Executors or assigns the Sum of Five
Pounds, in full Discharge of a Warrant drawn by Lord Cornbury, aforesaid, the
third Day of July, 1705. payable to Daniel Toy, or Order for his Sallary as
Land and Tide Waiter.

To Francis Jones, his Executors or assigns, the Sum of Thirty Pounds Seven
Shillings and six pence, in full Discharge of an Account and demand of One
Hundred and Forty Pounds and Ten Shillings, for the hire of his Ship and sundry
Provisions, Employed in a Cruise after a Privateer upon this Coast, in the year
1705.

To Rip van Dam, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Forty Seven Pounds
Eighteen Shillings and Six Pence half Penny, in full Discharge of an Account
and Demand of Ninty Five Pounds Seventeen Shillings and One Penny, for the hire
of his Sloop Sea Flower, and sundry Provisions, Employed in a Cruise after a
Privateer upon this Coast, in the Year 1705.

To William Smith, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Thirty six Pounds Nine
Shillings and Four Pence Farthing, in full Discharge of an Account and Demand
of One Hundred and Nine Pounds Eight Shillings and one penny, for the hire of
the Brigantine Return, and sundry Provisions, Employed in a Cruise after
Privateer upon this Coast, in the Year 1705. And the Sum of Thirty One Pound
six Shillings and Eight pence, in full Discharge of an Account and Demand of
Ninety Four Pound, for the hire of the Sloop Peartree, Employed in the Cruise
before mentioned.

To the Executors or Administrators of Phillip Rokeby, deceased, the Sum of
Nine Pounds, in full Discharge of an Account and Demand of Ninety Days service
by him, as Surgeon General in the First Expedition against Canada.

All which Sums of Money aforesaid, shall Immediately after the Treasurer of
this Colony has received the Bills of Credit, hereafter mentioned, be paid to
the Persons aforesaid, their Executors or Assigns demanding the same, by the
said Treasurer, without any Needless Delay, on any pretense whatsoever.

And for the better and more effectual preventing of the paying over again, or
undue payment of all or any of the Sums above mentioned, or of any part
thereof, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly, and it is
hereby enacted by the authority of the same, That all and every the Persons
above named, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall on the Receiving
of the several and respective Sums, directed to be paid them, as aforesaid,
sign a Receipt on the Back or some part of each Account or Warrant, in these
Words,

I A. B. Do acknowledge to have received full Satisfaction for the Money
claimed by the above or within Warrant or Account, as Witness my Hand.

In which Receipt shall be mentioned the Circumstance of the Receiver, whether
Executor, Administrator or Assign; which Warrants and Accounts, shall by the
Claimers of any of the Sums of Money aforesaid, their Executors or Assigns, be
delivered to the Treasurer of this Colony, and by him Carefully Numbered and
kept, and Accounts of them, and the Dates, together with the Sums demanded and
paid, shall be fairly entered in a Book for that purpose, by the said Treasurer,
to be kept; to each of which, the Persons Claiming or Receiving the Money,
shall sign a Receipt, as aforesaid, and shall also make Oath in the Following
Form,

I A. B. have not, directly nor Indirectly, formerly received the Sum now to be
paid me, or any part thereof, or any Consideration of any kind whatsoever, for
the services mentioned in the Warrant or Account, for which I am directed to be
paid by the General Assembly of this Colony, nor any other Person for me, or by
my Privity, Consent or procurement; nor do I know or believe that the said Sum,
or any part thereof, or any Consideration has been paid or given to any Person
whatsoever for the Services therein mentioned. So help me God.

Which Oath the Treasurer of this Colony for the time being, is empowered,
appointed, directed and required to Admininister to the several Persons
aforesaid, or to their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, before their
Receiving of any of the said Sums, as aforesaid, and not otherwise to pay any
of the Sums mentioned aforesaid, or any part thereof, to any Person demanding
the same, and refusing to sign Receipts and make Oath as before directed.

Provided always, That whereas several Persons directed to be paid by this Act,
live remote from the Habitation of the Treasurer aforesaid, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person directed by this Act to be
paid any Sum of Money, every such Person may take the Oath before mentioned,
before any of her Majesty's Justices of the Peace in this Colony, who are
hereby empowered to administer the same, which being certified by the Oath of
any one Witness present at the time of administering the said Oath, and hearing
the same, unto the Treasurer aforesaid, the said Treasurer shall pay any of the
Sums aforesaid, and take receipts as aforesaid.

Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, That his Excellency Robert Hunter, Esquire
shall only declare upon his Word and Honor, That the Sum mentioned in this Act
is truly, and bona fide, due to him, and that he has not received any payment
or Consideration for the same, or any part thereof.

And it is further Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly, and
by the authority of the same, That any Person or Persons having given in any
Warrant or Account to the Commissioners for stating of the Public Accounts, or
to the Clerk of the General Assembly, and shall hereafter make Oath before the
Treasurer of this Colony, or any Justice of the Peace, as by this Act is before
directed, and it shall afterward happen to be made appear, either by the Oath
of Two Credible Witnesses, or by Receipts or Accounts under the Hand of the
Person or Persons assigning, transferring, delivering over, bringing, se^ding
or claiming of the Sums mentioned in such Warrant or Account, or any part
thereof, or by the Minutes of Council, or Books or Accounts of or belonging to
the Auditor, deputy Auditor, Receiver or Receivers General, or Commissioner or
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Receiver General, or by any manner of
ways or means whatsoever, that the Sums mentioned in such Warrants or Accounts,
and claimed as a Debt due from this Colony, have been paid and discharged,
either in Whole or in part, before such Claims made, or Oath taken, every such
Person who has assigned, transferred, delivered over, brought or sent any such
Warrant or Account, or claimed the Sum mentioned by the said Account, to be
due, or any part thereof, or receiving any of the Sums appointed by this Act to
be paid, as aforesaid, or any part thereof, and knowing that the said Sum, or
any part thereof, has been paid before; shall Repay the Sum received, and be
fined to Her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors in the full Sum so claimed, to
be applied toward the support of the Government of this Colony.

And for the better, and more Speedy and effectual Payment of the several Sums
before mentioned, and other the Sums appointed to be paid by this Act, Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That Bills of Credit, to the Value of
Twenty Seven Thousand six Hundred and Eighty Pounds, shall be Printed, That is
to say.

Five Hundred sixty Eight Bills of Twenty five Oun^^s of Plate, or Ten Pound
Value each.

Five Hundred Bills of Eighteen Ounces Fifteen Penny Weight of Plate, or Seven
Pound Ten Shillings Value each.

Seven Hundred Bills of Fifteen Ounces of Plate, or Six Pound Value each.

Seven Hundred and Twenty Bills of Twelve Ounces Ten Penny Weight of Plate, or
Five Pounds Value each.

One Thousand Bills of Seven Ounces Ten Penny Weight, of Plate, or Three Pounds
Value each.

Eight Hundred Bills of six Ounces Five Penny Weight of Plate, or Two Pounds
Ten Shillings Value each.

Eight Hundred Bills of Three Ounces Fifteen Penny Weight of Plate, or One
Pound Ten Shillings Value each.

Ten Hundred Bills of Three Ounces two Penny Weight and Twelve Grains of Plate,
or One Pound Five Shillings each.

Twelve Hundred Bills of One Ounce Seventeen Penny Weight and Twelve Grains of
Plate, or Fifteen Shillings Value each.

Fifteen Hundred Bills of One Ounce Ten Penny Weight of Plate, or Twelve
Shillings Value each.

Two Thousand Bills of Fifteen Penny Weight of Plate, or six Shillings Value
each.

Four Thousand Bills of Seven Penny Weight and Twelve Grains of Plate, or Three
Shillings Value each.

Upon Which Bills shall be impressed on the left Side of the said Bills, about
the middle of the side, the Arms of the City of New York; and said Bills shall
be in the Form Following, viz.

THis Indented Bill of -- Ounces of Plate or -- due from the Colony of
New York, to the Possessor thereof, shall be in Value equal to Money, and shall
be accepted accordingly by the Treasurer of this Colony for the time being in
all publik Payments and for any Fond at any time in the Treasury. Dated in
New York the First Day of July, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen, by
Order of the Governor, Council and General Assembly.

Which Bills shall be signed and Numbered by Robert Walter, Esquire Robert Lurting,
Esquire David Provoost, Esquire and John Cruger, Esquire or any three of them; and in case
of the Death of any the said Persons, the said Bills shall be signed and
Numbered by the Major part of the Persons above mentioned, then alive

Which Bills of Credit to be made and Issued by Virtue of this Act, shall be
and Continue current for and during the space and time of Twenty One Years, and
shall be received and paid for the same Value, and equal to the current Coin
passing in this Colony, for Goods or any other thing bought and sold by all
Persons whatsoever, residing and passing through this Colony, according to
their Rates; and the Tender of the said Bills for payment or discharging of any
Debt or Debts, Bargain, Sale of Lands or other things, Bonds, Mortgages,
Specialties and Contracts whatsoever, shall be as effectual in the Law, to all
Intents and purposes, as if the current Silver Coin of this Colony had been
offered and tendered for the Discharge of the same, or any part thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, Creditor or Creditors, Obligee or Obligees, and party or partys to any
Contract, Covenant, Bargain or Agreement whatsoever, already made, or hereafter
to be made at any time during the said Twenty One Years, shall, upon tender of
all or any their Debts, Dues and Demands Whatsoever, or any part of them, in
the Bills of Credit made current by this Act, refuse to accept or receive the
said Bills of Credit in discharge of the said Debts, Dues or Demands, or any
part of them, according to their Values and Rates, he, she or they so refusing
to accept the said Bills of Credit, in discharge as aforesaid, shall loose the
said Debt or Debts, Sum or Sums of Money, or such part of the same so refused,
and they and every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators shall forever be Barred from bringing his, her or their Action
for the Recovery of the said Debt or Debts, Sum or Sums of Money so refused, as
aforesaid, and the Defendant may plead this Act in Bar to any Action or Actions
that shall be so Commenced.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whatsoever, within this Colony, shall, during the said Twenty One
Years, offer to Sell or expose to Sale any Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements whatsoever, and deny or refuse to Sell, or ask a greater Value for
the same, unless payment be made in current Silver Money, Gold, Plate, Dollars,
or other specie whatsoever, and not in said Bills of Credit (whereby the Credit
of the said Bills may be Impaired) then and in such case the Person so exposing
to Sale, and refusing as aforesaid, shall, if the Goods or Chattels exposed to
sale, be under the Value of Five Pounds, forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings for
each offense, to be Recovered before any Justice of the Peace within this
Colony, upon the Oath of any two Witnesses; and if the Value of the Goods or
Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above Five Pounds, and under Fifty Pounds, the
Exposor to Sale shall Forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds; and if the Goods or
Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above the Value Fifty Pounds, and under One
Hundred Pounds, the Exposer to sale shall of Forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds; and
if the Value of the Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above One Hundred
Pounds Value the Exposer to Sale shall Forfeit Fifty Pounds, to be recovered by
Action of Debt in any Court of Record within this Colony, with Costs of Suit;
The first four Forfeitures to the use of any Person that shall sue for the
same, the other three Forfeitures, the one half thereof to the use of such
Persons as shall sue for and Prosecute the same to effect, the other half to
the use of the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to be applied toward the
Support of the Government of this Colony, any Law, Custom or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Persons appointed for
the signing of the said Bills of Credit, shall take an Oath before any one
Justice of the Peace of this Colony, for the true signing and Delivering of all
the said Bills of Credit, and no more than the Number mentioned in this Act, to
the Treasurer of this Colony, according to the true intent and Meaning of this
Present Act.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Quantity of Plate that
each Bill shall be current for, and the Value of the same, be printed on the
Top of each Bill.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Robert Walter, John Cruger,
Robert Lurting, and David Provoost, Esqrs. appointed hereby to sign the Bills
of Credit made current by this Act, shall for such their Service have paid unto
each of them, or each of their Executors or Assigns, by the Treasurer
aforesaid, in Bills of Credit made current by this Act, the Sum of Fifty Pounds
as a Reward for their trouble in signing and Numbering the Bills aforesaid.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall presume to Counterfeit any of the said Bills of Credit, he,
she or they being convicted thereof, shall incur the Pains and Penalties of
Felony, without Benefit of Clergy, and shall suffer accordingly.

And that the said Bills of Credit may be Truly and Bona fide, sunk, as the
Fond arising by Virtue of an Act, entitled, An Act for laying an Excise on all
strong Liquors retailed in this Colony, is paid unto the Treasurer of this
Colony for the time being,

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the authority of the same, That Robert Walter, John Cruger, David
Provoost and Robert Lurting aforesaid, or the Major part of them living, or
that shall be living, shall twice yearly and every Year, viz. on the First Day
of June, and on the first Day of December, Audit the Accounts of the Money
received by Virtue of the Act aforesaid, and shall within one Week there-after
affix Advertisements in the most publik Places of the City of New York, seting
forth what Quantity of Money has been received, and is in the Treasurers Hands,
by Virtue of the Act aforesaid, which Money shall by the Treasurer aforesaid,
be given in Exchange for Bills of Credit made current by this Act, to any
Person or Persons bringing in the same; and the said Bills of Credit shall, on
or before the Expiration of one Month after the time of such Audit, be sunk and
destroyed in presence of Robert Walter, Robert Lurting, John Cruger, David
Provoost, or the Major part of them then alive, appointed by this Act to audit
the Accounts of the said Treasurer, having first compared the said Bills of
Credit, with their Counter parts, and entered into a Book to be kept for that
purpose, the Number and Value of each Bill of Credit so Sunk and destroyed. But
if it so happen that all or any part of the Sums arising by virtue of the Act
aforesaid, shall be paid unto the Treasurer of this Colony in Bills of Credit
aforesaid, That then and in such Case the said Bills shall be Sunk in manner
aforesaid immediately after the said Account of the Treasurer is Audited, and
Public Notice shall be given of the Value of the Bills so Sunk and destroyed,
as also of the Quantity of Money in his Hands, if any be, within the time
before prescribed.

It is also Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer shall
receive no other Bills of Credit for the Fonds arising by Virtue of the Act
before mentioned, than those made Current by this Act, until all the said Bills
shall be Sunk, any thing to the contrary in this or in any other Act
notwithstanding.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the now Treasurer of this
Colony, shall within one Month after the Publication of this Act, take the
following Oath, viz.

I A. B. appointed Treasurer of the Colony of New York, will faithfully and
truly Discharge the Trust Reposed in me as Treasurer of the same; I will not
Issue, or cause to be Issued or paid, any Money that now is or may hereafter
come into my Hands, as Treasurer aforesaid, otherwise than is or shall be
directed by an Act or Acts of the General Assembly of this Colony; and I will
keep true and faithful Accounts of all the Money or Effects that has been, is,
or may come unto my Hands, or be Issued or paid by Virtue of any such Acts,
with the times of my receiving and paying the same. So help we GOD.

And in case of the Death or Removal of the now Treasurer of this Colony, the
Treasurer for the time being, to be nominated and appointed by the General
Assembly of this Colony, shall upon his taking upon himself the Office of
Treasurer aforesaid, take the Oath before mentioned, to be administered by any
one of Her Majesty's Council, or any Justice of the Peace in this Colony, who
are hereby empowered, directed, appointed and required to do the same; and any
Treasurer Neglecting or refusing to take such Oath, shall be disabled from
Executing that Trust; and any of Her Majesty's Council or Justices of the Peace
refusing to administer the said Oath when by the Person appointed Treasurer of
this Colony, required to do the same, shall for every such Refusal Forfeit the
Sum of Five Pounds, to be recovered by the said Person appointed Treasurer; or
any other Person that will sue for the same in any Court of Record within this
Colony, where in there shall be no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law, or any
more than one Imparlance; and the said Treasurer shall notwithstanding execute
the said Office of Treasurer; any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And each of the Auditors, appointed by this Act, to Audit and Examine the
Accounts of the said Treasurer, with Relation to the Money received by Virtue
of the Act aforesaid, entitled, An Act for laying an Excise on all strong
Liquors Retailed within this Colony, and to see, compare and sink the Bills of
Credit, as by this Act is directed, shall take the Following Oath, viz.

I A. B. appointed to Audit and Examine the Accounts of the Treasurer of this
Colony, will truly, faithfully and Impartially Examine and Audit the said
Accounts, and compare and sink the said Bills of Credit, as directed in an Act,
entitled, An Act for the Paying and Discharging the several Debts and Sums of
Money claimed as Debts of this Colony, to the several Persons therein Named,
and to make and enforce the Currency of Bills of Credit to the Value of Twenty
Seven Thousand six Hundred and Eighty Pounds, for that purpose; Also, to make
void all Claims and Demands made or pretended to be due from this Colony before
the first Day of June, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Fourteen, and to prevent this Colony from being in Debt for the future; and
will truly and faithfully do and perform, according to my best Skill and
Ability, every thing directed and appointed by the before mentioned Act, for
me, as Auditor, to do and perform. So help me GOD.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That any Person or
Persons who shall neglect or refuse to Demand of the Treasurer aforesaid, the
Sum or Sums of Money appointed by this Act to be paid to him, her or them, and
to take the Oath appointed by this Act to be taken by the Claimers or Receivers
of the Sum or Sums of Money so demanded or received, within Twelve Months after
Her Majesty's Royal assent to this Act is signified in this Colony, every such
Person so neglecting or refusing, shall forever thereafter be precluded and
debarred from receiving any of the said Sums appointed by this Act to be paid
them.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Persons before
Named, appointed to Audit and Examine the Accounts of the Treasurer, as
aforesaid, shall for such Examination and Auditing receive the Sum of Forty
Shillings each Time of their Examining and Auditing such Accounts, to be paid
by the said Treasurer out of the Fond arising and accruing by Virtue of the Act
aforesaid, entitled, An Act for laying an Excise on all strong Liquors
Retailed within this Colony.

And if it shall so happen that after the time of twelve Months after her
Majesty's Royal Assent to this Act is signified in this Colony there be any
Bills in the hands of the Treasurer of this Colony, not Demanded within the
Twelve Months, as before directed, such Bills are, by the Auditors and
Treasurer, hereby directed to be first Sunk, and an Account of the Sums
mentioned in the said Bills, and the Numbers of them, together with the Names
of the Persons Neglecting or refusing to Claim the Sums of Money appointed to
be paid by this Act, fairly entredin a Book to be kept for that purpose.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer of
this Colony, for the time being, shall keep an exact Account of the particular
Sum and Sums of Money paid by Virtue of, and according to the Directions in
this Act, with Receipts or Discharges from the Person or Persons, their
Executors or Assigns, to whom the said Sums are payable, at any time to be
produced by him, for View and Examination of the Governor, Council and General
Assembly of this Colony, or either of them, on Penalty of making Good and
refunding any Sum or Sums of Money which shall not be so Vouched and
Discharged, according to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

And whereas sufficient Notice has been given, so that all Persons having any
Claim upon this Colony, might have brought in their said Claims, It is
therefore Enacted by the Governor Council and General Assembly, and by the
authority of the same, That the Sums paid by Virtue of this Act, shall be
taken, deemed, esteemed and accounted to be an absolute, full and entire
Satisfaction for all the Claims made, and Debts said to be due from this
Colony, and the Persons bringing, claiming or demanding the same, their heirs,
executors or Administrators shall forever be precluded and debarred from
claiming, demanding or Receiving any other Payment, Acknowledgment or Reward
for the said Claims, or any part thereof, than what is before mentioned and
appointed by this Act; and all Persons whatsoever are by this Act forever
Precluded and Debarred from pretending or making any Claim for the payment for
any service or Services, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Effects, done, advanced
or expanded by them, or any of them, their or either of their Predecessors,
Constituents or Imployers, or by any Person or Persons whatsoever, for the use
of this Colony, at any time before the first Day of June, in the present Year
of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted, That neither this Act, nor
any part thereof, shall be construed to Debar any Person or Persons, having a
Right to the same, from claiming and Receiving from the Receiver General of
this Colony, by Virtue of a Warrant drawn by the Governor in Council, their
part, share and proportion of the Sum of Two Thousand Eight Hundred Pounds,
raised by an Act of Assembly of this Colony, for and toward the support of the
Government of the same.

And provided also, That neither this Act, nor any part thereof, shall be
construed to Bar the Chief Justice that now, is or any Member or Officer of the
General Assembly that now is, or that heretofore has been, from Claiming or
Demanding the allaries, Fees or Rewards due to them, as Members or Officers of
the said General Assembly.

And be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and General Assembly of this
Colony, and by the authority of the same, That all Moneys whatsoever that shall
for the future be ra^^ed by Act or Acts of General Assembly of this Colony, and
directed by the said Act or Acts to be Lodged in the Hands of the Treasurer of
the same, shall not, on any pretense whatsoever, be disposed of, but by Virtue
and Direction of the said ^ct or Acts, or of an Act or Acts of General Assembly
for that purpose to be made; and all Moneys whatsoever raised or accruing by
Virtue of any Act or Acts of General Assembly of this Colony, made or to be
made for and toward the support of the Government of this Colony, and by the
said Act or Acts appointed and directed to be lodged in the Hands of the
Receiver General, ^or the time being, appointed or to be appointed by Her
Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, shall be Issued by Warrants signed by the
Governor or Commander in Chief, for the time being, in Council, by and with
the consent of the greater part of the Council then present.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer of this
Colony, for the Time being, shall pay in the Bills of Credit, made current by
this Act, unto each of the Persons hereafter Named, the several Sums of Money
hereafter expressed, That is to say,

To Capt. Samuel Mulford, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Seven
Pounds Ten Shillings, for his Service in the General Assembly of this Colony.

To William Nicol, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Ninety one Pounds,
for his service in the General Assembly of this Colony.

To Coll. John Jackson Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Coll. Thomas Willet, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Cornelius Sebering, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Cornelius van Brunt, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Capt. John Stillwell, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Abraham Lakerman, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty One
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Cornelius Hearing, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Leonard Lewis, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty One Pounds
Ter Shillings, for his service as aforesaid.

To Coll. Henry Beekman, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Three
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Coll. Jacob Rutsen, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Three,
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Henry Renslaer, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Four Pounds,
for his service as aforesaid.

To Major Myndert Schuyler, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Capt. Peter van Brugh, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as a^oresaid.

To Robert Livingston, jun. Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Stephen De Lancey, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Two
Pounds, for his service as aforeseaid.

To Coll. Jacobus van Cortland, Esquire his Excutors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty
Two Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Samuel Bayard, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Two Pounds,
for his service as aforesaid.

To Capt. Lawrance Read, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty Two
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Coll. William Willet, Esquire his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Capt. Joseph Drake, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of sixty six Pounds,
for his service as aforesaid.

To Coll. Lewis Morris, Esquire his Executors or Assigns the Sum of Ninety One
Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Cornelius Pos, Doorkeeper of the General Assembly, his Executors or
Assigns, the Sum of Twenty Seven Pounds, for his service as aforesaid.

To Robert Crannel, Sergeant at Arms, his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of
Fifteen Pounds, for his service in attending upon the General Assembly of this
Colony.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Sum of Ninety Pounds,
in Bills of Credit, aforesaid, be paid by the Treasurer of this Colony, for
printing the said Bills of Credit.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
none of the Bills of Credit intended to be made current by this Act, shall be
signed or pass current within this Colony, before this Act, as also an Act,
entitled, An Act for laying an Excise on all strong Liquors Retailed in this
Colony, Published the fifteenth Day of October, 1713. be and are past Her
Majesty's Royal Assent, and said Assent be first signified within this Colony,
any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

At the Court at St. James's the 17 th. Day of June, 1715. PRESENT The Kings
Most Excellent Majesty.
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, Lord Chancellor, Lord President, Lord
Chamberlain, Duke of Montross, Duke of Roxborow, Duke of Kent, Lord Great
Chamberlain, Marquess of Dorchester, Marquess of Annandale, Earl of Dorset,
Earl of Manchester, Earl of Carlisle, Earl of Cholmondley, Earl of Laudon, Earl
of Islay, Earl of Vxbridge, Earl of Ayelsford, Viscount Townshend, Lord
Coningsby, Mr. Comptroller Mr. Secretary Stanhope, Sr. Richard Anslow, Mr.
Wallpole, Mr. Earl,
WHereas by Commission under the Great Seal of England, the Governor, Council
and Assembly of his Majesty's Province of New York in America, are Authorized
and Empowered to make, constitute and ordain Laws, Statutes and Ordinances for
the Public Peace, Welfare and good Government of the said Province. Which
Laws Statutes and Ordinances are to be as near as conveniently may be agreeable
to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and to be Transmitted to his Majesty
for his Royal Approbation or Disallowance of them. And whereas in Pursuance of
the said Powers two Laws, past in the General Assembly of the said Province,
have been Transmitted from thence, the Titles thereof are as follows, viz.

An Act for laying on Excise on all strong Liquors Retailed in this Colony.

An Act for the Paying and Discharging the several Debts and Sums of Money
claimed as Debts of this Colony, to the several Persons therein Named, and to
make and enforce the Currency of Bills of Credit to the Value of Twenty Seven
Thousand six Hundred and Eighty Pounds, for that purpose; Also, to make void
all Claims and Demands made or pretended to be due from this Colony before the
first Day of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen, and to prevent this
Colony from being in Debt for the future.

WHich said Laws having been Perused and well Considered by the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, and by them presented to this Board,
with their Humble Opinion, That the same be Confirmed, as being of Service to
the Inhabitants of the said Province, His Majesty this Day taking the same into
consideration is Graciously Pleased, with the Advice of his Privy Council, to
Declare His Approbation of the said Laws. And Pursuant to His Majestys Royal
Pleasure thereupon, the said Laws are hereby Confirmed, Finally Enacted, and
Ratified accordingly.

Ja. Vernon.

At a Council held at Fort GEORGE in New York this 3d Day of October, 1715.
Present His Excellency Robert Hunter, Esquire etc.
Coll. D' Peyster, Esqrs Capt. Walter, Esqrs Rip van Dam, Esqrs Mr. Barborie
Esqrs. Mr. Phillipse, Esqrs.
HIS Excellency Communicated to this Board, His Majesty's Order in Council, of
the 17 th Day of June last, Signifying his Majesty's Approbation of two Acts of
Assembly, past in this Province: The one Entitled,

An Act for laying an Excise on all strong Liqours Retailed in this Colony.

The other Entitled,

An Act for he Paying and Discharging the several Debts and Sums of Money (...)
as Debts of this Colony, to the several Persons therein Name^, and to make and
enforce the Currency of Bills of Credit to the Value of Twenty Seven Thousand
Six Hundred and Eighty Pounds; Also to make void all Cla^^^ and Demands made or
pretended to be due from this Colony before the first Day of June, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Fourteen, and to prevent this Colony from being in Debt for
the future.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Board, That his Excellency do Publish
the same at the City Hall. And his Excellency and Council went accordingly to
Publish the same.

Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty for
the Province of New York, 1715.


