A LETTER, From One in BOSTON, To his Friend in the Country. In Answer to a
Letter directed to John Burril, Esqr. Speaker to the House of Representatives,
for the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

Printed in the Year 1714.

SIR,
UPON your so earnestly repeating your Desire to me, to give you my Thoughts,
or the Thoughts of the Gentlemen of this Town, relating to the Bank of Credit
Projected; and to a Letter directed to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives against it, and the Objections made against it with no common
Applause, cried up by the Court Interest as Unanswerable; though I readily
acknowledge my self as unfit a Person, as you could have Writ to about it,
being not concerned with the Gentlemen in the Projection, and but little
conversant with them, and in that I pretend to little or no acquaintance in
State Affairs, or in Trade; yet when I sat my self down to Read that Letters,
it appeared to me so trifling, and below the Character of the Gentleman that
Subscribed it; that it confirmed me in my thoughts that the Cause was not so
good, as some Others he has pleaded, and invited me in a few Remarks to comply
with your Request.

I frankly acknowledge, that I have been sometime of the Opinion, that a Bank
of Credit, well Founded and well Regulated, would be of the greatest Advantage
imaginable to this Country; and therefore it was a real pleasure to me, when I
first understood that a Number of Valuable Gentlemen were Concerting proper
measures to accomplish so desirable an end. But I must confess my self to have
been at a Loss when they had given the finishing stroke to their first Scheme,
wherein I apprehend they had left the foundation too fluctuating and changeable
for a Land Bank, and that, though the Possessor of the Bills Emitted, had good
Security, yet it seemed to me that they had not secured it well against one
another, but had left it too precarious and dependent on the Caprice of every
Accident, and the Probity and Justice of they knew not who, which might come
after them, yet I am very ready to excuse them that they did not arrive to the
best method in their first Essay; but since this great Mistake is Corrected in
their last Model, viz. by every ones Mortgaging a Real Estate in proportion to
the Interest he is to have in the Bank, and so to abide during its Continuance;
hereby there is suitable provision made not only for the Credit of their Bills
and Notes, but a sufficient Obligation upon them to do Justice to each other,
and to every man that shall be concerned with them, in case the Bank or
Partnership shall come to an end; which the Author of the Letter himself allows
to be good; which in my Opinion before was not: All that I have to do is to
blow off the Cloud of Dust and Smoke, which the Author of the Letter has
covered the Bank with; that when it comes to stand in its native light, we may
be the better able to pass a Judgment upon it; and that I may have the
advantage of standing on my own ground, (and be freed from the encumbrance of
making good any of his) it will not be improper to tell you, how far I can
agree with the Author of that Letter, viz. That the People as to their Trade
and Business, cannot well carry on their necessary Affairs much longer, without
a further Supply of Money, or Bills of Credit, page 30. But there is a
necessity of supplying the People with a further convenient quantity of Bills
of Credit, page 26. The Question then is, Whether the Public shall Emit these
Bills of Credit; or whether it had not better be done by a Company of men in
the nature of a Private Bank of Credit. I agree with the Author also in this,
That I am not a-against a Bank of Credit in general, were it well founded, well
regulated, page 26. I leave out the words (by the Government,) because the
Consideration, whether by the Government, or otherwise comes under the
foregoing Quaery; so that the Question here is, Whether or no this Projection
for a Bank of Credit be well Founded, well Limited, and Regulated? And here I
cannot avoid doing the Gentlemen that Justice to say what some of their Number
have informed me, namely that when they first waited on his Excellency with
their first Scheme, they were desired to leave the Limitation to the General
Court, that it was a proper Compliment to pay them, to desire them to set the
Sum, which was one reason why there was no Limitation; but this by the way.

We agree thirdly, That the Projection of a Bank of Credit, very much imports
the Prerogative of the Crown, the Constitution and Laws of the Province, the
Estates and Liberties of the People; and that not only for the present, but
Succeeding Generations, page 4. For I take it, that the word import when so
used, generally means to be of advantage; however to deal fairly, it shall be
the question, Whether it imports to their advantage or disadvantage, and which
does most of all import them, the Public or the Private Bank? I agree with him
also, That it behooves the Government and General Assembly of the Province, and
really concerns every man, that has any Interest in the Country, with great
application to enquire into, and seriously consider the Nature and Consequences
of this Bank or Partnership, page 4. And so Sir, I am sufficiently warranted to
make my Enquiry, and endeavor to set things in a true light; but to find these
things wherein we agree to confusedly ^umbled together as they are in Mr.
Attorneys Letter, that they might appear a sort of dark Arguments against a
Bank of Credit, is such a fine Amusement to the Ignorant and Injudicious
Reader, and such an odd way of reasoning, that we could have expected it from
none, but he that had lost his own eyes, or thought every body else was blind.
And to be plain, when I heard of such a Letter published in Mr. Attorneys Name,
I expected to find the strongest Arguments, and the fairest Pleadings that
could be, against the Private Bank of Credit, from a Gentleman of so bright
Parts, and so Learned in the Law, as is his general Character: Yet I must
assure you, that I had not read over the first page, before I had altered my
mind, and received this settled Idea of the whole Piece; that I should find
nothing in it but Evasions, Doublings and Misrepresentations, and some few
amusements; for I was astonished to see so fair (not to say false) a light
given to the Order of the Governor and Council, which being Public, every one
has the opportunity to see and judge of the fallacy. He tells us, page 3. That
the Projectors were directed to proceed no further in the Affair, till the next
Sessions of the General Assembly; notwithstanding all which (I am loath to say
in contempt of it) the persons concerned are openly carrying on their Bank with
utmost Vigor and Expedition. How could he Sir, so openly give us this wrong
Account of the matter? My News-Letter Printed by Authority, August 23. tells
me, that upon Reading, etc. Ordered, That the Projectors or Undertakers of any
such Bank, do not proceed to Print the Scheme, or put the same on Public
Record, Make or Emit any of their Notes or Bills, until they have laid their
Proposals before the General Assembly of this Her Majesty's Province, who are
always ready to Encourage and Countenance any Proposals, etc. I. A. Secr. Which
Order, as it was far from forbidding their proceeding any further in that
Affair; as to the digesting their thoughts upon it, and filling up their
Number, etc. but rather supposed they ought to wade through all the
difficulties, and bring their Scheme to its perfection, that it might be fit to
lay before the General Assembly; so was it, as I have been well informed, in
every Article complied with, in Duty to the Government; and even to this day
have neither Printed their Scheme, Put it on Public Record, Made, nor Emitted
any of their Notes or Bills; so that really Sir, what has been done by the
Projectors, will not bear so much, as a, notwithstanding, much less, a, loath to
say in contempt. Indeed, I have heard it whispered, that they have thought the
Order very hard, in that they were denied the benefit of the Press, and the
benefit of Public Records, which I shall leave: And now Sir, after so plain,
and publicly known, a false Comment, upon the Order of the Governor and
Council, and the Actions of the Projectors in the very Entrance of the Letter;
what can be looked for, but Arguments of the same Kidney through the whole: And I
Confess when I had Read the Letter out, I should verily have thought it had
been Calculated to Lull the Government into a profound Sleep, if I had not
remembered that he said page 5. his design was to Awaken it; so easily do we
mistake things till we are informed better. But not to give you or my self any
further trouble about the design of it, believing it is not laid so deep, but
your penetration without being put to the Wreck will fathom it. I Return to the
first Enquiry, since it is agreed there is a necessity of a certain number of
Bills of Credit, or Notes to be Emitted, as a Medium in Trade, viz. Who shall
Emit these Bills? Had the Government of the Country best take it on themselves?
or would it not be safer to permit particular Persons in Partnership to Issue
out, and give a Currency to their own Notes, founded on their Lands, under the
name of a Bank of Credit? This is the main Enquiry which now falls under every
Bodies Examination, and becomes the debate of the Town this Winter Season; and
that I may give you my thoughts upon it freely, I say with all due Deference to
Government, by all means let the Governments Notes, Emitted to pay the Public
Dues, and called in by Taxes granted as a Fund for them, have all possible
Honor and Credit amongst us; and if in their great wisdom they should see meet
to make it a Public Charge, to Emit a certain number of their Notes in
Erecting a Bridge over Charles-River, and make it a Toll Bridge, with suitable
Allowances to the College at present; and suppose that Forty Thousand Pounds
were Issued out to make it a substantial and firm Bridge; and that a Toll upon
every thing passing and carried over, should be a Fund to Call them in
gradually; and after that it had cleared it self, it should be taken off from
Passengers, and left only for Carts, Horses, etc. And the College have the
Income for ever, or any such Public Charge, as Fortifying the principal Town
by Sea, Erecting Stone Forti^ications or Garrisons on the Frontiers, or
Erecting Light Houses, for the Security of Trade; and the Re-settling the
Eastern Parts of the Country in a Defensible manner, in giving a Bounty for the
encouraging the Sowing, water-rotting, and well curing of Hemp; the encouraging
them that should make the best pieces of Hollands-Duck: Which two Articles
alone, it is thought might so effect the balance of our Trade, as to bring us
in Silver Money; especially if a Reward of Three Pounds per Head were given for
all Male White Servants, that shall be Imported into this Province, and Bound
out from the Age of Ten to Eighteen Years; the Reward to continue the Term of
Twenty Years; and this would furnish us with Sailors, with Laborers in
Husbandry and Fishery, and Soldiers for our Defense, whose Polls in a few years
would pay it in: And whereas now they are Sold for a Term of years, for Fifteen
and Twenty Pounds a Head; such a certain Reward would induce men to bring in
such Numbers, that they would be Sold for Five Pounds, as they are in
Pensilvania, and other Places, where such certain Encouragements have been
given. The Debts Contracted by these Emissions would be the real Credit of the
Country, both Serviceable and Honorable, the Strength, Support, and
Exterternal Glory of a Country; and whereas the Trade wants a Medium to
Circulate it, there would be no necessity of Laying heavy Taxes, and the Funds
might be carried forwards as the Government would see cause; for I believe by
this time most men of thought may see, that since Paper Notes are our only
Medium, that Day we are out of Debt, we are out of Credit, and must unavoidably
sink, unless there should be found out some other way to save us from Ruin. So
the Question comes the fairer in view, Whither is the better of the Two, a
Public or a Private Bank?

I shall therefore in the next Place, give you those Reasons that are of weight
with me against a Public Bank, and Rescue the Private from the Authors
Objections: For these Reasons may not the Public Bank be Objected against? May
there not be a danger if the Public should go on to Emit Bills on Interest,
that it will be too great an Invasion of the Prerogative of the Crown: For I am
apt to think every body will grant, that the Stamping of Money is a Royalty
invested in the Crown; and I am prone to imagine, that Bills Emitted by Public
Authority to Lend at Interest, will carry with them many signatures of Money;
especially since the Act of this Province makes them a Legal Tender, so far as
no man may be Imprisoned for Debt that Tenders them; especially if we Consider
the difference in the Emission of these Bank Bills, that they are not paid out
of the Treasury, as the Notes Obligatory of the Government to those they were
Indebted unto, with the Public Faith, plighted to Call them in by Taxes; and
so though they are of the same Tenor, yet the manner of the Emission, with that
Law cited, gives them the character of real Money; for I cannot persuade my
self to say with Mr. Attorney, that nothing can be Money properly, but Silver
and Gold, because that both Copper and Brass have had the Royal Stamp, and
Copper passes in small Payments, as other Money in Great Britain at this day;
and I have also heard, that Leather was once the current Coin of Rome: And I am
very much inclined to think, if the Crown of England saw cause, they could make
Paper Bills, so stamped, as properly Money, as any Money whatsoever. Now is
there not ground to fear, when the Sovereign has been pleased to indulge us
with the Privileges of Emitting Public Notes for the defraying the necessary
Charge in the Defense and Support of the Government, and to Confine us to those
Occasions in the Taxes and Assessments allowed to be made on the Inhabitants;
would it not be looked on as an Incroachment in very deed on the Royal
Prerogative for us to exceed, and what the Consequence of that will be, you are
a much better Judge than I am; (and I have been informed that the Gentlemen
concerned, have had Letters from their Friends at Home, advising that by no
means the Government would be Concerned in such a Fund) but if it should not in
all the signatures of Money be a direct Invasion of the Prerogative, on the
account of its being really Money, yet would it not be a going beyond our Last?
and a doing what we had no power or warrant for; for I look upon it a weak and
foolish plea, some peoples mouths are filled with, viz. That we ought not to
debate about the Power of the Government, that it tends to weaken us, and that
there are enough that do that, and the like. I think the way to have our Powers
rendered strong and durable, would be to Consider what they are, and use them,
and not go to the brink, or one hairs breadth beyond them: And truly I fear
there is some design in raising all this smother, to blindfold is, and lead us
whence we cannot so easily return. I take it that our Charter sets us the
bounds of our Power, and tells us how far we may go, and all without that is
forbidden ground; now it is a plain thing, that the Governments Emitting Bills
of Public Credit on Interest, is not to be found, neither granted or warranted
by the Charter, the boundaries thereof are Assessments and Taxes, in the
necessary defense and support of the Government, and the protection and
preservation of the Inhabitants there. -- Mr. Attorney has given it us, page
29. He was so well apprized of this Objection, that he lays out his strength to
remove it; though I think he has not been able to make it stir one inch. He tells
us, there is nothing in the Charter repugnant to the Governments Issuing a
further supply of Bills, page 29. It is very true upon the Foot or Fund of
Assessments, as they have been hitherto Emitted, for Paying the Debts, and
Defraying the necessary Charges of the Province; but once for all, the Charter
may well be allowed to be repugnant to all that is not fairly Contained in it.
He says secondly, That it has been done once and again, on great Occasions, and
the Government not blamed for it. The Government has Emitted their Bills to pay
their Debts, but never to Lend at Interest, before his Letter was written,
which is the matter in Controversy. The Bills the Merchants Tent to the
Treasury, and the Treasury in Return, Lent the Merchants by Order of Government
on that great Emergency, were for the paying Her Majesty's Soldiers, and would
not have been Emitted, but in such an Extraordinary Case, and upon that bottom,
so that it can never be made the president to Let out Bills at Interest: and
then he would persuade us (not himself) that the words the necessary Support of
the Government, protection and preservation of the People, will allow it, and
so forsooth with an (if) it is and cra, then it comes within the Charter; and I
am verily persuaded (if) he were of Council against us, he would with all
imaginable Justice declare, as every reasonable man else (especially a
Gentleman of the Law) would, that the evident meaning of these words are, the
Charges of the Government and the War, even all such Charge as the Inhabitants
shall be Assessed and Taxed for, and that they have not the least aspect upon a
Fund for Trade, or the supplying the People with a Medium of Exchange, and
therefore his thrusting the word, Government, and into a parenthesis, as to
their Trade and Business, into the Sentence at page 30. is as arrant a piece of
Sophistry as can be, akin to his forementioned Arguments, and what I told you
at first you must look for; I readily grant the General Court here must be
Judges of their own Power; and there is no Doubt but that it is possible also
they may have been, by this Letter under the Attorney Generals Hand, induced to
believe that they have more than really they have. I am informed, that in May
Sessions, the Sufferers by the late dreadful Fire applied to them for Relief to
Lend them Money on their Lands, they did not apprehend it in their prudent
Power so to do; and some of as good Council as any in this Province, have
declared it as their Opinion, that the Country had not the Power to form
themselves into a Public Bank, and Emit Money at Interest, and how the Wisdom
of the General Assembly came to be of that side, I cannot say whether it is
hard or easy to guess.

I cannot help reciting the words of the Charter here: We do, etc. Give, Grant,
etc. To Make, Ordain, and Establish all manner of Wholesome and Reasonable
Orders, Laws, statutes, and Ordinances, Directions and Instructions, either
with Penalties or without, so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to the
Laws of this our Realm of England, as they shall judge to be for the Good and
Welfare of our said Province or Territory -- And for the Welfare, Support, and
Defense of the Government thereof. And a little after this General Clause,
comes the Power of Imposing Taxes. To Impose and Levy proportionable and
reasonable Assessments, Rates and Taxes upon the Estates, and Persons, of all,
and every the Proprietors, or Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, to
be Issued and Disposed of by Warrant, under the Hand of the Governor of our
said Province, for the time being, with the Advice and Consent of the Council,
for our Service in the necessary Defense and Support of our Government, of our
said Province or Territory.

Upon which, and the Publicks Emitting Bills of Public Credit upon Interest,
we may make a few Remarks, for the Investigating of Truth, so much embarrassed
by the Letter.

1. In the first place then, I would Remark, That by the Charter we have a
Power to impose reasonable Taxes, to be disposed of by Warrant under the Hand
of the Governor, with Consent of the Council, for Defense and Support of the
Government, etc. This being our Power and Limitation, no Act of ours can alter
the Power of Disposing: for the following words according to such Acts, can be
understood I presume, no otherwise than for the Uses Raised, yet no ways alters
the foregoing Clause of the Governors and Councils Powers of Judging and
Disposing of it.

2. That the Clause for Imposing and Levying Taxes coming after the General
Power of Making Laws in the Charter; can be I think understood in no other
sense than a Limitation of the foregoing power, and the path of our Duty, in
that of Taxing the People.

3. That the Credit of every Freeholder is as much his Property as his Lands.
Suppose a man gives his Obligatory Bill or Note to pay an Hundred Pounds on
Demand, or to take again in Payments, though he does it to serve a Friend in
Distress, yet so passing his Bill in his own Name, becomes the principal
Debtor, and the Possessor can look for no other, though the Person takes
private Security for himself.

If the General Court Emit Bills Obligatory upon the Province, whether they are
not bound in Justice and Honor to make them good as much as private men; and
whether it is not creating a Debt upon the Province for such Sums as shall be
so Emitted, which they must make good to the Possessor, which is a burden, and
may be called a Tax with a Witness. Now it may well be Quaeried, How far a
Representative Body or Free State has a power over, and a right in the Credit,
and the Properties of the Principals they represent? Whether a free People
submit their Estates any further to their Deputies, than to pay the Proportion
of the Charge that arises for their mutual support and Defense? Whether it
would not be entering in such a State on the Properties of every particular
Person, who is Lord of his Penny* (...) only has a right of Disposing of his
own. It is true, that the Representative Body are said to be the Keepers of the
Peoples Purse; but that can be understood by any Freeman I believe in no other
sense, than for what is, or should be a common Charge; and to state the
proportion, if it is questionable, in a free State: May it not be much more so
in a depending Government, whose Powers are Limited by Pattents, and are
accountable for Usurped Powers; but some say the Province runs no risque, for
they are to have the Profits, which are four and an half per Cent. for all
Emitted, which will pay all the Charge of the Government, and the People be set
free in their Taxes, and that they may gain a Stock in the Treasury -- A Golden
Bait. As for the Risque the Province runs in the Principal and Interest, it is
not yet determined; it is judged by some, and those not the most unthinking,
that it is great; in that the Security taken by the Trustees if it comes to be
sued out, would be claimed for the Crown; for in our Charter we have not; as
Sir Ferdinando Gorges had in his, the grant of that privilege of the
Forfeitures and Reversions of Lands; besides the Collusion that may be
introduced, by suffering Lands to be forfeited and redeemed at half price; that
as to the Profits and Income which is for His Majesty's Service in the Support
of the Government, it being a Revenue to the Crown; how natural does it ly
instead of a Salary for a Governor to ask at Home, in a Line or two of
Instructions for himself and all his Officers, as Lieutenant Governor,
Secretary, Judges, Attorney General, Captain of the Castle, Surveyor General,
etc. which is not I hope the end intended, or the most grateful: Other
difficulties referring to the Borrower, not proper to be mentioned may arise;
the Crown will not want Occasions of Disposing of their Revenues, which may
seem on due reflection to overbalance the gains proposed: May it not be
thought an hazard, if they should go on to Emit greater Sums on such a
foundation, that the Crown may be invited to take away the Charter, and that
for the sake of the Money Emitted as forfeited? And may not the Confusion be
better thought on than expressed on such en event? May not the old Maxim be of
use to us here? that in doubtful Cases the negative is the safer. I am in duty
bound, to suppose what has been done, was thought necessary by the Government
in their distress; unto whom I am sensible we owe all possible deference and
respect; and I assure you, none is more ready to pay it than I am; yet in such
a weighty case, truth stands the clearer in view, on a free, modest and
rational enquiry: And since the Interest arising from those Bills they say will
be for the support of the Government, if they will take the Attorney General's
Opinion; he has given it, page 28. That this Government neither can, nor ought
to be maintained in any other Method, than by the Charter, and Instructions
from the Crown, and I presume this method is neither. And to Conclude this
Argument, we have heard Sir, of Informations in the nature of Quo Warranto's;
and this very Country has felt the weight of one, and upon the very score of
Invading the Prerogative, in the Article of Money, and doing what was said we
had no warrant from Charter to do; and certainly no Lover of this Country can
wish them to take such methods as may be though it to put it in any hazard of a
second Quo warranto; no, none but such as have not scope enough already to get
Money, etc. extending Law Suits, to the enriching none but themselves. I assure
you Sir, I am the plainer on these Heads, in that I value the Liberties of my
Country so dearly, as never to esteem such its best Friends, that are willing
to part with them; and yet does not the disputableness of this Power, if we
should go on in such a method, show that at least we run the risque of a
second; which if it should take place, would not the Country (and with just
cause) cry out, Ah! why did the Government hearken to Mr. Attorney's Letter?
Ah! Mr. Attorney, why did you so amuse and slily argue them into it? And by the
way, the very notion of a second Quo warranto, confirms what I ground much of
this Argument upon, viz. that what is not within the Grant of the Charter, is
forbidden to us, and to be avoided. If after all that has been said to the
Power and Safety of the Publicks going on to Emit Bills Obligatory on the
Country, which is making the Country Principal Debtor, and to Let 'em out on
Land Security, where is the Limitation of the Power? the Gentleman would do
well to explain it; if the paying the Public Charge and its Defense be not the
boundaries and limitation, why may they not Emit Five Hundred Thousand Pounds
as a Fund of Trade, and appoint Factors for the Government, that they may have
the Profit? the difference seems only to be in the prudence, not in the power;
how safe then is it Living in a Community where the Estates may be charged to
answer more than the value upon such Projects, does not such a Power render
men's properties in their Estates very precarious? especially since it is
hinted, that the Representatives may be kept by the Charter as long as a Prince
lives; we may open a door wide enough for the getting Estates; it is but
dividing a number of Bills amongst themselves, and call it for the support of
the Government, according to that argument, and it is done. We have always
looked upon it, That an empty Treasury is very much our Security; This
Government thought it so when they appointed a Committee to burn the Public
Bills that were returned into the Treasury during the recess of the General
Court; and prevents many line Schemes of Arbitrary Power; a full Treasury by a
stated Revenue has the contrary consequences, and may soon involve the poor
people into unknown mischiefs. No says the Letter, page 28. The principal
Profits of that Money, according to the Scheme agreed on, reported by the
Committee, were so settled and secured, that nothing less than the General
Assembly could dispose of either. This is his main Argument against the
Objection to the Supply, etc. The Governor and Council has the draught of all
Moneys that are Raised by the Government according to the Charter as, I
observed before, and should the Public Emit a large Sum as is necessary for a
Public Bank, the Income there^^ would be inviting, and I doubt not of the ways
being presently found to it, for a Law contrary to the Charter being void of it
self, would be no boundary; and supposing it were not so, is not the Governor
an essential part of the Constitution, and is not his Council necessary? Has he
it not then in his power to come to terms for his own allowances? Will there be
any room left for Contests about settling Salaries? Will it not be done to
hand? I beseech you Sir, to Consider when this Pandora's Box shall be once
opened, what unforeseen accidents, what irreparable mischiefs, confusion and
misery would his whole People be in? This is true, if we may take what the
Author of the Letter says, they intend to give the Government Two Thousand
Pounds a year. I cannot tell whether they were no once out to make such an
offer; if they mean a Governor by Government, it would be an effectual method
to Enslave this Country says the Letter. Indeed I never knew that Governor and
Government, were one and the same word; yet it is Observable, that the Author
of the Letter makes them so. If the General Assembly says the Author of the
Letter, then they neither can, nor ought, etc. Yet I believe all Government
have Liberty to accept of Donations; but be it so that they cannot, then
neither can the Government be supported by the Profits of the Public Bank, for
this is not in the Charter; and if the Authors Arguments were good, that the
Public could not make use of it, the Governor as he assures us, will be sole
Heir of it: and then what will the gain of the Country be? Whilst I retort this
Argument* I had almost forgot the Clause in Hudibras, that, no man turns the
Case upon his own Concerns. What would become of the Fund, if the Crown should
forbid it? Will not the Confusion be great on the Borrowers? Justinian was of
Opinion, that nothing could be a Law that was not just. The Gentleman who
should promote such an one, surely would have no thanks from them they
represent, when they come to feel the ill effects of it; but I hope no such
thing will take place. Thus Sir, I have given you some of the thoughts of the
Town, and the Reasons in particular, that sway with me against a Public Bank.
The Reasons why I prefer a Private Bank, are such as the^e.

1. That there will be no Invasion of the Prerogative; for every body as well
as Mr. Attorney will readily accknowledge that, they are not Money, page 11.
And they may have the face and signature of Money, as much as the Bank Bills of
England, that is none at all; for they carry nothing of Authority with them,
but are only Notes on the Bank, passing from one to another, for so much value
as is expressed in them; which value being deposited in the Bank, either in
Lands or other imperishable Estate as the Original Fund, and the Obligation of
the several Partners, to take 'em in all Payments, except Specialties, under a
great penalty, gives Credit to the several Bills or Notes issued from the Bank.

2. Nor will a Private Bank open a door of Arbitrary Power to invade the
Liberties of the People, by a Governors handling at his own pleasure such Sums
as he has occasion to make use of, to promote his own ends.

3. Nor is there any infringment of the Liberty of the People, there is no Tax
requisite to make good the fall of the Bank, no Public Warrantee to secure it,
but only the Estates of such Gentlemen as are willing of their own accord to
Mortgage 'm; that by the Security given, and their mutual agreement, their
Notes should have a Currency, that they might serve the Country, and themselves
in promoting the Trade of it; so that if the Bank be suppressed, it would
hazard only their particular Estates.

4. It may be Carried on as other Merchant-like Affairs, by Factors or
Trustees, without offense to the Crown, or Government; This being the head of
Argument that bears the Countenance of reasoning in Mr. Attorneys Letter, which
I shall Remark: I take it for granted, that it is the Natural Right of English
to Trade, and to carry it on in such Methods, as they shall conceive to be most
advantageous to them; and that in order thereto, they have a right to take one
another Word, Note or Bond, as the Case may require, with due regard had to
Justice, and the power of the Legislature, to enlarge and limit this Trade, as
shall be though it most suitable to the Honor of the Crown, and the Public Weal:
It is in the liberty of any in Trade, to enter into a Covenant, to take one
another Notes, and that they might be better known, they may agree upon some
persons to form those Notes under their hands for them; and on their making
over such Security as there is required, for their mutual safety, for such Sums
as they shall emit or take, and may agree to pay such an Interest as may
support the Charge, and Lend of their Credit to others for their benefit, since
there is no Statute Law broken, and nothing contrary to the Common Law; so that
the difference between us is not, Whether the Government cannot crush such a
Partnership, for no body denies that? but whether such an Affair may be carried
on in a Company, without being Incorporated, without being a breach on the
Prerogative of the Crown? Thus the Private Bankers in Lumbard-street Emit their
Notes, and that on Interest too without being though it so; Our Fathers about
Twenty eight years ago, entered into a Partnership to Circulate their Notes
founded on Land Security, stamped on Paper, as our Province Bills, which gave
no offense to the Government then, and that at a time, when the Prerogative of
the Crown was extended further than ever has been since; What Mr. Attorney says
of the Bank of England, that they obtained an Act of Parliament for their
Support is true, yet proves nothing to his purpose; for although a Company can
manage their Affairs better, and in a shorter method, for their mutual Security
by a Pattent or Charter of Incorporation, and with the ^reater Security by an
Act of Parliament as (...) Bank of England, by the loan of One Millio^ Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds to the Nation obtained, yet it proves nothing that such
Companies were any breach on the Prerogative; the Act of the Sixth of Queen
Anne, quoted by the Author of the Letter, viz. That during the Continuance of
the Bank of England, it shall not be lawful for any Body Politic or
Corporation, or other than the said Company of the Bank, or for other Partners
exceeding six in England, to borrow or owe any Sum, or Bills, or Note Payable
on demand, or at any time less than six months from the borrowing thereof; is
so far from proving against the Partnership, that strong Arguments may be drawn
from it, of its Lawfulness: As,

1. It appears plain, that the Limitation of the Act is to England, and that
during the Continuance of the Bank; and so is of no force in the Plantations or
Ireland.

2. That it is lawful now for the number of six.

3. It implies that they might do it, before this Act was made in favor of the
Bank of England, and consequently lawful for us, where that Act never was in
force, which is what we Contend for.

4. It implies that the Law of England does not look on every number of
Partners to be a Corporation purely for their being Partners; and Mr. Attorney
quoting my Lord Cook's description of a Corporation, and his applying it to the
Gentlemen concerned in the Projection, is nothing but an amusement, and
deserves no Answer, in that none of the Essentials to such a Body was pretended
to by them: for a Pattent from the Crown, which gives the Form and Being to a
Corporation, was but hoped for.

But what I would Remark with the greatest Complacency, is the applying this
Law to us in New England; for he tells us, page 12. If the same fact committed
in England, by a Number not exceeding six would be a breach of Law, much more
may we suppose it forbidden, and made unlawful for an hundred to do it here. A
nice way of Arguing, that concludes strongly, and deserves thanks for the new
Invention: Because Gunning upon Boston Neck is forbidden by a Law, therefore in
every Town of the Country, I am apt to think that any man that is able to carry
a Gun, may see the folly of such an Argument: Truly it gives me a merry turn of
thought to entertain the Idea, how Mr. Attorney would crow to hear his
Antagonist at the Bar plead a desperate Cause with such a mighty dint of
argument as this; it is well he did not proceed, to give himself any further
trouble to argue with the same velocity and strength, how far the Projection
would be a breach on the Constitution of the Bank of England; for we are not
able to stand before the whiz -- But did the Author of the Letter, who quoted
the Law, in very deed believe it possible that it should have any influence so
far over the Water? I wonder then how it consisted with his Conscientious
regard to it, to advise the Public to Erect a Public Bank of Credit! for I
would put it to his Conscience, whether this Law is not as point blank levelled
at the Corporation, (which the Government is) in case they should have the
thoughts of doing any such thing as private Partners, and whether it is not as
possible for the Government to Set up and Establish things contrary to the Laws
of England as for private Persons? and whether the offense would not be as
great; and because I do not know but that the Supreme Authority may see cause
to crush any Bank set up here, I will add, that there is no reasonable man, nor
man of Law, nor man acquainted with the nature of Government dare say, that it
will be of equal pernicious consequence, for private Persons to set up, as for
the Public; for no act of private Persons can forfeit our Charter, it must be
a Public Act to do that; all the mischief of the Private's being condemned,
would be that the Bank would fall, and that the Bankers must make good their
Notes; but if the Public Bank should be set up and Condemned, by that means we
should be endangered in our Charter: And I am afraid there are some men in the
world that would gladly lay hold of the first opportunity to deprive us of it.
-- The Tendency of a Public Bank, as have been proposed, is to Unite the Power
of the Country and the Cash together, which all wise people have endeavored to
keep asunder, in order to preserve their Liberties; it tend^ to being all the
People into a dependency upon the Court Interest; and consequently to render
them Abject and Servile, which I think no Lover of his Country should promote:
As it is proposed at present, it tends no way to help the Landed Interest in
the stocking and improving their Lands, but only serves to remove the evil day
a little, very little further off, and then runs them into greater distress. On
the contrary, the Projection for a Private Fund of Credit, which since I began
this Letter, I hear is coming out in Print, that all may judge of it, and no
doubt will be acceptable to the Country; is so well founded and secured, that
were they permitted to proceed and Emit their Notes, would furnish us with a
Medium of Exchange; the Landed man might either be Concerned in the Foundation,
or might borrow Credit without any fear of a sudden or surprising demand, to
the prejudice of his Affairs, might Stock his Farm, and be able to lessen his
Principal, as his Product would enable him; it would be a certain resort for
men to borrow Credit on any Emergency; it gives the Industrious an opportunity
of improving their Lands to greater advantage, which would increase the Export
of the Country, it ^ould hurt none but the envious, who will do no good
themselves, and yet are grieved at that their Neighbor does. The Public
Charities are not inconsiderable, that are Established in it; in a word,
without it, we cannot so comfort^^^y enjoy the Outward Blessings that Heaven
has indulged us with. With it we may enjoy all the Conveniences of a Plentiful
Cash, without running the risk of being a Prey to an invading Foe; and in that
as well as in every other respect would answer our Occasions as the Mines of
Peru or Potosi: But I think I hear you in the Country say, they will not pay
our Rates, and therefore will not answer our ends. In answer to which I would
say, that the Bills of Credit of the other Provinces do not pay our Rates, yet
have a general Currency amongst you; that the Gentlemen concerned to promote
the Projection say, that whilst there is any of the Province Bills stirring,
they would change them gratis, when they should grow scarce that the People
could not obtain them; there is no doubt, but that the Government would Order
the Treasurer to take what would answer their Occasions, that would pay the
Soldiers and the other Officers of the Government, and the other Charges; then
they would not have the occasion to be at the Charge nor Risque of making Bills
of Credit if they saw good; it would revive the Trade of the Province, and
enable them to pay their Debts; for as things are now, they cannot make Money
but wi^h a small part of their produce, they are fo^ced to Truck them away, so
that some are not able, and others take the opportunity to defraud the Country
Trader, and he of Consequence is not able to pay the Merchant in Boston, to the
great Damage of the whole Country, as well as a Discredit to our Trade; for the
badness of the Pay for want of a Medium, obliges the Merchant to make a great
Advance on the Sale of his Goods, that they are as dear now as in the height
of War; the Country in Course ask dear for their Produce, which occasions a
great Loss in Returns, and the Dearness of both affects the Tradesman, and
makes him ask dear for his Labor, without which he is not able to Live; so
that as the state of our Commerce is now, every thing tends to drive away the
Trade from us to our Neighbors: The Fishery will fail, because they have no
Money for it, and all Industry is very much crampt; in that when men have
Labored, they are obliged to go to a Shop for Goods for their Pay, which often
invites, if not necessitates 'em to spend more than they want of English Goods,
to the hurt of their Families; and by that means brings us more in Debt to
England; all which would be remedied by the Establishing the Land Bank: And
whereas the Gentlemen are applying Home for a Charter from the ^^ing to
Incorporate them, that they may be the better enabled to secure the Foundation
and ^he Credit of the Bills: I wish them good success, and doubt not the whole
Country, (when they have a clear view of their best Interest) will say, Amen.
-- And whereas some of you in the Country object, that if such a Company goes
forward, they will have all the Lands in the Country: In answer to which
Objection, it would be worth while to Consider the Scheme how it is guarded,
and it will easily be apprehended that the Charge is groundless; for the Lands
will be taken in at little more than half the value, and whilst the Borrower
pays his Interest Money, the Bank will never trouble him; if he neglects that,
he will stand a year longer before he can be Sued for it; and no man will let
his Land go at half the value; his Neighbor will sooner buy it of him than let
it go at so low a rate; but if the Bank recovers it, they must Sell it, for
they have not asked leave to purchase Lands; then there is three years right of
Redemption left to the Owner: if the Land sells for more, the Bank returns the
Overplus, which I think sufficiently takes off the weight of that Objection:
Besides, as it is proposed by the Public, there will be but few Borrowers, but
what are in distress to put it off the further, because they are sure of being
straitened at the expiration of the five years to pay it in; (...) in this
Projection, every Partner is ob^^ged to take out a quarter part of what he
Subscribes, to bring out a Medium of Exchange: But I shall tire your patience
in enlarging on the pleasant Subject, in which we have a prospect of relief
under the present and growing distress: I shall make a few more transient
Remarks and Close. The Letter says, page 15. That the several Laws of this
Province respecting Money, or the Interest, are broke in upon by the
Projection: It is so far from being so, that it directly has a contrary view;
the Act of the Fifth of William and Mary about the Interest of Money is broke
in upon, because we fix the Interest at less than six per Cent. when the
preamble of the Act says, for as much as the abatement of Interest has always
been found beneficial to the Advancement of Trade, and the Improvement of Lands
by good Husbandry; which is the very thing we have consulted. I have with care
examined all the Laws of this Province, relating to Money or Bills of Credit,
and the several Acts of Parliament quoted in the Letter too many to be recited,
and cannot for my life imagine that any Lawyer besides Mr. Attorney could find
that they were invalidated, or in the least broke in upon by this Projection;
and now that any person acting as he apprehended in his Office as Attorney
General, should insinuate to the Government, and publish to the World in Print,
that they have been all broke in upon is very strange and unaccountable: His
Insinuation, page 18. That the Bills being but pieces of Paper, have no other
value than what the Borrower gives 'em, is a very ungrounded (I am loath to say
false) Assertion, in that they are Notes Issued out under the Hands of them
that are abundantly sufficient to make them good, and who were obliged not only
to that, but under a Fifty Pound Penalty to take them in all Payments, and the
Borrower being at his liberty, must be bubbled indeed to take them out, if they
would not answer his Occasions, in page 19. he asserts, that the Projectors are
only obliged to accept of them for the redemption of Pawns and Mortgages; and
supposes that the Possessor has neither, referring to the Tenor of the Bill:
See his own recital of the Bill, page 7. Obliges, etc. to accept the same in
all payments, according to Covenant made by us; (or rather see the true Form or
Tenor of the Bill in the Scheme Printed) both which so manifestly contradict
his Assertion, and at first sight tended to mislead the Honorable House of
Representatives in Matters of Fact, that it is unaccountable he should offer
it. As for his gross Charge of Contempt of Government, I suppose the Gentlemen
will vindicate themselves; I have heard say, they are sufficiently able, as
well as obliged: his breviate of the Scheme, and his Tenor of the Bill being a
gross misrepresentation, and his reflections made thereon, consequently ill
grounded, I do not trouble you with a Confutation, they fall of themselves,
page 13. He says, That the General assembly are under a necessity of enquiring
into the Justice, Legality, the Safety, and Public Advantage; wherein I agree
with the Author, and I believe the Gentlemen concerned, would have been glad if
it had been duly weighed, and fully considered before they had been prohibited;
and whereas no man has ever proved it to be, either unjust, illegal or unsafe,
or not for the Public Good; and the contrary I think, is sufficiently evident
to any disinterested; the Gentlemen that they might proceed in their Affair
without offense, (since he desires that it might be forbidden, until His
Majesty's Pleasure is known;) have agreed by a Humble Petition, to lay it
before His Majesty, praying for a Charter of Incorporation, to enable them with
the more security to Circulate their Notes founded on their Lands: The Author,
page 20. and 18. seems Concerned about the Credit of the Bank Notes, and that
for two Reasons; the lowness of the Interest, and the Foundation being Land and
not Money, to answer the Notes: As for the Interest which is set at Five per
Cent, it is that the Public has seen reason to set theirs at, and therefore
may be supposed their reason was b^^od; the value of Money or Notes never was
founded on the Interest, but what they would purchase of Land or Merchandises;
the Interest is justly lowered by the abundant Security required, which is
considered in the nature of a Sum paid in hand by way of fine, as in the Leases
of Lands to lower the Annual Rent. As for Land Foundation, the only measure of
valuation we have left, and the best (in that Silver has altered four parts in
five within this two hundred years, as is affirmed by good Authors) to found
our Notes on, in that our Trade will be governed according to our produce
either in our own growth, or what by our Industry we Import from others, to
Export by way of Returns to Great Britain, which wholly takes off the common
cry by way of amusement against it, that we are extravagant in our
Consumptions, and Over-traded, which ^ho' they may be true in themselves, are
thing promoted by this, in that the Notes ca^ not be sent off. Mr. Attorney
tells us, page 30 that in what he has done, he had no private view, or separate
Interest, nor any prejudice to the Gentlemen concerned, among whom he has many
particular Friends, but has sincerely aimed at the Public Good. I believe the
Gentlemen concerned do not think he has treated 'em like Friends, who they say
never came amongst them to reason about the Scheme; but in his Lette^ has dressed
them Alamode the Spanish Inqui^^tion, with horrid pictures on their Design that
they might be delivered over to the Secular Power, to be punished. And as for
his design and separate Interest, being one that improves his Stock by Letting
Money at Interest; if he had not told us so, we should have been apt to have
believed the contrary, and may be worthy of a second view and Reflection by
him, as well as the Portion of Sacred Writ, so much abused as to be set in the
Frontispiece of his Letter, which I shall take the freedom to repeat to his
Consideration in the very words, That better is a little with Righteousness,
than great Revenues without Right. And now Sir, I have given you a few of the
many dark thoughts of the Town, relating to the Letter, and the Public Bank
Projected; as also some of their hopes of the Success of the Private. If what
has been written may contribute to the setting Truth, and the Interest of the
Country in a clearer Light in your Parts, it will be a sufficient Reward, and
an entire Satisfaction,

To your Humble Servant, F -- l. B -- t.
New England, Anno 1714.

