An Election SERMON, PREACHED Before the General Assembly of the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, at Hartford, May the 12 th. 1715.

By Joseph Moss, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Darby.

The Discourse shows, That frequent Reading and Studying the Scriptures and
the Civil Law of the Common Wealth, is Needful and Profitable for Rulers.

Exodus xviii.20, and 22. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the People,
Able Men, such as Fear God, -- And let them Judge the People at all times.
Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, Printer to his Honor the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1715.

An Election SERMON.
Deuteronomy XVII.18, 19. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of
his Kingdom, he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which
is before the Priests, the Levites.

And it shall be with him, and be shall Read therein all the Days of his Life:
that he may Learn to Fear the Lord his God, to keep all the Words of this Law,
and all these Statutes, to do them.


WHEN God chose Israel to be His peculiar People before all the Nations of the
Earth, He gave them Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of several sorts: He gave
them not only the Moral Law written on the Tables of Stone, at Mount Sinai;
which was a Rule to direct them in the performance of those Duties which the
Light of Nature had more imperfectly inculcated upon them: but He gave them
also the Ceremonial Law, consisting in sundry Rites and Ceremonies, to be used
in their Religious Worship; most of which had a Typical reference unto the
Messiah to come, and the Righteousness that He was to bring in, and so ceased
with the coming of the Messiah. And moreover, besides these, God gave them also
their Judicial or CommonWealth Law, which consisted in sundry Statutes, and
Political Orders; directing how the Civil Affairs of their Common Wealth, as
they were a Civil State, should be managed. Our Text and Context is a Branch of
their Civil Law, and is God's Statute to Israel, declaring how their King,
their Chief Civil Ruler, should bear and behave himself in that high and
dignified Station, and how he should Qualify himself for that Post in the
Government of God's People, so as to attain the right Ends of Civil Government,
and be God's Minister, for good to His People.

In the words of the Text we may observe two things more generally;

(1.) God declares what the Chief Civil Ruler of His People shall do, or what
he ought to do.

(2) He renders a Reason why he shall thus do.

1. As to what God requires the King the Chief Civil Magistrate to do; its in
these words, When he sits on the Throne of his Kingdom, he shall write him a
Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests, the
Levites; And it shall be with him, and he shall Read therein all the Days of
his Life. And here by a parity of Reason, this Command seems to be binding to
all Inferior Magistrates, though none but the Chief is expressed; for their
Office is of the same kind, though their Power may be less in degree: And then
the reason rendered to Enforce the Command, shows it to be as needful for all
Inferior Civil Rulers, to comply with this Command, as the Chief, for they
have all need to fear the Lord their God, and to keep all His Statutes, to do
them; and particularly that of Executing Judgment among His People, so as to be
God's Minister for good to them; the great End of the Office of Civil Rulers,
whether of higher or lower Degree. And in this Command of God, respecting Civil
Rulers, there are two Branches.

(1.) That the King, the Chief Ruler should Write out a Copy of this Law in a
Book, out of that which is before the Priests, the Levites. Here we may do well
to observe, that this Original Law, out of which the Ruler was to take a Copy,
was not only the Moral and Ceremonial Law, but also the Civil or Judicial Law,
which was to be the Rule of his Government; and according to which he was to
Execute Justice and Judgment in Israel. This is plain, if we consider that the
Civil Law, as well as the Ceremonial, was laid up before the Priests, in the
sides of the Ark of the Covenant, there to be kept from one Geneneration to
another; as its written, Deuteronomy. 31.24, 25, 26. And it came to pass when Moses
had made an end of writing all the Words of this Law in a Book, until they were
finished; that Moses Commanded the Levites that bear the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord, saying, Take this Book of the Law, and put it in the sides of the Ark
of the Covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a Witness
against thee. And this was more than the Moral Law, for that was reposited in
the Ark, and not in the sides; as may be seen at large, in Deuteronomy. 10.2, and 5.

(2.) The second Branch of the Command unto the Civil Ruler is, That he should
keep this Copy he had taken by him, and should Read therein all the Days of his
Life. The meaning seems to be, that he should often Read and Study this Law;
and thereby get the Letter of this Law well fixed in his Memory, and his
Understanding well enlightened as to the meaning and true intent of the Law;
(both which frequent Reading and Study has a tendency to promote.)

2. More generally; In the Words we may take notice of the Reason rendered, to
Enforce this Command, and that is this; That he may learn to Fear the Lord his
God, and to keep all the Words of this Law, and all these Statutes, to do them.
The general Nature of the Reason seems to be this; That he might by his own
Practice, according to the Moral and Ceremonial Law, and by exercising his
Power over the People, according to the Limitation of the Civil Law, show
himself to be one that fears God, and will be God's Minister for good to His
People; (as Romans 13.4.) One that will take care that the Laws of God, and the
good and wholesome Laws of the Common Wealth are kept: Which is the great End
of the Office of all Civil Rulers, whether Supreme or Subordinate; for they are
all to be God's Ministers for good, such as bear not the Sword in vain,
Revengers to Execute Wrath on them that do Evil.

The DOCTRINE from the Words, on which I may insist is this;

That the frequent Reading and Studying the Scriptures, and the Civil Law of
the Common Wealth, is a thing very Needful and Profitable, for Civil Rulers in
order to a right Execution of their Respective Civil Offices.

For Illustration of the Doctrine, it may be needful to State and Answer one
Enquiry, viz.

Quest. Wherein consists the right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office?

Precedent to the Reply unto this Enquiry, it may be premised, That Civil
Rulers, in the Discourse under management, are to be taken in a limited sense;
only as they are vested with Executive Power of Government and not Legislative;
not as they may be concerned with Legislative Power in Government. This we may
take notice of in the whole of the following Discourse. This being premised, I
answer the Question stated, (1.) More generally. (2.) More particularly.

1. More genesis The right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office lies, in their
well Governing of a People subject to their Authority, according to Just and
Good Laws, so as to be God's Ministers for good to them. It is not merely in
Ruling a People, but in Ruling them by good and wholesome Laws, keeping within
the due limits of their Power in Government. All Civil Rulers have their Power
of Government limited, and that by the Boundaries of some Laws, that are the
Laws of that Kingdom, State or Common Wealth, over which any particular Ruler
or Rulers are set to Govern. All just Government, whether it be Monarchy or
Popular, or a Mixture of both, or of any other differing Form; is originally
founded in either Compact or Conquest (where the War is just on the Conquerors
part:) Now when and where its founded originally in Compact or Agreement,
between the parties Ruling and Ruled, there must necessarily be supposed some
Rules agreed upon which the Ruler is bound to take notice of, in his exerting
Power of Government over the Ruled; for as none can make a just Claim to any
Natural Original Right to Rule over others, (Family Rulers only excepted) so
Mankind never did nor will, Submit themselves voluntarily to the Government of
others their FellowMen; but upon some Agreement of what Rules, the Ruler or
Rulers should observe in Government; which Rules are the Laws of that Kingdom
or State so Covenanting to be under Government; and in such Government founded
thus Originally in Compact; the right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office
lies in the impartial and upright Administration of Justice among such a
People, according to these Rules. And again; When and where the Government of
any Civil State, is originally founded in Conquest, (which may be a Just
Government, where the War is Just on the Conquerors part) yet there God has
not Left such Connqueror at his liberty, what Laws to impose upon his Conquered
Subjects, but has obliged him to institute good Laws for the Rule of his
Government, for he is bound to be God's Minister for good to the People, Romans
13.4. A revenger to execute Wrath upon them that do evil, and not on them that
do good; and so his Laws must be correspondent to the Laws of God, and so good.
Neither has God left it at such Conquerors liberty, when he has instituted
good Laws, whether he will keep to them, as the Rule of exerting his Executive
Power in Government, or no: but he is as much bound to Govern by such good Laws
as to make them; for he that Rules over men, must be Just, Ruling in the fear
of the Lord. This the Rock of Israel has said, 2 Samuel 23.3.

But more Particularly to Resolve the Enquiry before us, we Answer,

1. The right Execution of the Civil Magistrates Office, partly consists in
preserving promoting, and maintaining Peace among the People over whom they are
set to Rule; and to do this by executing good and wholesome laws made for that
end. One great end of the Civil Rulers Office is Peace; that Peace might be
kept was one end for which God appointed and approves of Civil Government.
Peace is a very valuable and choice outward Mercy; and therefore the Spirit of
God, in the Hundred and Thirty Third Psalm, compares it to the Odoriserous
Anointing Oil, that ran down upon Aarons Head and Beard, even to the skirts of
his Garments. Now men's Lusts Interrupt the stream of this Choice Blessing; as
James faith, Jam. 4.1. Whence come Wars and Fightings, but from your Lusts? And
thus every Kingdom and Country would be in an Uprore, and rush quickly into
inevitable Ruin, if there was not some Magistrate in the Land to keep the
Peace. And therefore God has appointed such an Office among men; and men
themselves have seen it needful every where, to set up some Forms of Civil
Government for this End. Parallel here unto are we commanded, in I Tim. 2.1, 2.
To Pray for Kings, and all in Places of Authority; that under them we may lead
quiet and Peaceable Lives.

2. The right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office, partly consists, in their
obliging men subject to their Authority, to Worship God according to Divine
lnstitution, so far as they are enabled to do it, by virtue of any Civil Law of
the Common Wealth over which they Rule The Civil Magistrate is rightly styled,
Custos utriusque Tabula; The Keeper of both Tables. Its as much within his
Province to see that Men under his Authority, attend First Table Duties to God,
as to oblige them to Second Table Duties; as Duties of Righteousness, etc.
toward their Fellow Men. Thus the good King Asa did; as we find, in 2 Chronicles.
14.3, 4. He took away the Altars of the strange gods, and the high places, etc.
And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law
and the Commandment.

3. The right Execution of the Civil Magistrates Office, consists partly in
rendering such Rewards to the Righteous and Virtuous in the Land, as they may by
Law; and especially in shielding them from those Injuries, Oppressions and
Violence, that they are liable to, and may be in danger of: and most certainly
to acquit them, in Judgment when ever the Righteous and Virtuous, happen to be
Arraigned at the Tribunal Bar under the supposition, and accusation of Guilty
persons, as Violaters of the Laws. The Civil Rulers are as much bound in Duty
as Officers in the Civil State, to Justify the Righteous in Judgment, as to
Condemn the Wicked. Both were incumbent on the Judges in Israel, by one and the
same Command; as Deuteronomy. 25.1. If there be a Controversy between men, and they
come to Judgment, that the Judges may Judge them, then they shall Justify the
Righteous, and Condemn the Wicked.

4. The right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office, in part lies in the
Condemning and Punishing according to the Rule of the Law, those that are
guilty of breaking the good and wholesome Penal Laws of the Land; especially if
the Transgression be a Violation of any Moral Precept, so that the Criminal
has transgressed the Law of GOD, as well as the good and wholesome Laws of the
Government; then the Civil Ruler with Phineas's Zeal and religious Fortitude,
should take up the righteous Javelin of the Law, and finite through the Loins
of such workers of Iniquity; that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more
so Wickedly: In thus doing, the Civil Ruler becomes God's Minister for good; as
Romans 13.4 A revenger to execute Wrath upon them that do evil. The Civil Ruler
does rightly execute his Office in such Cases, when he acts without fear of
offending any but God; and without indulgent affection on the score of
Consaguinity or Affinity; after the Example of that Tribe of Levi, in the
Wilderness at Mount- Sinai, when Israel was fallen to Idolatry; of whom it is
recorded, in Deuteronomy. 33.9. That with reference to Executing Judgment for God; he
said of his Father, and his Mother, I have not seen him; neither did he
acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own Children.

5. The right Execution of the Civil Rulers Office in part, consists in their
making a right and just Decision of Controversies, in matters of Meum and Tuum,
depending between Persons that are subject to their Authority, and that
according to the rules of the Law One End of Civil Government, is, That
Controversies of a Civil Nature might be well issued, and that men might not be
Judges in their own Cases, and endeavor to right themselves, Vi and Armis;
when they think they are wronged, which would be destructive to any State: And
therefore God has instituted the Civil Magistrates Office among men, and set
up Rulers, that they might Judge righteous Judgment between a Man and his
Neighbor, and issue the Quarrel by a righteous Sentance, binding to both
Parties. This was God's Command by Moses to the Seventy Elders, that they
should Judge Righteously in Controversies of this nature; as we see in Deuteronomy.
1.16. And I charged your Judges at that time, saying Hear the Causes between
your Brethren, Judge Righteously between every man and his Brother, and the
Stranger that is with him. And in this kind of Executing Civil Power the Judges
should not respect Persons, but Causes only: The Rich Should not be favored in
Judgment, because he is Rich; nor the Poor carry his Cause to his mind because
he is Poor, when the right according to the Rules of the Law is not on his
side; neither should the Virtuous man gain Judgment in his favor, because he
is Virtuous; nor the Vicious man loose the Cause because he is Vicious (in
matters of a Civil concern) when the Law discovers the right to be on his side.
The rule given by Moses, to the Judges in Israel, was; as in Deuteronomy. 1.17 Thou
shall not respect Persons in Judgment; but shall hear the small as well as the
great.

This Enquiry being Resolved in some measure; the thing that is next to be
attended, is the Proving of the Doctrine in both the Branches of it.

PROP. I. That the frequent Reading and Studying the Scripture, is a thing
Needful and Profitable for Civil Rulers, etc. This will appear if we Consider
these things.

1. By frequent Reading and Studying the Scripture, Civil Rulers will be likely
to be men of Religion and good Conscience: And Religion is very serviceable to
the regular managing the affairs of Civil Government. It was told Timothy, in 2 Timothy 3 15. That the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, was able to make him wise
to Salvation. Now, if Rulers become wise to Salvation, through the knowledge of
the Scriptures, gained by reading and study; they will be Wise also in ordering
the Affairs of Civil Government under their care; or will order them the more
Wisely. If Rulers are men really Godly, have and maintain the true Fear of God
before their eyes; they will endeavor to execute their respective Offices
well, so as to attain the right ends of Civil Government: As Nehemith said of
his Brother Hanani, Neh. 7.2 That he gave him Charge over Jerusalem, Because he
was a faithful man, and one that feared God above many.

2. By frequent Reading and Studying the Scriptures, Civil Rulers may learn how
to exert their Civil Power aright, for the glory of God and the good of the
People. It is set down in the Scriptures, what is the Nature and End of the
Civil Magistrates Office: As in Romans 13.3, 4. Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same: For he is the Minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not
the sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
on him that does evil. So in Lev. 19.15. Ye shall do no Unrighteousness on
Judgment; thou shall not respect the person of the Poor, nor honor the person
of the Mighty: but in Righteousness shall thou Judge thy Neighbor. So in a
Chron. 19.6, 7 And said to the Judges, take heed what ye do: for ye Judge not
for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Thus when
Civil Rulers, learn their Duty as Rulers out of the Scriptures, they are the
more likely to well execute their respective Offices; and thus Reading and
Studying the Scriptures, is a thing very needful, and profitable for them.

3. The frequent Reading and Study of the Scriptures keeps fresh in the
Memory of Rulers, the Examples of sundry Good Rulers in old time, whose
Examples of right Ruling, are recorded in the Scriptures for Imitation. And as
Examples, are more prevalent than Precepts, in some things; so they are not
without their usefulness in the affairs of Civil Government. The Record of the
Examples of those good Rulers of old, and the Blessings that followed them as a
Reward of their Faithfulness in Government, has a great tendency to influence
the minds of present Rulers, to a vigorous discharge of their Duty, as such;
that they may be the recipient Subjects of the same Blessings. And thus Reading
and Studying the Scriptures is a thing needful and profitable for all Rulers,
Supreme or Subordinate. The Scripture Examples of good Rulers are those, of
David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah; and other Godly Kings, who Ruled well; and God
show'red down many Blessings upon them. Its peculiarly observable in
Jehoshaphat's case, in 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6. That he had Riches and Honor in
abundance. And this seems to be sent from God, as a reward for his good Service
in Government: For it is said in the foregoing words; That he sought the Lord
God of his Fathers, and walked in His Commandments, etc. and therefore the Lord
established him in the Kingdom, and all Judah brought him Presents; and he had
Riches and Honor in abundance.

4. The frequent Reading and Studying the Scriptures, impresseth on the minds
of Rulers those accounts of Evil Rulers, in old time, recorded in the
Scriptures, and the Judgments of God that fell upon them, for their Sins and
Errors in Government; which has a tendency to dissuade present Rulers, whether
Superior or Inferior, from the like evil practices in Government, left being
found in the like Sins, the like Judgments should alight upon them also: For
those things written in former times, were for our admonition and caution, as
well as some of them for our imitation. And thus the Reading and Studying the
Scriptures, is needful and profitable for Rulers. In the Scriptures there is
Recorded the wicked Reigns of Jereboam, Ahab, Ahaz, and Zedekiah; and other
Ungodly Kings and Rulers, on whom the wrath of God fell in the terrible effects
of it in outward Judgments, brought on them and their Houses; for their
wickedness in Government. Very Remarkable is Ahab's case; who by a wicked act
in Government had disseised righteous Naboth of his Vineyard, and his Life
also: but God meets him by his Prophet Elijah; as in I King. 21.19. Upon the
same spot of ground he had so unrighteously gotten, with a dreadful Threatening,
which came exactly to pass; in the place where the Dogs licked the blood
Naboth, there shall they lick thy blood, even thine.

5. The Scriptures contains a Body of Political Statutes, which although they
were instituted by God as the Civil Law of the Common Wealth of Israel only;
yet many of them are of a general Nature, and are founded in natural Equity;
and so are as suitable for other Nations, States and Kingdoms, as for God's
Israel of old; conformable unto which, sundry Christian Nations, (and ours in
particular) have framed many of their Civil Laws. So that upon this account the
frequent Reading and Studying the Scriptures brings the Civil Ruler to a better
understanding of the Civil Law, the Rule of right exerting Power of Government;
and so is Needful and Profitable for all Civil Rulers.

Most of our own Laws, called Capital Laws, are exactly the same, with the Law
given to Israel in those cases; and sundry other of our Laws are conformable
to, and framed out of the Reason of those Laws recorded in the Scripture; and
so the Reading and Studying the Scriptures is very Needful and Profitable for
our Rulers, in order to know and understand the Rule by which they are to
Govern us; without the knowledge of which, they can never rightly Execute
Judgment for God and for the Good of His People.

PROP. II. That the frequent Reading and Studying the Civil Law of the Land, is
a thing very Needful and Profitable for Civil Rulers. This will appear if we
Consider these things.

1. The Knowledge and right Understanding of the Law, comes by Reading and
Study. Homo fit Doctus non vi sed sepe Legendo: And the Knowledge of the Law is
so needful a thing for Civil Rulers to have; that they can not rightly execute
their Civil Office without it: They cannot do Justice and Judgment without it
(except it be by accident, as a blind man may chance to hit the mark) for the
Law being the Rule they are to attend in Judgment, (and that they are Sworn to
attend) how can they do Justice, according to this Rule, unless they know it?
In all affairs whatsoever, its needful that men know the Rule by which they are
to act, otherwise its as likely their actions will be irregular as regular. One
reason why there is a Woe, pronounced upon that Land, whose King is a Child, (as
Eccl. 10 16.) is because being a Child in Knowledge, he cannot understand the
Law the rule of his Government, and so cannot rightly sway his ruling Rod; for
want of which, the Kingdom will be in a sad case; and in danger of utter Ruin:
Likewise when the Rulers of any People are Children in the Knowledge of the
Law; that Land is in danger of Ruin: For however good the Law is, which is the
great Bulwark to secure Religion, Life, Liberty and Property to the Subject;
since its but a dead Letter, if the Ruler or Rulers don't understand it, the
Common Wealth is in a sad case; the best Subjects in all their best Enjoyments,
stand upon a very fickle, uncertain and dangerous Foundation: The malicious
Transgressor rises up, and no man is sure of his Life; as Job 24.22. And the
wicked trespass or rises up, and no man is sure of his Inheritance; though there
be the best Laws in the world to defend it; because he that is to Execute the
law is a mere Child in Knowledge, and does not know that righteous Rule by
which Controversies are to be decided.

2. The Knowledge of the Civil Law which comes by Reading and Study, is a
thing very needful and profitable for Civil Rulers, in that hereby they are
enabled to weigh with a just Balance, those Pleadings of the Law that are
frequently offered to their Consideration, when they are setting on the Seats
or Judgment; so as to reject Error though in never so fine a Dress; and to
receive Arguments of Truth, and be swayed thereby, though not set off with so
much flowrish of Words. If men that are Rulers and Judges don't know the Law,
they are easily imposed upon, by more knowing Advocates, that sometimes have a
bad Cause to manage; and so in the issue the matter is brought to that fatal
Catastrophe, that the Prophet Isaiah Complains of, in Isa. 59.14. Judgment is
turned away backward, Justice stands afar off, Trush is fallen in the
Streets, and Equity can not enter.

3. The Knowledge of the Law of the Land which comes by Reading and Study, is
needful and profitable for Civil Rulers; in that this good Knowledge gives them
good Courage and Fortitude of Mind; or at least has a tendency so to do,
without which its a very difficult task for the Civil Magistrate to Execute his
Office aright. If Rulers are afraid on the Seats of Judgment, there is but a
little or no Likelihood of their bearing the Sword of Justice, so as to make
others Fear; so as to be a Terror to Evil doers: And if Rulers have but little
knowledge in the Law the Rule by which they are to Govern, and be Persons of so
much common Sense as to know they know but little, it has a natural tendency
to make them afraid, when in the Exercise of their Civil Power, so every
threatening Word from a bold and saucy Delinquent, which a wise Judge would Curb
and Punish, is such a Lion in the way, to the ignorant Ruler, that it brings
him to a ne plus Ultra; he dare proceed no further: And so the daring Criminal
Offender passes with Impunity.

4. Reading and Studying of the Law, is a thing needful and profitable for
Civil Rulers, in that God has seen meet to Enjoin it on the Chief Ruler in
Israel, even the King upon the Throne; and for such Reasons as make it as
needful for all Inferior Rulers. That which God does Command Rulers to do, as
Needful, none may say is Needless: Now God expressly Commands, as in our Text;
That the King when he sits on the Throne of his Kingdom, should write him a
Copy of the Law in a Book; and it should be with him, and he should Read
therein all the Days of his Life; that he might learn to fear the Lord his God,
and to keep all these Statutes, to do them.

5. The Reading and, Studying the Civil Law of the Land, by which Knowledge is
attained, is a thing very needful and profitable for Rulers; in order to keep
up their Credit and Reputation among the People over whom they are to Rule;
without which they cannot be very Serviceable as Rulers, in their Places. When
the People have a contemptible low Thought of the Ruler, and esteem him as a
man of little or no Knowledge in the Law, the Rule of Government; they but
little Regard him, or his Civil Commands, how Just so ever they are, and but a
little do they Regard the Punishments that the Law lays upon Transgressors,
how great so ever they are; since they Esteem him that is to Execute the Law a
mere Child in Knowledge, whom they think they can easily delude or affright;
And so the great End of Civil Government is in a manner Lost, and the Ruler
very Unserviceable in his Place.

Having endeavored to Illustrate and Confirm the Doctrine in both the Branches
of it. I would make some suitable Improvement; and that in several Uses.

USE, I. Of INFERENCE or INSTRUCTION, in a few Particulars.

1. Hence we may learn, That the Civil Magistrates Office well Executed, is
that which requires or calls for great Labor and Pains. Idleness we may see is
inconsistent with the right discharge of Duty in a Civil Ruler. Frequent
Reading and Studying, the Scriptures and the Civil Law of the Common Wealth
which the Doctrine shows, is so needful for the Civil Ruler, is Laborious.
Solomon well observes, in Eccl. 12.12. That much Study is a weariness to the
Flesh. He that will Qualify himself for a good Ruler, must take Pains. He that
thinks a man may be Qualified for the Office of a Civil Ruler without Reading
and Study, which takes up Time, and costs Labor and Pains is much mistaken.
Rulers are to bear the weight of Government upon their Shoulders; the smaller
Vessels the lesser Subjects, are to have their dependence upon them, to
preserve them from those injurious Oppressions and other Mischiefs that they
are liable unto: In this sense they are to be as Nails fastened in a sure
place, on which they hang the smaller Vessels. As was said of Eliakim, a Chief
Ruler in Judah, in Isa. 22.22, and 24. I will fasten him as a Nail in a sure
Place, etc. And they shall hang upon him all the Vessels of smaller quantity.
Now what Support can the Civil Ruler afford to the smaller Vessels the lesser
Subjects, that have their dependnnce upon him, for Security and Safety, many
ways, unless he be a man of Knowledge? And how can Knowledge be attained,
without Reading and Study? Nemo sapiens nascitur. And Reading and Study is
Laborious. So upon the whole we see that the Civil Rulers Office well Executed
is Laborious.

2. Hence we infer, That men who are careless in Reading and Studying the
Scriptures, and know but little of the Mind of God contained in the scriptures;
are not fit for Civil Rulers. Hence we may learn, that all Persons of
Atheistical Principles, are unfit for Rulers; and so are all Persons grossly
Ignorant of the Scriptures: also all Irreligious Persons, who show by their
Practical Ungodliness, that they are Unacquainted with the Law of God that
Convinces and Converteth the Soul, Enlightens the Mind, and makes Wise the
Simple. If Rulers don't fear God, (which is gained in great part by the
frequent use of the Scriptures) what may be expected from them, but that as
often as they can do it, and pass with impunity, (which they have great
advantage for, considering the Sphere of Elevation which they are placed in)
they will Sell the Righteous for Silver, and the Poor for a Pair of Shoes?
Which the Prophet Amos complains of, (in Amos. 2.6.) as the sad Custom of
those Evil Times. Abraham expected no Justice would be done him in Abimelech's
Court, but rather that he should be Slain, though an innocent Man; not because of
the want of Civil Government in that Country, for that there was, and
Abimelech was Chief Ruler at that time; but the reason of his fears and sad
expectation, arose from an apprehension he had that there was not the fear of
God in that Place; as we may see in Genesis 20.11. Because I thought, Surely the
fear of God is not in this Place; and they will Slay me, etc.

3 Hence we may be further instructed, That it is not every good Man, who does
really fear God; that is fit for a Civil Ruler: For some such have little or no
Knowledge of the Law of the Common Wealth, which Rulers are Bound, nay Sworn to
attend in Government; and so not fit, And many times the case is so with some
good Men, that they cannot qualify and fit themselves for good Rulers, though men
of natural good Abilities; for the case is so circumstanced with them, that
they cannot find Time to gain Knowledge in the law, the Rule of Civil
Government; which Knowledge comes by Reading and Study: For their Secular
occasions, needful to be attended in order to Support themselves and their
Families in this World, ingrosseth all their Time; except so much as is
requisite for Natural Comforts, and Religious Duties; and so if power of
Government should be devolved on them, they cannot be Strong Rods for Scepters
to bear Rule.

4. Hence we learn, That Rulers should spend Time and deep Though It upon the
Scriptures and the Civil Law of the Land; in or^^r to a right Administration of
Juftice: as well as to spend what Time is needful in Hearing and Determining
Causes that come before them in Judgment. Preliminary Preparation in this way,
is as needful, as Proceeding with Care and deliberate wise Counsels when they
are upon the Seats of Judgment; a^^ indeed the latter is not like to be without
the former. One Reason why God Commanded the King of Israel, as in our Text; To
write him a Copy of the Book of the Law, and to keep it by him, and to Read
therein all the Days of his Life; was, That he might have so well digested the
whole Body of the Political Statutes contained therein, in his thoughts; that
when he came to apply it to Particular Persons and Cases, he might not be at a
loss, but might make a ready wise and Just Decision of all Controversies,
according to this Rule. If Judges come upon the Seats of Judgment unprepared as
to any precedent Study of the Law; one of these Mischiefs ordinarily will
ensue, Either Justice must be delayed, until the Judges have took time to Study
the Law referring to such. Causes, as are depending before them; which is an
injury to the Subject, many ways: or else Judgment must be given ignorantly,
which is as like to be wrong, as right; and this will bring all Legal Decisions
to a mere Chance, which will make the righteous Subjects whom the Laws should
Secure and Protect, as unsafe in all their best Enjoyments, as if the Dice were
cast for them.

5. Hence we learn, That the Civil Ruler should be a man of a good Estate, that
he may be able to afford Time to be spent in Reading and Study, in order
furnish him with Knowledge in State Affairs, that he might serve the Public
the better. There are some Men that would make good Rulers, if that of Estate
were not wanting: but for want of this, they are not only apt to be of mean and
mercinary Spirits, but are also unable to spend that Time which is needful in
Reading and Study, thereby to Treasure up Knowledge; and so they are upon this
Consideration incapable of being good Rulers. And when any Government finds it
needful to place Persons in exalted Stations of Trust and Civil Power, who are
of mean Estates; there should be some way found to supply that detect, by
affording them such Supplies out of the. Public Treasury, as may make it a
thing seasable for them, to spend a convenient part of their Time, in Reading
and Study that they may serve the Public the better. And upon this
Consideration of its being needful for Rulers to spend part of their Time (and
so disadvantage their own Estates) in Reading and Studying the Law, that they
may advantage the Public Interest; and be God's Ministers for good to His
People: I say upon this Consideration, it becomes a very just, Righteous and
Reasonable thing, for the Ruled to Pay Tribute to Rulers: Romans 13.6, 7 For this
cause pay you Tribute also; for they are God's Ministers attending constinually
upon this very thing. Render therefore to all their Dues: Tribute to whom
Tribute is Due, etc.

USE, II. Of EXHORTATION, unto several Ranks and Orders of Persons here Present,

1. With all due Regards and utmost Humility, and Sabmission, I would suggest,
a few word of Exhortation to our Honorable and Worshipful RULERS; that now are
or this Day may be fixed in the most Exalted Station of Civil Dominion in this
Colony; as well as to all Subordinate Rulers, that have or may have a share in
the Executive Power of Government.

Honorable, and Worshipful, and worthy Gentlemen;

The Exhortation that may be offered to you and each of you, as resulting from
the Text and Doctrine under our management; may be Proposed in these following
Particulars.

(1.) Be pleased to take Time, in seriously Reading and Studying the
Scriptures, the Law of God that Convinces and Converteth the Soul, that
Enlightneth the Mind, and makes Wise the Simple. It is not to be imagined,
that this Duty has been grofly neglected by our Honorable and Religious
Rulers, and it is not under that apprehension, that the Counsel is now given:
but as it lies fairly in my way, at this time, having been showing how needful
and profitable it is for Rulers to frequently Read and Study the Scriptures.
And here suffer me a few words. With all submission, let it be spoken to our
Honorable Rulers; The greater Care, Time and Diligence is taken, by your
selves in Reading and Studying the Word of God, the more likely it will be,
that you will become Wise to Salvation; and the more capable you will be of
doing GOD and the Government, good Service as Ruler; for in the Scriptures you
learn the Art of Government; and there you have all manner of Encouragement to
the right Discharge of those Duties that are incumbent on you as Rulers: and
that as a chief, and notable Persuasive, that GOD will be with you; if you
Zealously and Religiously attend your Duty as Rulers: As in 2 Chronicles 19.6. Ye
Judge not for Man, but for God, who is with you in the Judgment. In the
Scriptures you find the End of Civil Government, and what are the most proper
Methods to be taken by Rulers, in order to attain this End; which may be a
Motive to good Rulers to Converse much with the Scriptures, that they may be
what God has appointed them to be, His Ministers for good to His People.

(2.) Be pleased to be frequently Reading and Studying the Civil Law of the
Land. Let a Copy of this Law, the Rule limiting your Power in Government, and
teaching you how to Govern; be with you, and Read therein all the Days of the
Life of your Civil Power; that you may keep all the Statutes thereof, and do
them; and may be the better able to oblige all of us, Subject to your
Authority, to keep those good and wholesome Laws likewise. I need not suggest
it, to Persons of your Reason and Experience, that the Study of the Law is a
large Field, in which many a Painful Step must be taken; and much Observation
used, before we discover the utmost Boundaries of it: yet the Delight that is
in it, to ingenious Minds, in your Stations* ( Scire multum est Jucundissimum)
Knowledge is most Pleasant: and the Profit that resolteth there from, unto your
Selves, and to the whole Government under your Command, I hope will be an
encouraging Motive thereunto; though the work may seem tedious and may require
length of Time, depth of Though It, and great Pains. I hope none will object, That
our Civil Law is so plain and easy to be understood, that there needs not
much Time to be spent in the Reading and Study of it. For though the more the
matter is looked into, the more Knowledge will be gained, yet the more shall we
find it to be, Durum opus est Difficile; an hard and difficult Task. It is noso
easy a thing to understand the right spirit and meaning of the Law, so as to be
able to make a right Application of it, to all the various Persons and Causes,
that come before the Judges on the Seats of Judicature, as some men vainly
imagine. If any such Objection, as above stated should be made, it may be
Replied; That the Political Statutes which God gave to His Israel of old, were
as plain and easy to be understood, as any of the Laws of Nations of a later
Date; and yet God did expressly Command that the King upon the Throne, the Chief
of Executive Rulers, and the Fountain of Executive Power, should write him a
Copy of this Law in a Book; and should Read therein all the Days of his Life.
Neither the Dignity of his Office, nor the Weight of his other Business should
excuse him.

(3.) Be humbly Exhorted to distribute Justice and Judgment among our several
Tribes, and in all our Gates, according to this Rule, the Law. Let the Law
Studied and Understood by you, and each of you, be the Rule and Measure of all
your proceedings in Government: To this Rule you are limited by the Solemn Oath
of God upon you; and by your virtual Covenant with the People, by whose
Suffrages, you are designed to those Places of Power and Trust, that you are,
or may be in. Let neither fear of Offending some, nor hope of Pleasing others;
nor any other thing cause you to deviate from this Rule the Law, in any of your
Civil Administrations. Let this be your peculiar Motto and Maxim of State, Fiat
J^^^itia ruit caelus; Let Justice be done what ever be the Event.

It will not surely be ungrateful, to recommend to your serious Consideration,
that Scripture; Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. And I Charged your Judges at that time, saying,
Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and Judge Righteously between every Man
and his Brother, and the Stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect
Persons in Judgment, but you shall Hear the small as well as the great; you
shall not be afraid of the Face of Man; for the Judgment is God's.

(4) Be pleased to show a distinguishing Zeal for God and His Cause, in bearing
the Sword of Justice so, as it may be terrible to Evil Doers. In this you will
do a great Service for God, and for His People also, even in severely Punishing
according to the Law, those Wicked Men, who greatly Provoke God, by their high
handed iniquities, and not only bring Wrath upon themselves; but are one
principal meretorious Cause of those heavy Judgments, that from time to time,
fall upon our Land. We read, Josh. 22.20. That one man Sinned, even Achan the
Son of Zeri, and Wrath fell upon the whole Congregation of Israel; and that man
perished not alone in his Iniquity. Those that thus Offend God, and bring Wrath
upon His People, should be Punished by the Civil Magistrate according to the
Merit of their Offenses; and for this reason the Civil Magistrate is Armed with
the Sword, that he might cut off from the Common wealth those Wicked Men, whose
Crimes merit it; and who are (as gangrened Members, to the natural Body)
infectious and destructive to the whole Body Politic. Ense reciderdum ut ne
pars sincera trahatur immedicabile Vulnus. The incurable Limb must be cut off,
left the whole Body be Ruined. Be pleased to inflict the Just punishments the
Law has allotted, upon Criminal Offenders of every Kind, so, as you may be
God's Ministers in this respect for good, Revengers to execute Wrath upon them
that do evil; that all Israel may Hear and Fear, and do no more so Wickedly.

Suffer me a few words by way of Motive here, in two Particulars.

[1.] For Rulers to bear a severe Testimony against Sin, and Sinners; is the
ready way to bring on themselves and their Families a peculiar Blessing from
God. See that Scripture; Numb. 25.12, 13. Wherefore, behold I give him my
Covenant of Peace. And he shall have it, etc. Because he was Zealous for his
God.

[2.] For Rulers thus to do, is the way to turn away God's Wrath from a Sinful
People, and to lengthen out their Tranquillity: Numb. 25, 11. Phineas the Son of
Eleazer, the Son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away my Wrath, while he was
Zealous for my sake among them. And so says God by His Prophet of old; Jer. 5,
1. Run ye to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and search in the broad
Ways thereof, if ye can find a Man, to stand up and execute Judgment, and seek
the Truth, and I will Pardon it.

2. In the Second Place by way of Exhortion, I would make my humble Address,
unto my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the MINISTRY: And though it belongs not
to us, to execute Judgment for God according to the Statutes of the Land, (as
it belonged not to King Uzziah to burn Incense, but to the Priests the Sons of
Aaron;) and so not so needful for us to Read and Study the Civil Law: Yet as
Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD, and Rulers in His
House; it is very Needful and Profitable for us, to Read and Study the
Scriptures, in the which the Law of CHRIST is contained. That ought to be the
Rule of all our Sacred Administrations: Christ was not less Faithful in all his
House, than Moses was in his. And HE is the great Legislator, as well as the
King of His Church. And in the Scriptures His Laws are contained, to which we
must Conform as strictly in our Ministry and Government, as the Civil Ruler
must Conform to the Civil Law, as the Rule of the Lawful Exercise of his Power.
Let us therefore Painfully Study this Law of Christ in all the Parts of it; and
make it the Rule of our Practice, in the performance of all the Duties of our
Sacred Calling. To CHRIST our Great Lord and King, we must ere long be
Accountable; and the great Enquiry then will be, Whether we have Regulated all
things, in the House and Worship of God according to the Pattern given in the
Mount. Therefore let us take a Copy of this Law, in the Book of the Scriptures;
and let it be with us, and let us Read therein all the Days of our Lives; that
we may learn to fear the Lord our God, and to keep all His Commandments and his
Statutes, to do them. In our Ministry and Government, let us bear a due
Testimony against Sin, and Sinners; as did Phincas the Son of Eleazer, that God
may Bless us, and Establish with us the Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood,
because we have been Zealous for His sake among His People. That bold and
daring Transgressors, where the Sword of Civil Power does not reach, or not
sufficiently correct and amend, may be reached and slain by the Sword of the
Word: That it may be, as was said, in 1 King. 19.17. Him that escapes the
Sword of Jehu, shall Elisha Slay.

3. The Third Branch of Exhortation may be directed to all such, who according
to the Constitution of our Government, are Electors of Rulers; either as they
are Freemen of this Corporation, or as they are Members of that Representative
Body of our Colony, to whom the Power of Electing Inferior Rulers does belong.
The Advice to you, Gentlemen, is this; Take care to Choose such for Rulers
whether Superior or Subordinate, as are men of Religion, and Knowledge in the
Laws. Such as Conscientiously Read and Study the Scripture and the Laws of the
Land, that they may do God and His People good Service as Rulers; and be God's
Ministers for good. Don't choose either Vicious Persons or Babes in Knowledge,
to manage our State Affairs; such are not fit to have the Charge over our
Jerusalem: or if they have it can they manage that Charge and Trust, as becomes
good Rulers. And don't choose Men to Rule over us, merely because they are your
particular Friends, and will suit you in some of your particular Designs and
private Interests: Neither withold your Suffrages from any that are Men of
Religion and Knowledge of the Laws, because they are not of your Faction, and
will not suit with your private Humor and particular Interests. If you do
guide your Choice by private Favor, Affection or Faction, without regard to
Public Good; you will Violate the Solemn Oath of God upon you, and bring your
selves under great Guilt; and can not answer it before God in the Great Day of
Account. You ought herein to act in the fear of God, and discarding all respect
to your Private Interest and all Prejudice; aiming at God's Glory, and the Good
of His People in general; and as God declares to the Rulers what they must do
in order to Rule well; viz Write them a Copy of this Book of the Law, and Read
therein, etc. So those you observe most Conformable to this Duty which God
requires of Rulers; they are the Persons for whom you should give your
Suffrages when ever you are called to it.

To you, Gentlemen, who are the Representative Body of our Colony, I would say
one word in special; That although there may want some further good Laws to be
made, for the Punishing of Sin, Immorality and Profaneness, that are too much
abounding in our Land (and if that be the Case, its your business to Exercise
your Legislative Power for that end) yet it may be a matter more highly
requisite in order to Reformation, to put good Laws already made, in due
Execution: And your business herein, is to put into Place of Power, such
Inferior Rulers throughout our several Tribes, as in their respective
Stations, will put good Laws in due Execution. Such as know the Law, and so are
such as crafty and bold Criminals, or their Advocates and Abetters can not,
battle; and such as have learned the Fear of God out of the Scriptures, and are
men of such Religious and Conscience, that they will be Zealous for God among
His People, bearing the Sword of Justice not in Vain; but so as to be God's
Ministers for good, revengers to execute Wrath upon them that do evil.

4. Lastly, I would by way of Exhortation offer a few words, unto all those
that are the Ruled, Subject to the Authority of Civil Rulers: And the
Exhortation to you is, Take care to Keep the Laws of God, and the good and
wholesome Laws of the Common Wealth. It is as much our Duty to keep the Laws,
as its the Duty of our Religious Rulers to inflict the Punishments of the Law
upon us in case we are the breakers of it.

And here more Particularly be Exhorted to discharge Four Points of Duty,
respecting our Carriage toward our Rulers, which the Laws of God as well as
the Laws of the Government make our especial Duty.

(1.) To Honor and Regard them as our Civil Fathers; not Vilifying or
Reproaching of them in any of our words or actions; as in Romans 13.7. Render
therefore to all their Duet, etc. Honor to whom Honor is due. So in Exodus
22.18. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People.

(2.) To Freely and Readily Pay them Tribute for their Serving us as Rulers,
and being God's Ministers to us for good: Romans 13.6, 7. For this cause pay you
Tribute also: for they are God's Ministers, attending continually on this very
thing. Render therefore tribute to whom Tribute is Due.

(3.) To Pray for them to the Eternal Lord Heaven and Earth, whose Vicegerents
they are; that they may be acting in their sphere of Exaltation for God's
Glory, and our good. To this we are Commanded, 1 Timothy 2.2 Pray for King's, and
all in Place of Authority, that under them we may lead Quiet and Peaceable
Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

(4) To Submit to them as they are God's Ministers to Rule over us, and have
received their Power from GOD; and are called Gods from the dignity of their
Office: which Submission we must render unto them as a Duty which God requires
of us, so long as they keep within the limits of their Power in Ruling over us.
And this we must do not only for fear of their Wrath, but for Conscience sake:
For the Rule is, Rom 13.5. Wherefore ye must needs be Subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. And God says, in the Second Verse of the
same Chapter; Whosoever resists, resists the Ordinance of God: and shall
receive to himself Damnation.

FINIS.
Adbertisement. Lately Printed
A Primer for the Colony of Connecticut, or an Introduction to the true Reading
of English. To which is added, Milk for Babes.

AND

THE School of Good Manners. Containing, (1.) Sundry mixed Precepts. (2.) Rules
for Childrens Behavior at the Meeting house, at Home, at the Table, in
Company, in Discourse at School, Abroad; with an Admonition to Children. (3
Good Advice for the ordering of their Lives with a Baptismal Covenant. (4) Some
wholesome Cautions. (5.) A Short Plain and Scriptural Catechism. (6) Eleven
short Exhortations. (7) The Ten Commandments in Verse, with a Compenduous Body
of Divinity, an Alphabet of Useful Copies, and Cyprian's Twelve Absurdities
(8.) Some Prayer for Children; with Graces before and after Mea^.

Both Sold by T. Green, at New London, near the Meeting House.


