Objections TO THE Bank of Credit Lately Projected at BOSTON. Being a LETTER
upon that Occasion, to JOHN BURRIL, Esquire Speaker to the House of REPRESENTATIVES
for the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Better is a little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right.
BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, in Pudding-Lane, near King Street. 1714.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Believe it cannot be unknown to you, That some time the last Summer, I
presented a Memorial to His Excellency the Governor and Council, referring to
the Bank of Credit, Projected by a Number of Gentlemen, Merchants, and others
among us; and you must needs have seen in the Public News-Paper, an Order of
Council that was passed upon that Occasion; whereby the Projectors were
directed to Proceed no further in that Affair, until the next Session of the
General Assembly, That so the whole Government might be of Advice in a Matter
of that Weight and Consequence. Notwithstanding all which, (I am loath to say in
Contempt of it) the Persons Concerned, are openly carrying on their Bank with
utmost Vigor and Expedition; as Supposing, and indeed Affirming, That the
Government have nothing to do with them in that Affair: So that it is very much
to be questioned, whether the Projectors will make any Application to the
General Assembly or not; looking upon themselves very Well and Sufficient
without it. But does it follow, SIR, That the Government must sit still, and
neither Say nor Do any thing, when they see and hear of a Projection that is
just ripe for Execution, which so very much Imports the Prerogative of the
Crown, the Constitution and Laws of this Province, the Estates and Liberties of
the People, and that not only for the present, but succeeding Generations? No,
it cannot be!

I doubt not, but that before I have finished this Letter, to prove beyond all
Question, and that by very good Reason, That as it Principally, and in the
first Place behooves the Government, and General Assembly of the Province, so it
really Concerns every Man that has any Interest in this Country, with great
Application to Enquire into, and seriously Consider the Nature and Consequences
of this Bank of Partnership, and that before it take Effect, and there be no
Remedy: For do but suppose, SIR, This Pandora's Box once opened, and Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds of these Bank-Bills Issued and Circulating upon Loan,
or otherwise, and the Government at home should afterward, in their Great
Wisdom Disapprove and Suppress 'em, or it should otherwise Miscarry and come to
nothing, by any unforeseen Accident; into what irreparable Mischiefs, Confusion
and Misery would every body be Involved, that had to do with 'em? and the Blame
and Reproach of it finally (with too much Reason) be thrown and Center on the
General Assembly: For it will be Natural for every one then to say, Ay' Why did
not the Government Interpose and Prevent this? And it was this very
Consideration that principally Determined me at this time, freely to
Communicate my Thoughts upon this Matter: And I could not, I am sure, think of
a more suitable Person to Offer 'em to, than One, who has deservedly so good a
Character and great an Influence in his Country.

But before I proceed any further, I must pray you not to mistake my Design;
for my Intention is not so much to sit in Judgment upon this Bank Projection,
as to Awaken the Government, (Pardon the Expression) and to Convince the
Projectors, that not one Step in an Affair of this Consequence, ought to be
taken without the Knowledge and Leave of His Majesty's Government of this
Province, and that for these two Reasons: Principally,

First. Because we are a Dependent Government, and must in all things Conform
our selves to the Laws of Great Britain, and the Instructions of the Crown; and
therefore must expect to give an Account of all our Matters. And then,

Secondly. Because the People of this Country have their next and immediate
Dependence on the General Assembly, who are therefore to see to it, (as they
will answer the Trust reposed in them) that the Commonwealth receive no Damage
by their Means. But to proceed in what I have further to say, I shall take this
Method. First I shall give you a short Abstract of the Projection it self, and
then some of my Sentiments or Reflections upon it.

The Projection in short, as I understand it is thus: A, B, C, D, etc, to the
Number we'll say of one Hundred, by a certain Policy of their own Framing,
Aggregate or Join themselves together into a Company or Partnership, in Order
to make a Bank of Credit, as they call it, by Subscriptions, amounting to Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds; which Sum they propose to make into Bills, of Pounds,
and Shillings, and to let 'em out at Four Pounds per Cent. Interest; the
Subscribers themselves being obliged to take out one quarter (...) of their
respective Subscriptions, and give good Security accordingly; the other three
Quarters to be let out upon good Land Security, to such as will borrow 'em; the
Profits arising from time to time, upon the Loan of the Bills, to be to the
Community or Partnership, excepting some Proportions thereof, which they
propose for the Use of the Government, the Town of Boston, and some other
Public Uses, after the ^^piration of such a Time, and on certain Conditions
therein Expressed. And for the better Management of their Affairs, they have
their Treasurer, Directors, and other Officers, etc. But for your further
Information of the Projection, I will now Insert the Form of one of their
Bills, Viz.

s. (20)
THIS Indented Bill of Twenty Shillings, Obliges us, and all and every of us,
and all and every of our Partners of the Bank of Credit in Boston in
New England, to Accept the same in all Payments, according to Covenant made by
us, on Public Record; and that it shall be accordingly received by the
Treasurer for the Redemption of any Pawn or Mortgage in the said Bank Boston,
etc.

Now in the first Place, SIR, How Plainly and Greatly must the Prerogative of
the Crown, and the Honor of Government, be affected by, and concerned in this
Projection? Dare any Man of Law, or will any Man that loves or understands any
thing of Government, Say, or Imagine, That such a Bank as this, may Safely, or
can indeed Possibly be set up, and carried on without a Charter from the Crown?
Shall a Number of Persons, of their own Head, Form themselves into a Company,
(...) C^nstitution of their own making, and Erect themselves into a Body
Politic, and Corporate to all Intents and Purposes in the Law, so as to Sue
and be Sued, to Purchase and Grant Lands to take in Succession, with the Power
of Making and Lending at one Stroke, the Modest Sum of Two Hundred Thousand
Pounds, and afterward as much more as they shall see meet? Certainly, Men that
Talk at this Rate, must be absolute Strangers to the Constitution and Laws of
Great Britain, the Honor of Government, the very Notion and Nature of
Corporations: For any one that has but looked into the History of England and
London, will find that the several Companies, Fraternities, and Corporations
there, have been all of them Created, either by Charter from the Crown, or by
Act of Parliament, and some of 'em by both; and neither have, nor pretend to
any other Powers, Franchises or Liberties, than such as are Given and Limited
to 'em in and by their several Charters. And indeed it is altogether as Absurd
in the Law, for a Body Politic to Create it self, as in Philosophy for the
Body Natural.

The Law Books of England, do all Una Voce Proclaim it as an undoubted Truth,
That all Powers Politic, all Franchises, Liberties, Charters Corporations, and
the like, are Derived from the King, as their Original Fountain. And I believe
this is the first time that ever any thing to the Contrary entered into the
Reason of any Man out of Eutopia. I am sure the Great and Famous Bank of
England was first Founded, and is still Supported on the strength of an Act of
Parliament, and a Charter of the late King William and Queen Mary of Glorious
Memory; as may be seen at Large by the said Act of Parliament made in the Fifth
and Sixth Years of that Reign: Whereby Their Majesty's were Empowered to
Incorporate a Number of Gentlemen, Merchants, etc. by the Name of the Governor
and Company of the Bank of England; who were to Govern themselves by certain
Rules and Limitations, made partly by the said Act of Parliament, and to be
made by Their Majesty's in the Charter, and which was finally Subject to the
Condition of a Redemption by Parliament.

But our Gentlemen, it seems, have found out a nearer way to a Bank and
Corporation, than the Tedious and Troublesome one of a Charter from Home, or
Acts of Assembly here; and not only presume to Incorporate themselves, and make
their own Rules and Orders, but also very Dutifully foreclose and shut out the
Government from any Power of Redemption, or indeed any other Concern with 'em.

Possibly these Gentlemen may say, They don't pretend to Incorporate or make
themselves a Body Politic, etc. but to Obviate that Objection, I shall give
you the Notion, and Nature of a Corporation, as I find it in my Lord Cook's
Institutes, and then leave you to Judge how Inconsistent this Objection is with
their Policy or Projection.

My Lord Cook says, A Corporation is a Body to take in Succession, Framed as to
that Capacity by the Policy of Man, and called a Corporation, because the
Persons are made into a Body, and so are of Capacity to Take or Grant, etc.
with Powers to Sue or be Sued, etc. Now it is easy to observe, how fully the
Projectors, in their Scheme, have come up to this Description of a Corporation.

As to their Bank-Bills, I readily grant they are not Money; for indeed nothing
can be Money properly, and in the Law of England, but Silver or Gold (both
which are of an Intrinsic and Universal Value) that has the Impress of the
Prince, and made Current at a Rate, or Value set by Act of Parliament, or
Proclamation of the Crown. However, these Bills will have as much the Face and
Signatures of Money, as even the Bills of the Bank of England, or the Bills of
Credit of this Province. For they are to be Printed, to be Stamped with an
Escutcheon, to be Marked with Pounds and Shillings: They are to be Let out at
Interest, and finally, the Projectors themselves tell us, They are to serve as
a Medium of Exchange, which was the First Rise, and still continues the End and
Use of Money. But that which I Insist on under this Head as before, is, That no
Person, or Number of Persons whatsoever,, can Assume, or may Dare to take this
Power to themselves, but must Derive it from the Crown.

But besides what I have said of the Prerogative, the Nature of Corporations in
General, with Political Powers, Liberties, etc. and in Particular of the Bank
of England, I must needs observe to you, an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth
Year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Anne of Blessed Memory,
wherein it is Enacted, That during the Continuance of the Bank of England, it
shall not be Lawful for any Body Politic or Corporate, other than the said
Company of the Bank, or for other Partners exceeding Six in England, to Borrow,
or Owe any Sum on Bill or Note Payable on Demand, or at any time less than Six
Months from Borrowing thereof.

Now I shall not trouble you or my self, to Argue how far this Projection would be
a Breach upon the Constitution of the Bank of England; yet I think it is very
fair and easy to observe, that so great a Number of Persons, as our Projectors
consist of, may by no Means, without a sufficient Power first had, presume to
Make or Issue these their Joint Bills or Notes. For certainly, if the same Fact
committed in England, by a Number exceeding Six, would be a breach of Law, much
more may we suppose it forbidden and made Unlawful for an Hundred to do it here.

We frequently meet in our Law Books, with Informations in the Nature of Quo
Warrantos against Corporations, and Bodies Politic, for Usurping Powers,
Franchises and Liberties not belonging to them; or for abusing and acting
contrary to those that do. And the Defense generally made in those Cases, has
been Founded on their several Charters. But now suppose such an Information
were Ordered to be brought against these Projectors, what Defense in the Law
could possibly be made by them, or for them?

I now proceed to the next General Head which I proposed, and that is, How far
the Government, and the very Constitution of this Province may be affected by,
and therefore ought thoroly to Inform themselves about this Projection: And I
think nothing can be plainer, than that the General Assembly of the Province,
are under a necessity of Enquiring into the Legality, the Justice, the Safety,
and Public Advantage of this Bank, and if judged otherwise; by some proper
Act, or Public Order to Declare against, and forbid it, until His Majesty's
Pleasure may be known upon it. And as no wise Man, or good Subject can question
the Power or Justice of the Government in so doing, so it is much to be feared
on the other Hand, in Case they should be wholly Silent, they might be called
in Question at Home, for any ill Consequences of their Neglect therein: For I
cannot agree by any means with those Gentlemen that Argue, Because the Bank is
Private, and the Government as such not Interested Interested in it, that the
whole Blame and Damage will fall on the Projectors. Can it be Imagined, that
when this Affair has been so Public, the Government Notified of it so
Effectually, and the Projection it self of so high and extraordinary a Nature,
That upon the whole, no Account will be demanded by His Majesty of the
Government, what Methods they took upon this Occasion, to secure the Honor of
the Crown, and the Safety of the Subject. But be that as it will, I think it
very Unreasonable, and absolutely Inconsistent with the Honor, the Power, and
Wisdom of this Government, to suffer any Projection whatsoever, though otherwise
never so well Framed, to be set up and carried on, and they have no Advice
about it, no Authority over it, nor so much as a Power to Redeem it, in case
they see good. This will be in effect, to suffer a Number of their own People
to set up an absolute Independent Government, which like a Fire in the Bowels,
will Burn up and Consume the whole Body. If such things as these may be
Tolerated, 'twill be a vain thing any longer to talk of Government, a Power of
making Laws, Regulating Trade, etc. For they that can make at one Dash, the Sum
beforementioned, and as much more when they please, will quickly Govern the
Trading part, and by degrees get the Land, of the Country Mortgaged to them,
and so at length bear down the Government it self, and nothing be restrained
from them. For which Reason I hope, and doubt not, but that the General
Assembly of the Province, will upon this great Occasion, exert their proper
Powers, as they have once and again heretofore, when they have been under any
apprehensions of Danger, either to the Government, or the Public Good. Two
notable Instances whereof you will find in the Memorial, one with respect to the
making of Money, and the other of a Partnership or Company, both which are
Published among the Printed Acts.

As to the Act of Parliament of the Sixth of the late Queen beforementioned,
the Act of Parliament of late also made referring to Money in the Plantations,
the several Laws of our own Province, with respect to Money, and the Interest
of it; as also those that concern the Bills of Credit Established on the
Province; all of which will more or less be Affected, Invalidated, and broke in
upon by this Projection. I have taken so much Notice of them in the Memorial,
that I shall forbear saying any thing more on that Head here, save only to
Remark, That as the General Court or Assembly of the Province, so certainly no
particular Number of Persons in a Company or Partnership, can Pretend, or must
Presume to Institute or Establish any thing Repugnant to the Laws of England.
And so I pass on, in the last Place to Consider the Frame and Nature of this
Laudable Projection, as some are pleased to call it; and my Objections to it
are such as these.

First. Its absolute Independency on the Government, either as to its
Regulation, or the power of Redemption; which, as I observed before, is a thing
Intolerable, and without Precedent, and never so much as entered into the Minds
of the Projectors of the Great Bank of England to Ask, much less of the
Government to Grant.

Secondly. I cannot see the Reasonableness and Justice of it, betwixt the
Subscribers and Borrowers: For, as I have Remarked already, the Subscribers are
obliged to take out but a Quarter part of their Subscriptions, the other three
Quarters is to be Let out at four per Cent. Interest, upon good Security. Now,
according to the common course of Interest, in less than Twenty Years, and if
the Company shall please, by issuing out a greater Quantity of Bills, in a
third part of that Time, the Subscribers will have cleared their own Mortgages,
draw out their own Stakes, and so have the Interest of the whole to share among
themselves, and the Bubbled Borrowers pay Interest for their own Estates. Pray
where is the Justice of this? Why should not the Borrowers when it comes to
that, have some of the Profits of the Bank, when their Estates are the only
remaining Fund? I confess, it may seem a very easy and short Way of getting an
Estate; but sure no Projection can expect to Succeed, that is not Founded in
Commutative Justice and Common Honesty.

I should be glad to know of these Gentlemen, that pretend to be so Public
Spirited in this Business, whether they could be Contented, and have the fame
Opinion of this Bank, if their Names were taken out of the Policy, and an equal
Number of others put in, and I suppose, without any Reflection, as Good may be
found, and so instead of being Lenders, they would become Borrowers of these
Bank-Bills? I am afraid not! For the Business is, and very good Business it
would be, in one Day to be Masters of 150000 l. and without any Risque at all,
or any other Charge or Trouble, except the Printing and Signing a few pieces of
Paper, to accept of Six Thousand Pounds per Annum Interest: By which Method, in
effect, the Projectors would immediately have the Profits of other Men's
Estates; and finally, as the Matter may be managed, the Estates themselves,
without a valuable Consideration; their Bank-Bills being but pieces of Paper
that have no other Value, but what the Borrowers give them. And yet we are made
to believe, that the Borrowers are well dealt with, if though they pay Interest,
yet they may at last have their own Estates or Pawns back again, upon bringing
in the Bills. If this be not the Philosopher's Stone, there is no such thing in
the World.

Thirdly. It must, I think, unavoidably prove a great Snare and Mischief to
People that want Money to pay their Debts or otherwise, for whose Ease and
Advantage nevertheless the Bank is Projected: As for Example; A Man owes me one
Hundred Pounds upon Bond, in the Bills of Credit of the Province, and very
readily pays me Six per Cent. Interest; to Discharge which, he repairs to the
Bank, and Borrows 100 l. in their Bills, and comes to take up his Bond: Can any
Man in Prudence or Justice think, that I shall take one Hundred Pounds in
Bank-Bills, that will fetch but Four per Cent. for one Hundred Pounds in
Province-Bills, that People so willingly give Six per Cent. for? No sure. I
must at least have as many of the Bank-Bills, as will fetch Six per Cent. And
if the Bankers should out of their great Generosity, and in Compassion as they
pretend to such as want Money, Let their Interest at three, or two per Cent.
Interest, the Case would be so much the worse.

Fourthly. What Security will the last Possessor of these Bills have to depend
upon, in case this Bank should be broke up, either by the Government, or its
self? As for Example: A Man has one Thousand Pounds of 'em by him; what shall
he do with 'em, when the Credit of 'em is come to nothing? For, by the Tenor
of the Bills, as you see, they are only obliged to accept of 'em for the
Redemption of Pawns or Mortgages; and this Possessor has neither to take up.
Possibly you will say the Bankers will Assign him over a Mortgage: To that I
answer, That the Foundation being gone, every thing else will fall with it. I
doubt our Courts would never Adjudge those Mortgages to be good in the Law,
being for no Valuable Consideration, so that the Lands so Mortgaged, would
Revert to the Original Owners, like the Year of Jubilee among the Jews. And
then as to the Possessors Suing of the Company to make good their Bills, first
there will be no such thing in case they be Dissolved by Order of Government;
secondly, If in the other Case, it should sink of it felf, they may prove
Insolvent, and so the Possessor be finely Lurched: For which Reason, all Wise
Men will be afraid to meddle with them, or be sure to get rid of them as fast
as they can.

Fifthly. The Name and Style of this Projection, is a Bank of Credit: Now I
take it for a certain Rule, That no Money-Bank, as we may call it, can or will
possibly have any Credit that is not Equal, either Really, or in Reputation, to
the True or common Current Money of the Country, or Place where such Bank is
Erected: And You may depend upon it, SIR, That if the Bills of the Bank of
England it self were not looked upon as good as Specie, and in effect a
Money-Bank, the Credit of 'em would quickly come to nothing. For which Purpose
there are always kept in the Office of the said Bank in London, vast Sums of
Silver and Gold, to Exchange for their Bills to any one that demands it.
Besides which, the Exchequer, as you may see frequently by the London-Gazett,
is always ready for that End to Assist 'em with whatever Sums they may have
Occasion for. But now our Projectors don't so much as pretend to have the least
Doight of Silver or Gold, or even a Stock of Bills of Credit of this Province
to Answer, in Case of Necessity, or to support the Credit of their Bills
withal. And I am sure they have no reason to expect the Assistance of the
Government upon any Emergency, since as yet, they have not so much as Consulted
them in the whole Affair.

Sixthly. I cannot but think, the Making and Issuing so great a Quantity of
these Bank-Bills, will be attended with a great deal of Mischief and Confusion
as to Money in General: Now Money is of the greatest Importance, and last
Consequence to a Commonwealth; for as it is the Sinews of War, so it is the
Strength of Peace: For which Reason, we cannot have too much of that which
really is Money, but we may very easily have too much of that which is not so.

The poorest Countryman in the Province, is not convinced to this Day, but
that Silver, though never so Rough and Unpolished, is preferable to the finest
Paper-Money that ever was seen. We have had too much Confusion already in the
Province, by the Difference that has been made between Silver-Money and our
Public Bills of Credit, (when yet they were Supported by the Government) and
are hardly got over it to this Day. But into what a Gulf of Misery by
Stock-jobbing Difference of Money, and innumerable other Mischiefs shall we be
plunged think you, when such a Flood of Private Paper-Money comes to be poured
out among us? It Is now more than Twelve Years since the Government first began
to Make and Issue the Bills of Credit; and though the Occasions and Necessities
of the Province have been very Pressing and Urgent, yet in all that time, they
have made but about Two Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds: But as if that were
a small Thing, our Gentlemen propose at once to Make and Issue out 200000 l.
And by the same Reason that a Bank is set up in Boston, several others may go
on in the several parts of the Province; and what can the Consequence of this
be, but to Confound the People, and make Money Vile and Contemptible; and as
much as in them lies, to Alter and Destroy the very Nature of Money? So that
instead of Answering all things, as it has always done, and ought to do, it
will now Answer nothing, and be worse than every thing else; For that which
really makes the Value of Money, among other things, is its Rarity: So that
upon the whole, the Remedy proposed by these Projectors, will be much worse
than the Disease. As to the Business of Trade, for the Ease, Benefit, and
Advantage whereof this Wonderful Bank is Projected, it would be well
Considered, First, Whether we have not generally run upon too much Trade for
our Profit, already? For if I am not mistaken, though I am no Merchant, the
greatness of the Credit given in Trade, has in a great Measure, brought this
want of Money upon us.

I confess, as to the Encouraging the Produce of our own Country, and our own
Manufactures, the Exporting of our own Commodities we cannot well exceed; but
if we Import from Abroad, more than we can Pay for, by what we Produce our
selves, or Purchase from others with our own Commodities, we shall unavoidably
grow Poor, and a Million of Paper-Money will not help the matter at all: So that
the less we Import from Abroad, the less Money or Medium of Exchange, the
Trading part will want. And here indeed has been our great Improvidence and
Unhappiness in this Country, (of late Years especially) that the greatest part
of our Consumption in Boston, and other Seaport Towns, almost to Food and
Raiment, has been of Foreign Commodities, when the same things might be raised
among our selves, were the Produce of our own Country Encouraged, at least, so
much as to make a Balance of Trade in our Favor. Besides all which, I cannot
but think it the Duty and Interest of our Merchants and Traders, who have been
the great Occasion of the Loss of our Silver, to Project some way of Recovering
it again, and manage the Trade, so as that a good Proportion of Silver and Gold
might once more find the way into New England, and there remain for the Honor
and Service of the Government and Country, who have Suffered and been Exposed
too much already for want of it; and had not the absolute Necessity of the
Government and People Required it, it had been better (in the Opinion of many
Wise Men) for the Province, they had never made any Bills, or Paper-Money at
all.

I might also mention the great Extravagance that People, and especially the
Ordinary sort, are fallen into, far beyond their Circumstances, in their
Purchases, Buildings, Families, Expenses, Apparel, and generally in their whole
way of Living: And above all, the excessive Consumption of Rhum and Wine, as
one of the greatest Sources and Causes of the present Distress: Hereupon it
must be granted by every one of common Sense and Observation, That if the
Importation of Foreign Commodities were less, and especially those two Branches
beforementioned, viz. Rhum and Wine Reduced to what only might be Necessary.
Were but a tolerable Proportion of Silver brought in to us, which might be
effected with Ease and Profit, were Frugality and good Husbandry Universally in
Fashion among us, there would not be such a Clamor for want of a Medium of
Exchange. I confess, as things are at present Managed and Circumstanced among
us, both Silver and Paper-Money is become very scarce; though really more in
Boston, and among the Trading part, than in Proportion, in the other parts of
the Province. And the last Session of the General Assembly, when I had the
Honor to be one of an Extraordinary Committee raised for that Purpose; I gave
it as my Opinion, That considering the Demand of the Government as to the
Taxes, and the great Occasions of the People as to their Trade, it might be
convenient to Make and Issue out a further Quanty of the Public Bills of
Credit, etc. in such a Method as was then agreed on: And of the same Opinion
were all of that Committee, save Two, as I Remember, and they consisted of
Thirteen: And accordingly a Report was made by the Chairman, in the Name of
the rest. But how that Matter dropped when it came into the Lower House, I shall
not take upon me here to say, though it may easily be guessed at. However, I
persuade my self, that when the General Assembly comes to Review that Report,
the Scheme then Agreed, will be found the best, if not the only Expedient to
Relieve the present Distress; and the Gentlemen that Oppose it, will I Am
Confident, have no Thanks from those they Represent.

SIR, I do not pretend in all, or any thing that I have said, to be against a
Bank of Credit in General, were it well Founded, well Limited, and Regulated by
the Government, and Equal to our own Current-Money, as such a Bank ought to be:
But I am utterly against this present Projection, for the Reasons I have given,
and many others that might be Mentioned: And since, as I said before, and I
really am of that Opinion, That there is a Necessity of Supplying the People
with a further convenient Quantity of Bills of Credit, for the better Payment
of their Taxes, and the ease of Trade. I am absolutely for its being done by
the Public, and for such Reasons as these.

First. We have, had Twelve Years Experience already of the Public Bills, with
great Honor, Safety, and Success; Whereas the Private Projection, is a Path
that has never yet been Trod, and what the Consequences may be, we don't know.

Secondly. The Bills of Credit upon the Province, are Equal even to Seventeen
Penny halfpenny Weight, as to the Public Tax, and by a late Act of the
General Assembly, they are made a good Tender in the Law, as to all Debts
Contracted in the Common Course of Trade, and by that means upon the Matter,
made of an Intrinsic Value, and so the Credit of 'em Firm and Necessary.

Thirdly. The Profits in Case the Government Issue the Bills, will always
Redound to the Public, and so every one will have a Benefit thereby. And
again, we may reasonably suppose, that the Government would be more Sparing and
Cautious, and not so Lavish in Launching out their Bills, as a Private Bank
would be, not being under the like Temptation: By which means the Credit of the
Bills would be the better preserved. Besides which, the Province has once and
again made good Counterfeits, and further provided against 'em, as you may see
by a Private Act made in the Third Year of the late Reign, and a Public Act
made the very last Session of the Assembly: Whereas there is no Provision at
all against Counterfeits in this Private Projection. And to mention no more
upon this Head, the Fund of the Public Bills of Credit, being the Province in
General, according to the ordinary Course of Things, can never be doubted, or
in Danger.

I know very well what the Bankers Object to all this, viz.

First. That as by the Constitution, it is in the Power of the Governor and
Council to draw out the Public Money, so it would be much more in His Power to
lay His Hand on the Money so made and Let out, it being not raised for His
Majesty's Use, and Appropriated, and thereby Endanger the Liberties of the
People. To this I Answer, First, That according to the Scheme agreed on, and
Reported by the Committee, The Principal and Profits of that Money were so
Settled and Secured, that nothing less than the General Assembly could Dispose
of either. Secondly. As the Projectors have Ordered their Bank, 2000 l. of
their Yearly Profits they design to present to the Government: Now what they
mean by that, is uncertain. First, If they mean a Governor that they shall
please to like, I Am sure it would be a very effectual way to Enslave this
Country, by an understanding between such Governor and the Bank. Secondly. If
they intend the General Assembly, then I say as in the Memorial, That this
Government neither can nor ought to be Maintained in any other Method, than by
the Charter, and Instructions from the Crown.

Secondly. That the Government have no Power to do any such thing, as to Make
and Lend out any Public Bills; but with what Design they make, and how well
they Enforce this Objection, I leave the World to Judge, and with their Favor,
I should think the General Assembly as Capable of knowing and understanding
their own Powers, as the Projectors for 'em. I am sure it was the Opinion of
the Committee beforementioned, That the General Assembly of the Province, were
sufficiently Empowered by the Charter, whenever the necessary Support of the
Government required it, to Make and Issue these Bills of Credit in the Method
then proposed. And their Opinion was Founded upon that Clause in the Charter,
referring to imposing reasonable Assessments, Taxes, etc. In the necessary
Defense and Support of the Government, and the Protection, and Preservation of
the Inhabitants there, etc.

Now First, There Is nothing in the Charter Repugnant to the Governments Issuing
a further Sum of Bills. Secondly, It has been done, once and again, upon great
Occasions, and the Government not blamed for it, that I know of. Thirdly, If
the necessary Support of the Government of this Province, and the Preservation
of the People, (for those are the Words of the Charter) require the Making and
Issuing a further Quantity, then it is directly within, and well Warranted by
the Charter. Now I think we are all agreed in this, That neither the Government
nor People (as to their Trade and Business) can well be Supported and carry on
their necessary Affairs much longer, without a further Supply of Money, or
Bills of Credit. Besides which, the Projectors would do well to tell us, how it
comes to pass, that they should have so great a Power of Supplying the People
with Money, and the General Assembly have none at all. But certainly, if the
Bankers are so wise and Cautious as to the Powers of the Government, for fear
they should be exceeded, and the Constitution thereby Endangered; it much more
behooves the General Assembly of the Province, to Exercise this Caution, with
respect to this Projection, and effectually secure the Honor and Safety of the
Government, the Estates and Liberties of the People, which is the very thing I
Contend for, And that which Comforts me in what I have said and done upon this
Occasion, whatever the Event prove, is, That I have had no Private View, or
Separate Interest, much less any Prejudice to the Gentlemen concerned; among
whom I have many particular Friends; but have Sincerely aimed at the Public
Good. SIR, It was the Excellent Character of the Heads of the Tribe of
Issachar, in David's Time, and Recorded for their Honor, and our Imitation,
That they were Men of Understanding in the Times, to know what Israel ought to
do, etc. I earnestly Desire, and Believe, That the Heads of our Tribes like
them, upon this great Occasion, may and will Discern both Time and Judgment;
know and seek the true Interest of their Country: And I shall be glad, if I may
in any wise contribute to so good an End, by what I have here Offered. You Will
please to Excuse the Trouble of this long Letter, and Communicate it as you
think Proper.

I am, SIR, Your very Humble and Affectionate Servant. P. Dudley.
Boston, October 22. 1714. POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the Date and Delivery of this Letter, I understand the Bankers have new
Modelled their Projection, and Reformed it, as they reckon, in two Articles;
But how long this new Scheme will hold, is uncertain, First. Instead of Four,
they now propose to have Five per Cent. Interest; but they would do well to
tell us by what Law, or with what Justice they can pretend to ask or receive
one per Cent. or indeed any Interest at all, for their own Bills, which (as
before is observed) are nothing in themselves, have not the Foundation, the
Advantage and Value of the Public Bills of Credit on the Province, nor ever
can without the Government, and must be wholly obliged to the Borrowers for
their present worth or Currency. And I believe this is the first time that ever
Interest was asked for any sort of Money or Bills that had not the Stamp or
Authority of a Government.

Secondly. They have Reformed the Fund also, in obliging the Subscribers to
give in Real Security, to the Value of 200000 l. the full Sum of the Bills
proposed to be made, and so not to be obliged to the Borrowers for any part of
the Fund. I confess, there seems to be some Justice in this, and serves to
prove, that there was Reason and Weight in my first Objection to the Nature and
Frame of the Bank; And when they have Answered the rest, and made a through
Reform of their Projection, so as it may be Consistent with the Honor and
Safety of the Government, the Liberties and Properties of the People, and
agreeable to the Rules of Reason, Justice and Equity, I believe every one will
Encourage and give in to it.



FINIS.

