A Devout Contemplation On the Meaning of Divine Providence, in the Early DEATH
Of Pious and Lovely Children.

Preached upon the Sudden and Lamented DEATH of Mrs. Elizabeth Wainwright. Who
Departed this Life, April the 8th. 1714. Having just completed the Fourteenth
Year of Her Age.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor to a Church in Boston.

Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Joanna Perry, at her Shop on the North-side
of the Townhouse. 1714.

To my Honored FRIENDS, the Mournful RELATIVES of the Deceased Mrs. Elizabeth
Wainwright.
IT may doubtless become that Pastoral Relation which it has pleased the DIVINE
PROVIDENCE to Honor Me with toward many of You, to give You this public
Expression of my deep Sympathy in your present Sorrow, and to minister as I am
able to your Support under it, and Profit from it.

I pray GOD to Sanctify to Your Selves, and to your Families the many
surprising Breaches, which have within a few years been made upon that late
Flourishing part of your Family; and in particular the sudden Death of this
Lovely BRANCH which we now mourn.

You had a great deal of Pleasure and Comfort in Her the few days that GOD
spared Her to you; nor did the Town show a Child more Amiable in Person, or
more Innocent and Virtuous in Behavior; of a more sweet Disposition, or
seemingly better Inclined: not a Child scarce of greater Hopes, or more
universally Esteemed. So fair a Mind in so fair a Body was indeed worthy to be
loved. Nor was She without the happy Signs of a Spirit of true Devotion toward
GOD, as well as full of endearing Love and Goodness, Humility and Meekness
toward all whom She Conversed with: those Ornaments which are in the sight of
GOD of great Price.

I shall never forget the Agonies of Distress I found You in, as Many of you as
could suddenly get together on the Alarm of her Unexpected Change: Nor would I
have You to forget your own gracious Expressions of Humiliation and holy Fear,
Submission and Adoration, in the transports of your Grief on that sad Occasion.
O the Astonishing Spectacle we then had before our Eyes, of the Vanity of our
Best Estate in this Life! What a poor thing are Riches, or Children and
Families, or any Earthly Enjoyments to build any Expectation on: Our days upon
Earth are as a Shadow, and there is no abiding.

Many of You, my Good Friends, are in the Prime of Life, and some in your
Youth, just Entering on a Vain World, in Superior Circumstances with respect to
Outward Rank and Estate. Suffer me therefore to Exhort You to get above these
empty transitory Temptations that do surround You, and endanger you. You have
the more need to think often of Death, and of parting with every pleasant
Object of Sense; to withdraw your Hearts from things below, and betimes to get
that Faith in CHRIST, and in the Life to come, which is the Victory that
overcomes the World. The more GOD has given You of this World, the more are
you obliged to devote your selves to the Service of GOD in your Generation, as
good Stewards of those Talents He has put into your Hands.

Suppose that GOD should call one or other of You to die, as suddenly as He
called away your dear and blooming Relative a few days ago, amidst your
Acquisition of Riches, and just as you have bro't all your Designs to bear for
this World; have you considered how to give up all these Abortive Labors and
frustrated Hopes? Have you set your Eyes and Heart upon a Better World?

I Am sure You must needs agree with me, that this is your Wisdom and true
Interest, and will be your Honor and Comfort Living and Dying.

I heartily wish You this Grace; and pray GOD to make You great Blessings in
your Day, to spare you long to live unto His own Service and Glory, and to
Establish His Covenant with your Children, whom He gives you to bring up in His
Fear.

I am with great Affection and Respect, Your Obliged and Unworthy Servant, in
the Gospel of CHRIST, Benjamin Colman.

TO THE Children Of the TOWN.
I take this Opportunity to Address you, into whose hands this Sermon may come,
for your Souls Good. You have seen many of your Own Age Buried in the Winter
past; diverse of whom died very hopefully, and made a gracious End. You have
been Sick (most of you) your selves; and many of you may remember the Religious
Frames you were then in, and the holy Desires and Purposes you then had. Some
have been so wrought upon by their Danger, that I hope truly they have been
bro't home to CHRIST. I wish the number of such were greater.

You are now, many of you, much affected with the Sudden Death of Mrs.
Wainwright; and now while your Hearts are warm and tender, I would press you to
lay it to heart, and receive Instruction from it.

Which of you all are more likely or worthy to live than the Deceased Child
was? Where is there any One among you fairer in Body or in Mind? Which of you
have a fairer prospect for this World than She had? But that which was best of
all, she appeared to be Pious and Gracious.

I remember well with what delight and thankfulness she once and again
Entertained the good Counsels and Exhortations I have given Her about Her
Spiritual State. I have the Comfort now that I did my Duty toward Her in this
particular, and it much Endeared me to Her. I now call upon you, Child, while
you read these Lines, that you mind your Soul, and pray to GOD daily, and fear
to Sin, and make Religion your Business betimes; remembering the Words of the
LORD JESUS, which He spoke when He was twelve year old, Luke 2.49. Wist ye not
that I must be about my Fathers Business!

I have reason to think that the deceased Child was accustomed to Secret
Prayer. They who have had Opportunity to Observe, have told me of her careful
Retirements. Nor may I forget her gracious Care and Concern for her younger and
only Sister, who lay dangerously Sick of a Fever but a few days before Her own
death: Lucy, said she, do you pray to GOD now for your self? and did you pray
before you were taken Sick? This looks as if she were no stranger unto Prayer
her self. Her last words also were to ask the Prayers of Others for Her.

A Praying Child is, I hope, a Gracious One. Children, do you Pray to GOD daily
for your Precious and Immortal Souls? Will you not be put upon doing so by this
Example? May you not die so suddenly as not to have time to pray at last?
Should you not Adore the GRACE of GOD that spares you? and Improve the space He
gives you? and say, as One of our Lovely Children did to Her Mother on this
Occasion GOD has many ways to bring Souls home to Himself, and it may be this
is to be the means of bringing me to Him.

O that we could see a serious Concern in our Children for their Everlasting
Interests? how wise and grave and amiable would they then be? how happy and
safe under the Care and Love of Divine Providence! in what Honor and Esteem
would they pass through the World? How Useful and what singular Blessings would
they be in it? how pleasant, easy and cheerful might they live, free from
vanity and the Wounds of guilt! and in what peace might they at last hope to
Die?

This Mercy and Grace I would in particular wish from GOD unto the Surviving
Sister, the only Immediate remaining Branch of this broken Family; Beseeching
Almighty GOD (if it may be His Will) to Restore Her perfectly from Her present
Languishments, to Adorn Her with His Grace, and grant Her Long to Live, and be
a Mother in Israel.

A Devout Contemplation On the Early DEATH Of Pious and Lovely Children.
JER. IX. 21. For Death is come up into our Windows, and is entered into our
Palaces, to cut off the Children from without, and the Young men from the
Streets.


HOW often does the Great GOD repeat His Calls to us to look into our Graves!
and how seasonable is this Melancholy Subject ever to us through our whole Life!
The affecting Strokes of His Providence return surprizingly upon us, every now
and then, as the Clouds after the Rain.

We have had a dark and sorrowful long Winter by reason of the Untimely Deaths
(as we are ready to say) of many of our dear Children, and hopeful Young
People. And now this last Week a very sudden awful Death has taken away One of
the fairest Flowers in this Garden of GOD; One of the most Blooming and Lovely
Children in the Town or Land, whether we speak of Body or Mind.

I would take this Occasion therefore, for the profit both of Elder and Younger
Persons, to recollect the Contemplations which I have sometimes had on the
Meaning of Divine Providence, in such grievous distressing Dispensations.

Our Context is one of the most mournful Chapters that you can find in all the
Holy Scripture. Jeremiah, the Weeping Prophet, does in the most pathetical
words that Art can choose and lay together, excite Himself and others unto Holy
Sorrow on the foresight of the Calamities coming upon Judea and Jerusalem, by
the conquering and cruel Arms of the King of Babylon. He wishes that his own
Head were Waters, and his Eyes a fountain of Tears, that he might weep day and
night, for the slain of the Daughter of his People. He weeps for their Sins,
which he therefore Enumerates; and then He weeps afresh over the prospect of
GOD's Judgments, the sorrowful Fruit, and dreadful Punishment of their Sins: in
which he must be a Stock rather than a Man, who is not affected with the Hand
and Anger of Divine Providence.

This was the bitter Mourning in the Context: v. 15. Therefore thus says the
LORD of Hosts, the GOD of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, even this people,
with Wormwood, and give them water of Gall to drink. v. 17. Consider ye, and
call for the mourning Women, that they may come, -- and let them make haste,
and take up a Wailing for us; that our Eyes may run down with tears, and our
eyelids gush out with waters: for a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion! How
are we spoiled! -- Hear -- O ye Women, -- and teach your Daughters wailing, and
every one her Neighbor Lamentation: for Death is come up into our Windows, and
is entered into our Palaces; to cut off the Children from without, and the Young
men from the Streets.

What can be more soft, passionate and moving, than the strain of the Context?
and what wound up the strings of sorrow unto this High Note, but Death come
into their Windows, to cut off the Children and Young people from the Streets!
Well does the Prophet call for the tenderest hearts, and the shrillest voices,
even of Women, to raise the Lamentation on this account.

All Divine Judgments call for our Sorrowing under Gods Hand and Rod. While God
distributeth sorrows in his Anger, our Eyes should pour out tears unto God. We
ought to weep with him that is in Trouble, and our Eyes should mourn by reason
of affliction. But in no Instance does Nature teach and even force sorrow, more
than in Bereavements and the Death of Children: This was the voice in Rama,
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, etc. It was said
of Mary, she goes to the Grave to weep there; a Melancholy place indeed to
draw forth the Tears of Relations.

But I Am aware that many may be too apt of themselves to indulge Grief. I will
forbear therefore to Enlarge any further on the Context. Death is come up into
our Windows: scil. of the Chambers where the Sick lay. There Is no locking our
Doors against this Officer, when he comes to Arrest, or serve his Execution. Or
rather, as a Thief in the Night Steals in at the Window, so does Death often
steal as suddenly into our Houses, ere we are aware. Nor does it enter into the
Cottages of the Poor only, but into the Houses of the Rich, the Dwellings of
Rulers, and the Palaces of Princes. But that which I shall only attend to is,
that it spares not the tender pleasant Children, nor the hail and promising
Youths; These, a most sad part of its Execution, it cuts off from the Streets*
The Streets, where the Young people were wont to Walk, and where the Children
used to Play.

All the Observation that I shall raise from the Words, is this:

DOCTRINE. That abundance of the Children of Men, and of our most hopeful,
pious and promising Children do Die Young.
A very plain, and poor, little Observation you will be ready to say; what any
Child may make, and I would pray them to do so. I Am sure, you don't think that
I intend to labor in the proof of this obvious Truth, and Universal Experience
of Mankind. There is great Inequality as to the length of peoples lives here in
the Body, though at the longest the life of man is very short; as a Vapor that
endures but a short time. There are the untimely Births which never see the
Light: and many that are Born alive, yet only number a few breaths, hours and
days, and expire again, without fulfilling their Week or Month. What brittle
and tender things are our Babes, and what multitudes die in Infancy! Delights,
lent us for a year it may be, and then taken (we hope) to the Delights of God
for ever. In Childhood the blooming flower falls too, and Autumn comes almost
before the Spring's begun. If through a million Dangers, mortal to others, we get
up to Youth, yet how suddenly and often does Death cut down the verdant budding
plant! And when from Youth we are got to Manhood, even then in the prime of our
strength we are often snatch away from Families, from Service, and from all
Worldly Enjoyments. Job 21.23. The number of his months are cut off in the
midst; he dies in his full strength, his Breasts are full of Milk, and his
Bones are moistened with Marrow.

Thus is it with the Children of Men; and this happens alike to all, both to
the Evil and the Good. Now my Design is with Modesty and Holy Reverence to
Enquire into the Reasons of Providence in this particular, which though it may
sometimes appear very dark, and be very grievous to particular persons, yet
certainly is in it self very Wise, and Holy and Gracious.

I am to Observe then, that abundance of our hopeful and lovely and promising
Children, and those top that are really Pious and Godly in their Childhood, do
Die Young. It always has been, and still is so. Righteous Abel, the first
fruits of fallen Man to God, the first Martyr for Religion, and the firstborn
of the Grave, died young. Enoch was no Old Saint in his Day, though ripe for
Heaven, when God took him. He died not, it is true, but was the Earnest to the
Old World of the Resurrection. The ten Children of Job, who we hope Inherited
their pious Fathers Sanctity, and Prayers, died together in their Youth. Heavy
the Tidings to their amazed Parents -- The House fell upon the Young men, and
they are dead, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. Sometimes the Holiest,
and whom God loves best, he takes soonest. So it was we know in the peaceful
Death of the young Prince Abijah. 1 King. 14.13. He only of Jeroboam shall come
to the Grave, because in him there was found some good thing. To name no more,
Our Blessed Savior himself has sanctified an Early Death by dying in the prime
of the Life of Man.

And now give me leave to do some Honor unto the Divine Providence, (as it
shall enable me) in ordering these Early Deaths. It is a thing very grievous to
us, lamentable to see, and heavy to bear, and so it should be; yet we may not
complain of the Divine Government, no not in this; however grievous it be to
Grace and Sense together. Let the Sovereign GOD call soon for them that fear
him, and are but beginning to serve him, and so are likely to honor him, and
be Blessings in the World; whose Hope and Crown they are; yet is he easily
justified in his doing, and clear in his judging thus. Now that I may begin
right on this Argument, which is one of the deep things of God; Let me say,

1. The Sovereignty of God is enough, and instead of a thousand Reasons, to his
Creatures in any of the Dispensations of his Providence, which may be dark to
them. I Am afraid that the Sovereignty of God is not at all conceived of, nor
adored by multitudes of Christians, as it ought to be. The Scripture every
where speaks in the most exalted strains that can be about it. And when the
Dispensations of God are such as furprize and confound our weak Reason and
Understanding, then very often instead of going about to satisfy our scruples,
and level them to our Capacity, it bids us worship, instead of arguing about
the Unsearchable Councils of Heaven; and contemplating the Greatness of God to
be dumb. So in Gods dealings with his Servant Job, when he and his Friends had
been contemplating the possibility of such Inflictions on an Upright person; at
last Elihu takes up the Argument, and reproves them all for presuming to talk
so freely of the Great GOD; asking them if God were to give them Account of
what He did or could do? or if they must be dissatisfied with the Almighty's
Actions when ever they could not account for them? He vouchsafes them no other
satisfaction but the Greatness and Dominion of God; and when God himself spoke
afterward out of the Whirlwind, it was in the same lofty Style and Reasoning;
proper to, and worthy of a God. Job 33.12, 13, 17.36.22, 23, etc.

Very justly may the Great GOD disdain to let us reason with him against any
Circumstances which He orders for us, either in respect of Life or Death. Shall
not the Clay ly still under the Potters skilful Hand? Balaam was provoked to
stand corrected by his Ass; and yet the Ass taught the Prophet with Justice and
Mildness: Yet Vain Man, that is born like the Wild Asses Colt, would be wise
before God, even to reprove his Maker!

Let me further observe here Two Things.

1. Life and Death are among those things that absolutely belong to the Divine
Sovereignty. Who but the God of the Spirits of all flesh shall say, when our
Souls shall come into these dwellings of flesh, and when leave them? The Key of
Hades is in his Hand, and it is one of the Insignia of his Supreme Dominion.
The Life he gave is his own, and shall he not do what he will with it? 2. God
is to be resigned to even with respect to the degrees of present
Serviceableness, or Future Glory. We should desire indeed a Distinction in both
Worlds, owning our selves unworthy mean while of a Name in either of them. But
in the midst of Usefulness here, and of the prospect of Advancement in a better
World, we must bear a spirit of absolute Submission if God call us to Die. To
do much we should always desire, that we have done no more, should be our
Humiliation; that we have done any thing is matter of Thanksgiving, and if it
must be no more, we must (like our Famous and Eminent Mr. Mitchel when a dying)
bless God for the least, which we never deserved, and so resign our else
desired Life. If we have any place in the Firmament of Glory, we must leave it
to God to ordain our magnitude and brightness there; and as one Star differs
from another Star in Glory; so is the Resurrection of the Dead. Now he that
tells the Number of the Stars, and calls them all by Name, has done the
same in Numbering the Elect, and making them Vessels of Honor.
I proceed now to say,

2. Our lovely, gracious Elect Children cannot be too soon in Heaven. Happiness
and Bliss in the fullness and perfection thereof can never come too soon. If God
takes the Elect Infant from the Mothers Breast, or the Fathers Knees, to
Himself an infinitely better Father; pray, what loss is it? How blessed is it
for the Babe that no more days or months were ordained for it in this scorching
and freezing world of ours! in this world of Sin and Affliction! Will the Babe
pine after the Mothers Breasts, when Angels have taken it in their brighter
Arms to carry it to, and lay it in the Bosom of JESUS; the Good Shepherd of
Souls, who lays the Lambs in his Bosom? Surely it is best of all to go to an
immediate Everlasting Rest, since God ordains it; never to have felt at all the
Evils of guilt or trouble which the Godly are here so often groaning under!
Well then, we are never too young to be happy: Happiness can never come too
soon; that Surprise must at last be exceeding pleasant.

3. Sometimes it has been the desire and choice of Holy Children, with
submission to the Sovereign Pleasure and Wisdom of God, not to have a long
continuance here in this World. This is a rare thing indeed, yet we lately had
an Instance of it in our Neighborhood, in that Excellent Youth, the Son of
Major Fitch, whose gracious Example, and lamented Death will not be soon
forgotten. It was a pretty frequent passage with him, that he saw little in
this World to make one desire to live long here. 'Twas a sign that his heart
was soon and strangely set on Heavenly Things. This requires some very
comfortable degrees of hope and good assurance of our Interest in a better
Life. There are but few even of the Children of God in advanced years, who upon
settled and weighed principles of Devotion, arrive unto an habitual willingness
to Die. Yet some strange Instances of it have been found under the Early
Impressions of Divine Grace: The fear of Sin, the longing for freedom from it,
and the desire to be with Christ, may sometimes excuse even the desire to be
dissolved, preserving Resignation to God: but the Glorifying God on Earth, the
Serving our Generation according to the Will of God, and the Believing in the
Alsufficiency of the Grace of God to keep us through the World, must make Life
when prolonged, not only easy, but delightful to us, and an Esteemed Mercy of
God to us. Certainly to abide in the flesh is very needful and desirable, while
to live is Christ: but when we change this thought, and can say to our selves
-- to me to die is Gain, it may be difficult not to verge too much with the
Holy Apostle in his desires rather of a dissolution; and to groan being
burdened in this Tabernacle; knowing that while we are at home in the body, we
are absent from the Lord, Phil. 21.23. 2 Cor. 5. begin. Some Good People have
wished for a Sudden Death; but most of the Children of God with great Reason
join rather in that part of our Littany, to be preserved from it. However, it
very much takes away the darkness of the Dispensation, when it comes to be the
matter of a devout persons desire and choice. But these are Extraordinary
Cases, not to be bro't into Example, nor to be commended to our Imitation; and
therefore not to be insisted on.

4. Possibly God may have consulted the Spiritual advantage of a desirable and
gracious Child in its Early Death. I mean both in respect of Grace here, and
Glory hereafter. Had the Child lived, you know how certainly it had been
exposed in this place of sin, temptation and danger: what from the Snake in the
Grass, latent Indwelling Sin, and that Adder in the Path, the Devi and Satan;
what from an Insnaring World, and the lusting flesh resisting the Spirit in all
its heavenly desires. It is a Circumstance of great happiness to be once safely
past all these hazards, and out of the reach of these mortal Enemies and fiery
darts; never to be tempted, nor to sin more; but to be confirmed in a State of
Grace, and ascertained, possessed of Everlasting Happiness. Now God only knows
how little a longer time might have been improved; how little might have been
got by it, how much might have indeed been suffered by it. It is a sad truth,
but a certain one, that many Good people have found little or no advantage to
their Spirtual Life by length of time. They were Converted young, it may be,
and if they had died young, they had been in the same place in Heaven, if not
in a better, then having lived to more years. How often have people gone
backward, quenched the Spirit of Grace, and hurt their own Souls. Take the
Instance of Solomon; how gloriously did he begin, and outshone in Grace, as he
did in Wisdom and Dignity: He was the Wonder of the Church, as his Temple was
of the World: He went before the very Ministers of Religion, and the Lords
Prophets in zeal and in devotion: and now had he died young, his Grace had been
without a stain upon it: but he lived to show the frailty of the Greatest Saint
in a State of Worldly Affluence, and the hazard there is from Sensual Objects
in our greatest Seize here below. I dare not presume to think whether his
fall has put him a great way back in the List of the Glorified, his Repentance
and Recovery being glorious in our Eyes; but certainly if his Graces had not
been brighter above, had he died in his unspotted youth, and before his fall,
yet had his Name among Saints on Earth been so.

We are Sailing in a very tempestuous and uncertain Sea, like Mariners that
sometimes set out with a fair and strong Gale, and make half their Passage in a
few days; but then they meet with some rough contrary Winds that force 'em to
Ly by at least, if they are not driven back, and have many a League to measure
over again, if ever they make their Passage at all. If the Ship spring a leak,
though it do not founder, but after many hardships the Port is gained, yet the
Loss and Damage sustained is usually very much. So are there many that Set out
well in their Youth, and at last get to Heaven, but it is sorely shattered and
broken, through their falls before one temptation and another in their way. The
Floods do not drown them in perdition, but yet through their ill Conduct and
foolish Management much of their rich Freight and Lading is damnify'd and
thrown Overboard. They can show the Riches they once had put aboard them, but
alas, cankered and marred now: they are not when they die, even what they were
in their early years, but their Beauty marred by the advance of Age; which though
it be natural to the Body, yet it is unnatural to the Immortal Soul. They die
Penitents it is true, but not Proficients; and though they get to Heaven at last,
yet no higher there than if they had died in their younger days.

Upon all, say, if it is not very possible that God may graciously have
consulted the Spiritual Advantage of many an Elect Vessel of Mercy, in their
Early Death. We have no foresight of things to come, but God has the most
perfect that can be; and though there is no foresight of Grace in the Saints
before it is given, but only in the purpose of God to give it, for in our
corrupt nature it never could be at all but of his free Gift; yet in the best
of Saints there is an easy foresight to us all of Corruption ready to break out
upon all Occasions, without Gods restraint and prevention thereof: and to God
it is open and naked how good people will act if they come to be in these and
those Circumstances. Some God permits for wise Ends, and the Good of others, to
live and show the prevalency of Corruption in them, against suitable strivings
and measures of his Grace; and others God prevents from being like Instances
and Sufferers, by a happy Early Death. And though he does not say, as to
particular persons (and less may we) that this is his End; yet possibly it may
be so in the very Instances we are mourning over. Indeed for ought we know, had
they lived they would have grown in Grace more and more; and it is meet for us
to suppose and hope it would have been so: but it is as true, that for ought we
know it would have been otherwise: and it is not at all amiss for us to satisfy
our selves after this manner; when the matter is necessarily left so doubtful
to us, and hazardous. But so much for this particular.

5. The Righteous are sometimes taken away from the Evil to come. As the
Prophet observes, Isa. 57.1. And sometimes it is certain, that Hopeful and Pious
Children are so, as Abijah was: 1 King. 14.13. And King Josiah too, to whom it
was promised as a token of Divine Favor; 2 Kings 32.20. That because his heart
was tender and humble before God, therefore he should be gathered early to his
Fathers, and his Eyes should not see the Evil that was coming on Judah and
Jerusalem.

Long Life here in this World is unavoidably attended with many Sorrows,
especially if a person be pious and devout. Men's own Sins, and the Sins of
others, especially of Relatives; our Afflictions also by Bodily Pains and
Sickness, and by Bereavements in Estate and Relatives, multiply Grief upon us
through our present Pilgrimage, and make the days of the years of it very Evil.
They that die young are soon out of this dark and suffering Scene; if they had
lived longer, there had been possibly many things which they little foresaw to
have embittered their lives to 'ern; yea, the very things (many of 'em) wherein
they promised themselves the most comfort. How often have the Relatives that
Survive come to bless their Departed Dead, saying, -- Blessed are the closed
Eyes that never saw these things. This is true, both as to Sins and Judgments,
and those both public and private. For Instance, it may seem to us every way
to have been happier for Eli to have died young, than in his Age to have seen
the Iniquity of his Sons, and their Death in their Sins, together with the
Captivity of the Ark, which he died under the heavy Tidings of. How bitter is
it to a Godly person, to live and see Children and Brethren grow up and prove
Apostates from God, Children of Belial, and perishing under the Judicial
Strokes of Divine Providence. It is better never to live to bear, than to bring
forth these Sons of Sorrow. God sees (says the late Excellent Mr. N. Tailor)
the rising Storms to come, and when they would Overset the Vessel, and
therefore dispatches the Sailing Orders, and provides a safe Harbor: His
Greens he early Houses also in a warm place, because they are so tender, that
the sharpness of the coming Weather would nip and kill them. The mean while
there is Corn that can endure the cold of Winter, and the heat of the Summer;
and it is fitting that it stand and grow full ripe, and be gathered when it is
turned white for the Harvest. The hopeful Youth is sometimes taken away in
favor from the Evil to come.

6. Many things respecting the Nature of Saving Grace are to be learned from,
and are seen in the Early Deaths of pious and hopeful Young people. As, 1. It
shows us that Grace intends not to secure us a long Life here in the Body. No,
it is the assimilation of the Soul unto another Life, and its preparation for
it: it is to wean the Soul from the sensitive life, and to raise it above the
same: it points the Soul unto the life of spirits in holiness and happiness
that is to come; and on no pretense therefore can it fix the heart down in any
desires or prospect of living long here. Indeed, Grace never shortened any ones
life here, but has prolonged rather many a man's; length of days are in her
right hand and long life shall she add unto thee: Prove. 3.16. There is nothing
in a principle of Grace and Holy living, but what tends to the preservation and
lengthening out of man's life. It bears antipathy to, and detestation of all
those Intemperances and vicious Excesses, which shorten men's days. It does by
trust and prayer commit us to the care and blessing of the God of our lives. It
desires to live to his Glory; and it secures to us that so far as God sees it
best for us, we shall live in his world. But no further can a principle of
Grace look to a continuance of the present life. No, the first and chief
Relation of Divine Grace, and Benefit from it is unto a life to come. Col. 3.3.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in GOD. The Spiritual Life
only is worthy to be called our Life; and this is hid with Christ; as the life
of the Branches is hid in the Root: So are our Hopes for Eternity deposited and
laid up with Christ in Heaven. 2. Again, The Death of pious Children teaches us
this also of a Principle of Grace, that where it once is, the Soul is safe. Let
Death come as soon as it will after a persons Coversion, when once a
Sanctifying Change has passed on him, be he never so young, the Soul is safe.
It is indeed very desirable to us on many accounts, that there be some good
space granted to us for the Exercise of Grace, and the Actings of the
Regenerate Life: that so the Great GOD may have some Honor and Service from
us, the fruits of that Grace which He has Implanted in us; and we some good
Evidence and hope of His Grace in us, and of our Title to Eternal Life; that so
we may at last die in peace and Comfort as well as Safety. But this is not
absolutely necessary: and a person really dies in peace, in a State of
Salvation, and goes to Heaven, if a Change be truly wro't in the Soul, though God
do not spare him any length of time to bring forth the fruits of his Grace. And
the Early Deaths of pious Ones may satisfy us, That Salvation depends not on
length of time for the continued Exercise of Grace; though it be in its self a
Favor of GOD greatly to be desired, if it may be His Will. 3. Hence also does
it evidently appear, that Salvation is not of Works, but of Free Grace
altogether. If it were of Works of Righteousness wro't by us, it were much to
be apprehended that they who die young could never be saved. If Infants are
saved, it must be of free Grace, forthese can have no Works of their own: no,
not so much as one Act of Faith are they capable of: and yet of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Multitudes of them are sanctified and justified, and taken
to Heaven. In some proportion it is thus with him that dies young: suppose
within the Month or the Year wherein the Grace of God has taken hold of his
Heart; when he is but just beginning to live to GOD, is but turning to Him in
his own apprehension, and by his own confession has done nothing for Him; but
was beiginning he hoped in earnest to think of doing something, and Now must be
gone: However, he dies in Christ and goes to Him: but then how rich and free is
that Grace which saves him? Where is Boasting? Where is any life of working so
much as to be imagined?


Wherefore to finish this Head, How amiable and adorable does this render
saving Grace to us! that however young we die, it is possible to be saved by it;
that how soon soever it takes possession of us, it puts us into a secure and
happy Sat. O how lovely and desirable a thing then is it! how very valuable
and precious!

See you One that has but just begun to seek and serve GOD, and GOD has so
suddenly, instantly, presently rewarded and glorified him! when CHRIST his
Judge shall name this Child with honor in the Last Day, what can it answer? --
LORD, when did I ever serve Thee? What did I ever do for Thee? From the day
that thy Grace found me, I had not a year, not a month, not a week (it may be)
allowed me to live to honor Thee! No, Gracious LORD! in the day almost wherein
thou did please to Sanctify me thou did also Glorify me. Ever I could
find thy Grace in my Soul, I found my self taken to thy Glory; and as I was but
beginning to seek thy Mercy, I found my self Embraced in the Arms of it.

O what should render GOD and His Grace more amiable to us, than his glorifying
it after this manner to the young Penitent, the Infant Saint! No sooner born
from Above, than taken Thither.

7. And lastly, The Death of those that are pious and gracious in their Youth
is of excellent Use, and great Necessity, to quicken and excite their
Acquaintance, Friends and Relations to an instar and careful Preparation for
their own Dying Hour. Many are the Instructions and Admonitions in it, both to
Elder and Younger People. It may be of great Service to Survivors. And this is
a Reason worthy of a Good GOD, whose care is for the Souls of many in his
Providential Dealings with One.

Let me then Observe, and so make the proper Application of the Doctrine, in
this Illustration of it.

1. That to be sure in the Early Death of pious Children, there are many Useful
Admonitions intended to those that are Young. Younger Friends and Relatives
should take the Warnings of GOD, which are firstly and directly meant to them.

You must be admonished, O Young Person, that you your self may die soon and
suddenly likewise. You should never see one of your Own Age buried, or one
younger than your self die, but you should seriously think -- 'It might have
been my turn as well, or mine may be the next, and within a few days (if not to
day or to morrow) I may follow. What am I better than my Companion? or it may
be my life is not of half the worth that his or hers was! nor has been half so
well improved or redeemed! or if it has, yet this makes no difference; since
the best die young.

See one proof of that Truth, Psalm. 39.5. Verilye very man at his best Estate
is altogether Vanity. A Flourishing Youth and Piety met together seem one of
the best Estates of Man: the strength of our years united with the strength of
Grace. 1 John 2.14. I write unto you young men, because ye are strong, etc. Yet
in this Vigor of Nature and Grace both, may we suddenly expire and vanish away.

Wherefore Early Religion is the highest Wisdom, and Interest of all the
Children of men; the most Important and necessary thing that can be. You can
never begin too soon to think of your Souls, since you may every day look to
die. This alone ought to awaken you to remember your Creator in the days of
your Youth, and as you enter upon this life, to choose that Good part which can
never be taken away from you; and to Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and his
Righteousness. The Funeral of eevery Infant or Child, calls all the Children in
the Streets to be thinking of, and preparing for their own Death: for if you
are not too young to Die, neither are you to be Religious, and to make your
Souls your care.

It warns you now in your Youth, that you need better Friends and Dependence
than any in this World, and a better Portion than this World can slatter you
withal. For be you in the arms of your Parents, or bereaved of them can you
number up a great many Friends that heartily respect you, and care for your
Interests? Are the Comforts of this Life surrounding you and your Worldly
Estate increasing upon you? Yet a day or an hour may snatch you away from all;
while your helpless Friends stand in Amazement and Sorrow about you, to see you
expire. That Child alone is safe and happy, who has the Great GOD for its
Father, and Guardian and Portion.

Children! Let me put it to you, whether you have ever yet began to think of
your Souls, your Sins, your Savior, your Baptism, your Dying Hour, and of
Eternity. Do you pray, do you fear to sin, do you take any care to be Saved? O
what Reason there is to fear that few of you little consider any thing of this
nature! which of you almost has any though it about Death now in your Childhood?
You scarce seem to apprehend it possible, and much less do you realize it as
very likely, that you may die young. Will you never begin to think, Young
People? not one sober though it of your Eternal State, though you see so many of your
own Stature in the Grave. GOD teach thee betimes so to number thy days, as to
apply thy heart unto Wisdom.

GOD can make the Death of your Companions a most awakening and effectual
Sermon to you: and it may be worth another dying to do thy Soul good, and
bring thee home to Christ: It preaches to thee in a more affecting manner than
any mere words can, and in the happy season to Relatives, when their affections
are stirred, and their Souls the more easily come at. And O that our Young
people would but hear the good Counsels from the Funerals of their pious
Friends that die young! how well worth were it their dying, betimes to fasten
such Instructions for the Salvation of others.

2. The death of hopeful Children and Young people may be of great Spiritual
Advantage also to Elder persons. Parents should be quickened in Holy Living, by
the death of their Children; and the Gray Head should receive Instruction and
Awakening by the fall of the blooming Youth. There are many things said to them
that are in Advanced Age, in the Death of their Juniors.

Are these fallen so soon, how long ago then might I have been in my Grave? may
the Elder Christian say. Adore the Sovereign Grace of GOD, that has so long
spared you. Had you been cut down thus soon, think what had become of you, and
where had you been long since? Consider why God spares you. Shame your self for
your Defects, and fear: If the green tree be felled, laden with Blossoms, or
first ripe fruits; what then shall be done to the dry? Shall that stand always
barren and unprofitable, to cumber the Ground? What? see we a Child Older in
Grace, and wiser and better than we in Years? our selves not so ripe for
Heaven, as those that were Unborn when we were Men and Women! So the Army of
Israel blushed when they saw the ruddy Boy excel them all in Faith and Valor.

Are so many Young Ones in Heaven, and are we Old and never like to get
thither? How can we bear the though it? or how shall we when Death comes?

Are so many Young Ones in Heaven, and You O Aged Believer so little Ready in
your own Account? Your Evidences so little clear? Your Interest in Christ so
doubtful? Your Days spun and worn out to so little purpose? How should it
quicken you to give all diligence in making your Election sure?

Do so many Younger die in Christ, and have not we had all their Opportunities,
and more by far than all those which they have so well and timely Improved? How
will they rise up in Judgment against us, and condemn us! O fatal difference
between man and man! Some dying young in Christ, others living old Christless.

Take the Alarm, O Dying Aged Sinner! if one come to thee from the Dead thou will repent! and that too as we paint the bright Angels of GOD with a Youthful
Mein and Air! let him tell thee with a charming voice of the Glories he has so
soon passed into, and invite thee though so late to seek a part in those
unspeakable and Eternal Felicities! What? will not this Glorious Vision it self
Convert thee! No, though one come like Lazarus from the Bosom of Abraham unto you

You that are Parents, be you quickened to think seriously of dying your selves.
The fruit of your Bodies are already (some of them) in the Grave; how soon may
you look to be there too? Death that has already torn out some of your Bowels,
will soon pierce your Heart. Parents are so secure and forgetful of their own
Mortality, that Death must needs lay its cold hand on their Bosom, and take
their Babes thence, to awaken 'em: And surely they will sensibly feel
themselves Mortal, while they see a part of themselves Interred already. So
David graciously improved the death of his Child, -- I shall go to it. Say
thus, O Parent, to thy self: I shall soon follow; and be it thy care (O my
Soul) so to improve thy present Sorrows, and the Residue of thy few Evil Days
in the flesh, that I may meet mine whom I have committed to Christ, with Joy in
His Presence at the last.

Three words of Advice let me leave with Parents, respecting their Children.

1. To begin betimes to Institute them for GOD. We must give them up to GOD in
Baptism; and as soon as they are able to learn teach them to know God, and fear
Him, and serve Him. Betimes tell 'em of their Precious Souls, and of their
Glorious Savior, and of their Dying Condition. Put them betimes on preparing
for Death: they will die never the sooner for it, but may much the better, and
you will have the more peace and comfort in their death, if they are suddenly
taken from you. Your Children are daily liable to the stroke of Death, where
then (O Parent) is your Care or Love or Kindness to them, if you do not what
you can to prepare 'em for it! And how reverently ought Children to mind what
their Parents say to 'em about their Future and Everlasting Interests.

2. Let Parents prepare betimes to part with their lovely Children, and get
their Soul even as a weaned. Child; even before they wean their Babes from
their Breast. We must look for Abraham's trial and Emulate his Faith, Genesis 22.2.
Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer him up to
Me. Our best are GOD's Due; What He made for Himself, and lends for a while to
us. GOD comes into His Garden, and plucks which flower He pleases, and which
but the most beautiful and fragrant do men gather? Let the Great GOD take his
own, and let us make Abels acceptable Offering, the best of our Flock. The
Shunamite, that Great Woman, had one wondrous Son, a special Gift of Heaven to
her in Reward of her Piety; but soon had She the sorrow to see him die, and
that very suddenly, in her lap: She made no Shriek in that terrible Surprise,
nor so much as showed her Distress to Her Household; no, not to her Husband, the
partner of her Joys and Griefs: She went to GOD, i. e. unto his Prophets feet,
where her humble silent Action spoke those Auguishes which no Words could
utter: the mean while her Resignation to the Will of GOD, and her Contentment
therein, was most admirable: the Child was dead, yet said she, -- All is well.
Give me leave thus to Pharaphrase it.

What GOD Ordains is Well and Best.
It Is Well with Ours when gone to Rest.
It Is Well with Us who stay behind,
If more from Earth and Flesh resin'd,
We Are patient, pray'rful, meek, resigned.
3. Let us be Comforted and quieted in the Death of hopeful Children. A Child
in Heaven is well provided for, well disposed of, well preferred. It has a good
Portion, is gone to a good Father, to a good Family, to good Company; to an
Everlasting Rest, and to Infinite Blessedness. The Covenant of God embraces our
Children with more tenderness, than our Arms ever did. Blessed are the Dead in
Christ, that are soon passed from Sin and Sorrow here, to the Eternal Fullness
of Holiness and Comfort in the Presence of GOD for ever.

We must not repeat Jacobs Error, who supposed himself bereaved, when Joseph
was only Advancing under the special Favor of Providence in Another Country.
He would needs be an Inconsolable Mourner, and go down into the Grave after his
Son mourning, But in time he heard of all his Glory in Egypt, (which what was
it to the Glory of the least of our Little Ones that behold the Face of God in
Heaven) and then the good Patriarchs Spirit revived, and he said, -- Joseph my
Son is yet alive, I Will go and see him before I die. Truly, so, O Christian, the
Child thou mournest over may be now in Heaven and Glorified; It is thy Hope and
Faith it is so: let thy sinking Spirit then revive and say, -- By the Grace of
God, I will endeavor so to live, that I may See it in Glory when I Die.

FINIS.

