A Gospel Ministry The rich GIFT of the Ascended SAVIOR Unto His CHURCH.

As it was Represented in a SERMON preached August 2. 1715. By Mr. BENJAMIN
COLMAN, On a Day of Prayer kept by His Congregation, to implore the Divine
Conduct and Blessing with them, in their Election of Another into the Pastoral
Office among them.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump, for Samuel Gerrish, on the North
Side of the Townhouse. 1715.

Advertisement.
IT seems to me but a piece of Justice to Acknowledge the free Use I have made
of Mr. Henry's Expositions, through the following Discourse.

The Gospel Ministry The rich GIFT of the Ascended SAVIOR unto His Church.
EPHESIANS. IV. 8, 11. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led
Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men. --

And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some
Pastors and Teachers.


THE Text speaks of the Ascension of our Lord JESUS CHRIST into Heaven, where
He is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high; the Glory of which
Ascent is here meditated in the blessed Fruits and Effects of it to the sinful
Children of Men.

Three things here offer to our Consideration.

1. A Prophecy of our Savior's Ascension is referred to; and a very
Illustrious one it is, in the 68. Psalm. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou
have led Captivity captive; thou have received Gifts for Men, yea for the
Rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

THE Apostle in the Text quotes these words of David, who saw the day of our
Lord's Ascension, and spoke of it in Spirit as a thing past, it was so sure and
certain to be in God's appointed time.

2. IN the Text the Accomplishment of this Prophecy is supposed and taken for
granted, which amounts to an Assertion of its. Fulfillment, in the person of
Christ. To Him the Holy Ghost here applies it, as one of the Instances wherein
the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did testify before the Glory that should
follow his Sufferings.

THE Psalmist had spoken of Christ Prophetically in the second Person. Thou
have ascended, etc --. The Apostle applies it to him Historically in the third
Person; when He ascended up on high, He led etc --.

AND to satisfy us that the Prophecy of the Psalmist was of Christ truly, and
can bear no other Application ultimatly, the Apostle argues in a Parenthesis
between the two Verses of my Text; which I have presumed to omit in the reading
them just now to you; Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also
descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the
same that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things.
Which is as much as to say, that David in Spirit spoke of Him who first came
down from Heaven to our Earth, and here in our flesh descended into the Grave,
from whence he rose and ascended bodily far above all visible Heavens; unto the
presence and Throne of God. Thus we see the Prophecy and its Accomplishment;
that David's words did indeed mean Christ's Ascension, and were fulfilled in it.

3. LET us observe the glorious things which are spoken concerning the
Ascension of Christ: 1. That he led Captivity Captive. 2. That he received and
gave Gifts to men. And 3. These Gifts are specified, He gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, etc.


THERE is doubtless and Allusion in the words unto the Usages and Custom of
Generals and Conquerors, who after great and illustrious Victories obtained by
them were wont to Triumph; and in their triumphant Entries into the Capital
City of the Empire to which they belonged and for which they fought, they used
to be followed by the Captives whom they had taken in the War; and to make show
of the Riches, the Spoils they had taken from the Enemy, and to add unto the
pomp of the day they made public " Largitives and Donatives to their Soldiers,
and scattered their Magnificence and Bounty among the Crowds.

IT may seem probable that these sort of Triumphs were in use in David's time,
and the most famous One of his Reign might be on that occasion whereon the 68.
Psalm was composed, namely the Translation of the Ark (the Type of Christ's
Mediation) into the Tent which he had pitched for it in Sion. The Roman
Triumphs were of a later Date, but answered so exactly to the Description here
given by David, of the leading the Captives in procession, and the scattering
Gifts among the Multitude that we may think the Nations received the Custom
from him; whose Victories in war well deserved a Triumph; and were singled out
by God to be the Types of the Spiritual Victory of Christ over the powers of
Darkness. This seems to me more worthy to be said, than that the Holy Ghost
manifestly alludes unto the Roman Conquerors: which though it might have passed
had our Text been first delivered by the Apostle who lived under the Roman
Empire; yet what Allusion to their Triumphs could David make who lived so long
before them, unless you will allow too that he prophesied of them.

DAVID was a famous Type of Christ, and that Great Solemnity of his Reign, the
carrying of the Ark in pomp to Sion, was an illustrious Type of our Lord's
Ascension into Heaven David on that triumphant Occasion celebrated all the
Victories that God had given him over His and his Church's Enemies, and
ascribed all the Glory of them to God and to the Ark of his strength. This was
now ascending on High, even the Ark, from a humble and obscure state wherein it
had long been, into a Royal Tent which he had pitched for it in that Hill of
Sion which God had chosen, the Mount which he loved. Now to grace that
Procession and Ascent of the Ark, we may suppose that the King bro't forth the
train of Captives, even such as before had often led many an Israelite into
Captivity. Thus Captivity was led Captive, and the Spoils taken from them were
carried to Sion, and there Dedicated to God, for the building of the Temple in
after days, where the Lord God might dwell among them. Of Him David had
received these Victories and these Spoils; and to Him he ascribes the glory of
the one, and to His service and spicial honor he Consecrates the other. Of
which Spoils that David gathered and Dedicated, which were of Silver and Gold
and Brass, Solomon afterward adorned the Temple, and made its holy Vessels.

THESE things, though the Glories of the Kingdoms of this world were but a low
figure and shadow of the Ascension of the Messiah, the Son and Lord of David.
When He ascended on high, even to the right Hand of God, above all Heavens, He
did as Conquerors used to do and more; He led Captivity Captive; He led those
Captive that had led us so, and if He had not interposed would have led us so
for ever; He made openly a show of Principalities and Powers, of Satan, Sin and
Death spoiled of their power over His Subjects; utterly broken for ever and led
in Chains: He appeared then more than a Conqueror, for every Conqueror was not
allowed a Triumph, and all Believers too who follow. His Chariot with their
Hosanna's are more than Conquerors through Him, they too are Triumphers; for
thanks be to God who causes us always to Triumph in Christ.

THOU have received Gifts for men, yea for the Rebellious; says the Psalmist;
He gave Gifts unto men; says the Apostle. He received and and He gave; He gave
that which He had received; for it was given Him to bestow: Joh. 17.2, 22. As
thou have given him, -- that he should give --: and the glory which thou gave
me I have given them.

GIFTS for Men, not for Angels: Henry. For Men in General, not for the Jews
only, but for the Gentiles also. Gifts in Man, as the Margin reads it in the
Psalms; i. e. in the humane Nature, which the Son of God was pleased to cloth
Himself in, in whom (as Mediator) all fullness dwells, that from His fullness we
all might receive.

YEA for the Rebellious: for those that had been Rebels, and now were in
Rebellion; had forfeited any claim to the least Favor, but had deserved and
incurred wrath to the uttermost; for Rebels of the Gentiles in particular who
had been Enemies in their minds by wicked works; even these has He reconciled.
So they say, the Generous Conquerors of old in the day of their Triumph, were
wont not only to reward their Friends and faithful Soldiers with munificent
Gifts, but to show Acts of Grace also to their very Captives. The ascending
Savior gave His Divine Gifts even for and to His Crucifiers.

THAT the Lord God might dwell among them; says the Psalmist. That He might set
up a Church in a rebellious world, Henry.
in which He would dwell by His Word and Ordinances, as of old in the
Sanctuary. So says the Apostle in the verses after our Text; these Gifts from
the Ascended Savior were given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the Edifying the body of Christ; till we all come in the
unity of the faith, etc --. That is in one word, for the building up a Church,
and for the Edification of Souls in Knowledge Faith and Holiness unto Salvation.

AND now we come more particularly to consider what these Gifts of the Ascended
Savior to His Church were, and those the Apostle specifies and enumerates: He
gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc --.

YOU observe that only Offices are named, but Qualifications are supposed;
Christ never gave Offices without a suitable measure of Gifts for the discharge
of them; which are here therefore represented in their variety and diversity;
some Ordinary, others Extraordinary.

1. Extraordinary Offices and divine Gifts agreeable to them: some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists.

THE Apostles had an Immediate Call to their Office, Pool.
a Universal Commission, Infallibility in teaching, and the power of working
Miracles; they were Prophets and more than Prophets, being commissioned and
gifted in an excellent manner for the first founding of the Christian Church in
all parts of the World.

NEXTLY Prophets: These also were Extraordinary Officers, whom God endowed to
foretell things to come, and expound the writings of the old Prophets; they
Interpreted Scripture by Immediate Revelation.

Thirdly Evangelists. These likewise were Extraordinary Officers, ordained by
the Apostles as their Companions and Assistants in preaching the word and
planting Churches in the places where they had traveled. Such we esteem
Timothy and Titus and Apollos and others to have been.

THESE Extraordinary Gifts and Officers were necessary in the first planting of
Christianity, and ceased with that Extraordinary Occasion for them.

2. THE Ordinary and standing Officers of the Church of Christ follow: Pastors
and Teachers: Bishops and Elders: who are set over the Churches as Guides and
Instructers, to rule and teach. They are one and the same Office, and
accordingly joined by the Holy Ghost.

IN short, The Institution of a Gospel Ministry is the thing here taught, and
that it is the Gift of our Ascended Savior to His Church, and to continue in
it to the End of the World.

I will only add, to carry on the Harmony between the Psalmist and the Apostle,
between the Prophecy and its Fulfillment; That this variety of Offices and
Gifts; Superior and Inferior, Mollierus.
Ordinary and Extraodinary, the one excelling so much the other in Glory, for
the building of the Spiritual Temple of Christ; do well answer unto the
Princely Gifts which David dedicated for the building of Solomon's Temple, and
the Ark's. Ascent thereinto and final Rest therein. The Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists, and the Gifts of Inspiration, Tongues, Prophecies, Miracles, etc.
these shine like the Consecrated Gold; and let it suffice Us the Ordinary
Ministers of Religion, and be accounted too great Riches committed to us, if we
may but be used and serve as the Silver Vessels in the house of God, and may
but be able to bring our Offerings of Brass or Hair.

BUT I hasten to the Doctrine, hoping you will forgive me that I have been so
tedious in commenting upon such a Copious Text.

DOCT. That the Institution of a Gospel Ministry, and Qualification of persons
smith are to be esteemed among The Rich Gifts of our Ascended Savior to a
sinful World, and the glorious Fruits of His Ascension. When he ascended on
high, He gave Gifts (...) some Apostles, etc.

WE may take the Doctrine into these following Proposions. 1. That our Lord
Jesus Christ has Instituted and Ordained a Gospel Ministry. 2. That He
furnishes and qualifies Men for it, with a variety of Divine and Heavenly
Gifts. 3. That they are the rich Gift of Christ unto a sinful World. 4. That it
is the glorious Fruit of His Ascension.


I. OUR Lord Jesus Christ has Instituted and Ordained a Gospel Ministry, to
continue in His Church, and for the Edification of it unto the End of the World.

THE Savior of Men has had, has, and ever will have a Church in the World.
This has existed the same, under the various Methods and Dispensations of
Religion and of the Covenant of Grace, which have been from Adam to this day,
and so will it be by the power and grace of God unto the End of Time. In this
Church of the Living God there ever has been the Ministry of Men, and of some
particular persons whom God has called, endowed, and in diverse manner
authorized to Minister in holy things unto others, for their Souls Good. Of the
Patriarchal Age we can say but little more than this, that the venerable
Fathers of the several Religious Families and Tribes have been esteemed both
Princes and Priests to them; no doubt praying with and blessing their
households, instructing and charging them according to the will of God,
receiving their Offerings and offering up Sacrifices, and leading in the
Spiritual Sacrifices of praise unto God. No doubt too, but there were
Extraordinary Prophets raised up and inspired and sent by God with His will in
their mouths upon Occasion; as well as more Ordinary Revelations of Heaven to
the Holy Men that walked with God, as Enoch, Noah and Abraham did.

ENOCH prophesied in his day of the Judgment yet to come, the second Coming of
our Lord; as the Apostle Jude informs us. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness
in his Generation, and the Longsuffering of God endured them for a great while
under the Endeavors of his holy Ministry. Abraham we know was a faithful
Father to his numerous Household, to instruct them in and command them after him
to keep the way of the Lord.

AND thus things continued until the Descent of the House of Israel into
Egypt; where neither were their Posterity left altogether we may think without
Instruction; but when God visited them by the Mission of Moses, and had bro't
them thence by an outstretched Arm, He then came down on Sinai, and gave them
the Law by the disposition of Angels, in thunders and lightnings; which threw
them into such terrors that they humbly beso't of God that He would no more
speak unto them immediately Himself, but by the Mouth and Ministry of Moses;
solemnly promising that they would obediently hearken unto all that he should
speak to them in the Name of the LORD. GOD approved of this discreet and wise
Motion which they made, and took up Moses into the Mount, and there and thence
forward instructed him in His whole Mind and Will for the Religion and
Government of that His chosen People.

HE then Instituted among them, as His Ordinances of Worship and Sabbaths, so
the Ministry of the Priests and Levites; who were to serve at His Altar, and to
teach through the Land in their several Dispersions the Statutes and Commandments
of God. Their lips were to preserve Knowledge, and the people were to seek the
Law at their Mouth. God inspired also His Holy Prophets; and sent them with
particular Revelations and Messages, as it pleased Him; and thus the Ministry
of Religion continued in the House of Aaron, even till the coming of Christ.

OUR LORD JESUS was that Great Prophet which God had promised to His people
Israel that He would raise up of their Brethren, like unto Moses, and put his
words in his mouth, and require it of them that should not hearken unto him.

NOW as soon as our LORD began His public Ministry, He also called and
Ordained the twelve Apostles, and sent them forth to preach the Kingdom of God;
and after them the Lord appointed other Seventy also, and sent them two and two
before His face, into every City and Place, whither He himself would come. Thus
they ministered under Christ all the time that the Lord went in and out among
them, unto the day that they saw Him taken up into Heaven. Just before which,
He renewed His Commission unto them, and extended it unto all whom He should
call to minister in holy things even to the End of the World. Mat. ult. And
Jesus came and spoke unto them saying; All power is given to me in Heaven and
in Earth; go ye therefore and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of
the Father and of --.

HERE our Lord first asserts His own Commission and Authority, and then seals
His to us. He did not go beyond His power, nor did He assume or usurp any; but
all power is given to Him in Heaven and Earth. He has a legal Title, and a full
Possession; He is Invested in it, Inaugurated and Enthroned for ever. And He
gives Commission not only to the Apostles, though to them primarily, as the chief
Ministers of His Kingdom; but to their successors also, the Ministers of the
Gospel from age to age, to the worlds End. He assures them of His Spiritual
Presence with them in their preaching His Word, and administering His
Institutions; and that it shall be constant and perpetual; lo, I am with you
always even to the End, etc. His Spirit is with His servants to assist them,
and in His Ordinances to give them Success and Efficacy.

AGREEABLY to this Commission the whole New Testament abounds with the Accounts
of the Ministry of the Apostles and Evangelists, their Ordaining and
Instructing and sending others to preach the Gospel; the Qualifications Duties
and Labors incumbent upon Ministers are laid down, and Exhortations and
Charges given unto fidelity in this sacred Office; many Titles and Names of
honor and trust are given them; they are called Ministers of Christ, Stewards
of the Mysteries of God, Ambassadors for Christ, Overseers, Watchmen for Souls
that must give an Account, and Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, and Angels
of the Churches; And finally, Christian people are upon all these Accounts
required to Acknowledge them and highly Esteem them in love, to count them
worthy of double Honor, to Communicate for their Support, and to obey and
submit to them.

THUS our Lord Jesus has Instituted a Gospel Ministry in His Church.

II. He furnishes and qualifies Men for it with a variety of Divine and
Heavenly Gifts; He gifts them for His Church, and gives them to His Church.

HE is the True Light which lights every Man that comes into the World: the
Original and Fountain of every kind and degree of worthy Gifts, wherewith one
Person and another are Adorned and Enriched. Whether they be common Gifts or
saving Graoes, they are all derived and received from Jesus Christ. The
Endowments of Angels as well as those of Men are so; In Him was life, and the
life was the light of Men. "That life which is the light of Men comes "from
Jesus Christ: the life in Man is light, for he is made a living Soul. The light
of Reason is common to Men and all reasonable Creatures, and derived from the
Eternal Logos or Word, by whom and for him, the Thrones and Dominions in Heaven
were created as well as Man upon Earth. By the Publication of the Gospel, and
by the Operation of His Spirit, He lights all those that are enlightened to
Salvation. Our Lord Jesus both in His Eternal Godhead, and also as Mediator
and Redeemer, is the giver of every good Gift to us, and of His fullness we all
have received and Grace for Grace. All Apostles, and all Believers after them:
both the favor of Apostleship, and fitness for it.

CHRIST calls none to any Trust and Office in His Kingdom whom He does not gift
and qualify for their place in it. If Qualifications be wanting, we may be sure
they have no Divine Call and Separation of God thereunto. I mean here some
competent measure of Gifts, for whose are equal to this high and holy Service?
When God has called men to Extraordinary Offices and Service, He has gifted
them in extraordinary manner; as He did the Prophets and Apostles. But a more
common and ordinary Measure of suitable Gifts may suffice for more common and
ordinary Trusts and Services; which therefore are to be acquired in the use of
ordinary Means, by diligent study and prayer, under the common gracious
Influences of the Holy Spirit. Inspiration is not to be looked for on any
ordinary Occasion, nor the gift of Tongues, nor the working of Miracles.

CHRIST will give that which is requisite where He calls any one to His
Ministry; but He requires and expects too Diligence and Labor with many
Prayers and humble Dependence on Him on our part; and that we have an awful
sense of the great Knowledge and Learning necessary, especially in the Holy
Scriptures; and greater measures yet of Sanctity and Holiness, and the
continual Divine Influence to Incline, Spirit and Animate us, and also to
succeed and prosper us; that our studies and labors may not be in vain in the
Lord.

HE the Head of all glorious Influence to the Church chooses whom He will send
and employ in it, He makes men to differ in Gifts, which in various Manner and
Measures He bestows as pleases Him, on whom He will; and then by whom He will
He works.

THE Holy Spirit of Grace is poured out on the Church for that End; to furnish
some for the Edification of others, and by their Ministry to bring in the Elect
to believe and be saved. The Holy Ghost is substituted and given forth by our
Lord Jesus Personally to promote and effectuate His Mediation for God with Men.
Dr. Scot.
He is now the other Advocate to enforce the Ministry of Men on Christ's
behalf: even the Spirit of Truth, which abides with His Church for ever to this
End. He qualified and furnish d the Apostles for their service, and so He does
Ordinary Ministers for theirs till the worlds End. As long as Christ shall have
a Church upon the Earth, the Holy Ghost is vitally united to it, as One speaks
well, even as the Soul to the Body; for as there is one Body, the Church, so
there is one Spirit; as our Context has it: and this one blessed Spirit of
Grace works every saving and gracious Effect that is produced by the Ministry
of Men; Enlightening, Sanctifying, Quickening and Comforting the Souls of His
chosen and called, and being in them the Spirit of Supplication. He is the
Spirit of the Son sent forth into the hearts of the Elect.

BUT He works in and by the Ministry of Men. Not that He needs them or their
Ministries to him, but this is the Reasonable and Gracious way which He Himself
has ordained and sanctified unto our Use. We must look and wait for Him in His
own way, and therein expect His free and efficacious Operations. He will work
by whom He will work, and whom He will use He prepares for the use which He
pleases to make of him.

AS the Father sanctified and sent Christ into the world, and gave Him the
Spirit without Measure; so Christ has sent His Ministers, and furnished them
with measures of Gifts and Graces from His Holy Spirit.

HEAR how graciously and with what Solemnity our Savior speaks of it in His
Prayer for His Apostles, and in them for all that should believe in him through
their word: Joh. 17.17, 18, 19. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth. As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I sent them into the
world; and for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.

THE blessed Prayer is, Sanctify them as Ministers to thy Service; qualify them
with Christian Graces and Ministerial Gifts; own them in the Office and let thy
Hand go with them: For this cause I Sanctify, i. e. devote my self an Offering
that they may be qualified from above and accepted with God both as Saints and
Ministers. Thus Christ gave Himself for His Church to sanctify it. And for the
Sanctification of Believers He sanctifies His Ministers: Joh. 21, 22. Jesus
said again to them, Peace be unto you; as my Father has sent me, even so have
I sent you (Qualified and Furnished as well as Authorized and Commissioned;)
and when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto them, receive the
Holy Ghost.

III. THE Ministers of Christ, whom He qualifies and furnishes with Ministerial
Gifts and Graces are a very rich Gift of Christ to a sinful World. Manifold is
the Riches of His Grace unto them whom He qualifies, and when He has so
Enriched them Great is the Richness of His Gift in them unto the Souls of Men.
All His Gifts to them is so much Grace to His Church, and to render them a Gift
worthy of Himself, and of His love unto Souls.

LET me lay before you two Texts here; for I cannot pretend to enter into a
proper Method or Enlargement on this head, on which a great many worthy things
might be copiously said: The first Text shall speak the greatness of the thing
for God to furnish a Ministry, the second to give it to His Church. The first
is in the 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing, as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God; Who also has made us
able Ministers of the New Testament. The other is in the 1 Cor. 3. ult.
Therefore let no man glory in man, for all things are yours; whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas --, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.
Thus God forms a glorious Ministry in the world, to be His glorious Gift to it.

AND do but consider the End to which He forms it, and the glorious Effect
which under His Blessing it produces, and it will appear to be an Illustrious
and Magnificent Gift of Heaven. It is instituted in the hand of the Holy Ghost,
and under that Revelation which God has made of Himself and of His Will and
Grace to men, to be the means of the Illumination, Conversion and Salvation of
the World. And what can be more Noble or Important than this End? at least what
more glorious in our Eyes, to whom is the word of this Salvation sent, and the
Ministry of Reconciliation committed? One Soul is of an Invaluable Price; but
what then is the Salvation of Millions of Immortal Spirits, that were perishing
in Ignorance, Corruption and Spiritual Bondage and Death!

MEN and Brethren, if your Souls are of any worth in your own Eyes, so must you
value and set a price on the means of your Instruction unto the Kingdom of God,
the means of their Sanctification, and Perseverance in Grace unto Glory.

THESE are the Servants of the most High God, which show you the way of
Salvation: God has Endowed, Commissioned and sent them on that service to you;
at the urgent necessity and on the account of the perishing Condition of your
Souls, and their own too, and a Million Millions of others besides you: and
will you not reverence this Gift of Christ to you? how should you believe in
Christ and be saved, if these were not sent to preach Him to you, and as
Ambassadors from Christ to beseech and pray you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God?

WE then as workers together with God beseech you not to receive His Grace in
vain: not to make light of it, not to treat it with Contempt. Look not upon Us
nor our Office as a mean or insignificant thing, but suffer me to speak in
God's behalf and to magnify my Office, this Ministry which we have received of
the Lord Jesus.

SAY not, -- this foolishness of Preaching, seeing is pleases God by it to save
them that believe. Weak as it is, by it God has confounded the pride of the
world, for the world by wisdom knew not God. But in the preached Gospel, God
and the way of your Recovery from Sin and Hell, to Holiness and Heaven, is
revealed; and the glory both of His Grace and Justice is seen in the face of
Jesus Christ. Let a man therefore so account of us as of the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God; if so be that we may but be found
Faithful; which we are while we stand to and act up to our Commission. And I
will just read to you how the Apostle teaches us to stand by it, and triumph in
it, and therein commends our Ministry to the Consciences of our People: It is
in the Close of the 2 Chap. of the 2 Epistle to the Corinthians, and the
beginning of the 3. Chap. Now thanks be to God which always causes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his Knowledge by us in
every place. For we are unto GOD a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish: To the one we are the savor of Death unto
Death, and to the other the savor of Lise unto Life: and who is sufficient for
these things? For we are not as many which corrupt the word of GOD; but as of
Sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ.

DO we begin again to commend our selves? or need we as some others Epistles of
Commendation to you, or Letters of Commendation from you? Ye are our Epistle
written in our hearts, known and read of all men: for as much as ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not
with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart. And such Trust have we through Christ to Godward.

O might We bespeak You after this manner, who are our respective Charges, and
had we this proof of our Mission to you from God in your Consciences; we should
need no more to convince you, we should desire nothing more to satisfy you of
the greatness of the Gift of Christ to His Church in the Ministry which He has
Ordained in it.

IT only remains now in the fourth and last place to Observe,

IV. THAT this blessed Gift of God to His Church, an Instituted Gospel
Ministry, and Persons qualified by Him for the Ministerial Office, are the
glorious Fruit of the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. When he ascended on
high, He gave etc. He purchased them by His Death, He received them at His
Ascension, and being set down at the right hand of God He shed forth of His
Holy Spirit. So while He was here on Earth He informed His Disciples that it
was to be, and so He fulfilled His glorious Promise after He was taken from
them. I will only lay before you the Prophecy and Promise, and the Event.

FOR the first let us look into the parting gracious Discourses of our Lord to
His Disciples, just before His Apprehension and Crucifixion, and His Divine
Prayer with and for them, as it is recorded by the Evangelist John. There our
Lord tells His Disciples, that He would pray the Father, and He should give
them another Comforter to abide with them for ever; even the Spirit of Truth.
Joh. 14.15. This "was the Great New Testament promise, as that of the Messiah
was of the Old Testament. Christ was the Consolation of Israel which the
faithful were waiting for before He came into the world, and now that He was
leaving the world and going to the Father He promised His Church another
Comforter to supply His Bodily Presence, and to abide with them in His Absence.
Another Paraclete, another Advocate, another Master and Teacher, or Exhorter;
another Patron as some render it; This blessed Gift He promised upon His
leaving them; the Spirit of Truth in all His saving Gifts and Operations. v.
18. I will not leave you Comfortless, I will come unto you. Not only visit and
comfort them once and again after His Resurrection; but after His Ascension be
coming daily to them in His blessed Spirit, the visits of His Grace. Again, v.
25. These things have I spoken to you, being yet present with you; but the
Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He
shall teach you all things. Here He bids them expect another Teacher on His
Departure: one that should come in His name; as His Substitute, Agent,
Representative; for He is the Spirit of Christ, to carry on his undertaking: He
was to teach them all things, and be in them the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation; to accomplish them for, assist them in, and carry them through their
Ministry.

AGREEABLY we read again, Joh. 15.26, 27. When the Comforter is come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth which proceeds
from the Father, He shall testify of me; and ye also shall bear witness -- etc.
Mr. Henry says, That we have more in this Verse concerning the HOLY GHOST, than
in any one Verse besides in the Bible. Here is an account of him in his Essence
or Subsistence rather, He the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father:
The Emanation of Divine Light, the Energy of Divine Power: as Heat and
Influence are of the Sun and yet are one with it. Again here is an account of
this blessed Spirit in his Mission, Office and Operations. He was speedily then
to come in a more plentiful Effusion of his Gifts, Graces and Powers, than had
ever yet been. Christ had been long the O Ercomenos, He that should come, but
now the Holy Spirit was He. I will send him, said Christ, scil: upon my
Ascension. I will pray the Father and he shall give him. It was to be the fruit
of his Dominion, and Intercession within the vail. The Spirit was promised to
come from Christ the Mediator, upon the Apostles, to instruct them in their
preaching, to enable them for working, and to carry them through their Sufferings
and Testimony. He testifies of Christ to this day in the preached Gospel, and
by the mouth of his Ministers.

BUT there is yet a farther passage of our Saviors, wherein he told his
Disciples that his own Departure was necessary unto the Coming of the
Comforter, and that the Coming of the Spirit was absolutely necessary to the
carrying on his Interest on Earth; for that he was to receive of him and to
show it unto them. Joh. 16.7, 14. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not a way, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you. And when he is come,
he will convince the world etc. He shall not speak of himself -- but he shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and show it unto you. All things that
the Father has are mine, therefore said I, that he shall take of mine and show
it unto you.

THUS the Spirit of Grace was to come from the glorified Redeemer, to glorify
him on Earth, by converting the world to him, by the Ministry of Men. The Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit in the Apostles, and their preaching and writing under
his blessed Influence, were to display the power and glory of the Ascended
Savior; for in Operation as well as Essence He derives from the Son; He
communicates and applies what Christ purchased; as Christ therefore has
purchased all Spiritual Blessings and they are delivered to him by the Father,
so they are delivered by him to the Holy Spirit to be conveyed to us, and
conferred according to the Divine Eternal Purpose and Council, both as to
persons, and as to ways and means; both foreknown; the one Chosen in Christ,
the other Ordained by him.

TO have done, the last Order that our Savior left with his Apostles just
before his Ascension was that, Luke 24.49. Behold I send the promise of my
Father upon you; but tarry you at Jerusalem till ye be endued with power from
on high. And Act. 1.4. He commanded them to wait for the promise of the Father,
which said he ye have heard of me.

AND thus you see that this was the Promise and Prediction of our LORD while he
continued here on Earth with his Disciples, that after his Ascension the Holy
Spirit should be poured out to qualify his Ministers for, and carry them
through, and succeed them in their Ministry.

AND now let us see the Event, the Illustrious Event, wherein this glorious
Promise was fulfilled; which was upon this famous day of Pentecost, ten days
after our Lord's Ascension: when the Disciples being met together in one place,
assembled on the first Day of the Week for Worship, (as no doubt they had
continued in Supplications and Prayers night and day, waiting obediently for
the Descent and Supply of the Holy Spirit) suddenly there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
were sitting; and there appeared cloven Tongues like as of fire and sat upon
them; and they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with Tongues
as the Spirit gave them utterance. This miraculous Event made a great Noise
instantly in the City, upon so great a Festival, and the multitude gathered
together, dispersed Jews out of every Nation under Heaven, who were amazed and
confounded to hear these unlearned Galileans speak to them the wonderful works
of God, in the several Languages of the Nations where they were dispersed. But
Peter stood up, inspired and filled with the Descended Spirit of Truth and
Grace, and explained the amazing Occurrence to them: He told them in short,
That God had raised up the Crucified Jesus from the Dead, and had exalted him
to his own right hand in the highest Heavens; for they had often seen and
conversed with Him after his Resurrection, and at last they saw him ascend
bodily into Heaven; and that now having received of the Father the promise of
the Holy Ghost, he shed Him down upon them in what they now saw and heard.

THUS the Holy Ghost was given when Jesus was glorified, i. e. after his
Ascension, and not till then; i. e. in the fullest Effusion of his Heavenly
Gifts and Graces. And therefore we are to esteem the instituted, qualified and
prosperous Ministry of the Gospel, to be the Gift of Christ as Ascended,
reigning and Interceding for us at the right hand of God, and made the Head and
fountain of all divine Influence and saving Blessings to the Church: as we
read, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. And has put all things under his feet, and gave Him to be
the Head over all things unto his Church; Which is his body, the fullness of Him
that fills all in all.

AND thus I have in the plainest manner I could, but I fear too tedious, opened
and proved the Doctrine; That the Institution of a Gospel Ministry, and the
Qualification of Persons for it are to be esteemed among the rich Gifts of the
Ascended Savior. And now I should proceed to apply the Doctrine.

BUT such a world of awful and just Reflections offer themselves upon the great
Truths that have been set before you, that I am afraid to venture even upon the
hinting at them after this length which I have already allowed my self. And yet
I needs must.

1. We see (my Brethren) the Glory of the Lord Jesus, and his Grace to us: 1.
His Glory: in the verity of his Resurrection and Ascension, the perfection of
his Sacrifice, the height of his Exaltation, the dignity of his State, his high
Dominion, Supremacy, and Exercise of Rule and Government, both in the Kingdom
of Providence and Grace. Let us look to Him where he is, and where we hope e're
long to be, and behold his Glory.

2. WE see his gracious care of, and love and mercy to a miserable sinful
world, that He has instituted a Ministry of Religion in it, that he has given
forth his Holy Spirit to sanctify Persons thereunto, gift and qualify them for
it; incline and spirit, succeed and prosper them in it. He is the Rock, his
work is perfect. To Him we must ascribe all the Glory that there is to be seen
in Men or Means. They that are qualified and called and used by him, must put
it far from themselves; and people must turn off their Eyes from their
Ministers, to their Ascended Savior, for who is Paul or who is Apollos, save
Ministers by whom ye believed. If Peter and John were here to preach to you by
Inspiration, to work Miracles, and which is more to convert Thousands at a time
to Christ; yet would they not suffer you to look earnestly at them, as if by
their power or holiness any thing were done; no, they would tell us, but God
has glorified His Son Jesus, and to his Name, through Faith in his Name, must
every Divine Effect be solely attributed.

2. OUR Doctrine does great Honor to the Ministerial Office, and to them that
are in it, or are designed for it. Who would not desire to be a part of this
precious Gift to a perishing world for the Salvation of Souls! I thank Christ
Jesus our Lord, said Holy Paul, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the Ministry! O the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God (says he) committed to my trust. Ministers are Angels, and Stars in the
Church; high and awful is their Station; they must serve with fear, and rejoice
with trembling.

3. THE means of Education are a blessed Gift of Heaven to a Land: Our Schools,
our Colleges and the Sons of the Prophets there that excel in Diligence, in
Science and in early Piety. The Schools had Elijahs last Visitation before his
Ascension, and ever since our Lord's Ascension they have His. There he selects
the happy favorite Youth, adorns him with Gifts and Graces, inclines and
devotes him to sacred Services, designs him his eminent Use and Services in the
World, and calls him forth from thence into his Church and Kingdom among Men,
makes him a burning and a shining Light and sets him up in his Candlestic, to
give light in the world. How many such rich Gifts of Christ have the Churches
received from our College? how singular a Blessing has it herein been made unto
the Land?

4. OUR Doctrine would put persons on dedicating themselves to the Holy Work of
the Ministry, and Parents on devoting their goodliest Sons thereunto: Give
them, O give your selves, unto the service of your Ascended Lord, that he may
make you worthy Gifts unto his Church. And O what Diligence should Candidates
for the Ministry be put upon in the use of proper means, study, prayer,
humility, with purity of Aim and Intention at the glory of God, usefulness in
the world, the benefit of others, and the saving your own Souls? Yea how
thankful should they be for the Gifts of God to them, natural and acquired
Parts, the love of Study, an Inclination to his Service, a hearty and fervent
desire to do good in the world, and especially to labor in the Salvation of
Souls. Again, how careful should they be to do nothing which may provoke God to
deny unto them his Gifts, or to take them away from 'em? but to do every thing
whereby they may keep themselves in the love of God, and come behind in no Gift.

5. THE Doctrine would direct people in choosing a Minister or Pastor, to be
over them in the Lord: which as it is their undoubted right, so they are
accountable to Christ how they improve it for the good of their own Souls and
their Families. They ought surely to covet earnestly the best Gift of Heaven
they can find prepared for them and offered to them. Choose One who may be
indeed a Gift of Heaven to you: One whom Christ has gifted and accomplished for
his work, One that most visibly shines in the Spirit of Christ and of Grace,
One whom you may hope Christ will own, One that has a zeal for Christ and
Holiness, and for the Souls of Men.

TOO many there are that are ready to intrude without either Gifts or Graces
into the sacred Work of the Ministry; and too many seem careless whether the
Person whom they choose have either, if so be they may but have him cheap. Such
a Person may be separated to the Ministry of the Gospel by the hands of Men,
and I may add by the profane will of a People, but Christ never gave nor sent
him. Great care should be taken that unqualify'd persons be not received into
this Holy Office, for Christ will disown and disclaim their being his Gifts to
men.

6. OUR Doctrine would comfort and encourage those that are in the Ministry,
and desire to be found Faithful in the wighty Trust: You have (my Reverend
Brethren and Fathers) the glorious LORD and SAVIOR in the Heavens to be
looking to and relying on, to supply you with Gifts and Graces, to support and
comfort you in all your Difficulties, to protect and defend you in his Service,
and to succeed you in his Work. He reigns above, and has said to you, All power
is given to me in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore. In this his Might and Name
go forth therefore and go on. You and your work are his special Care, and while
he governs the World, his gracious Eye is upon the little Flock his Church
therein. This Man at the right hand of God stands also among the Myrtle trees
in the bottom; and Angels receive their Orders and make their Motions as the
Needs of his humble and feeble Remnant do require. He walks in the midst of his
golden Candlestics, and he holds the Stars in his right hand. Rev. 2.1. In his
hand which speaks his tender Care of them, his right hand which speaks his
power.

7. HOW Diligently should Ministers improve all their Gifts for Christ;
laboring to approve themselves as the Gifts of so glorious a Lord unto His
Church: For Men do not light a Candle to put it under a Bushel. How lamentable
was it that the Shield of Saul was at last vilely thrown away as though He had
not been Anointed with Oil! Having therefore gifts differing according to the
Grace of God which is given to us, let us wait on our Ministering, on Teaching,
on Exhortation, and on the Rule committed to us, with Diligence. Let us, as
becomes our Relation to God and Souls, follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness; fight the good Fight and lay hold on Eternal
Life. Let us study to be Examples to the flock, in Word, in Conversation, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. Let us preach the word, be instant, in season etc.
reprove, rebuke etc. Let us hold fast the faithful word, and feed the flock of
God that is among us, his Lambs and his Sheep, willingly and of a ready mind.

LET us study how to behave our selves in the house of God, and to show our
selves approved workmen that need not be ashamed etc. Let us be sound in the
Faith, always speaking the things which become sound Doctrine; with meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; being gentle unto all men, apt to
teach. Let us labor to become mighty in the Scriptures; and to preach not our
selves but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves the servants of Souls for
Jesus sake. Let us give attention to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine;
showing Uncoruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, and sound Speech which etc. Let us
open our mouths boldly, to make known the Mystery of the Gospel; that thereof
we may speak so as we ought to speak; as able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Let us meditate therefore on divine
things, and give our selves to Prayer and to the Ministry of the word; let us
give our selves wholly to them and continue in them, that we may both save our
selves and those that hear us.

Let us remember how we have been charged awfully unto all this, and have
obliged our selves, before God and the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall judge the
quick and the dead, at his Appearing and Kingdom: And when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory which fades not away.

8. WITH what Thankfulness and Esteem ought persons to entertain the Ministry
of Christ? and reverence their faithful Pastors, as the precious Gift of the
Ascended Savior to them? People and places should carefully seek the
settlement of the Gospel among them, honorably support the Ministry thereof,
give a hearty welcome and receive gladly the Salvation bro't to their Houses;
and every way encourage and comfort the Hearts of their Ministers in the work
of the Lord; especially by esteeming them highly in love for the Words sake,
and yielding a willing subjection to their Instructions, Admonitions, Counsels,
and profiting under the same.

LET it not be that Heaven casts its Pearls before Swine, that do but turn and
rend instead of reverencing the feet of them that bring the glad Tidings of
Peace. Too many are the places that put far from them the Ministry of Christ,
and count themselves unworthy of Eternal Life; they ignorantly and profanely
despise the Gospel, for they do not know the Gift of God: they abuse, revile
and vilify him that wears the name of a Minister. But this is as Christ himself
was rejected of Men, and if they have called the master of the House Beelzebub,
what shall they not call them of his Household? But Christ resents highly the
Contempt done unto his Heavenly Gift: Luke 10.10, 11. Into whatsoever City ye
enter and they receive you not, go out into the streets of the same and say,
Even the very dust of your City which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against
you: notwithstanding be you sure of this, that the Kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you.

VERILY there are too many that do not seem to esteem their Ministers, however
furnished and faithful they be, as the rich Gift of Christ to them: in some
places they starve them, rating them and their Labors at a vile and cheap
price; in some places they grieve and break the hearts of their Ministers by
personal disrespects, in others by Contentions and Quarrels among themselves;
and let me add, that if it be only by Unprofitableness under the Labors of
your Ministers you show the little regard you have, and the small account you
make of them and of Him that sends them. But beyond all, How evil is it to
revile, disparage and expose to contempt, to belly and slander the Ministry of a
Land; and through the Grace of God too a Body of Ministers second but to few
places of like numbers, for Ministerial Gifts and Graces, Diligence and Labors
both as to Study and Preaching, and other Instances of a Pastoral Fidelity and
Watch; to represent them in Satyr to their Churches through the Land as Traitors
to Christ and to the Churches, ignorantly or knowingly betraying them in their
best Interests which they ought to defend and maintain; to represent them as a
part of the Army of Gog and Magog compassing about the Camp of the Saints of
God and the beloved Gity; to make the Churches believe (if they can indeed be
made to believe it) that their Ministers are dangerous Persons, not to be
trusted by reason of their corrupt Principles or Designs: how Evil must this
be? For indeed were this true, it must then be confessed that the present
Ministry of this Land is no Gift of Christ unto these Churches, but a sore and
heavy Judgment on them. The word of God unto his Ministers under this present
trial is that, 2 Cor. 6. ^, 8. Approving your selves as the Ministers of Christ
in much Patience; -- by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report,
as deceivers and yet true, as unknown and yet well known.

9. AND lastly, We learn from our Doctrine the Reasonableness of our present
Prayers to God this day. We are come together to ask a great and blessed Gift
from our Ascended Savior to this sinful Flock of His; even the Union of our
hearts in the Election of some Person into the Pastoral Office among us, whom
He shall please to qualify and accomplish herefor, incline and spirit unto
fidelity herein, and make a rich and singular Blessing to us and our Children
after us: to the Town also together with us, and to the Land. Such Gifts are
with our Lord Jesus to bestow, and he dispenses them from Heaven freely even to
the Rebellious. He himself has bid us pray the Lord of the Harvest that he will
thrust forth Laborers into His Harvest: and he has promised to give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him, and to give his people (and his repenting
backsliding people too) Pastors after his own Heart. Jer. 3.15.

WE come this day to pray for all our Holy Brethren, both Ministers and People
together, that the Lords Ministers may be clothed with Righteousness and
Salvation, and his Saints be made to shout for joy: to pray for the Candidates
for the Ministry in particular, that our Colleges may be replenished with every
good and perfect Gift from God the Father of Lights, and that the Spirit of
Grace may rest in double Portions on the Sons of the Prophets.

WE are here this day to confess our utter unworthiness to receive any such
Gift from God, which yet he has bid us most earnestly to covet and to seek. We
are here to bewail all the forfeitures we have made of such a Mercy. We
therefore seek it only in the Name of our Ascended Savior, and from his
gracious Hands, of his fullness, and the riches of his glorious Grace. If we do
not ask amiss, surely we may receive; for it is a Petition every way agreeable
to his Holy Will. Why has Christ received such Gifts for Men but to bestow
them? Why has he gifted Men but to give them to his Church? or why else has he
inclined them whom he has gifted to give themselves to the Service of the
Church? Ask then with Humiliation, Faith and true Desire, and receive, that
your Joy may be full. Such a Gift was always meant to be sought and obtained by
Prayer; and the Gift is greatned to us when it is thus obtained.

THE united Prayers of our Brethren with us this day should strengthen our
Faith and fervency in the Prayers of the day. For has not our Lord said unto us
concerning the Acceptableness and Efficacy of joint Prayer with God, with which
words I will Conclude, Mar. 18.19. I say unto you, that if two of you shall
agree on Earth, as touching any thing that ye shall ask, it shall be done for
you of my Father which is in Heaven.

IF two agree it shall be done, how much more if many agree in the Petition.
Let us Agree my Brethren. God unite our hearts to make one Voice in Prayer; and
God unite our hearts to his own Glory in the Choice proposed by us.

FINIS.

