A Monitor for Communicants.

An ESSAY To Excite and Assist Religious Approaches TO THE Table of the Lord.

Offered by an Assembly of the NEW-ENGLISH PASTORS, unto their own Flocks, and
unto all the CHURCHES in these American Colonies: With a Solemn TESTIMONY to
that Cause of GOD, and RELIGION in them.

The Third EDITION.

Mal. I. 7. -- In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is Contemptible.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, and T. Crump; for Samuel Gerrish, and Daniel
Henchman, and Sold at their Shops, 1715.

Price 4 d. Single, and 3 s. per Doz.

A Monitor for COMMUNICANTS.
IT is much to be desired; And how Sweet unto our Soul, would be the Desire
Accomplished! That the TABLE of the LORD, may be more Generally, and after the
most worthy manner Approached unto. The Table of the Lord, with His Newborn
Children, like Olive-plants about it, verily, It Is an Excellent Sight. Worthy
Approaches to the Table of the Lord, are Excellent Actions; and they have a
Tendency to make Excellent Christians. At the Table of the Lord, we do
according to His Direction, Celebrate a very great Appointment and Sacrament of
the New Testament. There can be nothing more Plain and Positive, than that
Order of our Savior unto His Disciples; Luke XXII. 19. This do in Remembrance
of Me: Repeated by the Apostles of our Lord, after He was Received up into
Glory. [1 Cor. XI. 24, 25.] You need no Stronger proof, that some well known
Seducers in our Days, are Liars, and the Truth is not in them, in that they
keep not, but Seduce others from keeping that Indisputable Commandment of our
Lord Jesus Christ. But, how justly does the Holy Lord, by permitting the Rising
and Hissing of such a Sect among them, Chastise His People, for neglecting the
Ordinance which is decried and opposed by these Gainsayers! And, why, Oh! why,
do so many that are far from the Heresies of that Sect, yet indulge themselves
in the Miscarriage, which one of their most noted Heresies does lead unto!

Our People generally confess, That it is their Duty, to draw near unto the
Lord in this Holy, and Famous Institution. And most certainly, if you did it in
a Worthy manner, you would also find it unspeakably for your Interest. It would
mightily confirm your Faith, yea, strengthen your Sight, of the Doctrine of God
your Savior. It would Exercise the Graces of God in your Hearts; and the
Exercise would be a sensible Improvement of them. It would furnish you with
Remedies for all the Distempers in your Minds; your Distempered Souls would be
strangely relieved by the noble Medicines here dispensed unto us. It would
Comfort you under your Temptations, and with Comfortable Seals thereof bring
home the Everlasting Love of God unto you. It would admit you to intimate
Interviews with Heaven, and advance you to Heavenly Satisfactions and
Assurances; be a Sweet Emblem of your coming to Sit with your Savior in His
Heavenly Places. Oh! why will you Deny, to your selves, these Great
Conselations of God?

The common Apology made for this Omission is; I am afraid; I shall come
Unworthily; and by doing so, I shall Eat and Drink Judgment unto my self. But
verily, This will imply something that will hardly be capable of an Apology.
Have you done, all that you can do, that you may not come Unworthily? If you
have not, then you Stay away Unworthily. It Is a Sin to Come Unworthily. But,
Syrs, it is a Sin to stay away Unworthily. Suppose you had that Message by an
infallible Hand brought unto you; Set all things in Order, for thou have not
one Month more to Live in the World; A Month shall devour thee! What would be
your Course in this case? Doubtless you would immediately Set apart a portion
of Time for it; And Confess and Bewail all your Sins, and fly to the Blood of
(...) Savior for the Pardon of them, and earnestly declare, that you Look upon
every one of them, with all Abhorrence of Soul; and give up your selves unto
God, with very serious Resolutions to Acknowledge Him in all your (...): And
with unspeakable Agony beg the Spirit of Grace to take Possession of you. Have
you done thus? If you have done this, you may with an Encouraged Soul, come on
unto the Table of the Lord. Though you are not fully Sure, of your Sincerity, yet
you may come, and may Do it in Faith; Inasmuch as you have no Evidence
remaining, to Proclaim and Pronounce a Predominant Hypocrisy: You have now no
Evident Bar to your doing of your Duty; and so you may and must go on with your
Duty. But if all this be still Undone, why do you continue in such an
unaccountable Stupidity and Security! Why do you leave your Interior and
Eternal State, at such desperate Uncertainty? How can you bear thus to Sleep on
the Top of a Mast in the Midst of the Sea? In Hourly Danger, forought you know,
of a Damnation that Slumbereth not. Your First Work must be immediately to Do,
what is to be done, by every man, who expects to Die, and Propounds a Death
without a Sting; To Lay hold on Everlasting Life, in the Methods of a Repenting
Faith immediately. Till This be done, you not only Live in your Sins, but also
with a (...) Madness run the Extreme Hazard of Dying in them.

Sirs, The Ambassadors of Peace have cause, for Weeping bitterly over you.
What? Have we been Laboring so many years, to bring our People Home unto their
only Savior; and have all our pains been so ineffectual, that not Half of our
People have to this day come to those Dispositions of Piety, upon which they
may venture to the Table of the Lord? Surely, We have Labored in Vain, and
Spent our Strength almost for Naught and in Vain; Or else we should see more of
our People, with the Dispositions of a Regenerate Mind, accompanying of us, at
the Holy Table!

If this Consideration will make little Impression upon you, Oh! Look up to
your only Savior, and hear His Heartbreaking Expostulations. What? Have my
People so little Regard unto the Remembrance of their Dying Savior? Did I,
when I was going to lay down My Life, on their behalf, ask them to keep Alive
the Memory of what I have done for them, in a Sacramental Commemoration of it;
and will they Forget My Last Will and Testament? Do I give them a Precious
Opportunity of Communion with Me, wherein One Hour is better than a thousand
elsewhere; and are they so entangled in the Lusts of this World, that they will
not make Ready, to meet me, where I would Commune with them? Oh! Consider of it.

But that which I should rather proceed unto, is; To Set before you, the
Preparation, which you are to make, that you may not Come Unworthily unto the
Table of the Lord. Having seen your selves Unable to do any thing, and Unworthy
that God should enable you, Lift up a cry to Sovereign Grace, that you may be
enabled. O Thou from whom is the Preparation of the Heart in Man, Grant, Grant
unto me, the Preparation of thy Sanctuary!

And now;

First; You are to Set before you, the Covenant of Grace, in all the Proposals
of it; and Express and Renew the Compliance of your Souls, with all that is
Proposed.

The Demand of the Great GOD, is; Perishing Sinner, Shall I be thy God, and thy
Portion? Will thou take me for thy Father, thy Savior, thy Leader? Shall it be
thy chief Blessedness, to Enjoy me, and to be Employed for me? Art thou Willing
and Resolved, for ever to depend on my Jesus for every Good Thing and follow
His Conduct unto the Blessedness He has purchased and Prepared for His People?
Now let the Answer of your very Souls within you, be; Lord, I am Willing; Thou
have made me Willing! This it is to come into the Covenant of God. Having Truly
done this you may Safely come, and Seal the Covenant; Come, and Ratify your Act
and Deed. This is your Business, at the Table of the Lord. Your coming thither,
must be on this very Account; it is for this that you are called unto it.

Secondly. You must behold a Sacrificed Savior; the Lamb of God! and make a
fresh Application to the Sacrifice of your Savior. Affect your selves with the
view of your Sins, and of the Plagues to which you are Exposed by your Sins;
and then, the Provision which God has made, in the Sacrifice of your Savior,
that your Sins may be all Forgiven you. Own, you Need such a Sacrifice, and
Renounce all Hopes, but in That alone; and Admire the Favor of God that has
provided such a Sacrifice for you, and allowed you to Plead it as your
Atonement. Humbly Remonstrate; O Holy God, Thy Christ has been made a Sacrifice
for my Sin. Infinitely do I want such a Sacrifice. I despair of of all Help
from any other. I present that most valuable Sacrifice before thee, and beseech
thee for the sake thereof to be Reconciled unto me. When you have Truly done
this, you may Safely come, and put in your Claim for a Part in the Great
Sacrifice. This is done by coming to the Table of the Lord. It is to be the
Intent and Language of your coming thither!

Thirdly. Though you may be discouraged by the Defects which may still attend the
Work of Grace in your Souls, yet you must feel the working of Holy Desires in
your Souls, to have that work effectually carried on. A Work of Grace, lies in
a Principle, inclining the Soul, To Fear God, and Prize Christ, and Hate all
Sin, and Slight this World, and Do all the Good we can to all about us, and
Look and Long for the Felicities of the Heavenly World. You must be heartily
desirous, as to have a Real Experience of this Work, so to have it carried
(...) unto Perfection. The Table of the Lord has been Spread, for the
nourishment of this Glorious Work. The Person who is heartily Desirous, to have
this Work nourished in him will be welcome to the Holy Table. The Good Things
here, are for that Hungry and Thirsty Soul. Ah Soul above all things desirous
to have the Image of God and His Christ brought unto Perfection in thee; Soul
desirous to be cleansed from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and brought
unto Perfection of Holiness; The Great King will say, Welcome to my Holy Table;
I have put a Wedding Garment on that Soul. The sense it has of its own Rags
does bespeak a Wedding Garment for it.

In these things, there lies that which we call, An Habitual Preparation for
the Table of the Lord. There is an Actual Preparation also to be Endeavored.
And in order to this, A Time is to be set apart for it, a little before your
coming. You must not begrutch Time for such a weighty and awful affair. Shake
off your Secular Encumbrances, and command so much Time, as is requisite for
the bringing of your Souls, into an Heavenly Temper.

Now, In your Actual Preparation, One thing is to be this; You must actually go
over again the Poincs of your Habitual Preparation. Actually On each of those
Three Things over again; by which you will make it sure, That you have Really
done them. No Proof like this; You best prove that you have done the Things
that accempany Salvation, (...) Doing of them.

But then, another thing of great consequence to be now attended is, A
Self-Examination. So it is required, 1 Cor. XI. 28. Let a man Examine himself,
and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup. In the management of
your Self-Examination, First Implore the Help of God; Lord, Search me, Try me;
see, and cause me to see, if there be any way of Wickedness in me, and let not
a Deceived Heart cause me to Perish with a Eye in my Right Hand. Then take the
Marks by which the Converts of Zion are to be distinguished; and Examine your
selves, how far those Marks are to be found upon you. Put the Question to your
selves, and let not your Hearts put you off, without a Satisfactory Answer to
it.

Enquire; Is a Glorious CHRIST most acceptable to me in all His Offices; and
with all His Kindnesses; and would I fain have Him to be All that unto me,
which He is unto all the Heirs of salvation? Do I rely on Him, as my Sacrifice
and my Advocate, before the Righteous God; and also my Leader in the Paths of
Righteousness? Do I see Him out shining all Creatures in all their Beauties;
and is it the Grand wish of my Soul, to be Conformed unto Him? Does it
unspeakably Please me to Resemble and Imitate Him, in all Virtuous Things? Yea,
is it a Pleasure also unto me, to see my self in Sufferings made like unto Him?

Enquire; Do I Look upon Sin, as the Worst of Evils? Has the contempt which my
Sin has offered unto (...) Great GOD, been the inexpressible Trouble of my
Soul? Do I abhor every thing, that I take to be a Sin? Am I afraid of Indulging
so much as a Sinful Thought in my Mind? Have I chosen Affliction rather than
Sin; when I must undergo that, for the Avoiding of Sin? And can I rejoice in
that Affliction, which I find Mortifies my Sin, and prevents and preserves me
from falling into Sin?

Enquire; Does the Infinite GOD, appear in every Thing Desirable to me; in
every thing, worthy to be Loved, worthy to be Praised? Have I Placed my chief
Happiness, in an Acquaintance, and Fellowship with such a God; and in having
His Favor; and in being used in Service for Him; and in being brought where He
shall be All in All unto me? Is my Delight in those things that bring me near
unto Him? And is it my Study to advance His Kingdom in the World?

Enquire; Do I desire the Prosperity of my Neighbors? Am I glad when things go
well with them; Grieved when they go Ill? Is it my Endeavor to Do Good unto
them, who have Done Hurt unto me? And wherever I see in any of them the Piety,
which intimates their being Related and United unto my Savior, does this very
sensibly Endear them to me? Do I Love them, as my Brethren; the Children of my
Father?

Enquire; Have I Renounced the Idols, by following of which the Ungodly are led
into Perdition? Do I Deny my Flesh every thing, that God has Forbid? Am I
unwilling to Offend God, that I may Get any Thing, or Please any Man, in this
World? Is it my course to resist the Temptations of Satan, and reject them with
Detestation?

These are the Things, after which your Self-Examination, is to be Inquisitive.
But I make some Remarks upon the Performance of this Exercise.

First. Though you do not, upon your Self-Examination, get beyond all Doubts and
Fears, whether you have these things Really in you, yet you must not be by
these Doubts and Fears hindered from going on, and coming to the Table of the
Lord. If you have any preponderating Hopes that you have these Things, or
cannot fairly and justly Pronounce the Sentence, that you have them not; You
may and should come. Come, as the Poor Woman, that came Trembling, to touch the
Garment of our Savior. Come and say, Lord, At thy Bidding I come. I durst not
forbear, what thou have bidden me to do.

Secondly. While you are in your Self-Examination, to Silence your Doubts and
Fears, whether you have done these things or no, the best way is, not only to
Ask whether you have done such things, but now to Do them. It is now a Sweet
Season to Do all that belongs to the New Creature; To Do it, over and over
again; The Doing of it, will render the Being of it Unquestionable. Upon every
Stroke say, Lord, Now I do this, if I never did it before!

Thirdly. It is not only to be now Examined; Whether you have the Graces of a
Regenerate Christian? But it must also come into your Examination, What there
is yet wanting in your Graces? You should Enquire, In what you are still
Defective? And from thence Prepare some Errand, and some Request, which you
will carry unto the Table of the Lord; in order to the Relief of those Defects,
which are still found upon you. Sirs, The Church is an Hospital; It Is to
something like the Pool of Bethesda that you are now approaching. Find out the
Maladies of which you are to make your Complaint, in Expectation of here
finding some Relief.

Lastly. You cannot be insensible, That this your Self-Examination, must be
accompanied with all other Devotions, that may be suitable for a Soul Preparing
to meet the Lord; with Contrition for Sin and Confession of it; with New
Resolutions of a Better Life; with the Supplications of, One Striving to Enter
into the Strait Gate; And with Reading the Word of God, and Books which may
bring the Coals from the Altar to your Souls.

Having passed through this Preparation, I will now set before you, The Worthy
Manner of coming unto the Table of the Lord. It shall be briefly recommended,
in only Two Instructions; We will put upon you none other Burden.

First. You must behold the Sacramental Elements, and the Sacramental Actions;
and affect your Hearts with suitable and Heart melting Meditations upon them.

When you see the Bread, your Thoughts must be on that Body which God Prepared
for your Savior, therein to make Himself a Sacrifice and an Offering. When you
see the Wine, your Thoughts must be on that Blood of the Son of God, which
cleanses from all Sin.

When the Bread is Taken by the Pastor; and so anon, when the Wine is Taken,
Your Thoughts must be on that Subject; I see, I see, how the Son of God has
taken our Nature; How the Word was made Flesh!

When the Bread is Blessed; Your Thoughts are to be: Thus was my Jesus
Consecrated, and set apart for the Work of a Redeemer. And anon, when the Wine
has Thanks given upon it; your Thoughts are to be: Oh! what Thanks, what Thanks
do I owe for my Jesus!

When the Bread is Broken; You are to think: Oh! what Griefs was my Jesus
broken withal; when it pleased the Lord to bruise Him, and put Him to Griefs!
And He was bruised for our Iniquities! And anon, when you see the Wine has been
poured into the Cup; You are to think: Oh! how was the Blood of my Jesus poured
out, when his Soul was made a Trepass Offering!

When the Bread is Given; You are to think: O my God, Will thou give thy Jesus
to me! Yea, God bath so Loved the World!

When you Receive, the one first, and anon the other; it should be with such
Thoughts as these; O my dear JESUS, I receive thee, I receive thee; No longer
will I deny thee an Entrance into my Soul; at the Door whereof thou art now
Knocking; O my Lard, and my God!

When you Eat the Bread, you are to Think, and wish; Oh! Let me be United unto
my Jesus, and Strengthened by Him. When you Drink the Wine, You are to Think,
and wish; Oh! Let the Blood of my Jesus be applied unto me, as Purchasing Life
Eternal for me! Oh! Let the Spirit of my Jesus Enter me, and Possess me, and
Quicken me for ever-more.

A Soul thus Engaged, is at a Feast of Fat things full of Marrow, of Wines on
the Lees well refined.

Secondly. You may find Intervening Spaces while you are about this Work of the
Lord, for to prosecute many Special Designs of Godliness, which would here have
their most Effectual Prosecution. There are Intervening Pauses, whereof it is
pity a moment should be lost. Now, it were all Wisdom and Prudence in you,
before your coming hither, to Shape some Holy Designs, which you will come
upon. Besides what the Sermons Preached on these Occasions may Lead you to
think upon; you may aforehand ponder, What remarkable Deficiency in my
Christianity should I now seek to have repaired? Or, What is the Distemper in
my Soul, that I will now go to the Lord my Healer, for the Healing of? Or, What
is the Temptation, with which I am now most in Danger to find the Tempter too
hard for me? At the Table of the Lord, Look upon your Savior, as first
Purchasing that Favor of God, which you are now pursuing of. Declare that you
Receive what is before you, as a Yoken, that you Rely upon Him for that Favor.
Then Look upon your Savior as on the Throne at the Right Hand of God, Able and
Willing from thence to dispense it unto you. So go on expressing the Reliance
of your Soul upon Him, for that Favor in all the parts of it; Say, all that
you would have; until you can conclude, Lord, All my Desire is before thee, and
my Groaning is not hid from thee.

A TESTIMONY, addressed unto the People of New England, from a Number of their
Associated Pastors; Convened at Dedham, 4 d. III m. 1714.

FOrasmuch as by the Suggestions of the Envious Enemy of Mankind, (Whose Design
is to prevent Men of the Enjoyment of the Spiritual Influences and Blessings
especially Obtainable at the Holy Supper of the LORD) very many of the Children
of the Covenant do contentedly Persevere in a most Scandalous and Criminal
Neglect of that Holy Ordinance; most absurdly Justifying their Delinquency
therein by an Allegation of their Unfitness and Unpreparedness for it, which
itself is an heinous Iniquity: And forasmuch as by this Means the Spiritual and
Eternal Estates of Men are under no small Disadvantages; and the visible
Vovenant People of GOD dreadfully exposed unto Unchurching and Discovenanting
Dispensations, under the Provoked Wrath of Heaven: Therefore we cannot but be
Sensible, that it is our Duty to do all that we can (by the Help of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST) for the Remedy and Redress of this great Evil; And we do hereby
most Solemnly bear our Testimony against it; it being Diametrically Opposite to
the required Glorifying of God's Name, and Advancement of His Kingdom, and
doing of His Will, which, (as our blessed Savior has Taught us) Men must have
most at Heart on Earth, if they intend for Heaven. And forasmuch as, our
Reverend and Worthy Brother, (whose Praise is in the Gospel throughout the
Churches,) has, (according to the Wisdom given him of GOD) formed a Discourse,
Entitled, A Monitor for Communicants, (which upon our Perusal this Day, we
find, not only to be very Solid and Orthodox, but also judiciously Adapted to
the Removal of the Objection abovementioned, of Men's Unfitness for the Table
of the LORD:) we cannot but think that the general Spreading of it through the
Land, might be, (by the blessing of CHRIST) not a little Conducive to the
Putting forward the desired Reformation of the aforesaid Neglect of the LORDS
SUPPER. And we do earnestly Exhort all, (in the Bowels of Christ) into whose
Hands the said Discourse may come, to Subject their Consciences and their whole
Souls unto the Holy Word of GOD, and Will of CHRIST therein presented unto 'em;
and in the Name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, We solemnly Charge such of Our People
as are guilty of the Scandalous Neglect of the Sacred Supper of the LORD, to
Endeavor to Repent and Reform, as they will Answer it to their Great Judge at
the Last Day.

Now, May the Precious Blood of CHRIST be Sprinkled upon them, and the
Pardoning Mercy of our Heavenly FATHER be Dispensed to them, and the
Verticordious Influences of the Eternal SPIRIT be vouchsafed to their Souls,
for their Salvation! And may That Choice Discourse be Blessed to 'em for their
Spiritual Good! AMEN.

Zechariah Whitman Peter Thacher John Norton John Danforth Joseph Belcher
Nathanael Eeles.

With the Unanimous Vote and Consent of the whole Association.



FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere will speedily be Published, The Debtor's Monitor, Directory and
Comforter: Or, The way to get and keep out of Debt. In Three Sermons. By S.
Moodey, M. A. and Pastor of the Church at York in N. E. Sold by S. Gerrish.


