Maternal Consolations.

An ESSAY ON, The CONSOLATIONS of GOD; Whereof, A Man whom his MOTHER
Comfort, receives a Shadow And all the CHILDREN of GOD, enjoy the Substance.
Made on the Death of Mrs. Maria Mather, The Consort of the Reverend Dr.
INCREASE MATHER, and the Daughter of the Renowned Mr. JOHN COTTON, who expired
on, 4 d. 2 m. 1714. In the Seventy Third Year of her Age.

By Cotton Mather, D.D. and F.R.S. and a SON of the deceased Gentlewoman.

2 Cor. I.5. Able to Comfort them which are in any Trouble, by the Comfort
wherewith, we our selves are Comforted of God.

Boston: Printed by T. Fleet, for Samuel Gerrish, at the North-side of the
Townhouse, 1714.

THE OCCASION.
TO pay an Honor unto a MOTHER, yea, and make the Memory of them to Live, in
whom we received our Life; It Is what a Roman would practice: Even a Roman would
make a Funeral Oration for a Mother, especially one whom he could boast, that
he had never been reconciled unto: And therefore, it cannot be, that a
Christian should Reproach it: Even a Solomon himself was not the Less of One,
for the Respect he paid unto his Mother.

Mine Expired in the Night when the Fourth of April, which was the Sabbath, was
coming on: and retired unto her everlasting Rest. It was not fit I should let
that Day go over, without Entertaining my Neighbors with a SERMON; which is
here exhibited in Things, and in Terms also, as near as may be, to what was
then delivered. And certainly a Preparation of but a few Hours, bears but a
little Proportion of Time for a Requital of the Comforts received for more than
half an Hundred of Years; and invites the Reader also to look for but a very
mean Performance.

I Remember, that Roquetaillade, (or, De Rupe scissa') wrote a little Book,
which is by the Author styled, a, Librunculus, of this Title, Vade Mecum in
Tribulatione. I am sure, such Consolations as are here offered, will suit every
Christian, and ought to be his, Vade Mecum, in every Tribulation.

Maternal Consolations.
Delivered in Boston; 4 d. 2 m. 1714.
Isa. LXVI.13. As it is with a Man whom his MOTHER Comfort, so will I
Comfort you.
GLORIOUS Things are to be done for the CHURCH of God in the latter Days. And
especially for that People which for many Ages was the only Church of God in
the World: His Peculiar; which for Ages not a few, has been Repudiated by the
Lord, Rejected, Scattered, and cut off by Unbelief; which in the Ages coming
on, is to be Converted, and Restored, and set on the top of the Mountains, with
all Nations flowing unto it. Glorious Things are spoken of thee, O thou City of
God.

The Noble Prophet Isaiah, under the Inspirations of God, is in the Chapter,
and Context now before us, as well as elsewhere, employed as the Herald, by
whom these Excellent Things which the Lord will do, are so Proclaimed, as to be
known in all the Earth. These Excellent Things are Exhibited under the Term of,
Consolations. But then, that the Consolations may be described as exceeding
Comfortable, there is a Metaphor used, which carries the Tenderness of the
Comforter, beyond all Expression. Our most Gracious GOD, is pleased variously
to express His Love to His People, and His Care of them: He has used
Similitudes for it, and this in a most Elegant Variety. Among these, Herein God
commends His Love to us, that He not only assures us, Psalm. CIII.13. Like as
a Father pittieth his Children, so the Lord pitties them that fear Him: He also
gives us this Assurance, As a Mother Comfort her Children, so will I Comfort
them. Yea, I can tell where the Matter is carried further than so; He so
Endears Himself unto His People; Isa. XLIX.15. Can a Woman forget her Sucking
Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her Bowels? Yea, They
may forget; yet will not I forget thee. Oh! The Endearments of our God! Beyond
all the Endearments of the Tenderest Mother in the World!

The Consolations which the People of God find in Him, are here compared,
First, unto those which the Child has from the Mother, while in a state of
Infancy: The Consolations of the Infant, Sucking at the Breast of Consolations,
carried in the Arms, dandled on the Knees of the Mother. But in the Verse now
before us, the Comparison for the Consolations goes on, to those which a Man
receives from his Mother. I have the Original on my side, in so mending the
Translation; As it is with a MAN whom his Mother Comfort. One Reason for it
may be, Because a Mother who sees a Son grown to be a Man, and prove a Worthy
and an Useful and a Noted Man, and one that is to her, as they said unto Naomi,
The Restorer of her Life, and the Nourisher of her old Age; Her Affection to
such a Son, will be very Passionate, very Rapturous, very Mavelous, nothing
will be equal to the Transport of it. A Mother, when she has in her Sight, a
Son that is a Valuable Man, and a Rich Harvest of all her painful and anxious
Nursery, she places a violent Affection on him; such, that no Tongue is able to
utter it! She thinks no Consolations too much for a Son, that affords her such
Consolations. They who take Notice of such Things, tell of a Nation in Europe,
above others Remarkable for this Quality in the Mothers there, Prae alijs
Matribus mire Filios suos Grandevos amant. However, our God has a Kindness for
us, which exceeds that of such a Mother. There is also this Reason for it; Our
God is concerned for the Welfare of His People, not only in their more early
Days, but also all their Days. When Israel was a Child, then I loved him, says
the Lord; yea, and so He will in the Riper and Later Years of His People.
Having loved thy own, Lord, Thou will Love them to the End, and without End!
Particular Saints find it so; The seventy first Psalm contains their Story, and
is fulfilled unto them. I have thought of one Reason more for it. The Church
will be arrived unto Man's Estate, and and unto Manly Christianity, when this
Word shall be accomplished. When the Church is come, unto a perfect Man, unto
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, then, then shall this have
its full Accomplishment. I will add but this one Remark more; Every Believer on
the Son of God, may claim an immediate Share in these Consolations. Every Child
of God, in the Sufferings of this present Time, has a Claim to these more than
Maternal Consolations, as well as in the Glory that is to be Revealed.

My DOCTRINE is now ready for me.

The Consolations derived from the most Affectionate MOTHER upon Earth, do
shadow out, and are but a shadow of, those with which the Children of God will
find their Heavenly Father Comforting of them.

The Disposition which the Glorious God has to provide for the Comfort of His
People, has Two Resemblances, in His Two Testaments; And in both of them, it is
Resembled unto the Provision which Female-Parents make for their Young ones.
Agreeably to the more Sublime and Lofty Dispensation, wherewith our Lord
appeared for the delivering of His People, in the Old Testament, we read; Deuteronomy.
XXXII.11. As an Eagle fluttereth over her Young, hearing them on her Wings, so
the Lord. Agreeably to the more Humble and Obscure Dispensation, wherewith our
Lord made His Appearance to deliver His People in the New Testament, we read;
Matthew. XXIII.37. How often would I have gathered your Children together, even
as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings. There is a Vehemence in the
STOPG, and Passion of these Animals, to have their Young ones Defended,
Befriended, Comforted. But that the Disposition in our God for the Comfort of
His People, may have a yet more lively Emblem given of it, Behold, an Emblem
found for it in the Rational World. As it is with a Man whom his Mother
Comfort! Our God is more disposed for to Comfort us, and has better Comforts
for us, than the most Affectionate Mother in the World!

I. The first Thing I am to observe, is this. There are considerable
Consolations enjoyed by those whom their MOTHER Comfort. It Is a Consolation
to have a Mother Living. He is a barbarous Wretch, and worthy to have his Eyes
pulled out in the Valley of Careases, who does not count it so. Though it should
be a Decayed Mother, a Decrepit Mother, one under all the Inconveniences of a
Superannuation, and one that must be entirely supported by her Children, yet
the Presence of their Mother with them, is grateful to them if there be not a
Barbarity of Ingratitude in the Children. The Jews have a Proverb among them,
That a Mine of Gold in an House were not so rich a Blessing, as the presence of
such a Mother there. But then, there are numberless Consolations which good
Mothers give unto their Children. Mothers are the Comforters of their Children.
They are by Nature so; have a strong Instinct of Nature for it; are Naturally
very desirous to see their Children Comfortable. They cannot bear to see their
Children in any uneasy Circumstances. From this Natural Inclination in our
Mothers to Comfort us, how cheerfully do they, while we are yet in our
Minority, go through many Fatigues, many Troubles, many Self-denials for us? What
poor Shifts had we made in our Minority, if we had not had Mothers to Comfort
us? It was required, Deuteronomy. XXII.6. If a Birds Nest chance to be before thee,
and there be a Dam sitting upon the Young, thou shall not take away the Dam. A
Dam is ill spared from a Nest of Young ones. O Young ones, that have had your
Mothers continued unto you, until you have been brought up to your Maturity, Be
Thankful; Be Thankful to a Compassionate God, for all the Consolations which He
has by your Mothers bestowed upon you. Nothing like an Own Mother! If she be
yet with you, prize her Exceedingly! It Is but here and there, that
Mothers-in-Law, are found Mothers-in-Love. Those few that are so, are never
enough to be commended! And still, as we grow up, the Concern of our Mothers to
Comfort us does not grow Cold. Our Mothers continue their Concern to see us
have all sorts of Consolations, as long as they continue their Concern to see
us have all sorts of Consolations, as long as they continue with us. But then,
there are some Cases, wherein the Consolations we receive in our Mothers, are
Aggravated, are Distinguished, are Unspeakable.

First. Our Mothers unspeakably Comfort us, when we have good Instructions from
them. There was a Wise Man, whom his Mother Comforted, when he could say, Prove.
IV.3. I was a Tender and only one in the sight of my Mother, and then follow
the Lessons from her, that helped him to be what he was. There was another Wise
Man, whom his Mother Comforted, when there was, Prove. XXXI.3. The Prophecy that
his Mother taught him; and she told him what must be done by the Son of her
Vows. Mothers do sometimes contribute very much unto the Wisdom of their
Children; yea, do very much to make them Wise unto Salvation. The best Thing
that some can be advised unto, is, Forsake not the Law of thy Mother. When our
Mothers teach us our Catechism, and nourish our Souls with the sincere Milk of
the Word of God, and charge us to do Well, and warn us to shun the Paths of the
Destroyer, We are those that have our Mothers Comforting of us.

Secondly. Our Mothers unspeakably Comfort us, when we have good Examples from
them. There was a Minister of God, whom his Mother Comforted, when it could be
said unto him, 2 Timothy I.4. The Faith which dwelt first in thy Mother, I am
persuaded is thee also. As there are Children Ruined by their Mothers, when it
may be reported of them, as it was of one; 1 King. XXII.52. He did Evil in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his Mother; So a Man is one whom
his Mother has Comforted, when his best way to do that which is Right in the
sight of the Lord, is, to walk in the way of has Mother. Have we had Mothers
who have been Patterns of Piety, and of Hobiness in all manner of Conversation?
In whom we have seen an Abborrence of every Wicked Thing; a mighty Delight in
Conversing with the Word of God; Reading over the Bible perhaps Twice every
Year; a constant Regard unto the Religion of the Closet? Yea, with such a
Frequency, as no less than six Times in a Day. Such as been very Humble, in
other Things, as well as their modest Attire; and very Charitable to the Poor,
always Doing for them, or Grieving for them? If they had any little Feminine
Weaknesses, yet being Women that feared the Lord, that Honorable Character the
Fear of God, made a full Amends for all; and they were to be praised for it. We
are those who have had our Mothers Comforting of us.

Thirdly. Our Mothers unspeakably Comfort us when they are continually Praying
for us. There are Mothers who can say to their Children, as in Gal. IV.19. My
little Children, of whom I Travail in Birth again, until Christ be formed in
you. Mothers who are always Travailing for the Conversion and Salvation of
their Children, with Supplications full of Agony on their behalf; As Monica for
her Austin; Mothers that mention all their Children before the Lord, with
suitable Petitions for them, in their daily Supplications; Mothers that if
their Children are in any Distress, make their importunate Visits to Heaven for
them, in their fervent Supplications: Truly, these are comfortable Mothers.
Perhaps, they have been Mothers, that would, very often, very often, set apart
whole Days for Prayer with Fasting before the Lord. We may be sure, they
Remembered us on these Days; It may be, we were the main Articles of them. There
are Mothers that lay up a stock of Prayers for their Children; This is to lay
up a stock of Comforts for them. We read of one, Genesis XXIV.67. He was comforted
after the Death of his Mother. When a Devout Mother has been for many Years
Praying and Weeping to the Lord for the Blessings of Goodness to be multiplied
upon their Children, they may be comforted after the Death of such a Mother;
Comforted in this Consideration; Though she be Dead, the Effects and Answers of
the Prayers that she made before she dyed, may be Living and Lasting with us!

Thus it is, that our good Mothers do Comfort us. But O Children, How can you do
any other then study to be Comforts unto such obliging Mothers? When you were
first Born unto them, they expected, This same shall Comfort us. Oh! Let them
not be disappointed of their Expectations. A Disappointment, which will deserve
and procure, that you who give it, should Perish Wonderfully! Your Mothers even
Load you with Comforts; and all your Comforts are Theirs. Children. Do not you
now fill them with Sorrows; Oh! Do not bring down their Gray Hairs therewith
unto the Grave. Be it known unto you; Your Wickedness will fill them, and even
kill them with Sorrows. You read, Prove. X.1. A Foolish Son is the Heaviness of
his Mother. And, Prove. XVII.25. A Foolish Son is a Bitterness to her that bare
him. Very particularly, All Undutiful, All Rebellious, All Contemptuous
Carriage toward your Mothers; Wretches, I tell you, it will be extremely
Grievous to them. The Transgressors of the fifth Commandment, are called, 1 Timothy I.9. Murderers of Mothery. If you don't Honor your Mothers, you Murder
them. You had best beware, last you so see provoke your Mothers, that they may
Pronounce a Direful Thing in the Anguish that you give unto them. Some Direful
Thing will befall you, if it should be so. The Direful Thing will be dreadfully
Executed on you. There are Executioners that stand always realy for it! You are
worse than the Thievish Micah, if the Vengeance of an Irritated Mother be
nothing with you. I press for the Reverse of this. Comfort your Mothers, by all
possible. Demonstrations of your Affection to them; in speaking to them, in
doing for them, all that is Comfortable. Comfort them with contriving all the
Methods imaginable to make their whole Condition Comfortable. Comfort them,
with making them the Glad Spectators of such a Laudable Behavior in you, that
their Hearts may Rejoice, even theirs. Finally, Be of the Persuasion, That you
never can Retaliate the Consolations you have received from your Mothers; Be
persuaded, That you never can do so much for their Comfort as they have done
for yours. Children, This is Right! But perhaps there are some of you, whose
Mothers after Thousands of Groans to Heaven for you, yet had not the
Satisfaction of seeing you brought home to God before they Died; They had the
Pangs of leaving you in your Sins, in your sinful Impenitency, when they Died.
Oh! that the Thoughts of what your Mothers underwent for you, may this Day make
some Impression on you! Oh! that you would this Day resolve, I will no longer
Delay what my Dear Mother Died so exceedingly wishing to have me brought unto!

II. But I must pass on to a Second Observation. Temporal Consolations must not
be too long dwelt upon. God forbid, that Flesh and Blood should be the chief of
our Consolations. The best Relatives, who Dwell in Houses of Clay, will not
long yield us any Consolations. Nor do they ever yield us our best
Consolations. Nulli fit Injuria cui Deus praeponitur. It is no Disgrace cast
upon the most affectionate Mothers, to say, That we have a better Comforter
than the Best of them. Yea, if we have not a better than them, we shall anon
find them to be but miserable Comforters. We will draw near now to that better
Comforter, and make this Remark.

The Children of God will find their Heavenly Father gloriously Comforting of
them, with Consolations beyond what the most affectionate Mother upon Earth can
give, or so much as wish, unto her Children. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People,
faith the Lord, speak ye Comfortably to them. The comfortable Things we have
now to speak, are such as these. Our God will Comfort His People, His People
are His Children; and therefore He will Comfort them. When the good God comes
unto the Comfort of His Children, it is with them, as with a Man whom his Mother
Comfort. In the Consolations which an affectionate Mother affords her
Children, there is a little Shadow of the Consolations, which the Blessed God
bestows upon His. What are the Points, wherein our Mothers are willing to
Comfort us? First, All the Comforts that come to us from our Mothers, do
Originally come from GOD. GOD fonds us our Comforts by their kind Hands, that
indeed love to bring them to us. This Kindness in them to us, is also from GOD.
GOD has planted it in them, touched them with it. GOD will do for us likewise
all that is done by our Mothers; and very Transcendently so. They Feed us. Our
Heavenly Father gives us the Bread of Life. They Cloth us. Our Heavenly Father
gives us the Garments of Salvation. They Guide us. Our Heavenly Father leads us
in the way wherein we should go. They keep us out of Harms-way. Our Heavenly
Father does preserve us from all Evil. They confer Ornaments upon us. Our
Heavenly Father beautifies us with Jewels of great Price. They Comfort us, with
letting us know, that it is a Pleasure unto them to see us. Our Heavenly Father
says to us, Let me see thy Face, and hear thy Voice; thy Prayer is my Delight.
Yea, all the Comforts that our Mothers can wish for us, are such as our
Heavenly Father will give to us. What they can only Wish, He will Do. I am
still too short in my Language; He will Do for us, far Above all that they can
Ask or Think for us, or we for our selves! And there is one Transcendency more
in the Consolations of our God. Our Mothers will by'nd by leave Comforting of
us. Mortality will put a Period unto their Consolations. They are not suffered
to continue by reason of Death. But our Heavenly Father does never Dye; and His
Consolations do see no Death; but will Abide with us, yea, Increase on us,
after Death. So we read; 2 Thessalonians. II.16. God, even our Father, has lovea us,
and given us everlasting Consolation.

But let us now a little more particularly Enquire; What are the more than
Maternal Consolations, wherewith God will Comfort His chosen People?

First; Each of the Three Persons in the Eternal GODHEAD, is Distinctly and
Wondrously at Work, to Comfort the People of God. Let us take a View of this
Matter, and fall into a just Astonishment at the Contemplation!

First. God the Father will Comfort His People. Our Acknowledgement, our
Doxology to the Almighty Father, must be that; 2 Cor. I.3. Blessed be God, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
Comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulation. Certainly, we are comforted
by the Infinite Father, when He tells us, That He will be our Father. I will be
a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and my Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. What is the best of Mothers, weighed in the Balance with such a
Father? Our Father is now the Infinite GOD. But, O ye Adopted and Comforted of
the Lord, what an Inheritance have you a Title to? You shall come to no less a
Felicity than this; To inherit all Things. Who can Comprehend the Riches of the
Glory of that Inheritance, to which the Saints are Entitled? O the
Consolations, O the Consolations, of such an Incomprehensible Inheritance! My
Brethren, God the Father informs you, That He has chosen you before the
Foundation of the World, that you should be Holy and Blameless before Him in
Love. God the Father informs you, That He has so loved you, at to give His
Only-begotten Son for you, to bring you unto everlasting Life. If there be any
Comfort of Love, certainly it is in this Love! O Children of God, This is the
Comfort, wherewith we are comforted of God!

Secondly. God the Sow will Comfort His People. If a bright Angel were now to
Preach among you; he would now thus call upon you; Behold, I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy; To you there is born a Savior. And he would not stick to
add, Never, never any Comfort came up to this! The Jewish Rabbi's agreed upon
it, That the Name of the Messiah should be Menachem, or, The Comforter; Because
it is He that is thus called, Lam. I.16. The Comforter that should relieve my
Soul. We read of such a Thing as this to be forever taken for granted;
Conselation in Christ. Oh! what a Comferter we have in such a Savior! The
Consolations of a Redeemer, who is of God made Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Redemption unto us! No Mothers can do such things for us; nor can
it enter into their Hearts to conceive all that is in those things. Truly,
Sinners that have the Wrath of God abiding on them, and that are serving
diverse Lusts, and that are held by Satan in the Chains of Death, and are in
the way that leads down to a Devouring Fire, and Everlasting Burnings; These
cannot but be comforted, when they hear a Blessed JESUS calling to them, Look
unto me, and be ye saved! And saying, Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out! My Friends, will not it Comfort you, to have a Savior, who has offered
up a Sacrifice to God for you, and supplied you with a Righteousness wherein
God will accept of you? A Savior, who fits on the Glorious high Throne, with
the Government of the whole World in His Hands, and is resolved that in the
Administration of His Providence, all the Things that befall you, shall work
together for your Good. What shall I say? A Savior, who is your Brother and a
Man lying in the Bosom of God, and infinitely dearer to God, than all the Works
of His Hands? What Consolations are these? O my Soul, Why art not thou even
Overwhelmed in these Consolations!

Thirdly. God the Holy Spirit will Comfort His People. It Is indeed His Office
to be their Comforter. We read Joh. XV.26. The Comforter is the Spirit of
Truth. Surely, we cannot but be comforted, when we feel our Minds Purified,
Rectified, and brought into an Holy Order, and an Heavenly Temper, and the
Storms raised by our Irregular Appetites appeased, and succeeded with the Peace
of God which passes all Understanding. We cannot but be comforted, when we are
satisfied, That our Sins are forgiven to us, and that our Souls are bound up in
the Bundle of Life, and that Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all our Days,
and we shall dwell in the House of the Lord for ever and ever. None but a God,
can give such Consolations. But, Oh! Holy SPIRIT, Thou art God, and these are
thy Consolations!

It has been a little Surprising unto me to find, That in some of the Primitive
Writers, the Holy Spirit is called, The Mother. Tertullian uses this
Denomination for the Holy Spirit; The Mother, who is Invocated with the Father
and the Son. The Denomination was justified by this; That we are Born of the
Holy Spirit. And it has a notable Coincidence with it; That when the Holy
Spirit comes to take a full Possession of the Church, and in doing so, has
formed the Heavenly City; Then is this Prophecy fulfilled; As it is with a Man
whom his Mother comfort, so will I Comfort you. Then the Holy Spirit of God
in His Church, will do the part of a Mother, in Cherishing the Souls of His
People, and comforting of them, with God becoming their exceeding Joy! A City
which is the Mother of us all, so intimately possessed by the Holy Spirit, that
He becomes in a manner One with it; What Consolations will it bring unto us? In
the mean time, To be filled with the Holy Spirit, is to be always full, full of
matchless Consolations!

Secondly. The Promises in the Covenant of God, are alsufficient and
inexhaustible Springs of Comfort unto the People of God. The Covenant of Grace
is a Covenant full of Consolations. Oh! the Consolations of the sure Mercies
laid up in that most comfortable Storehouse! Christian, come to the Covenant of
God, as thou would unto thy Mother, on all Occasions, in all Necessities.
The Lord will there Answer thee, as He did the Angel; Zech. I.13. With good
Words, and comfortable Words. A Servant of God could say, This is my Comfort in
my Affliction; for thy Word has quickened me. Whatever it be, by which we may
be afflicted, we may find in the Word of God, something by which we may be
comforted; A good Word, which may make the Heart Glad, when stouping with
Heaviness. The Guilt of Sin affrights us. That Word will Comfort us, The Blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses from all Sin. The Power of Lust annoys
us. That Word will Comfort us, Sin shall not have Dominion over you. Furious
Temptations assault us. That Word will Comfort us, Our JESUS knows how to
Succor the Tempted. We Conflict with Straits and Wants, or the Fears thereof.
There is that Word for our Comfort, They that seek the Lord, shall not want any
good Thing. We are afflicted and tossed with Tempests of Adversity. We have the
Comfort of that Word; Whom the Lord Loves He Chastens, and He Scourges every
Son whom He receives. We are bereaved of our valuable Friends. We have the
Comfort of that Word; He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
O you feasted Children of God, What an incomparable Provision has your Heavenly
Father made for you? No Mother on Earth could have done so for you. None
Comforts like Him! Oh! Subsist on these Consolations, and with ravished Souls,
often, often make those Exclamations, In the multitude of my Thoughts within
me, O my God, Thy Comforts delight my Soul! This World will not afford any
substantial Comfort unto us. But from the Comfort of the Scriptures, we have
Hope, of coming e're long to a better World. The comfortable Scriptures have
told us, of a Paradise for the Spirits of the Dead, wherein it is said, They
are comforted. The comfortable Scriptures have told us of a Resurrection for
our Bodies from the Dead, and have said, Comfort one another with these Words.
From the comfortable Scriptures we become apprized of those Heavenly Places
intended for us, wherein God shall wipe away all Tears from our Eyes, and there
shall be no more Sorrow nor Crying there. O the Consolations of these exceeding
Great and Precious Promises! How exceeding Great and Precious the Consolations!
Why are they given to us? We read, Heb. VI.18. It is, that we may have a strong
Consolation. Take it, O Regenerate Souls; Eat, O Friends, Drink abundantly, O
Beloved ones.

But these Things are now waiting for the Improvement that we are to make of
them.

I. And now, Behold, what we have to Comfort us, when our Desirable Relatives,
and even our Mothers themselves, are taken from us; They which were the Desire
of our Eyes, taken away with a Stroke! In the loss of Relatives, we lose our
Comforters. And some thereupon abandon themselves to such an Excess of Sorrow,
that they Refuse to be comforted. An Error this; Inasmuch as we know where to
repair unto one, who tells us, As it is with a Man whom his Mother Comfort,
so will I Comfort you! A Sorrow on the Death of a Mother is very allowable;
Yea, it is a Phrase for a very pungent Sorrow, Psalm. XXXV.14. I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother. But the Sorrow is to be Moderated
and Regulated, by the Consolations of God. It is to be considered, That it is
GOD who gave us our comfortable Relatives, and made them to be all that they
were unto us. It was GOD, who was the Giver, and Author of all that we found
Comfortable in them. It is to be considered, That when God pleases to call for
our comfortable Relatives, He does but call for His own; He may do what He will
with His own. He does it also to bring us unto a more entire Dependence on
Himself alone, for all that is Comfortable. Our other Comforters are one after
another going from us. But we have a Glorious GOD still to Comfort us; An
Eternal GOD still to be a Refuge unto us. We are so advised; Psalm. CXLVI.3, 4.
Put not your Trust in the Son of Man, in whom there is no Help; His Breath goes
forth; he returns to his Earth; in that very Day his Thoughts Perish. This,
this is the Voice of our God unto us, in the Death of our Comforters;, Oh! No
longer expect your Comforts from the Children of Men; Children, expect them not
from your fondest Parents. They are Dying. Their Comforts will Dye with them.
They return to their Earth; see the Vanity of such Earthly Comforts. When their
Breath goes forth, in that very Day, the Comforts we had in them, do all
Perish. Retire then unto the Living God; Oh! Cry out for Him, to Him; and say,
My God, Thou shall be my Comforter! This was the Comfort which a Child of God
once refreshed himself withal; And, Oh! the reviving Refreshment of such a
Cordial! Psalm. XXVII.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord
shall take me up. In Imitation thereof, it will become us to say, Whatever
Comforters forsake me, Lord, I am not Miserable, if thou art still my
Comforter. Though all fails here Below, Lord, it is enough, that thou art the
strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever!

II. What remains, is this Admonition of the Lord unto us; Despise not, Refuse
not, the Consolations which an Heavenly Father has ready for you; Become the
Children of God, and put in for a share in His Consolations. It Is an
Expostulation, which we are every one of us to be addressed withal; Job XV.11.
Are the Consolations of God small with thee? My Hearers, The Consolations of
God are small with you, if you count them too small to be worth all your Pains,
and all your Cares, and an Head becoming a Fountain of Tears, distilled in your
Prayers, from Fired and Flaming Hearts, to be made partakers of them. They are
small with you, if you count them so small, that they will not sufficiently
Sweeten, and more than Balance the worst of your Calamities. They are small
with you, if all the Riches, and all the Delights under Heaven, do not appear
to you small Things in comparison of them. And if you cast Contempt on the
Comforts of God, what can you look for, but horrible Torments? The very
Reflection on the Folly of the Contempt, will sting the Soul with a Thousand
horrible Torments? Or, if you will not have GOD for your Comforter, whom, or
what will you find any where to Comfort you? Forsake the Mercies, and the
Comforts which you may have to be your own, (a Merciful GOD, who profers to be
your own God, and to Bless you!) and you will find your selves in the midst of
none but lying Vanities. Why, why will you so Deceive your selves?

Wherefore, let my Counsil be acceptable to you.

First; Choose the Glorious GOD, for your God, and Portion; He will then be your
God, and Comforter. Come to that Action; Lam. III.24. The Lord is my Portion,
says my Soul; Therefore will I hope in Him. Soul, Do this, and thereon hope
for Comfort from Him! We read Isa. XLIX.13 Sing, O Heavens, and Rejoice, O
Earth; for the Lord has comforted His People. They are the People of God, who
may expect Comfort from God. And who are the People of God? A People willing to
place all their Happiness in the Knowledge, and Favor and Image and Service of
GOD. A People willing to be under the Conduct of a JESUS, that they may be
brought unto the Enjoyment of God. A People willing to be formed into Holy and
Lovely Temples, by the good Spirit of God. This willing People, are they, to
whom there belong more Comforts, than there are Stars in Heaven!

Secondly. Who is He, that is, The Consolation of Israel? O Accept Him; Embrace
Him; Close with Him; set the highest Price upon Him. Say to Him, Lord, I am
Thine; save me. We read, 2 Cor. I.5. Our Consolation abounds by Christ.
Believer, when a CHRIST is thine, thou have Comfort enough. All Fullness, and so
all Comfort is dwelling in Him. Go to Him, in all thy Exercises; Look to Him as
the Purchaser, look to Him as the Dispenser of all Consolations; Wait on Him
for Consolations that will suit all thy Exercises. All Comfort built any where
but upon Him, is built on the Sand; will fail the Foolish Builder.

Thirdly. Don't Grieve the Grand Comforter. That is to say, what you have in
Ephesians. IV.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God. If He withdraw from you, all
Comfort goes with Him Indulged Sin will cause His withdraw from you. Wretches
that wallow in Sin, and pretend at the same Time unto Comfort; O deluded
Wretches, what will be the woeful Issue of your sportful Delusions? Verily, To
lie down in Sorrow! See that you Walk Circumspectly; See that you Walk before
the Lord in the Land of the Living; See that you maintain a Prayerful,
Watchful, Fruitful Walk, with a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and
toward Man. The Comforter will then fill you with unknown Consolations. The
Tendency of such a Walk is to Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. The Paths of
it are Paths of Peace; and at the End of it the Perfect and Upright find an
endless Peace.

Lastly. I will not break off, till I have told you of a Mother, who will
Comfort you, yea, bring you the Consolations of God, if you will do your Duty
to her. No doubt, you are aware, who that Mother is, that I now point you to.
It Is the Church of the Living God: The CHURCH, whereto they generally apply
that Passage; Cant. III.4. I brought Him into the House of my Mother, and into
the Chamber of her that conceived me. Yea, and the particular and instituted
CHURCH, of the Neighborhood whereto you belong, shall have her Demand now made
upon you; and require the Duty owing to a Mother from you. I show you this Day,
A Faithful People Associated and Incorporated for the Worship of God our
Savior, and I use the Language of our Dying JESUS to His Disciple, Behold, Thy
Mother! My Neighbor, Behold, Thy Mother! You owe no little Duty to such a
Mother in Israel! Children, Come under the Wings of your Mother, by joining
your selves unto the CHURCH that is ready to receive you. She will then admit
you to the Comforts of those Ordinances, that are in her Dispensation; She will
Comfort you with the Fruits wherewith Her Beloved has furnished Her for you.
She will Comfort you with a Feast of Fat Things full of Marrow, of Wines on the
Lees well refined. There are Crowns with which your Mother will Crown you, in
the Day when She Espouses you to your Savior; and brings you to a Gladness of
Heart that shall never, never be extinguished. If you have no Value for these
Comforts, Heaven will esteem you no better than the Children of Edom.

What I press for, is, That so many of you would no more turn your Backs on the
Table of your Mother, but Conscienciously Prepare for, and Approach to, the
Supper of your Savior there; The Childrens Bread. Some of those, who omit this
Duty, are on all other Accounts as well disposed People as any in the World;
yet in this, I declare unto you, I Praise you not. It is impossible for them to
make any Apology for this Omission, but what will imply a real Miscarriage in
them. Their best Apology is, That they have lest the state of their Souls, at
such Uncertainties, that they dare not come to the more special and awful
Ordinances. But, Syrs, Is this Excusable? Suffer me to go on with my
Expostulation. If every one should be disposed as you are, what would become of
your Mother? This Omission of yours, will Distress you on a Deathbed, I am
certain of it, I am certain of it! How soon you may come to lie on a Deathbed,
neither you nor I do know. Would you do what common Sense requires to be done,
by Men in Daily Expectation of their Dying Day, you would be no longer
unprepared for that commanded Action of, showing forth the Death of the Lord.
But this I know; That your having left this Duty undone, will be a Bitterness
unto you in a dying Hour. You will then blame your selves for it, and Mourn
exceedingly, and say with a Regret which who can bear? -- Oh! That I had made
more thorough Work, in that Article of Obedience unto God; my coming to Him in
all His Ordinances! -- I wish, that I may not see this Prediction too quickly
accomplished on some of my dear Friends, to whom I wish as well as to my own
Soul; Friends, whom it is because I Love them exceedingly, that I now deal so
Faithfully withal, and from this public Place of Thunder, do Repeat the
Warnings of God unto them. The Voice of a good Man, is that, 1 Chronicles. XXIX.3. I
have set my Affection on the House of my God. Syrs, It Is your Mother, for whom
I bespeak this good Affection! But then, if this Church of the Lord, is to have
the Regards of a Mother from you, Beware, beware, that none of you do the Part
of a spurious Brood in ill Treating of her. Wish well to her, Deal well by her,
Do her no Wrong in the World. Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, I am the Lord
your God, who command it, says the Lord, and will Punish you, if you Wrong
such a Mother. No, You must Love your Mother dearly; If you have the Love of
the Father in you, it will make you do so! You must heartily Desire, mightily
Study, zealously Project, that she may Flourish before the Lord, and be well
accommodated in all her Interests. What you do for such a Mother, your Glorious
Lord will say, You have done it unto me! And He will Reward it Gloriously.

You are sensible, That what has obliged me, to Entertain you with these
Meditations, is, The Death of a Pious, Loving, Tender MOTHER, with whose
Comforts, I have been for more than one and fifty Years favored of God. Though
she commanded me, To speak little or nothing of her, and I have obeyed her
Command, yet, I hope, you will think, that some Things in my Sermon have not
been Impertinently, or Unreasonably spoken. When I drew the Picture of a good
Mother above half an Hour ago, you may be sure, I had somebody sitting before
me for it; You may be sure, I could not say, I had never seen such an one! And
there shall yet remain a Truth in that Prophecy of the Virtuous Woman; Prove.
XXXI.28. Her Children arise up, and call her Blessed. But I am sure, I am not
forbidden to tell you, That no Mother, no Creature, can Solace us with such
Consolations as in our Glorious God, we have left unto us.

And Oh! How much is this one Thing to be desired? -- That whereas one
Generation passes away, and another comes on, that which comes on, may not
be on the saddest Accounts another Generation, but that what there was of
Heaven in those Handmaids of the Lord may Abide for ever among us. There has
been a Set of Aged and Pious Women taken from us, whereof we cannot but be
desirous, that they who survive and succeed may Do like unto them. We read of
some, Jud. II.17. They turned quickly out of the way which their Fathers walked
in; Those obeyed the Commandments of the Lord; but these did NOT SO. But, O
Children, let there not be cause to say, You turn quickly out of the way which
your Mothers walked in; These walked with God; but you do NOT SO. I must say to
you, That in multitudes of Instances, to have that Proverb actually made Good,
As is the Mother, so is the Daughter, would be the way for us to have, Glory
dwelling in our Land. It may be said of our departed Mothers, That they did
Abound in Supplications Night and Day; and often set apart whole Days for
Prayer with Fasting in secret Places before the I have obtained a fair
Absolution, for it, if I allow my Page to be illustrated with Two or Three
Passages, from the Private Papers of a Departed Mother, here crowded into the
Margin.
Lord. She Writes thus: While I was a Child, I loved the Ways of God; I took
great Delight in secret Communion with God in Prayer. From the Exemple of
Daniel, I did not live one Day without Prayer to God Three times a Day. But as
I grew Older, Temptations and Afflictions came upon me, that I found, there was
no living quietly, without more Acquaintance with my Redeemer. I then prayed
Six times a Day.

She Writes thus:, I kept a Fast lately, and found such Communion with God, and
Answer of Prayer, that I longed for such another Opportunity. Therefore I came
again into the Presence of God for Grace and Mercy. They that will Fast with
God, shall Feast with Him too!


God forbid, that it should be your Character, to lead Prayerless Lives, and
rarely go alone to Pour out your Souls unto the Lord, and cast your Burdens on
Him. It may be said of your departed Mothers, That they were Sollicitous above
all Things, to make their Calling and Election sure, and get their Evidences
for Heaven cleared up. She Writes thus: I was afraid after all I must Perish:
But God caused me to give no Rest to my Eyes, nor Slumber to my Eyelids, till I
had great Assurance of His Love, and of Eternal Happiness when this frail Life
should be ended.
God forbid, That it should be your Character, To go on from Year to Year in a
Neglect of the great Salvation, and unconcerned whether you are so Justified by
Faith, as to be at Peace with God. It may be said of your departed Mothers,
That they had a distressing Solicitude upon their Minds for the Conversion of
their Children unto God, and their Preservation in the Right ways of the Lord.
She Writes thus: I kept a Day of Fasting and Prayer, That God would bestow
special Grace upon all the Family; and that He would keep all our poor
Children, that not one of them should be Guilty of any Scandalous Sins, nor
live in any Secret Sins. Oh! Lord, Let not one of my Children Perish; no, Not
one, Not one of them! Lord, Let not me be Guilty of the Blood of any one of
their Souls. I know, I take much, and it is well if not too much Care of their
Bodies; But, Lord, I pray, that I may take much more Care of their Neverdying
Souls. Oh! That I may Discharge a good Conscience on that Account!

Of her Children, she Writes thus further; I was often afraid in having many
Children, lest I should have one more than Jesus Christ would accept of: But
now I desire to believe for them all.


God forbid, That it should be your Character, To leave your Children
Uncultivated with the best Endowments, and be able to bear their going on still
in their Trespasses. In a Word; Your Mothers are your Monitors, and will not be
your Gomforters, No, but your grievous Accusers, if you do not walk after the
manner of the Old Time, and as the Holy Women, who trusted in God, and adorned
themselves with such Things as are of great Price in the Sight of God.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Gerrish, on the Northside of the
Townhouse, in KingStreet, Boston.

A Discourse concerning Faith and Fervency in Prayer; and the Glorions Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus Christ on Earth, now Approaching. Delivered in several
Sermons in which the Signs of the present Times are considered, with a true
Account of the late wonderful and astonishing Success of the Gospel in Ceilon,
Amboina and Malabar.

MEditations on the Sanctification of the Lord's Day: And on the Judgments
which attend the Profanation of it. With Seasonable Meditations both for Winter
and Summer.

THe Believers Gain by Death, A Sermon, wherein is showed, Who are they that
Live to Christ, and how Death will be Gainful to all that do so.

These Three by Increase Mather, D.D.

BOnifacius. An Essay upon the Good that is to be Devised and Designed, by
those who desire to Answer the great End of Life, and to do Good while they
Live. A Book offered, in General, unto all Christians in a Personal Capacity,
or in a Relative. etc.

THE Sailors Companion and Counselor. An offer of Considerations for the Tribe
of Zehulon; awakening the Mariner, to Think and to Do, those Things that may
render his Voyage Prosperous.

ADvice from Taberah. A Sermon preached after the Terrible Fire, which
(attended with some very Lamentable and Memorable Circumstances, on October 2,
3. 1711.) laid a considerable Part of Boston in Ashes. Directing a pious
Improvement of every Calamity, but more especially of so Calamitous a
Desolation. With an Account of the Desolation then made.

THoughts for the Day of Rain, in two Essays. I. The Gospel of the Rainbow,
etc. II. The Savior with his Rainbow, etc.

A Censure on the Ungodliness, by which the Glorious Grace of God is too
commonly abused. With a brief Dissertation on that Case, Whether the Penitent
Thief on the Cross, be an Exemple of one Repenting at the last Hour, and on
such a Repentance received unto Mercy?

ADversus Libertinos. Or, Evangelical Obedience Described and Demanded; in an
Essay to Establish the Holy Law of the Glorious God, upon the Principles of
Justification by the Faith of the Gospel.

A Perfect Recovery. The Voice of the Glorious God, unto Perlous whom His Mercy
has recovered from Sickness. In a Brief Discourse to the Inhabitants of a Place
that had passed through a very Sickly Winter. With some Remarks on the shining
Patterns of Piety, left by some very Young Persons. These by Cotton Mather,
D.D. and F.R.S.

THe Young Secretary's Guide: Or, a speedy Help to Learning. In two Parts.

AN Abstract of the History of the cruel Sufferings of the Blessed French
Martyr, Louis de Marolles. From his Condemnation to the Galleys, to his Death
in the Dungeon. Transtated from the French

THe Lives of Mrs. Mary Terry, and Mrs. Clissould. By Thomas Reynolds. (Bound
together)


