TWO SERMONS THE Christians Behavior UNDER Severe and Repeated Bereavements,
AND THE Fatal Consequence of a Peoples PERSISTING IN SIN: By JOHN BARNARD A. M.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Benj. Eliot, and Sold at his Shop on
the North side of King's Street. 1714.

IMPRIMATUR,

I. DVDLEY.
BOSTON, June, 3 d. 1714.
I. SERMON. The Christians Behavior UNDER BEREAVEMENTS: Preached To the very
Reverend Dr. MATHER'S Church in the Time of the Measels, November. 29. 1713.
JOB I.20. Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and shaved his Head, and fell
down upon the Ground, and Worshipped.


THE manifest Design of this Book is, to give us the True Character of a
Christian Hero, bright and illustrious in every Condition of Life; possessing
himself in Prosperity with a constant Devotion to his God, and steadily
sustaining the heaviest and repeated Charges of Adversity, with a Firmness of
Mind, which evidently declared him to be under the Government of more exalted
Views, and (...) more noble Ends, than could be proposed (...) all the
Enjoyments of this World.

JOB is this Gallant Hero: who whether he descended from Uz, the Grandson of
Shem, by Aram; or was the I^bab mentioned in the Line of Arphaxad; or came of
Huz, the firstborn of Nahor, the Brother of Abraham, it matters not. Whoever
he was, it is evident he was the Greatest Man in his Country: God had blessed
him with the Affluence of the Good things of this Life, a Numerous and
Promising Posterity, and had exalted him at the Head of the Government.

HOW happily does he spend his Days? While every Ear listens to him, and every
Knee bows before him, and his Children also Delight him with their close
Friendship to One another, and their Dutiful regards to him. And how much like
a Christian does he Live? While under all this, he does not grow Fat and
Wanton, but keeps his Heart Perfect and Upright toward his God; and is
continually offering Sacrifices before the Lord, least his Children, in the
height of their friendly Entertainments, should so far forget themselves, as to
do any thing that might cast Dishonor upon the Name of God.

THIS is the Man! the Delight of God, but the Envy of Devils. And it is not long
before these Malicious Spirits fiercely assault him, and through the Divine
Permission bring him as Low, with respect to his Outward Circumstances, and
consequently as Low in the Opinion of the World, as before he was High.

HERE now is the Trial of the Man! Let us then view him in this his Depressed
State; his Fortunes sunk and gone, insulted by the Meanest of the People,
forsaken and reproached by his Unkind Friends: and how does he bear it all?
Like a True Hero! He stands the shock, preserves his Virtue, possesses his
Mind, triumphs over his Adversity; and so Baffles the Design of Satan, gains
the Divine Plaudite, and stands the Admiration and Emulation of all that come
after him.

IN this Chapter we have an Account of the First Method of his Trial, and his
Behavior under it. His Trial; in the repeated Messengers of Evil Tidings, and
Close upon the Heels of one another. The First Messenger comes in with the
Unwelcome News that the Sabeans had carried away his Oxen and Asses, and slain
the Servants that kept them; and he only had escaped to tell it. Ever he had
finish^d his sad Story, a Second rushes in, in a Fright, and tells him, that
Fire from God, the Lightening, had consumed his Sheep, and his Servants that
attended them, and he only had Escaped. While he is yet Speaking, a Third, who
only had Escaped, acquaints him, that the Chaldeans had made out a Band and
carried away his Camels, and slain his Servants. So is he spoiled of his
Substance; and without allowing him time to breath upon it, a Fourth Messenger
breaks in trembling and astonished, scarce able to utter his heavy Tidings,
That while his Sons and Daughters were feasting together, a strong Wind from
the Wilderness smote the four Corners of the House, and it fell upon the Young
Men, and they are Dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. This was a
Black-Day indeed! And who but a Christian could outlive it!

JOB like a Prince sits unmoved at the sorrowful Tidings of the Three first
Messengers; but this Fourth! Such is his Mien! such the killing accents of his
piercing report! His Children Dead! all of them! and in such a dreadful manner
slain! This sets Nature a work; it touches the inmost Fibers of his Heart; he
can hold no longer; and what but strength of Grace could have preserved it
regular? Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and shaved his Head, and fell
down upon the Ground, and Worshipped. Which shows us Humane Nature in a bitter
Agony, and Grace Triumphant.

1. JOB gives vent to the Sorrow and Grief that struggled in his Breast; He
ar^se; 'twas not a time to sit Sedate and Easy; and rent his Mantle; which was
Customary among the Eastern Nations, to express their Sorrow and Mourning. So
Jacob when he thought he had lost his Joseph. And Shaved his Head; which also
was a Custom that obtained among the Orientals, that when they buried a near
Fe^ation, they cut their Hair Short; or shaved their Head: the contrary to
which prevailed among the Romans formerly, (...) to let their Hair grow long,
and hang (...) about them, (as our Eastern Indians do at this Day,) when any of
their near Kindred Dyed. So did Nature work, and Job Expresses his Sorrow and
Grief by the usual Signs of it.

2. IN the midst of this Agony of Nature, we find Iob^s Grace Triumphant, and
correcting the Sinful Excesses and Defects of it; He Fell down upon the Ground,
and Worshipped. Job was not such a Stock, so destitute of Natural Affections,
as to be Untouched at the Death of his Children; nor was he so wholly under the
Government of his Passions, as to sink beneath the Burden; but he maintains an
Unbroken Heroic Mind; a Mind Subsisting in God, and Supported by Him; He fell
down and Worshipped. This therefore is the Doctrine I shall at present
discourse on.

DOCT. THAT, though under Severe and Repeated Bereavements, Nature may be allowed
it is proper Operation, yet it becomes a Christian to Correct the Sinful Defects
and Excesse^ of Nature, by Acts of Grace: That when he rends his Mantle and
shaves his Head, expressing his Grief and Sorrow, he should remember to fall
down and Worship his God.

I shall not spend time to prove, that a Christian may meet with Severe and
Repeated Bereavements; A Job is a convincing Evidence of it: and alas, that we
also have seen some sad Instances of it of Late. All I shall attempt shall be
briefly, as the Season requires, to show,

I. THAT under such Bereavements, Nature may be allowed its proper Operation.

And,

II. THAT the Sinful Defects and Excesses of Nature should be Corrected by acts
of Grace, by falling down and Worshipping our God.

I. I shall show that under such Severe and Repeated Bereavements, Nature may
be allowed its proper Operation. The God of Nature has formed us with
Reasonable Powers, apprehensive of Evil at a distance, and perceptive of it
when it overtakes us. He has endowed us with Passions and Affections suited to
the different nature of Objects, whether Good or Evil: and while some Objects
work upon our Love and Liking, others do so upon our H^tred and Aversion; while
some are suited to give us ^ Joy and Pleasure, others call forth our* Grief and
Sorrow. Now those things which have in ^he^selves, or in their circumstances, a
contrar^ety to us, either to the Body, or to the Mind, they are the Objects of
our Aversion; Hence we dread them while at a distance from us, and are filled
with Grief and Sorrow when they Seize upon us. Thus the Bereavement of any
Desirable Enjoyment, stands in opposition both to Flesh and Spirit, considered
in a State of Nature, and therefore when we meet with such, our Natural
Aversion will discover it self; the sense of our Loss will Evidence it self, in
the Shock which it gives us, the Pain and Uneasiness it throws the Mind into.

IN Vain does the most hardened Stoic boast such a Power over himself, as to
be unsusceptible of any Impression from Afflictive Evils, and remain untouched
by Bereavements. It Is impossible to us, in our present State, to be wholly
Insensible of Pain; and if it were possible, it would be very Irregular:
because a Sorrowful sense of our Afflictions is but suited to our present make,
while we are clothed with Flesh, and invested with Passions, that will, and
ought to be affected with Joy, or Sorrow, according to the different Nature of
the Objects that strike upon them. An Arm cannot be taken off, but Sense, while
in Health, will perceive it, and recoil at it; and the Passions will be stirred
up according to their Sensation of Pain. So a desirable Good cannot be taken
away from us, but the Soul will be apprehensive of the Loss, and Grief
necessarily follows. Job cannot hear of the Death of his Children, but his
Sorrowful resentments are kindled at it.

THE Design of Grace is not to destroy Nature, but to correct it. God therefore
does not require of us that we Eradicate our Natural Affections and Passions
out of our Souls, and that when he afflicts us we be like Stocks and Stones,
altogether insensible of it; but it is our Duty to be sensibly touched
therewith, to feel the Strokes, and let Nature work, and run in its proper
Channel of Grief and Sorrow. The Man JESUS Himself could allow of it; as when
apprehensive of the Misery that was approaching upon Him, He was in a bitter
Agony, and said, Math. 26.38. My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death.
And hence we find the Best of Gods Children, upon Record in the Sacred Pages,
Mourning over their departed Friends: As Abraham for his Sarah, and Jacob for
his Son. --

AND it is allowable to Express our Sorrow and Grief in proper ways, to let the
World see that we are in Heaviness because of our Loss, and that our Hearts are
full; and that not only by our Words, but by our Actions and Gestures, and
those decent Signs and Tokens of it, which may be the Custom of the Country
where we Dwell. Job rends his Mantle, and shaves his Head, in Token of his
Sorrow and Mourning.

BUT I pass to the Second thing, which is,

II. TO show how the Sinful Defects and Ex^esses of Nature should be Corrected
by Acts of Grace, by Falling down and Worshipping our God. He fell down upon
the Ground and Worshipped. To Worship God implies, the giving to Him the Glory
that is due unto His Name; it means such a suitable Deportment of our selves
under our Bereavements, as is answerable to the Character we sustain, as
becomes our Relation to God, and the Profession we make of His Name. Now such a
Carriage will certainly Correct the Sinful Defects and Excesses, which
otherwise our Natural Grief, and Uneasiness at o^r Bereavements, might throw us
into. All I have to do therefore is, to show more particularly, how under our
Bereavements, we are to fall down and Worship our God.

AND,

1. WE are to Acknowledge the Hand of God in all that befalls us; that it is He
that has taken our Desirable Enjoyments from us. He fell down and Worshipped;
Whom but his GOD? the only Object of Religious Worship. By this he plainly
Acknowledged that all came from God. And accordingly, we find Job saying in
express terms, ( v. 21.) The Lord has taken away. So whatever we have taken
from us, whether our Name, our Estate, our Relations and Friends, we must
Acknowledge, that it is the Lord that has done it. God says, Amos 3.6. Shall
there be Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? The Afflictive Evils
which befall a Person, or People, all comes from God, as the Prime Efficient
Cause of it.

NOW this Acknowledgment Corrects that Defect, of ascribing to Chance and
Casualty the Allotments of Divine Providence, and the looking only to Second
Causes, which tends to stir up our Anger and Revenge. Job had as Good a Plea
for this as any Man; he could have said the Chaldeans and Sabeans have taken
away my Goods; and have Attributed his Loss to the Casualty of the Thunder and
the Winds; but we find his Grace overruling and correcting this gross Defect;
we see him fall down before the Lord, acknowledging that this Trouble did not
spring out of the Ground, but the Lord order it for him. Whatever be (...)
Means and Instruments, still it is the Lord (...) has done it; and much more
should we (...) own His Hand, when He more Immedia^ely* Bereaves us of our
Enjoyments: and the (...) Death of our Relations and Friends may be looked upon
as such.

2. THE Divine Sovereignty over us and all that we Enjoy, must also be
Acknowledged by us. He fell down upon the Ground, as at the Foot of his
Sovereign Lord, and Worshipped* Acknowledging Gods Right to deal with him as He
Pleased, without giving him any account of his Matters. God is the Sovereign
Lord of all his Creatures, and He does with them whatsoever He Pleases; He
Saves Alive, and He Kills, as Pleases Him. We our Selves are the
Workmanship of His Hands, He made us, and He bestows all upon us that we Enjoy.
Hence God has an Original and Inherent Right in us, and is the only true
Proprietor of all our Mercies. God's bestowing this and the other Blessing upon
us don't relinquish His Right to them; He only I ends them to us, or rather
makes us Stewards of them; hence as our Sovereign Lord, whose we are, and whom
we ought to Serve with all that we have. He takes our Enjoyments out of our
Hands when He sees good, and it is but His Own that we Surrender to Him.

NOW the Acknowledgment of this Divine Supremacy, will Correct the Excesses of
Murmuring and Complaint, of Fretting and Quarrelling with God: This will keep
our Passions from ^^yling over, and throwing out their Froth and Foam; and make
us Think and Speak reverently of God, though He severely Chasten us. For who are
we Worms of the Dust, that we should enter a (...) with the Almighty? Shall the
Potsherds of the (...) quarrel with their Maker* and say, Why have (...) done
thus unto me* (...), let Him: do what seems Him Good, is the Language that
becomes us; as Good Old Eli said when he received the Sorrowful News of the
Death of his Children, I. Sam. 3.18. So should we acknowledge Gods right to
take from us the Dearest Enjoyment of this World; though He repeat His strokes
upon us, and take away till there is none left, it is all Thine Own, O Lord; I
have nothing but what I received from Thee; Naked came I into the World, thy
Bounty has enriched me with many Comforts, and if Thou take them from me
again, I will not complain; I have not a Word against it; nor would I angryly
say, Wherefore has Thou done so; I will be dumb and not Open my Mouth, because
thou did^^ it, Psalm. 39.9.

3. WE must pay the Profoundest Submission and Resignation to the Will of God
under the severest Bereavements. He fell down and Worshipped; manifesting
thereby the entire Resignation of himself and his Enjoyments to the Divine Good
Pleasure. By this he paid the greatest Homage to God; and did Him the Highest
Honor by this profound Submission to Him.

More Particularly,

(1.) WE must highly Approve of the Methods of Gods dealings with us. Our
Understanding must be so resolved into the Divine Mind, as highly to approve of
what that Infinite Understanding Directs and Orders for us. Without this, there
will be a Repugnancy in our Wills, and a Tumult in our Affections at the Divine
Disposals. We must therefore be entirely Satisfied in the Wisdom, Justice, and
Graciousness of the Lords dealings with us; and that not only when we may see
through the Meaning of Providence, but when Clouds and Darkness surround the
Most High, the goings of the Lord are a great Deep, and His Footsteps are
Unknown to us.

THUS we must approve of the Divine Wisdom in our Bereavements. The Infinite
Wisdom of God will so overruled all things, as shall be most for His Own Glory*
and it will so Temper the bitterest Mixture as shall be Best for His Children.
Thus therefore should we Worship before Him, acknowledging Him to be the only
Wise God, who knows what is Best for us, and would not have ordered this
Bereavement for us, if Infinite Wisdom had not seen it needful; and though we
know not now, yet we shall see hereafter something of the Unsearchable Depths
of Divine Wisdom in His Providential Dispensations.

THUS we must approve the Rectitude and Justice of the Divine Administrations.
God is Righteous in all His Ways, and Holy in all His Works, Psalm. 145.17.
Righteousness and Judgment is the Habitation of His Throne. And all the Divine
Administrations are according to the Rules of Relative Justice. If we had no
Original Guilt to answer for, our Transgressions are eno' to deserve the
Chastisements we meet with; or if we had never been Actually Guilty in our Own
Persons* the Original Guilt we derive from our Degen^^^t^ ^arents is sufficient
to vindicate the Justice of (...) in all His Infli^^ions* but seeing both of
(...) meet in us, (...) living Man (...), a Man for the (...) his Sin, Lam.
(...). This then should (...) ^ur L^nguage when God Chastens us, though never so
severely; Righteous are Thou, O Lord, and Upright are Thy Judgments, Thou has
Punished me far less than my Iniquities Deserve.

THUS we must approve of the Graciousness of God in what He orders for us. If
He Chasten His Children, it is for their Profit to make them Partakers of His
Holiness; it is to recover them from their Wanderings from Him; it is to fix their
Love more intensly upon Him, that He takes from them created Objects of their
Affection; and by this means also He Advances their Crown of Glory. Now such
gracious Ends and Intentions should be highly approved of by us; and it becomes
us to say, Gracious art Thou. O Lord, and full of Compassion, when Thou
str^west my Way with Thorns, and waterest my Path with Tears to make my Walk
more Circumspect and Fruitful; when Thou take Earthly Delights from me, to
fill me with Heavenly Joys and Consolations; and when Thou carryest me through
Fire and Water, to bring me to the Possession of the Eternal Crown of Glory. So
should our Minds be resolved into the Infinite Understanding of God. This was
the Language and Frame of Job when he bowed the Head and Worshipped, Lord, I
approve of all that Thou have done unto me.

(2.) WE must entirely Res^on our Wills up to the Will of God: our Wills must
be perfectly Governed by the Divine Will. Now this Resignation lies not in the
Divine Dispensations ^^rmonizing with our Natural Will and Choice; but when
there appears a Di^^greement between the Will of God, ^^^ering this or that
Bereavement for us, and our Will, which has a Natural Reluctance to such Evils;
then for us to Supercede our own Will, by resolving it into the Divine, and
sincerely and heartily Choosing the Affli^tion, because God has Chosen it for
us; This is indeed to fall down and Worship (...) God! The Will cannot Choose
Evil, and Embrace Affliction^ as such: but we must have it well reconciled to
what is most harsh and difficult to Flesh and Blood from this Principle,
because it is the Will of God that it should be so; and we are sure He will
never do us any Hurt. Thus we find Holy David when driven from his Throne,
saying to Z^dock with the profoundest Submission: II Sam. 15.25. Carry back the
Ark of God into the City; if I have found favor in the Eyes of the Lord, He
will bring me again, and show me both it, and His Habitation; but if He say
thus, I have no Delight in thee; behold here am I, let Him do unto me, what
seems Good unto Him. And so our Blessed Savior, when He earnestly Prayed the
Cup might pass from Him, N^vertheless, says He, not as I will, but as Thou
(...), Math 26.39. If it be Thy Will, that I shall drink of this Cup of
Sufferings, as Thou will; what Thou choosest, I choose also.

(3) OUR Passions must be kept under a Good Regulation. Though we are allowed to
give some vent to our Passions, in Mourning over our Departed Friends; yet we
must not suffer them to get the Upper-hand of us* ^o depress our Spirits, or
break forth into Storm and Rage; For this will be, on the one hand, to Paint in
the Day of Adversity; and to fly in the Face of God, on the other. The Passions
therefore must be regulated, Soothed and Calmed, that we may still possess our
selves with something of Sedateness, and Ease. Till these ruffling Passions are
lulled, we shall be like Bullocks unaccostomed to the Yoke, kick and fling, and
yield no due Submission to the Will of God, nor Worship Him as we ought to do:
but when our Sanctified Mind has got the Ascendant over these, maintains its
Empire and Dominion in the Soul, scatters the thick Clouds that surrounds us,
makes us Patient in Tribulation, and Easy within when all things without us are
Tempestuous; this is to fall down and Worship the Lord, as Job without the
least Sinful Disorder and Ruffling of his Soul. And thus we find Holy David,
when Shimei Cursed him, and Abis^^i would have taken severe Revenge upon him
for it, how Calm? how Easy is he? Let him alone, says he, and let him Curse,
for the Lord has bidden him, II. Sam. 16.11. And so when he had lost his
firstborn by Bathsheba; though he had fasted and wept sore before, in hopes to
obtain the Life of the Child, yet now he rises, washes, anoints himself,
changes his Apparel, and with Composure of Mind, goes into the House of God and
Worshippeth, II. Sam. 12.20. Thus are we to fall down before the Lord and
Worship Him, by the Profoundest Resignation of our Selves and all that we have
to His Disposal.

4. WE must Humble our Selves deeply before the Lord when under such
Bereavements. He fell down upon the Ground Prostrating himself, (so some render
the Words) betokening his Deep Humiliation, and Self-Abasement. Hence we are
called upon, I. Pet. 5.6. Humble your Selves under the Mighty Hand of God. When
Gods Hand is upon us, it becomes us to lay our selves low, as in the Dust
before Him; to have our Souls filled with Weeping and with Mourning, and to be
covered as (...) Sackcloth and Ashes.

THERE is requisite, not only a Sorrow that arises from our Natural Affections,
but a Sorrow and Grief of Heart that arises from Spiritual and Heroic
Principles in us: a Sorrow from a Sense of the Hand of God upon us. It should
abase us, and make us Humble, to see the Frowns in the Countenance of our
Heavenly Father, and feel such heavy Tokens of His Displeasure. When He
Chastens us, He expects that we should be grieved at it, and lay our selves Low
at His Feet.

AND much greater should be our Humiliation and Sorrow, from a Sense of our
Deserving His Chastisements. The Sense of our own Sinfulness, which is the
first Cause of all our Afflictions and Bereavements, should make us to Walk
Softly, in the Bitterness of our Souls; and produce in us that Godly Sorrow
that works Repentance. For surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
Chastisement, I will not offend any more; if I have done Iniquity, I will do so
no more; Behold, I am Vile before Thee, wherefore I abhor my Self, and Repent
in Dust and Ashes.

5. LASTLY; WE must Carefully Attend all those Religious Acts of Worship and
Homage which we Owe to God. He fell down upon the Ground, and Worshipped: Then
under the Surprise and Confusion, which one would have expected he should have
been thrown into at the hearing of such Dismal Tidings, he did not forget the
Homage and Worship which he owed to his God*

(...) thus the Christian* whatever be his (...), Severe* and often Repeated
his Bereavements may be, still he will not suffer his Mind to be Unhinged, and
Unfitted for the Duties of his General Calling, but keeps himself in such a
Frame, as to Bow down and Worship his God, in all the Methods of his
appointment.

THERE are some Acts which are more peculiarly termed a Worshipping of God; as
Prayer, and Praise, whether in Public or Private: Now all such Acts of
Religious Worship must be carefully Attended, under the Sharpest Fight of
Afflictions; Nay, the more exact and frequent should we be in our Performance
of them, because of our Afflictions. For thus we Read, Iam. 5.13. Is any Man
Afflicted let him Pray? Then is a special Season for This, and all other Acts
of Religious Worship, and this will be the most likely way to fetch in suitable
Help and Support.

AND here suffer me to Suggest; whether it ought not to be esteemed a Fault
among Christians, for any to Absent themselves from the Public Worship of God,
while under their Bereavements, upon pretense that their Spirits are too much
overwhelmed, or their Outward Circumstances are such as will not suffer them to
Appear in the Habit of Mourners? This I am sure of, that those Acts of Worship,
which it would be our Duty to Attend, were it not for the Death of a Relation,
ought by no means, purely for that Reason to be neglected, when ot^^r
Circumstances will allow our Performance of them.

BUT then, there are those Duties* which Reflect Honor upon God, and are
therefore to be esteemed a Worshipping of Him; such are all Moral Duties, and
our steady Obedience to the Divine Commandment; these therefore ought Carefully
to be observed by us under the heavyest Chastisements; and no Affliction should
prevail with us to Omit them; nor should we take any Methods contrary to them
to Deliver our Selves out of our Troubles* For this is the Homage which we
forever owe to our God, to Govern our Selves by His Laws; and we cease to
Worship Him, when we do it not.

THUS is the Christian, when exercised with Bereavements, or indeed any Sort of
Affliction, to fall down upon the Ground and Worship his God: and when he does
so, he appears a Perfect and Upright Man, One that Fears God and Escheweth
Evil; for these are some of the Characters of the truly Christian Heroic Mind,
which renders him Illustrious among Men, and a Delightful Spectacle to the Holy
Angels.

I Proceed now to make some Improvement of this DOCTRINE.

USE. 1. HENCE; we may infer the Excellency of True Christian Principles. The
great pretenders to Philosophy may reason with themselves all their Days, and
form as many fine Schemes and Projects as they please, to support and
strengthen their Minds, and preserve them calm and steady in the midst of the
uncertain Changes of Providence, and the thick and black Storms that may beat
upon them; they may boast as long as they Please, of their greatness of Mind,
and their remaining untouched by the Sharpest Adversity; but it is certain after
all, they have but put a trick and cheat upon themselves, and formed Artificial
Passions (as One expresses it) in hopes to Suppress their Natural Ones; and yet
their hopes are but vain; for their Natural Passions will certainly rise upon
them, break in upon their Quiet, and disturb the Peace of their Minds, in spite
of all their Reason and Philosophy; As has been Evidently seen, in the
Deportment of the severest Philosophers; Especially in Cato, that Celebrated
Man, who gained the Title of Severe from his Government of his Passions; yet
after all his Prentences, when Distresses grew thick and heavy upon him, how
did he discover the Bastardlyness of his Spirit, and his Fears to meet his
approaching Fate, by meanly rushing upon his own Sword, to escape Death in the
form of an Enemy, or being lead Captive to Grace the Triumphs of a Generous
Conqueror.

BUT here lies the Superiority of Truly Religious Principles, over all merely
Natural or Acquired Habits of the Mind, that they will enable a Man, with a
Steady and Composed Countenance, to meet the Allotments of Divine Providence,
to face the greatest Dangers, and bravely walk through the Flames, and receive
all the Fire with an Undaunted Resolution, when it meets him in the way of his
Duty: and though the Stormy Shower may fall never so thick and heavy upon him,
these Christian Principles will Support his Mind, keep him Serene and ^air
within, and cause Light to arise in Darkness to him; this will give him a
Presence of Mind, a Sedate Temper, and Cool Thought under all Exigencies; will
enable him to Quit himself like a Man of Conscience and Honor, with a just
Deference to his God, (...) Serious regard to the Welfare of his own Soul (...)
a Faithful Discharge of all Relative (...) So does the Christian Religion show
us a more Excellent and Perfect way, than Reason and Philosophy with all their
Art and Contrivance can pretend to.

2. HENCE; A Stupid Insensibility of the Hand of God, when He bereaves us of
dear Enjoyments, is very unbecoming a Christian. This is the Guilt the Prophet
Charges upon the Jews: Isai. 26.11. Lord, when thy Hand is Lifted up they will
not see! They refused to see the Hand of God smiting of them, might think of
this or that Reason of their Affliction, but did not see God in it; or else
like the same hardened People whom God complains of: Isai. 42.25. It Set him on
Fire round about, but he knew it not; it burned him, but he laid it not to
Heart. So Stubborn was he grown, as not to feel the Blows that were struck upon
him. Now such a Wilful refusal to see the Hand of God; such a hardness of Heart
as, like the Anvil, resists to the Blows that are struck upon it, is altogether
unbecoming the Character of a Christian; for it argues a Secret Atheism in the
Heart, and Disbelief of God's Governing Providence, which is most contrary to
an Acknowledgment of Him, and Worshipping before Him.

3. HENCE; Neither is it agreeable to the Christians Character, to Sink under
the Weight of his Bereavements. Though we may Sorrow and Mourn, when we are
Bereaved, yet we must not Sorrow, as those that are without Hope; nor, with
Rachel* Refuse to be C^mforted. We must not conclude that all is gone, and we
are undone, because this Valuable Earthly Enjoyment is taken from us. For this
Sinking, Fainting, Desp^nding Frame argues, that there is a Disagreement
between our Wills* and the Will of God in ordering this Providence for us;
whereas we have seen, that the Christian is to fall down and Worship his God,
by an entire Resignation of his Will to the Divine. And this is the holy
Apostles advice: Heb. 12.5. My Son, despise not thou the Chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when thou art Rebuked of Him.

4. HENCE; We owe Our Thankfulness to God for the many Mercies He is Pleased
yet to continue to us. If when He Bereaves us of the Comforts of this Life, we
are under all still to fall down and Worship Him, certainly then we are to
Worship Him when He continues His Smiles upon us; and our Thankfulness to God
for His Mercies, is but the Natural Worship which as Creatures, who have our
whole Dependence on Him, and receive all our Enjoyments from His Bounty, we owe
unto Him. We are to Bless God even when He takes away; As Job, in the Verse
following my Text, The Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord:
Then certainly we should Bless and Praise Him for what of His Favors He
continues to us. And those of us who have Experienced His Goodness, in
Restoring our Selves, or those that belong to us, from Sickness, and Preserving
us from going down to the Pit, when, it may be, we have been brought to the
Edges of the Grave, Such certainly owe this Tribute of Praise. Bless the Lord,
O my Soul, and all that is within me, Bless His Holy Name; Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, who Heals all thy Diseases; who ransometh thy Life from Destruction,
and Crowns thee with Loving Kindness and Tender Merc^, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 4.

BUT,

5. LASTLY; Let us all then Labor after Job's Religious Frame, when under the
Divine Bereavements, To fall down and Worship our God. We all of us have our
Trials, and meet with Afflictions of One Sort or Other; and some of us have
sadly stood as in Job's stead, have met with Bereavement upon Bereavement, and
till there is none Left. And whose condition it shall be next to pass through the
like Fiery Trial, God only knows. Well then, Let us all endeavor after this
devout Frame of Mind, that when we are called to rend our Mantles and shave our
Heads, to Weeping and to Mourning, and the Expressions of our Sorrow and Grief
by our Outward Actions and Deportment, our Souls may at the same time, Fall
down and Worship our Maker.

IN order to work us up to this Frame of Mind,

1. MAINTAIN a Steady View of Gods Governing Providence. How would it Prostrate
us before the Lord, compose all the Tumults and Uneasyness of our Minds, to
uphold a continued fixed Belief of Gods Government of the World? To consider
that all things are of His ordering, and Nothing comes to pass without His
Knowledge and Direction; that the very Hairs of our Heads are all Numbered by
Him; that not a Sparrow falls to the Ground without His Good Pleasure, much
less does any of our Relations* (the Dear Objects of our Love, whom God has
given to us very much for this End, to Solace our Selves in the Enjoyment of
them) fall into the Grave without the Concurrence and Direction of His
Governing Providence.

2. LET GOD Himself have our highest Esteem, and Maintain a Low Opinion of the
Best of the Things of this World. If God be the Object of our highest
Affection, and we have chosen Him as the Portion of our Souls; and can
Sincerely say, I have none in Heaven but Thee, and Desire nothing on Earth in
Comparison of Thee; then though we should be bereaved of the Best of our Earthly
Delights and Comforts, or of all of them, yet our Treasure will abide by us
still; Our God cannot be taken away; No; not Death it self can Separate us from
His Love.

AND if we have a Low Opinion of the Things of this World; Consider them as
truly they are, Perishable Things; then it will not be hard to part with them,
we shall be able to bear the Loss Patiently, and Weep as though we wept not; as
we are advised, 1 Cor. 7.30. This now will tend to keep us in a Religious and
Devout frame of Mind.

3. EYE the Example of those that have gone before us in the like Sufferings.
Set before us the Example of our Savior. Whose Sorrows are like unto His
Sorrows? View Him in every State and Condition of Life, and we shall find Him a
Man of Sorrows and Acquainted with Griefs: and what was His Deportment under
them? but the Deepest Devotion, and a Constant Adoration and Worshipping of God
His Father. And herein Christ has Suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that
we should tread in His Steps: As the Apostle tell us, 1 Pet. 2.21.

BUT then, we have the Example of Holy Men; Men like our Selves, as frail by
Nature as we are, subject to like Passions with us, to whom their Relations and
Friends were as dear as ours to us, and who had as Natural an Aversion at
Parting with them, as we have; We also have the same Helps with them, the same
Religious Principles, the same Divine and Gracious Spirit to Strengthen and
Support us. And how did they bear their Bereavements? You have heard of the
Patience and Religion of Job; Let us then take our Brethren for an Example of
Suffering Affliction, and of Patience, and be fired with an Holy Ambition, to
do like them.

4. CALL to Mind the Recompense of Reward that shall be given to them, who thus
Govern their Natural Passions by Acts of Grace. It may be they shall be
Rewarded in this Life, and like Job, have made up to them abundantly in the
same kind that was taken from them, and their Latter End be better than their
Beginning.

BUT however, there are Rewards in the ^uture Immortal World, for them that
behave themselves aright under the Dealings of God with them; through Faith and
Patience they shall come to inherit the Promises: For we shall Reap if we faint
not, says the Apostle. Gal. 6.9. Our Light Afflictions, which are here but as
for a Moment, shall work for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And how should the Thoughts of this make us to fall down
and Worship our God.

5. LIVE in Expectation of all Sorts of Afflictions and Bereavements while in
this World. We are told, Act 14.22. Through much Tribulation we must enter into
the Kingdom of God. If we Live in Expectation of them, consider our Selves in a
Mutable World, perpetually Subject to Changes; a World where none of its
Enjoyments are Sure and Certain; then when we are Disappointed in our best laid
Designs, Crossed in our most valuable Interest here, and Bereaved of our
Sweetest and most Comfortable Enjoyments, we shall not think Strange concerning
the Fiery Trial, as though some Strange Thing had happened to us; we shall not be
thrown into Dejection and Despair, into Impatience and Murmuring; but shall be
enabled to meet our Trials with a Composed Mind, and Sustain the Shock that may
be given to Nature by them, with a true Christian Heroic frame.

6. LASTLY; And when Bereavements and Afflictions do overtake us, Exercise
Prayer and Faith. This is indeed part of that Worship, we must Pay to God under
them; and it is also a proper Method to lead us to the whole of that Homage,
which God Challenges of us, when He Rebukes and Chastens us.

THUS then, let us earnestly Pour out our Supplications before the Lord,
thereby making known all our Wants to Him, entreating His favorable Support
under our Bereavements, His Gracious Deliverance out of our Trials, and a
Sanctified Use and Improvemen^ of them. This will be the way to Unbosome our
S^uls, to give a proper vent to the Griefs and Sorrows of our Hearts, to breath
out our Troubles, and to fetch in of the Divine Consolations which are not
small. So will it Buoy up our Spirits, and keep our Hearts from fainting.

AND then Exercise Faith, relying upon the Mercy of God, who is more ready to
Communicate than we are to Ask or Receive: trusting to His Goodness (though with
the Pr^foundest Submi^^io^ (...) His Will, as to the Time, and Manner) for our
Assistance and Deliverance: (...) upon the Infinite Merits of Christ Jesus, who
by His Sufferings has Purchased for us, that our Afflictions of Curses shall be
turned into Blessings, that all things shall work together for Good unto them
that Love God; and Humbly persuading our Selves, that this our Merciful High
Priest, who is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, will find out a way
for our Escape, and bring all to a happy Issue for us.

THUS let us work our Selves up unto Job's happy frame of Spirit, that when we
are Bereaved of what is most Delightful to us here, we may with him fall down
upon the Ground, and Worship the Lord our God. Then shall we be Perfect Men in
Christ Jesus, wanting nothing to make us Comfortable here, and Happy hereafter:
For this Frame will be our Perfection and our Happiness. Our Perfection;
because by this Means, there will be a good Agre^men^ (...) our Wills and the
Will of God* wh^^h is t^^ Perfection of the Gloryfied Spirits Ab^ve 'Twill will
be our Hap^^^es^ also; because this will ^eep us Temperate, (...) and Easy; and
our Happ^^^ss arises not so (...) from our Enjoyments here* as from the Frame
and Temper of our Minds. Besides, this will be a Comfortable Evidence of our
Adoption, that we are the true Children of God: for thus we are assured, Heb.
12.7. with which Words I Conclude, If ye endure Chastisement, God deals with
you, as with Sons; for what Son is he, whom his Father Chasteneth not?

II. SERMON. The Fatal Consequence Of a PEOPLES Persisting in SIN: Preached To
the very Reverend Dr. MATHER'S Church, on a Public FAST, in the Time of the
Measels, January, 14. 1713/14.
EZRA IX.13, 14. After all that is come upon us, for our Evil Deeds, and for
our Great Trespass; Seeing that Thou, our God, have Punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as This; should we again
break Thy Commandments, and join in Affinity with the People of these
Abominations! W^uldst Thou not be Angry with us, till thou have Consumed us, so
that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping.


THE History of the Jewish Nation is very Entertaining and Instructive,
Presenting us with a fair view of the various Scenes of Providence, and the
Methods of the Divine Proceedings, with a People that stand peculiarly related
to God; at once showing us the Happiness of that People, whose God is the Lord,
while they faithfully adhere to His Covenant, and maintain their Loyalty to
their Sovereign; and giving us a Prospect of the Unspotted Holiness and
Righteousness, and the burning Jealousy of God in Punishing of them, when they
forsake His Ordinances, and Disobey His Commandments.

IF we trace that People, from their first Infant State, to their very
Consummation, we shall find they Prospered in all their Designs, grew Great and
Flourishing, or were brought Low and Abased with various Calamities, according
as their Religion was Upheld, and they were found faithful to their God, or as
Profanness and Vice prevailed among them.

WHILE they were careful to Walk in all the Ordinances of the Lord blameless,
to observe His Statutes and Judgments to do them, what amazing Instances of the
Divine Power, Wisdom, and Care, exerted for them, do we meet with in the Sacred
Story? How is the Almighty Arm made bare for their Support and Deliverance, and
the overthrow of their Enemies? Their Increase and Flourishing in Goshen; their
Miraculous Redemption from their Egyptian-Bondage; the Conduct afforded them in
their Long Travels; the Amazing Supply of Manna and Quail^, and the Stream from
the Rock that followed them in the Desert for their Refreshment; the Wonders
wrought by the hands of their Judges; their Subduing the Land of Canaan; their
State and Magnificence in the Reigns of David and Solom^n, and some other of
their Good Kings; these are all Lasting Monuments of the Divine Care, and
Evident Demonstrations, what God will do for His People, while their Hearts are
Perfect toward Him.

ON the other hand, their Plagues and Distresses, their Intestine Jarrs, and
Repeated Wars, their Captivity in Babylon, and their final overthrow by the
Romans, are as full Prooffs, that though God has known a People above all the
Families of the Earth, yet He will Punish them for their Iniquities.

AND we may observe throughout the Sacred History, that God is wont very much,
to Proportion His Judgments according to the Degrees of His Peoples Crimes;
that He laid His Inflictions upon them more heavy and severe, as His People
were more Obstinate and Incorrigable, and by their repeated Trespasses filled
up the Measure of their Iniquities.

MY Text and Context leads me a little to Consider their Captivity in Babylon,
and their Deliverance there from. When the Wicked Reigns of Ahas, Menasseth,
Iehojakim, and Zedekiah, filled with Idolatry, the Contempt of Gods Sabbath,
House and Ordinances, with Oppression, Injustice, and every Evil Work, had
fully ripened them for the Desolating Judgments of God; Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon comes up as a Devouring Scourge* and compleats their overthrow, in the
Destruction of Jerusalem their Royal City; burning their Palaces and their
Temple; Slaying their Young Men, their Flower and Hopes; scarce sparing Age or
Sex, and carrying the Remnant that had Escaped the Sword into Babylon, where
they remained Vassals for Seventy Years, till their Land had fulfilled its
Sabbath.

IN this their Distress, there were a Remnant that Feared the Lord, and sought
Him with their whole Heart, and the Lord stirred up Cyrus, King of Persia, to
issue out a Royal Proclamation, giving Liberty to the Jews, to return to their
own Land, and Re-build their City, and the House of their God; at which time
their Seventy Years Captivity Expired; though they still met with many
Difficulties and Hindrances from their Enemies, in the Reigns of Cyrus,
Cambyses, Artaxerxes, Darius Hystaspis, till it was finished in the Sixth Year
of the Reign of Darius, or Artaxerxes Longimanus.

EZRA a Priest and Scribe of the Law of the God of Heaven, who had peculiarly
set his Heart toward the House of his God, probably had tarryed at the Court
of Babylon, to take such measures there, as might be necessary for the
furtherance of the work; after the House was finished and the Wall of
Jerusalem, he leaves the Persian Court, in the Seventh Year of Artaxerxes, and
brings up the remainder of the People with him, and the Vessels of the House of
the Lord, giving them into the hands of the Priests and Levites, to whom he
appoints their several Charge, and they offer Sacrifice with Joy and
Thanksgiving before the Lord.

WHILE these things were doing, Ezra is informed, that Contrary to the Divine
Commandment, many of the Princes and Priests with the People had taken Wives,
for themselves and their Sons, of the Babylonish Women, whom they had brought
with them to Jerusalem; which as it was expressly forbiden, least thereby their
Hearts should be drawn away to Idolatry, so was it extremely Provoking to God.

UPON the hearing hereof, Ezra s^ts down filled with Astonishment and
Indignation, and under the black Apprehensions he has of the fatal Consequents
of it, he humbles himself before the Lord, and pours out a Prayer; as in this
Ninth Chap. whereof my Text is a part: And after all that is come upon us, for
our Evil Deeds, etc. Wherein I shall only Remark.

1. HIS acknowledgment, that it was for their Evil Deeds and Great Trespass,
that God had brought those heavy Judgments upon them, which they had labored
under; All this that is come upon us, for our Evil Deeds.

2. THE Aggravating Circumstances that Attended their present Transgression;
first, in that it was after all that had come upon them, and so a Contempt of
former Judgments; and then, it was notwithstanding God had punished them less
than they deserved, and had now granted them a very great Deliverance, and so
it was base Ingratitude, and an abuse of the Divine Lenity and Mercy.

3. HIS Just fears least, if they persisted in their Transgression, it should
prove their utter Ruin and Confusion: After and Notwithstanding -- Should we
again break thy Commandments, in Joining Affinity with the People of these
Abominations, would no^ Thou be Angry with us, till Thou have Consumed us, so
that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping. Certainly, the bold
Transgressions of a People, so Circumstanced, so ^ighly Aggravated, after
Judgments to Deter them, notwithstanding Mercies to Allure them* are very
Provoking, and lay such an Incorrigible People (...) to the Amazing Effects of
the Divi^^ Displeasure. From which Words we may gather this Doctrine, Viz

DOCT. THAT for a People in Covenant with GOD to Persist in their Evil Deeds
and Great Trespasses, after former Judgments GOD has brought upon them
therefore, and notwithstanding the Merciful Deliverances He has favored them
with, is the most ready way to utter Ruin and Confusion.

IN the handling of this Doctrine, I shall Endeavor these things:

I. TO show, That GOD does and will Punish the Evil Deeds of His Covenant
People, by Judgments upon them in this Life and World.

II. I shall just hint, That the Judgments GOD Inflicts upon His People,
ordinarily rise in Proportion to the Nature of their Crimes.

III. I shall Endeavor to Prove, That for GOD'S Covenant People to Persist in
their Evil Deeds, after Judgments, and notwithstanding Deliverances, is the
most ready way to Ruin.

IV. AND then I shall make some Improvement, suitable to the Solemnity of this
Day.

I. THE first thing then is, to show, That GOD does and will Punish the Evil
Deeds of His Covenant People, by Judgments upon them in this Life. This appears
plain from these things.

1. THE Covenant between God and His People considers them as a Collective
Body. That there is a Covenant between God and His Professing People, is too
evident in the Sacred Pages to make any Question of. His Israel ever stood in a
Covenant Relation to Him, from the Days of Abraham, to the Days of the
Messiah; and His Spiritual Israel have done so, from Ad^m to this Day. All the
Difficulty lies in Understanding the Nature of this Covenant. And I freely
Acknowledge, that I take it to be none other, than what we call the Covenant of
Grace, Diversifyed with respect to the Parties, and the Sanctions of it. As the
Covenant of Grace respects a Particular Person, so it considers him Singly and
by himself, and the Sanctions of it are Eternal Rewards or Punishments: But as
the same Covenant respects the People of God in the General, so it considers
them as a Collective Body, all as One, and so its Sanctions are Temporal
Rewards and Punishments.

THE Covenant between God and His Professing People is, their Mutual Engagement
to each other, to perform something or other Specifyed in that Covenant. The
very Notion of a Covenant carries Obligation in it: and this Obligation must be
Mutual, and the Covenant binding upon both Parties; or the One, being under no
Obligation, is at Liberty whether he will perform his Part or no, which
necessarily leaves the other at as great a Liberty by reason of his
Uncertainty; and so that which is Designed for the Strongest Tie and Bond,
becomes Weaker than Sampson's Withs, having no force at all. And then the Terms
of the Covenant, or Articles upon which the Two Parties agree, must be
Specified in the Covenant; otherwise it is altogether uncertain what is to be
done on either Part, and so no Obligation can lie upon either to the
Performance of any thing at all; a Covenant binding no further than it
expresses.

THUS God and His People stand engaged in Covenant unto each other; the Sum of
which is expressed in, Jer. XXXI.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my
People. That which is re^uired on Man's Part is, all Possible Homage and
Obedience to God, as He has fully set their Duty before them in His Word, which
is the Book of the Covenant; and God has been graciously Pleased to come under
Covenant Obligations, to bestow upon His People all the Blessings expressed in
that Covenant, if they be Faithful to Him therein. Now this Covenant is
Mutually Obligatory, upon the Divine Majesty and His People; only Man being to
receive the Benefit of the Covenant, it stands him in stead to see to the
Performance of his Part, ever he can Challenge the Blessing, or indeed so much
as hope for it. And this is still the Covenant of Grace, in that it is an high
Act of Grace, for the Great GOD thus to Condescend, to come under Covenant
Engagements to a Worm; and in that the Covenant is still founded in Christ
Jesus, as Head and Mediator of it, without whom there could be no Possibility
for a Sinful Creature, to come into so near a Relation to a Holy God; nor would
the Duty Performed by Man, be sufficient to entitle him, to the Blessings
engaged by God, were it not for the Merits of Christ; even Temporal Blessings
being more than Man can Deserve. And besides, in this Covenant there is
sufficient Room for the Suspending, at least for a Time, the Threatenings
denounced in case of Disobedience, and the utter averting of Impending
Judgments, upon a Sincere and Hearty Repentance and Reformation.

NOW this Covenant, between God and His People, ever considers them as a
Collective Body, being made with the Whole Congregation of His Professing
People; and therefore wherever we find it mentioned in the Sacred Pages, it
always ru^s in such Terms, as evidently manifests, that it respects the People
Collectively and Together, all of them as One Party concerned in it. So it was
at the first more evident Ratifying of it on Mount Sinai; and therefore when
Moses had received all the Statutes and Ordinances for the Children of Israel;
says God to him, Exodus XXXIV.27. Write thou these words, for after the Tenor
of these words I have made a Covenant with thee, and with Israel. i. e. with
the whole Body of the People, whom Moses represented. And this more plainly
appears at the renewing of the Covenant in the Land of Moab: for thus runs the
Preamble to it, Deuteronomy. XXIX.10. Ye stand this Day all of you before the Lord
your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your Officers, with all
the M^n of Israel, your Little Ones, your Wives, and the Stranger that is
within your Gates, from the Hewer of Wo^d, to the Drawer of Water, that thou
should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into His Oath* which
the Lord thy God makes with thee this Day, that He may Establish thee to Day
for a People unto Himself, and that He may be unto thee a God. Than which*
nothing can be more full and pertinent to the purpose; and it evidently shows*
that the Covenant is made with the whole Body of the People* considered as a
People.

2. THE Sanctions of this Covenant between God and His People are Temporal;
Temporal Rewards, and Temporal Punishments. Far be it from me, to say any thing
that shall take off the Edge, and a^^^e the Force of those Eternal Rewards and
Punishments, by which the Covenant is Established with Particular Persons.
Every Visible Professor in a Christian State stands related to God in a Double
Capacity, both as a Private Person considered by himself, and as a Member of
that Collective Body of which he is but a Part. As a Private Person, he is by
his Baptism Personally in Covenant with God; and though the Dispensations of
Providence toward him here are not Proportioned exactly according to his
behavior, but as God in Infinite Sovereignty sees meet, yet the Eternal
Rewards and Punishments of the future World will be Dispensed to him, according
to his Fidelity or Unfaithfulness in the Covenant.

BUT then, as a Person stands related to the Body Politic, so he is but a Part
of that Body, or Community with whom the Covenant is made; and this Society or
Body of Men, of which each Person is but a part of the whole, have the Covenant
Ratifyed with them by the Sanctions of Temporal Rewards or Punishments; and
accordingly they are National and Public Judgments that are Inflicted on such
a People, for their Sin; And Public Blessings that are Conferred upon them,
when they are a Righteous People. Hence every Member of the Commonwealth has
some Part in the Allotments of Providence; and the most Righteous Person has
his share in the Common Calamity brought upon such a People; and though a very
Profane and Vicious Person may happen to escape a Personal Suffering, under the
heavy distresses that may be Inflicted upon the Nation or State of which he is
a Member, yet have they all their common Interest bound up together, and every
Part of the Body feels something of the Wounds that are given to it, and
rejoices in it is Health and Prosperity.

AND indeed throughout the whole Bible, wherever we find the Covenant made
with a People as such, we shall also find, that Outward Prosperity is the
Blessing engaged in Case of Obedience, and Outward Afflictions and
Chastisements are the Punishments threatened in Case of Disobedience.

THUS it was when the Covenant was made with Abraham, who was considered as the
head of a Family and Nation: Genesis XVII. begin. The Lord appeared to Abram, and
said, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou Perfect; and I will
make my Covenant between Me and thee, -- and thou shall be a Father of many
Nations. -- Thy Name shall be called Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have
I made thee, and I will make thee exceeding Fruitful, and I will make Nations
of thee, and I will establish my Covenant between Me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee; -- and I will give unto thee and thy Seed after thee, the Land
wherein thou art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an Everlasting
Possession. -- And God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee. In all of which it is plainly Evident,
that tho Covenant here was not made with Abraham merely as a Single Person, but
as including a Great People in his Loins, and respected that Unborn People
together with him; It Is Evident also that the Blessings of this Life are the
Favors engaged in the Covenant, if Abraham and his Seed keep their Covenant;
and their Temporal Punishment, in Case of Disobedience, is inferred by the rule
of Contraries, and is fairly pointed at by the Word therefore: Thou shall keep
my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed, Q. D. if you do it not, you shall not
be so blessed, but on the Contrary Afflicted; and we see by the Event it was
so, in the many bitter things they met with ever they came to the Possession of
the Promised Land of Canaan.

AND this Ratification of the Covenant by Temporal Rewards and Punishments
appears in a clearer Light, when after the Seed of Abraham, by Isaac, came to
be a Great Nation, and the Covenant was more fully and openly made with the
whole People; as is to be seen, Levit. XXVI. Chap. Where after all the Articles
of the Covenant had been expressed, Moses lays down the Sanctions from Verse 3
d. If ye walk in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments to do them, then I will
give you Rain in due Season, and the Land shall yield her Increase, and the
Trees of the Field shall yield their Fruit; and your Thr^shing shall reach unto
the Vintage, and the Vintage shall reach unto the Sowing Time; and ye shall Eat
your Bread to the full, and dwell in your Land Safely: And I will give Peace in
the Land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid; and I will
rid evil Beast out of the Land, neither shall the Sword pass through the Land;
and ye shall Chase your Enemies, and they shall fall before you by the Sword.
-- And I will have respect unto you, and make you Fruitful and Multiply you. --
And ye shall Eat old Sto^e, and bring forth the Old because of the New, etc.
But (on the other hand) If ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all
these Commandments, if ye shall Despise my Statutes, or if your Soul abhor my
Judgments, so that ye will not do all my Commandments, but that ye break my
Covenant; I also will do this unto you* I will even appoint over you Terror,
Consum^tion, and the Burning Ague -- And ye shall Sow your Seed in vain, -- And
ye shall be Slain before your Enemies. Throughout the whole of which it plainly
appears, that Temporal Rewards or Punishments are the Sanctions of the Covenant
between God and His People.

AND indeed it seems natural that it should be so; for a People in Covenant
with God are more Peculiarly under a Theocratical Government, having Chosen the
Lord for their Head and King, and are become in a special manner His
Commonwealth; and though His Power over them is Monarchical and Absolute, yet He
proceeds by the Rules of Rectoral Holiness and Relative Righteousness, and
accordingly favors them with Outward Prosperity, or punishes them with Outward
Adversity, according to their Manners, as they behave themselves with a steady
Loyalty, or prove Treacherous and Disobedient to Him.

3. THE Evil Deeds and Trespasses of Gods Covenant People are Provoking to Him,
and Deserve Punishment. God is a Holy and Jealous God, of Purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity; and all Sin must needs be offensive to the unspotted Holiness,
and unerring Rectitude of the Divine Nature: it is the Abominable thing which He
Hates, (Jer. XLIV.4.) And which He will sooner or later, one way or other,
certainly Punish wherever it is found.

WHEN therefore this hateful thing is found in a Particular Person, the Holy
and Righteous God will either Punish for it, by inflicting the Just Wages of
Sin upon the Offender in his own Person; or accept of what his Surely has
Suffered for him, as a Sufficient and Satisfactory Punishment.

BUT when a People are found Guilty, we may rationally Conclude, that as the
Covenant is made with them as such, and the Sanctions of tha^ Covenant threaten
Temporal Afflictions, that accordingly their Crimes, which are provoking to
God, shall be Punished upon them as such a People.

FOR Sin is not the less Offensive and ill Deserving, for its being found among
a People in Covenant with God, but rather the more so; because such a People
know better, the Law of the Lord their God is among them; and besides they have
Sworn Alleigance to God as their Righ^ful Sovereign: so that their Evil Deeds
must needs be Peculiarly Offensive and Provoking, being against the clearest
Light to the Contrary, and the addition of Perjury to their Disobedience.

HERE then I might properly enough Inquire; When may a People considered as
such be Looked upon as Guilty? For it is very certain, that some particular Acts
of Sin and Disobedience, found in particular Persons, among a Covenant People,
don't always involve that People in the Guilt thereof. But all I shall attempt
to say in Answer hereto (having no time to be larger) is, that when the Sins of
Particular Persons are allowed and abetted by the generality of a People
especially their Heads and Rulers, without providing proper Laws against them,
or neglecting the Execution of those Laws; and when any Sin becomes the general
practice of a People and Epidemically rages among them; and much more when all
kind of Sins prevail among a People: I think under these Characters they may be
accounted the Sins of the People, for which they lie exposed to the Divine
Chastisements. For You only have I known (says God) above all the Families of
the Earth, therefore will I punish you for your Iniquities, Amos III.2. So that
Sin is not lest Offensive and Provoking for being found among His Covenant
People.

4. THIS Life and World is the only suitable Time and Place for a People
considered as such, to be Punished for their Evil Deeds. For the Covenant being
made with a People considered as a Collective Body, and the Sanctions of that
Covenant respecting them as such, and accordingly threatening them with
Temporal Punishments, when therefore by Sin they become Obnoxious to the
Penalties contained in the Sanction, what of Punishment is inflicted on them as
a People therefore, must be while they are such a Collective Body, and so
considered. Their Evil Deeds and Trespasses are considered, not as the Acts of
this or that particular Person, but when they are op^^ly Tolerated, and
Epidemically prevail among ^^em, they are looked upon as the Evil Deeds of the
whole Body of the People together; and therefore while they are such a
Community, which is only in this Life and World, they are to be Punished
therefore.

IN the General Judgment* then every particular Person shall stand or fall by
his own Deeds, he shall be Tried, Condemned or Acquitted, Rewarded or Punished,
according as his Deeds in the Body have been: But then, in the other World, a
People don't appear as a Body, a State or Kingdom, to be Tried and Judged for
what their Behavior has been as such a People; nor indeed is there Room for
such a Trial* the Perpetual Mutation and Succession of Generations forbids it.

SO that since the future World is no proper Time and Place for the Rewarding
or Punishing a People, considered as a Collective Bod^* it remains* that this
Life and World, wherein only they are so, is the only fit Time and Place of
their being Punished for their Evil Deeds and Trespasses. And accordingly this
we find the Method of the Divine Proceedure; if we examine the Sacred History
both of the Old Testament, and the New.

FROM all which it appears plain that God does, and will Punish the Evil Deeds
of His People, by Judgments upon them in this Life and World: for the Covenant
between God and them considers them all as one Body, the Sanctions of that
Covenant are Temporal Inflictions, the Sins of Gods People are displeasing and
deserve Chastisement, and this Life and World seems to be the only suitable
Time and Place for it. I proceed to the Second thing I Proposed, which I shall
but just touch upon: viz.

II. THAT the Judgments GOD inflicts upon His People, Ordinarily rise in
Proportion to the Nature of their Crimes: The Punishments brought upon them are
greater or less, more gentle, or more severe, according to the Degrees of their
Provocations. For God is a Righteous Lord; Psalm. XI.7. And He Rules and Governs
the World according to the strictest Rules of Righteousness, in Conjuction with
His other Perfections.

WITH respect to a particular Person, there is no necessity that the strict
Rules of Justice give Law to the Divine Dispensations here, and that therefore
he should never be Afflicted but Merely upon the account of some Sin or other
deserving it; for God may have Wise and Holy Ends, and Gracious Ones too, why
He deals so or so with a particular Person; and yet Righteousness and Judgment
is the Foundation of His Throne, when His Providence are Dark and Mysterious:
but with respect to a People or Nation, it is more peculiarly an Effect of
Divine Justice that He Punishes them; nor do I know any one Instant in the
whole Bible, where National Judgments were not inflicted purely upon the
account of National Sins. Now the same Justice that leads to the Punishment
Proportions out the several Degrees of it, answerable to the various Degrees of
the Malignancy and Provocation of the Crimes; that lesser Sins shall have a
lesser Punishment, and greater Sins a more grevious one. For it is equally an
Effect of Justice, to Proportion the Degrees of the Punishment to the nature of
the Crime, as to Punish for it at all. Sometimes also the Divine Justice is
seen so to Proportion the Punishment, as that the greatest share of a Public
Calamity shall fall heaviest on those, who have had the chiefest hand in the
Trespass.

IT IS true, the Justice of God does not necessitate, that immediately upon the
Commission of the Sin the People should Suffer the Punishment of it* for God is
their Sovereign, and there is sufficient Room for the Exercise of Mercy,
Patience, and Long-suffering; and therefore the Lord has Proclaimed His Name to
be, The Lord God Gracious, and Merciful slow unto Anger, -- And yet, that He
will by no means clear the Guilty: For though God may forbear to Punish for a
while, and bear a long time with the ill Manners of a People, yet He will take
a time to Visit for their Iniquities* and when He does so, their former
Trangressions* which remain Unpunished, shall come into Remembrance with Him:
Exodus XXXII.34. Nevertheless in the Day when I visit, I will visi^ their Sin
upon them. And when He does thus (...) for Sin, He will Proportion His
Judgments, according to the Demerit of their Sins, as one Sin holds in
Proportion to another.

IF we take a view of the History of the Church of God, we shall see this
Proceedure Plain and Evident: And in such a Method God before hand declares He
will deal with His Covenant People: as may be seen in Levit. XXVI.14. v. and
on. But if ye will not hearken unto me -- I will appoint over you Terror,
Consum^tion and the burning Ague. -- And if ye will not yet for all this
hearken unto Me, -- then I will Punish you Seven times more for your Sins, and
I will break the Pride of your Power, and will make your Heaven as Iron, and
your E^r^h as Brass -- And if you walk contrary unto Me, -- I will bring Seven
times more Plagues upon you according to your Sins. -- And if you will not be
Reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto Me, then will I also walk
contrary unto you, and will Punish you yet Seven times for your Sins; and I
will bring a Sword upon you, that shall Avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. --
And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary to Me* then
I will walk contrary unto you also in Fury; and I, even I will chastise you
Seven times for your Sins. -- And I will Scatter you among the Heathen, -- And
your Land shall be desolate, and your Cities Wast; then shall the Land Enjoy
her Sabbaths, etc. Which last finishing Judgment particularly Points to the
Babylonish Captivity, under which their Land was desolate, and their Cities
waste, for Seventy Years, till the Land had fulfilled it is Sabbaths.

THUS we see a very remarkable Gradation, in the Punishment inflicted,
answerable to the Nature of their Crimes; by lesser Judgments God Chastens them
for their Amendment, but if these will not Reclaim them, the Rod shall be
turned into ^ Sword, and His Anger become heated Indignation; and as their Sins
rise higher, proportionably will the Divine Displeasure increase till His
Jealousy Smoke against them, and His Anger burn like Fire.

I pass, to the Third Head. viz.

III. TO prove, That when a Covenant People Persist in their Evil Deeds and
Trespasses, After former Judgments, and Notwithstanding Merciful Deliverances,
they take the most Ready Way to utter Ruin and Destruction.

THIS will appear from these things:

1. THIS Temper and Frame in a People, Naturally opens the Door to utter Ruin.
For a People to go on in Sin, violating the Covenant of their God, after He has
Punished them therefore, and notwithstanding the Deliverances and Mercies that
have been mixed with Judgment; it argues that they have a fixed Love and
Delight in the Ways of Sin: and when this comes to be the Epidemical reigning
Distemper of a People* that they Love to do Evil, and will not be Reformed* it
naturally sets open a Wide Door to all sorts of Miseries and Desolations. For
if the Laws of God, which are of the strongest Obligation* loose their
Efficacy* and become of no force at all; if they can easily break His Bonds*
and cast His Cords from them* of how little force will Humane Laws be to
restrain them, to cirb their Passions* and subdue their Lusts? These however
well concerted, will be but like Tow and Fla^ with them* which their Mo^ Lusts
will easily snap asunde^ And certainly while there are no sufficient restraints
upon them* to keep them within the Circle of their Duty, they will of
themselves rush into utter Ruin and Destruction.

HENCE GOD says of Ephraim, Hos. IV.17. Ephraim is Joined unto Idols, let him
alone: Which is not barely a giving him up to Sin, as a Punishment for Sin; but
is Designed to show, that thereby he will himself make his Drink to become
Sour; Let him Alone, leave him to his own Counsils, they are so perverse, that
his Ruin will be the Natural fruit of his Doings. As our Savior said of the
Pharisees, Math. XV.14. Let them alone, they are Blind Leaders of the Blind;
and if the Blind lead the Blind, they both shall fall into the ditch.

LOOK among all the Barbarous Nations of the World, and see if their Ignorance
of the true GOD does not involve them in sufficient Misery: Yet wide is the
Difference between them and Gods Covenant People. For as their Guilt is
greater, and so provokes God to deal more severely with them, and Punish them
by Confounding their Counsils, and hiding from them the plain Path; So their
Passions and Lusts, which have heretofore been under some Restraint, now break
forth, like pent Rivers, with greater force and violence, with Impetuous Rage
and Fury, and carry all before them. Now Tyranny, Injustice, and Oppression in
Superiors; Insolence, Murmuring, and Sedition in Inferiors, Wrack their Civil
Constitution, and sap the very foundations of their Government; on the Good
Settlement whereof, very much of the Prosperity and Flourishing of a People
does depend. Besides Fraud and Couzening, Falsehood, Hatred, Malice, and Envy,
and every Evil Work, will now Prevail among Private Persons; who having ^^st
off all restraint, and make a Pish at the Laws of God and Man, each One will
set up for himself, resolving to promote his own Interest, right or wrong; and
will stick at nothing, how base and unjust soever, to accomplish their Designs.
And what a Mortal Consumption must this needs through a State into? So that this
Frame and Temper in a People, naturally runs them into Ruin and Destruction.

2. THIS Persisting in Sin Gives the highest Provocation to God, For,

[1.] BY this means they make a New Addition to their Old Guilt. Though a People
may have had National Judgments inflicted on them, and have been sorely
Punished for their former Transgressions, yet by their Continuance in their
Sins, and their resolved Persisting in their Rebellions against their
Sovereign, their Old Guilt returns upon them; because by their Anew
Transgressing the Law of their God, they Approve and Vindicate all their former
Disobedience; which equally involves them in the Guilt of it, as if it were but
just now committed, and had never been Punished upon them. Hence our Blessed
Savior tells the Jews, Math. XXIII.35. That, upon that Generation should come
all the Righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, from the Blood of Righteous Abel,
to the Blood of Zacharias the Son of Barachias, whom they slew between the
Porch and the Altar. For by their Sinful Deeds, and especially by their Slaying
^he Messiah, they Vindicated the vile Murders that had been committed upon
those of His Prophets, whom their Forefathers had, slain; and so they took
upon themselves the Guilt of it all: and accordingly all that Righteous Blood,
that had been so unjustly shed, fell v^ry heavy upon that Generation, upon them
and their Children, as they Imprecated on themselves.

AND as their Old Guilt thus returns upon a People, by their Persisting in Sin;
so by their continual repeated Acts of Sin, they contract New and Greater
Guilt: As every New Transgression adds to the Pile of their Iniquities, so it
increases their old Debt, and adds to the Weight of their Guilt. And besides,
as the first Act of Rebellion is a Crime, provoking to God, and exposes to
Punishment; so the repetition thereof increases their Guilt, not only as it is a
New Crime, but as it is of a deeper Dye, and of a more heinous Nature; because
it Argues a fixed Malignity against their Sovereign, and a resolution to do all
they can to Affront Him, since they cannot depose Him: So that by this Means
God is more highly Provoked. Hence it is reckoned as an increased Provocation in
the Children of Israel, that to all their other Sins, They added this, to ask
for them a King, ^ Sam. XII.19. And God expresses His Anger, and (...) His Woes
against them that thus go (...) to add Sin to Sin. Isai XXX 1 Woe unto the
Rebellious Children (says the Lord) that take Council, but (...) of Me, that
they may add Sin to Sin. And it is uttered as one of the heaviest Curses upon a
People, Psalm. LXIX.27. Add Iniquity to t^eir In^quity So that by this
Persisting in Sin there is an Addition of New and Greater Guilt, and so
increased Provocation given to God; and certainly this must need^ b^ the ^eady
way to Ruin.

[2.] THE Peculiarly Aggravating Circumstances that Attend a Peoples Persisting
in Sin, renders it more highly Provoking to GOD Here I shall distinctly, though
but briefly, touch upon those Aggravations mentioned in my Text. As,

(1.) THEIR Sin is peculiarly Aggravated* in that they go on and persist in
their Evil Deeds, After all the Judgments GOD has brought upon them therefore.
After all that is come upon us for our Evil Deeds and our Great Trespass --
Should we again break thy Commandments! -- What, after God had so severely
Punished them! -- Had driven them out of their own Land! -- Had laid their
Cities waste, and left their Land Desolate! -- After the Sword had devoured
their flourishing Youth! -- After Seventy Years Ca^tiv^ty and Bondage to the
King of Babylon! -- And when they k^ew too, that this Desolation befell them as
the Punishment of their Sin! -- After all ^his! -- To go on Sinning Still! --
What can be more Provoking to Heaven?

THIS was that A^az's peculiarly Aggravated Guilt, that, in the Time of his
Distress, he Sinned yet m^^e, II. Chron XXVIII.22. And so was it Judah's, Isai.
XLII. ult. Because they have not walked in my Wa^es, (says God) and would not
be Obedient unto my Laws, therefore He has Poured out upon them the Fury of
His Anger, and the Strength of Battle, and it set him on Fire round about, but
^e knew it not; it burned him, but he laid it not to Heart. It did not reclaim
him, but he went on Sinning still: and this Provoked God to bring yet heavier
Judgments upon them. Jer. XLIV.10, 11. They are not humbled even unto this Day;
therefore, (thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel) Behold, I will set
my Face against you for Evil, and will cut off all Judah. He did so, and but a
small remnant Escaped, to return from their Babylonish Captivity to Jerusalem;
and yet; After all this! -- Should we again break thy Commandments! -- What
could they expect should be the fruit of such highhanded Provocation, but their
total Ruin and Destruction.

(2.) THEIR Sin is peculiarly Aggravated, in that Notwithstanding the great
Me^cies and wonderful Deliverances they have Experienced, they still Persist in
their Evil Deeds. Seeing thou, our God, have Punished us less than our
Iniquities do deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as this! -- Should we
again break thy Commandment! -- This must needs be a Mighty Aggravation of
their Crime and Guilt, and highly provoking to God; that God in the midst of
all the Judgments He had brought upon them, had Remembered Mercy for them; He
had not poured out upon them all His Indignation, had not so strictly marked
all their Ways, as to Punish them to the height of what their Iniquities
Deserved; but had showed Compassion to them, and endeavored by lesser
Judgments to Reform them; and now had wrought such a great and surprising
Deliverance for them; had stirred up the Spirit of a Pagan Prince, whose
Vassals and Tributaries they were, of his own accord to Propose their
Deliverance, and encourage them to return to their own Land, and build the
House of their God; and Successively through several Reigns had still preserved
the Hearts of the several Princes in their Interest, notwithstanding the many
Subtle Contrivances, and Powerful Endeavors of the Politic Courtiers and
Great Men of Persia, to frustrate the Good Design; and at last had enlarged the
Heart of Artaxerxes (probably Longimanus) to Contribute so largely toward the
Defraying the Charge of the Work, and had enabled a handful of the Jews to go
through and finish the Work, Maugre all the Opposition they met with from their
Malicious Enemies! -- After all these Mercies! -- So Great and Signal a
Deliverance as this! -- Should we again break Thy Commandments! Would not
Thou be Angry with us, till Thou have consumed us, so that there should be no
Remnant nor Escaping. Verily such their Persisting in Sin would have been the
blackest Ingratitude, and the most Intolerable Abuse of the Divine Goodness,
and Extremely Provoking. And so God resents the vile Ingratitude and Baseness
of those that trample upon His Goodness, and spurn at the Bowels of Mercy, who
are so Disingenious as to Conspire against His Crown and Dignity, at the same
time that He is loading them with His Benefits, that can rise up in Rebellion
against the Breast that gave them Suck. Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth;
for the Lord has Spoken, I have nourished and brought up Children, and they
have Rebelled against me; the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib, but Israel does not know, my People does not consider: Ah, Sinful Nation,
a People laden with Iniquities, a Seed of Evil Doers, Children that are
Corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have Provoked the Holy One of
Israel unto Anger, Isai. I.2, 3, 4. And who cannot see, that such Increased
Guilt, such Aggravated Impiety, such a Contempt of the Divine Arm, and Abuse of
the Goodness of God, which should lead them to Repentance is the most direct
and ready Way to Ruin and Destruction.

TO Proceed,

3. BY this Pe^sisting in Sin a^^er Judgments and M^r^ies, a People Ripen (...)
for Utter Ruin: When God Chastens a People ^y lesser Judgments, His
Corrections are designed to Amend them; By this shall the Iniquity o^ Jacob be
Purged, and t^^s is all the Fruit to take away Sin, Isai. XXVII.9 When He
confers Mercies and Deliverances on them, it is to draw them by the Cords of a
Man, and the Bands of Love, Hos. XI.4.

BUT if they remain Incorrigable; If Judgments will not teach them
Righteousness, nor Mercies lead them to Repentance; If the proper Methods to
work upon their Hopes and Love, their Fear and Aversion prove Ineffectual, and
they can contemn the Rod, and despise the Riches of His Grace, shall not my
Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Says the Lord. GOD is as it were
wearyed with their Iniquities, and with useing Means to reclaim them; why
should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more: by this Means
they fill up the Measure of their Iniquity; and when their Ephah is full, what
can they Expect? but the Tallent of Lead to be let down upon them: since all
the Divine Cultivations have been bestowed upon them in vain, and they remain
barren and unfruitful under all; the next thing is, Cut them down, why Cumber
they the Ground?

THIS was Gods last Resolution concerning Judah, in the Song of the Vineyard,
Isai. V. begin: He had Planted a Vineyard on a fruitful Hill; had Fenced it,
and gathered out the Stones thereof, and Planted it with the choicest Vine,
etc. And what could have been done more, that I have not done in it (says God)
but since after all this pains, it brought forth only wild Grapes; I will take
away the Hedge thereof, and it shall be Eaten up; and break down the Wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste, Unpruned,
Undigged, and it shall be full of Briers and Thorns. And thus we find it, in
that forementioned, Lev. XXVI.14. -- If you will not hearken unto me, I will
do this unto you, -- and if you will not for all this hearken unto me, I will
Punish you yet Seven Times. --. Observe the Gradation in the Judgments
inflicted, and then as the last result of all, if they would still Persist in
their Sins, If ye will walk contrary unto Me, I also will walk contrary unto
you in Fury, and I will Obhor you, and make your Cities waste. By this
obstinate irreclaimable Temper, the Harvast grows Ripe, and it is time for the
Sickle to be thrust in; by this great Wickedness, the Press becomes full, the
Vats overflow, and now the Wine Press of the Wrath of God shall be trodden
down* till they are bruised to Pieces, and made an utter Desolation.

4. WHEN a People resolvedly Persist in Sin, the Honor of God seems to call
for their Utter Ruin. The Honor of God is more peculiarly concerned in a
People that are in Covenant with Him; for the Nations round about them will be
apt to Judge of their God* according to the Behavior of such a People, and His
dealings with them: and as their Obedient Walk manifests their God, to be a God
Glorious in Holiness; and it gives a forcible Invitation to the Heathen World,
to bow down and join in His Praise, when they see how peculiarly favored they
are with Prosperity; so their Disobedience reflects most dishonourably upon
Him, as though He were a God that had Pleasure in Wickedness. If therefore they
will not take Care to give Him the Glory due unto His Name, and make His Praise
to be known, by their Fidelity to His Covenant; it is time for Him to arise,
when Men make void His Law, and vindicate the Glory of His Own Name; by
Punishing their Bold Transgressions with a Rod, and their Iniquities with
Stripes: and if they prove Irreclaimable, and will go on still in their
Rebellions against their Lord, the Honor of His Name seems to Demand, that He
appear a Righteous Judge in the Earth, that all Nations may fear before Him,
and give Praise at the Remembrance of His Holiness.

SO the Honor of the Divine Sovereignty seems to demand, that those Rebels,
that will not by any Means be brought over to their Obedience, should no longer
be born with, but have the Penalties of the Law Executed upon them.

SO the Glory of the Divine Holiness, which now has the last and highest Abuse
and Indignity cast upon it, seems to demand the fullest Evidence of its
Unspotted Purity, and that therefore the highest Testimony should (...) against
such workers of Iniquity.

SO the Glory of the Divine Faithfulness, which stands bound by the Sanctions
of the Divine Law, and the Covenant between God and His People, that if they
will not fear the Glorious and Fearful Name of the LORD their GOD, that their
Plagues shall be Wonderful, calls for the Accomplishment of it.

THUS the Injured Patience, Long-Suffering, and Mercy of God, which has been
abused and trampled on, (...) into Wantonness, and Improved against Him, seems
necessarily to withdraw and bear no longer with such hardened Rebels, but leave
them to their Deserved Punishment.

INFINITE Wisdom, which Concerts the Best Me^thods of Government, for the
Attainment of the true Ends thereof, seems to bespeak it, that such a Nation be
delivered up, and made an Example* that others may hear and fear and do no more
so Wickedly.

AND certainly Divine Justice urges for a speedy Execution of all the Curses
written in the Law* upon those that are resolved not to do the things contained
therein, but will go on in their high-handed Violations of the Divine
Commandment.

SO that the Glory of the Divine Name, the Asserting and Vindicating the Honor
of His Glorious Perfections, all of which have the last Contempt and Indignity
cast upon them* by a Peoples irreclaimable Pursuit of Sin, seem to call upon
God to Arise and Scatter His Enemies* that He no longer keep Silence, least Men
should vainly Imagine Him to be, One Ignorant and Weak like themselves, but
that He set their Sins in Order before them, and reprove them; that they that
Hate Him, and lift up their Heads in Contempt of Him, may be Confounded and
Trouled for ever, that they may be put to Shame and Perish; that Men may know*
that Thou, whose Name Alone is JEHOVAH, are the Most High over all the Earth.
(...) Psalm L.21. And, LXXXIII.1, 2* -- 17, 18*

5. LASTLY; Such a resolute Persisting in Sin, notwithstanding Divine Judgments
and Mercies, has proved the Utter Ruin and Destruction of a Professing People.
I will not attempt, under this head, to present you with the Sorrowful History
of what has befallen any part of the Christian World; who have felt the weight
of the Divine Displeasure for their Stubborn Rebellion: but I shall close this
Proposition, with a short view of the Methods of Gods Proceedings with the
Jewish Nation; in which we have a plain and full Confirmation of what is
Asserted.

THEY were once a People Peculiarly dear to God, among whom only, of all the
Families of the Earth, He had caused His Name to be known, and had Established
them for a People to Himself: And if you take a view of them in their Infant
State, while as yet the Name of Jews was not known among them, from the Days of
their Great Father Abraham, under their Theocratical (...), and under their
Judges, You will find, That when they Rebelled against the Lord, and forsook
His Commandments, God Punished them for their Disobedience: they Repented while
under His Hand, and Reformed for a Time; but soon forgot their God and Savior,
and returned to their former Courses; and were again Punished therefore. The
same you will see, if you consider them under their Kings, after the
Distinction of Jews and Israelites had obtained among them; till their Crimes
grew so Great, and were so frequently repeated, and they become so hardened in
them, that the Lord was Provoked to deliver them into the Hands of the King of
Babylon, and laid them waste for Seventy Years together. And after all this,
that had come upon them for their Evil Deed* and though God had granted them a
Revival, tha^ they returned to their own Land, built their City and Temple, and
Planted Vineyards, and ^at the fruit thereof; yet they soon forgot it all, and
returned to their old Idolatry and Prophanity* grew incorrigible in their
Wickedness; hated and slew the Lords Prophets, and the Son of God Himself; that
Warned and Advised them; (...) Judgments, no Mercies would reclaim them: (...)
then the Lord was Angry with them, till He ^ad Consumed them; till by their own
Feuds, their dreadful Intestine Broyls, and unheard of Cruelties upon one
another, and the Roman Invasion (which brought them into such miserable
Distresses, that the very Relation of them by Josephus is enough to shock the
most resolute Mind, and overwhelm the Heart with fainting in the midst of the
Bowels) had utterly Consumed them, and destroyed them from being a People:
under which fatal Destruction they remain to this very Day.

SO that we see, that such a Professing People as resolve to go on in Sin,
notwithstanding former Judgments, and the Merciful Deliverances God has
favored them with, are in the ready way to Utter Destruction; for this their
Persisting in their Sinful Courses, naturally opens a Door to their Ruin and
Confusion, is highly Provoking to God, ripens them a-pace for Desolating
Judgments, which the Honor of Gods Name now seems to call for, and which has
been the Sad and Lamentable End of such an Incorrigible People.

AND so I have Passed through the Doctrinal handling of my Text; I shall proceed.

IV. TO make some IMPROVEMENT of this Discourse.

I must wave many Inferences which this Subject would afford us, and only
Select a few that seem proper to the Work and Solemnity of this Day.

I. HENCE then; It concerns us to take a View of the Methods of Gods Dealings
with us.

THAT we are a People in Covenant with God is readily Confessed; we have His
Name called upon us, His Statutes and Ordinances, the Laws of the God of Israel
among us; we call our selves His Servants, and openly wear His Mark and Livery.
Now by a View of Gods Dealings with us, we shall be helped to form some
Judgment of our true State and Frame. For if this Life and World be the only
proper Place for a People as such to be Rewarded or Punished, then by the
Tenor of the Divine Dispensations, we may be helped at least to see what Terms
we are in with God. With respect to particular Persons indeed, there is no
Knowing Love or Hatred by all that befalls them: For there is One Event to the
Righteous and the Wicked, Eccl. IX.1, 2. But the Reason is otherwise with
respect to a People, with whom God always proceeds with a strict Adherance to
the Rules of Relative Righteousness; so that they may make some Rational
Conjecture, what Interest they have in His Favor, by a view of the Methods of
Providence toward them. So Moses urges Obedience upon the Children of Israel,
from this Consideration, That their Flourishing would be so conspicuous, that
the Nations round about them would rightly conclude; What Nation is there so
Great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is, in all things
that we ^all upon Him for, Deuteronomy. IV.7. And certainly it is a M^tt^r of very
Considerable Importance, for a People to be well Acquainted with their State,
to know what Interest they have in the Divine Favor; that they may take the
Comfort of it, and Worship before the Lord with the Voice of Joy and Praise, or
be put upon Searching out and Removing the Accursed thing, which Separate,
between them and their God.

NOW I freely confess, I have always thought that if there has been any People
in the Wo^^d* whose History has run Parallel with that of the Ancient
Israelites, it is the People of New England. GOD delivered our Fathers out of
the hands of those who Imposed heavy Yokes and Burdens upon them, Conducted
them through the Paths of the Sea, and brought them into a Strange Land; and though
some Unpromising Accounts and Circumstances, relating to the Land and its
Native Inhabitants brought a Discouragement upon the first Attempts for a
Settlement here, yet our God has given them Possession of this Good Land, as
Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Hon^y* He drove out the Heathen before
them also, though not all at Once, or in one Year, least the Beasts of the Field
should Multiply against them, and the Land become desolate* but by little and
little did He drive them out from before the^, till they were increased to
Inhe^i^ the Land* so did He make room for them (...) up His Tabernacle also
among (...) them: yet did He (...) to be as Thorns in their Sides, and a
Scourge to them and their Children, when they decline from the Path of His
Commandments.

AND since the Settlement has been made, how various have been the Judgments of
God upon us, as upon Israel of Old. What Desolations has the War with the
Salvages, once and again, brought upon several Parts of the Land, though God has
not suffered them wholly to prevail against us? Has not God often sent Blasting
and Mildew, the Locust and the Caterpillar, to devour the Fruit of the Ground,
and eat up all most every Green Tree? Has He not often reduced us to a great
Cry for Bread, that the Poor of the Land especially have sought it, and been
ready to part with their Desirable things for it? Has not He sent Pestilential
Diseases that have Multiplied the Slain among us? So has God been often
Punishing of us.

AND yet He has Punished us far less than our Iniquities do deserve, and has
granted us great Deliverances out of our Afflictions, and from those Evils that
Threatened us; as now at this Day, in Sheathing the Devouring Sword of the
Wilderness; in Delivering this Great Town from the distressing Famine, which we
had so near a Prospect of, by sending in Sufficient Supplies, in the only
Opportunity and Season, the Roughness of the Weather would have allowed for it;
as also in carrying the Town almost through the Dangers of that Common
Distemper which so lately invaded us, and so swiftly and fatally spread among
us.

NOW certainly it is for our Evil Deeds and Great Trespass, that the Lord our
God has been Chastening of us in so many Instances. He would not have blasted
our Hopes, frustrated our Undertakings, and confounded our Best laid Designs;
as when He break to Pieces our Gallant Navy, and Scattered them in His Anger,
and so defeated the Attempt of 1711. He would not have Delivered our Substance
into the Hands of the Spoilers; that when we went out Full, we returned Empty,
and when we looked for much, Lo, He had blown upon it, that it came to little:
He would not have reduced our Ordinary Food to so Scanty an Allowance, and
Greviously Distressed and Impoverished us with the Scarcity and Dearness of the
Necessaries of Life: He would not have sent raging Sickness among us, and given
a Commission to the Destroying Angel to Smite and Cut down so many, as we have
seen in the Latest Months: Our God would not have brought all these Evils upon
us, if He had not a Controversy with us, because of our Great Trespasses
against Him; for He does not willingly Afflict nor Grieve the Children of Men,
but thus Punishes His People for their Iniquities.

II. HENCE; It concerns us to Examine what are those Sins amongst us, which
Provoke the Lord to Anger. If all this is come upon us for our Evil Deeds, it
concerns us to get the Cause Removed, as ever we would have the Effect to
cease: And how shall we get rid of those Malignant Influences, if we remain
Strangers to What and Where they are? Had Ezra continued Ignorant of the
present Crime of the Jews, to which my Text relates, their taking Strange Wives
to themselves, and Joining in Affinity with an Abominable People, he would
never have been able to have taken the proper Methods to Purge away that
Iniquity, and so divert the threatened Ruin. It therefore becomes a People,
laboring under the Afflicting hand of God, to say with Job, Job X.2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me. This is what God calls us to this Day, even
to Search and Try our Ways.

THEN let this whole People Set upon Examining, What are those Evils Prevailing
among us, which enkindle the Divine Displeasure, and pull down His Judgments
upon us. Alas! Alas! Are there not many and great Impieties to be found in our
Land? Is not God Himself too much neglected, our Loyalty to Him forgotten, and
a bare Formality, without the Power of Religion, the Guise of many High
Professors? Is not His most Dreadful and Sacred Name greatly Dishonored and
Blasphemed, by the most Hideous and Execrable Oaths and Cursing? Is not His
Holy Day Profaned? And does not His House too much lie waste, by Multitudes
forgetting the Assembling of themselves together; by a Contempt cast upon the
plain Ordinances and Institution of Christ, to Remember Him in a Serious and
Worthy Approach to His Holy Table? Is not Love and Charity, the Christians
peculiar Badge, grown Cold? Is there no Oppression and Injustice, no Levelling
and Seditious Spirit, crept into the several Orders, wherein we (...) ^elated
to one another? Are there no raging Boisterous and Contentious Passions flaming
among us, and Consuming the Peace and Good Order, even of the Churches
themselves? Are there no Rampant Lust Tyranizing over none of us, and
Intemperately hurrying the Possessed through the Dark and Miry Places that
Pollute and Defile them? Are there no such things as Fraud, Cousen and Deceit,
as Falsehood and Evil Speaking, to be seen or heard of in our Land? Has not the
Spirit of this World gained the Ascendant over the Thoughts and Actions of the
Generality of Men? And, to have done, Is there not an Impious Spirit of
Murmuring and Complaining of Divine Providence, and instead of Thankfully
receiving the many Blessings the Divine Bounty Yearly confers upon us, a
Piteous Lament of the Thinness of them, Murmured out by many, that under the
Covert thereof they may make their Advantage to Oppress their Neighbors? It
were most heartily to be wished, that none of these things were to be found in
the midst of us.

BLESSED be GOD; We have as yet Pious Rulers, and many wholesome Laws; Faithful
Watchmen, and bright Examples too of Virtue and Religion: Yet if such things
as these should grow Common among us, and pass freely without proper Endeavors
to Suppress them, they will certainly be Imputed as the Sins of the People, and
accordingly expose us to the Righteous Judgments of God.

III. HENCE: We may Learn, What we have to Fear, if we will still go on in our
Evil Deeds and Trespasses. GOD has been dealing with us in much Tenderness and
Compassion. We have Sinned, and He has been Angry with us, and Punished us* but
far less than our Iniquities do deserve. He has been Shaking His Rod over us,
to Warn us of our Sin and Danger, has been giving us more Easy and Gentle
Stripes, mixing many Mercies with His Judgments, and trying by the Mildest
Exercise of His Sovereign Authority to Reclaim us, and bring us to a Steady
Obedience. His Patience has been Lengthened out to Long-Suffering, and the
Tenor of His Dispensations has Spoke the Tender and Gracious Language, that
was uttered to Israel and Ephraim: Hos. XI.8. How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How
shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are
kindled together.

BUT if we should be a People bent to back-slinding; If we harden our Hearts,
and go on in our Evil Ways; If we are not afraid of His Tokens, nor tremble
for fear of His Judgments; if we refuse to be drawn by the Cords of Love, and
the Bands of a Man; What can we Expect, but that more Severe and Heavy
Judgments than ever yet we have felt shall over-take us! For thus we are
assured; Isai. IX.13, 14, and 17. The People turns not unto Him that smites
them, neither do they Seek the Lord of Host; therefore the Lord will cut off
from Israel, Head and Tail, Branch and Rush, in one Day; -- for His Anger is
not turned away, but His Hand is stretched out still. After all that is come
upon us for our Evil Deeds, and for our Great Trespass, seeing that Thou, our
God, have Punished us less than our Iniquities Deserve, and have given us such
Deliverance as this; should we again break Thy Commandment -- Would thou not
be Angry with us, till Thou have consumed us, so that there should be no
Remnant nor Escaping.

IV. LASTLY; Hence then, We see the Way to Prevent our Ruin, and Obtain the
Divine Blessing: viz. By a Sincere and Hearty Acknowledgment of our Sins, and
turning therefrom; by a Steady, Constant and Universal Obedience to the
Commandments of our GOD, and the Institutions of JESUS CHRIST; and our Fervent
and Incessant Prayers to Heaven through our Glorious Mediator.

THUS then, Let us Sincerely Confess and Bewayl, and Turn from all our
Transgressions, wherewith we have been Transgressing the Law of our GOD. For
this we are called together this Day, TO MAKE AN HUMBLE PENITENTIAL
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF OUR SINS. Let this then be heartily attended by us, not only
in the Public Services, but in our Private Retirements, Mourning before the
Lord, that we have been a People so void of Understanding, as to Sin against
our GOD, and Provoke His Holy Displeasure; And, ACKNOWLEDGING THE HOLINESS AND
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD in Chastening of us for our Sins, Saying before Him,
Righteous art Thou, O Lord, in all Thy Ways, and Holy in all thy Works. And
then take care to break off from our Sins by Righteousness, and from our
Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor. Thus does Pious Ezra. For our Evil
Deeds and Great Trespass, all this is come upon us; And, v. 15. Behold we are
before thee, in our Trespasses: And, with what Humiliation and Abasement of
Soul, -- O my God, I am Ashamed, and Blush to Lift up my Face to Thee, my God;
v. 6. And then we find him (as in the Tenth Chapter) Putting away the Provoking
Evil, and Separating themselves from their Strange Wives. And if we thus turn
from our Evil Ways, the Lord will Repent of the Evil that He thought to do
unto us. Vid. Jer. XVIII.8.

AGAIN; Let us Evidence the Sincerity of our Repentance by a Steady and
Universal Obedience to all the Divine Commandments. Turn ye unto Me, even unto
Me, says the Lord; If ye be Willing and Obedient ye shall Eat the Good of the
Land, Isai. I.19. Let us then Search and See what is amiss, that we may cease
to do Evil, and learn to do Well. And let every One begin this Work with
himself; for there never will be a General Reformation, but what is founded in
Individuals. Let it not be said of us, No Man Repented, Saying, What have I
done? But let every One consider what are the Personal Evils I have been Guilty
of, that have helped to pull down the Divine Judgments upon the Land. And now
Immediately, Set upon the Practice of all known Duties; Faithfully Performing
all that we stand engaged to in the Covenant of our God; Expressing our
Unfeigned Love to God; and our Neighbor, by an Universal Conformity to all the
Particular Instances of our Duty, to our Creator, and our Fellow Creatures;
which are but so many branches of that Royal Law of Love. Let every One, in his
Station and Capacity, do what he can, for the Suppressing of Vice, and the
Encouragement of Virtue: And at least, by the Powerful Influence of a Good
Example, dash Profaneness and Immorality out of Countenance, and Revive and
Support declining Virtue and Religion; that Pure Religion and Undefiled may yet
appear Shining in its Native Luster among us. O that my People had hearkened
unto Me! (says God, Psalm LXXXI.13, 14, and 16.) and Israel had walked in My
Ways! I should soon have subdued their Enemies; -- He would have fed them also
with the finest of the Wheat; and with Honey out of the Rock should I have
Satisf^ed thee. And, If thou will diligently hearken unto the Voice of thy God,
and wilt do that which is right in His Sight, and will give Ear to His
Commandments, and Keep His Statutes, I will put none of these Diseases upon
thee, -- for I am the Lord that heals thee, Exodus XV.26.

TO draw to a Close; To these let us Ioyn our Earnest Prayers in the Name of
our Blessed Mediator, for the Removal of Divine Judgments, and the Obtaining a
Blessing. This is a Day for us to bow down before the Lord our God, and Implore
His Pardoning Mercy, and to Seek His Favor and Blessing.

MY Text is found in the Prayer of Ezra, under the Apprehension of what God
might inflict upon them for their Sin* And this is the Way God Himself has been
graciously Pleased to direct us; For this, I will be Enq^ired of to do it for
them, Ezekiel. XXXVI.37. And for our Encouragement He has Mercifully assured us,
That He has not said to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye Me in Vain. Let us then be
found Faithful and Hearty in this Duty this Day, with the greatest Earnestness
and Importunity Pouring out our Supplications before the Lord, both in Public
and Private. And let all our Prayers As^end in the Name (...) CHRIST JESUS, our
Blessed Advocate with the Father, who ever Lives to make Intercession for us*
That Perfumed with His Sweet Incense, they may go up with a Pleasant Savor
into the No^^rils of our God, and find Acceptance ^ith Him*

SO let us Earnestly Supplicate at the Throne of Grace, for the Pardon of all
our Many and Great Sins; for the Removal of those Judgments which we feel, and
for the diverting those which we fear; for Suitable and Seasonable Supplies to
the Wants of the Poor and Needy, as well as our Own; that the Angel of DEATH
may not pass in Triumph through our Land; that GOD would be Attoned for our Land,
and Vouchsafe His Merciful Regards to us, for the Sake of His Dear SON, our
Lord and Savior, JESUS CHRIST.

AND let us Remember in this our Day of Supplication, Humbly to ask for the
Guidance and Direction of Infinite Wisdom to our Royal Sovereign, that Her
Majesty's Councils may be as though we had Enquired of the Oracles of our God;
for the Flourishing and Peace of Her Dominions; and for the Prosperity and
Deliverance of the Church of God in the World.

THUS let us Attend the Work of this Day, with all Possible Sincerity, and with
true Devotion of Soul; and who knows but the Lord will Return to us in Mercy,
and not only grant us a little Reviving, but Establish us a Quiet Habitation,
and make us a Praise, and a Joy in the Earth. I will Conclude all with, Jer.
VI.8. Be thou Instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest I
make thee Desolate, a Land not Inhabited.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop in the North Side of
King Street, near the Town House, Boston.
SAcramental Meditations upon diverse Select Places of Scripture. Wherein
Believers are Assisted in Preparing their Hearts, and Exciting their Affections
and Graces, when they draw nigh to God in that most Awful and Solemn Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper.

By (...) Minister of Christ in Devon.

The Sixth Edition Enlarged.

THe Fountain Opened: Or, The Great Gospel Privilege of having Christ Exhibited
to Sinful Men. Wherein also is proved that there shall be a National Calling of
the JEWS, From Zech. XIII.1.

THe Chr^stians Exercise by Satan's Temptations: (...) discover the Methods
which (...) to Tempt the Child^en of GOD, and to direct them how to escape the
Mischief thereof. Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached on that
Subject.

SPiritual Desertions Discovered and Remedied. Being the Substance of diverse
SERMONS Preached for the Help of Dark SOULS laboring under Divine Withdrawings

These Three by the late Reverend (...) Teacher of a Church in Bost^n and Vice
Pr^sident of the College in Cambridge. N. E.

THe Great and Last Day of Judgment: O^, The last Trumpet Sounding, the G^av^s
(...) all the D^^d Ari^ing, to receive their last (...) Jesus Christ, who will
desce^d (...) Matchless Glory, to Reward the (...) the Wicked to all Etern^^y*
In several (...)*

FIve Sermons: viz. The First being the Last Delivered in the Old
Meeting House. The Second at the South Meeting House in Boston, being the First
Lord's Day after the Fire. The Third being on a Fast, Kept by the Old Church:
Occasioned by the Burning of their Meeting House. The Fourth being the First in
the Brick Meeting House, where the former was burnt. The Fifth a Thanksgiving
Sermon for God's Goodness in Providing a New Meeting House for the Old Church.
With a Preface giving some Account of the Fire, October 2. 1711.

CHristian Advice to the Sick and Well. In Answer to these Questions. I. What
should Christians do, when under Bodily Sickness? II. How should Christians in
Health, improve the Sickness of Others; and how should they carry it toward
the Sick? III. How should Christians behave themselves, when Recovered from
Sickness? And, None but the Righteous Saved: A SERMON on I. Cor. VI.9.

Now in the Press:

An Help to get Knowledge: Or, An Assay, familiarly to explain the Assemblies
CATECHISM, to the Capacity of the Weakest Learners; and to prove the Truths
therein contained, by plain Scripture: With a Preface to Quicken to the
Profitable Work of Catechizing. These last Four by Benjamin Wadsworth A. M.
Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston, N. E.

These Four last Books Printed for, and Sold by Nicholas Buttolph at his Shop
in Cornhill, and Benjamin Eliot at his Shop on the North side of King Street,
near the Townhouse, Boston.


