The Lord's Voice, Crying to His People: IN SOME Extraordinary Dispensations
Considered In a SERMON, (...) Preached 27 d. 1 m. 1715. Occasioned By the
Terrible Tragedies of a Man Barbarously Murdering his Wife and her Sister, and
then Burning his House, (...) Together (...) Man (...) Living

By Nathanael Clap, M. A. Preacher (...)

Boston: Printed by B. Green. Sold at the Booksellers Shops. (...).

HEAR the Rod, AND Who has Appointed it.
Micah VI. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the Man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name; Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.
MAY the GOD of all Grace in our Lord Jesus Christ, by His holy Spirit, so
influence our Souls, that by Minding the dispensations of His holy Ordinances,
we may come to understand something of the meaning of the dispensations of His
awful Providence among us. Then will there be some room for us to hope, that
God is making all things to work together for good unto us, among them that
Love God.

It would be inexcusable inadvertency in us, and a dreadful token of lamentable
Stupidity in our Souls, if we should take no Notice of the late Stupendous,
Tremendous dealings of the glorious Lord among us, while the very bars of the
Infernal Pit have seemed, as it were, to shiver and the dreadful Smoke of the
bottomless Lake has begun to break out and ascend before our Eyes: And the
venomous Vipers of Hell have had a Permission to raise up their heads and after
a very uncommon manner, to spit about their Venom upon us, and to show us a
little of their cursed and cruel disposition, by the blood that has been shed,
and the fire that has been kindled in our Neighborhood.

What means the heat of this anger of the Lord our God! The Words of God must
be attended that we may understand the Works of God. We must regard the Works
of the Lord and consider the Operations of His hands, or we shall be destroyed
with yet more terrible destructions. But that we may know what God says by His
Works, we must mind what He speaks by His Words: The holy Bible is written for
the admonition and the information of us upon whom the ends of the World are
come, and we shall do well to give heed unto that sure Word of Prophecy: The
Oracles of God in His Book are to explain the operations of God in the World.
And our considerations upon the Words that have now been read unto us may by
the Divine Blessing, help us to know something of the intention of the Most
High, in the Works that have been lately done among us.

In the beginning of this Sixty Chapter of Micah, the Lord by the Prophet
manageth a Controversy with His People. He enters an Action against them, and
in His declaration charges them with unaccountable unreasonable ingratitude
For, after the Lord had called for Attention, by saying, Hear ye now what the
Lord says, Arise, contend thou before the Mountains, and let the Hills hear
thy voice, Hear ye, O Mountains, the Lords controversy and ye strong
foundations of the Earth: for the Lord has a controversy with his People and
he will plead with Israel. Then He goes on to plead with his People, by saying,
Oh, my People. What have I done unto thee; wherein have I wearied thee? Testify
against me. For I brought thee out of Egypt and redeemed thee out of the house
of Servants, and sent before thee Moses and Aaron, and Miriam Oh! my People
remember now what Ba^ak the King of Moah consulted, and what Balaam the Son of
Beor answered him, from S^ittim unto G^gal, that ye may know the Righteousness
of the Lord. The Lord would have them to consider the tokens of His kindness
toward them from time to time; and in one Place after another, that they might
be ^ffected with His goodness toward them, and be ashamed of their
Unthankfulness toward Him. He enumerates diverse Particularities of his care
about them, for the aggravation of their Wickedness in their unanswerable
returns to him. And He appeals to their own Consciences and makes them Judges
to (...) the case between Him and them. He knew that they could not but
acknowledge his Righteousness, and must condemn themselves for their own
Sinfulness Nevertheless after the declaration of the Lords controversy with
them, and the demonstration, by the clearest and fullest evidences of their
ingratitude to him. The People being thoroughly convinced in their own
consciences, that they were very faulty and that God had just reason to be very
angry at them; They seem to demand what they should do to appease the anger of
God, by saying, Where with shall I come before the Lord and ^ow my self before
the High (...)? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings and ca^^es of a
year old, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams or with ten thousands
of rivers of (...) Shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit
of my ^eay for the Sin of my Soul? Hereby they seem to insinuate that there
will be ^oundance of difficulty in their endeavors to please God and pacify
his Wrath; it would be a difficult thing for them to satisfy his demands to
remove the causes of his controversy with them, so as to obtain reconciliation
with God. But he there upon tells them. The Lord has showed thee, O man, what
is good [or who is the good One: may this intend the Messiah, who is the Good
One: as if the Lord had said I have found a Ransom, I have provided a Redeemer,
who will satisfy my Justice for all that will accept of him for their Savior,
and I have showed him and offered him to you, that through him there may be a
Possibility of Reconciliation Then he goes on, saying] and what does the Lord
require of thee [upon thy accepting the Redeemer, the good One] but to do
justly, to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God The terms of
Reconciliation between God and Man are plain, easy, possible and highly
reasonable. There can be no good objection made against the proposals for
accommodation between their God and their Souls But the Sinful People standing
out against the offer of Mercy, the Lord shows that he designs a Process of
Judgment against them in the Words of our Text.

The Lords voice cries unto the City. The Word of God proclaims Wrath, Anger,
Indignation against all Impenitent Sinners. The Wrath of God is by the Word of
God revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of them
that hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. If Sinners be convinced of their Duty,
but will not do it; or convinced of their Sin, but will not forsake it; the
word of God is against them. The Lords voice then cries against them in his
Word.

The Man of Wisdom shall see thy Name. It will be Wisdom for every one then to
Mind what the Lord says in his Word and to see his Name who cries with his
voice: to Mind who it is that speaks to them. And then there is that call. Hear
ye the rod, and who has appointed it. Something extraordinary is employed, If
the cry in the Word be not regarded, then comes the Rod. And there is a voice
in the rod that should be heard by all, and so heard as to excite all to
consider who sends the rod, and upon what errand the rod is ordered to come.

To Doctrine then, to be now considered by us, must be this.

DOCTRINE. It would be the Prudence of all People, and will be the Practice of
wise People to take such notice of the Extraordinary dispensations of GOD as to
learn the design of GOD in managing of His Controversy with Sinners, by those
Dispensations.
We have several Propositions to be considered under this Doctrine.

I. PROP. The GOD of Heaven does frequently manage a controversy with Sinners
upon Earth for their Misdemeanors before Him. He shows that he is displeased
at them. And he shows them that he has just cause to be so displeased. Their
ways are not pleasing in his sight, and so he walks in ways toward them, that
are not pleasing nor easy to them. So in the Second Verse of this Chapter, it
is said, The Lord has a Controversy with his People and he will plead with
Israel. Then he tells them what he had done for them. And they had not done
before him, as he might justly have expected, and therefore he was offended,
and they should be made sensible of his displeasure. And so it was foretold
unto the People of God, in Levit 26, 27 If you will walk contrary unto me, then
I will walk contrary unto you. The Lord having told them that if they were
willing to obey him, then they should enjoy the blessings of his Covenant. But
if they would not hearken to his voice and obey his Commandments and walk in
his Statutes, then he would be angry against them, and they might expect the
tokens of his anger: Then he shows them that if they would not repent and be
reformed by lesser Judgments, then he would bring up on them greater Judgments
and punish them yet Seven times for their iniquities and yet Seven times more,
and Seven times more, until their Uncircumcised hearts be humbled When he has
begun a controversy with Sinners, he will go on with it until they be reformed
or destroyed.

II. PROP. The Lord is often pleased to bring Judgments upon Sinners for their
Sins, while He is managing his Controversy with then. He has threatened them
with Judgments for their Sins, if they don't turn from their Sins He must bring
the Judgments threatened, that he may appear to be the God of Truth. And he has
done from time to time according to his threatenings, thus in the Thirteenth
verse of this Chapter, He declares, I will make thee sick in smiling thee, in
making thee desolate because of thy Sins. Thus also in Deuteronomy 28 58. Says the
Lord, If thou will not observe to do all the Words of this Law, that thou
may year the glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD. The Lord shall
make thy Plagues wonderful. He told them that if they would be obedient, they
should enjoy abundance of blessings, but if they would be rebellious, then
there should be curses multiplied upon them. Accordingly it came to pass. The
Promises of blessing having been fulfilled, Joshua and Solom^n could bring in
their testimony for that, so far as to their days, [in Josh. 23. 14 1 King. 8
56] The threatenings of curses were also wonderfully accomplished, as both
Jeremiah and Daniel observed, [in Lam. 2. 17. Dan. 9 11.] So the Lord often
brings various Judgments upon Sinners, while he manageth his controversy with
them. They find it a perilous thing to continue in ways of Sin against the
Holy God. But,

III. PROP. GOD in pleased graciously to Warn Sinners, before He brings
Judgments upon them in His managing to His controversy with them. And these
warnings of God are in various ways delivered.

For sometimes the Lord warns by his Word. So the Lords voice Cries unto the
City. People that read the Word of God, may discern a cry in the Word which
they read, like that in Isaiah 3. 10. We to the Wicked, it shall be ill with
him. The Written Word of God plainly cries, Evil pursues Sinners, it cries,
The Soul, that Sins, shall dye, it cries, The wages of Sin is Death, The cry
of the Word is, God will render to every one according to their Works: To them
that are contentious and will not obey the truth, he will render indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every Soul of them. The plain cry of
the Word is, The Wicked shall be turned into Hell and all the Nations that
forget God. God will rain upon Impenitent Sinners, fire and brimstone, a
burning Tempest must be the Portion of their cup. God will find a time to call
to remembrance the Sins of Sinners, and will set their Sins in order before
them for their Eternal confusion. The plain Cry of the word is that in the a
These. 1. ^ -- The Lord Jesus will be revealed from Heaven, with his Mighty
Angels in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. And besides and before
the terrible things, that will come at last upon all finally Impenitent
Sinners, there are awful cries in the Word of God against them, denouncing
terrible things in this Life and World. Would People Read the Word of God, as
they should, they might find the Written Word crying against them for their
multiplied Impieties against and before God.

So People that hear the Word of God, may often perceive a cry, like that in
Ezekiel. 18 30. Repent and turn from all your transgressions, that iniquity may
not be your ruin. A cry, like that in John 3 36. He that believes not the Son
of God, the wrath of God abides on him. A cry, like that in Zeph: 2. 3. Seek
ye the Lord, Seek Righteousness and Meekness, that ye may be hid in the day of
the Lords anger.

The Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, who are to Preach the Word of God,
are commanded, as in Isaiah 58 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like
a Trumpet, show People their transgressions. And as in Ezekiel 33 8. 9. Thou shall
hear the word at my Mouth and warn People from me, when I say unto the wicked,
Thou shall surely dye; and thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way
the wicked shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand. Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn him from it, if
he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have
delivered thy Soul. Thus must the Ministers of God warn Sinners about their
Sins, against their Sins, that they may turn from their Sins. They must cry
with earnestness, with vehemence, with solemnity against the Sins and Vices of
the Times and Places, wherein they live.

Indeed Sinners don't love to have their Sins cried against. And if the
Ministers of God will venture to cry against the Sins of Sinners, then will
Sinners be ready to cry against the Ministers of God. And if the Ministers will
not let Sinners alone to Sin quietly and to live in quiet, while they live in
Sin, they be sure Sinners will not (...) let the Ministers of God alone, to
have any quietness in their Lives o^ any comfort in the World, if they can help
it. Did not Elijah, Elisha, Isaiah, Jeremiah, John the Baptist, and the
Apostles of our Lord find it so. But if Ministers do let Sinners alone to live
in Sin, to Sin as they please, then God will not let Ministers no^ Sinners
alone very long They shall neither of them enjoy any long time of quietness.
For,

So lies the case. If Sinners will Sin against God, and God send his Ministers
among them, He will have them to cry against their Sins. But if the Ministers
of God will not cry against the Sins of Sinners, but will be silent, then will
Sinners be in danger of perishing in their Sins: but negligent Ministers must
answer for the Souls of the perishing Sinners. Their blood will be required at
the hands of those that should have cried and given them warning, that they
might have turned from their Sins: Therefore the Ministers of God must not
dare, for their Lives, to be Silent; They must cry against Sin, if they love
their own Souls. They must be as Trumpets through which the Lords voice cries
unto Sinners. Thus there is the cry of the Word, by which the Lord is pleased
to warn Sinners, that they may turn from Sin, so as to prevent his Judgments
from coming.

But sometimes notwithstanding all the cries of the voice of the Lord by his
Word, Sinners will go on still in their trespasses. But what comes then?

Then,

Sometimes the Lord warns by His Rod And therefore is it said, Hear ye the rod
an^ who has appointed it. If Sinners will not hear the Word of God, then comes
the Rod of God. If the cry of the Word be despised, then the smart of the rod
must be endured. Lesser Judgments come to war^ Sinners of greater Judgments
coming i^ they continue Impenitent, if they are no Reformed by lesser
Judgments. The rod comes to tell that the Sword is coming, in Sinners will not
be persuaded of the rod to forsake their Sins. For when God has begun his
controversy with Sinners, the^ may expect that he will go on, to finish in
Righteousness, if they will not be Reformed they must be ruined. The Lord will
overcome when He judges. Thus we find it with the People of God, of old, it
the forementioned 26th of Leviticus, and 28th of Deuteronomy, and in diverse
other Places of Scripture we find that they were told that if they would not
hear the Words of God, they should feel the rod of God. There should come
lesser Judgments, and if they did not reclaim them, then there should come
greater Judgments. And if they would not be Reformed by the Lord, by these
Judgments, then He would punish them yet Seven times more for their Sins. The
Lord would break the Pride of their Power, and would send the Sword to avenge
the quarrel of his Covenant. So afterward we find, the Lord began with them as
a Moth, by lesser Judgments consuming of them; and then went on as a Lion, by
greater Judgments, devouring of them. So the Lord is pleased to deal with
Sinners. The Word cries unto Sinners. You have Sinned against God, Oh! Turn
from Sin, left God bring his rod. But if the Sinners do not turn from Sin, then
they may justly look for the rod. And when the rod comes, then the rod cries
unto Sinners Oh! The Word of God has been despised therefore is the Rod come
Take heed, lest you despise the rod: For if you don't hear the Rod, the Sword
may come next The cry of a lesser Judgment, is, Oh! Be Reformed by this lest a
greater come. And if there be no Reformation, a greater does come, and if
Sinners continue still incorrigible, it may be still complained according to
Isaiah 9 11. The Lord has brought sad things upon his People, they are
environed with Enemies; they know not which way to turn, they are exceedingly
distressed, yet, For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still: For the People turns not (...) him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. By these things we learn that God is
pleased to give warning to Sinners, before He brings Judgments upon them He
warns by his Word, before he strikes with his Rod. And by lesser Judgments
coming, He warns that greater will come, unless there be amendment by lesser.
So it is commonly with a People externally in Covenant with God. He speaks by
the Word for their Instruction, before he smites with the Rod for their
Correction: or strikes with the Sword for their Destruction. But if they will
not be Reformed by the Word, nor Amended by the Rod, they may fear being ruined
by the Sword.

IV. PROP. It would be the Prudence of all People to take such Notice of the
extraordinary Dispensations of God, as to learn what is the design of God in
his managing of his Controversy with His People by those Dispensations. We are
to remember that the God of Heaven is pleased ordinarily to walk in a way of
Mercy toward Sinners, while they live in this World. The Sinfullest People in
this World enjoy more Mercies than they endure Sorrows while they live here
upon the Earth. And when God begins to bring any Sorts of Judgments upon
Sinners: they are strange, uncouth, unusual, unexpected things; and so may be
styled the extraordinary dispensations of God. He goes out of his common Road,
when he steps into a way of Judgment with Sinners. The judicial dispensations
of God may be called His Strange Works, for at their first coming, they are
frequently surprising and amazing unto Sinners. Though they have been told and
warned about them, yet when they come they seem to wonder at them, as new and
strange things. Indeed when judgments have continued some time and are grown
common, then People grow less and ^ess affected and concerned with them. So
when War, Famine or Pestilence are grown common Evils among a People, then
Sinners frequently grow hardened, unconcerned, unaffected. They make light of
the Evils. But then frequently the Lord is pleased to bring something that is
uncommon. There shall happen some extraordinary things, that shall mightily
astonish People, and put them into great confusion at lest for a while.

And the All wise God has evermor^ some holy design in His extraordinary
dispensations toward Sinners. For He is cause by Counsel, ever acting with
Infinite Wisdom. He does nothing in vain. He does never amuse the World with
any strange thing, without some wise aim. He has some Glorious Intention in
all his extraordinary dispensations about his Creatures. For we are sure from
Ephesians 1. 11. He works all things after the Counsel of his own Will. And
therefore with Infinite Wisdom, consummate Prudence, and exquisite Contrivance.
All his Actions a^ weighed, ordered and contrived with a view at something for
the Advancement of His Own Glory.

And about all the Evils of Trouble that come upon Sinners, all sorts of
Judgment whether they be ordinary or extraordinary Ones, it may be demanded, as
in Amos 3. 6 Shall there be Evil in the City, and the Love has not done it?
[The Lord has a han^ in all the Judgments that come upon Sinners] The Lord will
do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his Servants the Prophets. And
elsewhere it is demanded, Who is b^ that says and it comes to pass, when the
Lo^^ commands it not? The Counsel of the Lord shall stand, the Thoughts of
his Heart to all Generations. Every thing that comes to pass in the World, is
directed by the Infinite Wisdom of God. He knows and sees all, yea He foresees
and orders all. Nothing can come to pass without His permitting Will.

Indeed He does not force the Wills of Sinners, nor compel them to Sin against
himself in breaking of his Laws. There is no such decree or purpose of God as
lays any necessity of compulsion upon the Wills of any of his Creatures, that
may be improved as Instruments in the hand of God, in bringing to pass those
things that may be called the Judgments of God: For God may appoint what shall
be, and may design to direct his Instruments in their Actions, while they act
most Willingly and most Wickedly, without his being the Author of their Sin.
For we are sure that God before knew, for He 'foretold unto Moses, that the
heart of Pharaoh would be hardened so that He would not be willing to let the
Children of Israel go out of his Land. Yet Pharaoh did voluntarily harden his
heart. Neither the Purpose of God to permit Pharaoh to hearden his heart, nor
his Prediction of that purpose unto Moses, had any such Influence upon Pharaoh
to harden his heart, as that he had any reason to complain that he was
necessitated by any coactio^ or compulsion upon his Will by the permission of
God, to harden his own Sins heart; he willingly hardened his heart Yea though
God upholdeth Sinners (...) their Being, and strengthens them (...) their
Acting about those things that and very Sinful, He is not chargeable with their
Sins, while thy do, what they do against his Revealed Will. And the All wise
God knows how to govern the Will of Sinners, in all their Actions for his Own
Glory; and has some glorious Ends all his dispensations about all his
Creatures. Thus it was in a peculiar manner observed about the crucifixion of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Servants of God would acknowledge (in Acts 4 28) The
Sinner in Crucifying our Savior, have do^^ What thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. Him being delivered (...) the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God, they had by wicked Hand crucified and slain. So our
Lord Jesus Christ has told us, about the Providence of our heavenly Father
extending it set unto the very Hairs of our Heads ( (...) 10 29 30) Not a Bird
nor an Hair can fall on the ground without the Providence (...) God Governing
the World. Then God orders all things, directs all with Infinite Wisdom,
designs all for his Own Glory, has glorious designs in all his Works, and
especially in his more extraordinary dispensations about the Children of Men.

But what now follows here upon? Certainly it would be the Prudence of all to
like Notice of the extraordinary dispensations of God so, as to learn what is
the de^g^n of God in those dispensations. For ^is is employed in Hearing the
Rod, and who has appointed it. The Rod of God ^ath a voice; it is their duty
to Hear ^^at voice, and to Hear it so as to Mind it; to Mind it so as to
consider (...) and to consider it so as to understand ^e intention of the
Glorious God in sending his Rod: that by discerning the intention of the Rod,
they may be prepared to answer the intention of God in using His God. This
would be the Prudence of all people, when they behold the extraordinary
dispensations of God in His holy Providence, that they might conform to His
designs. For all People are called upon to ^ear the Rod, and who has appointed
it.

And,

V. PROP. This will be the Practice (...) Wise People: They will take such
Notice (...) the extraordinary dispensations of God, as (...) learn something
of the designs of God in these dispensations, while He is managing of a
Controversy with Sinners. The Man of Wisdom will see the Name of God. He will
not only Hear the voice of God in His Word; but he will endeavor also (...)
Mind the voice of God in His Rod, so a^ to discern something of the intention
o^ the Rod of God, that he may be prepare to comply with the intention of Him
that sends the Rod. They that are furnishes with the best Wisdom. The Fear of
the Lord, and are made Wise unto Salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus; when
the behold any extraordinary dispensations (...) Divine Providence, they will
consider such as these things.

(1) They will consider and acknowledge that there is a Providence of God
managing (...) things. All things are under the direction of the Glorious God.
The People of God will ascribe nothing to blind fate, nor to wild chance,
whatever Philistines may do They that are Israelites indeed will Subscribe unto
the ancient Acknowledgment of the Church of God, in Psalm. 115. 3. Our God is in
the Heavens, he has done what ever the pleased: And in Psalm. 135. 6. What ever
the Lord pleased, he did in Heaven and Earth, in the Seas and in all deep
Places. That is every where. All Creatures, both Inanimate and Animate, both
Irrational and Rational, both Good and Bad, both Men and Angels, are so in the
hand of God, and so under his Command, that they cannot move nor stir without
His Permission. All his Creatures and all their Affairs are ^^der his absolute
Government, so that they can do nothing without his leave, Yea, He has so
determined about all their Actions, that he knows What and When every One of
them shall be; and He designs to Glorify Himself in them all, by them all.
Nothing comes to pass any where in the whole World, but what the Almighty God
has determined to perform or permit. He performs what is Good, He permits what
is Evil, or else it ^ould not be. And as His Kingdom is an everlasting One:
Psalm. 145. 13. Thy Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures
throughout all Generations; Thus it is an Universal Kingdom, Psalm. ^03. 19. The
Lord has prepared his Throne (...) the Heavens, his Kingdom rules over all.
Then all things are under the Government of Divine Providence. The (...) High
does according to his Will, in (...) Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand, or say unto Him, What
do thou He says, My Counsel shall stand, I will do all my Pleasure. This
the People (...) God will consider, and they will acknowledge all things to be
under the inspection of Divine Providence.

And then,

(2) They will consider and acknowledge that the Lord manages all things in His
H^^ Providence with Infinite Wisdom. We m^^ say as in Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord,
How many fold are thy works! in Wisdom have thou (...) them all. The Wisdom of
God appear not only in the works of Creation, and more gloriously in the works
of Redemption, but also in the w^^ks of Providence there is the Infinite Wisdom
of God appearing. We read in Isaiah 18. 29. (...) Lord of Hosts is wonderful in
Counsel and excellent in working. And we read of it purpose of him who works
all thing after the Counsel of His Own Will. (...) having purposed about all
that has, (...) shall come to pass, the purposes of (...) must be framed with
Infinite Wisdom, and He must act wisely in His bringing to (...) all His
Purposes. Both Wisdom and Might ^re His. Nothing can come to pass without the
Divine Will; and the Wisdom of God is continually exercised in his taking ^are
about all his Creatures, and especially about his Children: For if things come
to pass by an Heatheni^h, fatal Necess^^y, then might the blessed God say to
His Children: Such and such Troubles and Sorrows will come upon you, there is
no help for you to avoid them, and therefore you must endure them and improve
them, as well as you can: But our heavenly Father has provided better comfort
for his Children than so; in the advice that our blessed Savior has given to
his People, in Matt. 10. 28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul
and Body in hell. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of them
shall not fall on the ground, without your Father; but the very Hairs of your
head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many
Sparrows. It means, that if God take care of the Birds in the Air and of the
Hairs of our Heads, then be sure he will take care about our Lives and our
Souls, and also about all our Affairs in this World. And then surely he does
wisely in all that he does. And if an heathenish Empero^ would acknowledge
about the King (...) Heaven, as in Dan. 4. 39. All his works (...) Truth and
his ways Judgment; Surely god^ People must acknowledge and consider and
remember he is Wise in Heart as we as Mighty in Strength.

But then.

(3) They will consider and acknowledge that the All-wise God wisely manages
(...) things, in His Providence for His own Glory The Glory of God is the
Ultimate End (...) all the works of God. He has designed his own Glory in all
his Purposes and (...) his Performances. All his determination from Eternity,
and all his dispensatio^ throughout all Time are levelled at the End, The
advancement of his own Glory Thence that Admiration, Romans 11. (...) Oh! the
depth of the riches of the Wisdom (...) Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
(...) Judgments and his Ways past finding (...) for who has known the Mind of
the Lord, who has been his Counselor; for of him a^ through him, and to him
are all things, whom be Glory for ever So the People God consider and
acknowledge that Go^ has designed his Glory in all the work of His holy
Providence.

(4) They will realize unto themselves that the extraordinary Dispensations of
God, are set before them for their consideration, that they may learn something
from them, for His Glory and their Own benefit. For the Children of Wisdom look
upon the God of Heaven as their Father; and they cannot believe that their
All-wise Father would present things before the Eyes of his Children, without
any design of Honor to his Name or advantage to their Souls. They don't
imagine that he only designs to amaze them or amuse them with his
dispensations. But they Believe that ^he would have them to consider of them so
as to glorify Him, and get good for themselves. They reckon themselves called
upon as in Job 37. 14. Stand still and consider the wondrous works of God. They
consider, Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of those
that have pleasure therein. So they think themselves under obligation to take
notice of the works of God. They consider, Psalm. 107. 43. Whosoever is wise will
observe those things. that are done by God in his holy Providence. All the
works of God are to be considered, wise Persons are willing to consider them as
they have leisure, advantage, ability and opportunity. But the more surprising,
and stupendous works of God call for more close attention to see into the
intention of them, and should be mov^ narrowly considered that they may be more
thoroughly understood and usefully improved by those that fear God, so the they
may answer the expectations of God concerning them. The People of God should
bend their Minds to look into his more notable and terrible works.

And therefore,

(5) They must not cease considering the extraordinary dispensations of God
until they have learned something of the^^ own duty, unto which they should be
excited by those dispensations, that they man know how to behave themselves
under All the awful dealings of God. These thing are employed in Hearing the Rod
and wh^ has appointed it: and in seeing the Name of God, when the Lord's voice
cries by extraordinary dispensations: We read (...) Heb. 12. 11. No chastening
seems, for (...) present, joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruits of Righteousness to them that are exercised
thereby When God is by extraordinary dispensations of his Providence chastening
a Sinful People, they should so consider of his dealings with them as to bring
forth fruit of Repentance, and of Righteousness, that may issue in everlasting
Peace to their Souls. And therefore they must consider the works of God so that
they may know what He would have them to do: It was a good resolution of a
Religious Man, Psalm. 85. 8. I Will hear what God the Lord will say, for he will
speak peace unto his (holy) People, but let them not return again to folly, (or
that they may not return again to folly.) This may imply that as we must mind
What God says by his Words, that we may be reduced or preserved from Sin; so
we should mind what God says by his Works that we may be reclaimed or diverted
from Sin; Be sure we should mind what God the Lord says to us, both by his
Words and by his Works, that we may more fully understand what our behavior
ought to be before the Lord. As the goodness of God should lead us to
Repentance, that we may do better than we have done; so by the Chastizements of
God we should be excited unto more Holiness. And be sure the more Awakening
dispensations of the Most High are to be considered and improved for such Ends.
While dreadful Judgments of God are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World
should learn Righteousness. Then would they see the Name of the Lord and hear
his Rod. And they are made no better by the extraordinary dispensations of God
in his Providence, it may be justly complained against them, they do not as
they should, behold the Majesty of the Lord. But that the^ may be no just
reason for any such complaint to be made against us:

The APPLICATION of the thing that have been delivered must now follow in this
Use of Exhortation.

USE.
Let all of us evidence our selves to (...) the Children of Wisdom, in taking
such Notice of the voice of the Lord crying (...) to us in the late
extraordinary dispensations of His holy Providence, that we (...) learn the
design of God in these dispensations, for his Glory and for our O^^ Benefit.

You need not, now, to be told that there have, lately, happened among us,
those things about which we may say, as (...) Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh
trembles for fear thee, O Lord, and I am afraid of thy Righteous Judgments.
The glorious Lord of (...) has been crying with (...) voice to (...) Town. We
should approve our selves the Children of Wisdom, in seeing the Name of God,
and hearing the Voice of his Rod, and who has appointed it, that we may ^now
something of what He would have (...) to do.

May we, in some respects, say the very face of the Earth under our feet, the
floor ^ver the Pit of Hell seems to be so bur^ened with our Sins, that it sinks
and ^racks, and begins to break and split and ^ery dreadfully give way under
the burden? Do the Fiends of darkness begin (...) appear, as it were, above
ground, acting horrible Tragedies among us? What, ^ay we think, would the
Devils do, might ^hey do what they would, and as they would upon the Face of
the Earth? Would they not strike People down with cruel blows and stab them to
Death, and ^ry to burn them in their Blood to Ashes, and make the whole
Inhabited World a ^neer Aceldama, a fi^ld of Blood and of Fire? Have we not
seen some of the horrible ^parks of the S^lphureous Lake rising up and flying
about among us? Don't we profess to believe that the All wise God ^ath
permitted these things in His holy Providence? Can we imagine that these things
have come to pass without the Divine Permission? But if the glorious God has
permitted such things among (...) must we not believe that He has had son Holy
designs therein?

Then should we not endeavor to know what God would have us to learn by (...).
Tremendous, Horrendous dispensations Are we not willing to Hear what the voice
of the Lord cries unto us by His Rod with which He has been scourging of (...)
That we may be assisted about this (...): [and if we are indeed the Children of
Wisdom, we shall be glad of any suitable suggestions for our assistance] Let
(...) following things be, in the fear of Go^ Religiously entertained in our
Serious Considerations.

I. Does not the Lords Voice cry (...) unto us? Oh! Let all People consider
more, than they have done, about the (...) Nature of In-dwelling Corruption,
(...) dreadful venom of Original Sin; the Wonderful violence of the evil that
does easily beset us, if the common restraints (...) God be removed from our
wicked heart. And let us manifest our selves to be the Children of Wisdom, in
duly laying (...) heart the Venomous evil of our Sinful Natures. And why should
not the (...) Rod of God upon us make us more sensible, than ever we have been,
of our dreadful danger of being ruined for ever, by the wickedness of our own
hearts, if the Righteous and Holy GOD should but leave us unto our own cursed
inclinations to comply with the cruel Solicitations of the Adversaries of our
Souls. For, Alas! We do not all of us enough consider this thing: ^on't all of
us enough consider this thing! Alas! where be any of us that duly consider it,
and lay to heart, as we should the wickedness of our own Hearts? Don't ^ost of
us, when we hear of any uncommon ^illany committed by any of our Neighbors,
think within our selves, I hope I ^^all never be so wicked. And are we not
^^clinable to think that we are better Principled than to do such wickedness.
And therefore may the Righteous and Holy, God, now and then, suffer a wicked
Sinner to run furiously and horribly into outrageous wickedness, that we might
more consider the dreadful wickedness of the (...) that dwells in us.

We do know, we may own, that our first Parents were made Holy and Righteous.
They were created in the Image of God. They had no Sin dwelling in them (...)
cleaving to them, as they come out of the hands of their glorious Creator:
(...) when they had hearkened unto the (...) Solicitations of their grand
Adversary, (...) enemy of God and of all goodness, as eaten to the forbidden
fruit of the (...) in the midst of the garden, where the were placed, of the
fruit of which (...) God has forbidden them to eat; the they were deprived of
that Original Righteousness wherein they were created; as in the room of that
Righteousness, the^ had a vicious disposition immediately se^^ing of them and
cleaving to them. The presently became Sinners, hating of the Maker: Their
Souls were filled (...) hatred against the God that brought them out of nothing
into Being.

And about the Farther of all the People that have lived since the Flood, we
rea^ (in Genesis 5. 3.) Adam begat a Son, in own likeness, after his own Image,
and call his name Seth. And all the Children Seth are born Sinners. About them,
well as about the Children of Cain, we read (Gen 6. 5.) Every imagination of
the though^ of his heart was only evil continually. (...) we read (in Genesis 8.
21.) The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. As (...) a Man as
Job demands, Who can bring clean thing out of an unclean? As holy Man as David,
Confesses, In Iniquity was I s^apen, and conceived in Sin. Solomon acknowledges
before God, Every man has the plague in his own Heart. He also demands, Who
can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Isaiah
acknowledges, We are all as an unclean thing. Jeremiah declares, The Heart is
deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. Our Savior says, Out of the
Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries and other vile Things. What!
Do we need any more Testimonies? All the Saints of God must ^nite and agree in
that Acknowledgment (...) Ephesians. 2 3. We are all by nature Children of Wrath. All
of us are Born into the World, with Hearts full of Sin, with Corrupt Natures
empty of Grace, ready to Sin, ready only to Sin, always ready to Sin. About all
Wicked Sinners we find in Psalm. 58. 3. They go astray as soon as they are born,
speaking lies. And who are not such Wicked Sinners by Nature? We find in Psalm.
14. 2. The Lord looked down from Heaven, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek God. (But how did things appear? If follows.) They are all
gone aside, they are together become filthy, there is none that does good, no
not one. The same things are told over unto us in Psalm. 53. People are too
unwilling (...) believe so sad a Truth as this, that the have such Corrupt
Natures. Be sure Unconverted Sinners don't love to consider it. And may not the
best of the Saint of God, by their own lamentable experience, find in their own
Souls, too much of Inclination to forget the Wickedness o^ their own hearts,
upon many sorrows Occasions? Therefore the Lord sees (...) often to inculcate
the consideration of the Truth in, Romans 3 9. All are under (...) There is none
Righteous, no not one, (...) the World is become Guilty before Go^ all have
Sinned and come short of the Glory of God. And in Romans 5. 12. By (...) man Sin
entered into the World and Death Sin, so Death has passed upon all, for (...)
(in him,) all have Sinned. But alas, (...) considers it, how few duly consider
(...) corruption of their Natures, and their clinableness to Sin against God.
It should be more considered. Now does not (...) Lord by His Voice, in what He
has late done among us, call upon us all to (...) this matter more into our
serious consideration, than we have commonly done Oh! think more sadly about
the sinfulness of Indwelling Sin. But,

II. Does not the Lords Voice cry this unto us? Oh! Let all People be more
Thankful unto God, than ever they have been, for the common Restraints, whereby
God has preserved People from that Outrageous Wickedness and Horrendous Misery,
that their Indwelling Corruption would carry and hurry them into, if they were
not so Restrained by God: and remember Christ Purchasing this good. And let us
all manifest our selves the Children of Wisdom in giving Thanks to the Glorious
God for His common Restraints upon Sinners, and consider, if this may not be
one Voice of the Rod of God lately scourging of us. Oh! be more thankful to God
for common Restraints from ^in and from Woe.

Are any People Restrained by a Principle of Grace within them? Has God put
this fear so into their Hearts, that they dare not do Wickedly, but say, upon
any Solicitation to Sin, as he in Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do this wickedness
and sin against God? Certainly, those Gracious Persons, those Fearers of God
will be Thankful to God, every day, for His Grace to their Souls, and for his
Preservations of their Souls from Sinning against Him: and they will own Christ
procuring this good. If People think that they have Saving Grace in their
Souls, but are no Thankful to God for being preserved from Sin; they have just
reason to fear, that they have hitherto deceived their own Souls. If you are
holy Persons, you will be Thankful to God, in Christ, for His Grace, and will
own as in 1 Cor. 15. 10 By the Grace of God, I am what I am. (...) in Gal. 2.
20. I live, yet not I, but (...) lives in me, and the life that I live in
(...) Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of (...) who has loved me, and
given Himself for (...) This will be the disposition of truly Gracious Persons.
But if People have been Restrained from Sin, chiefly, by the Convictions of
their Consciences, Oh! (...) them be Thankful to God for those Convictions.
Bless the Lord for enkindling those Convictions in your Souls, and (...)
keeping them alive. And while you have been preserved from great Wickedness
Remember, God may say unto you, as (...) him in Genesis 20 6. I withhold thee from
Sinning against me. Oh! What Sins an^ Woes would Unconverted Sinners quickly
rush into, if they were not withheld (...) the Glorious God. If the Martyr (
Bra^ford) might say, there is that Wickedness in my heart, that would make me
do as Wickedly as the Wickedest of Sinners, if God should leave me to my self.
And if the Father ( Bernard) might say to any, that told him of any fault of
another, Ay, he is fallen, I shall fall next, and then you may fall; if the
Lord do not uphold us. And if the Man after Gods own Heart saw cause to Pray,
as in Psalm. 19 13. Keep back thy Servant, O Lord, from Presumptuous Sins. Then
what Sins would Ungodly People fall into, if left unto themselves? And then
what reason have all to be Thankful for the Restraints of common Grace afforded
unto Sinners.

And if you have been Restrained from Sin, by any sort of Afflictions, Oh! then
acknowledge, It is good to have been Afflicted, that I might be preserved from
Sinning against God. Has God so hedged up your way with Thorns, that you could
not break into the Paths of Ungodliness, without exposing your self to many,
certain, ruining inconveniences? Be thankful for such Restraints of God.

And be Thankful to God for Civil Government, so far upheld in the World, as it
is, that Sinners who have no Grace in their Souls, no fear of God before their
Eyes, no Conviction upon their Consciences, nor be they Bridled nor Fettered
by, any Afflictions: yet are under some set of the Wrath of the Civil
Magistrate, (...) is not to bear the Sword in vain; but should be a Terror to
those Evil Doers, that (...) not be terrifyed from their Villainies (...) any
other means. How many Sinner would be much more Wicked than they are, if they
were not a little awed (...) some good Order, by some fear of the Sword of
Humane Justice, that might read them for some or other of their Wickednesses.
We find it was very bad with Israel, when there was no King in Israel, (...)
every Man did what was right in his o^ Eves; and very sad with another People
when there was no Magistrate [or Mast of Restraint] that might put People
shame, by restraining them from at Wickedness. Then should we acknowledge the
goodness of God in upholding of Civil Government, so much, in (...) World for
the preventing of the Wickedness of Sinners.

But besides all these things, we m^^^ consider, the immediate care of the
Glorious God, over his Creatures, and m^ give Thanks unto the Lord for that
(...) without which, all (...) means, for (...) preventing of the Wickedness of
Sinner would be unsuccessful. We read in Psalm. 127 1. Except the Lord keeps
the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. So we may say, that except the Lord
exercise an immediate care about his Creatures, all the common means for their
preservation from Sin and Woe, would be insufficient. For we see, we know that
some Sinners may arrive to such degrees of Wicked Madness, that they fear
neither God nor Man; They care not what becomes of themselves, their Souls or
Bodies, for Time or for Eternity. And in their Mad Rage, what Mischief would
they not do, if they were not Restrained by the Almighty Power of God? by His
more immediate Providence? What Raging Fury do some Sinners discover,
sometimes, in their Drunkenness or in their Passion? What Wickedness, would
they not do at such times; did not the All Powerful and All-Merciful God hinder
them, in Compassion to their Neighbors, that would be very Miserable, if the
Wrath of such inconsiderate People were not Restrained by His Power, who alone
can keep the World in any good Order, Then let us be Thankful to God, for His
continual and immediate care about us, that we may walk in the Street, and sit
in the House ordinarily, without a continual and astonishing dread upon our
minds, lest any wicked Sinner near us, might be (...) wicked, as to strike us
with Mortal Blow or stick us with Killing Stabs, unawa^^ unto us. Oh! Give
Thanks to the Lord for his continual and hitherto-continued Preservations.

But we have not well done with the Article of Thankfulness, until we have
Thankfully considered, unto whom (...) are obliged for the purchasing of all
the Preservations. They are all from the (...) Grace of God, and they all come
to most freely, without any desert in us. (...) deserve none of those
Preservations, (...) we, every day, experience. But yet the are purchased by
One, that has paid (...) for them. Our Lord Jesus Christ has been exposed unto
innumerable Woes an^ Sorrows and Miseries, and has been mad^ a Sin-Offering,
that we might be preserve from common Mischiefs, in this Wor^ as well as from
Eternal Misery. And we may readily acknowledge, that Jesus Christ, who is is
the Living God, is the Saving of all Men. [All People in the World generally,
enjoy abundance of Tempor^^ Salvations, by the Mediation of our Lord Jesus
Christ] Though we must ever mo^^ firmly believe, that He is the Savior,
specially, of them, that believe in Him. The (...) saved, with Eternal
Salvation, while others do experience multitudes of Temporal Salvations, by
common Preservations while they live in this World, by means of the Lord Jesus
Christ. And therefore should we be Thankful to God, in our Lord Jesus Christ,
for common Preservations, while we are living in this present evil World. All
People have cause to Thank God for Christ. Now may not we hear his Voice of the
Lord Crying unto us, Oh! (...) very Thankful to God, in Jesus Christ, (...)
that you are yet alive. And

III. Does not the Lords Voice Cry (...) unto us? Oh! Let all People be more
concerned, than ever they have yet been, make sure, about saving Conversion,
that (...) are turned from Sin to God, in Jesus Christ, that the Body of Sin
may be conquered and subdued. And therefore be advised to repair to and rely on
the once ^^ucifyed, but now Glorified Redeemer, (...) His Life and His Death
may bring Life into your Souls, and may bring Death into your Sins; that by
virtue of a real ^ion with Him, your Souls may, by (...) Grace and Power of His
Holy Spirit, (...) preserved from the power of Indwelling Corruption. Let us
all now manifest our selves the Children of Wisdom in see (...) the Name of God
so as to comply wi^^ this Voice of His Rod. Oh! No long delay the Work of
serious Conversion (...) God in Jesus Christ. But now turn from all Sin to God,
in Christ; now get a principle of Grace in your Souls; now get your Souls
possessed with the Holy Spirit (...) God; now Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ
that you may have Life Everlasting (...) in your Souls; and therefore now Cry
(...) the God of all Grace, for His Grace, (...) you may Believe in Christ; now
try (...) commit your perishing Souls into (...) Hands of a Merciful Savior;
now co^ply with the first and the least Motion of the Holy Spirit of God,
exciting (...) to Believe in Christ; and fear to contin^^ one day longer, under
the power of (...) a pernicious Principle of Indwelling Corruption. But

Then, if you hope that there is a (...) of Grace, begun in your Souls, and
that yo^ Souls begin to Live, and the Body of (...) in your Souls, has
received it is Death wound, be not satisfied with hopes, (...) you are got into
a good state, a state Grace; but Pray daily for more strength and for new
supplies of Grace from (...) Lord Jesus Christ, that you may be (...) served
from all the energy of Indwelling Corruption, that no Iniquity may have
Dominion over you, that the remainders of Sin within you, may not be too hard
for you; For there is need of the same powerful Grace, to keep a Soul from
going in the way of Sin, that is needful to (...) a Soul out of a state of Sin.
The ^est of Saints have so much of Sin, still abiding in them, as long as they
abide in ^^s World, that they have need of daily, and hourly, continual,
assisting Grace for their preservation from falling into Sin, as well as they
had need of the Grace of God (...) turn them from a course of Sin. Though (...)
be very common for not only Sinners, (...) fear they are not Converted, to
think; Oh! If they were once brought into a (...) of Grace and furnished with a
principle of saving Grace in their Souls, then they should be able to keep from
Sin; ^ut even real Saints are too often ready to imagine, that they shall be
able, by the strength of Grace received, to overcome (...) Temptations, with
which they may be Assaulted. But they should remember, how it was with the
Fallen Angels and with our First Parents, before they Sinned. And remember,
that some of the best of Saints, that ever lived, in the World, failed, when
they were tried, in some of the graces, wherein lay their peculiar excellency;
as Abraham in his Faith, Job in his (...), David in his Tenderness of Heart,
(...) in his Courage for his Master. (...) found that they could stand no long
than while they were upheld by the (...) Power of God. They needed the (...) of
God with them, to keep alive the (...) of God in them. How did Joseph con^^
greater Temptations, than those (...) with David was conquered? Sovereign
Grace, coming with seasonable assistance made the difference. Therefore as
(...) have heard, the experienced Saint of (...) Prays, Lord, keep back thy
Servant (...) Presumptuous sins; and in Psalm. 119. Let not any iniquity have
dominion ever And the Apostle complains, While I (...) do good, Evil is present
with me. The^ there need for the strongest of Christi^^ while in this World, to
Pray for (...) strength, for new Grace from Christ, of whom, they can do
nothing (as (...) 15 5) that they may be able to say Phil. 4. 13. I can do all
things (...) Christ, who strentheneth me.

IV. Does not the Lords Voice (...) this unto us, Oh! Let all People (...) more
carefully than ever they have done, avoid all those things, that would hinder
those Duties of Secret, Private and Public Religion, wherein they might have
Communion with God so as to maintain their Victory over Indwelling Corruption.
For (...) you neglect Secret Duties, no wonder if (...) as grow secretly, and
get strength insensibly. Therefore shun Sloth, Idleness, Indifferency about the
Secret Duties of Region. If you are grown slack to or cold (...) the Duties of
the Closet, there is need (...) beware. And if you neglect Private duties, no
wonder if sin break out into ^^en view, and cause much trouble. Therefore
should, Husbands and Wives, carefully shun all sinful strife and contention,
^ost lovingly agree about every thing, that their Prayers may not be hindered.
And (...) you neglect Public Duties, wonder not (...) sin prevail more and
more! Therefore (...) all Pride and Self-conceitedness. Don't ^^ink that
because you know so much, Therefore there is no need of your attending (...)
Public Worship of God: For that is (...) be attended, not only, to increase
Knowledge, but also to excite Practice. And (...) the Glory of God as well as
for your (...) benefit, and the benefit of others(...) you have, all, need to
attend at the means of Grace, that you can attend, that you may improve all the
helps for good that you can improve, as long as you liv^ in this World:
Therefore dread forsaking the Assembling of your selves together to the Service
of God. For if you leave God God may leave you: But then who will take you?
What will become of you? What Wickedness and Misery may yo^ quickly fall into?
And take heed (...) Stifling the Convictions of Conscience as so grieving the
holy Spirit of God Grieve Him not by Sinful delays abo^^ doing good: For if
you grieve the holy Spirit, he may go from you. And if (...) goes, who will
come? The evil Spirit may come and Possess you. But woe un^^ you, if you are
Possessed by Satan.

V. Does not the Lords Voice cry thi^ unto us. Oh! Let all People be mo^^
careful, than ever they have been, to shut all the Paths of the Destroyer of
Souls, that he may never meet them, in any of hi^ Paths. All Sin gives the
Devil an advantage against our Souls. But some Sins, (...) more Peculiarly,
furnish him with adva^^ages to do mischief unto us: Drunkenness Uncleanness,
Idleness, Unlawful Gaming Vain Company Keeping, Blaspheming (...) Name of the
Lord, Profaning his Day or his House: And consulting Books, that pretend to
help to the Knowledge of any forbidden curiosities about secret or future
things. Books of Palmstry, or Chiromancy, Judicial Astrology or Fortune
telling, turning, what they call, the Wheel of Fortune; or when People go to
those, whom they call Cunning Persons, (...) find their lost or stolen Goods,
or to know ^ow they shall be Related or Circumstanced in the World. And when
they (...) silly Notions about such and such things being Signs of Good or Evil
to themselves or others; and when they think some days to be Lucky or Unlucky
for ^his or that business. And when they Place a great dependence on foolish
Dreams. Too many Sinners, by these things and the like, do (as one says) play
upon the hole of the Asp. And the Fiends of darkness ^ake, hold of them sooner,
and oftener than they are aware. Let not the enemy of our Souls ever find any
of us in any of these Paths of his; but constantly remember the advice, in 1
Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be watchful, for your Adversary the Devil goes about like
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. But if in this Walks, he find any
of us nibling at any of the baits, that he has laid; or playing among his Nets
(...) Snares, no wonder if he lay such hold (...) us, as will issue in our
lasting Ruin^^ Remember you have been warned, not (...) to resist the Devil,
that he may flee from you, but also, to keep out of all his ways And therefore
consider,

IV. Does not the Lord cry this (...) us. Oh! Let all People, more than (...)
they have done, beware of all back sliding from good beginnings. For they that
begin to backslide from good, are going (...) one of the ways of the Devil;
who (...) begun to do well, to Praise God; once (...) the Sons of God sang
together and should for joy, ( Job. 37. 8.) But he left off doing well: So they
that leave off to do (...) they do like the Devil, they take his (...) and they
give advantage to him against their own Souls. Then if you have (...) to Pray
to God, begun to Read and (...) the Word of God, begun to take heed (...) to
your ways according to Gods (...) begun to order your Steps in his Word begun
to make some Essays about Securing your Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, as
getting assurance of an Union with (...) glorious Redeemer, and begun to be
earnestly concerned about the affairs of you^ Souls, and to work out your
Salvation (...) Fear and Trembling. Oh! Take heed of all declensions from such
good beginnings, for if you begin to decline from what is good, you begin to
incline to what (...) evil: And then will your iniquity get more power over
you, than ever, and then will the Adversaries of your Souls get more Possession
of your Souls than ever: And then will your condition grow more dreadful than
ever: Therefore frequently remember and consider the awful Admonitions that
have been frequently mentioned and repeated unto you, in the Name and ^ear of
the Lord, from, 1 Chronicles. 28^ Psalm. 73. 27. Psalm. 125 4. Prove. 14. 14. (...) 17.
5. Luke 9. 62. Heb. 3. 12. Heb. 10. ^8. 2 Pet 2. 20 -- 22. 1 Job. 2. 19. And
Oh! Take heed of the first and the least Motions to depart from God, or to draw
^ack or decline from the ways of God^iness. For if your Souls do but begin to
decline, there is danger of your declining more and more, unless your do
presently endeavor to recover from those beginnings of declensions from God.
For the Devil may know more about the Motions of ^our Sinful Hearts than you do
imagine. He may have more of an hand, than you are aware, in moving of your
hearts to Sin, (...) turning of them from God and from the, Truths and Ways of
God, and from tho^^ things that concern the Lord Jesus Christ and the good of
your Souls; Therefore Oh! Don't give way to any Sinful Motion to a revolt from
God. The Motions (...) a revolting backsliding Heart are of a dangerous
tendency.

But if you have uttered any expression about your intentions, to leave any of
(...) ways of Religion, than it is high time (...) look about you. The Devil
has gains a dreadful point against you, he has (...) a fearful power over you.
And you (...) Repent of your Sinful intentions, and (...) from your Sinful
expressions, and confess and bewail them before the Lord, (...) before the
World too, as openly as (...) you have discovered them, or you can (...) no
assurance that you are clear from (...) power of Satan. For if he has prevail
so far as to persuade you to engage, (...) your Tongue or Pen, for his
interest, (...) has gained a very dreadful dominion (...) your miserable
Souls: But if you (...) begun openly to decline from God, a^ others have seen
your declensions, yo^ danger grows daily greater and greater And if you have
been advised and (...) to Reform, and yet you continue (...) a stupid frame,
this would be (...) sad Sign upon you. And still more sad will things look upon
you, if you can Mock and Scoff at all admonitions or ex^ortations to turn to
God. And if you have said, that you will never take any Notice of any Reproofs
to reduce and reclaim you from the evils and errors of your ways, it will
appear yet more sad. But, if, instead of recovering from your own Backslidings,
you are endeavoring to en^^ice and seduce others into the ways of Apostasy and
Impiety: and if you begin (...) Persecute and Vilify the holy People of God on
account of their Holiness, and hate them the more, because of their likeness
unto the Holy God; then the Devil has (...) fast hold of your Souls, and there
will quickly be room for little more to be said or you, than The Lord have
Mercy on you. Consider these things ye that forsake the Lord, le^t He quickly
tear you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver you. But we have not yet heard
all the things, that (...) Lords Voice Cries unto us. For

VII. Does not the Lords Voice Cry his unto us? O, Let all People consider,
^ore than ever they have considered, what dreadful thing it is to fall into the
hands (...) Satan! A dreadful thing it is to be under the Power of (...) Devil!
A dread thing it is for Sinners to be led Cap^^^ by the Devil, at his ^ill! A
dreadful (...) for the Devil to have his will (...) Undone, Miserable Sinners!
Have (...) not seen what should make us to this Oh! The dreadfulness of the
Misery (...) those, of whom it may be said, The (...) has the mastery of them.
He does what (...) pleases with them Dreadful the Con^^tion of those that are
so delivered to Satan that he continually Tyrannizes over th^^. The holy
Apostle would say, Heb. 10 It is a fearful thin. [in a peculiar manner for
Backsliders from Christianity!] to (...) into the hands of the Living God. Yet
he^ David would say, (1 Chronicles. 21. 13.) (...) me fall into the hand of the
Lord, (for (...) great are His Mercies,) but let me not (...) into the hand of
Man. He consider the tender Mercies of many Men are c^^elty. But then, what
would he think falling into (...) hands of Satan? Be (...) that is dreadful!
Oh! how dreadful dreadful!

We learn from the Holy Bible that (...) may be angry (...) an whole People,
for (...) Sin: Then he may suffer one Person, (...) occasion that misery, that
shall be a Punishment upon the whole People, for (...) (...). But he may suffer
Satan to stir up (...) Person to that thing that shall occasion Misery to the
whole People. So the Lord ^ay be said to do that, as the Supreme A^^ent which
may be done by Satan, as the instrument. And Satan may be said to do ^^at by
another, which he moves another (...) by his Temptations: According to that we
read, in 2 Samuel 24 1. where we (...) The anger of the Lord was kindled (...)
Israel, and he moved David against (...) to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.
(...) when we read the Story, in 1 Chronicles. (...) 1. We find it thus related; --
Satan (...) up against Israel and provoked David to (...) Israel -- The meaning
is this, the (...) was angry at his People for their Sins, their Unthankfulness
for his Mercy might (...) their Sin] Satan was willing to take (...) of any
occasion to vent his Malice (...) Venom against the People of God, (...) to
show his hatred against the Lord; the Lord gave Satan leave to move David,
(probably by his Courtiers) to Number the People. David numbering the People
without any just occasion or direction (...) God, Sinned against God. The Lord
punished the Sin of David, by destroying several Thousands of his People: And
the Lord punished the Ingratitude of the People for his Mercies, by the
destruction that came upon them. What is now to be (...) is this; The Lord may,
in some respect be said to do that, which may, in another respect, be said to
be done by Satan. (...) Satan may be said to do that, which may move other
Sinners to do. And (...) then? Thus also may Sinners be (...) to fall into
hands of the Lord, and (...) to the hands of Men, at the same in when they may
also be said to fall into hands of Satan.

But now we are to consider, It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of
Satan To be Knocked and Mauled and Bea^ Banged and Stabbed and Chopp'd, and in
Pieces by the cruel strokes of his (...) less hands: Who will not say, It Is
dreadsful? Then, Oh! Take heed of all (...) keep clear from all Sin: make haste
to (...) out of the hands of Satan; make speed (...) get under the Wings of the
Lord Jesus Christ. And commit and resign yourself into his Almighty and
Merciful hands, ve^ture your selves into his Arms; Do (...) NOW, before it be
too late. He is (...) to Save to the Uttermost, all that come God, through him,
and he will, in no (...) cast out any, that come to him. Then pair to him, rely
on him, rest and trust him for all Salvation. Don't abide ^nger under the power
of Satan. Dread (...) a Misery, Be impatient, while so Miserable. God allows
you and requires you (...) be impatient, while under such terrible ^avery. Beg
and Cry and Pray, as for our Lives, that you may experience those blessings, in
Act. 26 18. To have your eyes opened, to be turned from darkness to light from
(...) power of Satan to God, to receive the forgiveness of Sin, with an
inheritance among ^^em, that are Sanctified through faith in Christ.! And Beg
and Cry and Pray unto the God all Grace, that he would glorify his free ^ace
for the sake of Christ, in giving you (...) Faith, whereby you may believe in
(...) Son of God with all your Hearts for (...) Salvation of your Souls. And,

Oh! Let the Little Children here get (...) keep clear from the devourer of
their (...)! Children! If you would get and (...) out of the hands of Satan,
you must (...) sure to hate and ^hun all the ways and ^^^ws of Sin. Don't Speak
bad Words; (...) call Vile Names, don't tell Untruths, (...) rebel against your
Parents, don't ^^^rrel with your Companions, don't Profane the Lords Day, don't
Sinfully spend ^ay your own Young Days in Idleness; (...) honor your Father
and Mother Keep (...) Tongue from Evil. Try to please and help all about you.
Fear God, Le^ his Truths, Mind his Ways, Love and (...) the Lord Jesus Christ
Pray to God as you Heavenly Father, Night and Day, in for Secret Place: And
earnestly desire of (...) to help you to believe in his Son Jesus Christ. Pray
that he would give you S^ving Grace in your Souls, Pray that (...) Holy Spirit
may dwell in you Pray (...) his Holy Angels may defend you (...) that you may
Live in (...) Fear and (...) ^y in his Love, that (...) and (...) you may ^e
the Lords. Then shall destroyer of Souls have to power (...) you.

(...) not the Lords Voice his unto us. Oh Let (...) People. (...) diligently,
prontably and thankfully (...) ever, improve all Opportunities (...) do get
good, with all Relations, because (...) not how speedily. (...) suddenly
Opportunities may expire. They may (...) Oh (...) now short a time. (...) the
call of God, now unto every (...) Ecel. 9 10. Do with my might, (...) that
(...) for (...) not now soon all Seasons for do Good may be ever for ever: nor
(...) ways, God (...) out in end any time, to do good, or to get good with thy
Relations. Then Children, Be thankful to God, that you have your Parents yet
with you. Love them, Honor them, Obey them, carry it Dutifully to them, and
make their Souls glad by your walking in the Ways of God. Walk in the Truth
and Walk after Christ, and Walk in the Way to Heaven, that your Parents may
have Joy in you, while Living and when Dying. And think, some Children among
our Neighbors, had Parents living with (...) this day Se'nnight, but where are
they, ^ow? The Condition of these Children (...) have been yours: Oh! Be
Thankful to God that your Condition is better than theirs, and get good by your
Parents.

And Parents, Be Thankful to God, that ^ou have your Children continued with
(...) while other Parents are Mourning with broken, bleeding Hearts, on account
(...) their Children, whose Blood has been, (...) Inhumanely, shed, within
these few (...) and they may now say of them, They (...) For they are gone Oh!
Pity those (...) Bereaved Parents and Pray for them, that they may experience
the Compassions of Heaven, the Consolations of (...). And Oh! do all the good
you can for the Souls of your Children, while the are continued with you;
Adore, Admit the Distinguishing Mercy of God unto (...) in their being hitherto
preserved and continued with you, that you may still be doin^ good for their
Immortal Souls.

And Husbands and Wives do all (...) good you can for the Souls one of (...)
while you have time to be so doing good. And take heed, lest by Omitts of any
Duty of Religion, the God of Heaven be so provoked, as to leave any of (...)
unto the committing of some Evil or other that may be fatally pernicious unto
yo^^ Souls. Oh! make Conscience of constantly preserving and cherishing (...)
Affection that should, in the fear of God be continually maintained by such
Relatives. Live together, as Heirs together of the Grace of Life.

And Brothers and Sisters Love one another, and be Thankful to God, for
continuing your Opportunities to be helpful (...) the Souls, one of another,
and improved your Opportunities, under the Impress^^ of this Consideration,
that you know (...) how soon they may all come unto (...) final Period.

IX. Does not the Lords Voice Cry this unto us: Oh! Let all Persons be always
ready for Death, for Judgment and for Eternity! And let them all make haste and
make sure about their Preparation for those things; because they know not how
surprizingly the Lord may call them away by Death, to appear before His
Tribunal, (...) receive their Eternally Unchangeable Doom. It was of Old,
advised, Mat. ^4. 44. Be ye ready, for in such an hour, is you think not, the
Son of Man comes. So (...) is very often, The Lord comes and ^alls by Death,
when Persons, least of all think of any such thing. Little or nothing did those
Poor Women, Murdered within these Six Days, think of their own Death being so
near, but a few Minutes before the Mortal strokes were given. So little or
nothing do any of us think about things that may suddenly come upon some or
other of us. There may come sudden, awful things, that are now altogether
unexpected by any of us. Who, among us all, expected this day Se'n night, what
has happened within this Week? Though we had not been without warning (...) look
and fit for awful things. And is there not reason still to fear more awful
things to come, unless means be attended for the preventing of them? Oh! the
they might be prevented! Oh! that tho^ things might be done, that must be do^^
if they are prevented! But what are the things that must be done, that bad
thing may be prevented. Briefly, Three thing must be done, that bad things may
be prevented. If any one of these three thing be neglected, generally, among
us, (...) may justly fear that sadder things (...) come than all those that
have come. Th^^ what are those three things, to be attended? One thing is this;
Let Prayer God be more constantly attended by (...) People, than it has,
generally, been attended. Oh! That all Persons would Pray ways, [in all Times
for Prayer,] with (...) Prayer [all Sorts of Prayer, Public, Private, Secret,
both Ejaculatory and continued on ordinary and extraordinary Occasions] with
Supplications in the Spi^^ watching there-unto with perseverance requesting the
blessings of Heaven (...) themselves and all their Neighbors, as especially
the Saints of God; this wou^^ be a means to preserve the Presence God with us,
and then God would preserve us from evil. Another thing is this Let care of
Truth be, more commonly regarded by all People than it has, generally, been
regarded. Oh! that all Persons would get Truth of Grace in their Hearts, keep
Truth of Speech in their Lips, and mind the Truth of God's Word for the
ordering of their Lives: Then might we hope that the God of Truth would be
graciously present with us, and then what evil could befall us? But there is
another thing that must not be forgotten. That other thing is this; Let Love to
Christ be, universally, entertained in our Souls and evidenced by our Lives.
This would be (...) Token for good unto us. If all Persons among us, would
maintain a due Esteem ^or Christ, in their affections, and express (...) high
value for Christ by their Conversations and would be continually and
solicitously exercised, upon all suitable Occasions, with serious endeavors to
secure their interest in the glorious Redeemer of Souls, and to be promoting
the Glory of the Son of God; then we should have God with us, and he would
effectually drive the Devils, and all Evils away from us. He would soon chain
up those Tigers of Hell, so that they should, no longer, annoy (...), nor do us
any real harm. Oh! that these counsels might be followed! But if Sinners will
still generally, continue as they have been, Prayerless, Deceitful,
Undervaluing the Lord Jesus Christ, neglecting (...) great Salvation, freely
offered in his Gospel; then there will sad things come, sadde^ than all that
have come. God knows wh^^ they will be. However it is good for (...) to make
sure about our own Preparation for Death, for Judgment, for Eternity, seeing
the Lords Voice cries unto us, You know no^ how suddenly your Lives (...) end.

X. Certainly, the Lords Voice cry this, very plainly, very loudly unto (...)
Let unfeigned Repentance, and evidence Repentance be practiced by all People,
(...) so their terrible, eternal perdition may (...) prevented. Oh! let us all
show our selves to be the Children of Wisdom, in hearkening to this cry of the
Voice of the Lord our God, in what he has been lately (...) among us; let all
Repent, that so no^ may perish. This would be to hear (...) Rod, so as it
should be heard, to hear well.

After the Lord had told his People ^old, about several dreadful Judgment
brought upon them, and yet they remain impenitent, He tells them thus; I on
threw some of you, as I over-threw Sodom a G^m^rrha, [burning, fiery Judgments
(...) been brought upon them; for he sayes] and ye were as a Firebrand plucked
out of the burning; yet you have not returned unto me, says the Lord: They
were still incorrigible after all; then he tells them, as in Amos 4 12
Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel! [How is that? As he had threatened
with an Oath, in the second verse. The Lord God has Sworn by his holiness,
that lo, the days shall come upon you, that I will take you away with books,
and your Posterity with fish-books. Both Parents and Children should suffer
grievous Miseries, and be, generally, miserably destroyed. But yet says the
Merciful God] And because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel, How better then with deep Humiliation, sincere and fervent
Supplication, with penitential Confession of their Sins, with bitterness of
Soul, with brokenness of Heart; with Hearts broken for and from sin, so as to
be ready and willing to forsake Sin, putting away all their iniquities, far
from them, relying on the Great Sacrifice for obtaining Pardon of Sin and
Reconciliation with God. Such Preparation to meet the Lord, would well become
us, at this day. There should be Repentance for Sin; this has two things
employed in it, as in Prove. 28. 13. Confessing of Sin with forsaking of Sin. It
is not enough to Confess our Sins, if we are not inclined to forsake them: nor
is it enough to forsake (...) Sins, if we are not disposed to Confe^^ them.
Confessing and Forsaking of si^^ must go together; if Repentance be (...)
feigned, if it be, as it ought to be, from thy Heart. But if it be from the
Heart, it will be in the Life: Unfeigned Repentance will be evident Repentance.
If Repentance be real in the Heart, it will appear in the Life, and it will
continue as long (...) Life continues.

Now such Repentance does the Lo^^ call for from us, with a loud Voice: (...)
loud Voice of the Lord cries to us, Oh Repent of all your Sins, with all (...)
Hearts, that you may be Saved; And (...) unto the Exalted Savior to give such
Repentance and Remission of Sin. Get you Penitent Souls washed from all
wickedness in the blood of the Lamb of God, th^^ you may not perish: And Live
Repenting as long as you live; Then die Repenting when you come to die. Die,
exercises Repentance unto life, unto Salvation, (...) you have been evidencing
a Life of Repentance through the whole course of your life. That our Lord
Redeemer calls (...) such Repentance, you may find before (...) Sermon is
finished, in Luke 13 3 5. Where, after some had told him concerning one
terrible tragedy of several Persons, that were dreadfully butchered, and their
blood mingled with fire, and he had told them concerning another sorrowful
Accident, whereby several Persons were suddenly hurryed out of the World; he
cautions them against the too common evil of Uncharitably censuring those that
had been the greatest Sufferers, as if they had been the greatest Sinners; and
then advises them unto the suitablest improvement of such, terrible, sorrowful
things, to excite their ^nfeigned Repentance, that they might void their
eternal Perdition. Saying to them, Suppose ye, that those, who suffered such
things, were therefore greater Sinners than others, I tell you, no; But except
ye repent, (...) shall all likewise perish.

New-port on Rhode Island.

NEver was this Town put into great Consternation, since I came into (...) than
that which was occasioned by (...) Terrible Tragedies of the Evening (...)
after March 22. 1715.

All the Alarms that have been (...) by the Notices of Enemies upon the (...)
have never so Terrifyed the General of People here.

For on that Evening, a Poor (...) having been for some time Exercised (...)
Grievous Hurries of Mind, after he (...) sat on his House Top some part of Day,
and been in his Chamber much the Afternoon; His Wife and her Sis^^^ upon his
Invitation, going up into (...) Chamber to him, after Sunset; while (...) were
striving to Persuade him to do^^ with them, or to Prevent his Hurting himself,
He Stabbed his Wife in (...) Throat with a Pen knife, and then (...) her and
her Sister down with an (...) Barbarously Murdering them, and miserbly mangling
their Bodies with several Dreadful Strokes, and then stood on Guard, with his
Pen knife, and his in his Hand; Knocked one Man (...) is he was going up
Stairs; Others Endeavoring to Apprehend him, by Breaking up the Floor under
him and Roof over him, and carrying some Fire Flaming before them, to light
their way, He Snatched away the Fire, laid it among, ^ome combustible Matter,
got Ready more, quickly Kindled a great fire in the Chamber, made the Room too
hot for himself, ^prang out at the Window, among the people, that were now
Surrounding his ^ouse. And being Apprehended, was imprisoned: And the Court
Speedily Approaching, He was Tried, found Guilty, condemned, and within a short
Time Ex^cuted, as the World has been already ^^formed.

This Poor Man had, in his Younger ^ime, Enjoyed such a Religious Education,
that his Conversation was, for a while, accounted by some, that knew him
remarkably Religious; before he began (...) leave Religiously inclined Company.

But according to his own Acknowledgments, in the Time, when he seemed to ^^ve
the clearest Apprehensions about ^ings of that Nature, He had grievously ^un'd
against the Light of his own Conscience, in Apostatizing from Godliness: ^or he
owned that he had Forsaken the Lord, Profaned His Holy Sabbath, Neglected His
Public Worship, and Misspent Abundance of Precious Time with Ungodly Company.
And the Lord had justly Forsaken him, and left him so to the Power of Satan, as
to be Guilty of the wickednesses that Brought him to his untimely End.

He said, He would give Thousands of Worlds, if he had them, that what was done
might be Undone, that he might Live to improve the Helps for Good that he had
Sinfully Despised; But he professed, that he Entirely Relied on the Free Grace
of God in the Lord Jesus Christ for all Salvation.

But now he is gone beyond the Reach of all his Neighbors, to make any
Positive-Determination, what Benefit (...) might obtain by the Means of Grace
that he Enjoyed at any Time while he was among the Living: It is the During of
all that are yet among the Living (...) Try to Benefit their own Souls, by wh^^
they are Acquainted with, concerning Him.

So Great was the Consternation upon the Minds of People, thus occasioned, th^^
not only little Children were afraid (...) Lodge, in the Night, in their usual
Place and were willing to have their Beds Removed into Places, where lodged
bigger Persons; but even up-grown Persons were Afraid, in the Day Time, to go
into a Room alone far Distant from the Rest of the Family: Such a Dread was
upon their Spirits.

While the Minds of People were under this Dreadful Consternation, the Sermon
Published here-with, was Preached in a Congregation, where Diverse then seemed
mightily Affected, as if Desirous to Know the meaning of the Voice of God in
His Providence: and to Comply with His Will.

When I understood that many of the Hearers desired the Publication of the
Sermon, as a more Durable Remembrancer of the impressions then made upon their
Souls, than their own Treacherous Memories were like to be; I was not utterly,
Unwilling to Gratify the Desires of them, who Designed not only their own
Benefit, but also the Benefit of Other. In what they Proposed.

If the Blessing of Heaven may so Accompany the Sermon, as to make it, by the
Grace of Christ, Beneficall to the Souls of them that have Desired the
Publication, or any Others of Gods Elect; and if People may be thereby at all
Directed and Assisted and Excited so to Hear and Mind the Lords Voice crying to
them, in the (...) things that Occasioned the Sermon, that Sadder things may be
Prevented; or that they may be suitably Prepared Profitably to Improve all the
sad things that may come, so as to Promote their Everlasting Good, Let the
Sovereign Grace of the Glorious GOD in the Lord JESUS CHRIST be continually
Acknowledged and For ever Glorified.

So Desires,

N. Clap
June 9 th. 1715.
Some of the Last Words OF Several Dying Persons Considered: In a DISCOURSE On
Luke XXIII. 39 -- 43. For the Excitation of Repentance unto Life AND Faith unto
Salvation. Delivered On a very awful Occasion. The Last SERMON That ever was
heard by the Poor Man Condemned to Die, for Murdering his Wife and her Sister,
March 22. 1714, 5.

It was Preached, Afternoon, April 10. 1715.

By Nathanael Clap, M. A.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green. Sold at the Booksellers Shops. 1715.

Some of the Last Words OF Several Dying Persons considered.
LUKE XXIII. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And one of the Malefactors, which were
hanged; railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ; save thy self and us.

But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation?

And we indeed justly; For we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this Man
has done nothing amiss.

And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him; Verily I say unto thee. To day shall thou be with me
in Paradises;


THE design of my Sermon is, to excite Repentance toward God and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Repentance unto Life, and Believing unto the Saving of the Soul, should be
always designed by all that Preach, and by all that hear the Gospel.

In the prosecution of this design, some of the last words of several Dying
Persons are now to be considered.

The last words of Dying Persons have been frequently esteemed considerable.

Of the Persons, that we are now to consider some of the last words; One was a
very bad man, he had lived wickedly and then he dyed woefully; he continued
wicked unto the end of his Life, and was very miserable in his Death, at his
last. Another had been a very bad man too long, but before his Death, he became
a very good Man, he showed and proved, beyond all contradiction, before he
dyed, that he was a very good Man; he had the Approbation, the Attestation of
Truth it self, that he was become really good. So that though some of the
circumstances of his death were very doleful, yet he dyed happily he was
unspeakably happy in his Death at his End. The Other was the very bell Man that
ever lived, that ever dyed; H^ was more than a mere Man, He was God as well as
Man, the Almighty Savior of Men. Therefore his words, be sure, first and last
and all of them are most worthy of our Serious consideration.

Among the Ancient Predictions about our Lord Jesus Christ, registered in the
holy Bible, it was foretold by the Prophetical Evangelist, the Evangelical
Prophet Isaiah, [whose Name signifies, The Salvation of the Lord. And so
clearly does he propose the Methods of Salvation for Sinners, by our anointed
Lord, and so plainly does he describe the Person, who is the Author of eternal
Salvation, that he may well wear that Name, He foretold,] in the conclusion of
the Fifty-third Chapter of his book, That the Lord, our Savior, should be
numbered with Transgressors, while he bare the Sin of Multitudes, and made
Intercession for Transgressors. Now we find that all the Four Evangelists, who
wrote the Life and Death of Jesus Christ, have taken express notice of the
Punctual ^ulfilment of this Remarkable Prediction.

There were two notable Transgressors crucified with our Savior, while he was
hanging on the Cross, bearing the Sins of all Multitudes of his People, making
Intercession for the Transgressors that Crucified him. One Transgressor was
hanging on his Right Hand, another Transgressor was hanging on his Left Hand,
He being placed between them, as if he had been the wickedest of all
Transgressors.

One of those Transgressors continued Impenitent, manifested his impenitence in
the time of his Crucifixion, dyed a miserable Impenitent.'

The other of those Transgressors discovered himself a true Penitent, evidenced
his Repentance in the time of his Crucifixion, dyed a truly repenting Believer.

Whether he was a true Convert before his being guilty of the crime, for which
he was Crucified, or whether he might be Converted after his Apprehension,
before his Condemnation; or after his Condemnation, before his being brought
unto the Place of Execution; or whether he might receive the Principle of
Saving Grace, and might begin the exercise of Repentance, after he was nailed
to, and hanging on the Cross; are all of them things not so easily and
certainly to be determined, as that he was a true Penitent, before he dyed,
whenever he began to Repent. We have as clear evidence that he was a true
Penitent, as we have concerning any Person, that we read of in the whole Book
of God. We are sure and certain that he was a true Penitent. Some of the sure
signs, the certain tokens of his Repentance are to be considered by us, with
some other considerable things, in the Sermon that is now Preaching.

Our Text may be divided, according to the Two Parts of the Speech of the
Penitent Sinner mentioned in the Text. And both Parts of his Speech have
several things in them, well worthy of our Observation.

1. We have the Speech of the Penitent Sinner unto his Impenitent Companion,
with the occasion of that part of his Speech.

The occasion of his Speech to his Companion, was the railing expression of his
Companion against the Lord Jesus Christ. It is said, One of the Malefactors,
which was (...) r^iled at him, saying, If thou be the Christ, save thy self and
us.

If the other Malefactor joined with him, for a while, in reviling of the Lord
Jesus Christ, or doubting whether he were the promised Messiah, yet we are sure
that he Repented of that wickedness, that sinful In belief, or disbelieving or
questioning the. Truth of the Word of God. But there is room for us to suppose
that he did not join with him at all, in his Unbelieving discourse, nor so much
as countenance him (...) all in his railing expression; or at most, not any
more than his Silence from reproving him for a while, might seem, in the
apprehension of some of the Bystanders, to countenance him in his Ungodliness;
however, certain it is, he did sufficiently clear himself, at last, from all
communion with him, in his Impiety. For his Speech to his Companion will be his
own everlasting Vindication. It will be a perpetual Testimony for him, that he
was entirely separated from the Sin of that Sinner, if he had, for any time, at
all partaken with him in his Sin. He showed that he would no longer have any
fellowship with him in his wicked expression, but rather would rebuke him for
the wickedness of his words. When his Companion she was his Impenitence by his
wicked words, he would not suffer those wicked words to (...) unrebuked.

And in his rebuking of his Companion, for his Impenitence, he discovers that
he had himself truly Repented, when he says, (...) not thou fear God, seeing
thou art in the some Condemnation? As if he had said:

If all this great Multitude of People should have so little of the fear of God
in them, as to revile an innocent Person suffering here, yet THOU should
have more of the fear of God in thee, than (...) revile this innocent Person.
If thou have no fear of Man, yet should thou have so much to the fear of
God, as to keep thee from adding Sin to Sin. If (...) have no Love to God, yet
the present Execution of his wrath upon thee, should produce in thee some fear
of God, so as to hinder thee from going on Impenitently in thy wickedness. Yea,
what thou now feel of the terrible impressions of the Justice of God upon
thee, in bearing the Temporal Miseries, to which thou art condemned by Man,
should make thee fear the more terrible impressions of the Divine Justice upon
thee in bearing those Eternal Miseries, to which thou deservest to be condemned
by God, so as to consider how thou may be delivered from his anger for ever.
Thy sufferings now are dreadful, but they will quickly be more dreadful, if
thou do^t not fear God so as to use all Means to escape his everlasting
indignation. So does he advise and reprove his Impenitent Companion.

But here is not all the evidence of his own Repentance, for he does not only
rebuke his Companion for his wickedness, but he also acknowledges the Justice
of their Punishment; They were justly condemned, for they received the due
reward of their deeds. And he justifies the Lord Jesus Christ, acknowledging
that He had done nothing amiss. Nor is this all the evidence of his Repentance,
We have yet farther evidence in the other Part of his Speech, that he truly
Repented. For,

2. We have the Speech of the Penitent Sinner unto his Merciful Redeemer; with
the consequent of that Part of his Speech. He says to Christ, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom. He had acknowledged that our Lord Jesus
Christ was true Man, while he was confessing his innocence. This Man has done
nothing amiss But now he acknowledges that he is true God, while he is desiring
his Mercy: he calls him Lord, Commits and Submits himself of his disposal; he
owns that he into King, that he has a Kingdom, that he was to come into his
Kingdom; that (...) had Power to admit whom he pleased into his Kingdom; that
he could bring the most miserable Sinner into his Kingdom, as easily as think
upon him: and he humbly desires the lowest degree of Mercy, (...) good thought,
that he might be kindly thought upon, that the Merciful Savior would
Mercifully Remember him, when he came into his Kingdom. Thus humbly Prays the
Penitent Sinner.

The gracious and comforting answer (...) our compassionate Redeemer
immediately follows this humble Prayer of the Penitent Sinner. Jesus said unto
him, verily, I say unto thee, To day, thou shall be with me in Paradise. It
means, that immediately after the separation of his Soul from his Body, he
should be lodged in a Place of happiness, in a State of blessedness; and should
certainly be brought unto the possession of what he humbly desired; he should
be remembered by the Lord Jesus Christ, when he came into his Kingdom. The Lord
Jesus Christ would have him assured, that he would not forget him, and fully
satisfied that he would Mercifully Remember him. As if he had said, Poor Soul,
don't fear that I shall forget thee, I Will certainly Remember thee, and thou
shall be sensible of it, this very day, to thy unspeakable Consolation. Oh!
Then let us think well and speak well about our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we find
thus ready and willing, in the time of his own bitter sorrows, to show
compassion to a miserable Sinner. What greater encouragement for Faith in
Christ, Repentance of Sin, Prayer to God, can be desired, than to have the Lord
nigh to us, in all that we call upon him for, and to hear us, and help us, and
bestow upon us all that we can desire, as soon as we desire it; yea, to do for
(...) exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think?

The Day of Judgment will be the most glorious Day of God, that ever has been:
Then will the glorious Perfections of the ever glorious GOD shine forth most
gloriously, before the whole World of Men and Angels, in such a manner, as
never before. But next unto the Day of Judgment wherein our Lord Jesus Christ
will appear upon a glorious Throne, The Day whereon our Lord hanged on the
Cross, may seem the most wonderful Day.

For as at the Day of Judgment, there will be some standing Condemned at One
Hand of the glorious Judge, and some Acquitted on the other Hand; so on the Day
of our Lords Crucifixion, There was one, Impenitent, on one side of Him, and
another Penitent, on the other side of Him.

And as at the Day of Judgment, the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ will appear
glorious in the Salvation of them that are Saved; and his Justice will appear
glorious in the Destruction of them that are Condemned. So in the time of his
Crucifixion, He appeared glorious both in his Righteousness, and in his Mercy;
Righteously suffering one Sinner to continue Impenitent in his wickedness, and
leaving him to Perish in his Impenitence; and mercifully enclining and enabling
another Sinner to Repent of his wickedness, and receiving him into his favor,
and promising to receive him into his Kingdom upon the manifestation of his
Repentance.

But having now considered these things about the Text in general, some of the
particular Doctrines, that ly plainly before us in the Text, may be mentioned
for our Consideration.

DOCT. 1. Persons may be equally favored with External Privileges, for the
Exciting and Assisting of Repentance, and other good things; and yet may be
wonderfully distinguished in respect of their Internal Advantages by those
Privileges.
They that enjoy the same External Means of Grace, may not always receive the
same benefit by those Means. They that are a-like as to their Outward
Enjoyments, may not be a like as to their ^^provements of those Enjoyments.
This is plain from the Instances in our Text; This Two Malefactors on the
Cross, were both of them near unto our Lord Jesus Christ; the dying Savior was
bleeding by their sides, and his blood, for ought appears, offered as freely to
one, as to the other; and both of them saw, and heard, and felt very terrible
things, that should have embittered Sin to their Souls, and made them willing
to have the blood of Christ applied to their Souls, and their Souls cleansed
from Sin with that blood. Yet one remained Impenitent, manifested his
Impenitence, proceeded in Sinning against God. The other appeared Penitent,
manifested his Repentance, gave glorious demonstrations, that he sincerely
Repented of his wickedness, confessed his Sin, acknowledged the Justice of God
in his Punishment, pleaded for the Innocence of the Lord Jesus Christ, believed
in him for Salvation, showed the Truth of his Faith by his humble Prayer to the
Lord, professed Him before all People; there present, had a speedy, gracious
glorious, wonderful and Soul-satisfying answer to his Prayer: A full
demonstration of the (...) and sincerity of his Repentance. Thus (...) these
two distinguished, as to the be^^^ that they obtained by the Means of Grace,
notwithstanding their being so much a like in the External Means that they
enjoyed. And so in other Instances, Persons that are a-like in External
Privileges may be unlike, in respect of Spiritual advantages by those
Privileges.

Thus, near the beginning of the World, Cain and Abel doubtless had the same
Religious Admonitions about the Affairs of their Souls given to them by their
father Ad^^. So Shem and Ham in the Family of Noah; so Isaac and Ishmael in the
Family of Abraham; so Jacob and Esau in the Family of Isaac. And yet they
differed much in respect of the benefit which they received by the means that
they enjoyed. And in aftertimes, did not Peter and Judas enjoy the same
excellent instructions of our Lord Jesus Christ? And were not the same
Exhortations delivered by John the Baptist, and by our Savior in the hearing
of the Pharisees, and of the Sadducees, that were delivered by them, in the
hearing of their other Disciples? And were not the foolish Virgins equally
favored with the wise, in respect of their External Privileges? But how vast
the difference between them, in respect of their advantages by those
Privileges? And is it not so in our days? Don't we see that as the same Sun
that softens the wax, hardens the clay; so the same Word which unto some is the
savor of life unto life, is unto others the savor of death unto death. And
the Seals of the Covenant may be Seals of Salvation to some, and of Damnation
to others And the Providential dispensations of God, both Mercies and Sorrows,
ordinary and extraordinary, may have a very different operation upon the
Subjects of them. Some are bettered and benefitted by what they experience, and
furthered in holiness, and prepared for eternal happiness; while others may be
hardened and confirmed in their wickedness, and ripened for eternal misery, by
what they experience.

This comes to pass by the Sovereign disposal of the All-wise God, who is not
obliged to give an account about any of his Matters, unto any of his Creatures.
He may do what he will with his own; we are all the work of his hands, He has
brought us out of nothing into being, and so may dispose of us for Time and for
Eternity as He pleases. And besides this, we are all Sinners, and by our Sins
we all deserve the Wrath and Curse of God for ever, and he would be just, if he
should leave us all to Perish eternally in our Sins, He might justly with hold
from us oil the Means of Grace, or a blessing from all those Means. It is not
of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy,
that any are saved or advantaged by the Means of Grace. Therefore should not
any trust in the Means of Grace nor bless themselves in their enjoyment of the
Means of Grace, nor imagine that, because they enjoy the Means of Grace,
therefore they are in a happy condition: For Persons may enjoy the Means of
Grace, and yet Perish in their Sin. Salvation cannot be ascertained to all them
that enjoy the Means of Grace. For we see that some who enjoy those Means of
Grace, that as far as we can discern, are exceedingly beneficial to others, yet
perish themselves. The Impenitent Sinner on the Cross perished in his Sin, though
he were near unto that Savior, by whom his Penitent Companion obtained Eternal
Salvation.

Yet we are not excused from serious diligence, in all suitable endeavors, to
get good by all the Means of Grace, though Salvation be not infallibly annexed to
those means. We must be diligent in the improvement of all the Means of Grace,
that we can improve, acknowledging, that if we obtain saving Grace, in the use
of any of the means of Grace, it must be ascribed unto the Free Grace of God,
by whose Grace we are saved, through Faith, and that not of our selves, that is
the Gift God.

Therefore we must not say, that because others have got no good by the Means
of Grace, there is no hope that we shall ever get any good, and so it is in
vain for as to use those Means, But we must in Obedience to God and with
Dependence on Christ, for assistance and acceptance, improve the Means of
Grace, with hopes for benefit, by the Grace of God, whatever has been the
effect thereof unto others, whatever may be the event thereof unto our selves.

Had the Penitent Thief on the Cross been discouraged, by hearing the ungodly
Expressions of his Impenitent Companion, he would have made an ill use of what
he heard. But when he exercised the Grace of God in his rebuking of his
Companion for his Wickedness, and acknowledged the Righteousness, of God and
the Innocence of Christ, and professed his Faith in the Glorious Redeemer,
Prayed to Him for His Mercy, humbly referred himself to His Will; we see that
things then issued well to him.

Indeed, that the Impenitent Thief continued Impenitent, is to be ascribed unto
the Wickedness of his own heart; and that the Penitent Thief discovered his
Repentance, must be ascribed unto the Free Grace of God. There is Wickedness
enough in the Hearts of all Sinners, to keep them for ever in their
Impenitence, if the Grace of God were not bestowed on some to promote their
Repentance. And God (...) under no Obligation to bestow His Grace upon Sinners.
But He will be Gracious, to whom He will be Gracious, and He will have
Compassion, on whom He will have Compassion. But where God intends to bestow
Mercy upon Sinners, He will excite Sinners to improve Means to obtain Mercy: at
least, before He makes them sensible that He has bestowed saving Mercy on them.
If your Salvation be intended, you shall be excited to use the Means of
Salvation. But it will not be enough to enjoy to attend the Means of Salvation;
others may do so and get no good by them, as to their Eternal Benefit. But if
God has designed your Salvation, He will incline you to improve the Means (...)
Salvation diligently, seriously, and to Work out your Salvation with Fear and
Trembling. And He will work in you (...) will and to do according to His good
^easure. And one hopeful Evidence of ^he Gracious Intention of God, about your
salvation, will be your Prayer to Him that His Grace may be so exercised toward
you, and therein glorified.

DOCT II. Impenitent Sinners would be Saved from Eternal Misery, without any
Regard to the Glory of God in their Salvation.
There is in all Rational Creatures a Natural desire of Happiness, or Freedom
from Misery. They would not be Eternally Miserable. The worst of Sinners have
some sort to desire to be Easy and Happy for ever. They think, they pretend,
they would be Saved and go to Heaven. They would not be Damned nor go to Hell.
If they must leave this World; when they leave it, they would not go to a place
of Torment, but to a place of Comfort.

But as for all Impenitent Sinners, while they remain Impenitent, they do not
sincerely desire the Glory of God in their Salvation. The Impenitent Malefactor
on the Cross cried, If thou be the Christ, sa^ thy self and us. He Prayed,
after a manner for Salvation, for himself and his Companion. He desired that
our Lord Jesus Christ would show Himself to be the Promised Messiah, by
delivering Himself (...) of the hands of His Enemies, and from His present
Sufferings, and by appearing for the Salvation of himself and his Companion
(...) present Mise^ (...) regard for the Glory of (...) might be Glorified in
their Salvation.

So it is with all Impenitent Sinners, might they live in Sin for ever, and be
free from Misery: they would have no concernment about being Saved to Glorify
God: they would be contented to live in Sin for ever, to the dishonor of God.
This is the disposition of all Impenitent Sinners Universally.

Indeed some Sinners do, more plainly, discover this disposition, than some
other Sinners. But all Impenitent Sinners have so much of this ungodly
disposition prevailing in them, as long as they are Impenitent, that might they
be Saved and Freed from Eternal Misery, let who will be concerned for the Glory
of God, they take no care about Glorifying God.

Thence it is, partly, that so many Sinners do so Shamefully and Wickedly put
off the Work of their Souls, from time to time, and follow their sinful
courses, until they think they are near Dying, and then they begin to think
something must be done, to get ready for Death, to make their Peace with God,
that He may be willing to take their Souls into Happiness, when they go out of
this Miserable World. They desire that God would take them to Himself, now they
think, they can live no longer. But if God remove the occasion of their present
fear of Dying, and they seem like to live longer; they can presently take to
the same Course of Sin, that they were in before, they go on still in their
Trespasses. They are not concerned For the Glory of God in their Salvation. All
the Salvation that they desire, might be separated from the Glory of God.

And so some, that seem to be Mightily concerned for some of the Means of
Salvation, Ecclesiastical Privileges, the Sealing Ordinances of God, Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord to be Administered to themselves and to others, they
are frequently too little concerned for the Glory of God. If they might be
admitted to Evangelical Privileges, they would be contented to live in their
Sins, to the dishonor of God, and the reproach of Religion. So, it seems, it
was with some of the Hearers of John the Baptist, and therefore he advised them
to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, if they desired to be Baptized now
they were up grown. So they that desire Gospel Privileges, in a Church State
now, must be concerned to prepare for those Privileges, that they may Glorify
God in their enjoyment of them. They must endeavor that there may be, at
least, room to hope that they do sincerely desire to turn from all Sin to God
in Jesus Christ, and to live holily by the Grace of Christ, and to follow and
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, for the Glory of God; before they can be
regularly admitted unto the Table of the Lord, or unto Baptism, if they are
come to years of understanding. I have said, at least, Room to hope thus of
the^.

Indeed, it would be a very awful thing, if any People, Professing the
Christian Religion, should be overwhelmed with such Enthusiastical Prophanity,
as to live contentedly without the Holy Ordinances of God, and without any care
to prepare for those Ordinances, and without any sense of any need of any
Preparation for them, and yet think that things are well enough with their
Souls, though they live in disobedience to the plain, express, positive Commands
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But it would be a no less awful thing, (...) ^y People, pretending to
Christianity should be carried away with such (...) Formality, as to desire
that (...) Ordinances of God should be prostituted (...) to the base Lusts of
Wicked Sinners; and be Administered unto those that are notoriously unprepared
for those Ordinances, and evidently without any care to prepare for the
improvement of them, and would be hardened in their Wickedness and confirmed in
their Impenitence, and have their Damnation dreadfully Sealed upon their Souls,
if they should enjoy them.

Nor would it seem well, if any Persons, manifesting a Zeal for God, should
ignorantly encourage poor Sinners to any such impiety. For how can they think
that the Lord will hold them guiltless?

For we should be concerned for the Glory of God, in all the remarkable
Enterprises of our whole Conversation, but peculiarly in our attending of the
Holy Ordinances of His Instituted Worship. And it is not for the Glory of God,
for us to neglect the Ordinances of God, pretending that we are not fit for
them. Herein we Rebel against God. Nor is it for the Glory of God for us to
abuse the Ordinances of God by Prostituting them to the Lusts of Sinners, in
Administering them to those, that by their clearly (...) to Ordinances; This
would be to Reproach the Lord, who is Glorious in Holiness.

But it will be for the Glory of God, if we mourn for our negligence and
carelessness about our Preparation for the Ordinances of God, and beg Pardon
for all our sinful Omissions, for the sake of Christ, and Pray for Grace that
we may be prepared for the Ordinances of God, according to the Directions of
the Gospel.

And when we are so prepared, it will be for the Glory of God, for us to desire
to have them Administered unto us, according to the Rules of His Word. This
would be for the Glory of God and for the Honor of His People in this World
and for their Welfare for ever.

But if People are not concerned for the Glory of God, in their Salvation, He
will take care for His own Glory, in their confusion. For He has declared in
Lev. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them, that come nigh me, and before all the
People I will be Glorified. Then if God intends our Salvation, He will make us
concerned for His Glory.

DOCT. III. Where there is no evidence of Repentance it may be justly feared
that there is no right fear of God.
If People did rightly Fear God, they would Repent of Sin. So thought the
Peninent Sinner on the Cross, about his impenitent Companion, hearing him utter
his ungodly expressions, that showed that he had no Repentance, he feared that
he was without the Fear of God, and says, Do not thou fear God. The fear of
God will excite Repentance of Sin. So thought the Saint of God, in Psalm. 26 1.
The transgression of the Wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of
God before his Eyes. If Sinners abide in their Transgression without
Repentance, we may justly fear that they do not rightly Fear God. Therefore
should we consider the Glorious Perfections of God, that we may Fear Him and
repent of Sin. For such is the wickedness of our sinful Hearts, that we are not
willing to part with Sin, except we are terrifyed from Sin. Job acknowleges in
Chap. 31. 23. Destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of His
highness I could not endure. Though he were a good Man, yet he found that there
was need for him to be kept in aw, by the Fear of God. Then let us consider the
Righteousness, the Holiness, the Infinite Purity, the Almighty Power and the
Superlative Excellency of God, that we may be excited to Fear Him, as a God
hating all Sin, resolving to Punish all Sin, to destory, Eternally, those that
continue finally Impenitent in Sin. But let us also consider the Grace, the
Mercy, the Compassion, the Loving Kindness of God, that we may Fear the Lord
for His Goodness, and Fear Him, as One ready and willing to show Mercy for the
sake of the Lord Jesus Christ unto Miserable Sinners that Penitently repair to
Him, in the Name of Christ, for His Pardoning Mercy, notwithstanding all their
unworthiness.

DOCT. IV. Penitent Sinners will Desire and Labor that other Sinners may be
brought unto Repentance.
This disposition appears in the Penitent Sinner on the Cross; one of the first
Evidences of His Repentance, was this, he rebuked his Companion for his
wickedness, and labored to excite him to Fear God, and showed him that there
was great reason for Him to Fear God now he was under Condemnation for his
wickedness.

And we read about David in Psalm. 31. 123 He promises that upon Gods restoring
him unto his Favor, after his great Sin, her would endeavor that Sinners
might be Converted unto the Lord.

And we find about the Apostles of our Lord, that were first called by Him,
they Invited others to come and partake with them, in the Benefits of the
Merciful Messiah.

And our Lord gives that Counsel to Peter, When then art Coverted, (that is,
restored from thy Fall) strengthen thy Brethren And he remembered the Counsel
and practiced it, in advising, Pass the time of your Sojourning bo^^ in fear:
he would not have others to be sinfully confident of their own strength, as he
had been of his. But he would have them to fear always, and walk humbly with
God that they might be preserved from Sin.

This will be the disposition of all truly Penitent Sinners; they will
endeavor that others may be brought to share with them, in the benefits of
Repentance.

For as Impenitent Sinners have so much of the Spirit of the Devil within them,
and the Image of Satan upon them, that they desire and labor to hinder other
Sinners from turning from Sin to God, in Jesus Christ, they strive to prejudice
them against the Means of Grace, and would all their (...) with base, mean
thoughts about the Ordinances and the Emba^^^dours of the Lord Jesus Christ,
be^^^e that then they may be kept out of the way of Conversion. So Penitent
Sinners, that have the Spirit of Christ in them, and the Image of God
reinstamped on them, they desire and labor to further others in turning from
Sin to God, in Jesus Christ; they endeavor to awaken them out of their sinful
security, and they strive to promote in them, good and right Opinions about the
Means of Grace, and would have them love the Ordinances of God, and prize the
Ambassadors of Christ, because then they will be in a hopeful way unto
Repentance and Salvation, they will be in the way where the Lord commands His
Blessing, even Life for evermore, to them that walk uprightly in that way
conscientiously improving the means of Grace (...) Obedience to God, with
reliance on Christ for the Influences of the Holy Spirit, to make those means
beneficial for the saving of their Souls.

This may help us to know what sort of People they are that hinder others from
repenting of their Sins. They are Impe^^^ Sinners themselves, or at best, they
(...) much more to be done, than has been done, about their own Repentance! And
this will be found the fault of not only the more Profane Transgressors, who
declare their Sin, like Sodom and hide it not, and labor all they can to make
other People as bad as themselves; and have their various devices to keep their
Foolish Companions fast in the Chains of Death, by holding them in the Cords of
their Wickedness: But this will be found the Crime of too many Formal
Professors, Persons that have only the Form of Godliness themselves, denying
the Power of it, and so labor to make others contented with the Formalities of
Religion, without ever endeavoring to experience the realities of
Christianity. And this likewise will be found the Crime of some indiscreet
Persons, that stifle the Convictions of Sinners, by leading them into some
Company, or some Exercise, that shall so divert their Convictions, that they
shall never be really Converted, they shall never see their need of coming to
the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation. Abundance of Souls are lost, by having
their Convictions diverted without being brought unto the Lord Jesus Christ by
a saving Conversion.

They that, notwithstanding all suitable Cautions, will still go on to hinder
Souls from repairing to the Lord Jesus Christ for deliverance from their
Burdens, will give too much reason to impact that they never yet experienced a
Work of Repentance in their own Souls; but taking up with an imperfect work of
the Law, having some Convictions upon their Souls, that (...) a little Trouble,
and then with an imperfect Work of the Gospel, misapplying some Promises, that
give a little Comfort to their Souls; they never come (...) Christ themselves,
and so are left unto the Tremendous misery of hindering (...) Conversion of
others. Let all of us beware of this Evil and keep clear from ^very such Evil,
that we may not lose our souls.

DOCT. V. It is a great aggravation of their Wickedness, for Wicked People to
continue Impenitent in their Wickedness, without the Fear of God, while they
are under terrible Punishment for their Wickedness.
Therefore says the Penitent Sinner to (...) Impenitent Companion, Do not
thou (...) God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? As if he had said,
whatever others may plead, you are inexcusable, if you remain Impenitent in
your Wickedness, while God is punishing of you for your Wickedness.

To Trespass yet more, in the time of Distress, it is the way to get a Brand
fixed upon the Impenitent Sinner to all Generations. This is that King Abaz!
that trespassed yet more in the time of his Distress. Take notice of him! To
Sin against God is very bad; to continue in Sin, till God calls to turn, is
worse; to proceed in Sin, till God smites with blows for Sin, is yet worse; But
to go on in Sin after many blows have been dispens^^^ ^ill makes the case worse
and worse. This proceeds from a dreadful hardness of Heart. To receive no
Correction; to refuse to be reclaimed, to resolve to continue unreformed,
unamended, incurable under and after all the dreadful strokes of Gods Mighty
Hand, it is to be going apace toward the Condition of the Devils, that never
will Repent.

Let none of us be found among such woeful Sinners. Have we been Chastised for
our Faults? Then let us resolve that we will not offend any more. Beg of God
for the Pardon of Sins past, for me sake of Christ. And beg of God to give His
Grace, for the sake of Christ, that you may give to His Glory for time to come,
and be (...) for His Glory for ever.

Tremble to think of being given over to such a Mischief, such a Misery, such a
Lamentable Calamity as to remain Impenitent under and after Punishment. Dread
the thoughts of coming into so sad a Condition, as that of the Impenitent
Malefactor upon the Cross, to be without the Fear of God, while under
Condemnation.

But what! Are there any Numbers of People in such Danger, that we need to be
so Admonished, thus Cautioned? Yes; there is reason to fear some are in Danger.
Three or Four sorts of People, at least, might be mentioned, that are in
dreadful Danger of being more Miserable than the Impenitent Malefactor on the
Cross, because they are in Danger of Perishing in their Wickedness, after they
have been warned by his Example. Who are they?

1. Unchaste Sinners. They that seem to be given over to the Sins of Unchastity,
and are so far brought under Condemnation, that they have brought shame,
disgrace, and reproach on their Names, dishonorable wounds, mischiefs and
ruins upon their Interests; and yet have so little of the Fear of God in their
Souls, that they venture to go on still in their Wickedness. They cannot find in
their Hearts to leave their Unchastity, nor can they heartily Pray (...) God
for clean Hearts. These are in Danger of Perishing under a terrible
Condemnation, because that such are seldom reclaimed unto Repentance. The Bible
shows about the Sin of Unchastity, that none that go to it, return. So few that
they are almost none, they are next to none. They make no show, they are so
very few that be recovered from the Sin. Oh! that the Sinners that feel their
Consciences now smiting of them, or should feel the lashes of their
Consciences, would beg Earnestly of God, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
for the Purifying Influences of His Holy Spirit, that they might have Grace to
Repent, before it be too late.

2. Drunkards. They that are given over to the Lust of Drunkenness, and are so
far brought under Condemnation for that their Wickedness, that they begin to
feel the Woes, that God has Denounced against Drunkards: Their Names are
Blasted, their Estates are Wasting and Sinking, their Bodies consuming, if they
don't stagger in the Streets, by reason of Strong Drink, but above all their
Souls are dreadfully Destroyed, yea, their Consciences benumbed so, that they
cannot find in their Hearts any the least Inclination to leave off their
Wickedness. They must have their Drams, they will have their Drams they love
their Strong Drink; so that it they loose their Eyes and all that is dear to
them, yet they cannot leave it. Are not these under Condemnation? Don't the
Wrath of GOD Flame upon their Souls? After they are Drunk, before they are
quite Sober, they will say, they will seek it yet again. They Will Profanely say,
they will take another Hair of the same --, though they are Damned for it. Oh! Let
no Person then abide under such Condemnation: But beg for the Holy Spirit of
God, that you may be filled with the Spirit, and then you will mourn bitterly
before the Lord, for all your Excesses in drinking Strong Drink, and you will pray
for Pardon for the sake of Christ, and you will beg that ^ou may be kept out of
the way of Temptation to the like Sin for Time to come and you will watch against
the Occasions of (...).

3. Hypocrites. That have made a Profession of Godliness, but have not been
Sincere in their Profession. They know that they endure Terrible Things, their
Consciences frequently scourging of them Terribly, for their False Dealing with
God. And they find it hard to keep up (...) Show of Religion, because they have
no Root of Grace in their Souls, nor Union with Christ. And yet they cannot find
in their Hearts to beg of God to change their Hearts. They are loath to leave
all their Sins. They have some Sin or other, that they are unwilling to part
with. And though they know themselves to be Hypocrites and so under Condemnation,
yet they will not Repent. Yea, though they find God chasti^ing of them, in
leaving them to sad Falls into great Sins; yet they Repent not of their
Hypocrisy. Let them take heed, lest they come at last into the Condemnation of
the Impenitent Sinners, who having no Fear of God, are led forth with the
Workers of Iniquity. When will they Pray Sincerely and Earnestly for Integrity
and Uprightness?

4. Covetuous Wordlings; who know that their Hearts are set upon the World,
(...) that they love the World more than they love God or their Souls, and find
God crossing them in their Worldly Designs, disappointing and impoverishing
them with one (...) after another. And yet they will not Repent of their
Unrighteousness, and their (...) from God more than is meet while they see it
brings them to Poverty. Let them take heed lest they be found lying under the
Condemnation of Sinners without the Fear of God. And let them remember, that
the Covetuous are Abhorred of the Lord. If any Man love the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him. Oh! That they would see the Vanity of the World, and
choose the Lord for the Portion of their Souls.

5. We might add One Article more, and a very Comprehensive One;

The Ungodly Company-Keepers. Who know, that their Ungodly Company has done
them a deal of Damage, robbed them of abundance of their precious Time, Defaced
and so Defeated all their good Convictions, filled their Souls with terrible
Confusions, deprived them of their once desirable Reputation among the
Religious, and yet they cannot leave their Ungodly Company. They seem under the
Condemnation of them that Fear not God. They have no Inclination to abandon
their unnecessary Familiarity, with their Ungodly Company, that never did them
any good. Though they have heard the awful Warnings of God, A companion of (...)
must be destroyed, and they that will not depart from the Tents of the Wicked,
shall be consumed in all their Sins. And they that will partake with Sinners in
their Sins, will partake with them in their Plagues; and though they have seen
the dreadful Judgments of God, signally breaking the Knots of Ungodly Company,
and wasting away those that belonged unto those Impious Combinations, yet they
venture on still in their Wickedness, encouraging one another to hold on their
Way, strengthening the Hands one of another for their Evil-Doings,
notwithstanding all the remarkable Blasts of Heaven Thunder striking of them,
in their Infandous Enterprises, before all Serious Observers. But,

When will the Ungodly Company-Keepers come to themselves, and forsake the
Foolish and Live, and walk in the way of Understanding? When will they become
the Companions of them that Fear God, and keep His Precepts, and mind their
Souls. Oh! That they would walk with the Wise, and Pray to God for the best
Wisdom, that they might appear Wise unto Salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus.
But leaving them, another Doctrine may now be considered.

DOCT. VI. The Truth of Repentance for Sin should be discovered in Penitent
Sinners, not only by their Serious Concernment for the good of others and the
Glory of God, as well as their own good; but also by their Humbleness before
God, and their Thankfulness unto God.
They must humbly refer themselves unto the Sovereign Pleasure of God, and
Thankfully accept and improve the least Mercy from God. So the Penitent Sinner
in our Text, not only endeavors to reclaim his Impenitent Companion from his
unreasonable Wickedness, but he also sensibly acknowledges the Righteousness of
God, in the Punishments that were come on them for their Wickedness. And he
humbly Prays unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and humbly Submits himself unto the
Will of that Glorious Lord, and shows a willingness to be contented with the
least Mercy that might be conferred on him, and waits on the Lord for His own
Time to know His Will. So Humble, so Thankful was he in his Repentance:

We might here say, that the Penitent Sinner on the Cross, having Preached a
good Sermon, he then made a good Prayer, in the hearing of Jesus Christ. His
Sermon was Occasioned by what was Lamentable, the Railing Language of a Sinful
Creature at our Suffering Savior. His Prayer was answered with what was
Comfortable, the Gracious Promise of our Merciful Savior to a Distressed
Sinner.

The Converted Sinner concerned for the Glory of God, perceiving his
Unconverted Companion to be in a very bad Frame under his terrible Sufferings,
for his heinous Wickedness, he Preaches unto him an Excellent Sermon to promote
his Repentance toward God, endeavoring to Excite him unto a Consideration of
his Duty, under his (...) Circumstances, advising him to Evidence more of the
Fear of God, than had hitherto appeared in his Language, and to consider and
Acknowledge the Righteousness of God in the Punishment that was Inflicted upon
them both for their Wickedness. And then he Preaches about the Lord Jesus
Christ, declaring His Righteousness, while he Condemned himself and his
Companion for their own Wickedness, and manifested an acceptance of the
Punishment of his own Wickedness, and would have his Companion to be so
sensible of his Ill deserving that he might accept of the Punishment of his
Wickedness. Thus he Preached to (...) Companion.

But it is possible that the Penitent Sinner, seeing little or no Evidence of
Repentance in his Companion, he then Addresses himself unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, and makes unto him an Excellent Prayer, to entreat His Compassion for
his own Soul. But probably with an earnest Desire still for the Welfare of the
Soul of his Companion; for he so Expresses himself in his Prayer, that his
Companion might be encouraged to Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. He plainly
discovers before all People, his own firm Confidence in the Tender Compassions
of his Gracious Lord, so that he could venture the Everlasting Affairs of his
never-dying Soul with Him. This might have been for the Encouragement of his
Companion. However, in his Prayer, Lord, Remember me, when thou come into thy
Kingdom; he Acknowledges the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, the
Savior of Souls, and the King of Heaven; that He was then going into His
Kingdom, that if He had but a kind Thought about him, and would but think upon
him with Compassion, it would be to his Advantage; and he is contented with the
smallest Mercy, a kind Thought: And he desires this Kindness of the Lord, when
he should come into His Kingdom. He would wait His Will about the Time and Way
for the bestowing of any the least Mercy that He should see cause to bestow
upon him. Thus he Prayed to his Redeemer.

Now for the USE of this Doctrine.

Let all Persons thus discover the Truth of Repentance for Sin, imitate the
Penitent Sinner on the Cross. in his discovering of his Repentance for Sin.

It is not enough to say, that you have Faith in your Souls, toward the Lord
Jesus Christ; nor is it enough to say, that you have Repentance toward God in
your hearts; but you must endeavor to satisfy others, that you do truly Repent.

All Sinners have dishonored God, by Sinning against Him. They should
therefore endeavor to honor Him by Repenting of their Sins. But some of their
Sins have been committed before others, they should therefore endeavor that
others may know, as well about their Repentance for Sin, as they have known
about their Commission of Sin. The Salve should cover the Sore: and if the Sins
of any Persons have been openly committed, then should Repentance for those
their Sins, be openly evidenced.

And if God has, in His Holy Providence, brought Sinners out upon the Stage of
the World, to make them to be Examples unto others, then it is their Duty to
Glorify God before the World, by confessing of those their more Secret Sins,
that have Provoked the Lord to leave them unto the more Open Sins, that have
exposed them before the World; that others may be warned against, and so
preserved from the like Out-breakings into Sin, so as to prevent further
Dishonor from coming (...) the Holy Name of God, by Open Sinning. This agrees
with the Advice to (...) a Bad Man, as also with the Practice of David, a Good
Man; when their Sins found them out, and they were, by (...) Holy Providence of
God, openly exposed. They were then to give Glory to God by making Penitent
Confession of ^^eir Sins before the World, that others ^ight hear and fear, and
might no more ^in so against the Lord.

If one Sinner has been left, by the Sovereign Providence of God, to stumble
(...) fall grievously into any great Iniquity, (...) as mightily to Dishonor
God and ^ound his own Soul, and grieve the Hearts (...) his Neighbors; it is
for the Honor of ^od, and the Benefit of others, that he tell them of the
Evils, at or by which he began to stumble, and that he warn them against those
Evils. Thus,

If Sinners have neglected Secret Prayer to God, or grown slack to, or cold in,
or careless about, any other Duty of Godliness, and God has punished them for
their secret Neglects, by His leaving them to fall into more Open Sin, that
brings them under public Shame, they should acknowledge how they began to
leave God, and should acknowledge the Righteousness of God in leaving them, and
should therewithal advise others to take heed, lest they begin to leave God, by
giving way to secret Sins of Omission, that are often punished by the guilty
Sinners being left unto Open Sins of Commission, that bring the woeful Sinners
at last unto Open Punishment. If Sinners have been remarkable for their
Disobedience to their Superiors, and God has punished them for their
Disobedience, by leaving them to further and greater, and more Heinous and Open
Crimes, and they come to be cut down by the Sword of Civil Justice, and must
Dye before their Time, for their being Wicked overmuch, it is their duty to
Advise all and especially Young People, to avoid all sinful Disobedience to
their Lawful Superiors lest God cut them off in the midst of their Days, and
take them away by some dreadful stroke of His Wrath.

If Sinners know in their own Consciences, that they were very careless about
the Religious Observation of the Lord's Day, and God has left them so to some
other Iniquity, that they are Openly Punished, as they justly fear, for their
Profanation of the Sabbath of the Lord; they should warn others, that Sabbath
breaking is a costly Sin, that they may dread the Wickedness, the Sacrilage of
Robbing God of His own Time, that He has reserved in peculiar for His Holy
Worship.

And if Sinners know, and can truly charge themselves, that they have not kept
such a Guard as they should have kept, on their Tongues, nor had so much care
of Truth, as they should have had in their speech, but have sometimes talked
too much at random, without the Fear of God; and God has punished them for
that their Wickedness, by leaving them to more grievous and ruining
Transgressions; They should warn others to take heed to their Ways, that they
Sin not with their Tongues, but keep their Tongues from Evil, and their Lips
from speaking Guile.

The Penitent Sinner on the Cross may be produced as a good Example for this
Thing. The cautioning of Sinners against Evil Speaking. For he was ready to
reprove his Companion for his Ungodly Expressions. He would have him to govern
his Tongue more with the Fear of God.

The Impenitent Sinner on the Cross, doubtless might be Ignorant enough, and he
might have had very little Information about our Lord Jesus Christ; he might
only hear some general Report that he was the Messiah, the Savior of the
World, before he came to hang by him on the Cross. And so his Ignorance might
be some Occasion of his Unbelief, that he discovered in saying, If Thou be the
Christ, save thy self and us. But yet he was not without great Fault in his
Ungodly Expressions forasmuch as we know, that he should have been more
Confiderate than to make a Doubt, whether One that had so many Tokens of His
being the Christ, were indeed the Messiah. But the Penitent Sinner did well to
Admonish him for his unfi^ Discourse. And so should they that have been Faulty,
and are brought to Repentance themselves, Admonish others against the ways of
Sin, that they have experienced to be Pernicious to their own Souls.

And if Sinners know, and can justly charge themselves [and Oh! what Numbers
that live under the Gospel, may so charge themselves, and very justly?] that
they have dreadfully despised the Lord Jesus Christ, neglected the great
Salvation, delaying to accept the Offers of His Gospel, and to comply with the
Motions of the Holy Spirit of God, and so have lived in their Impenitent
Unbelief, and are satisfied that the Righteous and Holy God us therefore given
them up unto their own Hearts Lusts, and unto the Power of (...) ^s the
punishment for their wickedly refusing to accept the gracious Offers of (...)
Merciful Savior; They should seriously tell others about the Danger of all
(...) delays, and solemnly warn them against the Evil of all such needless
delays, and earnestly excite them to make ^aste and make sure about the
Affairs of their Souls, and presently give themselves unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, and sincerely comply with the Invitations of Salvation immediately,
that they may not receive (...) Grace of God in vain, lest the Lord would be
provoked to give them up Eternally unto the Lusts of their own Hearts and
^^ower of Satan, who will be ready to hurry them into Soul-Desolating
Abomination.

For so it is very often with Sinners living under the Gospel, that have a Day
of Grace, enjoying the means of Grace and the strivings of the Spirit of God,
urging them to accept the Offers of Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ, and
heartily consent to receive Him as their External Savior; they are not for a
present consent, but they carele^ly delay and put off this work from time to
time, until the Holy Spirit of God is grieved, so that He withdraws and goes
from them; and then the Evil Spirit comes to them and he takes possession of
their Souls, and fills them and rules (...) and leads them away Captive
according to his will, and they Perish for ever in their Impenitence; and some
of them do, before they Dye, become guilty of greater Abominations, than are
commonly committed by them that never lived under the Gospel. According to what
we find in Psalm. 81. 11. Where says the Lord, My People would not hearken to
my voice, and Israel would none of me (...) gave them up unto their own hearts
(...) and they walked in their own Counsels. But when Sinners be so forsaken by
God, they may fear that Satan will quickly be their Councellor. Thence have
some that once enjoyed the Offers of the Gospel, but rejected those Offers,
been given up to an astonishing efficacy of Error, they received not the love
of the Truth, that they might be Saved. And for this cause, does God send them
strong Delusions, that they believe a Lie, that they may be Damned. They take
such incurable Offense at the Lord Jesus Christ, or at some thing in His
Gospel, or Worship, or People, or Providential Dispensations, that they
forsake. Him and His Holy Ordinances, and will never be recovered, never be
reduced, never be renewed again unto Repentance.

But God may suffer some, that have neglected the great Salvation a long time,
to ill so grievously into Sin, that their Falls may awaken them out of their
sinful security, and when they are thoroughly awakened so as to see their
Miserable Condition, He may by His Holy Spirit, lead them unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, and help them to repair to Him with their distressed and burdened
Souls for Salvation. The Prodigal Sinner may go far from his Fathers House, and
may bring himself into grievous distresses, and while he is under those
distresses, he may come so far to himself, that he may bethink himself, and
call to mind how things were with him (...) former days, and how he enjoyed the
Offers of Mercy, but refused then to accept those Offers; and he may, by the
Grace of God, be assisted to seek the Face of God, and Pray to the Lord in the
time of his Affliction, so as to obtain Mercy and be received into the Favor
of God, for the sake of Christ, after a long time of wandering from the Lord!
Was it not so with Repenting M^^asseh? Was not he such an Instance of the
Sovereign Grace of God? He had enjoyed a Religious Education, but he had sadly
abused what he had enjoyed, he became a very Wicked Sinner; and among other
ways of his Wickedness, he Wickedly shed abundance of Innocent Blood, and
maintained Conversation with some who dealt with Familiar Spirits and was very
Wicked before the Lord and before the World. And God brought him into Trouble
for his Wickedness, but in the time of his Trouble he sought the Lord, and the
Lord was entreated of him, and he knew that the Lord was God. He acknowledged
Jehovah, the God of Israel for his God. It is hoped that he became a true
Penitent, that he truly Repented of his Sin.

But when Sinners become true Penitents, it becomes them to evidence the Truth
of Repentance by their endeavors that other Sinners may be brought unto
Repentance. They must not say, What can we do? People will not care to mind any
thing that we say to them. They will but reproach and revile us, if we should
say any thing to them concerning Repentance. They must not excuse themselves
thus. For the Penitent Sinner-on the Cross did not excuse himself, though the
Lord Jesus Christ was between him and the other Malefactor; yet when he
discerned a convenient Opportunity for him to say something for God and for
Christ, he then said what he thought proper for him then to say, for the
convincing of his Companion of his Wickedness, and the reclaiming of him from
it. He did not plead, That Wicked Sinner has railed at the Lord of Glory, and
therefore it is in vain for me to say any thing to him. There Is no hope that
he will mind any thing that I say. But he was willing to do his Duty, whatever
might be the Success. He leaves that with God. And one Event of his going his
Duty, is this that it is Recorded for his Everlasting Commendation, that he
pleaded against Sin, and for God, and for Jesus Christ, in the saddest
condition of Humiliation, that our Lord was ever in, while He was living upon
Earth, before He gave up the Ghost. And though the Penitent Sinner did not
prevail with his Impenitent Companion to Repent, that we can discern, yet it
tended ^o the Glory of God and his own honor, that he attended his Duty. And
so it will be with others, that will attend their Duty in their Season. They
shall not lose their Labor. And besides this, Repenting Sinners do owe more
than this unto the Glorious God, for what He has done for them, in granting
unto them saving Repentance. They should acknowledge their Thankfulness unto
Him for His Grace, by endeavoring that others may be Partakers with them in
His Grace, or at least, that He may have His Grace Glorified, in helping them
to perform their Duty.

But this must not be all that Repenting Sinners do for the Glory of God, to
endeavor that others may be brought unto Repentance; But they must Pray to God
for their own Souls. Thus did the Penitent Sinner on the Cross, he not only
suitably advised his Companion to what would have been for his benefit, if he
had taken his advice; but he also took time, while there was time, to Pray unto
the Glorious Redeemer to remember him, and he showed his humility in his
Prayer, and his Resignation to the Will of Christ, in Praying for the smallest
Mercy, acknowleging the Sovereignty of the Lord Jesus Christ, referring himself
entirely to His Pleasure. So should others do But Omitting other things, One
Doctrine more may be mentioned, and it is a very comfortable One.

DOCT. VII. The Gracious Lord Jesus Christ will readily admit into His Favor
all truly Penitent Sinners, and will certainly receive them into His Kingdom.
Let sinful Persons be sure that they truly Repent of all their Sins, with
unfeigned Repentance, and let them endeavor in all fit ways to show the Truth
of Repentance; and they may justly expect that the Merciful Savior will not
only be ready to Pardon all their former Sins, without upbraiding them with any
of them, and willing to admit them into His Favor immediately upon their
manifestation of Repentance; but also He will certainly receive them, at last,
into His Kingdom. No sooner had the Penitent Sinner made his humble Prayer unto
his then Crucified Lord, but immediately thereupon our now Glorified Lord
presently shows Favor unto him. receives him into His Favor gives him a
favorable Answer to his Prayer; graciously answers the humble desires of his
distressed Soul, assuring him, To day thou shall be with Me in Paradise. In a
state of Bliss and Ease, and Rest, and wonderful Satisfaction. Thence might the
Apostle Paul be fully satisfied (as well as by what is other ways Revealed)
that Believers on Christ will be with Christ, in happiness, immediately after
the Dissolution, the Separation of their Souls from their Bodies. The Lord
assured the Penitent Sinner, it should be so with him

It was one mentioned for the Disgrace, but it is indeed for the Glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ, That he Receives Sinners. Penitent Sinners will ever be
welcome to Him, he will in no wise, cast out any of them, that come to Him with
Repenting Souls. Never did he turn away one Soul, never will He turn away one
Soul, that comes to Him, desiring Deliverance from Sin. He is most ready,
forward, willing to receive such. And he says, in Mat. 9. 13. I am come to call
Sinners to Repentance. Then be sure he will not reject them that Obey His Call
but will receive them.

It was declared of Old, in Prove. 28. 13. It was advised and promised, in Isa
55. 6, 7. We are advised and assured, in 1 John 1. 7, 9. And elsewhere
abundantly in the Sacred Scriptures, we find that God is ready and willing to
Pardon Sinners, that sincerely Repent of all their Sins, for the sake of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and in Him to be Reconciled unto them. And that the Lord
Jesus Christ is ready and willing to receive ^^to his Favor Penitent Sinners,
that are coming to God by Him. And that He will certainly guide them by Counsel
(...) bring them to Glory.

USE.
Then let all Sinners be Advised to make haste, and make sure about their
unfeigned Repentance, upon the first Invitations to Repentance. Does our Lord
Jesus Christ readily admit Penitent Sinners into His Favor, immediately upon
their Expressions of Repentance, and speedily assure them of Admission into ^is
Kingdom? Then let Sinners be ^eady and willing to comply with the (...)
Invitations of the Gracious Lord (...) Repentance.

And if there be those that have slighted many Invitations, Let them comply
with the present Invitations to Repent. Oh! Repent Now and turn from all your
Transgressions that so Iniquity may not be your Ruin. Consider God's Laws and
Examine your Souls and Lives, Confess and Bewail before God, what you find
contrary to the Laws of God in your Souls and Lives. Acknowledge that you
deserve to be Destroyed for ever, because you have Transgressed the Laws of
God. Beg Pardon for your Transgressions for the sake of Christ. Repair to the
Blood of Christ for Pardon of all Sins past, and look to Him for Grace to
Glorify God, in Time to come, with an Holy Conversation. These are some Things
belonging to Repentance, and some of you have been often advised about such
Things. But if you have never attended them, you should Now attend them and
Repent Now.

If the Penitent Sinner had not heard about the Lord Jesus Christ, before he
was hanged on the Cross, then it seems that this was the first Invitation, the
ever he had unto Gospel Repentance And he complied with it. And if he had
neglected to comply with any former Invitations, we find that his. Now
complying with the present Invitation, was not in vain. Therefore

Let us all now comply with the present Invitations to Repentance. You are now
Invited in the Name and Fear of God to Repent; but none of you know that you
shall have another Invitation, if you don't comply with this.

And remember, though true Repentance be never too late, yet late Repentance is
too seldom true. Those that have been brought under fearful Expectations of
speedy Death, and have seemed mightily concerned about their Souls; and have
made their promises, how well they would live in time to come, if God would be
pleased to spare their Lives and continue them longer in the World, and have
been delivered from their Fears; Few of them have discovered (...) Truth of
Repentance by their after Conversation. I say very few of them (...) appear
true Penitents. The most of (...) quickly forget their Distresses and (...)
Promises, and are as bad as ever, (...) some worse than ever, before many
Months pass away.

Therefore should we take heed lest we ^^eive our own Souls, by pretending or
supposing that we may safely put off Repentance till we come to Dye, and then
may, in drawing some of our last breaths, do enough about Repentance, to secure
the welfare of our Souls: for there is danger about those who delay
Renpentance, lest they be hardened for ever and confirmed in Sin. They, that
think Repentance may be attended and performed well enough in a short time,
discover too much of Ignorance about Repentance. Indeed the Thief on the Cross
had but a short time to Repent, if he began there to Repent. But if God enabled
him to Repent in a short time, on such an extraordinary occasion; yet this may
not encourage others to delay Repentance with an imagination that they can well
enough Repent in a short time. Nor can we be sure that the Thief then began to
Repent, while he was Hanging on the Cross. He might have the Foundation of
Repentance laid in his Soul, a great while before then, so that the Principle
of Grace in his Soul, being then excited, he might then go on to Build upon the
Old Foundation that was laid a long while before that time. However it is
utterly uncertain that he was ever guilty (...) delaying his Repentance with an
Expectation to Repent, well enough, at last. But very certain it is, that our
Lord Jesus Christ will never come again to be Crucified any more, to give any
other Sinner such an Opportunity to Repent. On this Instance we may say, as
has been said a long Time ago. If the Penitent Sinner on the Cross began his
Repentance there, then there was one Sinner that began to Repent in some of the
last Hours of his Life, and is gone to Glory; and but one such Instance
recorded in all the Hystories of more than four thousand Years. There was One,
that none might Despair; and but One, that (...) might Presume. And we should
remember that God has always promised Pardon to the Penitent; but He has
never promised Repentance to the Presumptuous. Therefore let all of us Repent
Now, make haste and make sure Now about Repentance, hoping for the Pardoning
Mercy of God for the sake of Jesus Christ.

And YOU that have no expectation at all to hear another Sermon about
Repentance, Publicly Preached unto you, throughout Eternal Ages. Oh! Repent
Now and be Awakened and Encouraged unto Repentance by what you have heard.

You have head something about the broken heart of a Repenting Sinner, that
will be acceptable with God through Jesus Christ (in the former Part of the
Day) God can Glorify His Grace in giving you such an heart, and in healing your
broken heart. And you have heard now (in the later part of the Day) about some
of the last Words of a very bad Man, that Dyed (for ought we know) with an
hard, stupid, unbroken, impenitent Heart. Oh! Be not you like him, without the
Fear of God, while under Condemnation. You have heard about some of the last
Words of one that, though he had been a very had Man, yet he became a very good
Man before he Dyed. Oh! Be you like him, Do you follow him in Repenting of Sin,
Evidencing the Truth of Repentance, Being sincerely concerned for the Glory of
God, and the good of others, Humbly committing and resigning your self into the
Merciful Hands of the Almighty Redeemer of Souls And you have heard about some
of the last Words of that Almighty Redeemer of Souls, and how ready and willing
he is to receive into his favor truly Penitent Sinners, and to heal their
broken hearts, and fill their wounded and troubled Souls with the sweet
Consolations of his Holy Spirit, and to admit them at last, into his Glorious
Kingdom of Life, and Light, and Joy, and Peace and Eternal Blessedness.

Be assured, that our blessed Lord has the same Heart now He is in Heaven, that
He had while He was upon Earth. And He is now as full of Grace, and Mercy, Love
and Compassion as ever, toward Miserable, Unworthy Sinners, that humbly Cry to
Him for Grace and Mercy. He has not forgotten to be gracious, now He is in
Glory. Then, if notwithstanding all his Griefs and Pains, that he endured while
he was hanging on the Cross, He had leisure to take notice of and show kindness
to a distressed, broken hearted Sinner, making his addresses to Him for his
favor; We may be sure he will not now disregard those, that humbly seek to Him
for his Mercy, how unworthy soever they are. He did not upbraid the Penitent
Sinner with his Unworthiness, when he cried to Him for his Merciful Remembrance.

Let this Consideration be for your encouragement. If you sincerely Repent, the
Lord Jesus Christ will certainly have Mercy upon you. Remember David and
Manasseh that were guilty of Murder; and yet they Repented and Obtained Mercy.
Remember that some of the Murderers of our Lord Jesus Christ Repented and
Obtained Mercy, and their Sins were blotted out, and their Souls were Washed
and Saved by the blood, which they sinfully shed: Though no Murderer has eternal
Life abiding in him, yet they, that have Grace given them to Repent of their
Murders, with Unfeigned Repentance, will have their Souls cleared from the
guilt of their Murders by the Righteousness of Christ, and so shall be blessed
with Life Eternal.

But now you are going to hear the last Words that ever I expect to Speak to
you in this Place.

What shall I say unto you! Oh! Be not deceived about the Affairs of your Soul.
Be not deceived by trusting to your own Righteousness. Be not deceived by
making a Righteousness of your own with any thing that you think you do about
Repentance. You cannot but know that if you had Lived without Sin, all your
Days ever since you came into the World, (had such a thing been possible) Yet
you brought with you into this World enough Sin to deserve your Eternal
Destruction. You cannot but know that all your best endeavors about Repenting
of Sin, have so much of sinful Pollution cleaving unto them, that they deserve
the wrath of God for ever. And you cannot but know that all your own
Righteousness will come Infinitely short of the Righteous Demands of the Holy
Law of God. Therefore when you have done all that you can, to endeavor that
Things may be well between God and your own Soul, and all that you can, to
endeavor in all fit Ways to evidence the Truth of Repentance before the World,
by Confessing and Bewailing your Sins, Mourning Bitterly for them all, and
Lamenting your Miseries before the Lord. Acknowledging His Righteousness, and
Warning others upon all suitable Occasions to take heed of all the Paths of the
Destroyer, against which you may Advise them, and by begging the Prayers of all
that Fear God for you, and Praying to God for your own Soul; Don't imagine,
that by any of these, or any such Things, you deserve any the least Favor from
God. Renounce all Confidence in your own Righteousness. Remember it is a great
Sin to go to Establish a Righteousness of your own, by any of your own Doings,
or by Repentance for Sin. But when you have done all that can be done,
acknowledge that you are Unprofitable before God, and that you deserve nothing
of Good from God, and that God must Glorify His Free Grace unto you, if you are
Saved. And keep still relying on the Lord Jesus Christ for all Good; for
Pardon, for Healing, for Assistance, for Acceptancce, for every Blessing, that
is needful for your Soul. And beg of God, that whatever He denies you, yet you
may not be Deceived about your Soul, so as to lose your Soul for ever; that
whatever He denies you, yet you may be remembered by the Merciful Redeemer, and
received into His Kingdom, though a Miserable Sinner. And if it should be so,
that after all your Endeavors about your Soul, the Righteous and Holy Lord
should see Cause to hide the Light of His Countenance from your Soul, so that
you must go out of this World in the Dark, without any comfortable Satisfaction
of his being Reconciled to your Soul, or Assurance of the Pardon of your Sins;
yet be sure to Justify Him in all, Acknowledge His Righteousness and Holiness to
the last; and try to keep the Eyes of your Soul upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
remembering that He is able to Save unto the uttermost, all that come to God
through Him, seeing He ever lives to make intercession for them, and He can Save
at the Last. And remember what the Penitent Sinner on the Cross has
Experienced, at the Last, for your Encouragement. God can take from the Cross
into Paradise, and from the Gallows into Glory; and He can help you so to
Repent of all your Sins that you may Glorify Him before you Dye.

And so far as you may be Encouraged by this (and this may be some
Encouragement) you may be satisfied, that they that Fear God will not cease to
Pray to the Lord for you. They will continue to take all proper Seasons, both
in Public now, and in Private and in Secret to Pray for you, as long as you
continue a proper Subject for Prayer. But if you would have any saving benefit
by their Prayers, you must be sure to continue to take all Times to Pray for
your self, and continue Repenting of Sin as long as you Live, and continue
Believing on Christ as long as you Breath, and keep longing for such
Manifestations of Gods Love in Christ Jesus unto your own Soul, that you may be
able truly to say (as in Psalm. 49. 15.) God will redeem my Soul from Hell, and
he will receive me.

The End of the SERMON.
Readers,
NOw you have seen, (if you have Read the preceding Sermon,) some of the things
that were Preached in the Audience of a Poor Man hearing for his last. GOD
knows, if he got any good by what he heard. But we know that you and I should
get good by what I have Preached, and you have Read. If you hope that you get
any good, Ascribe the Glory of all to the Free Grace of God, in Christ, (for
there it is all due) and Praise the Lord for His Grace to you, and Pray that
the Riches of His Grace may be so Glorified to me, that I may be Saved and they
that hear me.

FINIS.

