Duodecennium Luctuosum.

The HISTORY of a Long WAR With Indian Salvages, And their Directors and
Abettors; From the Year, 1702. To the Year, 1714.

Comprised in A Short ESSAY, to declare the VOICE of the Glorious GOD, in the
Various Occurrences of that WAR, which have been thought Matters of more
Special Observation.

A RECAPITULATION made in the Audience, of His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, and
the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the MASSACHUSETT Province; At BOSTON, 30. d. VII. m.
1714.

Ego nihil haustum ex vano velim, quo nimis inclinant ferme, Scribentrum animi.
Live. Decad. 3. l. 2. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his
Shop on the North-side of the T. House 1714.

The History of a LONG WAR, Briefly Recited and Improved.
At BOSTON, 30. d. VII. m. 1714.
IT is not so much for a Close Discourse upon the TEXT, as for a Vindication
of, and an Introduction to, an UNCOMMON ACTION, Which I have thought I may have
a Sufficient Commission this Day to Proceed upon; that I shall now begin my
Discourse, with reading to you, what is Written, in

PSALM. LXVIII. 33. Lo, He does send forth His Voice, and that a Mighty Voice.

IT IS not my Purpose to make any Remarks on the Psalm, which affords this Text
unto us, and which is as Jerous Long Since Observed, Refertus Mysterijs, Full
of Mysteries; I may add, -- and Full of Prophecies.

Every One that hears it Read, will Presently form this Doctrine upon it,

There is a Voice of GOD unto the Children of Men; Yea, a MIGHTY VOICE: And
therefore a Voice Mightily to be hearkened to.

THE Entertainment, I Suppose, would not have been Unprofitable, if I should
have Enquired, What is the Voice of GOD, and what is it that the Mighty Voice
of our GOD Speaks unto us? You are all aware, That in the Gospel which is the
Word of GOD, we have the Mighty Voice of God, Speaking to us, in the Plainnest
Manner that can be. Our JESUS who Spoke as never Man Spoke, did never Speak, in
the Days of His Flesh among us, but, GOD Uttered His Voice, in the most
familiar Way that can be imagined. But there is also the Voice of GOD in all
the Oracles of the Gospel; GOD inspired the Writers of these Oracles, and there
is a Mighty Voice of GOD in the Inspiration. Where the Gospel comes, The Great
Trumpet is blown, and there is a Mighty Voice of GOD, in the Joyful Sound of
that Jubilee. Sirs, It would be Well, if you would be Prevailed upon, When you
Take up the Bible, and Open it, then to think, The Mighty Voice of GOD is now
Speaking to me; And when Qualified Preachers Open the Bible unto you, then
again to think, The Mighty Voice of GOD, is what I must now give earnest Heed
unto. Methinks, You should be also aware, That in the Dictates of our
Conscience we have the Mighty Voice of GOD unto us. The Principle in Man, which
acts in a Way of Judging on him, as Under the Judgment of GOD; though the
Dictates of that Principle, are a Sort of Whispers, yet there are also Thunders
in them: It cries with a Loud Voice, as when a Lion roars! Oh! that Men were
more fearful of Rebelling against the Light, and against the Voice of a
Principle, which, O rash Man, if thou put continual Sleights upon, will One Day
Tear thee to Pieces, and there shall be none to deliver thee. Yea, I will say
unto you, Sound Reason is always the Voice of GOD. When ever any Maxim, or
Demand of Reason is Offered unto us, We have GOD Speaking unto us. My Brethren,
If you will Show your selves Men, and Hearken to Reason, You may fill your
Lives with Acts of Obedience unto GOD. Whatever you see to be Reason, Conform
to it, from this Consideration, It Is what GOD Calls me to!

BUT then, You must be as much aware of this; That there is a Mighty Voice of
GOD, in all the Works of His Hands. All His Dispensations are Speaking
Dispensations. The Works of Creation; There is no Speech nor Language, Where
their Voice is not heard. All the Creatures of GOD are so many Teachers to us.
Ask them now, and they shall teach thee; Yea, the Mutest of them shall declare
unto thee. The Works of Providence too; Stand still, and Consider these
Wondrous Works of God; That is, To Hear what they Speak unto us. The General
Providence of GOD, which Preserves and Governs the World, has a Voice to all
the World; The Wheels of it make a Noise in their Motions. But so too has the
Special Providence. There is a Voice of GOD unto us, in what we see befalling
of Others. The Rewarding of the Righteous, and the Punishing of the Wicked, has
always a Voice in it, unto all the Spectators of it. But -- much more in what
we feel befalling Our selves. Do we meet with Agreeable Things? I Speak unto
thee in thy Prosperity, says the Lord. -- Oh! but what follows? -- Do we meet
with Deplorable Things? Now, Hear the Rod; the Voice of the Lord Cries unto the
Sufferer.

THE Sum of the Voice, even the Mighty Voice, You cannot but be aware, and
apprised of it. It is that of the Angel with the Everlasting Gospel, Saying
with a Loud Voice, Fear GOD, and give Glory to HIM. It Is, O Acknowledge the
Glorious GOD in all Your Ways; Make it the Chief End of your Lives, to Render
and Procure, continual Acknowledgments of His Glories. Place your Blessedness,
in the Enjoyment of Him. Embrace the Lovely JESUS in all His Offices, as the
Only Savior, to bring you unto that Blessedness. Be afraid of all Sin against
the Holy Lord. Be Weaned from a World, wherein Satisfaction is to be despaired
of ^e the Wiser and the Better for all that befalls you; and let GOD have
Revenues to His Kingdom, out of all that He does for you, or on you. Walk with
GOD, and be Holy in all manner of Conversation.

THIS the Voice. No Doubt, I might have gone on Profitably, to have told you,
How and Why the Mighty Voice of GOD is Mightily to be hearkened to? To have
told you, That to Study the Mind of God in His Voice, and to be, and to do what
is therein called for, is to Hearken to it. And then, to have told you, that
since it is the Mighty Voice of GOD, there need no other Argument for its being
Mightily Hearkened to.

-- BUT it is another Entertainment, That I have under the Impressions of GOD,
and with His Assistences, Prepared for you.

THE Design which I Propose this Day to Prosecute, is, That the Voice of the
Glorious GOD, even His Mighty Voice, in the Later Dispensations of His
Providence toward this Land, may be Regarded, be Understood, be Complied
withal.

WHEN the former Long War, which our Treacherous and Barbarous Enemies made
upon us, was finished, there was an Essay to make some Improvement of the
Observable Things that had occurred in it: An Essay, which God and His People
approved of.

ANOTHER Long War is now finished; A New Peace has been struck up, in our
Borders: And it is Time to Consider the Voice of our God unto us, in the
Observable Things that have therein Passed over us. For, O my Dear People,
While thy God has been Striking of thee, He has been also Speaking to thee; And
it is of the Last Consequence, that His Voice be Wisely hearkened to; A Total
Inadvertency to the Voice, will have a Consequence which we may justly tremble
at; -- If to be Punished yet Ten times for our Iniquities, or with more than
Ten Years of Confusions repeared upon us, be a thing to be trembled at.

IT is an Holy Undertaking; may it be a very Useful One!

FROM such an Holy Undertaking, we must not be discouraged, by the Derision of
a few Foolish, and Flashy, and Profane Creatures, (no more to be valued than
the Dirt of a Street) who Scoff at all Sermons of an Historical Importance;
that is to say. At such Sermons as the Prophets of God have all over the Bible
Exemplified unto us; Creatures below the Notice of One, who would Go Well, and
in Holy and Comely Going would never turn away for any. No, Sirs; Were One of
the bright Angels detached and dispatched from the Multitude of the Heavenly
Host unto us, most certainly he would most cheerfully take up a Trumpet of God,
and embrace the Office and the Honor of Sounding the Trumpet, that should
render the Voice of the Glorious LORD very Plain unto His People, and awaken
them to Entertain that Mighty Voice with a due Attention and Obedience.

WHEREFORE, Having this Opportunity, of Seeing the Elders and the Judges of our
Israel, here assembled, I call upon you, Stand Still, that I may Reason with
you before the Lord, Concerning the Righteous Acts which He has done among
you, and His Mighty Voice in those Acts, which He Expects you to take a
Reasonable and a Religious Notice of.

GOD forbid, That a People of our Profession and Original, should be so
abandoned by the Spirit of Piety, as to be Insensible, that there is a Voice of
the Glorious GOD unto us, even a Mighty Voice, in the Things which He has
dispensed unto us, during our Long War, with the Eastern Salvages, and the
bloody Papists that have inspired them and abetted them. Verily, Such an
Insensibility would but bring us within the reach of that flaming Thunderbolt;
Psalm. XXVIII. 5. Because they regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the
Operation of His Hands, He shall destroy them, and not build them up. I again
say, God forbid!

BUT then, the First Thing, Whereto your Attention is demanded, is; That the
Voice of the Glorious GOD, even His Mighty Voice, in the Long War that has been
Wasting of us, is what All People, have been addressed with; what All Persons
have been concerned in. The History of this Duodecennium Luctuosum, would
consist either of too Minute Actions, or be sometimes rather an History of
Inaction, and sometimes, especially where the chief Actors were Strangers to
us, the Truth of the Matter cannot well be come at, if it were to be retail'd
in all its Particularities. You shall have it all in a Summary Way, and in
Expressive Terms provided as long ago, as, 2 Chronicles. XV. 5, 6. In those times,
there was no Peace, to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great
Vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries; For God did Vex them
with all Adversity. And certainly, the Voice of God has been Extended unto All
the Inhabitants; who have All been Sharers in the Great Vexations of this Long
Adversity. Truly, We have All been Sufferers. How many have Suffered in their
Persons? Not a few, have Endured Hardships as Good Soldiers in the Public
Service. How many have Suffered, in what has befallen the Relatives for which
they have had a Tenderness? The frequent Pressea have often, often, filled our
Houses with Anguish. The Heavy Taxes have been such, that every One has felt
the Burden: Perhaps, those few that ^a^d None, did feel as much as any, of the
Burden. And then, It Is to be hoped, no Man could be so Labumane, but that he had
a Sympathy with Other Sufferers; The Advice of all Evil Occurrents afflicted
him. Surely, we have All been Sinners too! And this, no doubt, this is the
Voice of our Glorious GOD unto us All. Hear this All ye People, Every One of
you! Let every One of you All now ^earch and Try his Ways, and turn unto the
Lord. Sirs, We have ALL of us by our Various Miscarriages Contributed unto the
Controversy, which a Just GOD has been managing with us, in this Long Day of
our Calamity. It was Once the Complaint of Heaven; Jer. VIII. 6. I hearkened
and heard, but they Spoke not aright; No Men repented him of his Wickedness,
Saying, What have I done? Oh! May it not be heard over us! The Mighty Voice of
our God unto us, is; Let every Man Enquire, What Errors of his Own have thrown
Oil into the Flame of that Anger that has been such a Devouring Fire upon you.
And, Let every Man Enquire, What he shall do, that though God has been Angry, His
Anger may be turned away, and His People may be Comforted.

BESURE, We are deaf to Thunder, if we do not hear this Voice of our God unto
us all, in what we have all met withal: Oh! Take off your Hearts from a World,
which I have so many ways Embittered unto you all. Prefer, Pursue, Expect a
Portion in a better World.

BUT if the Mighty Voice of God may be apprehended as most Cogently, and most
Pungently directed unto them that have been the Greatest Sufferers, it is to be
hoped our dear Brethren in the Frontiers, will be most Suitably Affected with
it. O our Brethren, Who are Posted in the Valley of Achor; who have Gotten and
Eaten every Grain of your Bread, with the Peril of your Lives from the Sword of
the Wilderness; who have had your Lives always as it were in your Hands, ready
to be offered up, and been Shut up in very Uneasy Circumstances: To you there
is this Mighty Voice of God your Savior; Heaven requires it of you, to be the
best People upon Earth! O Examine whether you are so; and Examine how you shall
Order your Behaviors, and your Families, that you may be so.

OUR Mariners and our Fishermen, distinguished with so many Destructions upon
them, ought certainly to consider their Peculiar Obligations to have their Ears
Listening to the Voice of GOD. He that has Ears to hear, Let him hear, What
GOD now Speaks unto him.

I will go on, and invite you to Consider, in the Second Place, Whether you
cannot hear a Voice of the Glorious GOD, even a Mighty Voice, in the Perfidy of
the Enemy; Yea, and in the Remarkable Revenges, the Astonishing Revenges, of
the HOLY ONE upon that Perfidy. It is well known, that on the Twentieth of
June, Twelve Years ago, the Sagamores of the East, with their Dependents, made
their Submissions to the Crown of England, and Renewed their Promises of Living
in all Good Peace with the English Subjects thereof, and there were Two Pillars
of Stone Erected, with the Hieroglyphick Name of, The Two Brothers, for the
Perpetual Memory of the Thing. And yet, it is now known, That at that very
Time, the Perfidious Intentions of those Monsters were such, that it was a most
Wonderful Appearance of the Divine Providence, which Preserved His Excellency
our Governor, and the Principal Gentlemen of his Two Provinces, then attending
upon him, from an Hellish Contrivance of theirs to have Siezed on their
Persons: We are this Day blessing our GOD, with them, as well as for them, in a
Doxology of Antiquity; Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey to
their Teeth! But, alas, We can tell who did quickly become the Prey to these
Dragons in the Wilderness Prepare to hear a Tragedy, which our Poor Neighbors
did not prepare to feel. On the Tenth of the following August, these Wretches
under the Gallick and Satanick Instigation, Put forth their Hands against such
as were at Peace with them, and broke their Covenant. While our People were in
the Profound Sleep, of a Peace just now established, with all the Solemnity
imaginable, never Dreaming that it could be Possible for any thing in the Shape
of Men, -- to do what was going to be done; -- So much was France forgotten! --
Behold, Now these Treacherous Infidels, [Their being French Christians, will
not hinder me from calling them so!] I say, these Infidels went up against the
Land of Unwalled Villages. In Scattered Parcels, they fell, at Once on Seven
Villages; They Murdered and Captived, More than One Hundred and Seventy of our
People. And on some of them, especially some Women with Child, they Perpetrated
Barbarities, which humane Ears can do no other than tingle at. God Miraculously
Saved many Exposed Places, from these first Efforts of Indian Fury!

BUT, O NEW ENGLAND, Will thou hear the Voice of thy Glorious GOD unto thee, in
this dismal Tragedy? His Voice, even His Mighty Voice unto thee, is; Thou have
Sinned against my Covenant. A Sword is thus brought upon thee to avenge the
Quarrel of my Covenant. The Violations of my Covenant in the Midst of thee must
be Repented of!

I will take this Occasion to bear yet a more Particular Testimony. New England
hears ill among Strangers, for the Crime of, Promise-breaking. The Promises of
many Men, they say, are Little to be relied upon. It is reported, that many
Pretenders to Religion, are not, Men of their Word. I know not what their
Pretenses are; Be they what they will, the Men must not be owned for the True
Citizens of Zion. But, Lo, in the Punishment the Country undergoes, from the
most Infamous Promise-breakers, there is this Mighty Voice of God unto us, O my
People, Promise-breakers must not be found among you: Be Children that will not
Ly; So I will be your Savior.

WELL, but what Effect have the Salvages found of their Persidy? A Vengeance of
God has followed them; A Vengeance, that must be a Stay, and a Warning to all
the World.

HOW Many of them, have been Sacrificed by O^ Sword, it is not Easy for us to
say. They never Assault, but when they can Surprise. They have Quick Retreats
to Thickets and Mountains that are to us inaccessible; The Europeans, who
Wonder that all these Colonies don't Presently Swallow them up, have no Idea of
them. When also any of them fall in Battle, the Survivers use more than
ordinary Care to Cover them. However, I have been able to reckon many more than
an Hundred of these Cursed Salvages, which have been known to be Killed by Our
Hands. But, Thy Hand. O Lord, has found (...) thine Enemies; Thy Right Hand has
found out those that hate thee! God has Plagued them with Famin^, and Sioknest,
and many Wasting Miseries It Is affirmed. They are so reduced, that they cannot
make Half the Number, which they could when the W^ began. God has distressed
them Wonderfully! And so He will Some who are greater than they, and who have
infused their Maxims into them. There is that Mighty Voice from the GOD of
TRUTH to Those, in what has befallen These.

AND yet, I Wish, the Wounded Chaldeans, may not rise up Once more to inflict
Grievous Wounds upon Us. To Prevent more Desolations, I would with all
Humility, but with all Importunity, most Vehemently, and with most Pressing
Instances, beseech the Government, That all due Methods may be taken, for the
Upholding of Religion in the Plantations of the East, as they shall be going
on. Sirs, What has been done more than twice to break up our Eastern
Plantations, has in it this Voice of the Glorious GOD; Yea, it is His Mighty
Voice. Oh! Let not People be any more so Foolish, as to think of taking Root,
in Ungospellized Settlements; Lest I Once more do Suddenly Curse their
Habitations.

BUT then, Thirdly; We must be aware of this; That none of the Particular
Depredations, which the Enemy has in this Long War made upon us, have been
without a Voice from the Glorious GOD unto us in them: Yea, a Mighty Voice,
which ought to be heard attentively, as the Sound going out from His Mouth.

HE that would Write the History of this War, must put upon it the Title that
Orosius put upon his History, De Miseria homin^m.

AN Exact and Punctual Account of the several Depredations, with which the
Wild-beasts of the Desert have broke in upon us, is not necessary to be
Exhibited. Nor would it often afford more Material Passages, than those Insipid
Ones, which the Funeral Orations on the Professors in the Universities are
commonly Stuffed withal. But allow me to throw the Murdered and the Captived
into the same List, as there is too much cause to do, and I find my self able
to bring in a List of near Seven Hundred Persons, whom our Offended GOD has
delivered up into the dreadful Hands of the Salvages. No doubt there have been
more! The Boast made by One bloody Son of Cain among them has been generally
heard of! -- Animus meminisse ho^et!

OFTENTIMES what the Salvages have done, has been upon one, or two, or theirs,
at a time; done by a Skulking and Woiviso Adversary.

BUT Sometimes a Town has undergone a greater Effusion of Blood. Haverhil at
once Loses above Thirty of it is Inhabitants; And, Poor Deerfield! -- Never to
be forgotten Deerfield! -- An Hundred, and Perhaps twice Thirty more.

HOW many Deaths have been Contracted and Hastened, by the Fatigues of Attempts
against the Enemy, -- there can be no Account.

ADD unto these, the Numberless Deaths, accelerated upon ours in their
Engagements with the French at Sea, or by their Confinements among them: --
Here our Bleeding Land would Cry out, Oh! That my Grief were thoroughly
Weighed! Now it would be heavy like the Sand o^ the Sea.

BUT, What I am now to note, is, There has been a Voice of the Glorious GOD, in
every One of these Disasters.

I have reckoned up, in this War, near an Hundred Times, that Evil Tidings have
been brought in unto us, of Mischiefs done to our Brethren and our Children, on
the Land. Mischief upon Mischief! -- Besides those which have come to us, on
the Other Element. Among which, that on Fishery at one time amounting to Ten
Thousand Pounds Damage, will not be forgotten! Sirs, There has been a Voice
from the Glorious GOD Renewed unto us, in every Stroke of such Evil Tidings. A
Voice from the East, a Voice from the West, a Voice from the North, and a
Mighty Voice coming over the Mighty Waters too; A Voice from the Lord, rendering
His Righteous Recompenses to us, by our Enemies. His terrible Voice in all
these things has been, I am displeased with you; Oh! Take up due Sentiments of
my awful Displeasure at you!

IN the midst of these Calamitous Things, could we see BOSTON in Flames; the
very Place where I am now Standing, Perish in the Flames; the Glare whereof
reached more than hundred Miles off; and not hear the Voice of a Provoked GOD,
in these Fiery Rebukes? Yea, our GOD Spoke to us with His Mighty Voice from the
Midst of the Fire, as from another Mount Sinai; His Voice unto us was, O Fear
Me, and Receive Instruction, that so no more of your Dwellings may be cut off!

IN a Long Drought also this Year, the Lord God has been calling to comend by
Fire with us. And from the Heavens become like Brass over us, there has been a
Voice of GOD reaching to the Earth become like Iron under us; O Land not Rained
upon, Humble thy self in this Day of Indignation!

BUT, as All Sorts have come under the Deadly Strokes of this Time, so the
Voice of GOD unto Each of them should be more Particularly considered by all
the Survivors. The Deadly Strokes have been Decimations used by a Sovereign
GOD, upon Rebellious Legious; and all we that are Spared, should hear what His
Blows upon Some, do Speak unto us All. By Aged Ones, that have had their Gray
Hairs died in their Blood, GOD Speaks to Old Men, Oh! See that your Hoary Heads
be found in the Way of Righteousness! By such as have been cut down in the
Flower of their Youth, GOD Speaks to Youth Men, Oh! Make Haste, and no Longer
Delay to ke^ the Commandments of your God! By the Little One whose Brains have
been dashed out, by the cruel Proselytes of Babylon, GOD Speaks to Children;
Oh! Do you betimes fly to Me, and get under the Shadow of My Wings! Nor have
the Handmaids of the Lord been unspoken to, in the horrid Things which their
Sex has met withal. GOD Speaks to them; Oh! (...) your Main concern, to be
Espoused unto your only Savior!

I am Sure, There has been One Article of the Deadly Strokes, which it will be
very Proper for Me to be deeply affected withal. And I make no doubt, that my
Brethren will be so!

THERE have been Two MINISTERS, who have Owed their Deaths, unto the Sword by
which we have been so harassed.

THE Hopeful Minister of Lancaster, was Killed indeed by a most Unhappy Mistake
of a Soldier in his own Garrison. And might there not in such a thing be this
Voice of our GOD, unto all our People, ^eware lost you Kill your faithful
M^isiors before you ^e aware: Heartbreaking Temptations multiplied upon them
will do so.

THE Worthy Minister of Haverhil, was Killed, in a Descent of the hideous
Canibals upon his Neighborhood. In this Death, as well as in the Other,
Methinks, I hear the Mighty Voice of our Glorious Lord, unto the Pastors of His
Churches; Oh! Look into your Hearts and Lives, to see what Share you also have
in the Sins of the Times! Oh! Do with your Might what your Hand finds to do; as
not knowing When or How you may be taken off! Oh! Do all you can to make my
People Mind what I Speak unto them, in the Things which I do among them!

AND, O BOSTON, The Wormwood and the Gall of thy Last Winter must be remembered
with thee. I am Sure, with He it must be so. A Winter wherein One Dark Month
carried off more than One Hundred and Ten of our Inhabitants. The Voice of it!
-- Behold, I have made thee Sick in Smiting thee! Oh! Sin no more, Lest! --

SURELY then, it the Fourth Place; The Disappointments of Important
Expeditions, which in this Long War have humbled us, cannot but have in them a
Voice of the Glorious GOD; A Voice that should Strike us into the Dust before
Him.

I will make all the Haste I can, to See whether no Comfortable Things have
occurred for our Observation. But I would ask, that you would not be out of
Patience, till I have gone through my Enumeration, of Afflictive Things, yet such
as have been, and should be, very Instructive Ones.

I must remind you; That we have made many Salleyes into the Wilderness after
the Enemy, with Numerous and Courageous Forces, and well-Equipped Ones. And we
have sometimes made our Visits to the Headquarters of the Enemy, big with
Hopes to do something upon them there. More than Ten Times, have our Forces
returned from their Weary Marches, without Obtaining the Ends that were aimed
at. A^ not for the Full Relation of such Expeditions. To wh^ Purpose, the Full
Relation? -- I have told yo^ We went out, and we came home. -- That Is (...)
Full Relation! -- Indeed Much Good was done, wh^ there was Nothing done. We
found the Advant^ of having a Terr^ed Enemy. But still we were D^ appointed of
our Expectations.

IF Mortified by what thus befell us by Land, what shall we say of what befell us
by Sea? Our Mariti^ Expeditions, What an amazing, What an abasing, Blast from
GOD upon them! -- All the Event of them, to bring Immense Debts upon us; to
make us the Soorn of them that hate us; to Tire, and Corrupt, and Confound, the
Poor People Embarked in them! The Voice of GOD, still that; Hab. II. 13.
Behold, Is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the People should Labor in the
very Fire, and that the People should Weary themselves for very Vanity!

ONE considerable Armament, Ending with that Epitaph upon it; Lord, Thou have
cast us est, and put (...) to Shame, and Go not forth with our Armies.

ANON, We do with a most Profound Obedience to the Commands of our Sovereign,
and with a Wondrous Trouble and Expense, Propare for an Expedition against the
Canadien Source of our Calamities. But, All for Nothing: -- All under the Pain
of; Staying for them who did not Come. Canada was, as (in Spanish) the Name
Signifies, A Cape of Nothing!

SOME Years after, they did Come. The, Carthago ^elenda is again declared for.
We again express our ^yalty, and make a Preparation, which no other (...) of
America would have Paralleled. We did every (...). The Government exerted and
acquitted it self, (...) a Discretion, a Fidelity, an Assiduity most
Ir^oacheable. All Ranks of Men, did all that could (...) done by Mortal Men.
Would you now have (...) rest of the Story? Or be content that such Vile
Historians, as a Jovius, a Remond, or a V^illas, have the telling of it? -- No,
-- Enquire into it, O Britons at home: And let Justice take Place. It Is too
great a Matter for Us. You are all deeply concerned in it. --

BUT, this we may do. We may Enquire into the Voice of our Glorious GOD unto
us, in such Disastrous Disappointments?

AND, O thou afflicted Country, so tossed with Tempests, and I had almost said
Not Comforted; can thou not hear this Mighty Voice of thy GOD unto thee? O my
People, Thou do nor answer my Just Expectations; T^efore do thou miss of
thy Expectations. Their can not Prosper, because there are in thee some
Accursed Things; Oh! Find out, Oh! Abbor, Oh! Reform those A^ed Th^es!

THAT I may use all Good Fidelity, and that my Country may find a Faithful Man,
I will take this Place to (...) One thing more.

IT would be a Sad Thing, if any Persons in Stations, have taken Advantages
from the Distresses of the Country by the Long War, in Unrighteous, Ungenerous,
Indirect Ways to Propose the Enriching of themselves on the Miseries of their
Country. I wish that Persons in Stations would Examine themselves, what Base
Things may have been done this Way^ that are to be Repented of. I wish, they
wo^ now hear the Mighty Voice of GOD unto them, (...) pe^t, Ye Sordid and Cruel
Men, Repent of your Vil^ (...) humanity; Lest you and yours find Sad Reserves
(...) row for you!

BUT, Fifthly. The Case of our Captives, (...) be Passed over; There is a Voice
in their Case; (...) Mighty Voice of our GOD; and a very Speaking (...)

THE Incredible Miseries undergone by our Captives; What Labor, and What
Hunger, and What Gold, they have endured! How Cruelly they have been used! How
Cruelly they have been Scourged! With what Cruelties, the joints of their
Fingers have been bitten off! In what insupportable Terrors of Death, sometimes
their fierce Masters, of the true Tygre^eea have held them! The Hideous
Executions, with which the Incarnate Devils have gratified their Diabolical
Rage, upon some of the Miserable Captives: Roasting them alive at Lingering
Fires; Cutting and Slashing their Flesh, and Pouring hot Embers there-upon:
With Slow Tortures, Putting an End unto their Lives, and with intolerable, and
inconceivable Torments! There has been that Voice of the Glorious GOD in these
things unto us all; Oh! Be Thankful for the Comforts which you Enjoy in your
Houses full of Good Things, with all your Friends about you! But at the same
Time, there has been this Mighty Voice of GOD unto them, who continue Captives
to their Lusts, and will Go on still in their Trespasses: -- What must you Look
for, O Impenitent Sinners, what must you Look for, if you Die in your Sins, and
he delivered over into the Hands of those Tormentors, which are in the
tremendous Place of Torments waiting (...) you!

^O think of it; That some English Children, Yea, (...) of the Covenant, and
Children of Excellent ^stors; are now Indianizing in the remote and (...)
Wigwams of the Wilderness! To think of (...) That we should have still some
Scores of our (...), Enchanted and Enslaved, in the Idolatries of (...), and so
held in Chains of Darkness by the ^uds, and Cheats, and Chicaneries of the
French Priests, and such innumerable Circumventions, that an Hopeless
Gravestone seems to be laid upon them! -- It Is Lamentable. I am Sure, There is
this Voice of our GOD unto us, in their Condition; Oh! Be thankful for the
Protestant Religion; the Precious Liberties and Instructions of your Holy
Religion: Should you become a French Province, how forlorn, how rueful would be
your Condition! But is there not herein also a Mighty Voice of our GOD, calling
upon us, to take more Pains, that we may every where be well Englightened in
the Religion of our Savior; More Pains, that our Children, and all our People
may be Supplied from the Tower of David, with the Armor of Christianity, to
defend them from the Popish Abominations? This Voice of our GOD, I am certain
is very Plain unto us; Oh! Live up to the Rules of My Holy Religion, and hold
not the Truths of it in Unrighteousness, Less I Leave you to be Entangled in
strong Delusions.

HOWEVER, At several times we have seen some Scores of our Captives delivered.
I hope, the Ransomed Captives, hear the Voice of the Glorious GOD unto
Themselves; That Voice; O Give Thanks unto the Lord, for He is Good; for His
Mercy Endures for ever, Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, Whom He has
Redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy! That Voice, O Don't remain in the Bondage
to the Powers of Darkness, now thou art Redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy;
Become the Servants of the Redeemer, who has Loosed thy Bonds! That Voice; Oh!
Sin no more, Lest a worse thing do come unto thee!

BUT if these Redeemed Ones, would make true and fair Collections, of their
Experiences, it would be a Good Work. How Strangely they have been Preserved,
how Strangely they have been Supported, how Strangely they have Outlived many
Deaths; The Narratives of these Things, would have in them a Voice of GOD unto
the World: The Power and Goodness of our GOD would be Proclaimed therein most
Gloriously.

BUT, Sixthly, and Lastly; I remember my Promise of, Comfortable Things. I
remember, I did but Almost Say, N. Com^. No, Our Merciful GOD, has in Wrath
remembered ^y to us, and Checkered our State, with many Bright Circumstances,
which have Abated the Sorrows of the Long War, which He has distributed unto us
in His Anger. In the Favors of our Good GOD, we have had Him Speaking to us;
His Voice, yea. His Mighty Voice, has therein called us, To Glorify H^n, and
Praise H^n for His Goodness, and for His Wonderful Works to the Children of Men.

SHALL I make a brief Recapitulation?

HOW Favored have we been of our GOD, in So Vigilant a Care, and Guard, which
has kept our Frontiers, for Two Hundred Miles together, So Fortified, and in
such a Way of Communication, that the Salvages have been afraid of attempting
Frequent Surprisals upon them? Our GOD Speaks this unto us; Behold, An Hedge of
My making about you!

HOW Favored? -- When formidable Armies of the French, in Conjunction with the
Salvages from Canada, several times, have gone forth with great fury to
Destroy, and Utterly to make away many: and especially to Cut off the Praying
People of God in the Towns of the Northern County on Connecticut-River: Either
they have Mutiny'd among themselves; Or, some Deserter from themselves has come
in unto us: -- there has happened Something, that has caused them to do
Nothing. When they have Come upon us, to Eat up our Flesh, they have Stumbled,
and Fallen, and though after Long Marches, just arrived in our Borders, they have
gone back without Striking a Stroke. Or, if not so, a Kind Friend of Ours, has
Obliged us with a Timely Intelligence, of what Mischief has been hatching
against us; A Friendship for ever to be gratefully acknowledged!

UPON the Saying of which, I ought to Mention it, That there was in the Former
War, a Gentleman, who hazarded his very Life, and Procured no little Uneasiness
unto himself, by transmitting to us, an Advice of Mischiefs impending over us:
The Merits of which Action should not be soon forgotten with us.

BUT by such means as these, the Enemy, have hardly above Once, been able to do
any thing to Purpose, in all their Enterprises. They have gone round about the
City, and made a Noise like a Dog: By'nd by they have Returned, and Wandered up
and down for Meat, and grudged because they were not Satisfied.

GOD Speaks to us in this; Oh! Trust Me: Oh! Love Me; Oh! See what it is to be
under My Protection!

HOW Favored? -- When the rich Store-Ships bound for Canada, and filled with
Instruments of Death, have been taken by our Fleets; and the most Capable and
Resolved Persecutors of these Colonies, have been Killed aboard them.

HOW Favored? -- When Privateers infesting our Coasts, have by Storms,
[Fulfilling thy Word, O our God!] been Shipwrecked on them. Or some of our
Neighbors, Especially from One Helpful Island of our Neighborhood, have with
Sudden and Valiant Exploits, made them repent of their appreaching us.

HOW Favored? -- When we not only laid Waste many French Settlements, where
the Indians had been Harbored and Supplied; but anon their Citadel, with their
whole Country, fell into our hands; and that Jericho, having been Comtessed
Seven Days, fell before us. I Speak Literally enough in that Circumstance!

HOW Favored? -- In the Many and Ready Assistences, which our Brethren of the
Neighbor Colonies, have Lent unto us. Our GOD Speaks this unto us in it, Be
Tender of One another! My Colonies, Love and Live as Brethren. I will have no
unbrotherly Emulations among you.

AND certainly the Assistences that we have given to our Neighbors, -- Our
Brethren in Hampshire, will certainly in all Things do the part of Our Brethren.

HOW Favored? -- In that although the Prodigious Debts we have Contracted, One
would have thought, must have broke us, yet we find our selves able to
discharge these Ponderous Debts; Yea, our Debts have rather Enriched us, by
affording a Fund for the Circulation of Credit, among us.

HOW Favored? -- When in the midst of Our Charges, and Losses, and Various
Troubles, we have been moved and helped from Above, to Express our Charity for
our Friends in the Caribbee-Islands, and send some Taste of our Bounty to them
in theirs. Let not Ignorant Strangers abuse New England, until they Outdo that
Poor Country in the Things, that every One must Confess to be Laudable.

IN the mean time, Some Servants of God have had the Unspeakable Satisfaction
of Expressing and Obtaining Bounties, for Odd People, among whom it has been a
General Practice and Pleasure, to be Ignorantly and Venemously Railing at them.
-- Forgive them; They know not what they do!

AND how Favored? -- When under all the Creepling Disadvantages of the
Country, We see the Metropolis of it, and of the whole English America,
increase and flourish at such a rate? Yea, we see the ancient Fable of the
Phaenix rising out of its Ashes, Moralized and Verified, O BOSTON, in thy
rising out of thine: Things done for thee, the Report whereof will be thought a
Fable, by them that have not seen them.

SIRS, There is a Voice, yea, a Mighty Voice of our Glorious GOD unto us in all
these things. He bespeaks our Thankful Praises, to Him, in all these things:
This I am certain of!

IT must not be Left unconsidered among the Favors of our GOD, that we have
all this while, Enjoyed His GOSPEL, in the Privileges whereof we have been
Lifted up to Heaven. Our GOD has fulfilled that Word unto us; Isai. XXX. 20.
Though they Lord give You the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Affliction,
yet thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers.

ONE of the Least among them, is now doing his Part, that our Adversity and our
Affliction may be rendered Profitable to us.

BUT, that our Matchless, and our Envied GOSPEL shall be continued unto us, do
we see nothing like a Rainbow in the British-Heaven, to give us a Token, upon
which they who dwell in the Wilderness may be less Afraid than a Cloudy Day may
have sometimes rendered them?

YES, Unto our Inexpressible Satisfaction, we now see ascending to the British
Throne, A KING, for whom his NEW-ENGLISH People have continually Offered up
their most Earnest Vows to the GOD by whom Kings Reign, that they may see Him,
and His Illustrious Family, in the Succession running ^er them.

A KING, Who cannot in any of His Dominions, have more Loyal, Faithful, and
Hearty Subjects, than His NEW-ENGLISH People; who are by Principle as well as
Interest rendered so.

A KING, from whom we have all the Reason imaginable to Expect it, that He will
not only Continue the Civil and Religious Liberties of a People who so many
ways recommend themselves unto. His Royal Chemency, but also that He will
Multiply unto them the Tokens of His Paternal Benignity.

MY Brethren, You hear the Voice of your Glorious GOD, even His Mighty Voice,
in the Changes of His Providence that have Passed over you. A Voice that speaks
this; Ah! My Poor People; How shall I give thee up: As yet, I cannot do it; I
will not do it! Though I chasten thee sore, thou shall not yet be given over to
Death!

I have discharged my Duty, and my Sermon shall be finished, when I have
brought you the Voice of your GOD, in that One most Intelligible and
Unquestionable Articulation of it more; Psalm. LXXXI. 13, 14, 15. Oh! that my
People had hearkened unto me, and walked in my Ways? I should soon have
Subdued their Enemies, and have turned my Hand against their Adversaries; The
Haters of the Lord should have Submitted themselves unto Him; but their own
Time should Endure for ever.

Spicilegia.
Upon a Review of the Occurrences in my Collection for our Duodecennium
Lu^uosum, whereof I have in a Summary Way given the Public a Delibation, I
take notice of Two or Three Specialties, which I shall for some Reasons more
Particularly relate in an Appendix.

I. THE Action and Exploit of the MEN of Two Shallops belonging to the
Religious Town of York, Sept. 21. 1707. as I have it, from a Good Friend,
Samuel Penhallow Esqr. (to whom I have been Endebted for very many such
Communications,) appears not Unworthy of a Distinct Relation. Such a
Performance, and such a Deliverance, ought never to be forgotten!

ON board the Shallops, now lying at Winter-H^bour, were the Courageous Austin,
and Herman, and Cole, and five MEN more, and a Boy, who shall now pa^ for a
Man. About Fifty Canoes, in which were the or four or five Indians apiece,
approached them, in a Square Body. When the Fleet was come within Thirty Yards
of their intended Prey, Ours fired upon them, which first Shot put them into
Extreme Disorder. The Indian Fleet again drawing up in Order of Battle, fired
with such Fury, as obliged ours to quit One of the Shallops; which about fifty
of the Enemy Entered, and got the Mainsail a-Trip, before ours could get the
other to Sail. Ours therefore get out their Oars; but the Enemy was as quick as
they, and they joined Paddles on both sides. Ours gaining on them, the Enemy
got a dozen Canoes a head, with Fishing-lines, to tow after: But in about an
hours time, the Wind so freshened up, that ours Left them, under certain
Disadvantages, a quarter of a Mile astern. However the rest of the Cances, all
this while Attending and Surrounding of our M^fully defended Shallep, kept
incessantly Firing on our Men, who still bravely answered them They had a Long
Engagement, and were so near One another, that ours felt the Fire of the Enemy
in some sort almost Scorching of them. It Is an astonishing Thing! But in this
Long and Fierce and Hot Engagement, not One of our good Men was killed. Only
One, whose Name was Donnel, (a Godly as well as a Valiant and for being so not
at all the less Valiant, Man,) felt himself Shot through the Bowels, quickly
after they first came to Sail. At his Fall, he said, I am a Dead Man! But
removing himself a Little, he added, Let me Kill One before I dye! -- but found
himself not able to fire. -- After three Hours, in which our Men Spent about
five Pounds of Powder, and had not above a Quarter of a Pound Left, the
dis^irited Enemy drew off; but not without having a Considerable Number Killed
and Wounded; which though (...) the Time, the continual Cloud of Smoke had Left
(...) certain, was by Information afterward ascertained. What can Good Men do,
when GOD shall Spirit them, Strengthen them, and Protect them!

II. THESE had a more Significant Protection, than what was enjoyed by the
French Commander, in the Descent of the Indians upon Haverhil. That our People
may be entertained with a Taste of the French Popery, and see a Little, by Whom
and by What our Salvages have been animated; they shall be gratified with One
Curiosity.

ON Aug. 20. 1708. about break of Day, an hundred and fifty Indians, with
French Officers and Assistents, broke in upon Haverhil, and Surprised the
Center of the Town. Major Turner and Captain Price, with some small Forces
happening to be Posted there, did with much Bravery, Resolution and Celerity,
with half the Few Forces they had, give Battle to them; and in less than an
Hour made them fly. Leaving Nine of their Number Dead, besides what of their
Mortally Wounded they carried off.

Among the Dead, there was a Distinguished Frenchman, who had an Invulnerating,
and Immortalizing Amulet about his Neck; which I now have in my Hand at the
Time of my Writing. It was a Little Pouch, in which I find some small, Je ne
scay quoy 's, of the Popish Leipsanolatry. But with them, a Schedule, on which
there is drawn with Red Ink, the Pretended Figure of the Wound made by the
Spear in the side of our Dying Savior, with the Dimensions of it. Over it is
Written, La Mesure de la Saint Play (...) Sacree cote de notre Seigneur Jesus
Chrit. Under (...) Salve Latus gloriosum Domini nosti Jesu Christi, (...) nobis
Lancea Militis Perforatum. On the Backside (...) the Schedule is Written; Tous
Ceux qui Portent (...) foy et devotion, la Mesure de la Saint Play du Sac
Cote de nostre Seiqueur J. C'. Sont Preservez de beaucoup des Maux;
Particulierement du Feu, de l'eau, de la peste, de les Tempesles, de toutes
Blessures, et des Demons. [But, it seems, not from English Bullets!]

III. IN this Long War, there have now and then happened Things, that have had
such Evident Signatures of an Invisible World upon them, that they deserve to
be considered. I shall Single out, but a Couple which are well-attested.

THE One is this. Plutarch and Others, have Surprised us with Relations of
Intelligence conveyed unto a Mighty Distance, from the Place of Action, in so
short a Time, as was inconsistent with all Hum^ne Conveyance. One of the most
Notable Things done in our Twelve-Year Darkness, was when Colonel Hilton,
meeting with an happy Information where they were, came upon a considerable
Number of Indians in their Wigwams, and Slew all but One, whom they took a
Prisoner. Though this was done thirty Leagues off Pertsmouth, yet in the very
Morning, when it was done, they had a Distinct Account of it at Portsmouth,
(None knows how!) even in the Exact, and most Minute, Circumstances of it.

THE Other is this; One whose Name was John Mag^on was killed, by the Indians,
at Exeter. Three Nights before this, he dreamed, that he should be killed by
the Indians, at a certain Place, by his Brothers Barn. This Place, he went each
of the following Days to View; and showed it unto his ^ghbours, and told them
his Dream. At that very (...), on that very Spot, it was accomplished.

IV. MEMORABLES relating to our Captives, (...) Collected in a Little Book
Entitled, Good fetched (...) of Chil. It is to be hoped, that the Captives
(...) the Last Return, will add unto the Collection. May this be the Effect of
all we have met withal. That is to Say, Good fetched out of Evil.

FINIS.

