SEVERAL SERMONS Wherein is showed, I. That JESUS CHRIST is a Mighty Savior.
II. That GOD Converts His Elect some at one Age, and some at Another, Commonly
before Old Age. III. That when Godly Men dye, Angels carry their Souls to
another and a better World.


WITH A PREFACE in which there is a brief and true Character of the Reverend
Mr. Thomas Bridge a Lately deceased Pastor in one of the Churches in Boston.

By Increase Mather, D. D.

2 Pet. i. 13. I will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease, to have
these things always in remembrance.

Evangelizo Manu et Scriptione.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop. 1715.

THE PREFACE
I Shall not make any Apology for the Plainess of the Style in the Sermons
Emitted herewith, Much less for my having Confirmed the doc^ insisted on, with
Scriptural De^strations, that having always b^ and ever shall be, Studiou^
(...) deavoured by me.

There are Preachers in the World, wh^ have little Citation of S^ture their
Discourses, but (...) are Studied Harangues, Ca^ to please the Fantasies,
(...) awaken the Consciences of the Auditors. No Man of those few in the World
to whom I am known, will Expect any thing of that Nature from me. I bless the
Lord that in my Youth I did not so, because of the fear of God, but have been
willing to follow that Apostolical Precept, in Doctrine to show Incorruptness,
Gravity, Sincerity and sound Speech which cannot be condemned. Much more does
it become me to do so in my Old Age. I am grieved to see in a late Book which
gives an Account of the present State of the Dissenters, Complaints, that many
Ministers in England, among those that ^o under the Name of Dissenters, are got
into a Modish Way of Preaching; and tha^ so they might be thought to be florid,
they affect a Dramatick Style in their Sermons, and bring out Play house
Phrases into the Language of the Pulpit. That Writer says, that Mr. Alsop (my
worthy dear Friend, now among the Spirits of just Men made perfect) when a
Young Man Preached after the Modish Fashion, some commending his Sermon for a
Fine Discourse, in a just Indignation replied, It was a Sermon for the Devil,
for the Devil is pleased and God is offended with such Discourses in the
Pulpit. A Learned Writer says of an Epistle, Ornamentum est Ornamentis Car^re.
It may much more be said so of a Sermon. Painting Serious Truths, spoils their
Efficacy. Quo imperitior Sermo, e^ illustrior Ratio est, said one of the
Ancients.

In one of the Subsequent Discourses, the Immortality of the Soul, and a Future
State after Death is asserted: Which is a Truth that may be known by the Light
of Nature, without Scripture Revelation. Some Philosophers (the Platonicks
especially) have believed it; Plato having taught that when Men dye their Souls
pass through the Air to Eternal Mansions, and he says, some have been
restrained from wicked Practices, because they were Convinced of a Future
Recompense in another World. It is reported, that one having read what that
Philosopher has Written concerning the Immortality of the Soul, was so affected
with it, as to profess that he had rather suffer Death, than do a wicked thing.
How inexcusable then will those Christians be that Live Ungodly (...) when they
have the clear lig^ of Scripture, to make known unto them, what will become of
their Immortal Souls, when by Death separated from their Bodies, and they gone
into ETERNITY; And what Consolation must it needs afford to godly Souls, to be
assured, that Holy Angels will be sent from Heaven, to Conduct them to Glory.
There was a Book Printed at London, (1701.) being a Discourse Concerning
Angels. It is a very Judicious and Solid Treatise: The Authors Name is not
prefixed; but the Bookseller (Mr. Parkhurst) has informed me that Mr. Saunders
an Eminent Minister in Devon, wrote it. The Reader may find this Truth
confirmed by that Author, as well as by many others, who Treat of Angels

If any would ^e more, concerning the Elect being called, some at one Age, and
some at Another, they may cons^t an Excellent Sermon (all his are Excellent) of
out famous Mr. Ho^ker, ^n that Subject.

The two first of these Sermons (although last Preached) are concerning Jesus
Christ, as a Mighty Savior. As I begun my Ministry Eight and Fifty Years ago,
with Preaching Christ, so would I conclude it with Preaching Him. And the
rather, because I see but little of Christ, in most of those Sermons which have
of later Years been Published. Such Discourses are always seasonable, but they
are so in a special manner, when there are Books Printed in which Arianism and
Socinianism is contended for. It is a Mavelous thing, that Men who read the
Scriptures and pretend to Believe them, should Question whether Jesus Christ is
the True God, when there are no less than Fourteen Names or Appellations given
to Him in the Scriptures, every one of which does declare his Deity, as
Glassius has observed. They that trust in one, that is a Man only, for
Salvation, Cursed is their Faith. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm.

It might be expected, or however, I my self might expect, that one who has
(through the Patience and goodness of God) arrived to my Age, should be
dismissed from Public Labor, and enjoy rest in his Old Age, spending the
remainder of his few days in Reading, and in Contemplations on another World.
I cannot charge my self with having been altogether Idle (...) my Younger
Years, and now when Age has rendered me incapable of doing as once I could, why
may I not plead the Privilege of Miles Emeritus^? Neve^less, the wonderful
Mercy of (...) for which I ought every (...) less his Name) having con^ to me a
greater Measure of Ability for Service, than is commonly seen in Men of my
Years, shall I not according to my poor Ability endeavor to bring forth Fruit
in Old Age, and such Fruit as shall remain, when I can neither Write nor Speak
any more? Let Death find me so doing.

I must acknowledge, that I have been encouraged by Letters, which several whom
I have reason to respect, have sent to me, desiring that I would Preach seldom,
but Transcribe more of my Discourses for the Press, because (they tell me) God
has blessed those formerly Published for Good to many, in remoter Parts of the
Country, who never had any Opportunity to hear me Speaking in the Name of the
Lord. It is from free Infinite Grace, if it has been so.

It has been in my thoughts, to Write something concerning Old Age. Why may it
not be proper for One that is past Seventy Six, to Miditate on such a Subject?
Also, Concerning the Duty of Observing Divine Providence, in which I would
take Notice of the singular and signal Providence of God over His Church, and
over the English Nation, and in special over New England, and this Populous
Town of Boston. There have been many Remarkable Occurrences which ought not to
be forgotten by us. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them
that have pleasure therein.

These things (with some other) have been in my heart to do, if the God of my
Life shall lengthen my days. But it is probable that a speedy Death, which I
have long Expected, will prevent me. Whenever that shall be, the loss will not
be so great, as what these Churches have sustained, by the late Death of Worthy
Mr. Thomas Bridge: He was a Kinsman of that famous Man of God, the Excellent
Mr. William Bridge, whose Works praise him, and he will be had in Everlasting
Remembrance. Many Years ago there was a Testimonial sen^ to me, concerning our
Mr. Bridge, signed by Dr. Owen, Mr. Lee, and several other Eminent Ministers in
London, who give him a great Character. Since my acquaintance w^ him, I find
that he has fully answered that Character, being One of an Excellent Spirit,
Humble, Peaceable, and yet would not sell the Truth for Peace, and a very
Experimental, Spiritual and Solid Preacher, and firm to the Order of the
Gospel, Professed and Practiced in the Churches of New England, which are
weakened by the removal of such a Pillar. Who could have thought that I should
have Outlived him? who was many Years (Seventeen) Younger than I am, and of a
Strong, Healthy Constitution of Body: whenas I was always Weakly, both as to
Body and Soul, I^ali^ae vires ingeniumque mihi: The Death of my Friend, Calls
upon me to prepare to follow. The good Lord grant that I may be always ready;
and then let me dye as soon and as suddenly as CHRIST shall please.

Boston, October 17. 1715. INCREASE MATHER.

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Pre^ ^ok, Entitled, Benedictus. Good Men described, and
the Glories of their Goodness, declared. With some Character and History of One
who belonged unto the Tribe; Namely, Mr. Thomas Bridge, A Late Pastor of the
First-Church in Boston* Who Expired ^ 6 d. VII. (...) Whereto there is added,
An Instrument, which he wrote, when he ^rew near his End, and Left as a Legacy
to Survivers, relating some of his Experiences; And offering some Testimonies
to the cause of Religion. By COTTON MATHER* D. D. Sold at the Booksellers Shops
in Boston

JESUS CHRIST IS A Mighty Savior.
Isaiah LXIII. 1. -- Mighty to Save.


THE Prophet Isaiah being in an Ecstasy, had a Vision of a glorious Conqueror.
(1) He speaks of the Enemies that were subdued and destroyed by him (...). The
Edomites. Edom and (...) mentioned. Edom is (...) ^ites the Posterity of (...)
Edom. B^rah wa^ (...) Capital City belonging to the Edomites: These are
mentioned because they were next Neighbors to the Children of Israel, and the
most inveterate, and implacable, and are by a Synechdoche, put for all the
implacable Enemies of the People of God. (2) The Prophet gives a description of
the Conqueror which he had a Vision of. He is described. [1.] From his Garments
and Apparel: His Garments were dyed, viz. dyed with the blood of his Enemies
over whom he was Victorious, and therefore in the next Verse it is said, He was
red in his Apparel: He is also described as Glorious in his Apparel; for so
great Generals and Conquerors are wont to be, especially when they have been
Victorious. [2.] From the manner of his Marching along: He walked in State.
Traveling in the greatness of his Strength. As a Lion that knows the greatness
of his Strength, walks along in a stately manner. Thus is the Conqueror whom
the Prophet had a Vision of described.

In this Verse, we have a Question, and the Answer to it. The Prophet propounds
the Question, Who is this? This wonderful Conqueror that comes thus gloriously
arrayed, who is it? Christ Answers, It is I. In his Answer he gives a
description of himself. (1.) From his Fidelity: I that speak in Righteousness:
What he speaks, he does faithfully perform. He is always as good as his Word.
He has promised Salvation to his People, and he does accomplish it: He has
threatened Destruction to his implacable Enemies, and he does accomplish that
also, and is Righteous therein. (2.) From his Power and Ability: He is Mighty
to Save.

The Doctrine to be insisted on, is, DOCT. That the Lord Jesus Christ is a
Mighty Savior.

For the Opening and Confirming the Truth before us, we shall.

1. Show, How it does appear that Christ is a Mighty Savior.

2. Who are the Subjects of that Salvation, which this Mighty Savior is the
Author of.

Quest. 1. How does it appear that Jesus Christ is a Mighty Savior?

Answ. 1. The Scripture does abundantly declare this. The great design of the
Book of God is to make known unto Men that there is a Savior for them, and
that Jesus Christ is He. We find in the Gospel, that Angels from Heaven have
Preached this Doctrine. Luke 2.10, 11. The Angel said, I bring you good tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all People, for unto you is born this day a
Savior which is Christ the Lord. And there was a great Multitude of the
Heavenly Host, Praising God for it. The Names whereby Christ is called in the
Scripture denotes His being a Savior. The Name of Shil^ is given to Him, Genesis
49.10 Which imports His being a Savior, and a Great Peace giver. The Latin
Word Salus which signifies Salvation, is supposed to come from the Hebrew
Shilo. And the Name of Jesus is given to Him. The Angel gave this Reason, why
he should be called by that Name, Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call His Name Jesus,
for He shall Save His People from their Sins* He is in the Scripture called
Salvation it self, which imports his being a Savior in the highest Degree. As
soon as Simeon had seen the Lords Christ, he says, Mine eyes have seen Thy
Salvation, Luke 2.30. It was said, Salvation is of the Jews, because Christ w^
of them, Joh. 4.22. The Scripture call^ Him a Great Savior, Isai. 19.20.
Whoever might be Firstly and Typically meant, Christ is the Savior and the
Great One there Chiefly intended. And not only in the Text before us, but in
other Scriptures, He is said to be Mighty. Psa^. 24.8 Who is the King of Glory?
The Lord Strong and Mighty, The Lord Mighty in Battle. 45.3. Gird thy Sword
upon thy Thigh^ O Mighty. And 89.19. I have laid help on One that is Mighty. It
is meant of Christ Eminently.

2. Jesus Christ is the Mighty God. And therefore He is a Mighty Savior. Very
often in the Scripture, He is said to be God; and we may not think that he is
so in respect of His Office or Authority only, as Princes are said to be Gods,
but in respect of Nature, He is called The Mighty God, Isai. 9.6. Unto us a
Child is Born, a Son is given, His Name shall be called, that is he shall be,
The Mighty God. And he is said to be The Great God. Tit. 2.13. The glorious
appearing of the Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. He then is not only a
Mighty but an Almighty Savior. We all need such Salvations as no Creature,
yea, as all the Creatures in the World cannot help us unto. But Christ has a
Mighty Arm able to Save us, Isai. 59.1. Behold, the Lords Hand is not shortened
that it cannot save Christ is that God which made the World. All things were
made by Him, and without Him was not any thing made that was made. ^e that made
the World is able to save the World.

3. If we (...) Saviors, we shall (...) ^rably Greater and Might (...) any of
^m all. God raised up Sa^s for His People Israel Neh 9 ^ Thou gave them
Saviors, who saved them out of the hand of their Enemies These were Types and
Shadows of Christ, the great Savior which was to come into the World M^ses was
an Instrumental Savior to the Children of Israel. By that Prophet God brought
Israel out of Egypt, and by that Prophet he preserved them. In that he was a
Figure of Christ. It was Prophesied of the M^s^ah that he should be like unto
Moses (...). 17.15. The Hebrew Doctors (...) well, That Christ shall be like
unto Moses only greater than he, w^ was (...) greatest Prophet that ever was in
the W^ld, un^ Christ came (...) speaks the Apostle, Heb. 3.3. (...) Man (...)
counted worthy of more glory than Moses. Moses did by Divine Appointment
introduce a new Religion into the World, so did Christ, and in that respect was
like unto Moses. No Man was ever admitted to such familiarity with God, as was
Moses, but Christ much more. The Law was given by Moses, Grace and Truth came
by Jesus Christ. No man has seen God at any time, no not Moses himself so as
Christ has, the only begotten Son which is in the Bosom of the Father He has
declared Him, Joh. 1.17, 18. Moses was a shadow of Christ. The shadow
represents the Body whose shadow it is, so in Moses we see some Representation
of Christ shadowed to us. He was a Deliverer, but not comparable to Christ. The
Judges in Israel were Saviors, and on that account Types of Christ. In a
special manner Sampson was so. Jacob in his dying Prophesy concerning the Tribe
of Dan, breaks forth into this Expression, I have waited for thy Salvation, O
Lord. Sampson was of that Tribe, he was a Type of Christ, whose Salvation was
that which the holy Patriarch waited and longed for. Sampson signifies a Little
Sun: Christ is a great Sun: He is the Sun of Righteousness, that has healing
(Salvation) under his Wings: He is the Light of the World. Sampson saved his
People with the loss of his own Life: At and by his Death he Conquered more
Enemies, than in all his Life. So has Christ by his Death Conquered the
Enemies, and accomplished the Salvation of his People.

4. Jesus Christ is a Mighty Savior in respect of the Multitude of Subjects
which are saved by him. There are a World of them. Joh. 4.42. This is indeed
the Christ the Savior of the World. No Savior that ever was in the World,
saved so many as Christ has done. Cyrus was an instrument in the hand of God,
to accomplish a great Temporal Salvation for a whole Nation. He set at liberty
Nine and forty thousand Captives at once, Ezra 2.64. But Jesus Christ has saved
a far greater Number of the Captives of Hell; He is a Savior not only of Jews,
but of Gentiles dispersed throughout the World. Wherefore the Apostle says, 1 John 2.2. He is a Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only. Not for
ours only who are Jews, but also of the whole World; meaning the Gentile World:
Great Numbers among the Jews have been saved by Christ: In the Apostles days,
there were Myriads of them. Act. 21.20. Many thousands of Jews believe: but far
more thousands of that People shall ere long believe on Christ, and so become
the Subjects of his Salvation. It is supposed by some Learned Men, that if the
Jews which are scattered over the face of the whole Earth, were gathered
together, they would be the most Numerous Nation in the World: but this Nation
shall turn to the Lord, and then all Israel shall be Saved. But among the
Gentiles Christ has had ^r more Subjects than among the Jews. Many Millions of
them have been Converted to Christ, and Saved by him. And among the Gentiles
also, there are whole Nations that shall ere long become Christ's Subjects. He
will be their King, and he will Save them. All the Ends of the World shall turn
to the Lord. The Lord shall be King over all the Earth; In that day shall there
be One Lord and his Name One, Zech. 14.9. Then all the World will see and know
and believe that Jesus Christ is a Mighty Savior. His Elect, although they are
but few compared with the Reprobate World, Nevertheless, in themselves
considered they are a Mighty Number, and all Saved by Christ. Rev. 7.9. I
beheld a great Multitude which no Man could Number, of all Nations, and
Kindreds, and Tongues, clothed with white Robe^. They had never had those Robes
of Salvation given to them, if it had not been for Jesus Christ. Well might the
Angel say that Christ's coming into World was matter of great Joy to all People,
Luke 2.10.

5. Jesus Christ is a Savior of Souls, and therefore a Mighty Savior. He is
called the Shepherd of Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. Sin has brought death not only on
the Bodies of Men, but on their Souls. Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins shall
die. And a woeful death it is that Sin brings on the Souls of Men. Indeed the
Soul does not die a natural death as the Body does, but it may be a subject of
great woe and misery, and that is death. Isal. 3.9. They declare their sin as
Sodom, woe to their soul. But Jesus Christ saves both Soul and Body. Who is able
to redeem a Body that is dead from the Power of the Grave? Jesus Christ the Son
of God can do it, has done it, and will do it. Joh. 5.25. Verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live. But to quicken and save a Soul that
has been dead in Trespasses and Sins, is a Mightier work, than to raise all the
dead Bodies in the World, yet this Jesus Christ has Power to do. Therefore he
says, Isai. 55.3. Come unto me, hear, and your souls shall live. Christ has
redeemed Souls as well as Bodies by a Mighty Price. 1 Cor. 6.20. You are bought
with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit. And what
it that price, which has bought both Body and Spirit? It is the price of blood,
and the most precious blood that ever was, or that possibly can be, the blood
of Christ which is the blood of God. And as Christ has saved the Souls of his
People by Price, so likewise by Power. His All-powerful Arm has vanquished all
the Powers of darkness. Col. 2.15. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them. He has led Captivity Captive:
He has dis-armed the Devil and all his Angels and as it were tied them to his
triumphal Chariot, and exposed them openly in the sight of Heaven and Earth: So
has he set the Souls that were the Captives of Hell at Liberty. The Salvation
of a Soul is a Mighty thing. It is so, considering the worth of the Soul: One
Soul is more worth than all this World. Has not Christ said, What is a man
profited, if he gain the whole World, and loose his own soul? or; what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26. A Scripture which a Religious
Man advised a King that he would think on it, a quarter of an hour every day,
The Soul is of invaluable worth, considering the Immortality of it. Every Man
has a Mortal Body, and an Immortal Soul: A body that must die, and shall die, and
a Soul that shall never die. To Save such a Soul is a Mightier thing than to
save all the Bodies in the World. To redeem one Soul is such a Mighty thing, as
that all the Men on Earth, and all the Angels in Heaven cannot do it. Psalm.
49.8. The redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever. But
what a Mighty Savior then is Jesus Christ, who has Redeemed Thousands of
Millions of Precious and Immortal Souls?

6. Christ Saves his People from the Mightiest Enemies, and from the greatest
Evils, therefore he is Mighty to Save. The Miserable Captives of Hell were in
woeful slavery under Mighty Oppressors. The Almighty Lord Jesus Christ has set
the at Liberty. Isai. 49.24, 25. Shall the prey be taken from the Mighty, or
the lawful Captive be delivered? The Captives of the Mighty shall be taken
away, and the prey of the terrible ones shall be delivered. Sinners are said to
be lawful Captives, in that the Justice of God had delivered them into the
hands of Satan, and his evil Angels, who were terrible Ones. They had never
been delivered from those terrible Ones, nor the prey taken out of the hands of
the Mighty, if Christ had not done it. Satan is a powerful Enemy; the Scripture
speaks of the power of that Enemy, Luke 10.19. But this Conqueror whom the Text
speaks of, has Conquered the Devil, and taken his armor from him, in which he
trusted. Heb. 2.14. He has destroyed him that had the power of death that is
the Devil; not as to his Being, but as to his Dominion. We find in the Gospel,
that Christ delivered many that were under bodily Possession by Devils, thereby
declaring that he would deliver Souls that were under Spiritual Possession by
Evil Spirits. Spiritual Plagues are the greatest, therefore deliverance from
them is a Mighty Salvation. Blindness of Mind is a Spiritual Judgment. Sin and
Satan has blinded the Minds of Men. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this World has
blinded the Eyes of them that believe not. Jesus Christ saves from this
Spiritual Judgment. For one that is blind to have his sight restored to him is
a Mighty thing especially if he was born blind. Joh. 9.32. Since the World
began was it not heard, that any man opened the Eyes of one that was born
blind: But Christ has opened the Eyes of many a one that was born blind; that
came into the World with a dark Soul. To give sight to a dark Soul, is a
greater thing than to restore sight to a dark Body: But to how many Thousands
^s Christ done this? He was sent to Preach Deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the Blind, Luke 4.18. Again, Hardness of Heart is a
Spiritual Judgment; No Plague on Pharaoh was so great as that of the Hardness
of his Heart. Who can deliver from this Evil? Who can turn an Heart of Stone
into an Heart of Flesh? Can any Creature do it (...) No, but Jesus Christ can
do it. Many a Rocky Heart, that has been as Hard as an Adamant Stone, He has
broken it, and then healed it. He was sent to bind up the broken hearted, Isa.
61.1. Deliverance from the second Death is a mighty Salvation. There are some
concerning whom it is said, Of such the second Death has no power, Rev. 20.6.
There is a first Death, which is a Death of the Body, no Man is exempted from
that: What Man is there that lives, and shall not see Death. The second Death
is that which follows upon the first, as to the Soul of the Sinner, immediately
upon its separation from the ^dy and of both Soul and Body in Hell after the
day of Judgment, a part in that Lake which burns with fire and brimstone which
is the second death. This is that which Sinners are condemned unto. If it had
not been for Jesus Christ, no Sinner in the World had been delivered from that
terrible death: But Jesus Christ the Son of God has saved a World of Perishing
Souls from it. Joh. 3.17. God sent not his son into the World to condemn the
World, but that the World through him might be saved. The most formidable Thing
that can possibly be thought on, is the Wrath of the Infinite God. Who can save
from it? It is too mighty for any Creature in Heaven or Earth to undertake. Who
can quench that Devouring Fire? Christ has done it with his own Blood. Being
Justified by his Blood, we shall he saved from Wrath through him, Rom 5.9. It
is a Wrath to come, and will be Eternally coming. But Jesus has delivered us
from the Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. And this He does by saving from Sin. Mat.
1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their
sins. It is Sin that has caused the Displeasure of God against a sinful sinning
World, and caused his Wrath to burn to the bottom of Hell. Christ by saving
from Sin, has saved from Wrath, and from all the dreadful direful Effects of
that Wrath. Sin is the greatest Evil. He that saves from the greatest Evil is
the greatest Savior. Other Evils other Saviors may possibly deliver from, but
Sin is that Evil which none but Christ can save from.

7. Jesus Christ is an Everlasting Savior. No other Savior is so. All others
were but Temporal, Christ is an Eternal One. Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, and to day and for ever. He was a Savior Yesterday, and is a
Savior to Day, and will be a Savior for ever. He is the Savior of his People
in all Ages of the World. They may for ever Trust in him. Isa 26 4. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever, (...) Lord Jehovah is everlasting (...) There never was any
Man (...) the World began, but (...) ^ved by Jesus Christ. The Patri^hs under
the Old Testament, were saved by Christ, as well as we in these Days of the New
Testament. They did not obtain Heaven in one way, and we in another, but both
by Christ. Heb. 11.40. That they without us should not be made perfect. The
Redemption which he has obtained for us, is an Eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.12.
The Life which he has purchased is not a Temporal, but an Eternal Life. He says
concerning his Sheep, I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never
perish, Joh. 10.28.

8. Jesus Christ is the only and alone Savior of Men. As there is no God
besides Christ; the Father and the Son are the same God, so there is no Savior
besides him, Isa. 43.11. I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no
Savior. God has sent no other Savior for Men but his Son Jesus Christ. Acts
4.12. There is none other Name under Heaven, given among Men, whereby we must
be saved. They that will not own him shall Perish Eternally. Christ therefore
said to the Jews, If you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sins,
Joh. 8.24. He is not only a Savior, but the Savior, importing that he only is
so. Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. And as Christ, and no one else is the Savior
of the World, there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, so he is such an one by himself alone, without the assistance of
any Creature. Temporal Saviors have had many to assist them, or they could
have done nothing. But Christ had no Man to assist him in the mighty Work of
our Redemption. Isa. 9.16. He saw that there was no man, therefore His own arm
brought Salvation to Him. In making satisfaction for the sins of his People,
none joined with him. The high Priest went alone into the Sanctuary, not
without Blood, Heb. 9.7. By that signifying, that Christ alone by his Blood,
has made Atonement for the sins of his People. No one else did in the least
contribute toward that Salvation. Nor did any Man help him in conquering the
Enemies of our Salvation. He says in the Context before us, Isa. 63.3. I have
trodden the wine Press alone, and of the People there was none with me, I
looked, and there was none to help. Hence it is said of Christ, that he saves
to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. For that he has not left any part of our Salvation
to be accomplished by another, but he has done it all by himself alone. We see
that Jesus Christ is a Mighty Savior.

We proceed to the Second Enqui^ viz.

Who are the Subjects of that Salvation which this Mighty Savior is the Author
of*

Take the Answer in Three Particulars.

1. Fallen sinful Man is the Objects of Christ's Salvation. There is a World of
Fallen Angels which kept ou^ their first Estate; they are in Chain^ of
Everlasting Darkness. Christ is not a Savior to them. The Son of God took not
on him the Nature of Angels, but He assumed the Nature of Man, and is therefore
a Savior not of Angels that have sinned, but of Men that have sinned. And His
Salvation does extend to all sorts of sinful Men High and Low, Rich and Poor.
Wherefore it is said, God our Savior will have all Men, (meaning some of all
sorts of Men) to be saved, ^ Tim. 2.4. There is not a Man in the World, but
what needs a Savior. For all Men are sinners. God in His holy Word declares
that they are so. Gal 3.21. The Scripture has concluded all under sin. Now
Christ came to save sinners. This is a saying worthy of all acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came to save sinners. If Men were not sinners they would not need
a Savior. When the Pharisees said to the Disciples, ^y Eats your Master with
Publicans and Sinners, Jesus said to them, The whole have no need of a
Physician but the sick. I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance, Mat. 9.12, 13. Men have gone astray in the way of sin. They are
lost, their Souls are lost, in a woeful Wilderness of sin and misery. But that
Son of Man who is also the Son of God, came to seek and to save that which was
lost, Luke 19.10. The most wretched and forlorn sinners in the World, are not
excluded from partaking in His Salvation. For unto such He does offer it, in
the Gospel. To the Poor, the Maimed, the Halt, and the Blind, Luke 14.21. There
are some sinners which have a greater Load of Guilt upon their Souls than
others have. Christ will be a Savior to these, if they will come to Him for
His Salvation, and He bids them all come. Mat. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all you
that Labor and are Heavy Laden, and you shall find rest for your souls. Who
can save from the heavy Burden of the Guilt of sin? That Is a Burden
intolerable to be born: a Burden that has broke the Backs of Million of
Angels. Christ can deliver from it, though none but an Almighty Savior can do
it. He came to Save not only Sinners, but the Chief of Sinners. Nay, such as
have been guilty of all sorts of sins. We read in the Gospel: Mat. 4 23. That
he healed all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases; thereby
signifying that all sorts of sins, all manner of Soul-diseases should be healed
by him. This notwithstanding, we may not suppose that all the Sinners in the
World shall be Saved by Jesus Christ: Indeed he is able to Save them all. And
there is Merit enough in his blood to make Atonement for the sins of the whole
World, yea though there were a thousand Worlds Nevertheless, the greatest part of
Men will not be Saved by him, because they will not obey him.

Wherefore,

2. Believing Sinners are they unto whom this Mighty Savior will be the Author
of their Eternal Salvation. Their Salvation is begun as soon as they believe.
He that believes has Ev^^lasting Life. It is not only true (...) he shall have
Everlasting Life, but he has it already in the beginnings ^f it, and is in
respect of the Promise of God as sure of Heaven ^s if he were there already.
Joh. 3.16. God gave his only begotten s^n that whoever believes in him should
not perish, but have everlasting Life. All Believers shall be saved, whoever
they be. By him all that believe are Justified and none else No Unbeliever
dying in his state of Unbelief can be Saved. God has not only said but Sworn
that Unbelievers shall not be Saved. Heb. 3.19. To whom (...) he that ^e^
should not enter into his m^st, but to them that believe not.

3. (...) the Elect of God shall be Saved by (...) ^viour. For they either do
o^ ^ll believe. Hence the Scripture speaks of the Faith of Gods Elect, Tit.
1.1. Many of the Elect of God are already in Heaven: They were Believers on
Christ before they came there. Many of the Elect still abiding on the Earth are
Believers, and many of them are not as yet Believers, but they shall be such.
Christ therefore said, O her Sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also
I must bring, and they shall hear my voice. Joh 10 16. They are the subjects of
Christ's Intercession, and therefore shall be the subjects of his Salvation.
Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me. The Lords People Israel which he singled out from all the
Nations of the World, did Typify Gods Elect, who are therefore called, The
Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. The Son of God, who is the King of Israel, is the
Savior of Israel. To thee be Glory, O thou Savior of Israel, and the Hope
thereof!

SERMON II.
USE. I.
IT is a dangerous and a destructive Error for Men to seek Salvation in whole
or in part in any thing besides Christ. And yet thus it is with a World of
People. Wherefore the Prophet says, All People will walk every one in the Name
of his God, Mic 4.5. To walk in the Name of God is to Pray to him, and depend
on him for Salvation. There is an abundance of People that do so, but the God
they put their trust in is an Idol that cannot save. This has been the practice
of the Nations of the Earth generally. Thence it is that the greatest part of
the Children of Men, yea, whole Nations of them are in a perishing condition.
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nation, that
forget God. Salvation they would have, and Salvation they hope for, but in vain
because they hope for it without Christ. Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills and from the mountains. They worshipped their Idols on
the Hills and on the Mountains; those Idols were not Christ, and therefore in
vain was Salvation hoped for from them. There are many in the World that never
heard of Christ: How should such depend on him for Salvation. Romans 10.14. How
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed, and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a
preacher. A very great part of the Nations in the World, never had a Preacher
of Christ among them. And many that have heard of him do not believe on him.
Romans 10.16. They have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Isaias says, who has
believed our report? The Jews do not believe that Christ is Christ, that Jesus
of Nazareth is the promised Messiah; He came to them and offered himself to
them to be their Savior, but as the holy Prophets foretold that they would do,
they despised and rejected him. Joh. 1.11. He came to his own, and his own
received him not. They would be their own Saviors, they thought by a
righteousness of their own to save themselves, but therefore Salvation they
never obtained, nor was it possible they should without Christ, or without
Faith in him. They attained not Righteousness, they were not Justified: why?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law,
Romans 9.32. And there are many who own Christ to be their Savior, but then they
join other Saviors with him, as if this Mighty Savior were not able to save
them himself alone Christ says in the Context before us; Isai. 63.3. I have
trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me. They
then who expect Salvation partly from Christ, and partly from something else,
will be disappointed in their Expectation. Such Christians are too like the
Samaritans of old, of whom it is said, that they Feared the Lord, and served
graven Images. All Papists are such. They pretend that they hope for Salvation
by Christ, yet they Pray for Salvation to this and the other Saint, to the
Virgin Mary, to Saint Peter or St. Paul, more often than they do to Christ
Himself: nay, to fictitious Saints of their own making. The Pope will Canonize
them, and the deluded People will Pray to them, though it may be they were
wicked men, and their Souls now in Hell. Yea, they make a Crucifix their
Savior: They say of a Cross, Vnica spes, salusque nostra, thou art our only
hope and salvation. And among those that are called Protestants, many build
their hopes of Salvation on other things besides Christ. It may be on some
righteousness of their own. Nothing i^ more natural nor more dangerous than to
do so. Thus it was with Paul before his Conversion: He was touching the
righteousness of the Law blameless. A Man Zealous for the Ceremonies of Moses
Law, and free from any Scandalous Immorality, and those things he accounted
gain, Phil. 3.7. He made account that by this Righteousness he should gain
Heaven. Is it not thus with many that go under the Name of Christians! Ask them
a reason of their hope, they will presently say as the Pharisee did, I thank
God I am not as many other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers; and this
Morality they depend upon for Salvation, especially if with a Sober Life they
practice Religious Duties, they Pray and it may be Fast often; this form of
Godliness they doubt not will save them. They Pray to God, they Read the
Scripture, they Hear Sermons in Public Assemblies, they go to Private
Meetings. All this is well done: But is Prayer, Christ? Is Reading and Hearing
the Word, Christ? Are Private Meetings Christ? Again, some build their hopes of
Salvation on those Spiritual Privileges which they are the Subjects of. They
are baughty because of the holy mountain, Zech. 3.11. They are Church Members,
Baptized, admitted to the Lords Table; but had not the Children of Israel that
which was Analogous to this: 1 Cor. 10.2, 3. They were all baptized unto Moses
in the Cloud and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did
all drink the same spiritual Drink. Nevertheless, with many of them, God was
not well pleased; because they had only Sacraments, but not Christ in them,
they missed of Eternal Salvation. Yet again, there are who think that because
they are the Children of Godly Parents, and many Prayers have been made for
them, that therefore they must needs be saved. But are thy Parents, Christ? or
are their Prayers, Christ? The Jews had no words in their Mouths more
frequently than Abraham Abinu, that is, Abraham is our Father: They set up
Abraham in Christ's Place, hoping to be saved because of their Relation to, and
descent from that holy Patriarch. John Baptist endeavored to Convince them of
this their fatal Error. Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves we have
Abraham to our Father. Is there not a Parable in the Gospel which speaks of a
Son of Abraham which was in H^ll? Not only to set other things above Christ,
but to join any thing with him, as the Author of Salvation, is in Effect to
renounce him. The Apostle said to the Galations, If you be Circumcised Christ
shall profit you nothing Gal 5.2. Meaning, that if they did think to be
justified and saved by the Law Christ would not be their Savior,
notwithstanding their calling themselves Christians. We must seek for Salvation
in this Mighty Savior only, if we would not miss of it. Have you not heard of
the dying words of the blessed Martyr Lambert, Who in the midst of the flames
of Martyrdom, said, None but Christ, None but Christ.

USE. II.
If Christ is a Savior of Souls, then they who are the d^stroyers of Souls,
are the m^st unlike to our Lord Jesus Christ of a^y (...) the W^ld. In this
respect Christ and the Devil are most contrary: For the Devil is a Mighty
Destroyer of Souls. And Sin which is worse than the Devil, is a great Soul
Destroyer. The Devil by causing Men to sin, destroys their Souls. He designed
the destruction of all the Souls that ever should come into the World, when he
persuaded Adam, the common Parent of Mankind to sin a against God. This he did
soon after the World began, and is therefore said to be a Murderer from the
beginning, Joh. 8.44. And he had obtained his bloody design, if God had not
sent his Son Jesus Christ into the World to be the Savior of it. 1 John 3.8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy
the works of the Devil. The Devils work was to destroy Souls, Christ's work is
to save them. The Devil is still driving on his old cursed Trade. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour. Writers say of the Leopard that he delights in nothing so much as in
humane Blood. The Devil (...) a Lion and s^ a Leopard he thirsts after nothing
so much as the Blood of Souls. It is indeed true, that he designs the
destruction of the Bodies of Men. He is the Angel ^f Death. If God shall permit
him, he will poison the Air, and destroy Multitudes with the noisome Pestilence he
will raise bloody Wars, and set Nations upon destroying one another; but this
he does, because when the Bodies of Men are destroyed, if they dye in their
sins, their Souls are destroyed also. When there is a battle fought and many
Thousands slain, if they are Christless their Souls fall into the Devils hands
the great devourer of Souls, so unlike is he to Christ. And there are Men who
are the Devils Children and most unlike to Christ, in that they are the
destroyers of Souls. There are some that endeavor to hinder oth^s from
Embracing the way of Truth, which is the way of Salvation. Such (...) one was
Elymas, who sought to turn away Paulus Sergius from the Faith, to whom the
Apostle Paul said, O thou Child of the Devil will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord, Act 13.10 They that corrupt others with fundamental
Errors in Religion, are destroyers of Souls. There were many such in the
Primitive Times of Christianity. And therefore if there are (as there are) many
such in these days, it is not to be wondered at, who bring in damnable Heresies,
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction,
and many follow their pernicious ways. How many Souls does one Herestarch
destroy? How many Thousands, nay Millions were infected and their Souls
poisoned with the Heresy of Arius, who maintained that Our Mighty Savior was
but a Creature? A World of Miserable Souls were ruined by that Error. It was
^ns complaint that the whole World sighed and wondered to see it self become an
A^n. The Christian Church was in Extreme danger of being drowned in that (...).
It is not without reason supposed by Judicious Interpreters, that this is
spoken of in the Revelation. The serpent cost cut of his mouth waters as a
flood after the woman that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood,
Rev. 12.15. The Woman that had like to have been carried away with the flood,
is the Church. The Arian Heresy was a flood cast out of the Serpents Mouth. And
how many Millions of Souls have been poisoned with the Mohammedan Religion,
which has prevailed over a great part of the Earth for these thousand years and
more. Are not Mahometans described to have a King over them which is the Angel
of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, and in the
Greek Apollyon; both words signify a Destroyer: Rev. 9.11. Mahomets doctrine
came out of Hell, on which account he as well as the Devil may be called the
Angel of the bottomless pit. There are some who counsil and persuade others to
those things that will prove destructive to their Souls. It is noted concerning
Ahaziah, that they of the house of Ahab were his Counselors after the death of
his Father to his destruction, 2 Chronicles. 22.4. There are some who by their evil
Example cause others to be guilty of those sins which prove the destruction of
their Souls. Many Parents are in that respect guilty of the blood of their
Childrens Souls: Jer. 2.35. In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of
the p^or innocents. They teach their Children to be Idolaters. The Children
gather wood, and the Fathers kindle the fire, and the Women knead the dough, to
make cakes to the Queen of heaven, Jer. 7.18. So there are Children that learn
to Curse, and Swear, and to Profane the Sabbath Day from the Example of their
Parents. And great Men are oftentimes guilty of destroying Souls, by their
pernicious Example. It is said of Rehoboam, that he forsook the Law of the
Lord, and all Israel with him, 2 Chronicles 12.1. How many thousands of ruined
Souls, had that King to Answer for? And Jeroboam many more: He established
iniquity by a Law. He commanded his Subjects to Conform to a Superstitious
Worship, and the People went willingly after the Commandment. How often in the
Scripture is he branded with that Character, Jeroboam the son of Nebat that
made Israel to sin. He set up Devils for them to worship. He was then like the
Devil a great destroyer of Souls. Are there not those in the world that make
Laws to compel men to sin, or else to destroy their bodies, if they will not
consent to have their Souls destroyed. Many will sin against their Consciences
because of such Compulsory Laws, they that compel them to it must answer for
the Souls ruined by them. There is a Law in Antichrists Kingdom, that if Men
will confess the truth of the Gospel, which they call Heresy, they shall be
burnt to death for it, or other punishments as bad inflicted on them. How many
have of late Years, and at this day, been cast into loathsome Dungions, and
cruel Galleys, for their Religion? Has not the Dragon of France boasted, that
he caused Twenty hundred thousand Persons to renounce their Religion. In doing
so to Save the Bodies and Estates, they have lost and destroyed their Souls.
But who must answer for all those Souls, before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
the great Savior of Souls, in the Day when he shall judge the World in
Righteousness?

USE. III.
Considering that Christ is such a Mighty Savior, His People have cause to
Rejoice and to be of good Comfort. They need not fear what their Enemies can do
against them, as long as they have such a Mighty One as Jesus Christ to be
their King to Protect and Save them. Psalm. 149.2. Let the Children of Sion be
joyful in their King. He is Mighty in Counsel as well as in Power. And is
therefore able to disappoint all the Machinations of Earth and Hell against His
Church, be their Enemies never so many or never so mighty. Why do the Heathen
rage, and the People imagine a vain thing. The Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Nations take Counsel together against the Lord and against
his Christ. He that ^its in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision. The Devil and Wicked Men, have been designing the extirpation of the
Church of Christ along time. Christ should not have an holy People on the
Earth, if they could help it. Psalm. 83.3, 4. They have taken crafty counsel
against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said,
come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the Name of Israel may
be no more in remembrance. A thing which they could never ^ccomplish, nor ever
shall they, as long as the Church has such a Mighty Savior to defend them. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, who Rules the World, lets the Enemies of his People go on a
great way, until they say of them, they are a ruined Party, and then (...)
sudden he makes a mighty Re^tion, and crushes his Enemies under the Wheel of
his Providence, as we see in what befell Haman, who plotted the destruction of
all the Lord's People, but it proved his own ruin. That Mighty Lord Jesus
Christ, who saves his People with an Eternal Salvation, is easily able to
accomplish Temporal Salvations for them, when and so far as he pleases.
Oft-times he has done so when his People have been reduced to the greatest
extremity. When he sees that their Power is gone, and there is none shut up and
left to be a Delieverer for them, his own Arm brings Salvation. When it is with
them as it was with Isaac, the Knife was just made ready to cut his Throat,
then the Angel called out of Heaven, Hold thy hand, Genesis 22.11, 12. Christ was
that Angel. In the Mount, the Lord will be seen. When his People are brought
into a Mount of the greatest difficulty and danger, then it will be seen what
God can do, and will do for them. It has been Christ's usual way, to save his
People by such means, and at such a time as they least expected it. So when he
brought them out of Egypt, the Mountains did flow at his Presence, and he did
terrible things which they looked not for. In special when they were at the Red
Sea, rocky Mountains were on each side of them, which they could not possibly
go over. Pharaoh with a bloody Army was behind them. The Jewish Historians
relate, that there was Fifty Thousand Horse, and Two Hundred Thousand Foot in
that Army. The Sea was before them. Now Christ appears in this Extremity. The
Angel of God steps in between Israel and the Egyptians, and wrought a
Miraculous Deliverance. That Angel was Christ. The Lords People in Babylon,
said, we are cut off, our hope is lost; then did Christ open their Graves, and
caused them to come out of their Graves. And thus it has been with the
Christian Church. The Emperor Dioclesian raised the greatest Persecution
against Christians that ever was known, he endeavored, and thought it was
done, to have all the Bibles in the World Burned. He caused a Pillar to be
Erected with that Inscription, D^leta Superstitione Christiana, he gloried that
he had (as he imagined) extirpated Christianity. Now was the time for Christ to
appear. He raises up Constantine, makes him Emperor, and a Christian, then was
the Power of Christ Magnified, and his People wonderfully Saved. Of this I
conceive the Scripture speaks, Rev. 12.10. Now is come Salvation, and Strength,
and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ. But those comfortable
days for the Church were soon ended, and a very dark time quickly followed.
Arianisme and Antichristianism has overwhelmed the Church, and covered it with
worse than Egyptian Darkness. But the Comfort is that the Mighty Jesus will do
yet greater Wonders for his People. A light Day of Salvation is hastening which
shall have no Night following it. Isa. 60.20. Thy sun shall no more go down,
neither shall the moon withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be thine
Everlasting Light, and the Days of thy Mourning shall be ended. That will be a
light and blessed Time indeed. The Church of Christ, shall be no more a Subject
of Persecution. Ezekiel 28.24. T^ shall be no more a p^ing brier to the House of
Israel, nor any grieving Th^rn of all that are round about them. But the
contrary to that. The People of God who are now kept under, shall be lifted up
above the Hills, and be established on the Top of the Mountains. Dan. ^.18, 27.
The Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for
ever. The Kingdom and Dominion the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High.

USE IV.
If Christ is such a Mighty One, then w^ to His Enemies. The mightiest of them
all are nothing in his Almighty Hards. Devils are greater in Power and Might
than Men are, but they cannot stand before the Power of C^ The Disciple said,
Lord, the (...) are Subject to us through thy Name, that is, through thy Power.
They have sometimes cringed to Christ and begged Mercy of him. When there was a
Legion of Devils entered into a miserable Man, the Master or Chief Devil among
them, Cried with a loud voice, Jesus thou Son of God most high, I b^seech thee
torment me not, Luke 8.28. Christ is sometimes compared to a Lamb in the
Scripture, he is so (as some have observed Twenty times in the Book of
Revelations,) importing his Patience and Long-Suffering toward his Enemies.
But he is also compared to a Lion, denoting his Strength. This Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, Who shall stir him up? Woe to the Man or Men, that shall dare to
do it. He will soon tear them in pieces. He will tread them in his Anger, and
trample them in his Fury. He will crush them under his Feet, as Grapes in the
Wine Press, and make his Garments Red with their Blood. Woe to the greatest of
them, when Christ shall take them in hand. He shall strike through Kings in the
day of his Wrath, and shall w^und be ^d over many Countries, Psalm. 110.5, 8.
And has he not done so? Has not the Pagan World fallen before him, which was
thought impossible. When once the Day of his Wrath is come, the mightiest Men
on Earth will cry bitterly. Rev. 6 15. The Kings of the Earth, and the great
Men, and the chief Captains, said to the Mountains and Rocks fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that (...) on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be ab^e to
stand. Wa^ there not a fulfillment of that Scripture, when Christ overthrew the
Pagan Emperors? Lacta^tius who lived in those days, says particularly
concerning the Emperor Maximinus, that he had a Vision, he thought he saw
Christ sitting on a Throne, and many about him in White; he fell into despair,
and in Anguish cried, O Jesus Christ have Mercy on me* O Jesus Christ b^ Mercy
on me, and so Dyed; Prof^ng that if he might live, he would (...) more ^e a
Persecutor of Christ. The ^econd Psalm says, Be wise O ye Kings, Kiss the Son
of God, Worship him, left you perish in the way, when his Wrath is kindled but
a little. Did not the Emperor Julian (that infamons Apostate) perish in the
way, when he swore that as soon as he returned from his Expedition against the
Persians, he would Sacrifice to his Idols, in the Blood of Christians. Upon
which a Pagan scoffingly and blasphemously said to a Christian, What is the
Carpenters Son doing now, Julian is resolved as soon as he comes home to make a
Sacrifice of Christians. To whom the Christian replied, I Will tell you what he
whom you blasphemously reproach for being a Carpenters Son, is doing, He is
preparing a Coffin to put Julian in. He Prophesied right, for he never returned
from that Expedition. The Ancients tell us, that an Arrow from Heaven st^ck out
his Bowels, and then in desperate rage he said, vicisti Galilaee vic^i, Thou
Christ of Galilee, Thou have overcome me, thou have overcome me! Woe ^o Edom.
The old Edomites were a Type of the present Romanists. Woe to B^z^ab. The City
of Rome is the B^zrab of the World at this day. It is the Learned P^cator his
Observation on the Text before us, that as Boz^b was the chief City in the
Kingdom of Edom, so is Rome the chief City in the Kingdom of Antichrist. What
though that Cursed Kingdom has been gaining ground of later years, Christ can
soon make a Mighty Revolution of Affairs, he can do it in One Day, he can do it
by one Death. Have we not seen more than once that he has made a Mighty Change
in Three Kingdoms in one Day, by one Death? He can by one Death make as great a
Revolution in the greatest Kingdom in Europe, or on the Earth, and has many
other ways to do it. If the Edomites are secure and confident, that is a sign
that the things which shall come upon them make haste. When Babylon says in
her heart, I set as a Queen and shall see no sorrow, then shall (...) ^gues
come in one day, for strong is the Lord God who judges her. The Mighty Savior
of his People, will be a Mighty Destroyer of their Enemies.

USE V.
Christless Sinners are in a miserable Case. For they have no Savior. None
besides Jesus Christ is able to save a Soul. Act. 4.12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other. To miss of Salvation is a doleful thing. For if not
Salvation, what then is to be expected? The Gospel declares what, Mark 16.15,
16. Go and Preach the Gospel. And what must we say, when we Preach the Gospel?
we must say, He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall
be damned. Every Soul of Man must be either Saved or Damned, and both these
Estates are Eternal. Mat. 25.46. These, the Wicked, Christless Sinners will be
found among them, shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the righteous
into life eternal. If once in Hell, then forever in Hell. When once the Soul of
a Sinner is gone to that Place, where other ungodly Souls have gone before him,
shall he come out again? No, he shall not. Psalm. 49.19. He shall go to the
generation of his Fathers, they shall never see light. There is no hope that
ever he should. No more hope of it, than there is of a Man who is Dead and in
his Grave, that he should live again. Isa. 38.18. They that go down to the pit,
cannot hope for thy truth. When they are in that Prison, they cannot break
Prison. Can they break the Bars of the Bottomless Pi^? They must not come out
of that Prison until they have paid the whole Debt that was owing to the
terrible Justice of God. Not until they have paid the uttermost Farthing, Mat.
5.26. But that can Never, Never, Never be. And although some Sinners shall have a
deeper Damnation in Hell than others shall, yet they that shall have the least,
will be miserable enough. Whatever their pain of sense shall be, to be sure the
pain of loss which they shall be subject to, will be Infinite. They shall never
see the Face of God, they shall never enjoy His Favor. C^in, when a vein of
Vengeance was let into his Soul, fell a roaring at the dismal thought of this.
Genesis 4.14. From thy face I shall be had. So will it be with every Christless
Sinner. But who do we thin^ are they that shall receive the forest Damnation.
Christ has sent me to you this Day to tell you who they are. Verily they are
those that have had Christ offered to them in the Gospel, but have for all that
Dyed in a Christless estate. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation. No Mercy is to be expected for such Sinners. Heb. 10.28, 29.
He that despised Moses law dyed without mercy; of how much sorer punishment
suppose you shall he be thought worthy, that has trodden under foot the Son of
God. Will not those horrible Sinners which lived in Sodom and Gomorrah, have a
fearful Damnation at the last Day? But Sinners who have had the Gospel Preached
to them, and yet remain in a Christless estate, and live and dye so, shall have
a greater Damnation: Witness what the Lord Jesus Christ has spoken, Mat. 10.15.
Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, at
the day of Judgment than for that City. But some will be ready to say, Who are
Christless? Do you make Infidels of us? Are we not all Christians? I Answer; We
are so nominally, but are we all so really? Would to God it were so; But alas!
many call themselves Christians, whom Christ will not own for such another day.
Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; many will say have we not prophesied in thy name, and then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you. Most certain it is:

1. That there are but few in the World that have a true saving justifying
Faith. Romans 10.16. Who has believed our report. Among those that enjoy the
Gospel, who has believed? Among those that have Christ Preached to them, who
has believed? Faith is a rare Grace. Old Chrysostom was afraid that of the
Christians under his inspection, not one of an Hundred was a true Believer. But
they that are Faithless are Christless. For Christ dwells in the heart by
Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Nor is it every kind of Faith that gives an Interest in him.
It is not an Historical, or mere Doctrinal Faith, but a Faith that is attended
with Obedience, that is saving. Jam. 2.14. What does it profit my brethren,
though a man say he has faith, he does but say so, the thing is not true, and
have no works, can faith save him? No, such a Faith can never save him. A true
saving Faith is a working Faith. It works by Love. By Love to Christ, and Love
to his People, and Love to all his Commandments.

2. As for such as live ungodly lives, Christ will not be their Savior, if
they go on in their sins. Christ came to save his People from their sins, not
to save them with or in their sins. Let every one that names the Name of Christ
depart from iniquity. There are Men that call themselves Christians, that live
such wicked lives, that Christ esteems them a dishonor to his Name. They bring
a reproach on his Name. Some of the Ancients tell us, that Pagans in their
days, would say, If Christ was a good God, they that call themselves
Christians would not be such wicked Men, as we see many of them are. So it is
reported of the Indians, that they would not believe that Christ was a good
God, because the Spaniards who pretended to Worship him were the worst of Men.
Alas many that call themselves Christians are voluptuous Persons, and
scandalous Worldlings. Phil. 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you
often, that they are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction,
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things. There are among pretended Christians, those that indulge themselves
some in one Lust, some in another, some in Lusts of the Flesh, others in Lusts
of the Mind. Christ will own and save none of them at the last Day. But he will
say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart from me all ye that work
iniquity, Luke 13.27. He will say to one, thou wast a Drunkard, thou wast a
worker of Iniquity, depart from me; He will say to another, thy life was among
the Unclean, thou art a worker of Iniquity, depart from me; He will say to
another, thou wast given to Lying, thou did love and make a Lie, thou art a
worker of Iniquity, depart from me. Oh that Sinners would think sadly of this,
either they must depart from all their Iniquities, or Christ will say to them
at the Great Day, depart from me.

3. They that live in disobedience to the known Commandments of Christ, have
not an Interest in him. It is in vain for such to think, that this Mighty
Savior will save them. The Scripture says, that He is the Author of eternal
salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Then he will not be the Author
of Salvation to them that continue in their disobedience to him. What then will
become of Profane Sinners, that go on in their Trepasses? Does not Christ in
his Word say, Swear not at all? How then can any profane Swearer think that
Christ will save him? Does not Christ in his Word say, Bless and Curse not? How
then can they who in their rage will Curse and Damn themselves and others,
think that Christ will save them from Damnation? And sins of Omission, contrary
to the express commandment of Christ, may hinder Salvation as well as sins of
Commission. Now say, has not Christ positively commanded Men to Pray in Secret?
Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret. It may be the hour is yet to come,
the day is yet to dawn, when thou have done so. And are there not some who call
themselves Christians, that have so little Religion in them, as not to Pray
with their Families. What Lamentab^e Christians are they. Does not Christ by
his Apostle say to Masters in Families, Continue in Prayer, Col. 4 ^, 2. Which
words allude to the continual Offering which was to be Morning and Evening,
daily. Masters in Families, see that you Worship God with your Families Morning
and Evening every day. And does not God by the Prophet awfully threaten
Prayerless Families? How often have th^se Words been sounding in your Ears,
Pour out thy fury on the Families which call not on thy name, Jer. 10 25. How
can prayerless Sinners expect Salvation from Christ, on whose Name they do not
call. There is not a true Christian in the World, but he is a praying one. They
then that are Prayerl^ss, we may conclude that they are Christless.

I see the Hour is more than spent, yet I would mention in a few Words, One Use
more. I have not spoken to you for several Lords Days; but God knows I have not
been Idle, but doing that which I hope will be of some use to you and others,
when I shall be gone to that World where I have for a long Time longed to be. I
know that the Time of my departure out of this World is now very near at hand:
Blessed be God that it is so. It needs must be so, considering that this Lords
Day, Four and Fifty Years are past since I began to Preach the Gospel in this
Place (not indeed to many of you then, for many of you, I suppose the most of
you, were born into the World since that, but) to your Fathers and
Grandfathers: for so long a time have I been a very Unprofitable Servant.
Nevertheless, I have (after my weak manner) been endeavoring to Preach Christ
to you. And now that I am Preaching Christ, how glad should I be, if I might
dye before I stir out of this Pulpit!

The VI. and Last USE shall be this,
Let every One that would be Saved make sure of a Christ.

I Will set before you, only two Motives.

Consider 1. The most guilty Sinners in the World may be Saved by him, He is a
Savior and a Great One. Therefore the greatest sinners may be saved by him.
Notwithstanding the wounds of thy Soul are desperate as to all other Saviors.
There is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there, will heal thee if thou will go to him, although thou have no Money nor Price to offer him, do but go to
him, and he will heal thee on free cost. Notwithstanding, thou have stabbed
thine own Soul to Death a Thousand times over, a Plaster of his Blood will
heal all those wounds. Thou have destroyed thy self, thou have murdered thine
own Soul, but in him is thy help. Suppose thy Soul to be fallen never so deep
in Hell, the Arm of this Savior can reach and reco^ it As great Sinners as
over live^ in the World have been saved by ^n. He never refused any that came
to him, on the account of their having been great Sinners. O then make haste to
him, and though thy sins have been as Scarlet, they shall be where as Snow,
though they be red like Crimson, they shall (...) as Wool.

Consider 2. The day is coming when a Christ will be valued at a high rate.
When an Interest in him will be thought more worth than a Thousand Worlds. When
Sinners are on their Deathbeds, and see Hell gaping for them, then what would
they not give for an Interest in Christ? How often do we see, that when a
sinful creature is sick and like to dye, ask him, are you willing to dye, he
will say, if I had an Interest in Christ I should be willing to dye, I would
now part with all the World for that. Or, if their Hearts are hardened, and
Conscience stupefied, at their Death, to be sure at the Day of Judgment, an
Interest in Christ will be valued above Crowns and Kingdoms, when Kings and
Emperors, shall cry to the Rocks to fall on them, to hide them from the Wrath
of the Lamb. What crying do we think there was among the Sinners of the Old
World, when the Flood came, O that we were in the Ark! A more dismal cry will
there be among Sinners at the Great Day. O that we were in Christ! O that he
would be our Savior! Nor will any thing be such a Terror and Torment to the
Damned in Hell as this thought, I might have had a Christ, but I neglected so
great Salvation and now it is too late. It was a sad speech of Francis Spi^a,
who in his despairing Agonies said, The ^hought of Christ is a torment to ^e,
because I know I have no Interest in him. Wherefore go to Christ every Soul, ^o
you not hear him call you. Joh. (...). Jesus ^d and cried, if any man ^hir^ts
^et him come to me and drink. Do you ^hirst after the Waters of Salvation?
Christ excludes not any. He has sent me this Day into this Assembly (...) offer
Salvation in his Name. Oh be not like the Jews of whom Christ complains. Joh.
5.40. You will not (...) that you might have life. Will you not? Then Death and
Damnation will be unavoidable. Go to Christ by Prayer. It is said in the
Gospel, that his Disciples came and awoke him, saying, Lord save us we perish,
Mat 8.25. Get alone, and say, Lord Jesus I have an Immortal Soul, which will
perish Eternally, if thou do not save me. Lord save me or I perish. Go to him
by Faith, give thy self to Christ. Join thy self to him in an Everlasting
Covenant, to be his, and his only, and his for ever If thou do so in
sincerity, the Lord will say to thee as once he did to a great Sinner: Luke ^
5^. The (...) has saved t^ee, g^ in p^a^.

Pre^d (...) Sept 11 ^
GOD Converts His Elect, Some at one Age, and some at another, Commonly before
Old Age.
Matthew XX. 5, 6. Again he went out about the Sixth and Ninth Hour, and did
likewise. And about the Eleventh Hour --


IN the beginning of this Chapter there is a Parable concerning a Householder
who being the Lord of a Vineyard, hi^ed Laborers to work therein. It was
customary with the Jews for Men to go and stand in the Man Place (...) any
would set them to w^ which custom Writ^ inform (...) is still practiced in the
Eastern Nations The Jews divided their days into twelve Hours, and th^se into
four Stations, or Portions, containing each of them three Hours. First from Six
to Nine, which was with them the third hour of the day, from that to Twelve was
the Sixth Hour, from which to that which we call three a Clock in the
afternoon, was by them called the Ninth Hour, from that to Five was the
Eleventh or last Hour of the day. By the Vineyard in this Parable the Church of
God is meant. By the Laborers in the Vineyard we may understand the Elect of
God Called and Converted to him. By the several Parts of the day, the several
Ages of the Life of Man, Youth, Middle Age, and Old Age are described.

The Text affords unto us this Doctrine.

DOCT. That GOD Calls and (...) His Elect some at (...) Age* (...) another, but
most Commonly (...) Old Age. As for the Reason why the Lord does so, it is
sufficient to say, that in doing thus he shows his Sovereignty: He is not under
any Obligation to give an account of his proceedings with men. Job 33.10, 13.
God is greater then man* He gives not account of any of his matters. We may not
find fault with him who may do what he pleases. We may justly find fault with
Men, who deserve to be faulted, but not with God, Isai. 45 9. Let the porsherds
strive with the potsherds of the Earth, shall the cla^ say to him that
fashioned it what make thou? Ther^ are many who are never Called at all: They
have not so much as the Out-ward Call of the Gospel, and many who have the
External Call, have not that which is Internal, Effectual and Saving. Many are
^lled and fe^ chosen God declares his ^overeignty in choosing some and refusing
others He has mercy on whom be wi^ have (...), and whom he will be ha^. His not
the potter power over the day, to make (...) to honor and a^ (...) It is his
Sovereign Will and Pleasure to Call some of his Elect at one hour, and others
at another. And no one may say, Why did He call such an one at the Third hour,
and another not until the Eleventh hour. When the Laborers had some of them a
greater reward than others of them thought they should have had, the Lord
silenced them by saying, May I not do with mine own what I will? Thus all Men
are his own: They are his Creatures. Has not one God made us? Therefore he may
call some and refuse others, and Call some sooner and others later, according
to his Will and Sovereign Pleasure. Nevertheless, the infinitely wise God has
great and good Reason for what he does in this and in all the dispensations of
his Providence.

We proceed then to clear the Truth before us by an Induction of particulars.

1. Some of the Elect of God are Converted in their Y^uth. Of this we have many
Instances recorded in the Scriptures. Joseph was doubtless a Godly. Child
before his Brethren Sold him into Egypt, and yet then he was but Seventeen
Years old. He was troubled at the Misdemenours of his Brethren, and informed
his Father of them, that so he might use proper means for their Reformation,
Gen 37.2. He was therefore a Pious Youth, Samuel also was a Godly Child: he had
rare Communications from God in his ^ender Years: Such as no one else had in
those days when the Word of the Lord was precious: 1 Samuel 3.8 (...) that the
Lord had called (...) Before he was come to his full ^th there was a signal
Presence of God with him, v. 19. Obadi^h could say, I (...) the (...) from my
youth, ^ ^ng 18.1^. ^sah in the Sixteenth Year of his age discovered an
extraordinary (...) and Zeal for God: While he was ^ng he sought after G^ (...)
himself to make a (...) ^gh Reformation throughout his ^gd (...) thy is another
Instance of Lu^ Piety* He had Grace wrought in his Soul when he was a Child: 2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. He had a
godly Grandmother, and a godly Mother, under whom he had a Religious
Education; and the Apostle seems to intimate that his young Soul had Grace
wrought in it, by the blessing of the Lord on their Instructions, which
doubtless were attended with continual Prayer for him, 2 Timothy 1.5. Two Reasons
may be mentioned, why some of the Elect of God are Converted in their Youth.

1. Because some of them dye in their Youth. Therefore they must either be
Converted in their Youth, or not at all. For there is no Conversion after
Death, since every Man's Eternal State is then determined. After Death comes
Judgment, Heb. 9.27. The Immortal Soul then returns to God that gave it, and is
accordingly adjudged to its Everlasting State. Some that dye in their Youth, go
to Heaven when they leave this World. Now the Glory of Heaven is begun in
Grace. Without holiness none shall see the Lord. Wherefore it is necessary that
Regenerating Grace should be wrought in them, in their young Years. Jeroboam
though a very wicked Man had a Son which was a godly Child: 2 King. 14.13. In him
there was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel. In the 17th
verse, it is said, The Child dyed: Since he was to dye when a Child, it was
necessary that a Good Thing, that Grace should be found in him before Death
took him out of the World.

2. Some of the Elect of God are in his Eternal Purpose designed to do great
Service for his Name. Most of those mentioned in the Scripture as Converted in
their Youth, were in their Generation singular Instruments of Gods Glory, and
of doing Service for his Name. That so Men may do Service for God, it is
ordinarily requisite that they should have an unblemished Youth. Otherwise it
is like to be with them as was Prophesied concerning Reuben, when his Youth had
been blemished with an Incestuous Adultery: Genesis 49.4. Thou shall not excel,
because, etc. Such Sinners upon their true Repentance shall have their Sins
forgiven and their Souls Saved: but though they shall go to Heaven they seldom
excel on Earth. Scandalous Miscarriages will be a lasting wound to a Man's
Reputation. Wherefore God ordinarily when he designs a Person for special
Service, seizes him for himself whilst he is Young. It is true, that Paul
before his Conversion had been a great Sinner; and yet afterward the most
Serviceable Man in the World. But although he was a great Unbeliever and
Persecutor, he was not guilty of such Sins as blemish a Man's Reputation in the
esteem of the World. He was a very blameless Person. It is a very great Mercy
to have an unblemished Youth; for that Scandalous Miscarriages in Youth, will
stick upon a Man all his days after. Now if a Man has Grace wrought in his Soul
whilst it is Early days with him, that will be a blessed means to preserve
him from an unblemished Youth. Again, That so a Man may do much Service for
Christ he must have time allowed him ^o do the Services appointed for (...)
Therefore are some of the ^ect called into the Vineyard betimes, (...) so they
may have time to finish (...) the work decreed for them ^fore their going out
of the W^ ^dinarily they that must (...) ^l of work must have (...) of time to
do it in.

2. Some (...) of God (...) Called and Conver^d (...) ^deres of their Childhood
and (...) They are called at the (...) of the Day of their Life (...) Middle
Age. (...) (afterw^ds (...) so. Some writers affi^ (...) and thirty Years Old
at the (...) Conver^n. Notwithstanding (...) called a Young Man; he was (...)
young, or then the High ^iest would not have employed him in such work as (...)
which he Commissioned him for. It is most probable that Zacbeus, and the
Jailer, and the Thief on the Cross were in their Middle Age when Converted.
Such are the fittest and most capable to work in the Lords Vineyard, and
therefore such are most commonly Called into it. Children or decayed Old Men
are not so fit to be Laborers as Young Men, because of their Strength. 1 John
2.14. I have written unto you young men because you are strong. An Eminent
Divine of our own observes that, That Men of such an Age are the fittest
Materials for the Frame of Grace to be Erected on. Although God can work with any
Tools, yet He manifests his wisdom in choosing such as have the greatest fitness
for the work he designs them for in his Vineyard.

3. There are some of the Elect of God Called and Converted in Old Age. There
were some called into the Lords Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour: When the day of
Life is just Expiring, and they ready to drop into the Grave, God has looked on
them, and had Mercy on them. It was Charitably spoken by the Martyr Julius
Palmer, when one tempted him to recant, but seeing there was no persuading him
to that, said, One of us twain must be damned, for we be of two Faiths, and
certain I am that there is but one Faith that Leads to Life and Salvation. I
hope (said the Martyr) that we both shall be Saved, For as it has pleased our
Merciful Savior, according to the Gospel Parable, to Call me at the third hour
of the day, at the Age of Four and twenty Years, so I trust that he will Call
you at the Eleventh hour of this your Old Age, and give you Everlasting Life
for your Portion. This indeed is not usual, nevertheless, this sometimes
happens, though very rarely. One thus Paraphrases on the Text before us, Why
stand you all the day idle, you have lost the season of your, Work, and hope of
your Reward. The day is almost spent, you have no reason to Expect that I
should hire you, or reward you, yet for this once I will do it, though I do not
use to do it. God is pleased to Call some at all hours, that Sinners in all
Periods of their Lives, might have some grounds of Encouragement to Repent, and
Return to him. When there was in the Second Chapter of the Acts, three thousand
Converted in one Day by one Sermon, no doubt but that there were some Elderly
Persons among them. Men must have an Outward Call from the Word of God, before
they have the Inward Call, wrought by the holy Spirit. How shall they believe
on him of whom they have not heard? Faith c^mes by hearing, and ^earing by the
w^rd of God. When as there are some of the Elect of God, who have not the
Outward ^l before Old Age has overtaken them Abraham was Seventy and five Years
old, when God called him, G^. 12 4 Indeed if Men have lived under the Light of
the Gospel all their ^es for the most part either they are Converted before Old
Age (...) never (...) And yet now and then there (...) been ^n Example of such
Converted to God. We (...) One Instance of i^ (...) in the Scripture, viz. that
of Manasseh. He had a godly Father, who taught him in the ways of God, when he
was a Child, Isai. 38.19 And he lived under the Ministry of the Evangelical
Prophet Isaiah, nevertheless, he continued in his Rebellion until old Age, and
then was brought home to God a little before his Death, when he was about the
Six^eth Year of his Age. The Glory of the Divine Attributes does appear
wonderfully, when an Old Sinner is Converted. Therefore some such are Called.
For,

(1.) There is then a glorious discovery of the Mighty Power of God. To make
Bones that have been a long time dead and dry to live, no Power but that which
is Almighty, can do it, Ezekiel. 3^.2, 3. When Lazarus had been dead but Four
days, the glorious Power of God was minifested in rest^g him to Life.
Wherefore Christ said to Martha when she objected ^t her Brother had been dead
Four days, Sa^d I not unto thee, that if thou would believe thou should
see the glory of God; Meaning his Power, Job. 11.40 It is a greater discovery
of the Power and Glory of God, when a Soul that has been threescore Years dead
and perishing in a Grave of Sin and Misery, shall be made to live. Its an
easier matter to bend a young twig than an old tree: So is it an easier matter
to Convert a Young Sinner than an Old Sinner, which has got incurable habits of
Sin, incurable by any Power less than Miraculous. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin? or the Leopard his spots, then may ye do good that are
accustomed to do evil. According to humane judgment it cannot be, but with God
there is nothing impossible.

(2.) The Mercy of God does appear gloriously in the Conversion of such
Sinners. Misery is the object of Mercy. When God relieves such as are extremely
Miserable his Mercy is great. Now the most miserable Creature, on the face of
the whole Earth, is an Ungodly Old Man. Therefore if such an one shall be
Converted, Divine Mercy will be glorified. It is from Infinite Mercy that any
Sinner in the World is Converted. 1 Pet. 1.^. According to his abundant Mercy
be has begotten (...) again: but it is more abundant Mercy if an Old Sinner is
begotten again. When God forgives a Sinner He has Mercy on him. Wherefore David
Praying for the Pardon of his sins, says, Have mercy upon me, O God, according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions, Psalm. 51.1.
As for one that has continued many Years in his sins, what an Infinite Number
of sins has he been guilty of? It may be said to him, Is not thy wickedness
great and thine iniquities infinite? Job. 22.5. How many Millions of times has
an Old Sinner transgressed the Law of God? If th^n he is at last Converted, and
al^ his innumerable Sins forgiven, Men and Angels will see and say that the
Lord is Gracious and Merciful, and abundant in Goodness, That Is his Name.

(3) The Freen^ss and Riches of the Grace of God, is hereby declared, to the
Everlasting Admiration of Saints and Angels. No great Service for the Lord of
the Vineyard, can be Expected from an Old Man. He has not time to do much for
God, if he would never so feign. He is come to his Eleventh hour. He has but
one hour to work in, before his Sun is set, and his day is done: If the Lord
shall call such an one into his Vineyard, he can expect little Work or Service
from him. It must then proceed from free Grace and Goodness. When great Sinners
are Converted, the Grace of God therein is illustrious. The Ephesians had been
great Sinners: Idolaters, Magicians, and in other respects great Criminals. God
Converted them, that so the riches of his Grace might be seen and admired in
all succeeding Ages. Ephesians. 2.7. That in the Ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his Grace. The same is to be said, when an Old Sinner is
Convered* for such are great Sinners. Although some of them have not been guilty
of such Sins as the World cries shame on, nevertheless, the multitude of
iniquities and guilt which they have in so many Years contracted, renders them
great Sinners.

We proceed to the Improvement of the Doctrine before us.

USE I.
We are to be Cautioned against judging the Final Estate of Men, or to conclude
Preremptorily that they will never be Called, because they are not Called so
soon as some others have been. Suppose a Sinner to be come to his Eleventh
hour, who knows but the Lord may Call him then? We are to judge nothing before
the Time. Life time is a time of Mercy, until that is ended we know not what
God may do for miserable sinners. It is true, that we may judge of the present
state of Men, we may certainly know that they are for the present in a sinful
state, in which if they shall dye, they will perish Eternally, Peter said to
Simon Magus, Thy heart is not right in the sight of God, for I perceive that
thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8.21, 23.
And our Savior Christ has said, You shall know them by their fruits, do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thirstles? Mat. 7.16. If a Tree does bring
forth Thorns, we may know that it is not a Vine. So if Men live ungodly lives,
we may know that they have not Grace in their Souls. Hence the Apostle says, In
this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil, whosoever
does not r^ghteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 3.10. From that Scripture our Famous Hooker observes 1. That there are two
sorts of Men in the World, the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil.
2. That these may be known. 3. That he that is a bater of Saints, and a worker
of Iniquity, has a brand mark of a child of the Devil, whereby he may be
discovered. But although we may judge of Men's present estate, we may not judge of
their future and final estate. For that is a Secret known to God only. Now
Secret things belong to the Lord our God, those things which are revealed
belong to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. It is not for us to pry into the Ark of Gods secret
Counsels, as if we had seen the Book of Election and Reprobation. But rather we
should say as the Prophet did, when God proposed that Question to him, Ezekiel.
37.3. Can these bones live, he answered, O Lord God thou know. So if it be
said, can such an Old Sinner live? He that has been an old Standard bearer in
the Camp of the Devil, shall he ever be a faithful Soldier of Jesus Christ?
Thou Lord know whether it can be, whether it shall be.

USE II.
Young Persons are to be called upon. Let them Now hearken to the call of God
inviting them to come and Labor in his Vineyard. The wise Man saves, Remember
NOW thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Outward calls you have had from the
Word of God publicly dispensed in his Name. And many of you have been called
upon by your godly Parents. All these calls will aggravate your Condemnation at
the Last Day, if you obey them not. The Words of Wisdom are exceeding awful, Oh
that they might sink down into your Ears and Hearts. Prove. 1.24 Because I have
called and you refused, but have set at naught all my counsel, and would have
none of my reproof I w^ll laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes, when your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish
comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Beware Young Men, in the fear
of God beware that it be not thus with any of you. Therefore delay not your
Repentance toward God, and making sure of an Interest in Christ. Do it Now.
Jer. 25.5. Turn ye NOW. The Devil says not N^w. And thy own wicked Heart will
join with him and say, not Now, another time will do as well, but God says NOW
without any the least delay. Then say not as Young Persons are apt to do, that
when Old Age has overtaken you, then you will turn to the Lord. But how do
thou know thou shall live to Old Age? Where there is one that does so, there
are many that do not. Have not Deaths been multiplied among Young Persons? How
many have you known as likely to live as you, but Death has cut them off Some
godly ones dye in Youth, but far more ungodly ones. Job 36.14. They dye in
youth, and their life is among the unclean. When Young Men are very Wicked,
they provoke the Lord to shorten their days. Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord
prolongs days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. Then be not
Wicked overmuch for why should thou dye before thy time. Neither say, He
Repent when Sickness and Death comes. But do thou not know that Deathbed
Repentance is seldom true? Sinners will then flatter God and make fair
Promises, but he that sees into the Hearts of Men, knows when they are not
sincere. Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and inquired
early after God. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouths, and they
lied unto him with their tongue, for their heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in his covenant. Do we not often see it, that
Sinners when they think they shall dye make great promises, that if God will
spare their lives they will reform their Evil ways and yet after the Lord has
mercifully spared them, they are as bad and worse than ever before. Moreover,
how do thou know that thou shall lie on a Sickbed. It may be thou shall be
taken out of the World by a Sudden Death, and not have time to put up so much
as One Prayer to God for the Pardon of thy sins, and the Salvation of thy Soul.
So has it been with some Young Men in this Place. Therefore remember thy
Creator Now Repent Now, give thy self to Christ Now.

Consider 1. That if Young Persons will turn to the Lord, he will surely accept
of them. They that give their first fruits to God please him wonderfully. Prove.
8.17. They that seek me early shall find me. Wherefore whilst it is Early days
with you, seek the Lord. You may seek Him too late: After Death has taken hold
of you, it will be too late. Then although you seek him Early, you will not
find him. Seek him Early in the Morning and you shall find him, but if you seek
him Early in the Evening after the Eleventh hour is past, you shall not find
him. Thus you may seek the Lord too late: but it is impossible for you to seek
him too soon If Young Children will come to Christ, He will not refuse them. He
said, Suffer little Children to come to me; and took some such into his arms
and blessed them, Mar. 10.14. Were not these blessed Children thin^ you? To see
a godly Child is a blessed sight. To ^e a Child of Seven Years old a Praying
Child; A Child that will not Lie; A Child that fears God, and dare not sin: How
welcome are such Children to him. And if they that are past their Childhood: If
Young Men will come to Christ, and to God through Jesus Christ with a Penitent
heart, He has Mercy in Store for them. If a Young Ephraim is become a Penitent
Ephraim, the Lord will be Merciful to him. Jer. 31.19, 20. I have heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself -- I smote on my thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded
because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a
pleasant Child, for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord.

Consider 2. They that turn to God betimes, may do a great deal of Good in the
World. If they come into the Lords Vineyard betimes, they may do a great deal
of work there. If the Lord continue their Lives to Old Age, how many thousands
of Prayers will they pour out before him, for themselves and others. It may be
many will be the better for them, and for their godly and fruitful
Conversation. There is a cursed Proverb which says, A Young Saint will ^e an
Old Devil; the contrary is true. (...) Young Saint, if the lives to be an Old
Man* will be a Venerable Christian Prove. 16.31. The hoary head is a crown of
glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

Consider 3. They that turn to God in their Young Days will be gloriously
rewarded in another World. All their Secret Prayers will be rewarded. Mat. 6.6.
Enter into thy closes, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee
openly. So concerning other works of Piety and Charity, they shall not go
without a reward. Having had a long time to be working and doing good in the
Lords Vineyard, all will come into the account and the reward must need be
great and very glorious. Paul was Converted before he was an Old Man, and after
he was set to work in the Lords Vineyard, he was exceeding Laborious, and
continued therein until he became Paul the Aged. When near his Death, he was
greatly comforted in Meditating on the crown which was reserved for him. As
they that have lived long in Sin, will have the greater Damnation for it, so
they that have faithfully Served God for a long time, will have the greater
glory. Such Considerations as these should cause Young Persons to go to work in
the Lords Vineyard N^w when he Calls them.

USE III.
Let me speak a Word to those that are come to the Eleventh hour of the Day of
their Life, and yet have not Obeyed the Call of God. Are there not Old Men who
are still in their Natural Unregenerate Estate? Oh do not neglect the Great
Salvation any longer Will it not awaken you to consider (I wish you would
consider it) that you have but an Hour left you. The Glass of your Life will
quickly be run out. Your Eternal Salvation depends on the improvement of an
Hour. You had need look about you and bestir your selves; your Case is
ha^ardous, yet it is ^o* desperate and hopeless. God has Called some at the
Eleventh Hour, therefore it is possible that he may Call you. If you will now at
last obey his Call, he will not reject you. Christ has said, Him that comes to
me I will in no wise cast cut, Joh. 6.37. He does not say, except he is an Old
Man. For all that, Let him come with his Heart and Soul, and Christ will
receive him. Therefore despair not. I have elsewhere taken notice that the
Blessed Martyr Bilney when he heard a Preacher say in his Sermon, if you that
are Old Men should return to God, Do you think that he will accept of you,
after you have been serving the Devil so long? Do you think that God will take
the Devils leavings? The Martyr was troubled at him, and said that Man did not
Preach the Gospel. The Gospel offers Salvation to all Men, Old as well as
Young, if any will Repent and Believe. Since God Calls you still, he will not
refuse you, no not the Oldest Sinner among you all, if you will turn to him
with all your Heart. We read in the Gospel concerning a poor Blind Man, that
cried to the Lord Jesus to have Mercy on him, Jesus stood still and commanded
him to be called, and it was said to the Blind Man, Be of good comfort, he
calls thee, Mat. 10.49. So there is this Crevis of hope and comfort left for
thee, that have continued in thy sins to Old Age, Behold, the Lord calls thee
(...) come and work in his Vineyard. Come then before the Sun is set, and thy
Day is done. For thy Life delay not an Hour longer. Thy Time is limited to an
Hour, yet if after so long a time of Disobedience, you will this Day hearken to
the Voice and Call of God, happy art thou, otherwise Everlastingly Miserable.
Think on that Scripture (Old and Young think of it) with which I conclude. Heb.
4.7 He limiteth a certain time, saying to day, after so long a time, To day if
you will hear his voice harden not your hearts.

When Godly Men dye, Angels carry their Souls to Another and a better World.
LUKE XVI. 22. -- The beggar died, and was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom: --


THESE words were spoken by the Lord Jesus Christ. In the Ninth Verse of this
Chapter He Exhorts to Charity and Liberality. The Covetous Pharisees received
his Doctrine. with the greatest contempt and scorn. Whereupon he entertained
his Hearers with an awful Parable concerning a Rich Man, and a Godly Poor Man,
declaring the State of each of them in another World, after this Life is Ended.
The rich Man is not named, but he is described to be one that was clothed in
Purple, and fared sumptuously every day, verse 19. He showed more kindness to
his dogs, than to the Poor Man, and the dogs were more friendly to him, than
was their Matter. The Poor Man has the Name of Lazarus given to him, which is a
Contract from Eleazer. Hence is that Expression common among us, a poor Lazar.
This Poor and Pious Eleazer as described. (1.) From his miserable condition in
this life: He was as poor as a beggar, and besides that afflicted with sore
bodily diseases. (2.) He is described from his happiness after this life. It is
said, that when he dyed Angels carried him into Abraham's bosom. When it is said
Angels carried him, the meaning is that they carried his Soul. By a figure
called Synechache. (...) the whole is put for a part. T^ ^gels did not carry
his Body, (...) Soul. Christ spoke to the (...) specially to the Ph^ris^ (...)
^^ed that the (...) with their Bodies. It is a celebrated saying among their
Doctors, That when Righteous Men die Angels carry their Souls to Paradise, and
into Eden. They tell ^s that when a famous Rabbi dyed, another said of him, He
is this day in Abraham's bosom. The happiness of Heaven is set forth by that of
a joyful Feast. Among the Jews they sat at their Tables in a discumbent
postute. He that was the most beloved guest, said his head in the bosom of the
Master of the Feast: which gives light to that Scripture: Joh. 13.23. There was
leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his Disciples whom Jesus Loved. Abraham ^s
mentioned rather than any other Saint, because he was the Father of ^he
Faithful, the Promise was made to him, and he was Eminent for his Hospitality,
contrary to the Covetous rich Miser whom the Parable speaks of. Moreover,
Abraham had a faithful Servant whose Name was Eleazer, or Lazarus: That Godly
Servant does now Feast with his Master Abraham after a celestial manner in
another World. Wherefore the Doctrine to be insisted on, is, DOCT. That when
Godly Men dye, suppose them to be never so Poor in this World, their Souls do
not dye, but are carried by holy Angels into another and a better World.

The Doctrine may be Opened and Confirmed in several Propositions.

PROP. I. Every Man consists of a Body and a Soul in respect of the one of
which he is subject to Death, but not in respect of the other. These are the
two essential Parts of Man. It was so in the first Creation, and it is so
still. The first Man consisted of a Body and a Soul: Gen 2.7. The Lord God
formed Man of the dust of the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath
of Life, and Man became a living soul. Thus does every Man consist of an humane
Body, and a rational Soul. That Creature which does not so, is not one of
Mankind. Math. 10, 28, Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul, but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell. These two are of very differing nature and properties. The Body does
incur the outward Senses, but the Soul does not so. The Body may be seen and
felt, but the Soul cannot be so; for it is a Spiritual substance. Christ said
to the Disciples when he appeared to them after his Resurrection, and they
thought he had been a Spirit, Handle me and see for a spirit has not flesh and
bones as you see me have, Luke 24.39. The Soul is often called a Spirit. In the
Scripture, Man, is distributed into Body and Soul, (as was showed) and
sometimes into Body and Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20. It is in respect of the Body that
Men dye, which is therefore called your Mortal Body, Romans 5.14. And that being
an Essential Part of Man, he is called Mortal Man, Job 4.17. Its usual among
Writers to call Men by the Name of Mortals. To dye is the fate of all the Men
on the Earth. Godly Men as well as others. Lazarus as well as Dives must see
Death There Is a Statutum est, a Statute Law for it: Heb. 9.27. It is app^nted
for men to dye. We may see the Original Statute: Genesis 3.19. D^st thou art, and
unto dust shall thou return. But the Soul does not dye with the Body. Ecc^
12.7. The dust, that is the Body which was Originally dust shall return to the
earth as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Man is made
for Eternity, and not like Inferior Creatures, whose Sensitive Souls dye with
hei^ bodies. This is a truth which Me^ ^ag^t to know, yet but few know (...) as
they should do. Wherefore Solomon says, Who knows the spirit of a man that
goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth,
Eccl. ^.21. The Soul of Man neither shall not ^an dye. All the Men in the
World, are not able to kill a Soul. To deny the Immortality of the Soul, is to
destroy all Religion at once. For (...) ^ullifies all the Promises and
Threatenings contained in the Scripture, which are not fulfilled in this Life,
therefore if there is not a future State, and so an Immortal Soul they will
never be fulfilled. To say that Man is wholly Mortal, is an assertion not only
contrary to the Scripture, but (...) the light of Natural Reason. For it is
irrational, to think that a Vicious Man is happier that a Virtuous Man: yet so
it would be, if there is no other Life but this, or if the Souls of M^n dye
with their Bodies. 1 Cor. 15.19. If in his life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. If there is no life but this, the best Men would
be the unhappiest Men. What reasonable Man can believe that to be so? Blessed
Rewards are Promised to the Righteous; But in this life they see them not.
There is one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked. Yea, many times they are
subject to greater Miseries than others, and that all their life long. The holy
Penman of the Seventy third Psalm, says, All the day long have I been plagued
and chastened every morning. Severe punishment is threatened, for those that
have been great Sinners. Whenas many times they are not punished in this World.
The ungodly prosper in the World, they have more than heart can wish. From
these Conderations the Philosophers and Wise Men among the Gentiles, did
believe the Immortality of the Soul, and that there is another World in which
Good Men shall be Happy, and the Wicked Miserable. Balaam was so far enlightened
as to believe this. Wherefore he said, Let me dye the Death of the righteous,
and let my last end be like his, Numb. 23.10. He knew that when Righteous Men
dye, their Souls do not dye, but that afterward, (as the Original Hebrew
imports,) after Death they are happy. And this has been the Faith of all
Righteous Men. It is therefore said, The righteous has hope in his Death, Prove.
14.32. He has hope of being made happy at and by his Death. The Martyr Stephen
did not think that his Soul dyed with his Body, for then he would not when
dying have said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. The Faith of this, comforted the
Martyrs, when their Persecutors threatened them with Death, they would say,
kill our Bodies you may, but you shall never kill our Souls.

PROP. II. When Godly Men dye, their Souls go to another and a better World.
Their Souls go to that World where Abraham now is. When Lazarus died he was in
Abraham's bosom. When Good Men die they are no sooner dead as to their Bodies,
but they are blessed in respect of their Souls. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord. When they are taken out of this World, they go to
rest, they rest from their Labors, and their works follow them. This is
implied by their lying in Abraham's bosom. When Lazarus was dead, he was no more
afflicted with poverty and pains. Saints departed this Life, enjoy a perfect
freedom from all evils whatsoever. Then, and not till then, will that Promise
be fulfilled, Jer. 31.12. They shall not sorrow any more at all. And which is a
greater happiness, they are fully and forever freed from sin. Romans 6.7. He that
is dead is freed from sin. Therefore does the Scripture speak of the spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. They go to a place where they have nothing
but comfort. When Lazarus was dead, it was said of him, Now he is comforted.
Although their Bodies are not glorified before the Resurrection, their Souls are
as soon as they leave their Bodies. When the Clothing of Mortality is put off,
a Clothing of Glory is put on. 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4 For in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, if
so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. We that are in this
tabernacle groan being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up ^f life. Their Souls do not
remain in a naked condition, but instead of a Clothing of Flesh, they have a
Clothing of Glory. It is said concerning the Souls under the Altar, viz The
Christians that were Martyred in the Primitive times, that white robes were
given to every one of them, Rev. 6.11. White Robes are an ensign of Glory. When
the Priests were admitted into the inner Courts, White Robes were given to
them. Thus the departed Souls of Believers when they first enter into the
Heavenly Sanctuary, Robes of Glory are given to them. They then go to a blessed
place. To a place of which Paradise and the Garden of Eden was a figure. It was
a usual Prayer with the Jews, for an Israelite, Let his soul be in the Garden
of, Eden. They say, when Abraham dyed he went to Paradise, and that when Moses
dyed, he went to Paradise. This is true not only of Abraham and Moses, but of
all penitent Believers on Jesus Christ. It was therefore said to the Penitent
on the Cross, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. When they
leave this World, their Souls go to Heaven. The Scripture speaks of some who
Blaspheme them that dwell in heaven, Rev. 13.6. Idolatry is called Blasphemy.
Papists worship Saints departed. They Pray to St. Peter and St. Paul, and to
the Virgin Mary; to make Gods of them is Blasphemy. So do they Blaspheme them
that dwell in Heaven. We read of thing, in Heaven reconciled to God, Col. 1.20.
The Elect Angels are indeed things in Heaven, they are called the Angels of
Heaven, that is their Native Country* But they never needed to be reconciled to
God, as not having sinned, nor did the Son of God shed his Blood for them. But
there are Souls in Heaven, namely the Immortal Spirits of Holy Men departed
this life, and those are the things in Heaven, which Christ has reconciled to
God, by the Blood of his Cross. Good Men at their departure out of this world,
go where they have blessed Communion with those holy Souls, which are gone to
Heaven before them. They go to Abraham as we have showed. It was said to
Abraham, that at his Death he should go to his Fathers, Genesis 15.15. He went to
that World where Shem and Noah and other of his Fathers were gone before him.
That sort of People which served God as he had done, at the hour of his Death
he was gathered to them, Genesis 25.8. They go to be with Angels. God said to the
Prophet, If thou will walk in my ways, and keep my charge, I will give thee
places to walk among these that stand by, Zech. 3 7. Were they not Angels that
stood by? When the faithful Servants of God, have finished their work in this
world, they go to be with Angels, and to walk with them in the walks of Heaven.
They go to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ. They go to God. As long as they are in the Body, they are absent from
the Lord, but when absent from the body they are present with the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.8. All this we see in one blessed Scripture, viz. that in Heb. 12.22, 23. We
are come to the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to God
the judge of all, to the Spirits of just men made perfect, to Jesus the
mediator of the new covenant.

PROP. III. When Godly Men dye, holy Angels carry their Souls to Heaven. They
go to Abraham's Bosom, but who does Conduct them thither: Angels do it. Lazarus
died, and Angels carried him to be with Abraham. As when Elijah was carried to
Heaven Body and Soul, it was by the Ministry of Holy Angels. There was seen a
Chariot of Fire, and Horses of Fire, Holy Angels appearing in that Form, and
Elijah went up to Heaven, 2 King. 2.11. And they shall carry the raised Bodies
of the Saints to be with Christ at the Last Day, Mat. 24.31. He shall send his
Angels with the sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect
from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. So do they do with
the Souls of the Elect when their Bodies die. It was an Ancient Saying among
the Jewish Writers, That none have right to Paradise, but the Just, whose Souls
are carried thither by Angels. The Platonic Philosophers did not only believe,
that the Souls of Men were Immortal, but that the Souls of Wicked Men at the
Hour of Death, were by Evil Angels carried to a worse World than this, and the
Souls of Good Men by Good Angels, to a better World. We may suppose that they
had this Knowledge from the Jews, and that the Jews derived it from the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets. To intimate this Truth, is a special scope and design
of the Parable concerning Dives and Lazarus. And this has been the Faith of
dying Saints. It is reported concerning the Famous Morney, that when dying he
expressed himself after this manner. I am taking my flight to Heaven: there are
Angels standing, ready to carry my Soul into the Bosom of my Savior. There was
a Faithful Minister of Christ in New England, (it was Mr. Newman, Pastor of the
Church in Reho^ he that wrote that excellent Concordance to the Bible, which
commonly goes under the Name of the Cambridge Concordance) who perceiving the
approaches of Death, he was not in the least concerned or afraid, but after he
had spoke a few solemn Words to them about him, made an Apostrophe to the
Angels; And now (said he) Angels come and do your Office. Those Words were no
sooner out of his Mouth but he dyed Angels were by, they heard what he said,
and were ready to Conduct his Pious Soul to Heaven. Several Things may be
mentioned which confirm the Doctrine before us

1. Angels are by Divine appointment, Guardians of such as belong to God. Psalm
34 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. They are
charged with them, Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over them.
They shall bear them up in their h^nds. As tender Nurses do the Children which
are committed to their charge. An Heir of Salvation does no sooner come into
the World, but Angels are charged to look after him. Nor does the greatest
Angel in Heaven think it beneath him, to have such a Charge: Heb. 1. 14. Are
they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of Salvation. For the Devil stands ready to devour them as soon as they
are born, as he would have done our Savior Christ: Rev. 12.4. The Dragon stood
before the Woman, which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her Child as
soon as it was born: which Words although figurative, have respect to that which
is really true. As soon as Christ was Born, the Devil stood ready to devour
Him, by his Instrument Herod, but he was preserved from that Dragon, by the
Ministry of an Angel, Mat. 2.13. So are the Elect of God under the Guardianship
of Angels, whilst in a state of Infancy. The Scripture gives us to understand
that (...) ones have their Angels, Mat. 18 10 And when they are arrived to
Adult Age, still Angels have the charge of them. Wherever they are, whether by
Sea or Land Angels are with them Thus from their Infancy, and to their Old Age,
and to their dying Day. The Lord says of his People, They are born by me from
the belly, and are carried from the womb, and even to your old age I am he, and
even to hoar hairs will I carry you, even I will carry and deliver you, Isai.
46.3, 4. And how does God bear and carry them? He does it by the Ministry of
holy Angels. Austin in his Meditations, was affected with this thought, that
from the time of his nativity to the end of his Life, Angels were appointed to
be his Guardians. Can we think that Angels will take care of us all our life
time, and then leave us at our Death.

2. Angels have a great love for godly Men. They rejoice at their welfare. They
sang when there was a Savior born for Men. Luke 2 13, 14. There was with the
Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, glory to God
in the highest, and on Earth peace, good will toward men. When an Elect sinner
is Converted it causes no little joy among the Angels of God in Heaven, Luk ^0
10 They praise God for his everlasting mercies to Men that keep his Covenant.
The Psalmist having spoken thus, calls upon Angels to bless the Lord: Psalm.
103.20, 21. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, bless the Lord all ye his hosts, ye
Ministers of his that do his pleasure. God loves godly Men, and therefore
Angels do so, for it is natural for them to love what God loves. They love the
Image of God wherever they see it. They are of the same Family with Believers
on Christ, therefore they love them. Ephesians. 3.15. Of whom the whole family in
heaven and earth is named. Angels in Heaven and Believers on Earth belong to
the same Family of God. They are fellow Servants. The Angel said to John, I am
thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus, Rev.
19.10. Their love to holy Men must needs be confirmed and increased, by their
having been their Companions and Guardians for so long a time. Kind Offices
increase love. We see that Nurses have a special affection for the Children
that have been fostered by them. So have the Angels of Heaven for those
Children of God who have been under their care, tuition, and education, and
have been fostered by them from their Cradles to their Graves. Moreover, they
know that godly Men shall live with them in Heaven forever, and therefore they
must needs be willing to go with their Souls to Heaven when they leave this
Earth.

3. The separated Souls of godly Men, stand in need of such Guardians to carry
them to Heaven. For they pass through their Enemies Country. The Air is the
Devils Territory. There is a power of those evil Spirits there. The Devil is
called the prince of the power of the air, Ephesians 2 2. If Men are to pass through
the midst of Pirates, they need a strong Convoy to guard them. The Pirates of
Hell are waiting to seize upon the Souls of Men, as soon as they are out of
their Bodies. Godly Souls need not fear them, because they have a Convoy of
Angels to protect them, and to carry them safe to the blessed Country whether
they are bound. And as they are carried thither by Angels, so when they a^
there, Angels gladly receive them. They are in the Scripture represented as the
Po^ters at the Gates of Heaven, Rev. 11.12. They will not keep those Gates
shut, against any to whom Christ bids them open them.

PROP. IV. This Privilege belongs to the poorest and meanest godly Men as well
as to the richest and greatest. As the Psalmist speaks with respect to another
dignity, (...) honor ^ve all the Saints, Psalm. 149.9. A poor beggarly Lazarus
having a godly Soul, is conducted to Heaven after this honorable manner, with
a glorious Equipage. The greatest King on Earth, when he removes from one place
to another, has not such a splendid Equipage. Kings have Nobles to attend them,
but poor Lazarus has Angels to accompany him, who are the Nobles of Heaven. The
Soul of a poor Man, is as valuable as the Soul of a rich Man, more worth than
the whole World. There are poor Men belonging to the Election of God, as well
as rich Men. Nay, there are more poor than rich among those whom God has
chosen. Jam. 2 5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him. The
Redemption of the Soul of a poor Man, has cost as great a price as the
Redemption of the Soul of a rich Man viz. the precious Blood of Jesus Christ
the Son of God. It was a Statute in Israel, that the rich shall not give more,
and the poor shall not give less than half a sh^kel, when they give an offering
unto the Lord, to make a^o^ement for their souls, Exodus 3^.15 By which we are
taught this truth, that an equal Price has been given for the Redemption of
Souls It cost as much to make an Atonement for the po^ as for the rich Then
Angel will not disdain, but be glad of the Office, to carry the godly Soul of a
poor Lazarus, to be with Abraham in Paradise.

Thus for the clearing of the Doctrine before us. We proceed to the Application.

USE I.
We ought to bless God for the Benefit we receive by the Ministry of Holy
Angels. For the Benefit we have thereby is great. We shall not know how great
until we come to be with them in the Heavenly World. For the present their
Ministry is Invisible, Angelical Apparitions are not so frequent in these
days, as in the days of the Old Testament. Nevertheless, their Ministry
continues still, and will do so, as long as there shall be any Heirs of
Salvation on the Earth. Many evils are we kept from, by their Means. If we keep
in our way which God has Commanded us to keep in, He has charged them to keep
us, and to bear us up in their hands, that we dash not our feet against a
stone, Psalm. 91.11, 12. And many Mercies are conveyed to us, through their
Agency: yet they do nothing for us, but by a Divine appointment, Therefore the
Praise of all is due to God, and not to them. As long as we are living on the
Earth, they are doing for us, and when our Bodies are dead they befriend our
Souls. And ought we not to bless God for the good we receive by their Ministry,
both living and dying What though we know not particularly when they are at work
for us? We know in general, that in life and in death they are our Attendants
and our Guardians; and therefore, although we may not give Thanks to them, they
all with one Voice say, Do it not, Rev. 22.9. we may and ought to give Thanks
to God for what they do, and shall do for us.

USE. II.
Godly Men ought not to be afraid of Death, but rather to rejoice at the
thought of it. Death is indeed a frightful evil to Nature. The Philosopher
calls it, Of all terribles the most terrible. And Bildad styles Death, The King
of Terrors, Job 18 14. It exceeds other terribles as much as a King excels
ordinary Men. A great Man among the Romans was so terribly afraid of Death, as
that he said he would be willing to be in any pain and misery, on condition
that he might but live. And since Godly Men have Nature remaining in them, the
apprehension of Death is frightful to some of them. Through fear of Death they
are kept in bondage all their life time. But believers ought not to be afraid
of it. And we find in the Scripture that some of the Lords Servants, have been
above the fear of Death. The Psalmist could say, Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil. And why should he, when he
had Angels to be with him? When Moses was told that he should go up Mount Nebo
and there die, he was no more afraid than a Man would be to go up his Chamber,
there to ly down and sleep. The Children of God who have Served him faithfully,
should (with submission to his Will) rather be willing, nay, desirous of the
hour of their death, than to be afraid of it: 2 Cor. 5.8. We are willing rather
to be absent from the body and present with the Lord. Good old Simeon said, Now
Lord let thy servant depart in Peace, Luke 2.29. And the Apostle could say, I
desire to depart, Phil. 1.23. Well may they be willing and desirous of the Day
of Death, which will be better to them than the Day of their Birth, Considering
that their Bodies are no sooner dead, but their Souls are in the hands of
Angels, who will fly with them to Heaven. It is for Ungodly Men to be afraid of
Death, and well they may, because of that which (as to them) shall follow
Death, which what it will you may find in, Rev. 6.8. Behold a pale horse, and
his name that sat on him was Death, and hell followed with him. An Ungodly Man
is no sooner dead as to his Body, but his Soul is in Hell. Therefore let them
fear death, and fear that God who does punish Sin with Death. Remember the
awful words of Christ: Luke 12.5. I will fo^wa^ you whom you shall fear, fear
him that after he has killed has power to (...) into be^; yea, I say unto you
fear him. But as for Godly Ones, they ought to rejoice at the thought of Death,
because of that which shall follow with their Death, not Hell but Heav^ They
shall then be with Angels, and with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and which is far better, they shall be with Christ, to behold his Glory.

USE. III.
What do we think will be^me me of the Souls of Ungodly Men when their Bodies
shall (...)? Will holy Angels carry them to Heaven? No, certainly; but evil
Angels and carry them to Hell. One of the Ancients speaks of an Ungodly Youth
that when he was dying, he cried out to his Father, O Father, I see Devils come
to carry me away. So it is with those that dye in their sins, whether they see
it or no before they are dead; their Souls are no sooner out of their Bodies,
but they are sensible of this. Where was the Soul of ungodly Dives when his
Body was dead and buried? Was his Immortal Soul carried into Abraham's bosom?
No, the next word to my Text says, In hell be lift up his eyes. And how was it
with him there! was he not in flaming Torment? Lazarus his Soul was in
Paradise, but the Soul of Dives was in the place of Torment; and not one drop
of any comfort there, how did he beg for one drop of Water to cool his Torment,
but in vain. And how is it this day and for ever, with the Souls of those
ungodly Men that lived in the Old World, before the Flood. Are they not in
Prison? Does not the Scripture say that the Spirits, the Immortal Souls of
these who sometimes were disobedient in the days of Noah, are in prison, 1 Pet.
3.19, 20. They are in blackness of darkness forever. In a dismal Dungeon, where
is nothing but misery. And where are the filthy Souls of the Sinners in Sodom?
Does not Jude say, They suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire? Suppose what is
spoken in the Scripture concerning the Fire and Brimstone in Hell, to be
Metaphorical, since Spirits are not capable of being hurt by a material Fire,
that proves the Torment which the Damned endure, to be more terrible than the
hottest Fire upon Earth. No Fire to be compared with the Fire of God's Wrath. I
have somewhere Read of a miserable Man in Horror of Conscience, who looking on
the Fire, said, Do you see that Fire burn? To burn there, is but a Metaphor
compared with what I feel in my Soul. True it is, that the Damned will be more
Miserable after the Day of Judgment, than at present they are. As the Evil
Angels shall; whence some of them said to Christ, Jesus thou son of God, art
thou come to torment us before the time, Matt. 8.29. They know, that there will
be a time, when they shall be in greater Torment than as yet they are. The same
is to be said of Damned Souls. At the last Day their Bodies as well as their
Souls, as they have par^d together in Sinning, will partake in Everlasting
Punishment. Nevertheless their Eternal Misery begins as soon as their Souls are
out of their Bodies. For then they are deprived of all those Earthly Comforts,
in which they placed their Happiness. It was said to the Rich Fool in the
Gospel, This night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and then whose shall
these things be: Thy Goods which thou have laid up for many Years, thou can
not carry them into the other World with thee. The Rich Man that was clothed
in Purple, and fared Sumptuously every Day, after Death, had not delicious
Fare, or costly Garments to delight in. Nor will Sinners after Death has taken
them out of this World, have any Friends to comfort them. If they shall meet
with any of their old Friends in Hell, that will be little to their Comfort.
The Rich Man had no Mind that his Brethren should come after him to Hell, Luke
16.28. What, out of Charity to them? No, but he knew, that ^f they should come
into the Place of Torment, that would add to his Torment. The sad remembrance
of the Com^ which once they enjoyed, will likewise add to their Misery. It was
said to the Rich Man after he was Dead and in Hell, Remember, that thou in thy
life time recei^edst thy good things. It is reported concerning one of the
Popes, that he said. He could never Read those Words, or hear them mentioned,
but it ca^sed Horror in his Soul. Much more will the Remembrance of what Means
of Grace they once enjoyed, be a Terror and a Trouble to them. What Offers of
Salvation in the Gospel Pre^ what Exhortations, w^ A^ons, how often they were
called upon not to delay their Repen^ The Remembrance of these Thi^ will be
dis^ in Hell. So wi^ Remembrance of what (...) (...) of, with all the (...)
(...) them. Conscience (...) (...) all. For they (...) (...) Table of their
(...) written with a Pen of Iron, and with the Point of a Diamond. Those
Characters can never be blotted out by any thing but the Blood of Christ, which
Sinners in Hell never had, nor ever shall have applied unto them. The Thought
of the Day of Judgment will be Terrible to them. For the Souls in Hell, have a
certain and a fearful Expectation of Judgment, and of that fiery Indignation
which will devour them And the dismal Thought of ETERNIYT will be Amazing. It
was said to Dives in Hell, There is a great Gulf fixed. Eternity is a great
Gulf; when once the Soul of a Sinner is out of his Body, it is ^xed, it is
Staked down for Eternity. A German Divine relates a strange Passage for a
Truth, viz. That when ^re was a Council at Constance, some (...) an Evening
retired into a Wood ^ar the City, hearing a Noise, one of them said, In the
Name of God, what ^art thou? Reply was made, I am (...) Damned Spirit confined
to this Place (...) the Day of Judgment, when I she be in greater Misery; and
so departed, crying out, O quam diuturna et immen^ ^st Eternitas, O how Long, O
how Immense is Eternity. Despair is Misery Enough. Francis Spira thought it was
the chief Misery of Hell O (says he) might I e^d^re the Pains of Hell but for a
Thousand Years, I should think my self Happy, but when I think of Eternity my
Soul is Amazed. If Madness was not in the Hearts of Sinners, they would not
delay their Repentance one Day longer, for they know not but that they may be
in Eternity before to Morrow. They are as near to Eternity as they are to D^h
which may be this Night. How cost thou know but that Death like a Baili^f, will
come this Night, an^ require thy Soul? The Devil i^ Sam^'s likeness said to
Saul, To mo^row thou ^h^lt be with me. Ah! Si^ner, thou know not but that t^
Morrow ^hy Soul may be in Hell. If such Things as these were Considered, there
would be more among us that would make that Enquiry, What shall we do to be
Saved? What shall we do that when Death comes, Holy Angels may carry our Souls
to Heaven, and not Evil Angels carry them to Hell. The Answer must be, There is
but One Way for our Immortal Souls to be Saved, and that (...) by making sure
of an Interest in Christ by Faith in his Name. When the trembling Jailer said,
Sirs, what must I do to be Saved? The Answer (with which I conclude) was,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 73. line 2 read blemished Page 94 line 22 read Synechdoche. Page 100 l. ^
read Considerations.


