A SERMON Concerning Obedience and Resignation TO THE Will of GOD in Every
Thing.

Occasioned by the DEATH of that Pious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Mariah Mather, Late
Consort of INCREASE MATHER, D.D. Who Entered into her Everlasting Rest, On the
Lords Day, April. 4 1714.

Genesis xxxv.19, 2^. Rachel dyed, and Jacob (...) P^^a^ upon her Grace.

(...) xxxi.28. Her Children arise up and (...), her Husband also, and (...)
Praises (...).

Ezekiel. xxiv.16. Son of Man, I take away from (...) the desire of thine Eyes.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by T. Green at his Shop in Middle Street. 1714.

(...) ^mer Conjuge sua (...) ^^entia Rictera or^^^ (...) ac Memoriae hoc (...)
^^it.

(...) ^^bili Conjugiquae (...) ^^tiae, Mastiss. (...) ^^imer, Maritus Quem
nunquam nisi Morte sua Turbavit, Monum. posuit.

Melchier Adam in vitis Germanorum (...) Jure Consultorum. p. 51.

To my CHILDREN.
My Dear Children;
YOU are now Motherless. And a Tender Mother (if there was such an one in the
world) you have Lost. Be Humbled under the Hand of God, and be Thankful that
you were not deprived of her sooner. You will very shortly be Fatherless as
well as Motherless. And then you must think on that Scripture (on which one of
you has a Sermon Printed) Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me,
then the Lord will take me up. Your Mother Lived Seventy Two Years, Four Months
and Sixteen Days. Your Father is Two Years and Eight Months Older than your
Mother; and therefore will soon go after her.

Your Dear Mother, did in many things, set an Example before you, worthy to be
imitated. In special, She excelled in Humility. Who did you ever know had less
Pride in her than she had? You know that she took great pleasure in Reading the
holy Scripture. In her latter Years, when her Children being grown up, she had
more leisure, she has sometimes Read over the whole Bible, Twice in less than a
Years time. She was Constant and Frequent in Prayer to God, delighting in
Communion with Him. You know that I have ever since any of you can remember,
loved to be in no place on the Earth, so much as in my Study. But now I shall
love to be there more than ever; because I find in your Mothers Private Payers,
that when I was absent from her Four Years in England, that so I might there do
Service for the Churches in New England, she spent many Whole Days (some Scores
of them) alone with God there, with Fastings and Prayers for me, and for you
all; as well as for the People of God. Some Particulars referring thereunto,
are mentioned in the Sermon which one of you Preached on occasion of his good
Mothers Death. Those I shall not here take notice of, but some others which I
find in her Reserved Manuscripts.

December. 17. 1688 She thus writes; I kept a Fast alone in the Study, to request
of God that he would afford Assistance to my Dearest now in England; that he
may do Service for God, and for His New England Israel. And that he and Samuel,
might be brought in Safety to us again: And for my dear Son Cotton, that God
would abundantly Bless him in the Work of the Lord; and Increase his Family.
And for all my Children; and that all of us might be bro't nearer to God by the
Death of dear Nathaniel; and that Sin may be Pardoned, which has been the cause
of his Death. And I do humbly give Thanks to God this Day, for great Answers of
Prayer since I kept a Fast in this Study last.

July 15. Aug. 4. and Aug. 11, 1691. I kept a Fast in the Study, chiefly on
Sarahs account, Praying that she may be directed to do in the Momentous Affair
before her, what shall be Pleasing to God.

At another time she writes thus: I went through many Deaths in the Bearing of
Children: But those Deaths have proved the Spiritual Life of some Souls. God
has Blessed my Eldest Son, so as that I have often Blessed God for making me
the Mother of that Son. I thank God also for bestowing Grace on my other
Children. I hope they shall be the Children of God for evermore. God has by a
long Sickness taken away my little Catharin. I was earnest with God for the
Soul of that Infant Child. And have great hope that she is at Rest in the Bosom
of Jesus Christ. It pleased the Lord to afflict my Son Nathaniel with long
W^a^ness of Body: I often Prayed to God for his Recovery; and that the Lord
would accept of Service from him: But the Holy God saw meet to Cut down this
Young Tree, before it had time to bear Much Fruit to (...) Glory. But he has
left great Evidences of Grace; and was willing to Serve God to the uttermost of
his Ability. I desire to rest satisfied with the Holy Pleasure of God.

You see, Children, what your now Blessed Mothers Prayers and Hopes were for,
and concerning you. Now your Mother is gone, I and you must prepare to follow.
Notwithstanding the Promise annexed to the Fifth Commandment, and your having
been Dutiful to your Parents; I would not have any of you, Lot on a long Life
in the Earth. If God, for Christ's sake, shall give you Eternal Life in that
World, of which the Land of Canaan was a Figure, that will be sufficient. Four
of your Number (there have been Ten, now there are but Six of you) are gone
before your Mother; and I trust all of them are with her in a better World. Yet
they were Dutiful Children. Your Brother Nathaniel and Sister Ierusha, were
Exemplary for their Piety toward God, as well as for their Dutifulness to me
and to your Mother. But they are not. God has given Children to the most of
you: I doubt not but you are much in Prayer for them, as your Mother was for
you. I Bless the Lord that there are hopeful Signs of Grace and Regeneration in
several of them. The Lord whose Faithfulness extends to Childrens Children of
them that Fear him, remember his Covenant with them all. The Consideration of
the Families and Progenitors whom you are descended from, should make you the
more careful (not to say, We have Abraham for our Father) but to follow them as
they followed Christ. Your Mother, you know, was Pious: Your Grandfathers were
both of them Eminent Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ; and both your
Grand-mothers were very Gracious Holy Women. GOD forbid that any of you, or
yours, should Degenerate from the Piety of your Ancestors. In hope, that they,
and I, and your Mother, and you and your Children, shall Live together
Eternally, in the Heavenly World, I Bless you all, and all yours, in His Name;
who am,

From my Study in Boston, April 15, 1714. Your Loving Father, Increase Mather.

Let the Will of the Lord be done.
Matthew VI.10. Thy Will be Done.


THE Lord Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples an admirable Platform of Prayer,
which in Six short Petitions comprehends what ever it is our Duty to Pray for.
In the preceding Verse he shows who is the only Object of Prayer, viz. the God
of Heaven: Unto whom the true Disciples of Christ may come as unto their
Father. Our Father which art in Heaven. The Three First Petitions have a
peculiar reference to God, (1.) To his Name; (2.) To his Kingdom; (3.) To his
Will. These are fitly conjoined: If God's Name is Hallowed, his Kingdom will
Come: And where his Kingdom comes in the Power of it, the Subjects therein will
do his Will. The Original Word (...), here rendered, Be done; signifies, Let it
be done. It is expressed impersonally, denoting the extent of the Prayer. It is
not said, Let us do thy Will; that is but part of what is intended; but, Let it
be done, sc. by us and all the Men on the Earth, and that in all things.

The Words may be Opened under the DOCTRINE from them, which is, That all Men,
especially the Children of God, ought in all things to Comply with the Holy
Will of GOD.

Three Particulars may be Enquired into for the Clearing of the Truth before
us. [ I.] What Will of God it is that Men, his Children especially ought to
Comply with. [ II.] After what Manner ought we to do his Will. [ III.] The
Reason of it.

Quest. I. What Will of God is that that must be Complied with?

Answ. 1. There is the Secret Will of God. His Unalterable Decree is called his
Will: Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things after the Counsel of his own Will. This
Will is in many things kept secret from the knowledge of Angels in Heaven; and
much more from the knowledge of Men on the Earth: Romans 11.34. Who has known the
Mind of the Lord? Or who has been his Counselor? All the Men in the World
fulfill this Will, and cannot but do so: For it is Irresistible: Romans 9.19. Who
has Resisted his Will? It is impossible for that Will not to take effect: Isa.
46.11. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. Men may purpose
and not perform; but it is not so with God. If the Lord of Hosts has purposed,
who shall disanul it? The Divine Decree is not the Rule by which we are to act.
Men may fulfill that, and yet greatly Offend God in what they do. When Judas
Betrayed Christ, and caused him to be delivered into the wicked Hands that
Murdered him, never man was guilty of a greater Sin, yet this was by the
Determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God. And when Herod Mocked him, and
Pilate Condemned him, and the Jews Crucified him; they have been suffering
Vengeance for that Sin for more than Sixteen Hundred Years, nevertheless, says
the Apostle, They did whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined before to
be done, Act. 4.28. When the Ten Kings gave their Power to the Beast, they
fulfilled the Will of God, Rev. 17.17. Not the Will of his Precept, but of his
Decree. Many things are done by the Permissive Will of God, which are not
according to his Approving Will. God has Decreed that his Church in this world
shall be subject to great Persecutions; that is no Rule for us to Pray that the
Church may be Persecuted. On the other hand; we may act Contrary to the Decree
of God, and yet as long as it is kept Secret, Please him in what we do. When
David Prayed for the life of his Sick Child, it was his Duty to do so; although
(which he knew nothing of) God had determined that the Child should not live.
When he had a purpose in his heart to Build an House for God, the Lord said to
him, Thou did well that it was in thy Heart, 1 King. 8.18. But this was not
according to the Purpose that was in God's Heart, who had designed that not
David, but Solomon should Build the Temple. Only this further is to be added
here; That when the Decreeing Will of God is manifested, we must humbly Comply
therewith and Submit thereunto; and say, Let it be done.

2. There is the Revealed Will of God. Not the Secret Will of God which we may
not pry into, but his Revealed Will is the Rule of our Obedience, according to
which we must Conform our selves. Secret things belong unto the Lord; but those
things which are Revealed belong to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

There are Two ways whereby the Will of God is Revealed; viz. By his Word, and
by his Works of Providence.

(1.) By his Word. He has showed thee, O man what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly
with thy God, Mic. 6.8. The Law of God is his Word; and it is declarative of
his Will. We are to do all the words of his Law; as in that place mentioned in
Deuteromony. There are Affirmative Precepts in the Divine Law, which Reveal
unto us what we must do: And Negative Precepts, which Declare what we may not
do. The Moral Law of God contained in Ten Commandments, is a standing Rule of
Obedience to all the Men in the World. Our Savior Christ, has reduced it into
two general Heads. When there was one that asked him that Question, Which is
the great Commandment in the Law? Mat. 22.31. He said, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; this
is the First and Great Commandment: and the Second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these Two Commandments hang all the Law and
the Prophets. Moreover, The Gospel as well as the Law is the Word of God; and
is sometimes called a Law, Isa. 2.3. Out of Zion shall go forth a Law, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. When the Gospel was first Preached at
Jerusalem, and then at other Places; that Scripture was fulfilled. There is
Natural Religion, and there is Revealed Religion. Men have Natural Religion
from the Moral Law, which is written in their Hearts; whence they do by Nature
the things contained therein: But the Gospel contains a Religion which is
Supernatural and of Divine Revelation.

Quest. What does the Gospel Reveal to men to be the Will of God, which they
ought to Comply with?

Answ. 1. It is the Will of God Revealed in the Gospel, that men should Repent
of Sin: 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not willing that any should Perish, but that
all should come to Repentance. God in the Gospel declares it to be his Will,
that men should Repent that so they may not Perish. This Commandment of God
takes hold not only on some, but on all men wherever the Gospel is Preached,
without excepting any man. Now since the Gospel is Published to the Nations in
the world, He Commands all men every where to Repent, Act. 17.30. They must
Confess their Sins if ever they would have God Pardon them: 1 John 1.9. If we
Confess our Sins, he is faithful to forgive our Sins. So he will if they
Confess them with a Penitent Broken Heart: For then they will Forsake them as
well as Confess them. The Law knows no Repentance; but the Word of the Gospel
Charge men at their Peril, not only to Confess their Sins, but to Turn from
them, which is the principal thing in Repentance: Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and Turn
your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin.
That Is Repentance, it is a Turning from Sin, and from all Sin. You must do so,
or it will be your Ruin.

2. It is the Commanding Will of God Revealed in the Gospel, that men should
Believe on Jesus Christ: 1. Joh. 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should
Believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. This is an Evangelical
Commandment. Only the Gospel Commands us to Believe on Christ. The Law requires
that we should Believe on God, depending on his Power and Goodness; but it is
the Gospel, and not the Law that Commands us to Believe on Jesus Christ the Son
of God. And indeed this is the great Commandment of the Gospel, Obedience
whereunto is most pleasing to him. The Jews would fain have been Saved by the
Works of the Law: They said to Christ, What shall we do that we might work the
Works of God? Joh. 6.27. They meant a work for which God would accept of them
and give Eternal Life to them: They would have it by Doing and Working. The
Lord said to them, This is the Work of God, that ye Believe on him whom he has
sent. No Work will please God like Believing on Jesus Christ: No Obedience so
acceptable to him as the Obedience of Faith. As no Sin is so displeasing to him
as the Sin of Unbelief. He Swear in his Wrath against the Unbelieving Children
of Israel, that they should not enter into this Rest* Heb. 3.18. To whom Swear
he that they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that Believed not? So
nothing pleases him like Believing. Let a man do what he will, he cannot
possibly do the Will of God so as to find acceptance with him without Faith in
Jesus Christ. Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please him.

3. It is the Will of God Revealed in the Gospel that men should be Holy: 1
These. 4.3. This is the Will of God even your Sanctification. Not only does the
Law Command Holiness, but the Gospel wherever it comes, confirms that
Commandment. We do not by Preaching Faith make Void the Law, but Confirm it:
Wherefore the Gospel is called the Holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21. The Grace of
God which brings Salvation, i. e. the Gospel which is a Doctrine of Grace,
teaches men to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; that they should live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in this present world, Tit. 2.11.12. It
teaches men Sobriety in respect of themselves, Righteousness in their dealings
with men, and Piety toward God. It is the Will of God that men should have
Holy Hearts, that they should love the things which God loves, and hate the
things which God hates; then will they have Hearts after his own Heart, and
shall fulfill his Will, Act. 13.22. It is the Will of God that men should be
Holy in their Lives and Conversations: 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye Holy in all manner of
Conversation. Thus we see that the Word of God declares his Will.

(2.) His Will is Revealed by his Works of Providence. Providence is the
Execution of the Will of his Decree. There is as the Will of his Precept, so
the Will of his Providence, which we must in all things submit unto, and comply
with. The Providential Will of God is many times very contrary to our Natural
Wills; but then we must subject, and humbly resign our Wills to the Divine
Will, as the Caesarian Christians did: They were very unwilling that the
Apostle Paul should go to Jerusalem, because they knew that if he did, the Jews
would put him in Bonds, and deliver him to the Gentiles; the holy Apostle was
satisfied that he had a Call from God to go to Jerusalem, so that there was no
dissuading him from it: And when he would not be persuaded they ceased from
using any further disswasives, saying, The Will of the Lord be done, Act.
21.14. If his holy Providence shall disappoint us in any of our Designs or
Expectations, we must say, The Will of the Lord be done. When a great Emperor
was defeated in a Battle with his Infidel Enemy, it has been reported to his
Honor, that returning with Confusion; as he went he kept saying, Thy Will be
done on Earth as it is in Heaven! Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven!
If God shall withold from us those things which our hearts are most set upon,
we must humbly submit to his Holy Providence. So did David, when he knew not
whether he should ever see the Ark of God again, which he much desired. With
what Resignation to the Will of God does he express himself? 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both it, and his Habitation: but if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. If the Lord
will take away his Blessings from us; if he will make Breaches in our Families,
and deprive us of our dearest Enjoyments, Husbands, Wives, Children, it is for
us to acquiesce in the Will of God. When Aaron had Two of his Sons taken from
him after an awful manner, it is said, Aaron held his Peace, Lev. 10.3.
Notwithstanding his Brother Moses, told him that the awful Death of his Sons
was a just Judgment of God upon them for their Sin, he was Silent; he did not
Murmur against God, nor against his Brother: He considered that the Honor of
God ought to be dearer to him, than either the Honor, or the Life of his Sons.
When Eli was informed by Samuel, that doleful things were coming on his Family,
because of the Crying Sins which his Sons had been guilty of, and he had too
much connived at them; how Humbly and Graciously did he express himself?
submitting to the Will and Providence of God, 1 Samuel 3.18. He said, it is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good. And we have an unparalled Example of
Submission and Patience under Afflictive Dispensations of Providence, in holy
Job: When his whole Estate, and all his Children were taken from him in one
Day, he did never utter a Sinful Impatient Word, nor Charge God Foolishly; as
if God had done any thing unbecoming his Wisdom. (...), or Goodness: but
instead of ^^rmu^ing under the Hand of (...) his Name. This his Pame^^ (...) to
the Will of God, is taken notice of by the Apostle, Jam. 5.11. You have heard
of the Patience of Job. We cannot say that the like degree of Patience, under
trying Providence, was ever seen in any man that ever was in the world,
excepting that Man who is God as well as Man. But thus are we to Comply with
the Will of God, in Resigning our selves and all ours to the disposal of his
Providence.

We proceed then to the Second Enquiry, viz.

Quest. II. After what Manner ought the Will of God to be done by us?

Answ. We have the Answer to that in the following words in this Third Petition
in the Platform of Prayer, which our Lord Jesus Christ has given us: On Earth
as it is in Heaven; as it is done by Saints and Angels in Heaven. There will a
Day come, when the Will of God shall be done on Earth, with as great Perfection
as it is done in Heaven; Namely, in the Resurrection World: For the present we
cannot come up to the Perfection of Angelical Obedience; nevertheless, we
should aim at it.

Particularly, 1. We should do the Will of God Speedily and without Delay. The
Angels in Heaven do so. They wait to know what the Pleasure of God is, and when
it is signified, they do it without delaying so much as one Moment. The Angel
Gabriel said, I Stand in the Presence of God, Luke 1.19. As a Servant having
done the Business his Master has Employed him, comes and stands in the Presence
of his Master, waiting to know what his Pleasure is for him to do next. Psalm.
103.20, 21. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that do his Commandments, harkening
to the Voice of his Word; ye Ministers of his that do his Pleasure. That
harkening to his Word, implies ready Obedience. When the Great GOD sends his
Angels on any Errand to the Earth, they go presently. Therefore in the
Scripture they are represented not only as Going, but as Running, as soon as
the Lord sends them. It is said of the Living Creatures in Ezekiel's Vision, by
which Angels are meant, that they ran and returned as a flash of Lightning,
Ezekiel. 1.14. If they are sent on a Message they Run; and when they have done
their Message, they return again as swiftly as a flash of Lightning. They are
represented not only as Running, but as Flying swiftly: When the Angel Gabriel
was sent on a Message to the Prophet Daniel, he came Flying swiftly, Dan. 9.21.
Thus when the Will of God is manifested, we may not stand Considering whether
we should do it, but Obey presently: Psalm. 119.60. I made haste and delayed
not, to keep thy Commandments. Paul as soon as he was Converted, desired to
know the Will of God concerning his Duty: he said, Lord, What will thou have me
to do? The Lord told him what he should do, and then he Conferred not with
Flesh and Blood. He did not Consult with any man in the world, whether he
should do that, which was Revealed to be his Duty, but did it Immediately, Gal.
1.16. We have another Example of ready Obedience in Abraham; when God imposed
upon him and on his Family the grievous Commandment of Circumcision, in the
self-same Day he did as God had said unto him, Genesis 17.23. And when he was
required to Sacrifice his Son, his only Son Isaac, whom he Loved dearly, and
that he should do it with his own Hands, which made the Commandment the more
difficult to be complied with, he delayed not his Obedience, but rose early in
the Morning, and went to the place of which God had told him, Genesis 22.3.

2. Our Obedience to the Will of God ought to be not only without Delay, but a
Willing Obedience: Isa. 1.19. If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the
good of the Land. A Servant may do what his Master Commands him Presently, but
Unwillingly: It may be a forced Obedience for fear of Punishment. Thus do many
yield a Servile Obedience to the Commandments of God: They perform External
Duties of Religion, but as a Task which they would be glad to be eased of the
burden of it: Mal. 1.13. They say, What a weariness is it? Such have no reason
to think that their Obedience will find any acceptance with God, or be rewarded
by him: 1 Cor. 9.17, 18. If I do this willingly, I have a Reward; but if
against my will, a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me; what is my
Reward? If there is a willing Mind, God accepts according to what a man has,
and not according to what he has not. It is the Will of God that men should not
only promote works of Piety, but that they should do it willingly with their
Hearts. It is the Will of God that they should do works of Charity; that
according to their Ability they should relieve the Poor, but that they should
do it not grudgingly or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
9.7. It is not enough for us to do the Will of God, but we must do it with
Delight: Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy Will, O God. This are we taught not
only by the Word, but by the Example of our Lord Jesus Christ: He was so set
upon doing the Will of God, that sometimes he would neglect his necessary Food,
to do Service for the Name of God. When the Disciples said to him, Master, Eat;
He replied, I have Meat to eat that ye know not of: My Meat is to do the Will
of him that sent me, and to finish his Work, Joh. 4.34. Yea, if it be the
Pleasure of God that we shall Suffer for his sake, we should do it Willingly.
So did Moses: He chose to suffer affliction with the People of God, Heb. 11.25.
He was not forced to it, but it was his Choice. Nay, we should suffer his Will
Joyfully, which denotes a great Compliance of the Will: Jam. 1.2. Count it all
Joy when you fall into diverse Temptations. Joy, and all Joy; Temptations, and
diverse Temptations; These are Paradoxes of Christianity. The Apostle could
say, I take pleasure in my Infirmities, 2 Cor 12.10. In what Infirmities? Not
in his Sinful Infirmities. They were the greatest Grief and Burden which he had
in the world. By his Infirmities, he means the Afflictions and Persecutions
which he endured. Since it was the Will of God that he should be Reproached,
and Abused, and all manner of Evil spoken of him falsely because of his
Christianity; he took great pleasure therein.

3. Our Obedience to the Will of God should be Universal: We must Comply with
his whole Will. We may not pick and choose among the Commandments of God. That
was Jehu's Obedience, which discovered the Insincerity of his Heart. He walked
not in the Law of the Lord with all his Heart; for he departed not from the Sin
of Jeroboam, 2 King. 10.31. God Commanded him to destroy the Worship of Baal;
that he Obeyed. God Commanded him to execute Judgment on the House of Ahab;
that he Obeyed. He ought to have departed from the Sin of Jeroboam; but that
Commandment he would not Obey, because it did not Comport with his Worldly
Interest to do it. If we would be the true Disciples of Christ, we must observe
All his Commandments: Joh. 15.14. You are my Friends, if you do whatsoever
Command you. We must do all the Commandments of God; and forbear doing every
thing that he has Forbidden: Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy Precepts
concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. If we do so, we
may hope for acceptance with God; and we shall not be put to shame by a
disappointment of our hope. Then shall I not be Ashamed when I have respect
unto all thy Commandments, Ver. 6.

4. Our Obedience to the Will of God must be Constant. So is the Will of God
done in Heaven: The Glorified Souls they never do any thing else but the Will
of God; and they are always doing that: Rev. 7.15. They Serve him day and night
in his Temple. The holy Angels are Constant in their Obedience: They Always
behold the Face of God, Mat. 18.10. If they Always behold his Face, they Always
do his Will. When God employs them in any Service, they go on with it, and
never turn aside or desist from it, until they have done it. It is therefore
said of the Living Creatures that they turned not when they went, Ezekiel. 1.9.
Thus should we do the Will of God on Earth with Constancy and Perseverance:
Psalm. 119.112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, even to
the end. God Promised Solomon the Kingdom, on condition of Constancy in
Obedience: 1 Chronicles. 28.7. I will establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be
Constant to do my Commandments. Nor has God Promised the Kingdom of Heaven to
any other Obedience but that which is Constant and Persevering. If men would
have Eternal Life, they must seek it in a way of Patient Continuance in well
doing, Romans 2.7. They that thus keep the Commandments of God; that Fear him and
keep all his Commandments always, it shall go well with them forever.

We proceed to the Third Enquiry proposed, viz. The Reason of the Doctrine
before us; Why we should do the Will of God: There is infinite Reason for it.

Reas. 1. Absolute Sovereignty and Almighty Power belongs to God. Since he is
an Absolute Sovereign, He may Command what he Pleases; and it is for his
Creatures not to Dispute his Commandments, but to Obey them. His Will is Reason
sufficient: Wherefore he said to Joshua, Have not I Commanded thee? Josh. 1.9.
That Is ground enough for thee to Obey. And because of his Absolute Sovereignty,
he may bring upon men what Afflictions he shall please, and their Duty and
Wisdom is not to find fault with his Providence; but to say, Let the Will of
the Lord be done. When Patient Job, after long and sore Trials made some
Complaints of hard Measure, Elihu Silenced him by putting him in mind of the
Uncontrollable Sovereignty of God: Job 33.12, 13. God is greater than Man. Why
do thou strive against him? For he gives not account of any of his matters.
God, if he sees meet, may bring upon thee the sorest Afflictions, and not tell
thee why: He is not bound to give an account of his proceedings to thee, or to
any man: It is enough that a Sovereign God will have it be so: And therefore
hold thou thy Peace. Has not the Potter power over the Clay, to do what he will
with it? God has a greater power over thee his Creature, than the Potter has
over the Clay. And because of his Almighty Power, it is a vain (as well as a
wicked) thing to Contend with him. The greatest Emperor in the world was made
to Confess it. Nebuchadnezzar makes an humble Acknowledgment, and has
Proclaimed it to all Nations on the Earth, That the High God, does according to
his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; and
none can stay his Hand, or say unto him what do thou? Dan. 4.35. Wherefore
they that will Contend with him, will but bring Woe and Misery upon themselves.
Is any Creature a fit Match for him? Isa. 45.9. Woe unto him that strives with
his Maker. Let the Potsherd strive with the Potsherds of the Earth. Men are but
Potsherds of the Earth: Let them strive with their Fellow Creatures if they
will, but let them not think to Contend with their Almighty Creator. The Will
of Providence cannot be disappointed, therefore our work and wisdom is to
submit to it.

Reas. 2. The Will of God is Good, and for that Reason should be Complied with.
The Wills of men are sometimes Good, and sometimes Evil: Sometimes they Command
that to be done which is Good, and sometimes that which is Evil. We may not
then live to the Lusts of men, but to the Will of God; for His Will is always
Good, and it cannot but be Good because it is his Will, which is the Rule of
Goodness: Romans 7.12. The Commandment is Holy, Just, and Good. And not only the
Will of his Precept, but the Will of his Providence is Good, although never so
adverse to our Wills. When the Prophet Predicted to Hezekiah, that sad things
would come on his Posterity after his Death, he said, Good is the Word of the
Lord which thou have spoken: he said moreover, For there shall be Peace and
Truth in my Days. If the Calamities Threatened should come in my Days, the Word
and Will of God would be Good; but there is a further manifestation of the
Divine Goodness, in that there shall be Peace until I am gone, Isa. 39.8.

Reas. 3. Obedience to the Will of God will prove Beneficial to those that
shall duly Comply with his Will. It is not only in it self Good; but it is Good
for us that we should do so. This is the way to be Blessed: Joh. 13.17. If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. It is not the Hearer of the
Word, but the Doer of the Work, which that requires that shall be Blessed in
his Deed, Jam. 1.25. Would we know who shall go to Heaven, or whether we our
selves are like to go thither when we leave this world? Then Consider, are we
Doers of the Will of God? Christ says, Not every one that says to me, Lord,
Lord; that is to say, not every one that calls himself a Christian, or owns
Christ to be his Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Who then? He
that Does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21. Would we have
our Prayers heard? The Scripture says, That whatsoever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his Commandments; and do those things which are Pleasing
in his sight, 1 John 3.22. The best way in the world for us to have our Wills,
is to be willing that God should have His Will in all that he does concerning
us. And if we do his Will in respect of Passive Obedience, we shall be no
losers by it. It was an hard Obedience which God put Abraham upon, when he was
Commanded to Sacrifice his only Son Isaac, and that he should do it with his
own Hands too; but when the Lord saw that he was in Earnest set upon Complying
with the Will of God, he spared the Life of Isaac, and Promised that he should
be Blessed with a Numerous Posterity; and that one of his Posterity should be
the Man in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed, Genesis 22.18.

Reas. 4. God is our Father: Therefore we should Comply with his Will and
Pleasure. Our Savior Christ has taught us the greatest Submission and
Resignation to the Will of God our Heavenly Father. When the bitterest Cup that
ever could be tasted of, was given to him, He said, The Cup which my Father has
given me, shall I not Drink it? Joh. 18.14. God is a Father to all the men in
the world in respect of Creation. Have we not all one Father? has not one God
Created us? Mal. 2.10. And if he is our Father, where is that Honor of
Obedience which we all owe to him? But as for Believers on Christ, He is their
Father not only in respect of Creation, but of Adoption; on which account they
are under the greatest Obligation to Obedience that possibly can be. It is very
grievous to God when they that are his Adopted Children, although it be only in
respect of an External Adoption; much more if they are Savingly Adopted, and
yet shall by Disobedience to his Will Dishonor his Name. They Provoke him most
bitterly. Deuteronomy. 32.19. He greatly abhorred them, because of the Provoking of
his Sons, and of his Daughters. If Children that have a good and a loving
Father, shall disobey him, they are very Criminal. But what shall be said then,
of those who are Disobedient to a Good and Loving God and Father? Heaven and
Earth may be astonished at it, that ever such Ungrateful Wretches should be
found among the Children of men: Isa. 1.2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear, O
Earth; for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up Children, and
they have Rebelled against me.

We proceed to the APPLICATION.

USE I. How should we Long to be in Heaven? For this reason we should do so,
that we may become Perfectly Conformed to the Will of God; which whilst in
this world we cannot be. But the Saints in Heaven, Angels and Glorified Souls
are so; and when God shall bring us thither, we shall be so. A Perfect
Conformity to the Will of God, is Heaven. It is rightly spoken by one of the
Ancients, That if there were no Contrariety in our Wills to the Will of God,
there would be no Hell: All would then be Heaven: The Happiness of Heaven does
very much consist in the Perfect Holiness which is there. The Scripture says,
That God has Chosen us that we should be Holy, Ephesians. 1.4. God has Chosen us that
we should be Happy in Heaven for ever. Holiness in the Perfection of it, is
Heavenly Happiness. Therefore should we Long to be in Heaven, that so we might
obtain that Perfection. It will be a good Sign that we are really Bound for
Heaven, if we Long to be there for this reason, Because we would fain obtain a
Perfect Conformity to the Holy Will of God.

USE II. It is matter of Lamentation that the Blessed Will of GOD is no more
Complied with by Men on the Earth. Alas! For the greatest part of Men on the
Earth, who instead of doing the Will of God, have been doing the Will of Satan
all their Days: They are in the Snare of the Devil, taken Captive by him at his
Will, 2 Timothy 2.26. They are the Slaves of Hell, and (which is strange) they are
willing Slaves, have no mind to come out of their Slavery; but they Live so,
they Die so. It is yet sadder, when this shall be true of those who pretend to
be the Children of God; as it was with the Jews, Joh. 8.41. They said, We have
one Father, even God. Whereas in Ver. 44. Christ says to them, You are of your
Father the Devil; and the Lusts of your Father you will do. Is it not a sad
though it, that the greatest part of the Children of men, are Ignorant of the Will
of God concerning the Way to Salvation? They are shut up in a dark Dungeon of
Unbelief: 2 Cor. 4.4. The god of this world has blinded the Eyes of them that
Believe not. And many there are, who notwithstanding they know the Will of God,
they do it not. They know that they should Confess their Sins and Forsake them,
yet they do it not. They know that they should Give themselves to Christ, but
they will not do it, though they Perish Eternally for not doing it. They know
that they should Pray in their Families, and in their Closets, but they will
not do it. Such Sinners have a double Guilt upon them; and will fall under a
double Condemnation: Luke 12.47. That Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with
many Stripes. But then as to a Submission and Resignation to the Providential
Will of God in Bereavements, and Afflictive Dispensations, how many are there
that do it not? God must do nothing but what they would have him: And if he
does not do what they would have in the time they would have, they will not
humbly wait his Time. Like that wicked Prince, who when there had been a
terrible Famine, said, This evil is of the Lord; what should I wait on the Lord
any longer? 2 King. 6.33. It seems the Prophet Elisha, had put him in hopes
that relief would come; but when it did not come just when he would have it, he
would wait on the Lord no longer. And how apt are men to be discontented and
find fault with the Providence of God? How often did the Children of Israel
Murmur in the Wilderness, expressing great Dissatisfaction with the
Providential Will of God? Sinful Creatures are not quiet under the Will of God,
but struggle against it; and thereby bring themselves into greater
Perplexities: Isa. 51.20. As a wild Bull in a Net, they are full of the fury of
the Lord, the rebuke of God. The Bull in the Net, by struggling does but
entangle himself the more. And so it is with men which strive against the Will
and Providence of God. And if Persons who pretend to be the Children of God,
shall thus Rebel against him, they sometimes Provoke him to leave a signal Mark
of his Displeasure on them. I could tell you of a Person of Quality, a Lady who
made a Profession of Religion: She had a Son who was her Idol; whom she Doted
on. The Lovely Youth fell Dangerously Sick with the Small Pox. The Mother
desired some Godly Ministers to spend some time in Prayer for the Child's Life;
which they did. One of the Ministers in Prayer, saying, If it is the Wilt of
God to take the Child from her, may she humbly Submit thereunto. Her unruly
Passion was such, as that she interrupted him in his Prayer, and said, If He
will Take him away; Nay, He shall then Tear him away whether I will or no. What
was the Event? The Child Died: Some time after, the Mother being with Child,
the time for her Delivery came, but Delivered she could not be: The Child was
Violently Torn from her; so she Died. This was the fruit of Rebellion against
the Will and Providence of God.

USE III. Let us Endeavor after a Perfect Conformity to the Will of God. It is
true (as before was said) whilst in this world, we cannot attain to that
Perfection: Only in Desire we may, though not in Performance Rom 7.18. To Will is
present with me; but how to Perform that which is good, I find not. Although we
can not attain it, we should endeavor after it. The Apostle could not as long
as in this world attain unto that Perfection which Saints in the Resurrection
World, and so in Heaven for ever, shall be blessed with; nevertheless, he
endeavored after it. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend, that for
which I am apprehended by Christ Jesus. Passive Obedience is the most
difficult. If the Lord will take from us our Estates, and bring us to Penury;
or if the Lord will take from us our Health, and afflict us with painful
Diseases, to say, The Will of the Lord be done; is an hard Lesson. If the Lord
will bereave us of our dearest Relations and Enjoyments, to Acquiesce in his
Will, to take up the Cross, is one of the hard Lessons in the School of Christ.
Yet this Grace Old Jacob had attained unto: He said, If I be Bereaved, I am
Bereaved, Genesis 43.14. The Lord ( says he) has taken away Two of my dear
Children, and if he will bereave me of more, I submit to his Will. Yea, and if
the Lord will call for our Lives, we must willingly Sacrifice them to his
Pleasure. I have often thought of that holy man of God, and Mr. Eliot: whom
many of you (...) cannot but remember: Once, (...) with several other worthy
Persons, in a small Boat, to one of the Islands hard by; there came a bigger
Vessel under full Sail, running directly on them; the Boat was over-set, and
they all thrown into the Sea, the Good Old Man, when he though it he should not
speak one word more, lifted up his Hands to Heaven and said, The Will of the
Lord be done. On this Resignation to the Divine Will, he and all the rest were
wonderfully Preserved from being Drowned.

Quest. What shall we do that the Will of God may be done by us?

Answ. Let us look to Jesus Christ: Look up to him with an Eye of Faith for
supplies of his Spirit. What can we do without him? Nothing at all as we should
do. But (says the Apostle) I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. He could Acquit himself both as to Active and
Passive Obedience, as became him; performing all Duties, bearing all
Afflictions, through Christ strengthening him. And we should look on His
Example: He was the most Perfect Pattern of Obedience to the Will of God, that
ever was in the world. He was so as to^ Active Obedience: He said of God, I d^
always the things that Please him, Joh. 8*29. We should endeavor an Imitation.
And as to Passive Obedience, never man in the world was exposed to such
Sufferings, as our Dear Lord Jesus Christ endured. He Prayed with Tears of
Blood, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me: But he said
also, Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39. And in Ver.
42. O my Father If this Cup may not pass from me, except drink it, thy Will be
done.

And now, My Brethren; what I Preach to you, let me Practice my self. I would
never Exhort you to any Duty, but what I would endeavor my self to Practice.
You know that God has lately (even the last Lord's Day) taken from me one that
has been the Dear Companion of my Pilgrimage on Earth for Two and Fifty Years;
and she was a great Blessing to me, and to my Family, and to the Church of God.
If I had not been at all Related to her, I ought to Honor her Memory; because
she was the Daughter of the most Eminent Man of God that ever New England saw;
and much more on the account of those Gracious Qualifications with which she
was Endowed: For she was Singularly Conscientious, Humble, Pious, Prayerful. It
was her Custom to be with God Six Times every Day; and very often in a Years
time, to spend whole Days alone with God, in Prayer with Fasting; where (as I
find in her Private and Reserved Papers) she was wont to Pour out her Soul in
Supplications to God, for his Church in general, for New England in special,
and for Me, and for her Children. These Prayers will certainly Live, though she
is Dead. The Reason why I mention these things, is, not only to set before you
an Example of Piety, but because the Scripture has said of the Virtuous Woman,
Her Children rise up and call her ^^^ssed: her Husband also, and he Praises
her. The Woman that Fears the Lord, She shall be Praised. It becomes me to
Comply with the Will of God in a Sorrowful Bereavement; and to say, The Lord
gave me a great Blessing, Blessed be the Name of the Lord; the Lord continued
that Blessing to me for more than Fifty Years. Blessed be the Name of the Lord;
and the Lord has now taken away that Blessing, I yet say, Blessed be the Name
of the Lord. And as David said of his Dead Child, so say I concerning my Dear
Dead Consort, I shall go to her; (I trust in Christ that it will not be long
first) but she shall not return to me. Let the Will of the LORD be Done.

Preached at Boston April 11. 1714.

FINIS.

