THE Peaceful End OF THE PERFECT AND UPRIGHT MAN. A SERMON, Occasioned by the
Death of Mr. John Atwood, Who departed this Life, the 26 th. of August 1714.
Aged 67 years.

By JOHN BARNARD, A.M.

Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord -- that they may Rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them,

Rev. xiv. 13. The Righteous Shall be in Everlasting Remembrance,

Psalm. cxii. 6. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Benj. Eliot at his Shop in
King Street. 1714.

THE PEACEFUL END OF THE PERFECT and UPRIGHT MAN.
PSALM XXXVII. 37. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for the End of
that Man is Peace.


IT has ever been esteemed a Question of some considerable Weight and
Importance; Who is the Happy Man? Or, Wherein does true Happiness consist? And
Men in general may be ranked into two Classes, as to their Opinion about it,
the one Placing Happiness in the Outward Enjoyments of this Life; but with this
Difference, that some Center it in Sensual Pleasures and Gratifications, others
Fancy it treasured up in the Hoards and Abundance of Riches, while others again
View it as Percht upon the lofty Pinnacles of Honor; and accordingly each of
these are eager in their Pursuit after it, in those various Paths, and account
none to be truly Happy, but such as have attained the One or Other of them. The
other Class find true Happiness to lie more Within the Man Himself, and while
some of these, (as the Ancient Heathen did) think they have discovered it in
the Natural Strength, and acquired Endowments of the Mind; the Wiser part of
this order of Men have really found it, seated upon a more exalted Throne, than
Natural or Moral Excellencies and Accomplishments; Namely, in a Religious Bias
of Soul, in a Mind like to God and Devoted to Him; and inward Principle
enabling us to Serve God here, and fitting us for the Enjoyment of Him
hereafter,: for this carries Present rewards in its hand, and secures Future
and Eternal Ones.

BUT because those Future Rewards seem to be a such a Distance from us, and the
Present are so little Apparent to our Senses, we are often so weak, as almost
to give over our Pursuit after the True, and content our selves with the
Counterfeit show of Happiness, which this World presents us with; especially
upon a Cursory View of the various Dispensations of the Divine Providence, in
the unequal Distribution of the things of this Life.

IT is often a sad and fore Temptation to the Righteous, when they Reflect upon
the present Posture of Affairs in the World; and it gives a great Shock to the
Foundation of their Faith and Virtue, to consider the Present State of them
that are truly Virtuous, and the very Different Condition of the Wicked; That
the Righteous here are often in Trouble on every side, afflicted and tossed
with Tempests, laboring in Storms, and ready to be Swallowed up of the
Mountainous Waves that pass over them; while the Wicked as often pass under a
Serene Sky, with a fair and easy Gale, Wallowing in Pleasures, Laden with
Riches, and Distinguished with the highest Marks of Honor. Upon the
consideration hereof, how great are the Searchings of Heart? and how apt are we
to have our Minds Ruffled and Discomposed? And idly Imagine, that those, whom
the giddy World Looks upon and Admires, are the only Happy Men, and the
Peculiar Care of Providence; whilst the Faithful, whom the World Hates and
Derides are abandoned by God, and become Miserable?

IT IS the Great Design of this Psalm to obviate this Temptation, to correct our
Mistakes, and Direct us how to behave our Selves under such a Trial; that we
Fret not our selves because of Evil Doers, neither be Envious against the
workers of Iniquity: that we don't Murmur at the Providence, that makes the
Difference, grudge them their present Portion, nor foolishly wish our selves in
their Souls Stead; but that we do our present Duty, Depart from Evil and do
Good, Trust in the Lord, and Delight our selves in Him; and Commit our way to
Him, having the Law of God in our Hearts, and Speaking Wisdom and Judgment with
our Mouths, and so Maintain our close Pursuit after Happiness in the Paths of
Religion and Virtue, and Doubt not of our Attaining it at last.

THE Great Argument used to encourage us to Constancy and Perseverance in
Religion, is taken from a just Consideration of the Different Ends of the
Righteous, and the Wicked; Wait till the Conclusion, trace them to their Ends,
and we shall see their Ends are as Different as their present State, and more
abundantly; and then you will find who is the truly Happy Man. As for the
Wicked, whatever his present Condition may be, yet his End is, to be cut down
as the Grass, and wither as the green Herb, though he grow great in Power, and
spread himself like a green Bay Tree, yet shall he pass away, he shall not be,
the transgressors shall be Destroyed together, the End of the wicked shall be
cut off. But as for the Righteous, Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the
Upright; for the End of that Man is Peace; the Salvation of the Righteous is
the Lord, He is their Strength in the Time of Trouble, the Lord shall help them
and deliver them.

IN the words of my Text we may Observe,

1. WHO these Words are Spoken of, viz. The Perfect and Upright Man: i.e. The
truly Godly Man, set in Opposition to the Wicked, and described by these two
bright Characters, Perfect and Upright; Perfect in Heart, Frame and Temper, and
Upright in his Walk and Conversation.

2. WE may take Notice of what is here affirmed of this Perfect and Upright
Man, and that is, That the End of that Man Shall be Peace. The Upshot and
Conclusion of his State will be Peace. though he should meet with Difficulties
and Uneasiness in his Way to it. Peace will be the Reward of his Perfection and
Uprightness. By Peace may be understood not only Tranquillity and Calmness of
Mind, but all true Felicity as included in it.

3. WE are called upon to Mark and Observe this Man and his End: Mark the
Perfect Man, and Behold the Upright, for the End of that Man is Peace. Consider
well what his Walk is, and what it will certainly End in: View the Peace the
Joy the Happiness, which in the End he comes to, and is the fruit and reward of
his Religion; and let the Consideration hereof rectify all your hard Thoughts
of God; let the sight allure you to the Love and Practice of Religion, and
Support you under the Difficulties you may meet withal in your Christian
Course.

Mark the Perfect Man, and Behold the Upright, for the End of the Man is Peace.

IN the further handling of which Words, I shall Endeavor,

I. TO show you who is the Perfect and Upright Man.

II. TO give you a Prospect of that Peace which will assuredly be the End of
such a Man.

I shall briefly hint,

III. THAT we should seriously Weigh and Consider the Peaceful End of the
Perfect and Upright Man.

IV. AND then I shall make some Improvement.

TO begin with the First of these; which is,

I. TO show, Who is the Perfect and Upright Man.

IT is the truly Godly Man that is here Described; and that we may have a
clearer View of Him, I shall take these Two Characters of Him apart, and
Consider Perfection, as more peculiarly relating to the Inward State and Frame
of the Man, and Uprightness as relating to his Actions and Outward Deportment.

I. TO Consider Perfection as it relates to the Inner-man of the Heart, and so
that Man is said to be Perfect, whose State and Frame is so. This will give us
a distinct account of the Perfect Man, to Consider what Condition he is in, and
what Temper he is of. A Perfect Man is so,

1. WITH respect to his State and Condition; But here we must Distinguish
between a Natural and a Legal or Judicial Perfection; between what Naturally
belongs to the Man, and what is Legally accounted to him. For Naturally no Man
is Perfect with respect to his State, but having all Sinned and come short of
the Glory of God, we are concluded under a Sentence of Condemnation, being by
Nature the Children of Wrath; (Ephesians. II. 2.) whose State and Condition therefore
must needs be very Miserable.

BUT the Perfect Man is One who is in a Perfect State, in a Judicial Sense He
is perfectly Exonerated and Acquitted from that Guilt which lay upon him,
having a Perfect Righteousness, not his own, but Another, Imputed to him for
his Justification before God; being Justified by Faith in the Name of Christ
Jesus. That is to say, He is a True Believer, who realizing the Declarations of
the Divine Will and Purpose, and the free offers of Grace and Mercy in the
Gospel, heartily and unfeignedly Accepts of Jesus Christ as he is tendered to
him, Submitting himself to His Teaching and Instruction, to His Rule and
Government, and relying entirely upon the Infinite Merits of His Obedience and
Sufferings for Righteousness and Salvation. And by Virtue of his thus Accepting
of Christ as his alone Savior, he has the Righteousness of his Surely and
Redeemer, which is Perfect and Complete, reckoned to him, and accounted in
God's Court of Justice, as though it were truly his own. In this sense he is
Legally Perfect, (or Rectus in Curia,) and brought into a Perfect State of
Reconciliation with God, having No Condemnation belonging to him, because he is
in Christ Jesus, Romans VIII. 1. This His State of Justification is Perfect and
Complete, upon the real Actings of Faith on Christ; and will only be more
Evident to himself and the whole World another Day. Thus is he a Perfect Man in
Christ, Col. I. 28. being arrived unto a Perfect Man, unto the Measure of the
Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. IV. 13.

2. A Perfect Man is One that is so with respect to his Frame and Temper.

And here,

1. WE must Distinguish between a Legal, and an Evangelical Perfection. A Legal
Perfection here means such a Sinless Frame and Temper of the Soul, and admits
not of the least Inclination and Tendency to that which is Evil. This now is
altogether unattainable in this Life, and in this Sense there is no Man that
Lives and Sins not; but there are the remainders of Corruption in the Best
of Gods Children, which made an Holy Paul Cry out, O Wretched Man that I am,
who shall Deliver me from this Body of Death, Romans VII. 24.

BUT then, An Evangelical Perfection, which lies in the general fixed Bent and
Inclination of the Heart to God and His Holy Law, this is attainable, and it
renders Him a Perfect Man that has it. A Perfect Man therefore is One, who,
though he is not so thoroughly Sanctified as to have no remaining Tendencies to Sin
in Him, yet is Sanctified thro'-out in Spirit, Soul and Body, and maintains an
Universal Love and Esteem to all the Commands of God, and an earnest Desire to
Please Him. He is One who has the Image of God truly renewed upon him, his
Soul restored to its Primitive Purity, his Understanding Spiritually
Illuminated, his Will divinely Possessed and inclined, and his Affections
heavenly in their Aspirations and Tendencies; so are all Old Things done away,
and behold all things are become New in him, Thus is the Man of God Perfect,
being thoroughly furnished with an Inward Principle enclining of him to every
Good Work. This Perfection is the Truth and Sincerity of the Heart, the reality
of a Saving Change wrought in him, and is what is called a Perfect Heart, I.
Chron. XXVIII. 9.

2. AGAIN, We must Distinguish between the Kinds and the Degrees of Grace. No
Man is Perfect as to the Degrees of Grace. Hence our Savior said unto him that
called Him Good Master, Matthew. XIX. 17. Why call thou me Good, there is none
Good but One, that is God. In God only are the Excellencies of Goodness,
Holiness, Justice, Veracity, and the like, in their Proper Perfection. The
Bright Angels come short of this Perfection of Degrees; He charge His Angels
with Folly, and the Heavens are not Pure in His Sight, Job IV. 18. and XV. 15.
The Saints above are Perfect as to Degrees of Grace compared with what they
once were, and in that they are Perfectly free from Sin, yet they fall vastly
short of absolute Perfection; being finite Creatures, their Excellencies are so
too, and they are capable of Possessing them but in a Limited Degree. So the
Saints on Earth are Perfect compared with the rest of the World, and what they
were by Nature, but not as to Degrees of Grace.

BUT then, they are Perfect as to Kinds of Grace. The Godly Man is Perfect,
that is Entire, not divided, but all of a Piece: being Perfect and Emie nothing
wanting, James 2. 4. He has not only the Grace of Faith, but the Graces of
Love, of Fear, of Hope, Desire, Repentance, Humility, Meekness, Forbearance,
Brotherly Kindness, Patience, Temperance, and the other Fruits and Graces of
the Spirit of God which is in him. And though these several Graces may not, nor
can they, be all in Exercise at the same Time, yet they remain and abide in
him, in their Habit and Principle, and are called forth into Act according as
his Circumstances may be, and as there is Occasion there-for; (though sometimes
the Strength of Temptation, and remaining Corruption may Suppress the Actings
of them:) so that if there is wanting the Exercise of any Grace it may be said
to him, yet One thing thou Lackest, as to his Outward Behavior; and if there
should be did Habit of any Grace wanting, and the Man never find in himself a
Disposition, or Principle Prompting of him to the Exercise thereof, when he is
called thereto; it is certain, (however there should be the Semblance and
Appearance of many other Graces in his Actions) that there is not the Root of
the Matter in him, not so much as the true Habit and Principle of any One Grace
at all, and all the show thereof is but mere Counterfeit and Delusion. A
Heathen could observe long ago, That Virtue is all of a Piece, It Is One; only
appearing in different Garbs according to the Dignity of the Persons She
appears before, and the Occasion She manifests her self upon; Shining sometimes
in One Armor sometimes in another, answerable to the Various Natures of the
Assaults made upon her. So that from this Oneness, where there is any One true
Act of Grace there is the Habit of All; and where the Habit of any One is
wanting the Habit of All is really wanting too. He therefore is the Perfect Man
whose Heart and Grace is Entire, not he who has an Heart to Believe, and an
Heart to hugg and indulge his Lusts; a Heart to Love God, and an Heart to Hate
and Abuse his Neighbor; but he who has the Perfection of Grace as to the Kinds
thereof within him.

AND I might add, the Perfect Man is One that Aims at Perfection as to Degrees
of Grace: This he sets before him as his Mark and Scope, and does not content
himself with bare Existence, or a low Stature; nor Count that he has already
attained by the most lively Actings of his Faith and Love; but with an Enlarged
Soul Presses toward the Mark for the Prize of the High Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. He is so entirely Devoted to the Service of God, that this he
constantly Pursues, and though he cannot Glorify and Obey God as much as he
would, (because the Flesh is Weak when the Spirit is Willing,) yet his earnest
Breathings are to the Lord, and to His Holy Name; that as much as possible he
may show forth the Praise of Him that has called him out of Darkness, into His
Mavelous Light, by a Well Ordered Conversation.

Which introduces me,

2. TO the other Character of a Godly Man, he is an Upright Man: Which
Uprightness I shall consider as more specially relating to his Actions, his
Outward Visible Deportment. And in the General: An Upright Man is One that
Walks, by Rule, who Conscientiously Endeavors in his whole Behavior, so to
Conform to the Dictates of his Natural Conscience, and the Rules laid down in
the Word of God, as that he will not wilfully allow himself to Bow or Decline
therefrom, to the Right hand or to the Left; but with Holy Paul, Exercises
himself to have always a Conscience Void of Offense, both toward God and
toward Man.

Particularly;

1. AN Upright Man is One that Conscientiously Observes and Pays all that
Respe and Honor, Worship and Obedience which He Owes to his GOD. He is One
that, from a Just Sense of the Being and Adorable Perfections of God, Sincerely
endeavors to Worship Him in all the Ways of His Appointment. He acknowledges
his entire Dependence or God by his earnest Supplications to Him, Seeking to
Him for the Bestowment of all those Mercies his needy Circumstances call for;
by humbling himself under a Sense of his Fathers Frowns, acknowledging himself
Less than the Least of all His Mercies; and returning the Praise and Glory of
all that he Enjoyes to his Merciful Benefactor, acknowledging that it is not his
Own Skill, nor the Might of his Hands, that has gotten him this or that, but
every Good and Perfect Gift is derived to him from the Father and Fountain of
Lights. He Endeavors to lay out his Time, his Strength, and Estate in the
Service of God, so as He requires of him, and may tend to promote His Glory. He
appears Publicly before the Lord, to Worship Him (...) the Beauty of Holiness,
gladly embraces the Opportunity to tread His Courts, and Engages with a Devout
Body and Soul in the Services of His Holy Temple. He Complies with all the
Institutions of Christ in His House; reverences His Day and keeps His Sabbath
Holy, and never mentions His Name but with a Profound Awe upon His Spirits, not
in a trifling and Blasphemous Manner. He manifests his Sincerity and
Uprightness by his Secret and retired Devotions; is far from making a Show and
Pretense of Religion, to the neglect of the Great and Evident Duties of it; nor
does he think to Mock God, and put Him off with some Particular Services, with
a Desire to be Excused as to others; but endeavors to Walk in all His
Ordinances and Commandments Blameless, to approve himself an Israelite indeed,
in whom there is no Guile, by an Universal respect to the whole of that Homage
and Worship which he owes to his God.

2. AN Upright Man is One that as Conscientiously attends all those Duties
which He owes to his Fellow Creatures. He is an Honest, Just, True,
Plainhearted Man, in all his Converse and Dealings with Men. He endeavors
after the strictest Justice and Equity between Man and Man, and fears to do any
thing that should not be right: as he would not violently force any thing from
his Neighbor which he has no right to, so neither will be Fraudulently
overreach Cozen and Cheat him of his Just Dues, nor take an Advantage by a
Trick to wrest that from him, which his own Conscience tells him he has no Just
Claim to, and which he would never have been able to come at, if it had not
been for that Esteemed Pretty, but Really Villainous Trick that helped him to
it: but you may safely trust to his Honesty, and depend upon the Fairness and
Equity of his Dealings.

AND you may as safely Depend upon his Word and Promises, which are always
Sacred to him. He is a Man of Fidelity, who will not allow himself to deceive
and baulk the Expectation and Dependence of his Neighbor, but will carefully
see to the fullfilment of what he has Promised; nay though it should be to his
Own hurt that he has Spoken and Engaged, yet he Changes not, Psalm. XV. 4.
Much less will he indulge himself in False Speaking and Lying, especially in
that too familiar Instance of Vilifying and Reproaching his Neighbor. He will not
Insinuate Ill things of him, and under such a close Covert discharge as fatal a
Volley upon his Neighbors Reputation, as if he should openly say all manner of
Evil of him. He is One that takes not up a Reproach against his Neighbor, i.
e. readily catch at any Ill thing that may be said of him, rejoicing in his
heart that he has thereby an Opportunity to hurt and wound him, as the manner
of some is; Report, say they, and we will report; Give us the hint, and we'll
spread the Matter, true or false: but his Character is that, Psalm. XV. 2, 3. He
Speaks the Truth in his Heart, he backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does
Evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a Reproach against his Neighbor.

THE Upright Man is Plain hearted, without Dissimulation in his Words and
Actions, free from Pretext, Guile, and Design. He will not Speak You fair with his
Mouth, that he may Play you a soul trick with his hands: He will not hugg you and
Smile you in the Face, that while you are made to believe you have a Friend of
him, he may have the fairer Advantage to do you a Mischief. But the Upright Man
can say, Thy Servant is a True Man; and so he approves himself in all his
Converse; his Heart, his Mouth, and his Hands go together; and he steadily
Walks by that approved Maxim of Christianity, Matthew VII. 12. All things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.

AND I might add, that the Upright Man is careful to Approve himself so, in the
Watch and Guard he sets upon himself, the Government he keeps over his Passions
and Appetites, and his avoiding those Lusts of Intemperance and Uncleanness
which hurt and wound himself.

THUS the Upright Man is One who Walks by Rule, and is careful and exact in his
Endeavors to Live up to the Rule, in the whole of that Duty which he owes to
God and Man. And so we have seen a truly Godly Man Characterized by these Two
bright Marks, he is a Perfect and an Upright Man.

I pass in the Second Place.

II. TO show that the End of this Perfect and Upright Man will be Peace. If by
Peace we Understand the Calmness, Serenity, and Satisfaction of a Man's own
Mind, or Peace with God, or the Enjoyment of Complete Happiness, still it must
be Assumed that the End of the Perfect and Upright Man is Peace. For,

1. PEACE is the End or Natural result of his Perfection and Uprightness. If we
take a View of him as a Perfect Man, we shall find that he is in a Justified
State; and hence naturally results Peace with God; Being Justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans V. 1. God was indeed an
Enemy to him, while he was concluded under Sin and Guilt; but since Christ has
been Wounded for his Transgressions, Bruised for his Iniquities, now the Enmity
is Slain, the Partition Wall is broken down, the Breach is healed, and he is
made Nigh by the Blood of Christ, who is our Peace, who has made both One: now
he has a Propitiation for his Sin, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is also his
Advocate with the Father, in whom he has Redemption through His Blood, even the
Forgiveness of Sins; is Adopted into God's Family, and God Himself is not
ashamed to be called his Father.

THIS Peace with God is a Solid and Substantial Ground for Inward Peace and
Quietness of Mind; for since God is become his Reconciled God and Father, is
his Refuge, Strength and Shield, what need he Fear who shall be against him,
though the Mountains are carried into the midst of the Sea, and the Waters
thereof roar and are Troubled: No Outward Affliction and Trial can ruffle and
Discompose the Mind, while it is under a true Sense of the Loving Kindness of
God, which is Better than Life.

BUT besides, The Natural result of the Rectitude and Purity of the Mind, and
the Cleanness of the Hands, the Sincerity and Integrity of the Heart, and the
Uprightness and Honesty of a Godly Man's Life, yields him this Satisfaction and
Calmness of Soul. For by this means, those unruly Lusts and Passions, which
while rampant break in upon the Soul, Mar its Beauty, and Disturb its Harmony,
are Lulled and Quieted, and no such Blasts are suffered to blow there: the Man
is Conscious to himself too, that he is in some Good Measure what he ought to
be, and does what he ought to do, that he Lives as becomes a Rational and
Religious Creature, which affords him an inexpressible Pleasure and Calmness of
Mind; so to be Spiritually Minded is Peace, Romans VIII. 6.

THIS is the Peace that is the result or End of his Perfection and Uprightness,
what it naturally tends to, and always aims at in him. And though it be true,
that every Perfect and Upright Man does not always Possess this Inward Peace
of Soul, yet it is ordinarily, if not always, his own fault; proceeding from a
Breach upon his Integrity, or his careless neglect to gain a more through
Acquaintance with himself, that he does not Solace himself with this Genuine
Fruit of his Faith and Probity: for it will ever remain a Truth, That the Ways
of Wisdom (...) Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace: (As, Prove.
III. 17.) And, Great Peace have they that Love thy Law, and nothing shall
Offend them; as we are assured, Psalm. CXIX. 165. This Peace he may Enjoy in the
Way to his End, which if he should go without the Experience of, yet,

2. THE Perfect and Upright Man has Peace in his End, at the Conclusion of his
Life. The End of that Man is Peace. It Is true that the Neglect to clear up his
Evidence, the Strength of Satan's Temptations, and sometimes the Natural
Melancholy of a Distempered Body, may give a great Deal of Uneasiness to many a
Pious Soul when he comes to lie upon a Deathbed; it is an Untrodden Path he is
entering upon, it appears all Gloomy and Dark before him, it is an unknown State
he is passing into, and he may have some fearful Apprehensions at Entering the
Dark Valley of the Shadow of Death, and how it shall fare with him after it.
Yet ordinarily, Mark the Perfect Man and behold the Upright, the End of that
Man is Peace; though the Part he Acted was full of Difficulties and Sorrows, yet
he goes off the Stage with a Serene Countenance and a Composed Mind.

SOMETIMES Uncommon Joys and Transports of Soul Possess the Expiring Saint,
which breaks forth into Astonishing Speeches and Actions, full of Divine Light
and Comfort, even in the very Agonies of Death, beyond what can be Expressed:
but neither is this ordinary on the other hand; the more Silent retired
Calmness and Peace of Mind is the more Usual, if not the more Decent and
Eligible.

WE may sometimes indeed see a very Wicked Man pass Silently away, having no
bands in his Death, as the Psalmist Phrases it; but this is not from an Inward
Peace of Mind properly Speaking; which is a Rational and Spiritual
Satisfaction, resulting from a Distinct and Clear View of things: but this
their apparent Ease, is rather an Indolency, a Stupidity, and Insensibility of
their present Condition, and the State they are passing into: Whereas the
Perfect Upright Man, he Lays himself down in Peace, and Quietly hopes in God.

HE meets his last Enemy with a Manly resolution, a Christian undauntedness,
with Caution, but in no bondage through the Fear of Death; he can take him by the
hand, with a Sedate Countenance, to try the Combat with him, with good Hopes
of his proving a Welcome Messenger, designed to do him a kind Office, to knock
off his Chains, release him from his present Confinement and Sorrows, and usher
him into Liberty and Endless Satisfactions.

HE can reflect back upon the Integrity of his Heart, and the Uprightness of
his Walk, with a Joyous Soul: never any looked back upon a well-spent Life with
Horror and Anguish, but many Thousands have done it with Unspeakable Pleasure
and Satisfaction; while the Wicked is driven away in his Wickedness, is forced
out of the World, with reluctant horror, arising from the Sense of his
Wickedness; the Righteous has hope in his Death, and the review of his past
Life, though full of Infirmities, Humiliations and Repentings, afford a New Scene
of Joy, and yield a fresh Satisfaction and Pleasure. Our Rejoicing is this,
(says the Apostle, II Cor.I.12.) the Testimony of our Conscience, that in
Simplicity, in the Integrity of our Hearts, and Godly Sincerity, the
Uprightness of our Lives not by Fleshly Wisdom, not according to the Dictates
of the Flesh and under the Government of Sense, but by the Grace of God, by the
firm Belief of Unseen Eternal things, we have had our Conversation in the World.

AND he Possesses Peace from the Beautiful and Glorious Prospect that is before
him, the Mansions reserved for him, the Throne and the Crown that awaits him,
the Decays of the Outward Man Ministers to this Peace; through the Gaping Calms
of the Flesh, the Soul has a Clearer and Brighter Discovery of things beyond
the Grave; and upon a Sight of the Heavenly Vision, with what Calmness and Joy
can he say? As the Appostle did when the Glorious Scene was before him, I. Tim.
IV. 7, 8. I have sought the Good Fight, I have finished any Course, I have kept
the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
God the Righteous Judge will give unto me.

THEN, he may gladly Hope, to find God more Evidently manifesting Himself a
reconciled Father to him, and listing up the Light of His Countenance upon him;
Christ Jesus as a Kind and Obliging Friend stand by his Bed side, and say to
him. Fear not, I am with thee, I will Guide thee with my Crook, and Support
thee with my Staff, as thou Passest through the dark Valley of the Shadow of
Death; (as Psalm. XXIII.4.) And the Holy Spirit of God Witnessing with his
Spirit, that he is a Child of God and an Heir of Salvation. So does God keep
him in Perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on Him.

AND how Pleasant the Spectacle! To see a Gracious Saint, thus Silently
retiring from the World; Maintaining the Combat and Triumphing over the Last
Enemy without Struggling; Calmly, like a Lamb, laying his Body down to rest, in
hopes of a Glorious Resurrection; while his Soul Peaceably with draws and with
a Sedate and Easy Flight, Wings it self away, Touring a Lost to the Superior
World. Such often is the Peaceful Death of the Upright Man, and yet this is not
his End.

3. MARK the Perfect Man and Behold the Upright, for the End of that Man is
Peace; the Final Result and Issue of all things, when he comes to the End of
his Journey, to be fixed in his Determined Endless State, he will find it an
End and State full of Peace. Trace him beyond the Grave, and you will see the
Bright Messengers of Peace, that stood hovering round his Bed in his Dying
Hours, now take him under their strong Convoy, and Conduct him safe through the
Territories of the Prince of Darkness, to the rest that remains for the People
of God. Blessed are the Dead that Dye in the Lord, they rest from their Labor,
and their Works shall follow them, Rev. XIV. 13. Their work is at an End, and
now they go to Possess the Rewards thereof; the Reward of that Man is Peace, as
it is rendered in the Margin of our Bibles.

HERE they are in a Militant State, have many Enemies to Encounter with all,
are called to Hard and Difficult Services, many a fiery Trial, and sharp
Conflict; but in the End their Victory will be perfected and their Triumph
Glorious, and having no more Enemies to Encounter with, no not Sin it self,
they will accordingly be Dismissed from their Warfare, and be paid off with all
the Glorious Effects of a Sure Peace, Established upon the Everlasting
Mountains and the Perpetual Hills.

HERE they are in a World of Sorrow and Affliction, but then they shall arrive
safe home, cast Anchor as in the Pacifick Sea, nor shall the smallest Wave ever
rise to dash against them more; they shall return, from their Wandering
Pilgrimage, to the Heavenly Zion, with Songs and Everlasting Joy upon their
Heads; they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee
away; there shall be nothing to Disturb and vex them in all that Holy Mountain.

IN short, all that Happiness that is Included in Peace, will assuredly be the
End of the Perfect and Upright Man; The Righteous shall go away into Life
Eternal, Matthew. XXV. 46. Then God will become all in all to them, and they
shall Partake of the Rivers of Pleasures, and Fullness of Joys, that flow at
His right Hand for ever and ever; even Joy unspeakable and full or Glory.

Say now, Is not the End of this Man Peace!

III. WE should therefore Seriously Weigh and Consider the Peaceful End of the
Perfect and Upright Man. We should Soberly Consider this, to Allure us to the
Practice of Serious Religion, and excite us to become truly Godly. For, can we
think attentively on the Inward Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which the
Perfect and Upright Man Enjoyes? Can we View the Happy End which he comes to at
Last? And all this as the Natural Fruit, and Promised Reward of his Piety and
Godliness? How should the Beautiful Prospect encourage us all, to fall into
those Pleasant Ways of Wisdom, to travel on in the bright Path of the Just,
which shines with a clearer Luster the farther we Walk in it, till at length it
Surrounds and Swallows us up with Noonday Glory.

WE should Seriously Weigh this Happy End, to correct our hard Thoughts of God,
as though His Ways were not Equal and Just, as though the Yoke He lays upon us was
Intolerable, and His Burden too heavy to be born. This is what the Psalmist
designedly dwells on this Meditation for. Shall this Blessed Peace be the End
of the Perfect and Upright Man? Then though our Lord should put us to
Extraordinary Services, and call us to encounter with very great Difficulties
in our present Course, Yet have we no reason to think Him an Hard Master, since
He will so Plentifully reward our Fidelity at Last.

AND we should consider this, to Support our own Minds under Temptations and
Trials; the End will be Peace. Then hold out Faith and Patience yet a little
longer, continue in the Way of Well-Doing, and He that shall come will come,
and verily His reward is with Him.

FOR these Ends, and they are good Reasons why, we should Mark the Perfect Man
and Behold the Upright, for the End of that Man is Peace.

IV. I Proceed to the IMPROVEMENT of the these things.

I. IS the Perfect and Upright Man such an One as has been Described, hence
then we may infer, That there are but Few among Professors that Deserve this
Character: Alas, how many are there, who are not more than Hypocritical
Professors of Religion? That wear it only as a Mask, that they might have a
Name to Live, and be Esteemed among Men, while they are really Dead. How few
have Soundness and Integrity in their Hearts? Their Carnality and
Worldly-Mindedness, their Prophanness and Sensuality, Discovers them to be but
Whited Sepulchers, that they are Unsound and Rotten at the Heart, however fair
their Outside and Show may be They have a Form of Godliness, and in Words
Confess their Lord, but are without the Power, the Life and Spirit of
Christianity, and in Works Deny Him. They have given up their Names to Christ,
but alas have forgot to give Him their Hearts, and do the Works which He has
Commanded them. Thus it was sadly Complained, Isai. LIII. 1. Who has Believed
our Report? And to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? And may it not
be still Mourned, How few are the Number of True Believers? Whose Frame and
Temper is to the Service of God. Don't we see the most of Men rather choosing
the Service of Sin and Satan, hugging some Lust in their Bosom, rolling some
Sin as a sweet Morsel under their Tongue? Loath to pluck out a right Eye, or cut
off a right Hand, to part with their favorite Sins, which they are so easily
inclined too, and frequently indulge. How few Upright, Honest, Sincere,
Faithful Men are there to be found? This also was the Complaint of old, Psalm.
XII. 1. Help Lord; for the Godly Man cease, the faithful fail from among the
Children of Men. How much Fraud, and Injustice, and Oppression, is to be seen
in Men's Dealings One with another? How much Dissimulation, Backbiting, and Evil
Speaking, Prevails open Faced among the Professors of Religion? Certainly
where such things are Allowed and Indulged they slur all the Glory of a
Profession, they destroy the very Pretensions to real Godliness.

II. IS the Find of the Perfect and Upright Man Peace; Hence then we may Infer,
How Miserable will be the End of the Wicked. Certainly they can have no
Pretensions to that Peace which is the Portion of the Godly. The way of Peace
they have not known, therefore, There is no Peace, says my God, unto the
Wicked, Isai. LVII. ult. No; no Peace in their own Minds, that is true and
Solid. Their very Lusts and Passions give them Trouble and Uneasiness, in the
Gratification of them. Like a troubled Sea, they are never at Rest, they Sleep
not except they have done Mischief, their Sleep is taken away, unless they
cause some to fall: So do their own Lusts often hurry them, and deprive them of
Rest and Peace. Do but Compute their Pleasure Mirth and Jolitry, and without
making any great Abatements for their Sorrow and Heaviness, we shall find all
to be but like the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot; as the Wise Man Elegantly
Expresses it, Prove VII. 6. It may be Loud and Noisy, but it is not Solid nor
Lasting. And yet often in the midst of Laughter their hearts are full of
Heaviness, and that because of those Wounds they have given to their own Souls
by Sin; that they cannot think a little Soberly, retire within, and take a View
of the Temper of their Hearts, and consider the Irregularity of their Lives,
but the Thought terrifies and amazes them, and fills them with inexpressible
Anguish.

AND as they have no true Peace in their own Minds; so neither is God at Peace
with them, but He accounts them for His Enemies, and is Angry with the Wicked
every Day, Psalm. VII. II. And He will take a time to manifest His Anger against
them. They may indeed Dye in a Senseless, Secure, Stupid Frame, yet not in
Peace; but oft'ner their Portion is to lie Down in Sorrow; however, what will
their End be? But to be cut off and perish for ever. When their End comes, then
will those doleful Accents, from their Provoked Lord, strike them into
Everlasting Confusion; As for those Mine Enemies, that would not that I should
reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke XIX. 27. Then
will they howl, and wail, and gnash with their Teeth, and find to their Cost,
that however Pleasant and Sweet the Fruits of Sin seemed to them, while they
were indulging their Taste, yet now they are as Gall and Wormwood, as the Poison
of Asps, and Bitterness in the Latter End.

III. IS the End of the Perfect and Upright Man Peace; Hence then we Infer the
Vast Advantage of Integrity and Uprightness. It Is Advantageous to us in the
Present Life; for the Peace which attends it brightens the Mind, removes the
Stings, which are the Concomitants of Unpardoned Guilt; and renders a Man
Submissive, and Easy under all the Alotment of Divine Providence; It Is
Advantageous to us in the Future World, for it will End in Everlasting Peace:
Thus is true Godliness Profitable for all things, having the Promise of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to Come, I. Tim. IV. 8.

THIS therefore ought to be Preferred, to all the Advantages which this World
can propose to us: and no prospect we may have of Serving our Worldly Interest,
should prevail with us to do any thing, that would Mar the Beauty of our
Sincerity: but this we should Esteem our most valuable Treasure, the Pearl of
great Price, Preferrable to Rubies, the Merchandise thereof better than Silver,
and the Gain thereof than find Gold; and resolve with Job, Chap. XXVII. 5, 6.
Till I Dye, I will not remove my Integrity from me; my Righteousness I hold
fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I Live.
For this renders the Saint the Excellent in the Earth, and the Righteous Man
more Excellent than his Neighbor; is highly valuable in it self, and renders
him so in whomsoever it is found.

IV. IS the End of the Perfect and Upright Man Peace; this then is some Ground
of Comfort unto those who have been forced to Part with their Godly Relations.
For if they have Good Reason, upon a Charitable review of them, to Conclude,
that they were Prefect and Upright, such as Feared God, and Eschewed Evil, then
certainly they have no Cause to Sorrow, as those that are without Hope; for
the End of such is assured Peace. Whether therefore they are taken away Sooner
or Later, in their more Early or in their declining Days, yet how should this
help us to dry up our Tears, assuage our Griefs, and compose our Minds, and
make us Patient and Submissive? For though our Loss of them may be Afflictive and
Grevious to us, yet we must not be so Narrow and Selfish, as to look no further
than that, but remember, that it is their Gain. And since they have Gained
Unspeakable Joy and Peace, Let us Comfort our Selves with the Faith and Hope,
that we shall go unto them, though they shall not return unto us; and let not our
Peace be the Less, for their's being Consummated.

V. LASTLY; Let it then be our Care to Approve Our Selves such Perfect and
Upright Men, as that our End may be Peace. Be careful to approve our Selves to
God, and our own Consciences, walking in all His Ordinances and Commandments
blameless; and as the Grace of God in the Gospel has taught us, Let us deny all
Ungodliness, and Worldly Lust, and Walk Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in
this present World.

TO this End let us often being our Selves and all our Actions to the Rule.
Search out the Rule; see what it is that God requires of us in His Word, how He
would have us to demean our Selves toward Himself, and how to treat our
Fellow Creatures. Examine our Selves by this Rule, see how far we have already
attained, and what is yet wanting in us, to render us Perfect Men: bring all
our Actions to the Standard, Regulate, Square, and Proportion them to a Just
Dimension and Exactness hereby. This will be the way to Preserve us Pure and
Free from every Great Transgression, to keep our Hearts sound in Gods Statutes,
and to walk in our Uprightness before Him, and obtain the Blessing from Him.
For Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way, who walk in the Law of the Law, Psalm.
CXIX. I.

AGAIN, We should be earnest in our Supplications to God, to Make us Perfect
and Upright, and bestow upon us that Peace which is the Reward thereof. God is
able to Change our Hearts, though we cannot. He can make New Creatures of us; it is
easy with Him to Unbend our Corrupt Inclinations, to turn the Current of our
Thoughts and Actions into a Pure Channel, and Teach us the Way wherein we
should go: And for this He will be Enquired of, to do it for us. Let us
therefore Humbly, and Earnestly Implore His Grace and Favor, that He would
Create in us a Clean Heart, and Renew a Right Spirit within us; that He would
fulfill the whole Pleasure of His Goodness in us, and a Work of Faith with
Power; that He would Subdue our Lusts, Mortify our Corruptions, and Crucify us
to this World, working in us both to Will, and to Do, of His Own Good Pleasure;
that the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, may rule in our Hearts;
and that He would Guide us by His Counsel, till He shall bring us to His Glory.

TO draw to a Close, Let us Eye the Example of those Perfect and Upright Ones,
who have gone before us, and Endeavor to Be and Do like them. This is One
Reason why we should Mark the Perfect Man, and Behold the Upright, to raise in
us an holy Ambition, and Provoke us to an Imitation of them. Hence says the
Apostle, I Cor XI. I. Be ye Followers of Me, as I also am of Christ. All their
Virtues and Graces, we should endeavor to Copy after them: And a Just Eyeing,
a Marking and Observing their Laudable and Godly Walk, would be one Good
Incentive to us to do like them.

IT will not be Thought an Unjust Honor paid to the Dead, not a Flattering of
the Living, for me to say, We have seen such a Perfect and Upright Man. A Man
in whom the Truth and Sincerity of Religion shone with a Peculiar Luster; a
Devout Man, full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost; and Exemplary in the Exercise
of many Particular Graces. A Man Conscientious and Careful in his whole
Carriage toward his Neighbor; Just even to the Critticalest Exactness; His
Word might be depended on; and his Fidelity was Immovable; A true Hearted
Honest, Upright Man; and for that reason made the Common Almoner of the Poor,
(especially at this End of the Town,) the [ Among other Instances, there has
been for 10. Years past, every fall, about 20 l. by an unknown hand, laid in
the Dust of the Evening at his door, to be distributed among the Poor.
] Treasury where Pious Souls deposited their Aims, leaving it to his Care and
Fidelity to Distribute them, that their Lest hand might not know what their
Right hand did: And in the Expense of his Care, Time, and Labor a Man of
Uncommon Charity: A [ He was One of the Deacons of the North Church in Boston
for 21. Years.
] Servant to this Church, and Faithful therein.

SUCH was the Man, whom Yesterday Evening we attended to the House Appointed
for all the Living. Solemn was the Show; and the Rites reveared; and Universal
Grief seemed to set in State on every Countenance, and Spoke the Inward
Sentiments of the Long Mournful Train, Mark the Perfect Man, and Behold the
Upright, for the End of that Man is Peace. Such was his End. How Calmly did he
lay his Body down to Rest! And his Soul Silently withdraw to the Possession of
his Masters Joys!

His Perfect Heart on GOD Devoutly Placed,
And Upright Walk fair Virtues Footsteps traced,
With a bright Calm his Peaceful Mind Possessed,
Which Ends in Everlasting Peace and Rest.
MAY a double Portion of his Spirit upon his Relict, and Surviving Offspring!
And may we all be the followers of his Imitable Virtues, that being Perfect and
Upright, we also may Dye the Death of the Righteous, and our Last End may be
like His.

NOW the GOD of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
Great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make
you Perfect in Every Good Work, to do His Will, Working in you that which is
well pleasing in His Sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for Ever, and
Ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

