A VINDICATION OF THE BANK OF Credit

Projected in Boston from the Aspersions OF Paul Dudley, Esqr. IN A LETTER By
him directed to John Burril Esqr. Late Speaker to the House of Representatives
for the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

Printed in the Year 1714.

A VINDICATION OF THE Bank of Credit, etc. To John Burril, Esqr.
SIR.
MR. Attorney General, by his Letter of the Twenty Second of October last past
to your Self, as Speaker to the House of Representatives for this Province,
having most unaccountably, with an uncommon Freedom, taken upon him to Insult
and Arraign a Considerable Company of Gentlemen Merchants, etc. (as he is
pleased to style them) Projectors of the Bank of Credit, and call them to the
Bar of that Honorable House, Charging them with the many High Crimes and
Misdemeanors following.

First, That they are openly carrying on their Bank with utmost Vigor and
Expedition, in Contempt of an Order of Council; and indeed affirming, that the
Government have nothing to do with them in that Affair: And that they look upon
themselves very Well and sufficient to carry it on without making any
Application to the General Assembly. Vide Page 3, 4.

Secondly, That their Bank is Pandora's Box, Page 4.

Thirdly, That their Projection is just Ripe for Execution, which will more or
less affect, invalidate and break in upon the Prerogative of the Crown, several
Acts of Parliament, the Constitution and Laws of this Province, the Estates and
Liberties of the People; and that not only for the present, but succeeding
Generations. Page 4, 7, 15.

Fourthly, That their Projection is a thing Intolerable, Unreasonable and
Unjust, not founded in Commutative Justice, and Common Honesty; and must
unavoidably prove a great Snare and Mischief to People that want Money to pay
their Debts, or otherwise for whose ease and advantage the Bank is Projected.
Page 16, 17, 18.

Fifthly, That the Business of the Projectors is in one day to be Masters of
One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds, without any Risque, or any other Charge
o^ Trouble, than the Writing and Signing a few pieces of Paper, to Accept Six
Thousand Pounds Interest per Annum; whereby they would immediately have the
profits of other Men's Estates, and finally the Estates themselves, without a
valuable Consideration. Page 17, 18.

Sixthly, That their Projection will be in effect the setting up an Absolute,
Independent Government, which like a Fire in the Bowels, will Burn up and
Consume the whole Body. Page 14.

These Articles being Intermixed and Clothed with so many Invective Sarcasms,
Opprobrious Language and Undue Reflections, the Gentlemen Concerned hold
themselves Obliged in Justice to themselves, and the Truth, and in Honor to
your self; that you and every one else may be Undeceived, and that the whole
Matter may be set in its true light, do Affirm and Declare,

That two or three Gentlemen in the Town of Boston, discoursing of the
Difficulties that Trade labored under, for want of a Medium of Exchange, the
Silver being sent Home for England, and the Bills of Credit on the several
Provinces daily Called in by the Funds on which they were Emitted; thought it
proper to consult some other Friends, and to Meet together, and Consider of a
suitable Remedy for the present and growing Inconveniences and Difficulties.
At which time some were desired to Commit their thoughts to Writing, in order
to be considered of at a Second Meeting, which was accordingly done; And after
several Meetings, agreed on a Land Security, as a Fund for Bills and Notes to
be Circulated; and Minutes then drawn up, for the Regulating and Carrying on
that Affair, but all with an entire dependence upon on the Government for their
Favor and Countenance in promoting it, and furnishing them with all such
necessary Powers as might enable them to carry it on with safety to themselves,
and the Possessors of their Bills or Notes. And therefore immediately they
desired some of the Gentlemen to wait upon His Excellency the Governor for his
Advice, Favor, Countenance and Direction in their Projection; who accordingly
the very next Morning before they had taken a fair Copy of their Minutes,
waited on His Excellency; so careful were they of paying all due Respects to
Government, who were well Received by him, and Encouraged to proceed. And at
the same time their Scheme being first laid before his Excellency; his thoughts
were desired, whether it was practicable for the Public to come into a Fund
themselves, to which he was pleased to Answer, No, by no means; The Country is
greatly Indebted already, and if such a thing were proposed, any Landed Man
might come into the General Court, and enter his Protest against it; Neither
would it be safe for that a Governors Fingers could not be kept out of it. And
there then being further discourse about the power of the Government to Lend at
Interest on the Public Credit; He Replied, That what the Government could not
do wisely, equitably and safely they could not do; and that the Method that
they had Projected for Relief in that Affair, he well approved of; withal
adding, that he would be the first Person that would take out Three Hundred
Pounds of their Bills to promote their Credit, and encouraged them to proceed
to take Subscriptions, in order to lay it before the General Assembly for their
Allowance; and that he would do all that lay in his power to promote it;
assuring them that he would Write Home in their favor, by setting forth the
Necessity of such a Projection: And directed them to wait upon Mr. Secretary
Addington for his Advice, which they did, who was of Opinion that the
Government would not Raise Money or Bills to Let out upon Loan. They then, and
at sundry other times consulted him about their Scheme, committed it to him to
peruse, correct, alter, amend and frame as he should think fit, which he
accordingly did. Whereas if the Projectors had been discouraged in their so
early Attempts, it might have prevented any further proceedings: And the said
Scheme was laid before the General Court at their Sessions in February last
past, together with a Petition, Subscribed by most of the Undertakers of that
Affair, for the granting them such necessary Powers, as they should think meet
to carry on the same.

Sir,

The foregoing being Matter of Fact, and the exact steps taken by the Gentlemen
concerned in the Projection of the Bank. It cannot be so much as imagined, that
the Author of the Letter, his Post and near Relation to the Governor
Considered, should be ignorant thereof. However it fully proves that part of
his Letter respecting their Slight, Neglect and Contempt of the Authority and
Government to be a designed Misrepresentation, and therefore Abusive of the
Gentlemen concerned; some of whom on several accounts are Superior to him.

Now Sir, If you will please to Consider his Argument, whereby he would seem
and pretend to prove his Charge of Contempt, etc. you will find it as Unfair
and (...) his Charge, which is that which you must (...) have seen in the
Public News-Paper, or an Order of the Governor and Council passed upon the
Occasion of the Projection of the Bank of Credit; whereby the Projectors were
directed to proceed no further to that Affair, until the next Session of the
General Assembly; that so the whole Government might be of Advice in a Matter
of that Weight and Consequence. Notwithstanding all which, I am loath to say, in
Contempt of it, the persons concerned are openly carrying on their Bank with
utmost Vigor and Expedition, and supposing, and indeed affirming that the
Government have nothing to do with them in that Affair.

Is not this a bold and wilful Misrepresentation of the Matter? Whenas the
Order of Council, which the Government Ordered to be Printed in the Weekly
News-Letter, is in the Words following.

At a Council Held at the Council Chamger in Boston, upon Friday the Twentieth
of August, 1714.

Upon Reading a Memorial, Presented by the Queens Attorney General, setting
forth that upon good Information, a certain Number of Gentlemen, and Merchants
are Projecting a Bank of Credit as they call it, designing speedily to Make and
Emit a quantity of Bills to a great Value; which is a Matter of Importance, and
will necessarily be of General Influence.

Ordered, That the Projectors or Undertakers of any such Bank do not proceed to
Print the said Scheme, or put the same on Public Record, Make or Emit any of
their Notes or Bills, until they have laid their Proposals before the General
Assembly of this Her Majesty's Province; who are always ready to Countenance
and Encourage any Proposals that may be of benefit and advantage for the
Public; or for the promoting and encouraging of Trade amongst Her Majesty's
Good Subjects of this Province; And that this Order be Printed in the Weekly
News-Letter. Isaac Addington, Secr.

Now by what Words in this Order can Mr. Attorney support his Argument, to
prove the Projectors Contempt and Insinuated Disobedience, which as it did not
forbid their proceeding any further in that Affair, but rather encourage and
direct them to complete their Subscriptions, and perfect their Scheme, so as it
might be fit to lay before the General Assembly; so was it punctually complied
with, in that the Projectors neither Printed their Scheme, or put the same upon
Public Record, Made, or Emitted any of their Notes or Bills; but Reconsidered
and New-Modelled their Scheme, and took many more Subscriptions, and so far
perfected it, as to lay it before the General Assembly, which they did at their
last October Sessions; hoping for their Countenance and Authority, for that
because a certain number of the Gentlemen concerned were appointed to attend
his Excellency with the present Scheme, which they carried to him on the
Morning of the Day they presented another of the same to the House of
Representatives, who then freely declared, that he would favor the Design, if
the House of Representatives and Council would come into it, and that the
Publicks Raising of Bills to Let out, to him had its dark sides; for that if
any Person should borrow of the Public Bills, and Mortgage his Estate for
payment, and fail of making payment, whereby the Estate so Mortgaged should
become forfeit, the Estate so forfeited would belong to the Crown; and if he
were their Governor, he should think himself obliged to lay his Hands upon it,
till the Kings Pleasure could be had, who would have the entire disposition
thereof.

And now after so fair a Gloss and false Comment upon the Order of the
Governor and Council, and the Actions of the Projectors in Conformity thereto
in the very beginning of the Letter; what can be expected but the like
Arguments throughout. And indeed here you may see Ex Ungue Leonem. Is not this
too much like prevaricating talk in a bad Cause. Wherefore it is now to be
Noted, that notwithstanding the Gentlemen concerned, had made several
Alterations in their Projection* obliging every one that Subscribed thereto, to
give good real Security, to the full value of their several Subscriptions, to
Lie as a Fund or Security, to answer all the Notes or Bills Issued from the
Bank; and to make good all Deficiencies, whereby the Possessors or Borrowers of
the Bills or Notes were in no danger of being wronged, with some other
Amendments: The want of which Security in the first Projection, is one of the
most popular Arguments Mr. Attorney has made use of to cry down the same. Now
he being well Informed of these Alterations before he Published; Nay, before he
delivered and sent his Letter to you, whereby he certainly knew his short
Abstract of the Projection, and his Form of the Bills, with his Addition of an
Eschutcheon, and consequently all the fine Structure he builds thereon, to be
but upon a sandy Foundation; though he would have the Honorable House of
Representatives believe it.

And then he does in effect tell you, that the Projectors of the Bank have of
their own heads formed themselves into a Company, by a Constitution of their
own making, and Erecting of themselves into a Body Politic and Corporate to
all Intents and Purposes in the Law; and then calls in the Prerogative and the
Honor of the Government to his Aid and Assistance. It Is true, they have by a
Constitution of their own making, formed themselves into a Company and
Co-partnership, and that they take for granted they well might do without the
least affront to the Crown, or this Government, or else had never attempted it;
for what is more common and usual then for Merchants and others to enter into
Partnership, make their Rules, and oblige themselves to the due observation of
them. And does this make them a Body Politic, and Corporate to all intents and
purposes in the Law, or encroach upon the Prerogative, or dishonor this
Government? What is it then the Projectors have done, that makes them such a
Body Politic as Mr. Attorney pretends they are. Certainly no man but one in
Eutopia could make such an Interpretation of their Articles as he has done. The
Projectors, as he rightly observes, do not pretend to Incorporate, or make
themselves a Body Politic; neither does his partial description of a
Corporation, which he says is my Lord Cooks, with all the etcrs. he has put
into it prove they have.

We agree with him, that all Bodies Politic are derived from the King as their
Original Fountain; but it does not thence follow, that all Banks of Credit and
Companies are, for that there have been such as never were Incorporated: And
does not the Sword Blade Company in London, continue even unto this day, to
Emit their Notes to a very great Value by Trustees, and not Incorporated as a
Bank of Credit; so that their Emitting Notes or Bills is not in England
accounted a thing intolerable, Unreasonable and Unjust, and absolutely
inconsistent with the Honor, the Power and Wisdom of that Government, nor to
suffer a Number of their own People to set up an Absolute Independent
Government, which like a Fire in their Bowels, would burn up and consume their
whole Body. But Mr. Attorney it seems is wiser, and sees further into the
Matter, than the Government of England does. And then again to prove the
Erecting this Bank a Breach of Law, he brings in an Act of Parliament, made in
the Sixth Year of the Reign of Queen ANNE, to wit, that during the Continuance
of the Bank of England, it shall not be lawful for any Body Politic or
Corporate, other than the said Company of the Bank, or for other Partners
exceeding six in England to Borrow or Owe any Sum on Bill or Note, payable on
demand, or at any time less than six Months from the Borrowing thereof. Now it
is to be observed, that this Law does not make any Number of Partners to be a
Body Politic or Corporate, for their being in Partnership; Neither does it
forbid any six, or any other Number of Partners to Borrow or Owe any Sum on
Bill or Note, payable at any time longer than six Months from the Borrowing.
Most certainly that Law was made in favor of the Bank of England; So that even
in England it self before that Act had its force, it was lawful there for any
Body Politic or Corporate, or Partners to Borrow or Owe any Sum on Bill or
Note, etc. And therefore will be Lawful again at the determination of that
Bank. Then why may it not lawfully be done here, since that Act no ways affects
this Province; For can Mr. Attorney imagine that setting up a Bank of Credit in
New England, would in the least measure, prejudice the Bank of England:
However, though he says he will not trouble himself to Argue how far this
Projection would be a Breach upon the Bank of England; yet tells you, page 12.
That certainly if the same Fact committed in England, by a Number exceeding six
would be a Breach of Law; much more may we suppose it forbidden and made
Unlawful for an hundred to do it here. Certainly, this is a fine and accurate
Mode of Reasoning and Pungent Argument.

Because our Law forbids us Building of Wooden Houses in Boston, therefore we
must not Erect one in Lynn, or the Province of Main.

As to what he says of the Projection not being founded in Commutative Justice
and Common Honesty, and that he cannot see the Reasonableness and Justice of it,
betwixt the Subscribers and Borrowers; and therefore must unavoidably prove a
great Snare and Mischief to those that want Money, etc. To make a show of the
Proof thereof, he Argues from his own false Abstract of the Projection, so that
he disputing Ex non Concessis; all he draws from thence, together with his
Hypothesis, grounded thereon, must needs fall of it self, and come to nothing.
And it is plain, his design was only to amuse the People, but more particularly
the House of Representatives: Now since the Projection obliges every Subscriber
to Mortgage a Real Estate, of the full value of what he Subscribes for, to make
a sufficient Fund for the Credit of their Notes and Bills; as likewise to
Answer all Deficiencies arising by any defect or default of the Projectors in
the aforesaid Scheme; Whereby the Borrowers or Possessors of the Notes or Bills
are sure to have Justice done them; and all concerned with them, in case the
Bank should come to an end, even then will the last Possessors of their Bills
or Notes have good Security to depend on: Notwithstanding all the Objector has
said, or possibly can say: They still having their Credit and Value from the
Intrinsic Value of the Bank, and not from what his Bubbled Borrowers give
them, as he groundlesly asserts. He must needs suppose the House to be asleep,
and so to need awakening, as page 5. when he asserts, page 19. that by the
Tenor of the Bills you see, they are only obliged to Accept of them for the
Redemption of Pawns and Mortgages: When in his Reciting the Tenor of the Bill,
page 7. He owns that we oblige our selves to Accept the same in ALL PAYMENTS
according to Covenant made by us on Public Record, etc. Which how directly he
Contradicts himself, and endeavors to Mislead the House, we leave you and the
World to judge: Nor would the Projectors have the Profits of other Men's
Estates, much less the Estates themselves without a valuable Consideration, nor
make themselves Masters of any Estates but their own, which they willingly
Deposit and Mortgage for a General Benefit for the Loan and Credit whereof it is
as lawful for them to take Interest, as it is for Mr. Attorney for his Bills of
Credit on the Province. The Bank Bills having a better and more certain
Security than the Public Loan Bills, and more easily obtained, in Case that
late Act should be Repealed: And for that Reason his Argument against the
Private Bank is of far greater strength and force against the Public Bank.

Mr. Attorney is pleased often to put you in mind, that this Prejection breaks
in upon, and Invalidates the Constitution of this Province, page 4. 15. The Act
of Parliament of late made Referring to Money in the Plantations, designing
thereby to awaken the Government upon this great occasion, to Exert their
proper Power, and not suffer the Projection to proceed, but by some proper Act,
and Public Order, to declare against, and forbid it, lest thereby the
Constitution of the Government of the Province be broke in upon, and
endangered: Because we are a Dependent Government, and must in all things
Conform our selves to the Laws of Great Britain, and Instructions of the Crown,
and therefore must expect to give an Account of all our Matters.

Now if the suffering of this Private Bank to be Erected, is such an
Encroachment upon the Prerogative, and a breach of the Law of England, as to
endanger the loss of our Charter, and the Liberties and Estates of the People,
which to prevent, Mr. Attorney tells you, was the very Consideration that
principally determined him at that time so freely to Communicate his Thoughts
to your self in that Matter; with the several other fine flourishes and
plausible Insinuations, whereby he would induce you to believe that in all this
Affair that he has sincerely aimed at the Public Good, and effectually to
prevent any Attempts that might be made against our Liberties and Privileges,
which no doubt he is entirely fond of, and always was vigilant and industrious
to maintain and defend. If he has sincerely given you his Opinion respecting
the Private Bank, and the direful effects of it, with what sort of sincerity
did he when he says he had the Honor to be of an Extraordinary Committee
Raised for that purpose, give it as his Opinion, that considering the demand as
to the Taxes, and the great occasion of the People, as to their Trade, it might
be convenient to Make and Issue out a further quantity of the Public Bills of
Credit: And now in his Letter spend so much time, and take such pains, and
argue to persuade the General Court to set up a Bank of Credit themselves, Emit
their Bills, and take Interest for the same. Is it not as possible for the
Government to Erect, Set up and Establish things contrary to the Law, as for a
Number of Private Persons; and does not the Law of England which he says would
be broke in upon, by Erecting a Private Bank, much more respect a Corporation
than Private Persons; and which he himself readily grants it does. Is not this
then one effectual way to endanger the Constitution of the Government, the
utter Ruin and Loss of the Charter, and the many Liberties we hold and enjoy
thereby. For if a Number of private Persons break in upon the Law of England,
they may be severally punished therefore; But if a Corporation or Government
like Ours, Set up and Enact things contrary to the Law of England, doubtless
the way to punish them would be by Loss of their Charter and Privileges
granted thereby. So that upon the whole Matter, whether his Letter was not
rather to Lull you asleep if possibly he could, that then he might bring you
into the Practice of such things, which hereafter you, and all of us might have
sufficient Reason to lament and be grieved for, but when too late; than in the
least measure to awaken the Government that they might be upon their Guard
against any Attempts to undermine them. Because having lately seen a Book
Printed in London, Anno 1708. Entitled, The Deplorable State of New England,
etc. In which is a Letter in the Words following.

Boston, January 12th, 1703, 4. Dear Kinsman,
I Confess I am ashamed almost to think I should be at Home so long, and not
let you know of it till now; Though after all, a New England Correspondence is
scarce worth your having -- I Refer you to Mr. -- for an Account of every
thing, especially about the Government and the College, both which are
discoursed of here in Chimney Corners and Private Meetings as confidently as
can be. If there should be any occasion you must be sure to stir your self and
Friends, and show your Affection and Respect to my Father, who loves you well,
and bid me tell you so. -- This Country will never be worth Living in for
Lawyers and Gentlemen, till the Charter is taken away. My Father and I
sometimes talk of the Queens establishing a Court of Chancery in this Country.
I have Wrote about it to Mr. Blathwayt: If the Matter should succeed, you might
get some place worth your Return, of which I should be very glad. If I can any
ways serve you or your Friends, Pray signify it to

Dear Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, Paul Dudley.


Surely such a particular Favor done this Country, loudly calls upon every
good Inhabitant within the same, to be always paying his proper thanks: And may
it not very justly raise some doubts of his sincerity in seeking the true
Interest of this Country; or at least whether he does not vastly differ in his
Opinion from the most and best of Men among us, concerning what are our good
and valuable Liberties and Privileges.

Sir, We take no Pleasure in Rehearsing these things to you, but were
necessitated thus to do, lest by the aforesaid Letter in which he asserts, page
21. that as yet they have not Consulted the Government in the whole Affair; We
might be thought to be in any wise endeavoring to break in upon the
Constitution of this Government, and consequently the Privileges and Liberties
we enjoy by the Charter, which we highly esteem of, and shall never be wanting
to do what in us lies for the long and well securing thereof.

A very considerable part of his Letter being on the praise of Money, Silver
and Gold, and his Contrivance to store the Country with it, Regulating the
Trade of the Country, and the Extravagance of the Inhabitants far beyond their
Circnmstances in their Purchases, Buildings, Expenses, Apparel, etc. being not
to the present purpose, we shall not trouble you with an Answer thereto.

We doubt not but upon your Reading this our just Defense, you will be
sufficiently enabled to make proper Thoughts upon the whole design of that
Gentleman, as well as our Projection; which seeing it has labored under so
many needless Aspersions, shall take this occasion to Print the same; that
every one that pleases may have the Perusal and Examination thereof: whereby
they will perceive his Letter to be Pandora's Box, and not the INNOCENT
PROJECTION.

Dated at Boston, in New England, December. 20, 1714. We are, Sir, Your very
Humble Servants, At the Desire, and in behalf of the Partnership.
Samuel Lynde, To the Contents, except the Letter taken out of a Book. E. Lyde
John Colman Elisha Cook, jun. J. Oulton Timothy Thornton Oliver Noyes William
Pain Nath. Oliver.


A PROJECTION For Erecting a BANK OF CREDIT In Boston, New England.

Founded on LAND Security.

Printed in the Year 1714.

A PROJECTION For Erecting a Bank of Credit.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, and Seals affixed, send Greeting.

W HEREAS there is a sensible decay of Trade within His Majesty's Plantations
in New England, for want of a Medium of Exchange, wherewith to carry on the
same; the Running Cash being Exported, and considerable Sums of the Bills of
Credit put forth by the Government, which had their Circulation and supported
the Trade being already drawn in, and the remaining lessening Yearly, by the
payment of the Taxes, and other Public Dues; so that without a Medium, the
Trade must necessarily decay, to the unspeakable detriment of the Landed
Interest as well as the Trading Party; and there being no other Expedient in
our view for the Reviving and Encouraging of Trade, and facilitating Returns
for Goods and Merchandises Imported from Great Britain, but by Establishing a
Fund or Bank of Credit upon Land Security, which may give the Bills Issued
therefrom a General Currency amongst us.

We therefore the Subscribers, Parties to these Presents, for the more
effectual Erecting and sure Establishing of such a Fund or Bank of Credit, do
Mutually Covenant, Consent and Agree as follows:

1. THAT the Subscriptions shall be taken to a Value not exceeding Three
Hundred Thousand Pounds, and that every Subscriber shall Settle and Make Over a
Real Estate, to the value of his Respective Subscription, to the Trustees of
the Partnership or Bank, to be and remain as a Fund or Security for such Bills
as shall be Emitted therefrom; which Emission shall not exceed the
Subscription, and will make good all deficiencies that shall arise from any
Neglect, Default or Mismanagement of any of the Officers or Members of this
Partnership or Bank.

2. That no Person shall Subscribe above Four Thousand Pounds, nor under Two
Hundred and Fifty Pounds; and each Subscriber shall take out and keep for two
years at least, one quarter part of his Subscription, and not exceed one half
part by virtue of his first Mortgage, paying Interest there-for, according to
the Rules of this Partnership.

3. That we will from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter give
Credit to the Bills Emitted from this Fund or Bank, equal to what is given to
the Bills of Credit on the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, and to accept the
said Bills in all Payments (Specialties and Obligations for any other Specie
excepted) upon Forfeiture of Fifty Pounds for each refusal, until the Refuser
has forfeited his whole Security and Profits; and every such Person having so
forfeited, shall no longer be accounted a Member of this Partnership, but be
deemed ipso facto dismissed, and lose his Interest therein.

4. That it shall be free for any Person or Persons not being of this
Partnership or Bank, to borrow Bills, or have Credit out of said Bank, giving
Security according to the Rules hereof, and on payment of the Principal and
Interest, their Mortgage or Deposuit, shall be released and discharged.

5. That in all Matters to be Transacted and Voted in the General Meeting of
the Subscribers of this Partnership or Bank; every such Person who has
Subscribed Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, shall have one Vote, Five Hundred
Pounds two Votes, Seven Hundred and Fifty Pounds three Votes, One Thousand
Pounds four Votes, Twelve Hundred and Fifty Pounds five Votes; and no person
shall have above five Votes, how great soever his Subscription to, or Interest
in this Bank is, or shall be.

6. That the Interest to be paid on all Bills Issued out, whether on Persons
Mortgages or Deposuits, shall not exceed Five Pounds per Cent per Annum.

7. That there shall be at no time Emitted from this Partnership or Bank, any
Bills of Credit, but upon good Security, to the acceptance of the Directors for
the time being, at the Rates and Values following,

On Rateable Estates two Thirds of the Value.

On Wooden Houses without Farms, not exceeding the Value of the Lands belonging
to them.

On Brick Houses not exceeding the Value of the Land belonging to them, and
half the value of the Lands according to their different Circumstances.

On Gold not exceeding Five Pounds Ten Shillings per Ounce.

On Silver not exceeding Six Shillings and Eight Pence per Ounce.

On Iron and other unperishable Commodities, as a Pledge for one half, or two
thirds, according to the Market.

8. And whereas for the Security of this Partnership or Bank, it is agreed,
that there shall be Chosen seven persons in trust of good Interest, known
Integrity and Reputation, and that to them or any five of them, and such other
persons as shall from time to time be Chosen and Appointed by the major part of
the Votes of the Members of this Partnership then present to Use and Exercise
the aforesaid Trust: All Estates to be settled, shall be Conveyed for the ends
aforesaid, and that the Trustees for the time being, shall have full power by
Order in Writing, under the Hands of the major part of the Directors, to
Commence any Suit at Law against any of the Mortgagers, and make what Releases
and Assignment shall be thought necessary, for the Use of this Partnership; and
that the Trustees for the time being, shall be Obliged to Sign and Execute a
general Instrument, Binding and Obliging Themselves, their Heirs and Executors
unto the Directors for the time being, not to do any thing by way of Release or
Assignment; or Commence any Suit at Law against any of the Mortgagers, but by
Order in Writing, under the Hands of the Directors, and to the Use of this
Partnership: The said Trustees disclaiming all Right and Property in any
Mortgage or Conveyance to them by virtue of their Trusteeship.

FURTHERMORE, That the said Trustees do from time to time attend and perform
all such Orders relating to this Affair, as shall be given in Writing at any
time by the Directors, or the major part of them; and that it shall be in the
power of this Partnership, by the major Votes present in a General Meeting, to
Remove the said Trustees if they shall see cause, and to choose and place in
their stead others. And that A. and B. Esqrs. C. D. E. F. and G. Merchants, all
of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay
in New England, be the first Trustees of this Partnership or Bank of Credit;
and that to them, or any five of them, and the Trustees for the time being, all
the Estates to be settled shall be Conveyed in Trust; which Trustees shall
continue in their Stations until their respective Death, Removal or Resignment.

FURTHERMORE, We do Covenant and Agree, that the said Trustees shall be
Indempnified at all times by this Partnership or Bank from all Charges and
Damages which they shall sustain, or be put to by reason of their Trust, or the
due Execution thereof; and none of them shall be chargeable for the acts or
defaults of any other but his faults only. And for their Encouragement and
Reward, they shall have Annually paid to them out of the Profits, Thirty Pounds
each, which Sum may be augmented at the Annual Meeting, if it be found
insufficient.

9. That there shall be a General Meeting of the Subscribers in some convenient
place in the Town of Boston aforesaid, on the first Tuesday in June Annually,
where, by the major part of the Votes present, there shall be Elected to Serve
for one year next Ensuing, until others be Chosen in their room; Officers for
managing the Affair of this Partnership or Bank, on such Salaries for their
Service, as are, or shall afterward be agreed on. That is to say,

Seven Directors, who shall from time to time Choose one of their Number to
preside; Four of which Number shall have power to act; and in case of equal
Votes, the President to have the Casting.

That these seven Directors shall be Empowered to call General Meetings of the
Subscribers on all important Occasions, and shall be proper judges of all
Securities to be taken into this Bank, and have power to appoint persons to
apprize and report the value of all Estates to be taken as Securities, to give
Directions to the Trustees for Releases upon payment of Mortgages, under such
Regulations as are or shall hereafter be made for the good government thereof;
none to be capable of this Office, but such as shall Subscribe Five Hundred
Pounds in this Bank.

One Treasurer, who by Order, and under the Hands of the Directors, or the
major part of them shall be empowered to pass out Bank Bills, and shall inspect
and regulate the Books and Accounts of this Partnership, and shall have the
direction of the Clerks in order thereto; which Treasurer shall find Security
to be bound with him in the Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds.

One Head Clerk, and one Under Clerk or more if need be; each of whom shall
give to the Trustees of this Partnership, One Thousand Pounds Security or more
if it shall be hereafter thought needful, and shall be Obliged to keep two
setts of Books for the Affairs of this Partnership, and give their daily
attendance at such stated hours as shall be appointed, and observe such Orders
as they shall receive from the Directors or Treasurer: And in case of the Death
of any of the Clerks, or removal by the Directors for mismanagement, it shall
be in the power of the Directors to appoint others to Serve in their stead,
until the next Annual Meeting, taking Security as aforesaid.

10. That for the maintaining of the Credit of this Partnership, and preventing
Frauds, We oblige our selves, that the Books be always free to the inspection
of the Subscribers and Owners, and that they be posted up every day if
possible; Cast up and Balanced once a year, to be offered to the Annual
Meeting on the First Tuesday in June; That there be a perfect Register or Entry
made of all Mortgages and Pawns made to this Partnership, of all Assignments
and Releases.

11. For the further ease of this Partnership, and for preventing of Frauds, we
hereby agree, that any person interested in the same, who does not see reason
to take out Bills, he shall have Credit in the Books, and liberty to transfer
all or any part of his Credit to any person not under Ten Pounds at an Entry,
the Person transfering to return his Note if any given, and a new Note given to
the person transfered to, under the Hand of the Treasurer, and that the
Treasurer at the request of any Owners of Notes so Emitted, shall exchange the
same for Bills, discharging the Account of Notes, and charging the Account of
Bills; and that there shall be a Committee of six appointed to prepare, sign,
indent and perfect such a Number of Bills as shall be agreed on by this
Partnership, to be put into the hands of the Treasurer, and issued out by Order
of the Directors according to the Rules of this Partnership, which Committee
shall continue, until the Partnership shall see reason to alter them, and four
of them to sign every Bill.

12. That in Case any person or persons shall refuse to pay their Interest for
two months after it becomes due, he shall pay after the rate of six per Cent
per Annum from the time it becomes due, until he make payment; and if any
person Indebted to this Partnership be desirous to lessen his Debt, he shall be
allowed to pay in any even Sum, not under Twenty Five Pounds; but if any person
shall redeem his Mortgage or Deposuit, or lessen his Debt, in less than three
Months time after the making thereof, he shall yet pay three Months Interest
for the same; and in case he cannot pay in Bank Bills, he may pay in Province
Bills, or Current Silver Money.

13. If any person shall not redeem his Pawn deposited, the continuance whereof
shall be hazardous, or not pay his Interest for the same at the time agreed on,
it shall be lawful for the Directors of this Partnership, upon three months
notice given, to Dispose and make Sale of such Pledge, at the best Rates they
can, rendering the Overplus, if any be, to the Depositor; or if any Security
given, appear to be doubtful in the Judgment of the Directors; it shall be
lawful for them to demand a renewal or augmentation of such or other Security,
to provide for the safety of this Partnership.

14. When the Bills Emitted shall be much worn, to avoid pasting or covering of
them, the Possessors may have them exchanged, and the old Bills so returned
after they have been Examined, and an Account taken of them, shall be Burnt by
a Committee appointed for that purpose, whose Attestation in Writing that they
have been Consumed into Ashes, shall be the Treasurers discharge for the same.

15. That the neet profits arising from this Partnership, shall be, and belong
to the Subscribers and Owners of the same, their Heirs and Assigns, in
proportion to there respective Subscriptions, except what is herein otherwise
disposed of, and shall be under such Regulations as shall best answer the
design in giving a Credit to this Bank, but out of the profics of two first
years, the Directors shall have power to purchase or build suitable
Conveniences for the Affairs of this Bank before any Dividend shall be made;
such a purchase being first made, the neet Proceeds shall be divided amongst
the Subscribers, at the expiration of two years; but afterward the neet Proceed
shall be divided at every years Meeting in June.

16. That when and so often as by the Decease or Alienation of any Estate by
any Member of this Partnership Mortgaged to the Trustees for the Uses
aforesaid, shall happen to be invested in any other Person or Persons; That
such Person or Persons to whom such Estate shall descend or be conveyed, shall
within three Months next after, give notice to the Directors for the time
being, at the Office of this Bank, that so Entry of the same be made, for the
better direction of whom, to demand the Principal and Interest of said Estate;
and such person or persons shall be obliged to observe the Rules, Covenants and
Agreements of this Partnership, and shall be esteemed a Partner.

17. That the Bills shall be of several Denominations as shall be agreed on,
and of the tenor following, but alterable, at the discretion of this
Partnership; the Motto to be, Crescit Eundo.

THIS INDENTED BILL OF CREDIT, Obliges Us, and every of Us, and all, and every
of our Partners of the Bank of Credit of Boston in New England, to accept the
same in Lieu of Twenty Shillings, in all Payments, according to our Articles of
Agreement; and that it shall be so accepted by our Receiver or Treasurer, for
the Redemption of any Pawn or Mortgage in the said Bank.

Boston, November First, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen.

18. That every Subscriber, who shall Convey his Estate to the Trustees, shall
enjoy the same, the Rents and Profits thereof, until by his default in not
paying his Interest, his Mortgage be sued out; and that every Subscriber, who
shall settle his Estate on the Trustees, may withdraw the same, upon settling
another Estate of like Value in its room, to the satisfaction of the Directors;
and such new Estate so settled, shall be Entitled to the Profits, subject to
the Charges and Losses of this Bank, as the former Estate so withdrawn was.

19. And for a further benefit to the Public, when there shall be Emitted and
Continued at Interest One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds, We give out of the
Neet Profits of this Partnership, the Sums following, Viz.

Four Hundred Pounds per Annum to the Use of an Hospital or Charity School, for
the Support and Education of the poor Children in the Town of Boston, at the
discretion of such Persons as shall be Chosen Overseers of such Schools and
Hospitals when Erected: Provided the Inhabitants and Freeholders of the Town of
Boston, do, at or before their General Meeting in March, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Fifteen, order the Treasurer to accept the sid Bank Bills in
payment of Town Taxes and Assessments.

Two Hundred Pounds per Annum to be paid to the Treasurer of Harvard College
in Cambridge, for the Uses following, Viz.

Twenty Pounds per Annum for a Mathematical Professor Residing there, provided
he Read a Public Lecture once a Month on that Subject.

Forty Pounds per Annum for the Encouragement of three Graduates Residing
there, until they take their Masters Degree, to be equally divided amongst
them; the said Graduates to refund and pay back so far as they have received,
if they depart the College before that time.

One Hundred Pounds per Annum for the Support of six Ministers Sons, to be
equally divided amongst them; and in Case there be not six Ministers Sons, then
the remainder to be given to any other who may stand in most need thereof; the
whole Two Hundred Pounds to be at the dispose of the Corporation.

Forty Pounds per Annum to a Professor of Physic and Anatomy, Residing there
provided he Read a Lecture once a month, on that Subject.

Twenty Pounds per Annum, toward the further support of a Public Grammar
School in each County, now in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, provided such a Grammar School, be Erected and Maintained by every
such County, with an Addition of Forty Pounds per Annum, to every such
Schoolmaster. Provided Nevertheless, and it is to be understood, that the Neet
Profits of this Bank or Partnership amount to so much as the Donations herein
Expressed, and that the Donations first mentioned, be first paid, in case the
Neet Profits fall short.

20. That the Office for managing the Affair of this Partnership be always kept
in Boston aforesaid, and that every Subscriber on taking out by virtue of his
Mortgage the Sum belonging to him, shall pay in to the Treasurer for the time
being; one quarter of a years Interest for defraying the necessary Charges that
may arise, in managing the Affair of this Partnership; and every Subscriber
shall within three months after his Subscription take out his one fourth part
as abovesaid

21. That at any Annual Meeting of the Subscribers, they may by the major Votes
then present, make any Alterations or Additions to this Settlement for the
better managing the Affairs thereof, not inconsistent with the foundation.

20. That in Case any of the Possessors of the Bills happen to be damnified
through default by, or Non-observance of the foregoing Covenants and
Agreements, or by any other defect of this Partnership, or of any of the
Members or Officers thereof; the Person or Persons so damnify'd, shall have
remedy by Action and Suit at Law against the Directors of this Bank for the
time being, who do hereby subject themselves to such Suit and Actions.

And we further Covenant and Agree, that there shall be a Duplicate of these
Articles duly Executed, and lodged in the hands of the Treasurer of the Town of
Boston for the time being, that so persons injured may be in a Capacity to
bring their Suit.

23. That the Directors, Trustees, and all other Officers shall be indemnify'd
by this Bank from all Charges and Damages which they may sustain by reason of
their Trust and Office in the due Execution thereof, and none of them shall be
chargeable for the neglects or defaults of any but his own.

24. That if any Officer or Officers, Member or Members of this Bank or
Partnership, by reason of his Office or Partnership, be Sued in any Action of
Debt or Damage, such Person or Persons shall immeditately give notice thereof,
to the Directors for the time being, that they may prepare to defend the same;
and that upon neglect of giving such seasonable notice, the Partnership shall
not be obliged to indemnify such person or persons against whom such Suit is
brought, nor from the Cost and Damage that may ensue thereon.

25. Whereas the Affairs of this Partnership cannot be effectually carried on
without the Election and Constitution of the several Officers before named; We
have therefore appointed Monday the First day of November next, the day for
such Election of seven Directors, a Treasurer, one Head Clerk, and one
Under-Clerk, and more if need be, who shall have the power to Exercise their
Respective Offices and Trusts, and continue the same till the First Tuesday in
June, Seventeen Hundred and Fifteen, and until others be Chosen in their room
and stead in such manner as in these Presents is Expressed; Provided there be
Subscribed the Sum of Fifty Thousand Pounds on or before the said Day. And that
no Bills shall be Emitted from this Bank or Partnership, until further
Subscriptions make up the Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds.

26. To the true and faithful performance of all and singular the Clauses,
Articles, Covenants and Agreements, Forfeitures and Penalties herein before
Expressed: We the Subscribers, Parties to these Presents, Do mutually Bind and
Oblige our selves, and each and every of us, each and every of our Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, severally and respectively, each one
unto the other, and to the Possessor or Possessors of the Bills of Credit, that
shall from time to time, or any time hereafter be Emitted by this Bank of
Partnership in the full Value of the Sums by us, and each of us Subscribed
hereto.

Dated the Thirtieth of October, Anno Domini, Seventeen Hundred and fourteen,
Annoque Regni Georgii Magnae Britaniae, Franciae et Hiberniae, Regis Primo.


