Forcing A Maintenance NOT Warrantable from the Holy Scripture, for a Minister
of the Gospel.

BEING An Answer to some false and Erroneous pages, writ by Joseph Metcalfe
tending to stir up PERSECUTION

By THOMAS CHALKLEY.

Freely ye have received, freely give. Mat. 10.8. I have coveted no man's silver
or gold. Acts 20.33. I have Preached the Gospel of God freely. 2 Cor. 11.7.
Printed at PHILADELPHIA 1714.

THE PREFACE To the Reader of what Persuasion soever.
IT being a known Principle of the People called Quakers, that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ ought to be preached freely by his Ministers; yet notwithstanding
diverse people of diverse persuasions, either for want of Charity, or through
prejudice, or wrong information, or all three, d^ say or believe that the
Quakers Ministers or Teachers are paid for their Preaching. I do positively
declare to the world that it is an utter falsehood and scanda^ (...) the said
People: for we cannot in good Co^n^ make a Trade of our Holy Calling (...) is
the Word of God to be bought o^ and in outward gain; Witness the Apostle' ^wer
to Simon Magus Acts 8.18 20. And (...) cannot pay our own pray how can w^ ^ers
and be clear of Guilt or have the ^w r^ f^ conscience we believing it t^ (...)?
And every body that knows the (...) Scriptures knows that what is not (...)
Faith is Sin; and yet our Adversaries would ^us commit this Sin: and if we will
n^ ^o it willingly, they will force it from us*

Yet notwithstanding those Teachers receive so much money of the people, and
the Quaker Preachers none at all, (except they are poor and necessitous) they
are full of complaints: Whereas there is no complaining in all our Streets.

We should starve (cry they) if we had not a Law to Compel.

Christ's Ministers of Old, when he sent them forth, they had no Law and yet
they lackt nothing; Is Christ or the men changed now a days? the men doubtless:
for now they cry more, more, more money; let every true Christian judge in this
matter.

I Shall now take notice of his Preface, to one called a Quaker in which he
says That he thinks that is sufficient matter of Conviction in the Texts and
Arguments Improved.

Answer. But every sincere Soul when they come to see the Texts themselves will
have cause to think to the contrar^ for had they been fa^rly produced, the
would have saved the labor of a furt^ reply, they being far from countenance
(...) any forced Maintenance to Christ's M^ers. And as for his Arguments
Improv^ they smell so strong of Persecution, t^ I would charitably hope no
sober Christian or Magistrate who inclines to Moderation (which ought to appear
in all) will t^ any further notice of them, than to p^ his ignorance.

Yet notwithstanding his mighty Arguments and great Improvements, he gives them
the blow, He has but little hopes of his b^ Convicted, (to whom he writes)
becau^ of the Efficacy of error and delusion etc.

He would have had more reason to have writ so, if he had first proved error
and delusion upon him. And truly, he would have been greatly deluded, if he had
believed that great Untruth: that forcing a maintenance for a Gospel Minister
was warrantable from the Holy Scripture; if he be sober and in his w^ts, one
would believe that he cannot (when he seriously considers of it) but be
convinced that he is mistaken.

And as for his Prayers, the Scripture says; We know that God hears not
sinners: And that he is a Sinner, is plain, in wresting and perverting the
Scriptures, as he has done, and as I shall show through the help of Christ, my
Lord and Savior.

Forcing a Maintenance, not Warrantable from the Holy Scripture for a Minister
of the Gospel.
NOW, pray let us Observe what he says to the matter in hand.

1st. As to the Laws of New England; he says, The Laws of this Province require
that the Inhabitants of each Town shall take due Care to be constantly provided
with a Gospel Minister: And that each Minister shall be sufficiently supported
and Maintained by the Inhabitants of ^he Town.

That all the Ratable Estates, and Inhitants in the Town shall be Assessed, and
pay proportionable to such Maintenance.

And that such as refuse to pay accordingly, shall have their Proportion taken
from them by Distress.

Answer, I shall not here despute the Injustice of this Law (only I must add,
they have no such Example from Christ nor the Apostl^s with this proviso, that
it is made amongst a Society of men for themselves, and those of their own
Communion; but if this is intended to force those of other Professions and who
cannot for Conscience sake join with them, believing them to be Antichristian
Ministers, (as to be sure all ^uch are, as go about to maintain such Doctrine
as this Priest Metcalfe does: that it is warrantable from Scripture to force
Maintenance for Ministers) Then would he be willing the Papists of Church of
England should take away from him? surely no: I say, that it is an unjust Law,
and far from the nature of that Royal Law, which says. Do to all men as you
would that they should do unto you; Christ says, This is the Law and the
Prophets. And doubtless the Gospel falls not short of it (though this N. E.
Minister does) though I hope it is not the mind of all in profession with him.
Now the Law being unjust, it is no Crime to reject it: yet for Conscience sake,
and the Lord's sake, we submit to it in passive obedience; and it is well known
to all that know any thing of the Quakers, that their Principles is against
resisting the outward Power.

Next to the question, Whether it be Warrantable from Scripture and the
Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles to put such Laws in execution
to take from men, and the Minister preaches not to them, for they cannot
believe they are sent of God.

This is (...) ^t Question as he states it in his first page, which he pretends
to answer from Scripture, but falls far short of it; and he goes on thus.

1st. It is Warrantable from Scripture etc. that the Inhabitants of each Town
should take due care, in order to their being supplied with a Gospel Ministry.

Answer, this is as foreign from his question, as Rome is from Boston. What is
that to the purpose? let the impartial judge; if he cannot prove a forced
Maintenance from Scripture, he does nothing to his purpose, nor according to
his Grand Question in his title page etc.

Then he goes on to his second Assertion, and says.

2dly. It is Warrantable from Scripture, that Gospel Ministers be honorably
supported and maintained: such Maintenance is a debt due from the People to the
Minister in strict Justice and not as ^meer Act of Charity: for it is the here
of their Labor, and the Wages of their work.

Answer, Hereby he owns himself and all that are in his practice to be
hirelings, though he will not allow others to call him or them so; and quotes
these texts of Scripture to prove it. Luke 10 7. 2 Cor. 11.8. 1 Cor. 9.7, 14.
Gall. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17.18. and adds as fa^sly, and says,

The Argument which the Apostle uses for the Gentiles Ministering to the Jews,
reaches this case. Romans 15.27.

Answer. Surely the man forgets himself, for the Apostle only spoke of a free
Collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, as in the two foregoing verses
plainly appears, v. 25. But now I go to Jerusalem to minister unto the Saints.
26 v. for it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain
Contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem. When will our greedy Priests
take so much Care of the poor?

As to the Texts of Scripture above quoted, I shall take the pains to set them
down at large, that the Reader may see how they Answer his Grand Question: for
what purpose he concealed them (in his) in figures is best known to himself.
Truly if he had set them down at large it must needs have been plainly
manifested, to every body that should read them, that he was in the wrong: for
they assert no such thing, as he would have them to prove, viz a forced
Maintenance for Gospel Ministers. The first is Luke 10 7. And in the same house
remain eating and drinking such things as they give (What could be more against
him? for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire: Go not from house to house, and
into what city ye enter and they receive you* eat such things as are set before
you. (where is legal force here?)

Let this man have a care lest he be one of those that are blinded: for he must
needs be blind if he cannot see that this holy Text makes not for his purpose,
but directly against him; here is not a word of Legal force. it is so far from
it that they were only to eat what was set before them, if they received them
who were true Ministers sent of Christ, which yet will be hardwork for
persecuting Priests to prove themselves so; be they of what Religion they may.
Well, what shall we do for this Legal force? why truly we cannot find it in the
Gospel, or the New Testament Christ came to fulfill the Law and change the
Priesthood, and put an End to C^al Ordinances. But it may be Joseph M^calfe is
an Old Testament man, as a certain N: E: Convert said on occasion well known to
some of them) if he be, and will follow the Letter of the Law, he must go to
knocking down Oxen, and killing of Sheep, which work I believe they of his
Cloth are generally too high for.

The next is 2 Cor 8.11. I Robbed other Churches, taking Wages of them to do
you service.

Surely can any body be so bold as from this Text to say that the Apostle made
a common practice of Preaching for Wages, as our modern Priests do now a days?
I hope, no Christian will imagine from those words of the Apostle that he was a
Thief, or a Sacrilegious person, but only a freedom of speech which he used to
those whom he loved, as in v. 11. is plainly expressed. It is a familiar way of
expression among our gselves where we know we may be free when any thing is
given to us from our Friend. Oh I shall Rob thee too much to put any other
construction upon the Apostle's words would be to make the Apostle a
Sacrilegious person and a Robber which is absurd. But pray let him speak fairly
a little for himself and he will wipe of these Money loving Priests very
handsomely. v. 7. I have, says he, Preached to you the Gospel of God freely. Oh
that curting word freely what shall we do with it? though it was so near our
legal Minister yet he thought fit not to meddle with it and in the 9th. verse
(just under, as the 7th. just above, by which the poor man is hedged in, how he
will get out I know not) the Apostle says, and when I was present with you and
wanted I was chorgeable to no men, And tells them in the same very that he
kept himself from being burdensome to them, and that he resolved to keep
himself so. We dare all those that Preach for hire, and have money for Divining
to come to such a resolution. However if they will not come to this good
Resolution, let them forbear abusing and Persecuting those that (by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ) are.

The next is 1 Cor. 9 7 14 Who goes to a Warfare at his own Charge? Who
planteth a Vineyard and ea^h not of the fruit thereof? Who feeds a Flock and
eats not of the M^k thereof? even so has the Lord ordained that those that
Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel

Joseph has left out what he thought made against him, from the 8 v. to the
13th and 15 ^h. where Holy Paul says, (though he had Power to eat and drink v.
4 at free cost* yet he does not say any where that he had Power to take it by
force and we think it ought to be Preached from an Inward necessity, and not
for an outward Maintenance) I have used none of these things neither have I
written those things that it should be so done unto me. I wish Joseph Metcalfe
and others in his station could say so honestly.

Now I may proceed to say something to each particular above, as it lies in the
holy Text.

And 1st. Who goes a W^fare at his own Charge? there are some though very few, I
could heartily wish that there were more that would follow his Practice that
wrote it, who himself was one that did sometimes do it, as there, when he
wrought at his lawful Calling, and helped those that were with him; and blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, there are some who do go on in
this Holy Warfare of Preaching the Gospel in this Age of the World at their own
Charge, who have nothing to boast of neither; for a necessity is laid upon
them, and Woe is unto them if they Preach not the Gospel. Though if any be poor
and want help we have nothing against it, but are for helping of those who can
give a good account of their Calling, and we are so free to do it that we need
no forcing to it, nor no Law for it.

2dly. Who Planteth a Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof?

Well, he that has Planted a Vineyard let him eat the fruit of it and welcome,
but let ^n leave other folks Vineyards alone, ^t he be counted a Robber in the
worst sense; for if he H^y Apostle Robbed it was by consent but these Preachers
now adays R^b without consent, even Vineyards which they never Planted, but
would destroy if they could. Oh High base and Antichristian Practice with a
witness!

3dly. Who feeds a Flock and eats not of the Milk thereof? But who seedeth
a Flock and Milks the Flocks of others?

Answer. Antichrist an Persecutors, that cannot be content with the Milk that
their own flocks give, but will needs be m^king and fl^eing too those poor
Sheep which cannot in Conscience join with them, believing that their way is
not the door into the true Sheepfold, but that they are climbing up some other
way like thieves and Robbers. And because the poor Sheep of the true Shepherd
Jesus Christ* bleat forth those things those inwardly Ravening Wolves, who have
got only the Sheep's Clothing outwardly, being known to be such by their
fruits of Persecution, will needs put the poor Sheep in their Pounds when and
where they have power, or else take it by force, that is to say Legal forsooth.

4thly. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they that Preach the Gospel shall
Live of the Gospel.

Yes he has ordained that they should Live, but not that they should force a
Living. A blessed Ordination, and with Holy Reverence been repeated; for and
because every true Minister of Jesus knows the sweet benefit of it in a twofold
sense: 1st He has a holy Living for his Soul, he is richly fed at his Great
Masters table with the finest of the Wheat, and as with the holy Honey, or
sweetness of the Word of Eternal Life, which is strength to him in Weakness,
Riches to him in Poverty and joy and peace to him in Persecution which the
World and all the Persecutor therein can never take away from him blessed be
God in Christ forever.

2dly. As to his bodily Living, if he b^ a true man and not a lover of filthy
lucr^ or gain, he will have cause to say as (...) Great Masters servants did of
old, that he la^ked nothing, especially if his Call is from God and Christ, and
not from Man or Money. On this money that is a loud Call indeed to our men made
Ministers: If at any time there chance to be two Calls. I always observed that
the highest bidder carried the Priest. But where shall we find that the Lord
has ordained that a Minister shall have fifty or an hundred pounds per Annum?
(in all the Holy Records) for Preaching the Gospel no, our Great High Priest
said to his, Freely ye have received, freely give. But if it had been his mind
he could as well, and with as great and as good Authority as any of these men,
have said, if they will not give it you freely take it by force. But those
forcers know not what Spirit they are of: if they do, they must needs be the
greater Hypocrites, and so their Condemnation the greater.

Gall 6 6. Let him that is taught in the Word Communicate unto him that teaches
it all Good things.

Yes, let those which these men Teac^ Communicate to them: For Communica^ and
Legal force are words of different signification. I hope by this time this
Preachers eyes will be opened to see his error, in pleading for Legal forced
Maintenance, especially from Christ's and the Apostles Practice and Doctrine as
Recorded in the Holy Scriptures.

The next Text which he quotes is 1 Timothy 17.18. Let the Elders which Rule well
be counted worthy of double honor, especially they which labor in the Word
and Doctrine, for the Scripture says, Thou shall not m^zzel the Ox that
treads out the Corn, and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward.

Very well, what is this to his Legal force? here is nothing of it, those that
Rule well will not force any body nor set the Magistrates upon their backs,
because they cannot conform to their ways; Those must be Antichristian Teachers
for certain, being opposite to Christ: for he indeed was Persecuted, but never
Persecuted any, nor forced any though it was in his power: for which reason we
cannot give those men that double honor which they desire; and for those who
say they labor in the Word and Doctrine of our meek Lord, to set the
Magistrates upon us is wicked Ruling instead of Ruling well.

And as for the poor Ox that treads out the Corn, I am far from having him
muzzled: But when he bites, and with his horns pushes the Sheep, and tramples
the growing green Corn to dirt, I think then he ought to be M^zzled and hoppled
too.

In his 2d. page he says, 3dly. It is the duty of every Inhabitant in a town to
pay proportionable toward Ministers Maintenance.

Ans. No if they are not all of one persuasion, (and if they were all of one
persuasion he has no such President from Christ nor the Apostles to force,
neither Legal nor illegal and are as free in the choice of such Minister; he
runs too fast there, without he is Popishly inclined, to persecute every body
into his persuasion, which has been too much the practice of some of the N. E.
Magistrates and Ministers. I may not here forget, though I forgive, the
salutation of a certain person, when I first entered the streets of their
Metropolis of N E Oh says he, what a Pity it was that they did not hang all the
Quakers when they hanged the other four. Remarkable was the answer that one of
his neighbors made him. I wonder you are not ashamed to say so: for you kn^w
that the Judgments of God has been on our Country ever since I mention this as
a caution to the N E. Ministers, that they would teach their people more
manners to their neighbors and to strangers; and to let them know that
sometimes the abovenamed people cannot be quiet in their solemn Meetings, for
the Worship of Almighty God, in their chief town of Boston; which as I
understand, is very much owing to Lies and Reproaches which the people have
from their Priests and Pulpits. All which is a shame to moderate Christians;
some of which, of all persuasions I hope there are in the Country and
Territories of New England.

For first says he. None were exempted of Old from paying of Tithes for the
maintenance of the Ministry.

By his leave, He is mistaken, for those that did not join with them in
Circumcision were exempted.

2dly. Every hearer ought to pay proportionable toward the Maintenance of the
Preacher. Gall. 6.6. And every Inhabitant ought to be a hearer, (what against
their Conscience?) for it is Sin ^o forsake the Assembling themselves together.
Heb. 10.25. And one Sin can never excuse another.

Ans. If I should ask him* he being a Presbyterian, whether it be a Sin to
forsake the Ass^mblies of the Papists or Church of England Baptists or Quakers
and come to theirs I presume he would say no: Then to what a non plus he has
brought himself and brethren, especially in Old England, for forsaking the
Church and setting up Meetings of their own: truly he has made them all Sinners
in so doing; I do not know how his brethren in N. E. will resent it, but I dare
say his brethren in O. E. will give him no thanks for this unlucky turn; how he
will excuse himself in this sin of Ignorance I know not. Would not this have
been a topping Writer for the Papists when they Burned the Protestants for not
coming to Church.

3dly. In page 2d. he says, The Apostle directs in Acts of Charity that every
one Contribute in proportion as G^d had pro^^^ed him. 1 C^r. 16.2. And that
there shou^^ be equality every one bearing their equal proportion of such a
burden. 2 Cor. 8 13 14. He goes on, Much more ought there to be a proportion
or equality observed in the M^^^ntenance of the Ministry which (...) a M^^er of
Communicative Justice so ^t was (...) Law and so it should be under the Gospel.

Answer, Notwithstanding these Priests will bring those Texts of Holy
Scripture, that tend to promote Charity to the Poor, and many instances out of
ancient Authors for stirring up Charity to the Poor* yet they will not, when it
comes to their case, allow it to be as Charity but a debt: as says our Author
in his first page, and J. Mather in a little book (...) promote the Maintenance
of their (...), in which I obs^rve he tells them If they will stand to the old
Law of the Jews they must have but a tenth of the tenth, which I suppose will
not satisfy those men that have H^re for Preaching and M^ney for Divining: and
therefore I think it their best way to let the Jews old Law alone, and take to
the new Law and Covenant of our Great Lord Jesus.

And further if they will bring instance of Charity to the Poor out of
Scripture and other Authors let them be just, and always when they would make
the application of it to the Ministry, to put honestly the word Poor before
Ministry, viz. po^r Priest* poor Minister, otherwise let them let till their
argument for Charity to (...) Poor (which no good Christian will go about to
dispute against) and set what their arguments for Justice in the case will do
for them. They say it is a just Debt a matter of Communicative Justice but when
people do not see cause to Commu^e wi^h them but quite the contrary, and buy
none of their ware or merchandise, pray what Justice is there in this? Why
truly none, but a great deal of injustice.

4thly. He says, If any man fail of doing his just proportion ^he thereby
exposes either the Minister to loose so much of his just due ( but he fal^s
short of proving it a just due) or the other Inhabitants to pay more than their
just proportion and so he is Guilty of Manifest wrong and injustice

No where the people are not (...) conse^ting and if they were consenting the
New Testament is silent to any such way ^f maintaining Gospel Ministers) to
this proportion but see an evil in it; And there is no force under the Glorious
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ as I have abundantly and clearly (to those who
are not blinded) proved above, even from the very T^x^ of Scripture which he
brings and wrests to prove the contrary, of which set the impartial judge. Thus
he and they building their structure of Maintenance upon a bad foundation, viz.
Legal force, it will fall to the ground if the Magistrates do not help; for
whose help he calls very loud, and well he may, considering he and others of
his mind are ready to faint and fall without it. But by what has been said, I
would charitably hope all moderate Christian Magistrates will take care that
the Preachers eat only the Grapes of their own Vine, and the Milk of their own
flock and keep so far just as to let other folks Grapes and Milk alone. But if
the Priests and M^trates will join together in Persecut^, when will we poor
sufferers Appeal from them to our Great High Priest, and J^ Judge of Heaven and
Earth, and (...) ^gh his Grace patiently Suffer what be shall please to permit
to come upon us.

5^hly. In his 3d. page he says, The Public Ministry of the Gospel in any town
is a public privilege, and every Inhabitant is considered therein, and
partakes in the privilege: for the Preaching of the Gospel is the Great Engine
of Salvation, and means of Faith. Romans 1.16.10.17.

If he means that there is no other preaching the Gospel but from his Sect, we
openly declare to the World that we differ from him in our Judgment, and we
believe upon good grounds too. And what Gospel or Glad Tidings (which the word
imports) can that be to people to preach to them, That a certain number of them
are Eternally ordained for Damnation; And for ought these knowing men know,
they may themselves be some of them, for they cannot tell who these Damned ones
are. I think it would be abundantly better if those prying Ministers would let
the Secret Will of him that made them alone: for that belongs to God and not to
M^. The Revealed Truths belong to us and our Children. And to tell people they
can never be free from the act of Sin while in this World is really miserable
news, and dreadful tidings indeed, since Sin is the cause of God's Wrath, and
Damnation, and since we cannot in Conscience join with such Antigospel
Ministers, they ought not in Conscience to take our money or goods from us.

Again he says ^ Every one is invited to take "of the Water of Life freely Rev.
26.17.

But, by their leave, theirs is the Water of Death, if we must always Sin even
in our best duties, then he knows that the wages of sin is Death; and may not
any good Christians be truly thankful when they are delivered from such a
sinful Ministry. And what a knock he gives himself in saying We take of it
freely, and his pages are wi^ on purpose to make people believe they ought to
pay for it; and that they may force it from them too. So we may plainly see,
that their Waters, which proceed from them in such bitter streams, are the
Waters of Death: because we cannot have them freely according to the Doctrine
of the Holy Ghost in the Holy Scripture, which himself has brought.

Again whereas he says, Where there is no Vision, or Preaching the Gospel, the
People perish. Prove. 29.18.

This is contrary to what they say when they teach that Vision and Revelation
is ^eased.

He goes on, Being without God without Christ, without the Covenant, they are
in a hopeless perishing condition.

If he would infer from these words that where there is no public Vocal
Teaching the people Perish, the Almighty has been kinder than this Minister:
for he has Graciously promised that he would Teach his people himself: The
Children of the Lord ^re taught of the Lord etc. And thine eyes shall behold
thy Teacher, who cannot be ^emoved into a Corner. Isai. 30.20 which cannot be
meant of outward Preachers, or they are often removed into corners: ^ut God,
Christ and the Holy Spirit, these Teachers cannot. And Christ promised to send
the Spirit of Truth what should lead and guide into all Truth. (not ^o S^n) Now
to say that such who have not outward vocal Preaching perish, is absur^; and be
must want charity, and then all his ^arr^g^es in his Pulpit are but like
sounding brass.

But ^ow says he, Where the Kingdom of God is Preached, every man is at liberty
and has an opportunity to be pressing into it* (and I and without paying for
it) L^ke 16 16 But where the Kingdom of Satan is Preached, (which is S^n term
of Life) The people have liberty to fly from it Further he says, If any refuse
the Counsel of God "against themselves it is their own fault.

Ans. I^ any do so it is their own fault indeed: but to refuse the counsel of a
sinful Minister is a virtue, and no fault at all.

Again, They have a Price put in their own hand, although being fools they have
no heart to improve it.

We are willing to be counted fools by such wiselings; but let him know that
Wisdom himself said, He that will be Wise, must first become a fool.

He proceeds and says, It was a privilege to them that were invited to the
Marriage of the King's Son, though they made light of the invitation and would
not come Mat. 22.

Those that rightly come to the Marriage of the King's Son, the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, must put of the Garment spotted with the
Flesh, lest it he said to them, Friend how came thou in hither not having on
the Wedding Garment? Let every true Christian fear, lest he bring on himself
that awful sentence Depart from me all ye that Work Iniquity I know you not,
notwithstanding they had eat and drank in his presence, and in his Name they
had cast out Devils, and done many wondrous works, and he had taught in their
streets: yet nevertheless, because they were found in the acts of sin, they
must depart from him.

Now says he, Every Inhabitant partaking in the Public privilege of a Gospel
Ministry, Reason and Justice requires that every one should bear a part of the
external Change in order to the Maintenance of it.

Ans. But every person not partaking of what he calls so, and believing that,
as those erroneous Priests preach it, to be a bondage and not a privilege, to
force such to pay too, it is altogether unreasonable, and great injustice; let
all sensible Christians judge.

4thly* H^ says, It is Warrantable from Scripture, that such Inhabitants as
refuse to pay any thing toward the support of the Ministry should have their
just proportion taken from them by Legal Distress.

Ans We want him or any of his brethren to show us that Warrat from Holy
Scripture; for he has not done it yet: and where shall we find that it is
Warrantable from Scripture and the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his
Apostles? for what he has produced from Holy Scripture has fairly proved to the
contrary, and as for his Legallity that great word, it is only what others of
his Spirit have pleaded in former Ages; did not N^buchadnezzer persecute the
Servants of God by a Law? could not they say they suffered Legally? did not the
J^ws say concerning our Lord We have a Law and by our Law he ought to Dye? D^d
not the People of Massechusets make a Law and by it hang the poor innocent
Quakers? Did not all those say that those suffered Legally? And do not some of
the N. E. Ministers justify it in their Pulpits to this day? though others there
are, (I believe) really sorry for it.

Oh but say our Modern Teachers (who have money for it) We hope you will not
compare us Christians to Jews and Heathens.

Why not, if found in their Practices? for when once people go to Persecute
others for their Conscientious desent, it is must certain they go from the
Spirit of Christ as may fairly be proved from Christ's own expressions; and
doubtless all Persecuters are Antichrists, notwithstanding their finely
guilding of it over with the words Legal Distress and Prosecution.

In his fourth page he begins thus, For it is a just and legal d^bt as has
already been proved (to those that agree to it and contract it he should have
added.)

Ans. But unjust and illegal to those that cannot for Conscience take consent
to it, and therefore it is a mistake in him to say, It has already been proved,
for he has not, nor cannot prove it, (nor to force any by a coercive power) to
be consonant to the Holy Scriptures.

In page the 4th. he says, God has given his Ministers a Just Right to some
Proportion of every man's Estate, in the p^ace where they Minister.

What, J^ws H^athens and all? what every man whatsoever? where proves he that?
For my part if I were a Minister for money, I should think that what I got from
other people against their wills would never prosper, but would be a curse to,
and upon me, and tend to the consumption of the rest of my estate, rather then
augmenting of it: And I have heard some moderate Ministers who have money for
their preaching, to say the same.

He goes on further and says, And that part of each man's Estate which God
gives Ministers a Right to by his just and equal Law.

Ans By his just and equal Gospel he f^rces none; but leaves every one to be
fully persuaded in their own minds.

And he must needs say, That the Gospel Power exceeds the Power of any Law
whatsoever.

And the Gospel is free, not forced as he vainly would endeavor to prove from
Holy Scripture. That must be an unjust Law that forces people to buy whether
they will or no: and therefore none of God's Law or way: for all his Laws and
ways are equal.

And he also says in page the 4th. They have as much Power to challenge it as
any other Debt or Wages.

No, without people agree with them and hire them. (And though they do agree with
them, I no ways grant that they have any color from the New Testament to make
any such Law even among themselves; it being inconsistant with the nature of
the Glorious Gospel of Christ) Upon which a passage comes into my mind between
an Indian and a N. E. Minister well known to some of their teachers in New
England, who took from a Dissenter from the Presbyterian way (for Preaching)
one of his Cows, the Indian asked him why he did so the Priest answered If I
hired you to make a fence for me would you not expect your Wages? Yet says the
Indian, But he no hire you, and when me do man's work then M^n pay me, but when
you do God work then God pay you.

The poor Indian was in the right, for truly God's pay is better then all the
Silver and Gold in the world.

O But* ^ay they, how must we Live?

If they had Faith in God and Christ they need not fear a living in this world.

But, say they, the People are so hard hearted* that if there were not a Law
for it the Minister might starve.

Then their Doctrine must starve the people's Souls, or eise sure they would
not let their bodies starve: that must needs be a lifeless dull dead Ministry
that will not open people's hearts, so as to keep the preachers from starving.
But I think there is no fear of their starving, for they generally live like
Lords among the people. But let them remember withal they are not to Lord it
over the heritage of God.

It is says he, agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles that such
as refuse to pay their just debts should be distrained for the same by virtue
of a civil Sword amongst Christians Romans 13.14.

Ans. He should first have proved the debt to be just* and then this T^x^ would
have been to his purpose; for those which contract debts ought to pay them.

In page the 5 ^h. he talks on the Law and Light of Nature, and Reason, and
says, " It Is the Law of God written in the Heart. "Rom 2.15. He adds, All the
Laws of God do sweetly harmonize both one with another, and the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostle; there is no manner of jarr between any of th^se.

Ans. But there is a wonderful jarr between the corrupt Nature, or Law of Man
and the Divine Nature or Law of God; he should have distinguished between the
corrupt Nature, Reason and Law, and the Divine: for except he rightly divides
between the precious and the vile, he cannot be as the month of God to the
People, Now the corrupt and covetous nature in those that seek their gain from
their quarter, and Preach for hire and Divine for money, says That those that
cannot pay them though for pure Conscience sake, they must be forced to it
whether they will or no.

But the Divine Nature in Christ and his Apostles says* Freely you have
received freely give. If their Gospel is not free they have not received it
from Christ. Also if they have not received it freely, they may call it their
own Gospel, but it is no^ Christ's. And though Christ's Ministers had power to
eat and drink and to forbear working, yet says the Divine Nature in the
Apostles, I have used none of those things; neither do I write that it should
be so done unto me 1 Cor. 9 15. And that it is not Covetousness, that diverse
Quakers so called cannot pay the covetous Priests is manifest; for they take as
much more and sometimes double and triple, as I could easily bring many
instances and living witnessess to prove what I assert, from Virginia, Maryland
and abundantly in New England, without going over to Great Britain, (in which
many thousands or pounds have those Legal Ministers taken by force, within this
fifty years, from such as for Conscience sake could not put into their mouths;
and then War has been proclaimed against those poor sheep* well let the
Righteous judge, not the self Righteous I do not mean them) but those which are
clothed upon with the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, as he wrought it
outwardly for them and also as he works it by his Holy Spirit, in their hear^s.

Next to his 3dly. Touching Government and Magistrates, which the people called
Quakers ever owned and honored in their way, though they could not cringe,
scrape and bow after the common mode of the sinful times nor give titles to
them in flattery: But we reckon that those Magistrates that are a terror to
hypocrites and evil doers, ought to have a hear^y inward Respect, and Honor
sh^wn to them generously in Action and courteous expression, and not in a
parcel of idle Complements, such Magistrates as the above, were never a terror
unto us, but we have blessed God on their behalf in our Solemn Assemblies
publicly, and often also in the secret of our Souls privately; and many times
prayed for our Persecutors also. I wish this Priest be not too much inclining
to it. May his eyes be opened.

He goes on, and endeavors to animate and stir up the Magistrates to
Persecution, by insinuating that those who for Conscience sake cannot give any
thing to the Priests, are evil, unjust and wicked persons; who notwithstanding
take them in a general way and their conversations are as just as the brightest
of their Church Members, as diverse of themselves are forced to acknowledge.

If for this testimony to our Innocence, any should imagine we boast, it is he,
and such as he that are the occasion of this confident boasting, and we have
our Great Apostle even Paul for our example.

Now I hope the Magistrates will take care how they Persecute the just and turn
the edge of their Swords against the evil doers: and then doubtless they will
not bear their Swords in vain, and then let the edge of it be as sharp and keen
as it will, we fear it not: for against true men there is no Law which is upon
a just Basis or foundation that will harm them.

Now I tenderly and lovingly, as a Minister of Jesus Christ and true Lover of
good Government, exhort and warn all Magistrates to be careful to keep within
their own Province: for Conscience is none of theirs; it is the peculiar
Province of Jesus Christ, the Great Territores of the King of Kings and Judge
of the Quick and Dead; and he will render unto every man a Recompense.

Now if Conscience were only a Cloak for Covetousness it ought to be stripped
off, but it is plain that That cannot be our case: for we lose as much more by
our denial, and sometimes a great deal more than as much more, by our not paying
freely as it is abovesaid. But we may I hope) presume that the Magistrates know
their duty without being ^aught it from the Pulpit. I ^ould have no free
spirited Magistrate to let the Priests Ride them: for if they do it is to be
doubted they will Ride them to death: for Persecu^ing men of their Cloth seem
to have but little Mercy. I once heard a Priest say to a couple of Justices a
Church of England Preacher for money, but as himself said to some of his
neighbors a Presbyterian in his heart) Do your Office, which was upon my poor
self who had been Preaching against Sin and Evil according to the best of my
understanding why what is the matter?) He has been Preaching says the Priest in
a place not Licensed and has broke the Law. Well, says another Justice beside
the aforesaid two then you have broke the Law first for you Preach^d before
him, and though it was our M^ting by appointment, yet we quietly heard him read
his Sermon, and I dare say he never had quieter hearers in all his days than we
were.

And indeed R^ading is the general practice of some Modern Teachers, far from
the pract^ce of Christ the Apostles and Primitive Christians when Christianity
shone in it is Primitive Beauty and Glory, and when Christians depended more
upon the gift of the Holy Ghost (or Spirit) and less upon natural parts and
human inventions, which is worthy of the solid consideration of all true
Christians.

I have also observed that those Magistrates which have joined with Persecuting
Priest'^ in Persecuting men of sober lives and conversations for their
Religious Dissent, that they have not prospered, and many sober people not of
our society have taken notice of the same. This is offered to the serious
considerations of Men of high Degree (in Reverence and great Humility.)

And though J. M. flatters the Magistrates, telling them they bear the visible
Image and Character of Gods, in order to flatter them into a persecuting
Spirit, yet I hope and believe that he will not find many Magistrates nor
Ministers of his mind: for if all the Magistrates and Ministers in N. E. were
as much for Persecution as he seems to be by his writing what might all those
expect who differ from the Presbyterian way in N. E. if they had Power? But
Blessed be God, I certainly know that there are diverse moderate people, who are
against Persecution, even amongst the Presbyterians in New England.

In his page 7^h. he says, In case of people's defect in this matter, (of
paying for Preaching) Legal Compulsion is the only Remedy (what no other
Remedy?^ and must be used otherwise Religion which is a People's Life will soon
fall to the ground.

Ans. Where will his Doctrine land? What cannot Christ uphold his Church
without the Magistrates? The Religion of Christ, the Apostles and Primitive
Christians stood and stands yet without being supported by the civil
Magistrates. What has he got some new Religion which cannot stand without the
outward Power? But it seems some of the N E. Ministers reckon that they must
fall if the Magistrates do not uphold them. They (i. e. the Magistrates) are
says J. Mather, the Keeper of both Tables.

Ans. But I thought that God had been the Keeper of his People, and Christ the
Shepherd of his Sheep, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter of them; I thought this
Infinite Being had been the Great Preserver of men in Religion.

In his 8th. page* he brings diverse texts of Scripture to prove the Power of
the Magistrates, which we never denied, especially when he ex^rcises his Power
and Authority to the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well
And at the latter end of the said page he says, From the whole I ^onclude with
submission to better judgments that it is Warrantable from Scripture, and
agreeable from the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, for the
Laws aforesaid to be put in execution.

Ans. But alas this is all beside his assertion, his business wa^ to prove a
Legal forced Maintenance for Gospel Ministers or else he does nothing. What!
has he been traveling through all his pages, and brought forth nothing but
this windy Doctrine at last? He speaks of submission to better judgments, and I
would have him, if he dare to do it, submit to the judgment of Christ and his
Apostles, who I think have fairly decided the question in favor to the poor
abused Q^kers, that it is not according but contrary to the language of the
Holy Ghost in the Holy Scripture, that Gospel Ministers Maintenance should be
forced by a Coercive Power. From what has been said, let all ingenuous
Christian Readers judge.

In page the 9^h Nevertheless says he, if any Arguments can be produced from
Scripture or right Reason of greater strength and weight to prove the Negative
then there may be to maintain the Affirmitive, I hope I shall readily subscribe
thereto.

Ans. A body would from those expressions almost hope for a recantation from
him, especially if he seriously considers the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles as here noted at large.

But says he till I receive further Light, Conscience commands me to conform
to that measure I have.

Ans. He had best to have a care of the Commanding Power (...) evil Conscience.

He goes on, And while I do Conscienteously conform to that measure of Light
within me walking in Obedience to all it is Commands and directions.

Ans. But suppose that Light in him should be Darkness, then, as Christ said,
How great is that Darkness? A^ for certain, it is when he goes about to prove
that for truth which is contrary to Christ's Doctrine.

As to his saying, Then the Quakers must let fall the Grand Article of their
Religion.

Ans Let him seriously read over the first chapter of John, as also many other
places of the Holy Scripture on that Subject of the Light, and if he is not one
of those which are blinded, perhaps he may be undeceived, and his gross mistake
rectified. I hope he is careful of preaching such doctrine in his Pulpit.

A certain Church Member of the Presbyterian way in N. E. told me, that their
Minister told them in his Pulpit, That we denied the Bible or Holy Scriptures.
And made the poor woman really to believe it to be true, (than which nothing
could be more false) but the honest woman thought she would try me, Was you
says she, brought up among Quakers? Was your Father and Mother Quakers? Yes
said I* they were so c^d. And says she, would they suffer you to read in the
Bible when you were a little boy? Yes and ^orrect me too, because I was not so
willing to do it as they would have me to be.

Thus have the poor Quakers been abused in diverse Pulpits in N. E. and other
places, for which reason I would give this Christian advice to all professed
Christian Ministers in N. E. and elsewhere, wherever this may meet with them.
That for the time to come they do not tell the people in their Pulpits that the
Quakers deny Christ, the Scriptures, the Power of the Magistrates, and many
other things which would ma^^ Vo^ume of themselves, ^f they were (...) For them
(...) out in their Pulpits H^ a care of the Delusions of the Quakers and at the
same ^me to delude the people to believe lies of them, is really horrid.

Oh but says they the Quakers are more Orthodox now then they were, (when in
truth its the C^s that have been cast on us are now made more manifest) and
then ought not they to be glad at the news of our Reformation

T. C.

NOw I shall consider his Postscript, in writing of which he has dip't his Penn
deep in the Gall of bitterness in some parts of it, which I shall touch a
little upon as I shall come to them.

But to begin, Notwithstanding says he, all that I have said in the preceding
discourse concerning Maintenance: yet as to my own particular if a Temporal
maintenance had been my chief aim, I should have discovered great folly in
accepting a Call from so small and poor a people.

Ans. From his words (...) may conclude it was his aim though not his chief aim;
and then as to those Shepherd's Call, ought it not to be from the Great
Shepherd Jesus Christ? And if they will answer his Call, he says Go forth,
where do we find any example for a Minister of the Gospel to stay and Preach
only to one particular Congregation? pray let them produce it if they can.

But now suppose a place should present where the People were Richer and more
of them, would he not leave his poor flock to go to the rich? Pray let him have
a care as he says, that his own heart do not deceive him: We but too plainly
perceive by the practice of these money Ministers, that the loudest Call is the
most money. I query upon this great word Call, whether the Sheep use to call
the shepherd, or the shepherd the Sheep? Do not they strangely invert the Order
or Nature here in their pretended Call from the People? Christ the true
Shepherd said. My Sheep hear my Voice. So that he and his Servants call the
Sheep and not the Sheep them; and those Holy Shepherds called their Sheep
freely, though these must have Money for their calling, and the Sheep call them
too: neither will that satisfy some of those Shepherds, but they will needs
have money from some poor Sheep that never called them; and if they will not
give it the^ freely they will have it by force, as a youn^ Shepherd said to one
a^ Salem in N E. Tha^ though Paul had Power and did not use it, yet (...) would
use his Power. But that blessed Apostle never pretended to any forceable Power,
except the force and power of Love.

He the said J. M. complains of the small income for Preaching and of his
poverty, though it is probable he has more than all the twelve Apostles when they
were sent forth by their great Lord and Master; and to be sure he has more for
Preaching than they all had, but he has confessed his Call is not Divine,
therefore not from Christ, for he says, " If he had a Divine Call, he "could
forego every thing in the World. And so he is but a Legal literal Preacher and
Minister, a Minister that forces himself to Offer, and would also force those
who receive not his Offering to pay him though against their Conscience.

And as to his Family's starving I never heard nor read of any Christian
Minister's Family's starving especially in a Christian country, nor I believe
he nor any body else. Certainly there is need to cry out to those men, O ye of
little Faith? Who clothes the Lilies, and feeds the Sparrows, shall not he take
care of you? O ye of little Faith! I fear they forget the Doctrine of him whom
they sometimes call their Lord.

As to what he writes in his second page of his Postscript if he du^y minds
what I have writ in answer to his I think he cannot imagine that the Flaming
Vengeance there poured out by him upon us, can any way touch us, but let him
and them which are concerned in this work (for I understand he had the help of
a cunning man in this his work) have a care that it fail not on themselves: and
truly the poor Quakers may be truly thankful that the Flaming Sword is not in
their hands; for if it were experience, yea woeful experience, has taught us
that we might expect but little Mercy from some of them And pray why cannot
they be more patient, since they hold that God has ordained whatev^r comes to
pass? For they see it is come to pass that we cannot j^n with them cannot they
let the ordinance of God alone? I remember an expression of Cotton Mather in
one of his scurrilous pieces that the best way to deal with the Quakers was to
let them alone. Then according to C. M. this man and he that helped him has
taken the worst way to deal with us: and truly they loose ground generally when
they meddle with us.

As for his foolish pity and bitter lamentation over us we desire that they
would lament over themselves and their children, as our Savior did the Jews
when they Persecuted; and truly those who justify their forefathers in hanging
the Quakers and their other ways, so bitterly Persecuting them as they did, had
not only need to lament, but to repent too. And even now they prove themselves
to be the Persecutors (and not we) by forcing their maintenance from us. The
Presbyterians in O E alias Great Britain, they are one with us in this
Doctrine, that forcing a Maintenance for Ministers from them that do not hear
them is altogether wrong and ^j^st: And how comes it to pass that the same
people are otherwise minded in New England? Let them resolve this question.

I shall consider those Texts of Scripture which he has thrown at us (and
gently return them unto him again.)

At the end of his Postscript he says, The Judgments of God are a great Deep.
(Yes too deep for his Legal literal buckets to fetch them up) Romans 11.7. The
Election has obtained it and the rest were blinded.

I hope he will give the Almighty leave to Elect whom he pleases. Was the
Election in the power of this Priest? Let the Reader judge whether we might
expect any of it.

He cites, 2 Cor. 4 3 " If our Gospel be "hid. it is hid to those who are lost.

Ans. Now why did this Priest hide the fourth and next verse, was it not for
fear the Light of the Quakers Doctrine should shine unto people? which is thus,
(the fourth verse opening and explaining the third) In whom the God of this
World has blinded the mind, of them which believe not: least the Light of the
Glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God should shine into them. or as
in the 6th verse, For God who Commanded Light to shine out of Darkness he has
shined in our hearts to give us the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God
in the Face of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ. He thought good to hide this
Gospel. but I think good to make it manifest; which puts me in mind of a
proverb, Who is so blind as those who will not see.

He goes on, (...) These. 2.10, 11, 12. They received not the Love of the Truth
that they might be Saved and for this cause God shall send them strong
Delusions that they should b^^ieve a Lie that they all might be Damned wh^
believe not the Truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness And J^ 8 10,
11.1^.13. These filthy Dreamers, Despise Dominion, and speak ^vil of Dignities,
and speak evil of these things which they know not Wo^ unto them; Clouds they
are without Water Rag^ng Waves foaming out their own Shame, Wandering Stars to
whom is Reserved the bla^kness of darkness forever.

To a^ w^h^ Answer 1 st. We have ^d the Truth in the Love of it, the How Spirit
b^ati^g w^ w^h our spirits that we are the (...) God: which B^ Witness is ^g^
for us than the witness of ten thousand Priests can be against ^s.

2 d^y So the cause being taken away the effect of D^on cease.

And 3 dly Pr^y let them be careful of deluding themselves, and the people by
keeping them i^ Ignorance and darkness, ^eli^g them they cannot be cleansed
from all Sin while here in this world, for all those that believe this, do
believe a lie with a witnes^; and are strangely and strongly deluded. This is a
miserable Gospel, contrary to the doctrine of the Holy Apostles, who are
positively opposite to that ^et. If (says the Apostle) we walk in the Light as
he is in the Light, then the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all Sin. And Christ ^me to destroy the works of the Devil, and to Save his
People from their Sin. And pray beware of a^king pleasure in pleading for
Unrighteousness.

4 thly. A ^o these Filthy Dreamers, pray be careful what you Dream in your
Palpits to the people; for some of you will not allow of the immediate ^ion of
the Holy Ghost wherefore ^re of filthy Dreams, and O^d Wives habits.

5 thly. We despise not those who are ^nny (...) Truth, and Rule will in the
Church, (not with Rigor and Persecution) and we account them worthy of double
H^ur; but Persecutors are not so much as worthy of single Honor and we should
be but hypocrites to give it them.

6 thly. And what Celestial Rain or Holy Divine Water is there in those Cloudy
Dark Preachers who preach Damnation to the greatest part of the World? Let them
look to it and Repent in time.

7 thly. Raging Waves, foaming out their own shame.

Ans If Persecution is not the fruits of Rage and Shame I do not know what is.
Pray co^rteous Reader judge.

8 thly. Wandering Stars to whom is Reserved the blackness of Darkness forever

Now because many cast this Text in our teeth I shall write a little to it,
thus; this must be intended to those who wander from the Holy Spirit Gift and
Grace of God in themselves, by and from which every true Minister ought to
exercise his Gift, and not to speak when, where and what he pleases; Oh happy
World! I^ all professing to be Christian Ministers did not wander from this
into the inventions and traditions of men. And further this cannot be taken in
an outward sense, because Christ himself and his Apostles traveled, and said
Take u^ for Examples follow us as we have followed Christ. And all that know
any thing of Letters know that the word Apostle signifies a Messenger which
necessarily implys a Traveller, and diverse of these Blessed ones had no certain
dwelling place. Our Dear Lord himself had not whereon to lay his head, as
himself says, and those who Conscienciously travel to turn people from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God and are Instrumental
to turn many to Righteousness, notwithstanding all that men can do to bl^ken
them yet the Holy Text says, Dan 8 2.3. They shall Shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and as the Stars forever and ever. Amen.

THO. CHALKLEY.

Errata.
In Answer to his Preface p. 1 l. 23 for Convicted read Convinced.

P. 2 l. 9 after [Then] read I say it is an unjust Law. p 8 l. 5 r. Who goes a
warfare. p. 14 l 18 r. and are free. p. 22 l. 21 r Teachers. p. 25 l. 15 r.
Warrant. p 30 l 6 r. the civil Sword.

These Typographical Errors the Courteous Reader is desired to Correct.


