INSANABILIA.

An ESSAY Upon INCURABLES; Handling that CASE, What shall People do under their
Griefs, when there is no Curing of them? And Aimed at the COMFORT and COUNSIL
Of the many, who Encounter those Grievous Things, For which there is no Remedy
but PATIENCE.

Leve fit, quod been fertur Onus. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for Samuel
Gerrish, on the North-side of the Townhouse. 1714.

BOSTON-Lecture. 19. d. VI. m. 1714.
Job XVI. 6. Though I speak, my Grief is not assuaged; and though I forbear, what
am I eased?

IT is Probable, and more than so, That every Person in this Assembly of Zion,
has Bitter Griefs that may be complained of: There is not an Heart but what
knows its own Bitterness. But it is as probable, that the Griefs of many People
are Incurable ones; Griefs hopelefs of any Cure in this World; There is nothing
that can be done to Cure them. It may be said unto them, as in Jer. XXX. 12.
Thus says the Lord, Thy Bruise as Incurable, and thy Wound is Grievous.

This CASE, What shall be done with Griefs, when there is no Curing of them?
It Is a Case, which I make no doubt, very many are concerned in; A Case, which I
make no doubt, may be very Profitably, and very Seasonably discoursed on.

My Discourse upon the Case, will have an agreeable Introduction, in pointing
you to an Instance of it. The celebrated Job, was one in whom you find it
instanced. It is well noted by the famous Jew Maimonides, That the Book of Job
Was written, to Establish us in the grand Article of Divine Providence. And the
Mahometans themselves, look upon it, as written to Instruct us in this
particular Mystery of that Providence; That God may Afflict those, whom He has
a great Favor for. He who writes the Ancient Commentaries on this Book, under
the Name of Origin, says, that he found this Tradition, In Antiquorum dictis,
That Moses beholding the Calamities of his Brethren in Egypt, made a Present of
this History unto them, to Encourage their Expectations, that if they suffered
Patiently, God would in the latter End bestow such a Deliverance upon them, as
He did upon His Patient Servant Job. And in like manner, it was the Custom of
the Primitive Christians, when they visited one another in their personal
Calamities, to Read a Lesson out of Job in their Visits, for the Support of
their Minds under what had befallen them.

It seems, I do no New Thing, when I call in the Patriarch Job, to serve the
Intention, of giving some Direction about Incurable Calamities. The Afflicted
Patriarch here Complains of his Grief, as being Incurable. Says he, Though I
speak, my Grief is not assuaged; and though I forbear; what am I eased. Neither
Speaking nor Silence, will do any thing for my Cure. Let me try what Methods I
will, my Grief will remain without a Cure. Perhaps, it was not without some Eye
to this Passage, that Elibu charged Job, in Chap. XXXIV. 6. with saying, My
Wound is Incurable. Be that as it will, my DOCTRINE will be Incontestible.

The Children of Men are frequently troubled with Griefs which cannot be Cured.

Many People have such Griefs as they have little hopes to Assuage and have
eased, as long as they are in this present Evil World. Many People meet with
Grievous Things, which they cannot hope to see removed; but must look to bear
them as well as they can; it may be, as long as they live. The Weeping Prophet
said of the share which he must have in the Woeful Things that came upon his
Country; Jer. X. 19. This is a Grief, and I must bear it. We see many a Grief,
which there is no Redressing of; We must bear it. But the Case now is, How to
bear it? This is to be spoken to.

I. And it will contribute a little unto it, for us to lay down in the first
Place, this more general Observation. Griefs must come; There are Grievous
Things, which in this World must be met withal. They are in the very Nature of
the Climate. It is the Condition of Mankind; the common Lot, the constant Fate,
which every Mothers Son must look for: A Condition of Affliction, which is not
Joyous but Grievous. We Read, Job XIV. 1. Man that is born of a Woman, is of
short Life, and full of Trouble.

We will a little Enquire after the Cause of the Grievous Things that are
appointed for us. For, Is there not a Cause? My Brethren, It Is not a mere
Chance that brings our Griefs. Let us leave it unto the Philistines to say, It
is a Chance that happens unto us. To ascribe our Grievous Things unto a Blind
Fortune; to make no more of it than this, It was my hard Fortune; it is a very
Foolish and Faulty Blindness. There is no Sense, and as little Grace, in the
Expression, though it be a very frequent one. I remember, the Holy one threatens
His People; Lev. XXVI. 24. If ye walk contrary unto me. The Original Word
signifies, not, Contrariety, but, Contingency. The Learned Jews Explain it with
such a Reading, If ye walk in the way of Chance. And who do so? They most
Emphatically, who don't look above Chance in the Events which in their Walk
they meet withal. They who don't see and own the Providence of God in all
Events. Of such People it is threatened by God. That He will Walk in the way of
Chance with them, and will regard their Prayers no more than if there were
nothing but a Chance to Govern their Affairs. But,

First. Our Sin is the Cause of our Grief. Our Sin has made us worthy of
Grievous Things. It Is to Chastise us for our Sin, that the Justice of Heaven
dispences to us all our Grievous Things. Whenever any Grief befalls us, it may
be said unto us, as in Jer. IV. 18. Thy Way and thy Doings have procured these
Things unto thee; This is thy Wickedness. It was by Sin, that the Curse of
Heaven was first brought upon the Earth. In those Terms was the Curse
denounced; Genesis III. 17, 18. Cursed is the Ground for thy sake; in Sorrow shall
thou Eat of it all the Days of thy Life. Thorns also and Thistles it shall
bring forth unto thee. All the Grievous Things that Embitter our Lives, are the
Thorns and Thistles, which the Earth does bring forth unto us. No Corner of the
Earth is free from them. The Cottage has them; the Palace also has them. The
First Adams World is always full of Grievous Things; Ever a Stranger to
uninterrupted Prosperity. It Is a Vain Thing to flatter our selves. This World
will be always filled with Vanity and Vexation. Indeed our Second Adam will
bring us into a Better World. In the World to come, we read, Rev. XXI. 4. There
shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow nor Crying: And Rev. XXII. 3. There
shall be no more Curses. But until we come into that World, we shall always
have some Fruits of the Curse to Conflict withal; some Grievous Things always
attending of us. Ah, Sin, Sin; Thou art the Distresser of the Nations!

A very plain Inference I now see so lying before me, that there is indeed no
shunning of it. I Infer, Certainly, our Sin ought now to be our Grief. Oh! make
it thy Grief, and except what the Blood of thy Savior shall bring unto thee,
do not ask for any thing, that may Assuage or Ease, a Grief that will not work
thy Death, as every other will, but will save thee from it. If Sin bring all
our Grief, certainly then Sin should be our greatest Grief. It becomes every
one of us say with him; Psalm. XXXVIII. 18. I will be sorry for my Sin. We Read
of such a Blessed Thing, as A Godly Sorrow, working Repentance to Salvation
which is not to be Repented of. May every Grief which troubles us, be turned
into that Channel: A Grief, because we have sinned, and we have by our Sin
provoked the Holy One to send our Grief upon us. May all our Grievous Things
cause us to Reflect on our Sins, and fill us with Grievus Thoughts because of
our Sins. My Brethren, I am so far from any Wish to see this Grief cured in
you, that I wish it may be ever growing in you as long as you live; and that it
may Accompany you to the last Moment of your Lives. O Dye in the midst of this
Grief; and so, Enter into the Joy of your Lord. It is a Grief that will End in
a Joy which will never have an End!

Secondly. But, who was the Father of Sin? Give him his Due; He must be brought
in, as having an Hand in the Grievous Things, which Darken the World. Satan has
a mighty Hand in them; Satan, the Prince of this World; Satan, the Ruler of the
Darkness of this World. That Angel of Death, by the Permission of a just God,
sills this World with Grievous Things, and with Deadly Ones. When Grievous
Things befell the good People of Smyrna, our Savior told them, The Devil was
the Doer of them. Satan, with his Legions of wicked Spirits, having lost his
own Comforts, is full of Envy at ours. By our First Sin, we fell under his
Dominion; Oh! what a Grievous one! By every New Sin, especially if it be a
Gross one, we give him a fresh Advantage to obtain a Commission for our further
Annoyance. We Read, Joh. VIII. 44. He was a Murderer from the Beginning. And
who can tell, what Grievous Things are done, by the Influence and Energy of
that Murderer upon the sinful Children of Men! The Ancient Pagans had their
Minds much exercised upon that Question, What was the Origin of Evil; Or,
Whence Evil came in upon us? There was a Tradition among them, and a very old
one it was, That there were Two first Principles; One called Oromazes, who
might be resembled unto Light; Another called, Arimanius, who might be
resembled unto Darkness; the one a God, the other a Daemou. The one lodged this
World, like an Egg under the shell of his Favor; the other broke and pierced
the Shell, and insinuated a Mixture of Evil into all that is Good. A Tradition
that contained in it some notable Relics of Truth: God, the Maker of the
World, and the Author of all Good; Satan, the Spoiler of the World, and the
Fountain of all Evil. The Result is, That the Grief of Mankind, is the Delight
of Satan; What Grieves us, does Gladden him. He has no Pleasure, but that of an
Executioner in Grievous Things upon a World, which alas, is always too worthy
of them.

And here again, I could not but see an Inference, that looks Black upon some
among the Children of Men. I infer, To be pleased because our Neighbors are
grieved, this is a Satanic Disposition. The Children of Men, who love to make
or see others Miserable; I shall but speak Scripturally of them, if I say, they
are too like the Children of the Devil; They have the Image of Satan very plain
upon them. We may say, In this the Children of God are Manifest, and the
Children of the Devil. The Children of God; these are full of all Goodness;
like their Father, they are Good, they do Good; they Rejoice in the Prosperity
of their Neighbors. The Groans of the Miserable, are a Music to none but
Satan, and his Children. Indeed, there may be the Triumphs of the Righteous, in
the Ruins of the Wicked. But still the Triumphs have the Sorrows of a Gracious
and to say with him; Psalm. XXXVIII. 18. I will be sorry for my Sin. We Read of
such a Blessed Thing, as A Godly Sorrow, working Repentance to Salvation which
is not to be Repented of. May every Grief which troubles us, be turned into
that Channel: A Grief, because we have sinned, and we have by our Sin provoked
the Holy One to send our Grief upon us. May all our Grievous Things cause us to
Reflect on our Sins, and fill us with Grievus Thoughts because of our Sins. My
Brethren, I am so far from any Wish to see this Grief cured in you, that I wish
it may be ever growing in you as long as you live; and that it may Accompany
you to the last Moment of your Lives. O Dye in the midst of this Grief; and so,
Enter into the Joy of your Lord. It is a Grief that will End in a Joy which
will never have an End!

Secondly. But, who was the Father of Sin? Give him his Due; He must be brought
in, as having an Hand pensations of a Divine and most Glorious Providence.
Whoever, or whatever Grieves us, by taking away what is dear unto us, we must
say, It Is the Lord who has taken away! Whatever Instruments may Grievs us, they
are but Instruments. We may say, The Lord has bidden them.

The Grievous Things which befall the Reprobate part of Mankind; These are the
Punishments, which God in His Holy Providence does inflict upon them. In these
Grievous Things He restrains them from such Outrages, as would else break up
Humane Society. In these Grievous Things He lays them up in those Fetters, and
those Dungeons, that are to go before their final Execution.

And then, the Grievous Things which befall the People of God, belong to the
Discipline, wherewith His Holy Providence does prepare them for their Eternal
Happiness. By these Grievous Things, He weans them from a World, in which they
would else be too willing to Abide, and carry on multiplied Idolatries; He
kills the Weeds of those Corruptions that would unqualify them for His Kingdom.
He awakens them to the Things that are Holy and Just and Good. By these
Grievous Things, He Humbles them, He Quickens them, He Ripens them for Heaven;
He fits them for the Inheritance in the Heavenly Places reserved for them. The
Things which for the present are not Joyous but Grievous, do afterward yield
the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness unto them.

From this there will be an Inference, that is very Obvious. I Infer, We have
to do with God, as often as any thing that is Grievous occurs unto us. O all
you that are in any Grief, Remember this; God orders it, God appoints it; You
have to do with God in every Grief. To every one of 'your' Grievous Things you
may say, Thou could have had no Power against me, if God had not given it.
You have no Cross, but such as God has laid upon you. It Is impossible for me to
commend unto you a more useful Contemplation.

II. We may now go on to observe more particularly; Many of the Griefs that
come, are such as cannot be cured. We meet with some Grievous Things whereof
it is a vain thing to expect a Cure. We have Griefs, which will not be assuaged
by Speaking, or eased by Silence. They are altogether Incurable.

First. Be sure, we have this Grief that cannot be cured; That our state in
general, must be a state of Grief; a state liable to Grievous Things. There are
many Grievous Things that are the unavoidable Portion of Mankind. It is our
Portion, and there is no Avoiding, there is no Preventing, there is no Escaping
of it. Come, let us do like the Wise Man, in Eccl. III. 10. See the Travel
which God has given unto the Sons of Men, to be Exercised in it. There are the
Laws of our present state, which are less to be altered, than the Laws of the
Medes and Persians; Laws which oblige us to many. Humbling and Creepling
Circumstances. And what art thou, O proud Worm, that thou should propose for
thy sake any Alteration of them? Shall the Earth be forsaken for thee, and
shall the Rock be removed out of his Place? Vain Man, Rash Man, Though thou tear
thy self in thine Anger, it shall not be done. A state of Grievous Things here,
it is Unalterable, it is Unalterable! I shall speak very Comprehensively, when I
say, Every Condition of Life, must have Temptations attending of it. There is
no Condition free from its peculiar Temptations. Very much of our Work in the
World, is to Watch against the Temptations in it. O our God, let them not be
too hard for us! I go on; It is a Grief, that we must Labor under such
Frailty, and such Meanness, and such Necessities, as the Constitution of our
Bodies does bring upon us; A Grief; but there is no curing of it. It is a
Grief, that it is appointed for Men (...) to Die; and after we have, like the
Sparks, mounted up for a little while, we must anon sink, and fall down into
the common Heap of Ashes: A Grief, But there is no Curing of it. It is a Grief,
that we must be always liable to Grievous Things; The Wheel always upon the
Turn; and no Man know a Day aforehand what a Day may bring forth. Say, This is
my Grief; I am Feeble, and Mortal, and Jog on from Day to Day, Ignorant and
Uncertain every Day what may come upon me, in the Day that is coming on; But it
is Incurable: It cannot be otherwise. A state liable to Grievous Things, is
called, 1 Cor. X. 13. What is common to Man. O Man, Be not so Impertinent as to
Dream of Curing and shunning, what is common to Man. Among the Incurables of
our present State, wonder not that I omit the Body of Death which will cleave
to us till the Death of our Body; An Inclination to Sin, a Pro pensity to Sin,
which will be a Leprosy cleaving to us, till the Walls of our Clay-Tabernacle
be all taken down. My Reason for this Omission, is, Because I propose the
Mention of no Grievous Things, but such as we ought to bear Patiently, and be
Reconciled unto. Now out Sin is a Grief, never to be born with any Patience. We
are always to be Groaning under it. It will be no Offense unto Heaven to say,
Lord, I cannot bear it! The most agreeable Strain under it will always be that;
Lord, I am Oppressed, undertake for me!

But this Advice cannot leave us, without an Admonition; Heavenborn Souls, Long
for Heaven! Since the present State will and must be a Grievous one, even bear
it, as long as God shall please to keep you in it. But then, methinks, the
Future state should be Preferred with you; should be Desired by you: A Better
state, you may depend upon it. Syrs, You shall not therein do, according to the
Things which you do here this Day. Nor shall you therein suffer such
Abasements, and such Encumbrances, and such Inconveniences, as are now the
Grievous Things of your Pilgrimage. O determine this; I shall never be well,
till I come to Heaven.

Secondly. There is a Variety of more particular Circumstances in our state of
Life, which will cause Grief unto us; but the Grievous Things will be found
such as cannot be Cured. In the Course of Life, we must meet with many Things,
which we could very much wish were otherwise than they are. But our Wish will
signify nothing; It Is to no purpose to Propound it. We read, Eccl. I. 15. That
which is Crooked cannot be made Straight; and that which is wanting cannot be
Numbered. There are Grievous Things, which the Decree of God has assigned for
us, and Sorrows which He distributes in His Anger: A Decree which cannot be
Revoked, cannot be Resisted; there is no contending with it. Who can pretend
unto the Numbering of them?

First. We may have our Bodily Infirmities, which may be Grievous Diseases. But
can they not be Cured? No; There comes that Message unto us from Heaven
concerning them, Thou shall use many Medicines, and thou shall not be Cured. We
must lie under the Grief, as long as we are in the Body. Old Age will be full
of such Ails. Multa Senem --. Rarely can the Old Man say as he, I find nothing
amiss, which Old Age may be accused of. Ah, Dim-sighted Old Man, whose
trembling Hands lean on the Staff, whose Appetite flags, and whose Memory
fails; There is no Curing of Threescore Years and Ten!

Again; Grievous Accidents may come upon us. But they were Unforeseen. We could
not by any Foresight or Caution, or Parry, keep them off. And they are come,
they connot be Cured. The Grief will abide; the Wormwood and the Gall, be
always had in Remembrance with us.

Moreover, We may be plunged into Wants and Straits that will be Grievous to
us. But such as we cannot get Relieved; We can see no way of Relief. The Grief
is never like to cease as long as we live. We are staked down in the midst of
Difficulties: There is no getting from them.

There must be something out of Joint in our Families; and it cannot be Cured;
There will be no bringing of the Thing to Rights. -- I find these Incurable
Griefs to grow upon my Meditations, and crowd and press in at such a rate, as
to spoil my Method. I cannot Speak of them, as fast as I Think. But they are
Immethodical Things; they cause Confusion where they come; and it will be no
Indecency to go on with a Tumultuary Enumeration of them. I say then; There are
Maladies which are, Opprobria Medicorum; such as Despise and Disgrace the Skill
of our Physicians. And there are Miseries which are, Opprobria Amicorum; such
that our Friends are Physicians of no Value in them. Yea, perhaps our Friends
themselves may be such Miseries unto us: Crooked Things, that cannot be made
Straight: We cannot Mend them; And yet we cannot Leave them. Uncomfortable
Relatives, and yet Unescapable Relatives. A Grief; it may be, A Continual
Dropping. But it cannot be Cured; It will stick by thee, as fast as a Rib in
thy side; as long as thy Head upon thy Shoulders. O Prisoner of no Hope; There
is no getting away; No Out-gate can be hoped for.

Shall I go on? There may Vipers fasten upon us, which cannot be shaken off.
The Servant of God once Complained of, a, Thorn in the Flesh. A Wicked,
Venomous, Reproachful Adversary, is by the Prophet Ezekiel called, A Vexing
Thorn. I suppose, our Apostle Paul's Complaint was of such a Vexing Thorn. It
was, A Messenger of Satan to Buffet him. He would fain have been delivered. He
besought the Lord with one Day of Prayer after another, more than Once or
Twice, for Deliverance. But it must not be granted him. The Answer was, 2 Cor.
XII. 9. My Grace is sufficient for thee. Be satisfied with what my Grace has
done for thee on other Accounts; This Trial must continue all thy Days; It Is
enough that I will enable thee to bear the Trial.

My Friends; There may be strong Chains laid upon us: And such may be our
Madness, that Heaven will not allow the Chains to be taken off: 'Twill be a
Madness to think of having them taken off.

I perceive, my Catalogue of Incurables, is not yet finished. You were told,
They cannot be Numbered. Public Affairs, and Public Stations, will make a vast
Addition to the Number of them. In Public Affairs, it is how Grievous? -- to see
the Horrid Oppressions, the Cursed Briberies, the Villianous Treacheries, and
the Notorious Mismanagements, that Plague the Nations. That which makes the
Grief become a desperate Sorrow, is, The Things are to be Cured by no
Remonstrances. They may Lift up their Voice, if they please. There may be much
Roaring at it: No Curing of it. No Cure, till He come, who is Mightier than
many Waters. In Public Stations, it is Grievous to Encounter the
Misconstruction, and the Ingratitude, which all that are in any Service must
meet withal. O you Servants of Many, Heavy Loads must be laid upon you; and
under your Loads you shall be Basely dealt withal. But I Will tell you for your
Comfort, There is no Help for it; no Cure to be had; you must get along as well
as you can; To have it any better, is a Thing to be despaired of.

There is this Advice, you might be sure would be left with you, before we go
any further. Beware of taking any Indirect Ways to get off the Annoyances that
cleave so close unto you. We must bear our Grief, as long as we cannot Honestly
get from under it. Sometimes, if we will Sin for it, we may by some Sin free
our selves from these and those Grievous Things. That is to say, God has laid
on the Grief, and the Devil offers, that if you will accept his Help, he will take it
off. But, surely, The Remedy is worse than the Disease. Oh! Reject the Devils
Offers. Never do any Sinful Thing to be made Easy by it. Say; 'Tu my Grief, and
I will not speak any thing that is wrong to have it assuaged; I will forbear
doing any thing amiss to have it eased. It shall be as it is, until God will
put me into a way to be set at Liberty.

III. But now, the CASE is, How to bear these Grievous Things?

What though the Griefs cannot be Cured? Thanks be to our good God; They are not
Intolerable, though they be Incurable. The Direction to be given in a more
Summary way is this.

The Griefs that cannot be Cured, must be born, as God shall Enable us, and as
God has Directed us. It Is not enough to say, What cannot be Cured must be
Endured. The CASE is, How they shall be Endured? The only Cure for many of our
Grievous Things, is to Bear them Decently, to Bear them Discreetly. Hearken to
me, my beloved Brethren; A very considerable Part of what we have to do in the
World, is to Bear suitably the Grievous Things of the World. The Bigger, and
you will excuse me if I say, the Harder part of our Work, lies in our Passive
Obedience. Common Sense taught the very Pagans to say, Levius fit Patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas. What no body can tell how to Cure, may by
Patience be Assuaged and Eased wonderfully. Surely, special Grace will teach us
more than the Beasts of the Earth. It Is our best Prudence to bear our Grievous
Things with our best Patience; To carry our Burdens handsomely.

A due Patience under Grievous Things; I beseech you to consider it; This
Patience does exceedingly Glorify God. No Devotion does more Glorify God. God
sees our Patience. The Glorious God is exceedingly Gratified with it. No
Language, no, none, makes a more grateful Melody in the Ears of Heaven, than
this; O my God, such a Grief is by thee ordered for me; and because thou have
ordered it, I Patiently, Willingly, Cheerfully submit unto it. By this Lovely
Submission to our Grievous Things, Oh! the Glory that we give unto our God, and
our Savior. So did our Savior Glorify His Father. It Is an High flight in our
Conformity to our Savior, when we come to that Language; The Cup which my
Heavenly Father gives me to Drink of, shall not I Drink of it? Oh! It Is all
well, that such a Father does! Our Savior, who bore the Cross, will have every
Christian to be a Cross-bearer. There can be nothing more Pleasing unto our
Savior, than to see a Disciple take his Cross, and bear the Cross as it
becomes a Disciple. We also read, 1 Cor. IV. 9 We are made a Spectacle unto
Angels. The Angels of God, they are the Spectators of all the Grievous Things
that are laid upon us: They are Spectators of our Carriage under them Carry
well, O Suffering Child of God; The Morning-Stars will sing together, the Sons
of God will shout for Joy, at the Spectacle. The Grace of God working under thy
Grief, will appear Amiable and Admirable, to those Noble Spectators. And thou
that art now the Occasion of their Praises, wilt one Day be the Companion of
them. And by our Patience under Grievous Things, we are Gloriously preparing
for Glorious Things. Like our Blessed Forerunner, we must first Suffer and
then enter into Glory. By a right Behavior under the Sufferings of this
present Time; we make ready for the Glory that is to be Revealed. It is in this
Preparation working us up for it, that as we read, 2 Cor. IV. 17. Our light
Afflictions here, which are but for a Moment, work for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory. Briefly, There is no Remedy but Patience. Then
Patience, thou shall be the Remedy.

The CASE is yet waiting; How must we bear our Grievous Things?

First; You have been already told, You must bear your Griefs, AS GOD SHALL
ENABLE YOU. This implies, That they must be born Prayerfully. The first Thing
you are to do, is to confess, That you can bear Nothing. But then, in an Humble
Sense of your own Inability to bear the least Thing in the World, fly to God,
cry to God, ask for the Help of God Hope to Bear, as well as to Do, all Things,
according to the Motto of Christianity, THROUGH CHRIST, WHO STRENGTHENS ME. It
was a most proper Counsil; Jam. V. 13. Is there any among you Afflicted? Let
him Pray. When Grievous Things are laid upon you, receive them, as the Camels
do their Burdens; receive them on your Knees: Fall to Praying immediately. But
more than so, Carry them in this Posture too, as long as they must lie upon
you. Your Prayers under all your Griefs! Your Prayers: To call for these,
verily, it is not the least Errand of your Griefs: This is the Message they come
upon. Oh! pour out thy Prayer unto God, now His Chastning is upon thee. Now
this is to be one very Repeted Stroke of your Prayers; Lord, help me to bear my
Grief: To bear it Suitably. O my God, Let me not by any unsuitable Behavior
Dishonor Thee, under the Grievous Things which thou do Order for me! My
Fellow Sufferers, I will now speak a Good Word, which may make your Heart Glad,
when stouping with Heaviness. It Is this; A Solicitude about this thing, To
obtain Help from our God, that we may not Sin under our Grief; It Is a lovely
Token of a Soul bound up in the Bundle of Life: A lovely Token of an Heart
sound in the Statutes of God. It is a Token of Salvation; And such a Token,
that it is well worth meeting with some Grievous Things, to have such a
Discovery of it.

It will be no Contradiction, to go on, and say;

Secondly. They must be born Silently too. Under all your Grievous Things you
must keep up that Frame, Psalm. XXXIX. 9. I was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth,
because thou did it. No Murmuring, I beseech you. In a certain Place of the
Psalms, there is a Passage, which may be so Translated, Silence is Praise to
thee, O God. We never Praise our Glorious God so well, as by Silence under the
Grievous Things that He lays upon us. Our Murmurs are to be silenced by the
Sovereignty of God. O thou Afflicted, Whatever be thy Grief, lie at the Foot of
the Sovereign GOD, and think; Lord, Here I lie before thee, as the Clay before
the Potter. Shall the Clay Complain of any Grievous Things done unto it? Lord,
If thou break me to pieces, I cannot Complain of being hardly dealt withal. And
by the Righteousness of God, our Murmurs are to be yet further silenced. O thou
Afflicted, Adore a Righteous God, and think, Why should a Living Man Complain;
a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? In the most Grievous Things that are done
unto me, Lord, Thou do Punish me less than my Iniquities deserve; To be
broken sore in the place of Dragons is no more than I deserve. But is this all
that we have to Silence our Murmurs? No; There is a Faithful Savior, who does
manage all. O Believer, Thou have also this Consolation to delight thy Soul, in
the Multitude of Thoughts which thy Grievous Things do fill thee withal. O my
dear Savior, whose Name is, The Lord my Helper; Thou art He, by whom all my
Grievous Things are dispensed unto me; And I am sure, Thou have meant all unto
Good; Though what thou do, I know not now, I shall know hereafter. In the mean
time, I know, that thou will not lay more upon me, than thou will make me able
to Conflict withal. Oh! Let no unbecoming Expression be heard from you. Such
Thoughts as these must Restrain your Passions. You must not be Passionate,
Outrageous, Tempestuous under your Grievous Things: Not be always, or often
upon the Fret; Not give way to Discomposures. When you are in a Storm at any
time, Oh! Rebuke it into a Calm, with such Thoughts as these; Why art thou cast
down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Fear God and be Quiet.
It is God, who in every Grievous Thing, does but perform the Thing that is
appointed for thee!

Thirdly. Humbly, but yet Stoutly. They must be born Manfully: With the Vigor
of Manly Christianity. Under Grievous Things, don't forget that Word, If thou
Faint in the Day of Adversity, thy Strength is but small. There is Hazard, lest
Grievous Things befalling you, O Diligent seekers of God, may discourage your
Diligence. But, Oh! Don't give way to any Discouragement. Be not wearied, nor
Faint in your Minds! Most Laudable the Courage of the Godly Man; Job XIII. 15.
Tho He stay me, yet will I trust in Him. Thus; Though you should have the Grief
of being among the Poor of this World, yet Resolve, I will be as Rich toward
God, as ever I can. Though you should have the Grief of a Name overwhelmed with
Reproaches, yet Resolve, I will Honor the Name of my great Redeemer, as much
as ever I can. Though you should have the Grief of Languishments under
Weaknesses, yet Resolve, My God, I will yet Love thee with all my Strength.
Yea, Though you cry unto God, and He does not hear you; A Thing, how Grievous,
how Grievous? -- Yet Resolve, Lord, I will continue my Cries unto thee; I will
call upon thee as long as I live! Oh! Don't harbor the least Thought of
Deserting the Service of God, though you should meet with never such Grievous
Things in serving of Him, and have never such Darkness in your Paths. Bear all
with Resolution. O Resolved Servant of God, say; Lord, Though all this come upon
me, yet I will not forget thee, nor deal falsely in thy Covenant!

Fourthly. They must be born Fruitfully. Your Grievous Things, you must bear
them so well, as to be the Better for them. So bear your Grievous Things, as to
make them Useful Things. You cannot get rid of your Griefs, then get Good by
your Griefs. Press after that Attainment; Psalm. CXIX. 71. It is good for me,
that I have been Afflicted.

It is Observable, That for the most part, the Grief which People would be most
fond of having Removed, proves the most Abiding one, the most Confirmed one.
The Grievous Thing which is, the Grand Ulcer of their Minds, the Grand Vexer of
their Hearts, the Grand Imbitterment of their Lives; This Grievous Thing must
prove a Lasting one. I will tell you the Reason; O grieved one, Thou have not
yet got so much Good by thy Grief, as ought to be The End of thy Grief is not
yet gained, and therefore it must not yet come to an End. Syrs; Let nor your
Griefs prove as Unprofitable as they are Incurable. You cannot shake off your
Troubles; But if your Troubles all Work together for your Good, This will be
more to your Advantage, than if they were shaken of. Oh! It Is a Lamentable
Thing, to see a Man tied fast unto what is Grievous to him; and yet this Man,
as Foolish, and as Carnal, and as Graceless a Wretch, as if he were under no
Chastisement from God. The sight is a very Grievous one, but yet a very
Frequent one; People in Griefs, and not at all improving in Piety under their
Griefs. How Reproveable, but how Pitiable, that Obstinacy; Jer. XI. 30. In vain
have I smitten them; they have received no Correction.

My Friends, Your Griefs cannot be Cured. But cannot you then be Cured by your
Griefs? Oh! May it come to this; Isa. XXVII. 9. Iniquity shall hereby be
purged, and all the Fruit shall be to take away Sin. Your Grievous Things, Let
them Cure you of your Mistakes; Cure you of your Vices; Cure you of your
Follies. Be not Fools brayed in a Mortar. Let your Grievous Things bring you to
Repent of those Evil Things which you have most of all Cause to be grieved for.
Let your Grievous Things prevent your wandering in those Ways which are always
Grievous, and Reclaim you to a serious Enquiry into the Cause of your Evil
Things, or wherefore God is thus contending with you. Let your Grievous Things
cause you to grow in that Acquaintance with Christ, that Communion with God,
that Meetness for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and all that Good,
which may make amends for all the Evil you meet withal.

Will you pemit me now, to single out Three or Four very usual Cases in the
Neighborhood; Griefs that are very usual in the Neighborhood. The Neighbors
have them; and they cannot Cure them; they must bear them: If they speak, their
Grief would not be assuaged; if they forbear, they will not be eased. My
Neighbors, I will tell you, how to bear them, and find Cause to Bless God,
that he has called you to bear them.

First. There are Corporal Indispositions, wherewith many are incommoded; and
such as are not Curable ones. They are Indispositions that will stick by you:
If they don't shorten your Lives, yet they sower your Lives; and they will be
on you as long as you live. Blindness, Deafness, Lameness, the Tongue of the
Stammerer, or some Deformity; perhaps a Pain, or a Sore, beyond the Help of
those, whose Profession it is, to Cure what they can. You must say, This is a
Grief, and I must bear it! But, how will you bear it? Why, if you cannot have
your Natural Disorders taken away, I pray, Get your Spiritual Disorders taken
away. This may be done. Get a Soul Cured of all Sinful Distempers. The Grief of
a Soul out of Order, this is a Grief that should not be born. And, Oh! ply the
Throne of Grace; Do it with Supplications, for contrary Effects of Grace, which
may weigh against all the Defects of Nature. Ask, Lord, Give me Eyes to see
Invisible Things! Ask, Lord, Open the Ears of my Soul to thy Discipline! Ask,
Lord, Help me to walk Uprightly! Ask, Lord, Let me take heed, that I do not Sin
with my Tongue! Ask, Lord, make me all Glorious within! Ask, Lord Heal my Soul,
for I have sinned against thee! These are Points that may be come at. Come at
these, O you that are bowed down, And you have an Abundant Compensation for all
that bows you down.

I will add; The Female-Sex is become subject unto several Circumstances, that,
no doubt, are Grievous ones. There are unavoidable Sorrows, which the Third
Chapter of Genesis has confined them to. What will you do, O Handmaids of the
Lord, but make the Yoke as easy as you can, by well-bearing of it; and look up
to a dear Savior, who has ways to turn Curses into Blessings! Many such things
are with him!

Secondly. There are Impoverishments, which many do undergo, and must undergo;
there can be no Curing of them. You must be Low in the World; you cannot get
clear of the Things that will keep you Low. There are many Things; you could be
glad if you had them. You are distressed by the want of them. Yet you cannot
have them. Want is like to be your Master. You may say, This is a Grief, and I
must bear it! But, how will you bear it? Become Rich in Faith. You cannot make
sure of Temporal Riches; You may make sure of Eternal Riches. Oh! Hearken to
me; There is not the poorest Man in this great Congregation, but what may
before Night become an Owner of Unsearchable Riches. Man, Embrace thy tendered
Savior, and all the Unsearchable Riches of Christ are made over to thee. And
why should it not also be said, Honor the Lord with your Substance, though you
have but a little Substance. Do what you can, when you cannot do what you would.
The Two Mites; These will be of great Account with God.

Thirdly. There are some, who have their Adversaries; People are disaffected
unto them: The Disaffection is Invaterate. It had perhaps little Cause; and it
will have no Cure. It Is a Rooted Aversion. It will not listen to the Voice of
any Charmer. They will say, This is a Grief, and I must bear it! But, how will
you bear it? Why, with incomparable Meekness; With the utmost Abhorrence of all
Personal Revenge; with Generous and Exquisite Projections, How to overcome Evil
with Good? But this is not all. Mend your Pace, for Allatrations: as the Reine
Deer, for the Dog in the Sled: Let your Pace in doing all the Good that is
possible, be quickened by the Noise of your Enemies, as much as it is possible.
And keep an exact Guard upon all your Steps, to keep in plain Paths, because
of your Observers.

Lastly. Many see Grievous Things in their Domestic Circumstances. There are
those, whose Relatives bring to them, the Griefs that cannot be Cured. Some
have been bereaved of Relatives, that were the Desire of their Eyes. The Death
of such, has made a Breach upon them, which perhaps cannot be healed. They may
say, This is a Grief, and I must bear it! But, how will you bear it? Thus says
the Lord, Refrain thine Eyes from Tears; Thy Resignation shall be Rewarded. The
Tears will not fetch them to Life again. But now those are gone, that cannot be
fetched back, lay the faster Hold on a Glorious CHRIST; Converse more with Him
than heretofore. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul! and He shall be more to
me than all that is taken from me! Others there may be, who have their Hearts
broken with Undesirable Relatives: Foolish ones; Froward ones; Wicked ones;
Churlish and Wretched Consorts; Children which take to bad Courses; Brothers or
Sisters that are strangely Abusive: Those of whom it may be said, They are a
Grief of Mind unto them; They are an Heaviness unto them. They may say, This is
a Grief, and I must bear it! But, how will you bear it? You cannot Change the
Untoward Things: You cannot give New Hearts, or Kind Hearts unto them. However,
Two Things you may do. You may do This; You may carry it well to them, though
they don't carry it well to you. You may do your Duty, though they do not theirs.
An admirable way to Conquer them. How Happy are you, if God prosper you, and in
this way give you a Conquest over them? Again; You may do This. When you can do
nothing else for them, you can Pray for them. When there is nothing else to be
done for them, still they are to be Prayed for. Be they never so Vicious, or
never so Absurd, you may go alone, and Weep unto the Lord for them, and beg of
Him, to Convert them from the Error of their way. It may be, The Almighty
Hearer of Prayers, will anon say unto you, Concerning this poor Creature, I
have heard thee; and thou shall yet have some Comfort in what I shall do upon
thy Supplications!

Our Dear People, We Preach many Sermons to make you Holy; I have now Preached
one to make you Easy. Perhaps, it would be thrown into the List of Grievous
Things, if by extending it unto any further Length, it should go so far as to
be Tedious. In this also I will make you Easy; and here break off with saying,
Hold out, O Patience, Hold out under all thy Grievous Things; It will be but a
very little while; And Heaven will make Amends for all!

FINIS.

