A Guide to Christ OR, The way of directing Souls that are under the Work of
Conversion. Compiled for the help of Young MINISTERS: And may be Serviceable to
Private Christians, who are Enquiring the Way to Zion.

By Solomon Stoddard, A.M. And Pastor of the Church in (...)-Hampton.

With an Epistle (...) the Reverend Dr. (...)

Boston, Printed by J. Allen, for N. Book, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill. 1714.

TO THE READER
THat Preparation for Christ is necessary, before the Soul can be United to him
by Faith, is an undoubted Truth. He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to Repentance. Men must be convinced of their being Sinners, or they will not
be in bitterness for it: Sin must be bitter to them, or they will not forsake
it. As long as they love their sins, it is impossible, that they should believe
on Christ, Joh. 5.44. Nor will they come to Christ for Righteousness, and Life,
except they have an humbling sense of their own unrighteousness, To. 10.3.
These are Truths which cannot be denied. But whether there is any praeparatory
Work, which is saving before Faith, has been controverted among Divines. My
Learned Tutor, (whom for honor's sake I mention) Mr. Norton (once a Famous
Teacher in Boston) in his Chapt. 8.
Orthodox Evangelist has Elaborately proved the Negative, with whom the Worthy
Author of the Ensuing Discourse does concur. It has been an Error (and a
Tyranical one) in some Preachers, that they have made their own particular
experiences a Standard for all others. When as God is pleased to use a great
variety in bringing his Elect home to Christ, although Conversion as to the
substance of it, is the same in all, that are brought into a State of
Salvation. Some have experienced such terrors, and distress of Conscience, as
others have not been acquainted with, who nevertheless are true Believers on
Christ. To that Question, What measure of praeparatory Work is necessary to
Conversion? Mr Norton Orthod Evang. p. 160, 161.
answers judiciously, As the greatest measure has no necessary connection with
Salvation, so the least measure puts the Soul into a preparatory capacity, or
Ministerial next disposition to the receiving of Christ. There is not the like
degree of humiliation in all those, that are Converted, for some feel a greater
measure of trouble, others a lesser, ^not all that are truly Converted, are
humbled: Nor can it be determined how long a man must be held under fears and
terrors, before he is truly Conversed. To affirm, that men must be so many
years or months under a spirit of bondage, before they can believe on Christ,
is contrary to the experience of many Pious Souls, and to the Scriptures. The
preparatory work of the Converts mentioned in the Sacred Writings, was not of
long continuance. That super-eminent Divine Dr. Thomas Goodwin In his Preface
before Mr. Hooker of Preparation.
observes, That a man may be held too long under John Baptist's Water and that
some have urged too far, and insisted to much on that, as preparatory, which
includes the beginning of true Faith. Such Authors as have asserted, that men
cannot be sincere Converts, except they have been some considerable time under
great legal terrors, have caused groundless fears, and perplexity in the minds
of many gracious Souls, for the Relief of whom, Reverend Mr. Firmin Published
an Excellent Book, Entitled, The Real Christian. Very often the Children of
Godly Parents, who have had a Religious Education, and been kept from all
scandalous sins, that wound and waste the Conscience, have been favored with
an Easy, as well as with an Early Conversion: The seed of Grace has sprung up
in their hearts, they know not how, Ma. 4.27. So as that, although they can say,
as the blind man restored to his sight did, One thing I know, that whereas I
was blind, now I see, yet the particular time, they cannot account for. It is
(says Mr. Norton) Ubi supra: p. 162.
our duty to bless God, that we are Converted, and not groundlesly to afflict
our selves about the time of our Conversion. And he cites Mr. Pemble, whose
words are; To tell the month, day, or hear, wherein they were Converted, is in
most Converts impossible; in all, of exceeding difficult observation; though I
deny not, but tha time may be in some, of sensible mark That Eminent Man of
God, Mr. Baxter Of Infant Baptism, p. 129, and 133.
relates, that he was once at a Meeting of many Christians, as eminent for
Holiness, as most in the Land, of whom diverse were Ministers of great Fame, and
it was desired, that every one of them would give an account of the time, and
manner of his Conversion, and there was but one of them all, that could do it.
And, (says he,) I aver from my heart, that I neither know the day, nor the
year, when I began to be sincere. Nevertheless, for the most part, they that
have been great Sinners, are not Converted without dreadful Terrors of
Conscience. Our great Hooker (of whom Dr. Goodwin says, that if any Man, in
this Age, came in the Spirit of John Baptist, Hooker was the Man) his Doctrine
Sermons on Acts 2.37.
will be found a sad truth, viz That as for gross, and scandalous Sinners, God
usually exercises them with heavy breakings of heart, before they are bro't to
Christ. Especially it is so, if the Lord intends to make use of them in great
Services for his Name. Saul (afterward Paul) had a terrible Conversion, although
he was not long in the pangs of the Newbirth. The like has been noted of
Luther. Famous Mr. Rogers S^ Mr Firmin's Real Christian.
of Dedham had been very extravagant in his Youth. Mr. Richard Rogers of
Weather (...) who was his Kinsman, helped to maintain him at the University,
where he Sold his Books, and spent the Money, so that his Kinsman and Patron
would have utterly cast him off, had not the entreaties of a near Relation
prevailed with him, to try him once again. When he saw what a wonderful change
Converting Grace had made in his young Kinsman, he would often say, I will
never despair of a man for John Roger's sake. God designed, that this very
Ungodly Youth, should be made a great Instrument of Glory to his Name, and of
good to many of his Elect. He was bruised to purpose under the hand of the
Almighty. Great were the terrors of his Soul for some time, when he would get
alone under bushes in the Field, praying, and crying to God for mercy. When he
was Converted, it is thought he was an Instrument of Converting more Souls, than
any one Minister in England. He was inspired with an extraordinary zeal; (...)
a way of delivering himself in his Sermons, which in any other Man would have
been Ridiculous, but in him was very becoming, and awful; which made Bishop
Brownrig say to Mr. Ward, John Rogers will do more good with his wild note,
than we shall do with all our set Music. But this is God's usual Method, with
such of his Elect, as have fallen into great Sins; he brings them home by great
Terrors For the Confirmation of this, I might have instanced in Mr. Bolton,
whose excellent Books have made him famous in the Church of God. Before his
Conversion he was very Wicked He loved Stage Plays, Cards and Dice; was an
horrible Swearer, Sabbath-breaker, a Boon Companion, that neither Loved God,
nor Good Men; he hated Puritanical Preaching. Hearing the same of Mr. Perkins,
he went to Cambridge to hear him Preach, and having heard him, said, he was a
Barren Empty Fellow, and a passing mean Scholar. This Man, after his
Conversion, was an Eminent Saint, and a successful Minister of Jesus Christ.
But the manner of his Conversion was terrible. His Sins were so heavy upon him,
that he Roared for anguish of heart, would sometimes rise out of his Bed in the
night for very anguish of spirit; and to augment his misery, he was afflicted
with grievous temptations, horribilia de Deo, terribilia de side. These
heart-piercing sorrows continued for many Months. They issued in a sound
Conversion.

There have been some, who have maintained, that a man is not sufficiently
prepared for Christ, except he be brought to that pass, as out of respect to the
Will and Glory of God, to be content to be Damned Eternally. An horrid
assertion justly disclaimed by the Author of this Discourse, and refuted by the
Chap. 7. p. 151.
Orthodox Evangelist, yet there are some unhappy Passages of that nature, in a
Book of Humiliation, which goes under Mr Hooker's Name, by which, incredible
wrong has been done to that great Author. It may be, it will be to the
satisfaction of some Readers, to see what Dr. Goodwin has written concerning
Mr. Hooker's Books, about preparation for Christ, who, in his Epistle prefixed
to Mr. Hooker's Sermons on Act. 2.37. has these words; There has been published
long since many parts, and pieces of this Author, upon this Argument,
Sermon-wise, preached by him, here in England, yet having been taken by an
Unskilful Hand, which upon his recess into those remoter parts of the World,
was bold, without his privity or consent to Print, and Publish them (one of the
greatest injuries that can be done to any Man) it came to pass his genuine
meaning, and this in points of so high a nature; and in some things differing
from the common Opinion, was diverted in those printed Sermons, from the fair,
and clear draught of his own Notions, and intentions, because so utterly
deformed, and misrepresented in multitudes of passages, and in the Rest, but
imperfectly, and crudely set forth. That which the Doctor says is a sufficient
Vindication of the Renowned Name of Mr. Hooker, from the Reflections cast upon
him, on the account of some crude expressions in those Books pretended to be
his, which were never Printed with his allowance. The like is to be said with
reference to some passages in Mr. Shepards Sincere Convert, which have
occasioned great disquietment in some Godly Minds, and made them afraid to
believe on Christ, when deeply sensible of their misery without him. Concerning
which Book Mr. Shepard in a Letter to Mr. Firmin, Dated December 27. 1647. See
the Real Christian. p. 214. Discourse of Providence. p. 559.
Expresses himself thus; That which is called the Sincere Convert, I have not
the Book; I once saw it, It was a Cellection of such Notes in a dark Town in
England, which one procuring of me, published them without my Will or Privity;
nor do I like to see it: He that published it, confesses it came out altered
from what was first written.

It is usual with New Converts to be molested with fears lest they have
committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. I am far from being of Dr.
Tillotson's Opinion, who supposes, that none in these Days are, or can be
guilty of that Sin, nor any besides those, who were Eyewitnesses of the
Miracles wrought by our Savior Christ. I rather Concur with Dr. Collings,
whose words are, Give me leave to speak my fears. I profess they are my
thoughts, my sad thoughts, that we live in an Age as full of persons, that have
sinned that Sin, that shall never be forgiven, as any Age ever was, since our
Lord was on the Earth. Are there not many in our Days, who having been once
enlightened, have not only ^nned against the light of their Education, but are
become malignant haters of those Holy Truths, and Ways of God, in which they
were initiated, and malicious persecutors of all such, as profess the true and
pure Gospel? Do not such sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of
the Truth? And have they not done despite to the Spirit of Grace? As for such
as are troubled with groundless fears of their having been guilty of that Sin,
The Reverend Author of the Discourse Emitted herewith, has therein offered
that, which may ease and satisfy their disquieted Consciences. Mr. Baxter
notwithstanding the Dispute which had been between him and Mr. Tombs about
Paedo-Baptism, after that wrote a Commendatory Epistle before a Learned Book of
Mr. Tombs's against the Papists.

It is known, that in some points (not Fundamentals in Religion) I differ (...)
this beloved Author; Nevertheless, (as (...) there was a difference of Opinion
(...) Jerome and Austin) Jerome said for all (...), I cannot but love Christ in
Austin; so do I say concerning my Brother Stoddard. And I pray the Lord to
bless this, and all his holy Labors for the Conversion, and Salvation of many
of God's Elect.

Increase Mather.
Boston, November, 15. 1714.
THE Preface.
THE Work of Regeneration being of absolute necessity unto Salvation, it
greatly concerns Ministers especially, in all ways possible to promote the
same; and in particular, that they guide Souls aright who are under a work of
Preparation: some there be that do deny any necessity of the Preparatory work
of the Spirit of God, in order to a closing with Christ, this is a very dark
Cloud, both as it is an evidence that such men have not the experience of that
work in their own Souls; and as it is a sign that such men are utterly
unskilful in guiding others that are under this work: if this Opinion should
prevail in the Land, it would give a deadly wound to Religion, it would expose
men to think themselves Converted when they are not: if men do understand that
there is a work of Humiliation before Faith, then if they get some common
affections, love, sorrow, delight, yea, and a common faith too, they will say
these are not of the right kind; for men must see the plague of their own
hearts, their heplessness, and that they are like Clay in the hand of the
Potter, before they come to Christ, and so will be afraid, and be searching of
themselves; but if they do not know any necessity of preparation, they will
take the first appearances of Holiness for Holiness; and if they find religious
affections in themselves, they will grow confident that God has wrought a good
work in them. It would likewise expose them to boulster up others in a false
confidence: a man that knows there must be a work of preparation, will be
careful how he encourages others that they are in Christ, he will enquire how
God has made way for their receiving of Christ; but another that is a stranger
to it, will be ready to take all for gold that glisters, and if he se^ men
religiously disposed, will be speaking peace to them; he will be like the false
Prophets, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace: so men will be hardened,
it is a dismal thing to give men sleepy notions; and make them sleep the sleep
of death.

The truth of this Opinion is much to be suspected from what has been left on
Record to the contrary, by Hildersham, Perkins, Dod, Si^, B^ins, Dike, Ball,
Preston, Hooker, Shepard, Norton, etc. others of the like Stamp, whose judgment
in matters of this nature does outweigh the judgment of thousand of others,
though otherwise Learned men: but besides this, there is a great deal of light
held forth in the Word of God in this matter. I will not argue from Isreal's
being led by Moses the Lawgiver out of Egypt through a land of pits and
drought, and fiery flying Serpents, before they were brought into Canaan by
Joshua: Nor from the Legal Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace foregoing the
Evangelical: Nor from John Baptists being sent as a Forerunner of Christ to
prepare the way of the Lord: Nor from the Parable of the Prodigal, being in
want, and becoming a Servant of a Citizen of the Country before he returned to
his Father: Nor from the Dry Bones being in a disconsolate condition, before
God put life into them: these things may better be made use of for
Illustrations than Proofs.

But there are other Scriptures which hold forth, that there must be
PREPARATION for Christ before our Closing with him: it does appear by INSTANCES
recorded in the Scripture: One is of Paul, Acts 9.4, 5. he was terrifyed, in
way of preparation to his receiving of Christ, and about the same time was led
into the understanding of his own helplessness, Romans 7.9. Another is of the
Jailer, Acts 16.29, 30, 31. he was greatly scared, least he should fall short
of Salvation; and since we have such circumstances, and none to the contrary,
we may (...) judge that this is Gods method in Converting Sinners.

It also appears from such (...) as are held forth in the Scriptures: (...)
some Sinners are near the Kingdom of God, and others are far from it: Mark
12.34. this shows that some men are in a more prepared way, and more hopeful to
receive it than others: So that doctrine that some are not in a present
incapacity to come to Christ, because under the power of a earnal design: Joh.
5.44. this shows that men must be broken off from their carnal designs before
they come to Christ: so the doctrine of the difficulty of getting into a state
of Salvation. Mat. 7.13. Luke 13.24. this shows that there be many difficulties
in the way of Conversion; and that by striving, they may get into a nearer
preparedness for faith.

It also appears by that PROPHESY of our Savior, where it is foretold that God
will first prepars men, and then bring them to Christ, Joh. 16.8. here it is
foretold what method the Spirit will take with men; he will not reveal the
Righteousness of Christ to men in the first place; but in order to this, he
convinces them of sin, makes them see their danger and miserable condition:
first he searches their wound, and then applies the remedy: It appears also, by
the particular application of the Call of the Gospel to those that are
prepared: Sometimes the Call is propounded generally to all, but at other times
(...) propounded particularly to such as are in distress by reason of their
sins; that see themselves miserable and undone. Mat. 11.28. Isa. 55.1. Rev.
22.17. the Call is applied particularly to these, as being in the next capacity
to give entertainment unto it: intimating the condition that men must be in
before they do receive it.

EXPERIENCE also gives considerable light in this matter: we learn by
experience, that men's hearts are generally set for carnal things before they
are terrified, and for their own Righteousness before they see their own
hearts. Generally such men as have not had the terrors of God in them, don't
much mind Eternal Things; if they be not rude and vicious, yet they are
worldly, vain and proud. Ephesians. 2.3. And such convinced sinners as have not been
led into the understanding of their hearts, are set to build up a righteousness
of their own, they are taking encouragement from their frames, with a neglect
of Christ. Experience also shows that many men highly reputed of for Religion,
have had a work of preparation. Many men that have a special interest in the
hearts of others, can give a fair account how they have been prepared for
Christ: and many Professors that have not had such experience have not proved
well. Several that have had some lighter toucher of Conviction, though they
have made a blaze (...) while, yet have proved themselves carnal Men at last;
of at least have rendered themselves much suspected. Many that have been
strangers to the work of preparation, have cracked their credit at last. Mat. ^.
3.20, 21. Yea, many Godly People do know that they were Hypocrites, and never
(...) Christ, till after they had a work of (...): they know they were not
godly chough they have affections, enlargements and encouragements; it was all
common work, and they had no spark of grace in them; their Religion was but the
sruit of nature improved. Romans 7.9. Yea, this is exceeding agreeable to REASON;
the light of Nature cannot give a demonstration of it: for it is a voluntary
dispensation; there is no necessity in nature of any preparation before the
infusion of GRACE. Christ changed the Water into Wine, and raised the Dead to
Life, without any previous preparation; so he can do in this case. The work of
preparation does not make the work of the new Creation the easier; for after
men have a work of preparation, sin reigns in them as much as before;
preparation does not at all destroy the principle; and men when prepared, can
do nothing to help God in planting Grace in them: and men that are not
prepared, can do nothing to hinder God in implanting Grace: but yet it is very
agreeable to reason, that the Spirit do work a work of preparation, before it
does infuse Grace: for it is the duty of Ministers to preach such things to
Sinners, as are proper to work this preparation; they are bound to preach the
threatenings of the Law, man's Insufficiency, and God's Sovereignty: Yea, the
manner of God is to deal with men, after the manner of men. Man is a rational
Creature, and therefore God deals with him in a moral way ^s Convictions before
him. Men would make Enemies submit, before they pardon them; so does God.
Besides, it is the duty of the Sinner to do those things wherein preparation
does consist; it is their duty to seek to God, to reform, and to make an
absolute resignation of themselves to God. No wonder then if God holds them to
it; Yea further, there is an absolute necessity in nature, that men be prepared
before the Exercise of Faith; men cannot exercise Faith, till the heart be
prepared by a sinse ^ danger, and the insufficiency of other things. If they
don't see their danger, they can see no occasion that they have to come to
Christ: if they don't see themselves liable to Wrath, how can they come to
Christ to save them from Wrath; as long as they imagine that they can help
themselves, they will not come to Christ for help: men cannot trust in Christ
alone, till driven out of themselves; they cannot come as helpless and undone,
until they see themselves so. Phil. 3.3.

And seeing there is such a work of preparation foregoing men's Closing with
Christ, it must needs be of great consequence for awakened (...) to be guided
aright under this mark. If men have the best Guides, yet they may mi^ (...) but
undoubtedly many do perish for want of suitable help; some after they have been
in trouble a while, do grow discourage, under apprehensions that their seeking
with be in vain, and so leave off endeavoring (...) up and down Gonverted
Estate. Some wander up and down under fears and hopes as the Children of Isreal
in the Wilderness, until they dy^ they cannot be quiet in a way of sin, neither
can they find the way of deliverance; and many others, after a little trouble
are comforted under a notion of being at peace with God. Unskilful Chyrurgeons
make a palliate cure, and persuade them that the bitterness of Death is past:
multitudes of Souls perish through (...) ignorance of those that should guide
them (...) way to Heaven: men are nourished (...) vain hopes of being in a
state of Salvation, before they are got half the way to Christ.

Those therefore whose business it is (...) lead Souls to Christ, had need
furnish themselves with skill and understanding to handle wounded Consciences
in a right manner, that they may be serviceable to them in their distresses;
who would venture his Ship with (...) unskilful Pilot? Who would venture his
wounded Body with an Unskilful Chyrurgeon? Who would willingly put his
distreised Soul into the hands of an Unskilful Minister? Men should not
satissie themselves with other points of learning, but labor after that (...)
they may speak words in SE ASON to very one that is weary: that as Moses said
to (...) Father-in-law, they may be instead of eyes to than that are in the
Wilderness.

There are two things especially serviceable to this end.

One is, that they get experience of this work in their own hearts: If they
have not experience, they will be but blind guides; they will be ingreat danger
to entertain false notions concerning a Work of Conversion: they will be
inclinable to think, that there is not so much necessary as is in order to
Conversion; they are in danger to be deceived with pretenses of men's being
delivered from their own righteousuess, with shows of humilitation, faith and
love. Whatever Books men have read, there is (...) need of experimental
knowledge in a Minister, many particular things will occur that he will not
meet withal in Books: it is a great calamity to wounded Consciences, to be
under the direction of an unexperienced Minister.

The other is, to be acquainted with the observation of those who have
traveled much in this work: if a man have experience in his own Soul, that
will not reach all cases that may come before him; there is great variety in
the workings of the Spirit, and in the workings of men's hearts under the
convictions of the Spirit; and men that have had to do with many (...) in their
distresses, may afterward meet ^ith (...) difficulties as may puzzle them ^ery
much; therefore it is of great use to ^t the knowledge of the observations of
^ose who have had to do (...) variety of cases, whereby they (...) get a arger
Understanding how to manage themselves, when things are difficultly
circumstanced.

This small Treatise, composed upon the desire of some Younger (...) is offere^
(...) the consideration of such as do desire (...) be further instructed in the
right way (...) dealing with distressed Souls: and if t^ Author shall be hereby
the instrument (...) the Salvation of any perishing Souls, he sha^ count his
Labor well bestowed.

Directions How to guide Souls through the Work of Conversion.
WHEN a Sinner wounded in Spirit, does apply himself unto a MINISTER of the
Gospel for Counsel, it is profitable, after some Enquiries concerning the time,
means and degree of their Convictions and Terrors to use this method with him.

1. To confirm and establish him more in the apprehensions of the dangerousness
of a Natural Condition: showing him that every man that dies in a State of
Nature; will certainly be damned, that a State of Dammation is intolerable,
that the continuance of his opportunities for deliverance is very uncertain:
for there is danger that if his convictions be not cherished, they may by
degrees wear off: many men's terrors are but short lived: they harden their
hearts by company, clogging themselves with worldly business, and their natural
disposition to flatter themselves.

2. To encourage him to be in the use of means, in order to his Conversion: for
if they have not hopes of obtaining mercy; either they will not seek after it,
or they will do it in such a careless and dull way that it will come to
nothing: God leads men through the whole work of preparation partly by fear,
and partly by hope. If they run into either extreme, to have fear without hope,
or hope without fear, they are like a Ship that goes beside the Channel, and is
in danger to be broken to pieces; a mixture of fear and hope makes men
diligent: they may be encouraged from such considerations as these: that God
has provided a glorious way of Salvation through Christ, that all that do
believe in him shall be saved; that there is an infinite Ocean of mercy in the
heart of God; that God has had compassion on many greater Sinners than they,
that the day of grace is not yet gone: that God is now striving with them by h^
Spirit, which is many times the forerunner of Conversion.

3. To direct him what course to take at present: As,

1. Daily to seek God in secret. As this is a duty, so a special means to
cherish the motions of Gods Spirit in his heart: if this be neglected, it would
be no wonder if his Convictions should dye away: he is also to be directed, not
to content himself in putting up some good requests to God ^t he should open
his case plainly before God, as he would do to a Physici^ if he were sick: this
is a way to been him from wandering thoughts in Prayer, and further to affect
his own Soul with his condition. Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while be may be
found.

2. To Reform his Life, and not to indulge himself in any sins of Omission or
Commission: in any external sins, nor in sinful thoughts or desires; neither in
sinful actions, nor in doing good actions in a sinful manner: Men that are
seeking Salvation, must not allow themselves to go on in a way of Damnation:
that terror is not sufficient that will suffer men to live an unreformed Life:
if men be thoroughly ^red, they will dread doing what wounds then Consciences;
fear of Hell will make men afraid of sin: if they be thoroughly wounded, those
temptations that formerly carried them (...) will be overcome, Luke 13.10, 12,
14.

3. To lay himself open to the Convictions (...) the (...). Sometimes men are
desirous to be con^ed and terrified, but not so much, they would overruled
their Convictions is to time and degree; but as a Patient leaves himself in the
hand of the Chyrurgeon, so should they in the hand of the Spirit, when it (...)
him, and as much as it pleases him, not (...) eyes against the light, Joh. 3.20.

After the awakened Sinner (...) using means a while, he often timesgives an
account of some ALTERATION; he finds some affections, sorrow for sin, delight
in Sabbaths, love to the People of God, love to reading of the Scripture: What
is to be said to him in this Case?

1. He is to be told, that he must not rest in Ease, but labor after healing.
If a Wise man by applying Plasters to a Sore be delivered from much of the
anguish that he was in, he will not satisfy himself with that, and give over
the (...) of means, least the anguish should return again; so the Sinner had
need be careful that (...) don't satisfy himself in the ease of his
Conscience, but must get it healed by the application of the Blood of Jesus
Christ.

2. It is extremely dangerons to tell him, that it is hopeful that God has put
the seeds of Grace into him. There is not one in a thousand but does experience
such religious affections long before (...) is Converted; these religious
affections are nothing else but the workings of self-love and natural
conscience; natural Conscience discovers the danger of sin, and somewhat of
(...) baseness of it, hence he is sorry for it; the (...) conceives some hope
that by praying, reading, and c. he shall get Salvation, hence he delights in
them; the man hopes that he has accepted of God, hence he has some affections
to him; and of a Minister does but speak encouragingly as if the man were
Converted, he lays a foundation for (...) for he is in great da^ to fall in
with the flattery.

3. He is to be warned against a self-righteous Spirit. Men are exceeding ready
to think that their good works and religious frames will abate the fierce anger
of God, and incline God to pity them, and have mercy on them; they are proud of
their Services, ignorant of the Righteousness of Christ, and of the freedom of
Gods mercy; they think God cannot love them, unless they be lovely; and that he
cannot but love them if they be lovely, and so they are ready to dote upon
their own righteousness, Romans 10.^ They go about to establish their own
righ(...) therefore the man is to be warned against (...) and light is to be
held forth to him, to convince him of the insufficiency thereof.

4. He may be put upon to examine these affections, whether they be not in
hypocrisy; and signs may be given to him, whereby he may discern them to be
so; but there had need be great care that the signs be sound, and warranted by
the Word of God; otherwise he is in dan^ to be established in his mistake.

Quest. 1. Are Sinners that are awakened to be directed to labor to work up
their heart of sincere ^w for sin, and love to God and (...)

Answ. 1. If their terrors are great, they me neady of themselves to labor to
do this, from a self righteous Spirit; that they may (...) neart of God and
assuage his anger, they commonly take a great deal of pains in order thereto,
that they may work (...) qualificatious (...) themselves; the (...)
considerations before themselves, read and hear, and use all the methods that
are in their power, to enliven their own hearts.

2. It is a presumptuous thing for them to strive for this, for it is
impossible for them to work up such things in their own hearts; they are dead
in sins, and cannot sanctify themselves; no principle that they have, will
produce such an effect; fear will not make them do it, the fear of Hell cannot
make men hate sin more than Hell: Self-love will not make them love God above
themselves: they cannot by Considetation work any such effect upon their
hearts, for they don't understand spiritual things: Encouragements will not
make them do it, for it is beyond their power: Resolutions will be ineffectual,
they may as easily remove Mountains as to do this; therefore it is they should
not strive to work their own hearts to it.

3. There can be no benefit of such direction but only this, that they may find
by experience their own ^ability; that after they have done their utmost, they
may by their experience understand their own helplessness: it is the duty of
men to love God, and to repent of sin; and it is the duty of Sinners to labor
that they may love God, and repent of sin, etc. but it is not in their power to
work up their hearts to the love of God, and Godly Sorrow; they should labor
to be convinced, they cannot do it.

Sometimes it is much to be suspected, that they do not reform all that is
amiss: and in this Case;

1. The danger of a Natural Condition is to be solemnly set before them; though
their terrors seem to be great, yet they need to be greater; men must have so
much terror as to bring them to a separation from sin: therefore there is need
to represent their danger in the most lively and dreadful way, that the sense
thereof may pierce their heart deeply; if they be but thoroughly scared, they
will be brought to an universal Reformation: Isa. 2.20, 21.

2. They are to be urged to Reformation: their duty in this matter is to be
particularly pressed upon them, their Consciences must be stirred to part with
all sin, as Christ urged the Jews, Mat. 5.29. If thy right eye offend thee
pluck it out. For the neglect of Reformation will put a stop to the work, etc
they will not get forward in the work of Humiliation, till they are Reformed;
as the first Concoction prepares for the second, so Reformation does for
Humiliation: Men must overcome the next and more immediate difficulties before
they overcome those that are remote: he that will not part with sinful
practices, will not yield himself into the hands of Justice: if they don't
reform, they put the work to a stand; yea, such men do aggravate their own
sorrows, for trouble will lie upon them, till their hearts are brought to be
humbled, and their terrors will be multiplied, if they belong to God, till
they are persuaded to reform: Psalm. 32.3. When I kept silence, my benes waxed
old through my rearing all the day.

Sometimes some particular sin lies exceeding heavy upon his heart. In this
Case the Minister may tell him,

1. That it is not his duty in ordinary cases to publish such sin to him, it is
sit he should consess it to God; but ordinarily there is no just occasion to
publish a scandal to him; it is best that secret sins be kept secret, except
the circumstances of the person do call for the making of it known.

2. That the sin is pardonable: This he may demonstrate from several examples
in the Scripture; from the sufficiency of Christ's Redemption; from several
Offers and Promises of the Gospel, that the man's heart may not sink with
discouragement.

3. That in case the Rule does call for any satisfaction to men, he must not
delay that, but that must be attended as soon as there is opportunity; if he
can make satisfaction without confession, there is no necessity of confession;
for satisfaction answers for the wrong that has been done to man.

4. That he must not be sensible of that sin only, but of all other sins; every
sin being provoking to God, and deserving damnation: and particularly that his
Impenitency and Unbelief is more dangerous than any former act of sin: Joh.
3.19. This is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light

Sometimes after the man has been in trouble a while, before he has any great
experience of his own heart, he has some promises come to him with a great deal
of refreshing: and he hopes God has accepted him; in this case the Minister may
tell him,

1. That it is a common thing for God to give encouragements unto men, before
they are carried through the work of Conversion; that a^ God gives them
encouragements by his Word^ so he does many times by his Spirit: God always
maintains in the hearts of Sinners that are seeking of him, some hopes that
they may obtain mercy: and sometimes he gives them very great refreshing, by
some sense of the Glory of Heaven, Luke 14.15. by some fupersicial discoveries
of Christ: Mat. 13:20. thereby holding forth some promises before them, the
design whereof is to draw them on in a way of seeking, and to support them
under their temptations.

2. That God never gives a Faith of Assurance, before he gives a Faith of
Dependence; for he never manifests his love till men are in a state of Favor
and Reconciliation, which is by a faith of dependence. When men have
comfortable Scriptures come to them, they are apt to take them as tokens of
Gods love: but men must first be brought into Christ, by accepting the Offer of
the Gospel before they are fit for such manifestations. Gods method is first to
make the soul accept of the Offers of Grace, and then to manifest his good
Estate unto him.

3. That if his Comfort be not of the right kind, it will not continue: And
usually after such encouragements, men's terrors are wont to return with as
much violence as ever. God commonly intermingles smiles and frowns, and if such
vain confidences as men took up from refreshing Scriptures, be but nipped in
the bud, they generally quickly wither away; and their fears return as strong
as ever.

WHEN the Sinner that was hoping he was in a good Estate, because some
refreshing Scriptures came to him, sees his mistake, he is in danger to be
discouraged. In this case he may be told,

1. That it is a common thing for persons that are afterward Converted, to
pass through such Changes; it is not a peculiar thing to him, but a thing of
ordinary experience in such people as God is about to deliver out of a Natural
Estate. They commonly have some lightsome times, and then returns of darkness:
there was no reason to expect that that should last very long; such comforts
are like Jonahs Goard, that rise in a night, and perish in a night.

2. That it is a great mercy that those confidences are taken away from him;
had they continued, they would have ruined him; false confidence is better lost
than kept. His condition is the more hopeful now those confidences are lost;
while he had those confidences he was like a Ship that stuck in the Sand, and
now he is delivered from them, there is more ground of encouragement.

AFTER he has had affection and inlargements for a while, he is wont to
complain that he grows more dull, and he is afraid that his Convictions are
about to leave him: In this Case he may be told,

1. That there is no reason to expect that his Convictions should always be in
the like degree. Persons in such a Condition, are subject to many alterations,
as it is with a Ship at Sea, sometimes it has a fair Wind, sometimes it blows
more moderately, sometimes it is becalmed; yea, sometimes it has Storms and
cross Winds: There be many Changes that pass over such men. So men in a
Journey, have sometimes good way, sometimes bad; they meet with Rivers and
miery places, where they cannot make speed.

2. That he must be very careful that he do nothing to quench the motions of
the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. There be many ways whereby men do it, sometimes by
discouragement, sometimes by presumption and flattery, sometimes by rebelling
against the light, sometimes by Companykeeping. Men that are much addicted to
company, do commonly lose these Convictions; so by crouding themselves with
Worldly Business: though diligence be no hindrance, yet combring of themselves
will be a great impediment to the abiding of Convictions.

3. That it is his best way to improve the Convictions that he has. Sometimes
persons are wont to argue, that it will be to no purpose for them to strive. If
they have not greate^ Convictions, they shall but tire themselves to no
purpose; and they conceive it best for them to tarry, till they have stronger
Convictions a but the Seaman is wont to hoist his Sails, and improve the Wind
he has, whether it be less or more: if men improve moderate Convictions, they
may get forward, and do that which will further their Conversion: and if they
do improve lesser Convictions, that is the way to have more: it is their duty
to do it, and in that way God owns them; to him that has shall be given. Some
that have complained of the smallness of their Convictions, have within a while
changed their note, and complained as much of the greatness of them, that they
have been such, that they could hardly live under them.

A Person that is under the work of Conversion, is subject to many
affrightments, and discouraging TEMPTATIONS, a dreadful sound is in his Ears:
all such persons have not the same temptations, and they have them not in any
certain order; but care must be taken to give suitable support and advise to
them according to the variety of their temptations. ONE TEMPTATION is, That he
is not ELECTED; but God has Overlooked him, and appointed him to Condemnation;
this sometimes lies upon the heart with great weight: In this Case he may be
told,

1. That those things that make him fear that he is not Elected, are no certain
signs of it, there be no certain tokens of reprobation upon him. Those things
that he takes to be signs are very, uncertain; the greatness of his sins don't
argue Reprobation: Many that have been guilty of great Sins have been Elected.
His being of Elderly years don't argue it; sometime God turns such to himself,
Mal. 4.5, 6. Gods leaving of him still in a Natural Estate, though he has
sought God a long while does not show it; Israel was a great while traveling
from Egypt to Canaan.

2. That it is a sinful thing for him to draw any conclusions about his
Election. It is a secret reserved in Gods own Breast, and he cannot determine
any thing understandingly about it: Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the
Lord our God. When he undertakes to conclude that he is not Elected, he acts
presumptuously: his conclusion may be false for ought he knows; he pretends to
know what he is ignorant of.

3. That Gods striving with him by his Spirit, is an hopeful sign that he is
Elected, for many times is is the fruit of Election. When the Spirit convinces
of Sin, it is in order to his convincing of Righteousness, Joh. 16.8. This is
the course that God is wont to take with those that are Elected; frequently he
lets Reprobates live in security, but he is wont to terrify the Elect in order
to their Conversion; and the more earnestly the man follows after God, and
labors to get into a Converted Condition, the more hopeful it is that God has
Elected him; for where God has appointed the end, he has appointed the means
also.

Another TEMPTATION is, That he has committed the UNPARDONABLE SIN; that he has
committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that Sin which is unto Death, he has
carried badly after Illuminations, and it sinks into him, that now there is no
remedy.

In this Case he may be told, That it has been a frequent thing for men to fear
that they have committed this Sin, who have afterward been Converted; that it
is not the manner of those that have committed that Sin, to be perplexed and
exercised with fears about it; but the principal way to help in this Case, is
to inform him from the Word of God, what this Sin is; particularly he may be
informed,

1. That it is an External Sin, not a Sin that is committed in the heart; men
have some wicked thoughts after enlightnings, and then fear that they have been
guilty of that sin; but that is an outward sin, it is a sin that other men may
see, 1 John 5.16.

2. That it is a Course of Sin, not any particular act of sin, which a man
breaks off from, and is troubled for, but a way of evil that he does continue
impenitently in.

3. That it is one particular sort of sin, committed with great aggravations;
namely, A rejecting of the Profession of the Gospel: There be many other
grievous sins, but none of them however aggravated, are the Unpardonable Sin;
it is a rejecting of the Truth of the Gospel, and renouncing the Profession
thereof: they are said to fail away, Hebr. 6.6. they are said to forsake the
Assemblies of the People of God, Heb. 10.25. they are said to tread under feet
the Son of God; and to deny their Baptism, Heb. 10.29. So that if any person
among us should turn Papist or Heathen, having a blasphemous spirit against the
Ways of God, and a bloody persecuting spirit toward the People of God, there
might be reason to fear that he was guilty of the Unpardonable Sin; but there
be no footsteps in the Scripture to judge that men that are following after
God, and laboring to get into a Converted Condition, have committed that Sin,
though they are guilty of much Unbelief, of many decays and backslidings, and of
very vile tho'ts and risings of heart; for multitudes of men that have been
guilty of such things, have had experience afterward of the Pardoning Grace of
God.

Another TEMPTATION is, that his day of Grace is past; he had a time when he
might have obtained Mercy, but he has let it slip, and it is in vain for him to
strive: In this Case the Minister may tell him,

1. That it is a common device of Satan, when he cannot persuade men that it is
too soon, then to persuade them that it is too late. He is set to hinder men
from using of means; and first he tells them that there is no baste; and when
that temptation will do no longer, then he changes his voice, and tells them
that the season is gone.

2. That there is no such Doctrine in the Scripture that any sort of men's day
of grace is past, before the day of life is past, except they be guilty of the
Unpardonable Sin. It is taught in the Scripture, that God will strive with some
men, only a limited time, and then destroy them, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not
always strive with man, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. It
is also taught, that God does harden some Nations in order to great misery,
Isa. 6.10, 11. and sometimes in order to their Unchurching, Joh. 12.40. It is
also taught, that God may harden some particular persons before Death, and
never more strive with them in any remarkable way. Rev. 22.11. Let him that in
filthy, be filthy still: But there is no such thing taught, that there is any
sort of men that may be described, or any particular person that may be known
unto himself or others, whose day of grace can be said to be past before his
death. When men say their day is past, they only fear, they do not know it.

3. That such Scriptures as seem to evidence the their day is past, do not
determine any such thing it is said, Prove. 29.1. that he that being often
reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed. But it is evident,
that God waits longer upon some persons than upon others: Some Threatenings are
universal, and some are indefinite: showing what God does many times do; so it
is said, Heb. 10.28. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him; but the Backsliding here spoken of seems to be the Unpardonable Sin; he
had been speaking of that, ver. 26. and seems here to have reference to the
same sin; for in other cases God does speak incouragingly in his Word unto
Backsliders, Jer. 3.22. Hos. 14.4.

Besides the Temptations mentioned, there is ANOTHER SORT of Temptations that
are very exercising to him, his Conscience being guilty, he is much subject to
frights.

1. One Temptation is, That he shall be left to some great and dreadful sins.
In this Case he may be told by the Minister,

1. That one special reason of these fears is that he sees more of the badness
of his heart than formerly; Men under troubles of Conscience, are wont to see
much of the Corruption of their hearts, and they see that which is sufficient
to lead them to all sorts of wickedness; and because God is angry with them,
they are afraid he will not keep them, but avenge himself on them, by leaving
them to such wickedness.

2. That God is now striving with him in order to his Eternal Good; God is
exercising a great deal of mercy, and he has no cause to conclude that God will
so leave him; though God might justly do it, yet he has reason to hope in God
to preserve him.

3. That it is fit he should be humbled under the sense of the depravedness of
his nature, and be senfible of the insufficiency of his own Righteousness, to
bring him into the Favor of God, his heart being a sink of all manner of Sin;
he can never be justified but by the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

4. That his best way is to make haste to get into a Converted Condition. If he
were once Converted, he would not be in so much danger to fall into great
Transgressions; because he would have then an holy principle to resist
temptations to Sin; and then he would have an Interest in the Favor of God;
and it would be more hopeful that God would preserve him.

2. Another Temptation is, That he shall get a false hope, and so satisfy
himself that he is in a good Estate, when he is far from it; he understands
that it is so with many: Prove. 30.12. Rev. 3.17. In this Case the Minister may
tell him,

1. That he is indeed in danger of it, both because of the pride of his spirit,
ready to magnify his own performances; and because of his fears of Hell, the
tediousness of those fears make him ready to catch at any appearances of
Conversion, and therefore he had need be exceeding careful; it is good for him
to understand what Conversion is, and what Preparation there must be in order
thereunto; and if there be appearances to him at any time as if he were
Converted, his way is to examine them thoroughly, and get the help of some that
are skilful before he settle himself much in that persuasion.

2. That he must leave himself as to that matter in the Hands of God: it is
beyond his own power to deliver himself: if God delight in him, he will carry
him through all the difficulties of the Work, and show him the right way; it
may be God may have purposes of grace to him, and if so, he will show him the
path of life.

3. Another Temptation is, That Satan will appear to him. This is a great
terror to him; especially he is possessed with this fear when he withdraws
himself to Secret Prayers: sometimes this makes him neglect his duty, sometimes
it makes him attend it with distraction. In this Case the Minister may tell him,

1. That he is under Gods keeping; and that when he is doing his duty, he is
under God's protection. There is less reason to be afraid of Satan's appearing
at that time, than at many other times; it is not Gods manner to suffer Satan
to appear at such times.

2. That if Satan had power and liberty to appear to him, it is not probable,
that he would fright him with the expectations (...) it; he would not give such
notice of his coming; but his design in terrifying of him, is to prevent him
from doing that which might be serviceable to his Soul.

3. That it is too much honor to Satan, to be so far out-bid with the
temptation, as to change the time of his prayer; but if he cannot attend his
duty suitably, and the temptation do prove too overbearing to him, it is better
to attend the duty by daylight.

I may add to this Case another that now and then happens, that he says he has
heard some voice, seen some shape, felt something on him; this I apprehend at
least sometimes to be only the effect of strong imagination: a strong fancy may
make men to imagine such things; as it is with persons in their dreams, and
with distracted persons; all Sensation is in the brain, and therefore by some
disorder of that, men may think they see, feel, or hear things which they do
not see, feel or hear.

4. Another Temptation is, That it is best to destroy himself; many have been
urged to this, some have attempted it, and some have performed it, as Judas
did. In this Case the Minister may tell him,

1. That the Devil is very active in this temptation, though he has that in his
own heart, that may lead him to it; yet it is Satan that stirs him up thereunto.
The Devil entered into Judas when he betrayed Christ, and was not gone out of
him when he destroyed himself. The Devil has a double design in it; one is to
secure the man, he is afraid he shall lose him, now he is troubled about his
Condition, and is taking pains for Salvation. Satan is jealous lest he will
escape out of his hands, and labors to make him destroy himself, that he may
presently secure him, then there will be no danger of his running away. The
other design is to bring a reproach upon trouble of Conscience, and discourage
others from giving way to Convictions. If there be but one such Instance in a
Town, that will make many others to stifle Convictions, lest they should come
to the like End.

2. That there is good reason to hope that he may obtain Salvation. It is
discouragement that leads men to such practices: And if he have but
considerable hope of obtaining peace with God, there is not much danger of his
hearkening to the temptation; therefore such things may be suggested, as are
proper to bear up his heart, as that the Spirit of God is striving with him in
order to his Salvation; that Satan is afraid he will be saved, that his sins
are no other than what God has pardoned oftentimes, and the like.

3. That it is a dreadful sin to destroy himself. It is a sin against nature,
it is unthankfulness for Gods mercy in saving his life; that this is far worse
than other sins that are very terrifying to him; this is the way to throw
himself immediately into endless misery. Whatever may be said of the
possibility of the Salvation of such persons, there is no reason to think that
one in a thousand is saved; this sin is heinous, and quickly cuts off their
opportunities: Such a man as is tempted to this Sin, would be afraid to tell a
lie, or to profane the Sabbath; how much more has he reason to fear this sin,
which will bring him presently to Eternal Damnation? It is a poor remedy to
deliver himself from anguish, to throw himself into that, which is unspeakably
greater; certain damnation is far more dreadful than the fears they are
oppressed by: this will make their condition much worse, and not better.

SOMETIMES he complains of a self-righteous Spirit; that he is ready to trust
to every thing he does: that especially when he feels any affections, he is
proud of them, and ready to make a righteousness of them: In this Case it may
be profitable,

1. To convince him of the insufficiency of his own righteousness to save him:
that his own righteousness will not bring him into favor with God; for his own
righteousness is utterly imperfect, and so falls short of what the Law
requires. The Law stands for perfect Obedience, but he never did perform one
perfect act of Obedience: all his Obedience is stained with Corruption.
Besides, while he is in a Natural Condition, he does nothing sincerely, but is
an Hypocrite in all his performances; and accordingly God is so far from
justifying of him for the sake of them, that he will not accept of him, but
holds him guilty for the sake of them. Besides, his own righteousness han't the
nature of satisfaction in it; there can be no satisfaction for sin, but by
bearing the Curse of the Law. Obedience is a natural debt, and cannot satisfy
for his contracted debts; if our Obedience would have procured our acceptance,
there would have been no need of the Death of Christ: Christ's Death would be
in vain, Gal. 2.21.

2. To direct him how to get delivered from this self-righteous spirit, viz. by
getting an understanding of the badness of his own heart: for ^^t him hear
never so often of the vanity of his own righteousness, yet he will trust to it,
till he sees he has none, and can get none. A through discovery of his own
heart, will break him off from trusting in himself; for then he will see
nothing in himself to trust in: he will be afraid because of his duties, his
strong holds will all be thrown down; but a notional conviction of the
insufficiency of his own righteousness to save him, without an experimental
conviction of the badness of his heart, will not deliver him from confidence in
himself.

SOMETIMES he complains that he does every thing from a spirit of self-love: he
don't aim at the Glory of God in any thing; but fear of Hell, and desire of
Salvation, are the great things that do set him on work: were it not for fear
of Hell he should leave off. In this Case he may be told,

1. That it is impossible he should act from at higher principle. He has no
principle of love to God, Job. 5.42. Self-love is the reigning principle in
him, and therefore it is no wonder that he does all in Religion from that
spirit; it was his weakness that he formerly thought he did any thing out of
love to God. No Natural man ever did act with an higher spirit, then a spirit
of self-love: A bad Tree cannot bring forth good fruit.

2. That he should make use of this for Humiliation, and not for
Discouragement. There is no reason that he should be discouraged because of
this, for every one is an Hypocrite at first; and many that have sought God for
a while with a selfish-spirit, have afterward been turned, and have had another
spirit given to them: but he should make use of this to his Humiliation, and
learn hereby his own badness, the insufficiency of his own righteousness, and
the justice of his Condemnation, and that he has no cause to think much that
God does reject his Services, and not give peace unto him.

After this the Sinner gives an account that he finds a spirit of love to God,
sorrow for Sin, aiming at the Glory of God, hating of Sin, etc. In this Case he
may be told,

1. That there is a great resemblance between common and saving Grace: Common
Grace is the picture of Sanctifying Grace, and common affections are sometimes
stronger than saving. Pharaoh justifies God, Saul weeps, one who was far from
sincerity, tells Christ, he will follow him whithersoever he goes, the Jews
cry, Hosanna to the Son of David, the Israelites sang Gods praise, but soon
forgot his works.

2. That while they have such pangs of affection, it will be very hard for them
to see their Hypocrisy. Their fear of Damnation makes them catch at any
appearances of sincerity, and their pride makes them have an high opinion of
their seize; men sometimes in that frame make such signs as do indeed
show their hypocrisy to be arguments of their sincerity.

3. That it is a very dangerous thing for them to think that they are sincere,
while they are not: then they will bless themselves, when God curses them; then
they will continue quietly in a Natural Condition, and neglect the means of
Conversion: and if they don't see the deceit quickly, there is danger that they
may grow so hard-hearted, that if they do see it afterward, they will not be
the better for it.

4. That they may be satisfied from such things as these, that they don't love
God sincerely, whatever appearances there be, viz. That they never had a work
of Humiliation; and sincerity does never forego that: that they never Closed
with Jesus Christ, and the heart is never purified without Faith. All those
affections that go before faith, let them be never so strong, are deceitful;
the first good action that any man does perform, is to give entertainment to
the Gospel: other things follow upon that.

SOMETIMES he gives an account, that he does believe on Jesus Christ; he don't
trust in his own righteousness, but places his hope in Christ. In this Case the
Minister may tell him,

That there is a great deal of faith that does not justify. Some do believe
for a time, Luke 8.13. some receive the word with joy, and in time of
temptation fall away, Mat. 13.20, 21. Some believed on Christ, but did not
confess him, Job. 12.42. several sorts of faith do not justify: As,

1. An Historical Faith. Men do receive the History of the Gospel for a truth,
and take it for granted, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and Savior of
the World; and if any should deny it, or dispute against it, they would be very
zealous against him, it would stir up their indignation; if they have any
workings of infidelity, yet generally they go with that persuasion, that the
Gospel is true; but this is no more than a Turk will say for his Religion: this
Historical Faith, don't mortify men's corruptions. John 2.23, 24, 25. many
profane man have this Historical Faith.

2. A considerable confidence that Christ will save them. They are persuaded
that they shall obtain Salvation by Christ, and do rejoice in the hope of it:
This Confidence is a distinct thing from Justifying Faith; it is good or bad
according to the grounds of it. Godly men have frequently such a confidence
from the experience of a work of Grace in their own hearts, and the
manifestation of the Love of God; but this is not Justifying Faith, but a Faith
of Assurance. Carnal Men may have such a confidence, arising from an
imagination that God loves them, and from a sense of their own goodness; but
this is not Justifying Faith, but Presumption.

3. A depending upon Christ, on the encouragement of a man's own goodness. He
hears the Gospel, or has some common Illumination, discovering somewhat of
God's readiness to pardon Sinners through Christ: and considering what he is,
he ventures on Christ. When a man savingly believes, he ventures upon Christ
upon Gospel encouragements; but another ventures, being encouraged from the
consideration of his Prayers, Tears, Consciensciousness, or on that
encouragement that he is not very bad, so he thinks such an one as he may
venture; whereas if he did see himself so bad as indeed he is, he would not
venture on Christ; the man makes partly his own righteousness, and partly the
Righteousness of Christ the foundation of his Faith; he does not exclude the
Righteousness of Christ, but the preponderating consideration, and that which
especially imboldens him to venture, is his own righteousness; his own
righteousness is the first foundation of his hope, though he takes in the plea
also of the Righteousness of Christ; he sees enough in Christ for such an one
as himself, but not for the worst of Sinners.

But possibly he will plead for himself, That he was much affected with Christ,
and with the mercy of God, it was more than ordinary, he never had such a light
before. In this Case he may be told, That Carnal men have sometimes superficial
discoveries of Christ, and are affected therewith, Mat. 13.20. men have
considerable inlightnings and tastes, yet may fall away; and it is no wonder
they should be affected with the mercy of God: if men do apprehend that God has
pardoned them, they cannot but (...) affected with it: as pardon does affect
men, so does Imaginary pardon.

He may further plead for himself, That it was just so with him, as it has been
with Godly men, as he has heard them to express themselves; that all his
objections were answered; he was backward before, but he had such a discovery
of Christ, that all his objections did vanish away, and he had nothing to say.

But he may be told, that the reason why some men's objections are all answered,
is not from the greatness of the light that God gave them, but from their
ignorance of their own hearts. They did not see so much of their own badness,
as thoroughly to feel the power of an objecting spirit; if they had seen how bad
they were, their objections would not have been answered. A little matter will
answer the objections of an ignorant and conceited man, they have not light
enough to make such strong objections as they would do if they knew themselves;
and for all their objections are easily answered.

SOMETIMES he builds his Confidence upon some PARTICULAR SCRIPTURES.

ONE Scripture is, 1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from death to life,
because we love the brethren: He says he finds such a spirit in himself, and he
thinks his Condition good. But he may be told,

1. There is a great difference between loving the People of God for their
Plety, and honoring them for their Piety. Many Natural men have some
Convictions that Godly men are choice men, and happy men; and if they think a
man is a sincere man, they honor him, and have a respect for him; so Herod had
for John, Mark 6.20. but these men have not a sincere love to them for their
Piety; they don't love God nor Godliness, therefore don't love Godly men for
their Piety.

2. There is a great difference between loving Godly men for their Piety, and
loving them for their Morality. Godly men are moral men some of them are
eminent for Justice, Sobriety and Faithfulness, and these are very lovely
things in the eyes of many natural men; they love them upon that account, Dan.
6.3.18. Darius had a great love to Daniel, but it was not upon the account of
his Piety, but his Prudence and Morality: Morality is lovely in the eyes of
many carnal men. Some love Godly men, because they are related to them; some
because they are friendly to them, and some because of their moral
qualifications, that have not any love to them upon the account of their Piety.
The moral Carriages of the People of God flow from a spirit of Piety; but
Morality and Piety are very different things, and some persons that have a love
to them upon the account of their Morality, may have no love to them upon the
account of their Piet^

Another Scripture that he may build a confidence on, is, 1 John 5.11.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. By this Rule he
says he is in a good condition, he does believe this, therefore is Regenerate.
In this Case he may be told,

That the believing here spoken of, is the receiving of it as certain upon the
testimony of God. Many men have a common persuasion that Christ is the Son of
God from tradition, and from his Miracles, which is in a more general
acceptance called believing. Joh. 2.23. and yet they are not born of God: but
more properly they are said to believe it, who receive it, upon God's
testimony; and those men who have only a common persuasion, are indeed
Unbelievers; they that have not Grace, don't properly believe the Word of God.

ANOTHER Scripture that he takes notice of to strengthen his confidence, is,
Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness; his
Conscience testifies that he does so, therefore he hopes he is blessed. In this
Case he may be told,

That though some desires of grace are grace, yet all desires of grace are not
grace: As men may act hypocritically when they pretend to desire grace, so when
they do desire grace. For

1. Many Carnal men do desire Grace. It is a common thing for Ungodly men to
desire Grace, especially when terrified with the word, they desire to be
Converted: Some men have slighter Convictions, and they have faint and
languishing desires, and some have more smart terrors, and they have more
earnest desires to be Converted: they think they would give all that they have
in the World, that they were Converted: So the Foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.8.

2. Desires of Grace may arise from natural principles. Grace is not only
desirable, for its own sake, but there are several benefits that do attend it,
which may make natural principles crave it. Grace is an honorable thing, Heb.
11.2. it (...) among men, it procures men a good name in the World; hence Pride
makes men crave it: Grace is a means of many outward blessings, 1 Timothy 4.8. And
upon this account, men out of a selfish spirit may desire it; grace is
necessary in order to Salvation, Heb. 12.14. And upon this account, nature
makes men crave it.

AFTER he is delivered from his confident opinion of his good estate, and sees
himself to be in a natural condition still; it may be needful upon that
occasion,

1. To encourage him: For he is in danger to be too much cast down, so as to
hinder his future diligence: He may be encouraged from the consideration of
Gods Goodness in discovering that deceit which would have proved his bane; he
was in a dangerous way, but God has delivered him, and so put him into a nearer
capacity to be Converted: Gods not suffering him to continue in his delusion,
is an hopeful sign, that God does intend mercy to him; he is now under greater
advantage than before. John 9.4.

2. To war^ him that he don't run into the same error again; for he is still
under the reigning power of a self-righteous spirit, and may get a false
opinion of Conversion again. Some do several, times strike upon that rock,
therefore he must be cautioned not to be deceived with the appearances of
grace; nor to give way to the flattery of his own heart; if he should take up
such a persuasion again, it is doubtful that he would not be delivered,
relapses are dangerous; and if he should begin to think so, it were best to
advise with those that can inform him, before he be confirmed in such an
opinion.

3. To lead him into the understanding of his own badness, and insufficiency to
help himself. This is an advantageous time to drive him out of himself, and
bring on the work of Conversion. When he sees his own hypocrisy, the best way
is to follow, till he is quite emptied of himself; it is good policy to improve
a victory, and to help him to a through sight of himself, that he may be
prepared for Christ.

SOMETIMES after a man has been seeking a while, and has passed through many
Changes, there is reason to fear that he will leave off, he has a great deal of
discouragement; others obtain, and he is left; God don't make the Word powerful
on his heart, he don't get forward, and it may be perceived, that he is more
slighty than he was. In this Case it is best,

1. To encourage him: for the discouragements that he is under, are a great
cause of Apostasy; therefore it is best to hearten him up: the notion of the
giant-like stature of the Canaanites, and the strength of their Walls, was a
great inducement to Israel to entertain thoughts of returning back to Egypt. So
it is in this Case: And he may be encouraged two ways.

1. By showing him the possibility of his obtaining mercy. So Caleb told the
people they were well able to overcome, and if God delighted in them, he would
bring them in; thus he may be encouraged, by showing of him that God can help
him, and that nothing does appear to show that God will not help him; his mercy
is free, he has pardoned others as bad as he; his Providence to him are
consistent with designs of Grace.

2. By showing him the wonderful benefit that he will have if he does obtain
mercy; besides that peace and communion with God which he will have in this
Life, he will enjoy Eternal Salvation in the other World, which is
inconceiveaby great. It were a great thing to have his punishments moderated,
much more to be delivered from them; it were a great thing to be saved out of
Hell, after hundreds of years, greater to be preserved from coming there: It
were a great thing to be kept out of Hell, and suffered to live a natural life
always upon the Earth; greater to be translated into the glorious presence of
God, and to be like the Angels of God always beholding the face of the Father;
it is worth the while to go through any difficulty for Heaven; Heaven will make
amends for all: if all the way to Heaven were Rocks and Mountains, yet it is
worth the while to travel thither. The People of Israel were often told of the
excellency of the Land of Canaan, that it was a Land flowing with milk and
honey, and a land of vineyards, and olive-yards, and wheat and barley: So it is
useful to set before him the glorious Happiness that the People of God will
enjoy in another World.

2. To warn him of his danger, for security has a great hand in Apostasy; to
remember him what a miserable condition he would cast himself into, if he
should cast off fear, and restrain Prayer before God. Sometimes when men
Apostatise, they fall into despair; and God suffers them to be miserably
hurried and haunted by their own evil Conscience, and no means can deliver
them; so it was with Judas. Sometimes God shortens their days, and don't suffer
them to continue in this world: When they draw back, God withdraws protection
from them, and they quickly dye: When they neglect seeking Eternal Life, God
denies temporal life to them; and sometimes he leaves them to be very wicked;
they sometimes become of the number of the basest of men. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Mat. 12.44, 45. and they are in dreadful danger of Eternal Fire; and that
misery that no Creature knows how to grapple with. Such Considerations as these
may help him against the ^oth and slightiness of his spirit.

SOMETIMES he complains he is followed with Atheistical thoughts; he is
frequently followed with questions about the Being of God In this Case the
Minister may,

1. Acquaint him that though this is a great sin, yet it may be forgiven. There
is abundance of Atheism in the hearts of men, the lives of men show that they
have much of this spirit Tit. 1.16. And many persons that have complained of
this, have been afterward Converted; and that some Godly men are much exercised
with this temptation, Psalm. 73.12, 13. And therefore though he should not make
light of it, yet he should not draw up any dark conclusions against the
possibility of his Salvation.

2. Convince him that there is a God; and settle his heart about that great
Truth.

3. By evidencing to him the Being of God, which he may do, especially from the
Works of Creation thus. The things which we see, are made things; they are
finite, compounded, corruptible, and therefore it is impossible they should be
of themselves; that which is finite, is not Eternal, but was made in time, out
of nothing; that which is compounded, was compounded by some other thing; that
which is corruptible, has not its being from it self; we could not be of our
selves, and therefore the First man, who was of the same nature with us, could
not be of himself; and he that made these things, must be an Infinitely
Glorious God: He that could bring the World out of nothing, and make the
Creatures that are therein, with wonderful variety of properties and virtues
must be one of infinite perfection, this is God. Romans 1.20. Psalm. 19.1.

2. By removing those Objections that prove snares to him: If that be a snare
to him, that we do not see God: He may be told, That we don't question many
other things which we never saw. We doubt not that there are such Countries as
France and Spain. Several things are invisible, as the Souls of Men, Angels and
Devils, unless they affirm a Shape; yet we may be satisfied about these: There
be other ways to satisfy us about the Existence of things, besides seeing of
them. We know some things by reason, and some things by faith, Heb. 11.3. If
that be a temptation to him, that others don't believe the Being of God, he can
plainly perceive by the lives of men, that whatever they pretend, they do not
really think that there is a God: He may be told, That though they are not
fully persuaded, that there is a God, yet they cannot be fully persuaded that
there is not a God; they have so much light that they cannot extinguish it;
there is not a perfect Atheist in the World: Besides, Carnal men are led by
their Corruptions, and their reason is very much darkened, and there is no
weight to be laid upon their thoughts. Shall we think here be no Antipodes,
because some ignorant men denied it? Shall we question the roundness of the
Earth, because some others think otherwise? We may not offer violence to our
reason, because of the sottishness of other men. If that be a snare to him, to
conceive how God can be of himself; how it is possible he should be, without
being made: He may be told. That if that be above his reason to fathom, ^e^
that is not contrary to reason; as it is to think that a company of finite
things, should be of themselves: Besides, if there are beings, there must of
necessity be some First Being: If the rest be made, yet there must be one that
was not made: To say that nothing was made, and to say that all things are
made, are alike absurd; those things that are made could not have been, unless
there were something that was not made; seeing many things have a being, there
must be one of them that is of himself; they could not interchangeably make one
another, but there is one who was not made, but is of himself, who is GOD.

SOMETIMES he complains that he is followed with horrible injections,
blasphemous tho'ts, and other wicked thoughts, that are a great affliction to
him, and take away the comfort of his life, they make him a terror to himself.
In this Case he may be told,

1. That so far as they are injected by Satan, they are not imputed to him. The
heart of man, is very bad, and from that fountain of sin, exceeding wicked
thoughts may arise; but when persons are violently followed with such thoughts,
they are usually injected by Satan, they are some of his fiery darts spoken of,
Ephesians. 6.16. And when he casts them in, the man is no more guilty, than he that
hears a man blassheme: if a man were perfect'y holy, that could not prevent
such injections if God let Satan loose upon him.

2. That his Nature is so corrupted, that those injections do less or more
taint him. The heart is like tinder, and these, temptations will make some
impression, though he has a detestation of those thoughts, and labors against
them, yet there is a principle in the heart to fall in with them; and generally
upon such occasions, persons do contract guilt; and it is but ^re if ever, that
men are merely passive at such a time: The Sin that is in men, does easily
beset them, Heb. 12.1. And therefore it becomes him to be confessing before God
the wretched^ess of his own heart, in sodering in any degrees with those
temptations.

3. That such temptations are no sign that God don't love him; he may not
gather from thence, that God has given him up to Satan; for this has been the
condition of some very Godly men. This is an exercise that God has brought upon
some that have been dear to him: As Satan is wont to tempt the best of men, so
^me of the choicest with these suggestions; ^his is not too great an affliction
to be bro't upon such men as God does love; the Devil may in this manner hurry
those that he shall not be able to destroy. Paul in likelihood had some such
temptations, 2 Cor. 12.7. God for holy ends may suffer those whom he loves to
be thus exercised, that they may leave their own weakness, and be humbled
before God.

4. That it is not very usual for God to suffer men to be long followed with
these injections. Though there be some instances to the contrary, yet more
ordinarily after a while God does restrain Satan, though no man can determine
any precise time, yet after a while they are wont to be removed. God may so far
hear Prayers, as to remove this affliction.

SOMETIMES he complains bitterly of the badness of his own heart, speaks of it
as exceeding bad; he says he never saw it so bad as of late, and seems to be
almost discouraged thereby. In this Case he may be told,

1. That the heart of every natural man is exceeding bad. Many times through
restraints of corruption and common grace, the badness of it is hidden; but the
heart of every natural man is desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. Whatever
appearances it may make, it is utterly corrupt; every sin is unmortifyed: those
sins that they have not been accustomed to, those sins that their tempers don't
dispose them to; those sins of whose baseness they have the deepest sense and
their hearts are totally empty of all goodness, there is not one spark of
goodness in them: that the principle of sin is as strong in them after they are
enlightened and reformed as ever it was.

2. That it is necessary for him to be convinced of the badness of his own
heart. When men see the badness of their own hearts, they are ready to be
discouraged, but they are then in a more hopeful condition than before: If men
be strangers to their own hearts, they will trust in themselves, and neglect
Christ. God first discovers to them what they are, and then he discovers the
excellency of Christ to them: men will never come to Christ, till they are
convinced what corrupt, blind and dead creatures they ^e. And therefore the
more God shows him of the badness of his heart, the more graciously he deals
with him: The badness of the heart is matter of sorrow, but the sight of that
badness is matter of encouragement; the more they see of that, the more hope
there is of their being prepared for Christ.

3. That it is his best way to search his own heart further. Many times men
will complain bitterly of the badness of their own hearts, and one time after
another give an account that they have seen more in their hearts than over they
did before; and yet are far from seeing what they must see in their own hearts.
And while it is thus, they should be put upon it to study their hearts, that
they may see more of them: Persons are afraid to see their own hearts, and are
wont to strive against it, seeking to persuade themselves that they are better,
than indeed they be: it crosses their pride, and their false hopes, to see the
badness of their own hearts; therefore there is need to stir them up thereunto,
and to tell them of what consequence it is. The sight of the heart is like the
opening of a festered wound, it prepares men for healing; they should be put
upon it to search themselves, and led into the way to do it: particular things
may be propounded to them to search after; this is a very material thing, for
the sincerity of their Conversion has a great dependence upon the through
knowledge of their hearts.

Quest. Whether at this time it is not best to urge him to believe on Christ,
though he does not thoroughly understand the badness of his own heart?

Answ. 1. It may not be amiss while he is in this condition, to mind him that
it is his duty to believe in Christ. And to set forth sometimes the Excellency
and Sufficiency of Christ before him, it may be several ways beneficial to him;
it may help him to take notice of the contrariety and opposition of his heart
to this duty, and lead him into a further understanding of the corruption of
his Nature; it may give some check to that spirit of self-righteousness that
prevails in him, and make him sensible of the necessity of the Righteousness of
Christ unto his Justification; it may serve to encourage as to the possibility
of his Salvation, and convince him, that he is capable to be brought into a
state of Salvation.

2. Yet there is no ground to hope, that till he thoroughly sees himself, he will
accept the offer of the Gospel. Men must be first humbled before they will
believe. Invitations to come to Christ will never be succesful, till men are
driven out from all their false refuges; they may hear the most powerful
arguments with a great deal of evidence and affection, but they will not be
obedient; either they will be afraid to come to Christ, and have one thing or
other to object; they will be fearful, because they see so much sin, or because
they don't know that God means them, or they have not the inward Call of the
Gospel. Under some notion or other they will not come, or else they will come
in a ^resumptuous manner, and pretend to believe, when they do not indeed
believe: Either they will be born down with Unbelief, or they will get a false
Faith.

SOMETIMES the man complains that he has not encouraging Scriptures come to
him, and therefore he fears that he is not under the work of the Spirit: Other
men have encouraging Scriptures brought to them, and therefore God don't deal
with him, as with those he is wont to Convert. In this Case the Minister may
tell him,

1. That if he have supporting considerations cast into his heart, that is
sufficient; there is no necessity to have encouraging Scriptures to come with a
great deal of power upon his heart; there is need of some supporting
considerations, to maintain an hope, and to keep him from despair: and if the
heart be but supported with an hope that he may obtain at last, that is
sufficient. God deals very variously with men; some that have many encouraging
Scriptures, do never obtain mercy.

2. That if he does continue to wait upon God, he may have encouraging
Scriptures come to him after a while. God knows what he stands in need of, and
don't tie up himself to the same method, as to the circumstances of the work:
He uses a great deal of variety; scarce two persons are carried on exactly
after the same manner; some have more encouragement toward the beginning, and
others toward the latter end of the work.

SOMETIMES he says, that if he were sure to obtain, he could be willing to take
any pains: Yea, though God should hold him waiting a long while; and he could
be content to go through any anguish of spirit; but that which sinks his heart
and makes him dull, is, that he is not certain of success. In this Case he may
be told by the Minister,

1. That all that have obtained mercy, have sought upon the in encouragement
that they might obtain mercy. They did not know what the issue of it would be;
the possibility of it was that which bore up their hearts in using of means;
they had some hope mingle, with fear, and if they had not sought upon the
encouragement of the possibility, they had certainly gone without mercy. The
Sick man does not say he will not use means, unless he were certain of a Cure:
The Merchant don't say that he will not send his Ship to Sea, unless he were
certain of a prosperous Voyage: The Husbandman don't say that he will not Plow
and Sow his Land, unless he were certain of a good Crop; Men must wait upon
God, upon this encouragement, that they may obtain mercy, Jon. 2.8, 9.

2. That the mere loss of their pains is a small matter. It will be a dreadful
thing for a man to lose his Soul; but the mere loss of their labor is a small
matter. A man may well venture the loss of his labor, in hope of the Salvation
of his Soul: A man that is sick, will venture the loss of a little expense for
the preservation of his life: Men have no cause to be very scrupulous about the
loss of their pains: The loss of their Souls will be far sorer.

3. It is not fit that men should be sure to obtain mercy, till they do believe
in Christ. There is security enough, that if they do believe in Christ, they
shall be saved: And there is no reason that God should be desired to make a
New Covenant, and secure Salvation to any other Condition: God has descended
low enough when he promise Salvation to believing; and it is too much for any
man to desire that God should promise it to Praying, to Reading, to Reforming,
etc. Especially seeing those things are done with a false heart, only for
Salvation.

4. If men be thoroughly scared with the danger of Damnation, they will readily
improve their possibility, and not stand for assurance of success. Men will be
glad of a possibility, and not neglect means, because they have no more
encouragement: If a man be cast into the Sea, he will not neglect Swimming,
because he is not certain that he can swim to the Shore: If a man be pursued by
an Enemy, he will not stand still, because he is not certain that he shall get
clear. If men stand convinced of their dreadful danger in neglecting to seek,
they will betake themselves to the use of means at a venture, rather than run
the hazard of their Souls.

SOMETIMES he complains that after he has told the Minister how it is with him,
it seems to him as if he had told a company of lies; and he is terrified with
the apprehension of it. In this Case he may be told,

1. That these tho'ts rise partly from the frightfulness of his Conscience. He
is in a terrified condition, and so the sound of a shaking leaf will scare him;
and he flees when none pursues; he imagines dangers where there be none; he
has a humbling guilty Conscience, and is afraid that he sins when he don't, and
is ready to charge things upon himself without cause.

2. That these thoughts arise from those contrary workings that are in his own
heart. Sometimes he has a great sense of danger, sometimes he has but little
sense of it: sometimes he is afraid he has committed the Unpardonable Sin, and
then he is not afraid of it: he has great variety and change of frames, and
whatever account he gives of the workings of his own heart, he has had some
contrary workings thereunto; so that after he has told what workings of heart
he had, he has reflections, because he remembers some contrary workings of
heart.

SOMETIMES a man that has been seeking after peace with God a great while,
leaves off for some months together, he is followed with guilt, and comes and
makes his Case known unto the Minister: In this Case it is very suitable,

1. To reprove him for his backstiding, and set before him the sinfulness of
what he has done, and the danger that he has exposed himself unto: he has
quenched the Spirit, the tendency of whose motions was for his good; he has
sinned against a great deal of light; when he was in a more hopeful way, he has
relapsed into a sorrowful condition; he has lost ground, and has a great deal
of his work to do over again: God must needs be greatly provoked with him.

2. To encourage him notwithstanding, by assuring of him, that he is capable of
mercy. God invites Backsliders to return unto him: Persons are sometimes cured
of relapses: God has mercy enough to pardon such sins, several persons have had
experience of it: sometimes the first attempt is not successful; (as when David
attempted to bring the Ark into the place prepared for it) but the next time he
prospered.

3. To warn them that they do not so again. They are in great danger, because
they have done so already: A Beast that has once tired, is more ready to do so
again: Those temptations that have prevailed upon them, are more like to
prevail again; and if they get an habit of backsliding, they will be the more
incurable: Custom in any evil way, naturalizes it to men: They run more readily
into the same.

SOMETIMES a man goes on in a way of seeking a great while, yet seems to be at
a stand, the work don't go forward: he has the same fears, the same complaints,
sees nothing further into his own heart; he is like a man in a Chronical
Disease, that notwithstanding all Medicines, continues much in the same
posture, he is neither much worse, nor much better; like a Ship that beats upon
the Coast day by day, and cannot get in. In this Case the Minister may,

1. Mind him that he may quickly die. The fence of approaching Death is very
terrifying, and will stir up men to do their utmost: The face of Death is
terrible, and it may be very profitable to work upon them, a fence that they
may be quickly snatched away; they have the seeds of all Diseases in them; Gods
Judgments are as a light that goes forth. Men are commonly snatched away
before they are aware: Many of the Israelites that went out of Egypt, did not
live to go into Canaan: Their way is offensive to God, and so he may take them
away in his anger.

2. To convince them, that they cannot make their own hearts better. One thing
that makes men be at a stand is, that they are waiting in expectation to mend
their own hearts; they hope from Sabbath to Sabbath, and from one Duty to
another; and though they fail hitherto of their expectation: they find that
Afflictions don't do it, nor Ordinances, nor Mercies, nor Examples; yet they
are promising themselves that after a while, they shall make them better, and
it is fit they should be convinced of the impossibility of that; Their hoping
and waiting for that is their snare: They may be showed how it is quite beyond
their power: whatever resolutions they take up, whatever pains they take,
whatever encouragements, afflictions and terrors they have, yet it is beyond
the compass of their power; they cannot understand the excellency of God and
Christ, or the ^reat evil of Sin: Sin governs them, and they cannot subdue it:
Self-love may make them seek Salvation, but not love God above themselves. Men
cannot be scared out of a sinful Estate, though they may out of some sinful
practices.

3. To possess them that God is very angry with them, notwithstanding the pains
they take. For one great reason why they make no more proficiency is, because
they live upon their Duties; though they don't think that their Duties do
justify them, yet they do pacify their Consciences with them; and they think
that God will have a respect to the pains they take: they do what they can, and
they do more than some others; and they hope they stand upon better terms with
God than formerly; and though they speak of their own badness, yet they imagine
so much of their own goodness, as that they think it will be an hard case for
God to damn them: Therefore they should be convinced upon what terms they stand
with God; that as there is no merit in their duties, so there is nothing to
move God to pity them, nor to abate the anger of God toward them; but their
best duties are provocations, and impated to them as sins.

SOMETIMES a man that has been in a very hopeful way quickly to get through the
work of Conversion, returns again to his old postures; he had of late great
Convictions of the badness of his own heart, the hypocrisy of his duties, the
insufficiency of any thing of his own to gain Gods favor, and has such
workings of heart as are wont immediately to procure submission to God, and a
work of Humiliation, and in a little time tacks about, and is remote from
Humiliation as he used to be: As the Children of Israel when they were almost
ready to enter into Canaan, fetched a Compass, and wandered a long time in the
Wilderness. In this Case the Minister may,

1. Warn him that he be not afraid to see the badness of his own heart. For
persons that have been praying for it, are yet afraid of it when it comes to.
It is such a doleful and uncomfortable Spectacle that they cannot bear to
behold it; the sense of it is so cross to their pride, and stirs up such fears
of Damnation, that they cannot tell how to away with it, and labor to hide it
from themselves, and to get such affections as may comfort them; but they
should be told, that there is no cause for them to fear to see their own
hearts, for it is dangerous to be ignorant of them, but not dangerous to see
them; the sight of the heart is awful, but not hurtful; the heart is bad
whether they see it or no, and they must see it before it be better: The
Chyrurgeon must come to the bottom of the Wound before he heals it.

2. Instruct him, that there is a necessity of his submission to God; for his
opposition to that has made him to quench those Convictions of the Spirit which
he had. He could not bear to yield himself a prisoner into the hands of God,
and to lie at his foot waiting for mercy, and that has put him upon it to
deliver himself from those Convictions that led that way; but he must be
instructed, that there is a necessity of submitting himself to God; he cannot
help himself, and God is not bound to help him; God may leave him to perish if
he will, and so long as he magnifies himself, and refuses to resign up himself
to God, God will not discover Christ to him; he may pray, but he will not be
heard: God resists the proud.

SOMETIMES he is afraid that his Convictions are not like the Convictions of
other men, and he has several arguments to strengthen those fears.

One Argument is, that his Convictions are only the workings of natural
Conscience, and not from the Spirit of God: his Convictions are from the
workings of his own thoughts; but he may be told, the way of the Spirits
working when it does convince men, is by inlightning natural Conscience; the
Spirit does not work by giving a testimony, but by assisting natural Conscience
to do its work: Natural Conscience is the instrument in the hand of God to
accuse, condemn, terrify, and to urge to duty: The Spirit of God leads men
into the consideration of their danger, and make them to be affected therewith,
Prove. 20.27. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the
inward parts of the belly. When men's own hearts are stirring them up to Sin,
and they have many reasonings about it, that is no sign that Satan is not busy
with them: So when their own hearts are accusing and frighting of them, it is
no sign that the Spirit of God is not at work with them: All the regular
actings of Conscience, all those Convictions that are according to the Word of
God, are from the Spirit of God.

Another Argument is, that his terrors are not so great as other men's. Many
others have such terrors that they are swallowed up therewith, almost
distracted; all the Town may take notice of it; but his terrors are more
moderate by far: But he may be told,

That there is great diversity in the degrees of men's trouble: Every man must
have so much trouble, as to make him strive earnestly after Salvation, and do
what he can do in order to it; so much as to make him thoroughly to Reform, and
earnestly to strive to get into a Converted Condition. Every Ship that performs
its Voyage, must have so much Wind as may make the Ship Sail; but some Ships
have stronger and more tempestuous winds than others have. Some men are of more
tender spirit, and less will prevail upon them, than upon others; and some men
whose troubles are but small at the beginning, do grow afterward to a great
height: God uses his Sovereignty very much as to the degree of men's trouble.

Another Argument is, that his terror did not begin when other men's did. Many
others have been smitten in the Preaching of the Word, the Word of God has been
like a sharp sword in their heart; but his troubles came from the examples of
others, or from some affliction, or from his fall into some sin: But he may be
told,

That it is all one from what occasion his troubles did arise, provided that he
be but convinced of the absolute necessity of present Reconciliation, and be
but earnest in his endeavors after that: Though the Word be a principal means
of Conversion, yet God may bless what means he will to do the work, Luke. 3.10,
12, 14. Jer. 2.24. Examples fails, and Afflictions have a great tendency this
way. Whatever be the means of men's Reformation, yet if men be reformed it is
well: God would have men to make use of Providence as well as Ordinances,
there is a voice of God in them, Mic. 6.9.

Another Argument is, Because he does not see the evil of Sin. He sees a great
deal of danger, but he does not see the evil of sin, he thinks that other men
see more than he sees; but he may be told,

That other men do never see the great evil of sin, until they are Converted.
Men may see a moral evil in sin, and a great deal of the vanity and folly of
it, though they are not under a preparatory work of the Spirit; but they never
come to see the great evil of sin, until they are Converted. Men have not a
Spiritual Understanding given them, till they are Converted; they don't hate
sin, until they are Converted; so long as they remain under the preparatory
work of the Spirit, no such things can be expected from them, as are peculiar
to Saints: When once men come to see the evil of sin, they also see the Glory
of God; they do mortify their sins, and are brought into a state of
Sanctification.

Another Argument is, Because he don't prosper in his seekings; he has been
seeking a long time, and yet God stands at a distance from him, other men get
through it quickly; some that began a long time since him, have obtained peace
with God, but he is left yet in a deplorable condition: But he may be told,

That it is a common thing with God to Convert some in a far shorter time than
others. One Ship may spend twice as much time as another in performing the same
Voyage; one man's disease may be broke in far less time than another man's. Some
men has more temptations and hindrances than others; the Spirit pursues some
men more closely than others; and those that are longer under the work, may be
as soundly Converted at last. The great reason why men do not hitherto prosper
in their seekings, is not that their first troubles were not like the troubles
of other men, but because they trust in their own righteousness, and are not
yet convinced of their own helpless condition, and the badness of their own
hearts.

Quest. But are not some men's Convictions and Terrors Saving? Is there not a
difference all along in the terrors of them that are Elect, and them that are
Reprobate?

Answ. There is no difference for a great while between the strivings of the
Spirit in those that shall be Converted, and in those that shall not. As there
may be no difference in the Voyages of two Ships for a pretty while, one of
which at last arrives in the Harbor, and the other is Castaway; So it is
here. Those that shall never be Converted, may have the same experiences for a
considerable time, that those have that shall be Converted; there may be no
difference in their Awakenings, in their Reformations, in their Temptations, in
their Encouragments, nor in respect of their Frames. This does appear,

1. Because those strivings that men may have, that shall never be Converted,
are sufficient to bring men forward toward Christ. There is no necessity at
all, that the Elect should have any other strivings for a time, than what are
common to Reprobates; the Convictions that Reprobates may have, are sufficient
to bring men forward toward Christ; those terrors that Reprobates may have,
are sufficient to wean them from the World, to make them reform their lives,
and labor to be Converted. If men have but such a sense of Hell as many
Reprobates have had, there is no danger but they will take pains to be saved,
Psalm. 78.34. Though this will not Convert them, yet it will bring them nearer to
the Kingdom of God, then they were; it will make them travel toward Christ,
and overcome several impediments that lay in the way of their Conversion;
though they don't see the great evil of sin, yet they will be afraid of it;
though they don't see the excellency of Holiness, yet they will seek after it:
Common Convictions are a preparation for Conversion.

2. They that are to be Converted, are not capable of any strivings of the
Spirit, but what are common, till they come to be humbled, and to believe. It
is a pretty while after God begins to strive with the Elect, before they come
to be humbled, and to believe in Christ; and before that, they are not capable
of any strivings, but what are common. What can there be, but what is common to
other men? Other men have fears of Hell and Judgment (...) of Wrath, moral
Convictions of (...) Sin; encouragements, many (...) of vileness in their own
hearts, (...) deceitfulness: And what can these have more before they are
humbled? They are not capable yet to see the evil of Sin, the excellency of
Christ, nor of godly sorrow, nor of sincere desires, because they are not
Converted. Why may not a Reprobate have as much Conviction as they? What are
they capable of in their present Circumstances, but what many have had that are
now in Hell? Some speak of a Saving Conviction, and Contrition; What is it? if
it be only of Hell and Wrath, Reprobates have such as well as they; it cannot be
the great evil of sin, for none can see that, but they that are Converted:
Natural men are blind, Rev. 3.17.

3. If there be a difference, men might be able to tell what the difference is,
and apply it. There is a difference between common grace and saving grace, and
we are able to give an account what it is: So if there were a difference
between the Convictions of the Elect and Reprobate, we might be able from the
Word of God to tell what the difference is; if ordinary men could not do it,
yet it might be expected, that such as have a deeper insight into the
Scriptures should: There God gives us Rules to discern the difference that is
in his Dispensations; but no man in the world is able to tell what Convictions
of Wrath and Hell are peculiar to Elect Sinners, and what are peculiar to
Reprobates. Can we distinguish them by their kinds, by their degree, by their
continuance, by their immediate effects? What Rules have we to guide us in this
matter? And can we make an application to persons? If Sinners give us a true
account of their terrors, can we tell one that his Convictions are such as are
proper to the Elect, and they will end in Conversion; and another, that his
Convictions are the Convictions of Reprobates, and that they will end in
Damnation? This would be a bold Undertaking of any man; the Scripture is silent
about is; yea, the Scripture speaks the contrary, Luke 12.52, them that were
entering in ye hindered.

SOMETIMES the man is afraid that he shall dye quickly, and lives in a great
deal of torment upon that account. He is in anguish of spirit; this frame rises
either merely from his sense of Gods anger, he thinks God will presently pour
out his Wrath; or sometimes besides this, there is something in Providence that
looks that way, or some would come to him that makes him fear it; as that, Set
thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not live. In this Case he should
be told by the Minister,

1. That he ought not to take up such a Conclusion. No man should believe any
thing that may be false: He has no sufficient grounds to draw up any such
peremptory conclusion, for the thing it self is uncertain; Gods anger does not
show it; God has been angry with him a long time, yet he lives; neither do
those other signs show that it shall be; such things have oftentimes failed.

2. That it is not so usual with God to take men away when they are under
earnest endeavors to be Converted. God threatens Sinners to take them away in
the time of their security: When they say peace, peace, 1 These. 5.3. Mat.
24.48. Though sometimes men do dye that are seeking after peace with God, and
to all appearance have not found; yet this is not an ordinary dispensation.
When he is striving by his Spirit to bring them to Repentance, it is an hopeful
sign that God will wait a while upon them; if we knock at a man's door, and they
be all fast and don't stir to open the door, we are wont to go away; but if we
perceive that they are rising and preparing to open the door, we are content to
wait awhile. God generally stays to see what work men will make of it.

3. That he has indeed no certainty of his life; his body is mortal and frail,
and many men dye suddenly. God has been much provoked by him, and may justly
snatch him away by a sudden stroke. Many times men have very little warning of
Death, the fear of death is of great use to forward the work of Conversion: If
men put far away the evil day, they thereby harden their hearts; the right
numbering of their days, is a means to make them apply their hearts to wisdom,
Psalm. 90.12. Upon this account it is good to nourish awful fears of death; that
makes men sensible of the vanity of the World, of the dangerousness of Sin of
the necessity of making haste to be Converted: therefore Ministers should say
nothing to persuade them, that they are in no danger, for they are in real
danger, and it is best for them to have the sense of it; this will solemnize
their spirits, and quicken them to their work; when afraid of Death, they will
be willing to take pains, and not be hindered by temptations.

SOMETIMES he complains that he finds a dreadful murmuring spirit; he is
dreadful apt to quarrel with God, and cannot tell how to justify him: it is a
great terror to him, yet he cannot deliver himself from it. In this Case he may
be told,

1. That it is generally so with men under the work of preparation. There Is
scarce any but has experience of it. Men can hardly bear outward afflictions,
much less appearances of damnation: When awakened Sinners are called upon to
submit to God, yield themselves prisoners to him, there are two courses that
men take to avoid it; One is, to establish a righteousness of their own; they
strive to pacify the anger of God, they would fain do something to engage the
heart of God to save them. Upon that account they pray affectionately, they are
exact in their outward carriage, they strive to make their hearts better: The
Other way is, when they find that their danger continue after all their pains,
they quarrel with God, object against his Dispensations, find fault with him;
they are in a tumult, their hearts are in an uproar, and they are murmuring
against Gods dealing.

2. That he may see much of his own heart in these murmurings. And indeed these
murmurings are a great occasion sometimes to bring men off from their own
righteousnesses: Therefore it is good to lead him on this occasion into the
sense of the wretchedness of his heart; he may see in these workings much of
his own hypocrisy, he has owned many times the need he has of free mercy; and
that he deserved Condemnation; yet now he murmurs as if God owed Salvation to
him; he may see much of the Pride of his own heart, in rising up against God,
and of his boldness, and of his enmity to God; these workings of heart does
discover a dreadful fountain of Sin within.

3. That those Objections which his heart makes against God's proceeding are
causeless. He may be showed particularly, that the ways of God are righteous
and that men have no reason to murmur against him. It should be cleared up to
him, that God has great cause to find fault with him, but he has no cause to
find fault with God.

1. If the man OBJECTS, that men are bro't under a necessity of sinning, and
yet are punished for sin. Sin being DECREED it cannot but be committed, yet it
is punished. He may be told,

1. That the DECREES of GOD does not at all infringe the liberty of man: Though
the Decrees brings a necessity, yet men act as freely, as if there were no
Decrees. The Decree of God offers no violence to the will of man; men choose the
ways of sin, Isa. 66.3. And therefore the Decree is no excuse for Sin: Men
don't accept it when any wrong is done unto them, neither will God accept it as
an excuse; men act their own pleasure and dispositions when they sin: The
necessity rising from the Decree, don't take away the commendableness of good
actions, nor the blameableness of bad actions; this necessity don't cut off all
rewards and punishments.

2. That in this Decree, God does but use his Sovereign Liberty. If God will
make a multitude of Men and Angels, must he be bound to bring them all to
Eternal Life? Who shall lay a prohibition upon God, that he shall not make use
of some of them for the Glory of his Justice? If it be injurious for God to
Decree that men shall sin, and then punish them for their sin, then he is
utterly cut off from all opportunity for the glorifying of his Justice; but it
is worth the while for Men and Angels to suffer for the manifestation of Gods
Vindictive Justice.

2. If the man OBJECTS that the sin of ADAM is imputed to him, and upon that
account he is deprived of Original Holiness; whereas he was not at all active
in it, and gave no consent unto it. He may be told,

1. That men in many cases have a power to appoint others to represent them;
and they are accordingly bound to stand or fall according to the carriage of
those Representatives. Yea, men have a power to make Representatives for
others; these things are common in matters of a Civil Nature. Why then may not
God, who has more power over men, than they have over themselves, appoint one
to represent them, to act on their behalf, according to whose carriage, they
should stand or fall?

2. That this was a fair and probable way for the good of Mankind; it was as
hopeful a way as for every man to stand for himself: There was less likelihood
that all Adams Posterity should stand, then that he should stand; not only from
the personal qualifications of Adam, which were certainly greater than his
Posterity would have had in the time of their Childhood; but because Adam was
under an exceeding great Bond, he had a great Charge upon him; the Happiness of
all his Posterity having a great dependence upon his Carriage. Adam had not
only the care of his own Soul upon him, but he stood entrusted for many
Millions that were to descend from him; and it was probable, that that
Consideration should make him more careful to keep Gods Covenant.

3. If the man OBJECTS against the Severity of Gods Law, that punishes men with
Everlasting Damnation. He may be told,

1. That it is very meet that he should appoint such a punishment, as might be
a great restraint to man's sinning. If God had appointed some little punishment,
men would have been more bold to break the Law of God. Experience shows, that
this severe punishment is not sufficient to keep multitudes from living in a
way of sin; if the punishment had been less, men would have regarded it but
little.

2. It was very meet that God should appoint a punishment that was suitable for
the vindication of his Name. God loves himself, and his Name is dear to him;
and it becomes God to annex such a penalty to his Law, as that his Great Name
might be vindicated: God is a Great God, and therefore Sin is a great Evil; and
it is very fit that if sin be punished, there be a punishment appointed some
ways proportionable to the great evil of Sin.

3. That by Gods appointing so dreadful a punishment, he makes no man
miserable. God holds out the point of a sword, this will do them no hurt if
they don't run against it: God makes a dreadful pit, this will hurt no man if
he don't run into it: Gods Law makes no man miserable; they make themselves
miserable, and are cruel to their own Souls, when they sin against him.

4. The punishment appointed for sin, is no greater than the recompense of
Obedience. There is an equality in the Law, the Law is as bountiful to the
Obedient, as severe to the Disobedient: If the Law did appoint little rewards
of Obedience, and great punishments of Disobedience, men would have more show
for their complaints, but the reward is as great as the punishment. Heaven is
as good, as Hell is bad.

4. If he OBJECTS, That God has showed mercy to others that have not taken so
much pains as he: God pardons others, and gives grace to others, but denies
him. He may be told.

1. That his Labor and Service does lay no bond upon God to show mercy to him.
Whatever he has pretended in his Prayers, he has no true regard to the Glory of
God, he has minded nothing higher than his own Salvation; he has been serving
himself, and not God. God is no ways obliged to give him such a reward, he has
not merited grace, but has merited Condemnation by such services: There is
nothing in such services to work upon the mercy of God; God's mercy is not
moved by any external thing, there is nothing in those Services to engage the
Justice of God, they are far from being meritorious; there is nothing to engage
the Faithfulness of God: God has made no absolute promises to any hypocritical
prayers.

2. That God has a liberty to bestow his Grace upon whom he will. Mercy is Gods
own, and he will make choice who shall be the subjects of it. God is master of
his own gifts, will bestow them upon one, and deny them to others. It is just
for God to deny all Sinners Saving Mercy, but if he pleases to have mercy upon
some, none may prescribe who they shall be; but he may choose one, and refuse
another, 1 Cor. 4.7.

3. That God never did bestow saving mercy upon any Sinner, while he quarrelled
against his proceeding. Before ever others had mercy, their spirits were
brought down, and they were bro't to justify God, and lie at his foot; if they
had stood it out as he does, they should have gone without saving mercy, Isa.
45.23. To me every knee shall bow.

5. If he OBJECTS that he has done what he can, and yet God denies Grace to
him. He should not think much of it, if he gave way to a sluggish spirit, and
carried himself viciously, but he does what he can, and what would God have
more. He may be told,

1. That if he does what he can, he may not challenge mercy from thence. By
what Law will he demand saving grace because of that? That does not in its own
nature take away Gods Liberty and his Sovereignty: there is no wrong done him,
if God sees cause to deny him; neither is there any promise whereby God has
obliged himself to those that do all they can; God has left it in his own
liberty to deny them, if he pleases.

2. That he does not what he can. It may be he is otherwise very faulty, but
however he don't do what he can, because he does not own the Sovereignty of
God; he don't justify God, nor acknowledge that God may justly reject him
after all. Indeed he cannot do this without help from God, so he cannot pray and
reform, without assistance: Yet this is a thing that he can do, principles of
nature may produce this effect; many natural men have come to this; men that
have no natural principle have resigned up themselves to God, their mo^ths have
been stopped, and they have become guilty before God.

6. If he OBJECTS that God requires him to believe, whereas it is not in his
power; he is dead in sin, and yet God binds him to believe, and calls on him to
believe; this seems very hard and strange. He may be told,

1. That though he has lost his power to obey, yet God has not lost his power
to Command. If he has lost his strength, yet God has not lost his Authority: If
a Servant make himself drunk, and be not able to do his Masters Business, that
is no excuse. God gave man power at first, and his prodigality don't deliver
him from Gods Authority.

2. That in this way God is pleased many times to work Faith. Men are able to
do many things in order to beliveing, and hereby they are put upon it to
prepare for that; and in that way many have faith wrought in them. There have
multitudes by the Blessing of God on the Preaching of the Gospel been brought
to embrace Jesus Christ.

SOMETIMES the man says, he is afraid to do any thing in Religion; for whatever
he does he is ready to trust to it: if he Prays, Fasts, Reads, especially when
he does those things with any affection; so he trusts in his Conscienciousness.
In this Case he may be told,

1. That he will not neglect his duty by any means. He must be sure to attend
his duty whatever ill use his heart be ready to make of it; he must not scare
himself from his duty, because he is ready to trust in it: Duty must be done,
Gods Command must be attended, whatever be the consequence of it. Men may not
take upon them to judge when it is best to attend Gods Command, and when it is
dangerous, and so give themselves a dispensation from their duty; as men must
not do evil that good may come of it; so they may not neglect good, lest evil
come of that: Men must do their duty, and run the adventure of their hearts
making a bad use thereof.

2. That there is no necessity of men's trusting to what they do. If God do but
open their eyes, to see the plague of their own heart, they will not trust to
what they do. When men are thoroughly convinced of the abominations that are in
their hearts, and see the hypocrisy and formality of their duties, it is
impossible that they should trust in them: their confidence in their duties
rises from the opinion that they have of them, and when they come to understand
the wretchedness of them, their heart will not gather considence, but fear from
them; and therefore it is their duty to study their own hearts, and labor to
find out the wickedness of them.

When the man is told that there is a necessity of seeing his own heart, in
order to his Humiliation. Sometimes he Objects, that he is blind and cannot see;
how can a blind man see his own hearts. He may be told,

1. That he is indeed spiritually blind, and therefore he cannot see the evil
of Sin; that is not to be seen, till men have received a Spiritual
Understanding from God; and accordingly there is no necessity of seeing that in
order to his Humiliation.

2. But yet he is capable to have an experimental sight of the badness of his
own heart. Natural Conscience is able to discern that: Men may find by
experience, that they are under the power of pride, of discontent, and carnal
affection; and that they are utterly destitute of love to God, or any gracious
disposition; these things are not discerned by a spiritual eye, but by a
natural eye: Natural men may observe and discern the workings of their own
hearts, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of Concupiscence.

SOMETIMES the man says, he is willing to believe in Christ, but finds himself
unable; he could be glad he could believe, but it is beyond him. In this Case
he may be told,

1. That there is a mighty opposition in the heart of a natural man to
believing in Christ; as it is with all other Spiritual Duties, so it is with
this. Men don't love to believe in Christ, but have a contrariety thereunto,
Jeh. 5.40. Mat. 23.37. The opposition rises partly from pride, they had rather
be saved by their own works, that they may have somewhat to glory in; it is
very cross to their haughty spirit to go out of themselves, and be beholden to
Christ alone for Salvation, to have nothing of their own to glory in; Men don't
love to see themselves nothing; and partly it rises from fear: it seems to them
a terrible thing to adventure upon Christ, they are not certain that God is
free to accept of them; they are not certain whether Christ's Righteousness be
sufficient for them; they don't see the encouragement that is in the Gospel,
and think it an unlikely thing that they shall be safe in such a way: hence
they have a trembling in their heart; look upon it too great an adventure, they
fear it will be looked upon to be presumption, and that instead of mending their
condition, they shall make it worse, they should be afraid to stay away from
Christ; but they are afraid to come to him, and therefore are not willing.

2. If the man were willing, what keeps him from Christ? The difficulty lies in
the will, if the will be conquered, the man is conquered: Yea, Faith in Christ
is an act of the will: Faith is a choosing of Christ for his Savior. Christ is
offered to men, and many encouragements are presented before them; and when
once the will is gained to accept the offer, the man does believe on Christ: If
men were willing, the difficulty would be at an end; they cannot be willing till
they are able; they are not willing, until the will is strengthened to comply
with Gods Call.

3. That seeming willingness that is in many men is but feigned. They pretend a
willingness to quiet their Consciences; they don't it may be feel much
opposition, but they are not indeed willing; they are willing to be saved, and
willing to be saved by Christ, rather than not be saved at all; and have some
selfish desires that they could come to Christ, but there is no sincerity in
them.

SOMETIMES the man says, that he would fain submit to the will of God, but
cannot tell how; he has been striving after it a great while, but cannot attain
it. In this Case he may be told,

That Natural men do never sincerely strive after submission to God; they do
strive to submit after a fashion, and pray that they may, because they hear
that it is necessary in order to Conversion, but they are never sincere in it;
they do it in a false and deceitful way: Which appears,

1. Because they are laboring to make their hearts better. They are laboring
to mend themselves; and upon this account they labor after it, that they may
be necessitated to submit to the will of God; that their own goodness may be a
bond upon God to save them, that it may not be in the free liberty of God to do
what he pleases with them: And upon this account they strive to submit to God,
that they make a Righteousness of that.

2. Because at the same time they are hiding their own hearts from themselves;
they are afraid to see how bad they are. If they have any Convictions of their
own badness, they will stifle them if they can: they are laboring to excuse
themselves, and love to look upon any thing in themselves that seems like
goodness; they are persuading of themselves that they are better than they are,
which are great hindrances to Submission.

3. Because they are not thoroughly convinced of a necessity of submission to
God. If they were convinced of a necessity of it, they would do it; and if they
be not convinced of it, they cannot strive sincerely after it: as long as men
hope that they may make a shift without it, they will not heartily seek after
it: As long as they hope that their own righteousness will lay a bond upon God,
and that it is not fair for God to condemn them, they will not heartily
endeavor after submission.

When men are called upon to submit to God, and resign up themselves to his
Sovereignty, they say they do so; they cannot help themselves, but must justify
God. In this Case there is great need to examine, whether their submission be
of the right kind; for there is a show of submission, which is not real
Humiliation: and there are these signs of a false Submission.

1. When it is the fruit of their own strivings. Men hear that they must submit
themselves to God, before they obtain mercy; and accordingly they strive for
it, and work up a kind of image of submission to God: they bring themselves to
own that they are in Gods hands, and he may do what he will with them, this is
never right. When men are brought to submit to God indeed, the thing is forced
by the power of Conviction: they strive against it, but never so evidently
convinced of the insufficiency of themselves, and the Justice of God, that they
had no other way left them, but to fall into the hands of God; as it was with
those Lepers, 2 King. 7.4.

2. When men make a righteousness of their submission. When men have got a
false submission, they are wont to be proud of that, and to think that God will
be taken with them: they look upon it a choice frame of spirit, and rejoice in
it as a thing pleasing to God; but when men do indeed submit to God, they see
nothing in it to be proud of; they see themselves all over defiled like Lepers;
empty of all good, and look upon this submission as having nothing at all of
goodness in it; they see they are merely forced to it: That they have no other
way to take, but to fall into the hands of God.

3. When, notwithstanding their submission, they are still striving to make
their hearts better. If you ask them whether they are striving to love God, and
to do duties for his Glory? They say yes, they are laboring after it; you may
be sure they don't submit to God, but are laboring to get some goodness of
their own to commend them to God; they are not sensible of their own impotency.
But if a man do indeed submit to God, he sees himself dead in trespasses and
sins; ask him whether he be striving to make his heart better; he will say he
can as easily remove a mountain as do it; that he has been striving after it a
great while, but now he finds that he has no power; his heart is as dead as a
stone, there is no disposition to any thing that is good in him, it is quite
out of his reach; if God don't make him better, it will never be effected.

4. When men say they have been brought to that many a time. When some men are
enquired of, whether they were brought to submit to God's Sovereignty? Yes,
they say many a time. Sinners in trouble of Conscience say it has been so
oftentimes with them; this shows it is not a right submission. Godly men after
their Conversion, may submit many times to God, but that submission differs
much from this; that is a gracious submission, and they don't see at the same
time themselves utterly destitute of all grace; but that submission that goes
before the closing with Christ, is never wrought any more than (...); when it is
wrought it may continue some little time, till God reveals Christ to a man; but
this work is never wrought over and over again in the Soul.

5. When men are afraid they are not humbled enough. Some men that do pretend
to submission, are afraid that they are not humbled enough, and they wish they
may be humbled more; this makes it evident that they do not indeed submit, it
is a sign that they make a righteousness of their submission. When men do
indeed submit to God, they are never exercised with any such scruples, because
they don't look upon their submission as a thing that commends them to God.
When a man submits, he absolutely resigns up himself as a prisoner to God, is
wholly broken off from his own righteousness and sufficiency, and leaves
himself with God, and does not do it under a notion that there is any
excellency in it, but out of necessity leaves himself with God.

6. When men submit to God as looking upon him not very angry. Some Sinners
submit to God, and at the same time they think they have some love to God, and
some care of his Glory; and accordingly they look upon their peace half made;
truly this is no difficult matter; it is easy for a man to put his life into
the hands of his friend: there is no great opposition to submit to God, when a
man is pretty confident that God will save him; but it is another thing to
submit to God, when a man does not see a spark of goodness in himself, when he
looks upon God as bitterly angry with him, and is much afraid that God will
utterly destroy him: When men submit under such circumstances, it is evident
that God has conquered them, and that their Wills are broken.

Quest. What is to be said to a man in case he should say that he is willing to
be Damned?

A. 1. No man acting understandingly is willing to be Damned. All Ungodly men
do interpretatively love Damnation. Pro. 8.36. but no man that understands
himself, is willing to be damned; it is against Nature; Nature teaches every
man to desire Happiness. Damnation is a dreadful terror to them that know what
it is, Isa. 33.14.

2. No such thing is required of men. For God has put a spirit of self-love
into men, and binds them to love themselves; and commands men to be seeking of
Salvation, Joh. 6.27. Luke 13.24.

Such willingness is either only pretended; or if real, it must arise either
from desperate rage and passion, or from some violent pang of false affection
to God. The Spirit of God don't stir up such workings in the hearts of men.

SOMETIMES a Sinner does enquire, How he may come to know his own heart? He is
told, that it is needful for him to know it, and enquires what he should do in
order to it. In this Case he may be directed to these three ways.

1. To observe the sinful workings of his own heart. The hearts of men are
often working in a way of pride, discontent, worldliness, envy, etc. And by
observing these, a man may learn abundance of the badness of his heart, if he
do consider with himself how far such a spirit would carry him, if God did not
restrain it. As when a man sees the Fire burn the wood on the Hearth, he
gathers that it would consume the House too, if not restrained.

2. To examine those shows of goodness that the heart makes. The heart makes
many shows of goodness, sometimes of sorrow for sin, of love to God, to Godly
People, of love to Ordinances, of desires to be Converted, of believing the
Word of God, of Humility, of Patience, of Thankfulness: And the way to know the
heart, is, to search whether it be not false in these appearances; to examine
the ends and motions of those frames and workings of heart, whether the root of
them be not self-love, fear of Hell, hope of merit, etc.

3. To try his heart, by supposing some suitable cases to it; as he may suppose
to himself, That such Godly men as he pretends great love to, should slight and
despise him; that God should take away such a Child from him, that God should
Convert some others, and leave him under guilt and terrors; that his Estate
should be lost, that there should come Persecuting Times; that he were in the
hands of Enemies that would kill him, if he would not carry sinfully; that God
should now come to take away his life before he is Converted. By questioning
seriously with himself what he thinks he should do in such cases, he may come
to have more understanding in his own heart. Changes of Condition make great
discoveries of the heart: and supposed changes sometimes do a pretty deal that
way; such questions if seriously considered, may be as touchstones to discover
what is in the heart; the answer of the heart to such Enquiries, may give men a
great deal of light to see themselves by.

Quest. How does God show men the badness of their own hearts?

Answ. 1 The Means whereby God effects it, is by leading men into temptation.
Men in continuance of time fall into temptation, and so the Vizard falls off
from their hearts, and they come to have an understanding of the plague that is
therein. Sometimes by reason of some temptation they are drawn into some moral
evil, and that discovers their hypocrisy and corruption: Sometimes temptations
prevail upon them to make them worldly and proud: Sometimes by Afflictions the
coffeehouse of their hearts is stirred up; so by God's not hearing their
prayers, by converting other persons; sometimes by hearing the Doctrine of
God's Sovereignty, or the strictness of the Law Sometimes the Word of God, and
sometimes the Works of God are a temptation to them, and occasion them to be
dead to that which is good, and make their corruptions works violently, Romans
7.8. Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence.

2. As to the manner it is done gradually. God don't lead men at once into an
understanding of their hearts; as the Chyrurgeon by degrees comes to the bottom
of the Sore. God could at once make men see the bottom of their own hearts, as
when the Jailer was Converted; but in this way men would not have such
experience of the deceitful turnings and windings of their own hearts; but he
generally shows it them by degrees, and they are a long while before they come
to an understanding of them; they see something of their hearts, and then grow
into a pretty good opinion of them again, they have many partial discoveries of
their heart; sometimes they go forward in discerning their hearts, and the
(...) backward again; they get ground, and then (...) lose it; they seem as if
they would presently come to an understanding of them, and then there is a stop
put to it for a pretty while; a great deal of time is consumed before they come
to have a through understanding of themselves. Men are sometimes years under
trouble before they do attain unto it.

Quest. What must men know of their own hearts, before they be Converted?

Answ. In general, They must know so much as is sufficient to bring them off
from trusting in their own righteousness and their own strength. Some men know
a great deal more of their own hearts than other men, they see many particular
deceits and workings of corruption that other men don't see, and no man knows
his heart so before Conversion, but he may learn a great deal more after he is
Converted; but so much must be known by every man, as is sufficient to break
him off from trusting in himself: It is the sight of his own heart that does
take him off from trusting in himself: let him hear never so much about the
insufficiency of his own righteousness, he will trust in himself, till he sees
his own heart; but when he sees that thoroughly, it is impossible that he should
trust in himself, for he sees there is nothing there to trust unto.

Particularly, 1. He must see himself under the reigning power of Sin. If men
imagine that they have no great disposition to sin^ ^or that their corruption
are in any (...) ^ortify'd, they will commend themselves to God upon that
account; and wont see it (...) ^ir for God to condemn them. (...) absolute
necessity they should have the particular consideration of every corruption
that is in their hearts; but they must see that they are under the dominion of
sin, that a spirit of self-love reigns in them, and that their heart is
contrary to that which is good; they find such workings of pride,
coffeehouse and enmity to Christ, as shows to them they have abominable
hearts; that their hearts are like the hearts of Devils, as full of sin as a
toad is of poison, Romans 7.9.

2. To be empty of all goodness. He has no inclination to any thing that is
good, that there is no disposition to that which is good, but a total
emptiness. It may be he does not think particularly of every grace that he is
destitute of that, but sees that he is utterly void of spiritual life, that he
has no power to do any good; he is dead in sin, wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. Before that he was convinced of a weakness, but now
he finds himself dead: he thought before that he had little strength, now he
sees he has none: there is not one spark of goodness in him, nor any power to
get any, he is stripped out of all his perfections, and sees an utter emptiness
in himself of all that is good; he has no love, no godly sorrow, no
thankfulness, no humility, no spiritual desires, those appearances that he had
are all vanished out of sight, he cannot do any thing, there is no seed of any
goodness in him; if he be advantaged with all manner of helps, yet it is quite
beyond his power to work up any good frame in his heart; he prays, but there is
no goodness in his prayers, and he is incapable of working up any, he is not in
a swound, rubbing and chasing will not fetch him to life, but he is
everlastingly dead in sin, unless God will put a principle of life into him.

SOMETIMES the man says that he sees he can do nothing of himself. In this Case
he may be told,

That the best Saint in the world can do nothing of himself, Joh. 1^.4. Those
that do a great deal for God, and have a gracious principle, do yet know that
they can do nothing of themselves: And a Natural man may stand convinced of
this, that he can do nothing of himself, though he be very proud, and imagines
that he does God a great deal of choice service; when he says, he can do
nothing of himself, he only means, that he can do nothing without assistance
from God. This a man may see, and yet be a great ^anger to his own heart. The
thing that he wants to see is, that he has no principle of doing any good, that
there is no power nor inclination in him, but that he is totally and
everlastingly dead in sin, unless God infuse a new principle into him.

SOMETIMES men have great discoveries of their own hearts for a pretty while
together, and yet don't come to lie at Gods foot, they say themselves they
cannot do it. In this Case they may be told,

1. That they cannot deliver themselves; that it is utterly impossible for them
to mend their own hearts. For men may see themselves bad and insufficient, yet
not be brought to despair as to their own power; be nourishing a secret hope,
that in time with some advantages their heart will be brought to a better pass;
therefore it is best to possess them with a sense of their utter insufficiency
to help themselves; they may as well make a world, as make their own hearts
good; they cannot work faith in themselves, Joh. 6.44.

2. That they cannot deserve that God should give Grace to them. They cannot
force God to work Regeneration in them, they have no natural excellency to
engage God, they cannot work upon the Mercy of God, nor engage the Justice of
God to save them; God is not bound to them to help them, there is nothing to
hinder him if he pleases, there is nothing to oblige him, they cannot compel
God; God is free to help them or deny help, as it pleases him

3. That it is dangerous to stand it out long against God. If they do not
yield, they are in danger either to be left of God to a senseless spirit, or to
get a false confidence, or to be snatched away out of the world; men stand in
slippery places that continue to be stubborn against great Conviction: it is
not like to be long before the scale turn; if they do not quickly submit, there
is danger of their rejection.

SOMETIMES the man says, that now he can justify God, however he deals with
him, and yet it is evident that he is not brought off from his own
righteousness. In this Case he may be told,

1. That he must beware that he don't make a righteousness of this. Pride will
feed upon any appearance of good qualifications, and if he lots upon it that
now his heart is better than it was, and that God is taken with him, he will
greatly deceive himself; his justifying of God, is no justification of himself;
his justifying of God, will not make God to justify him; though he justifies
God, yet God condemns him.

2. That some men do justify God from a partial conviction of the
righteousness of their Condemnation. Conscience takes notice of their
sinfulness, and tells them that they may righteously be damned; as Pharaoh, who
justified God, Exodus 9.27. And they give some kind of consent to it, but many
times it don't continue; they have only a p^ng upon them, that usually dies
away after a little time: this justifying of God differs much from that which
does immediately go before Conversion, which is a fixed and through Conviction,
arising from a through understanding of their own hearts.

SOMETIMES the man seems to be upon the very borders of despair. For some men
are nearer to it a great deal than others, he is in anguish of spirit, and does
almost conclude, that there is no mercy for him. In this Case he may be told,

1. That there is no hope in any Creature. He cannot help himself, he has no
wisdom, power nor worthiness that can help him; there is no way that he can
take that is sufficient for his deliverance: that Ministers are not able to
deliver him, and that if others pray for him, yet tha^ will not secure his
salvation: All Creatures are as ciphers, and cannot work out any salvation for
him; if God will destroy him, there is none that can save him.

2. That God may help him; it is not beyond the power of God to change his
heart, and it is not beyond the Grace of God to help him. The reason that men
are not pardoned, is not the greatness of their sins, but because they do not
come to Jesus Christ. That though God be angry, yet he should not be
discouraged, God is always angry with Sinners, when he comes to bestow
Converting Grace upon them: That God has done a great deal for him, inasmuch as
he makes him sensible of his danger: That these discoveries of danger are many
times forerunners of Conversion: That his Condition is a great deal more
hopeful now, than when he pleased himself with his frames and seize;
every man must despair in himself, before he comes to trust in Christ; that
there is enough in Christ, he is able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7.15.
Christ came to save the chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 5.

3. That there is no way left him now, but to yield himself into the Hands of
God. If God destroy him he may, he lies at the mere mercy of God; if God will
deliver him he may, if he does not he does no wrong; he cannot run from God, he
cannot force God; if he stands it out against God, he takes a way to ruin
himself the safest course he can take, is to fall into the hands of God; it
may be God may help him, however he can but perish.

SOMETINES a little before the work of God is completed in him, he complains
that he seems to be as before he was under Convictions, careless and senseless;
his terrors have left him, and he is not affected with his condition. In this
Case he may be told,

1. That now he may see what an heart he has, and how insufficient he is to
deliver himself. His heart is empty of all that is good, and there is no
possibility of his attaining Salvation by his own power, he has no principle of
Grace, and never had; the frames that formerly he had, were nothing else but
the workings of self-love and natural Conscience; and unless God does deliver
him, he will never attain unto life.

2. That his way must be to wait upon God still. This is no sign God has given
him over, his terrors may quickly return again, and he may find mercy for all
this: When he had his good frames and affections, they could not save him, nor
make his peace with God; and if God do show him his own emptiness, he may
quickly after discover to him the Excellency of Christ.

At length the man seems as if he were thoroughly brought off from himself, and
brought to lie at the foot of God. All his selfish hopes are taken away, he
sees his own heart, and his will bows, he seems to resign up himself to God. In
this Case,

1. It is best to examine whether there be no deceit in it. Sometimes it is so
plain that there is no great occasion to examine, sometimes it is more
doubtful. When they are thoroughly humbled, such things as these do concur. (1.)
He sees all his own righteousness to be utterly empty and vile. that it has no
power to draw the heart of God; he sees nothing at all to commend him, but he
has been provoking God thereby. (2) He is at an end of his contrivances to
change his heart. Formerly when things appeared dark unto him, he was wont to
think that if he did th^s or so, that would bring him into a more hopeful way;
but now he is beyond all his contrivances, he cannot do any more. (3.) He sees
his heart spiritually dead. He is utterly destitute of power to do any good
thing; yea, he has no inclination to any good (4.) He sees he is in Gods Hand.
It is free for God to do as he will with him, and he resigns up himself to God,
so he is more quiet now than he was; both because his will is brought down, and
he is satisfied that God can, and may help him.

2. It is no ways fit to tell a man that God will show mercy to him. For
though this be the manner of God, when men are prepared for Grace, to bestow
Grace upon them, yet there is no promise in the Scripture made to such persons;
the promises are made to Coming to Christ: Faith is the Condition of Salvation;
and though there be many promises made to Humility, yet there are none made to
Humiliation. And he is to be told, That he is in Gods hands, God is at liberty
to do as he will with him, and that he must wait upon God to open his eyes, and
show Jesus Christ unto him.

3. It is very meet to set the Gospel before him, and mind him of Gods sending
of Christ into the World to Save Sinners. That Jesus Christ has satisfied the
Justice of God, and performed perfect Obedience for us: That God has pardoned
many through Christ, that he offers Salvation to him through Jesus Christ; and
that God has promised Eternal Life to all that do accept of Christ: That those
that have nothing to bring with them shall be welcome to him,; that God is of
infinite mercy, and delights to glorify his Grace in Saving the Chief of
Sinners: That because we had no worthiness, God has provided a worthiness for
us in Christ: That Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that come
to him: That Gods love is free, and there is no danger in venturing upon
Christ; whoever believes on him shall not be confounded.

Quest Is there at that time any true meltings of heart because of S^n? Is the
Soul truly gr^eved for its Sins against God, as some men have thought?

Answ. That though there is such a Conviction of sin as makes men to justify
God, yet there is no godly sorrow for sin. Men are not at this time affected
with any Godly sorrow.

1. Because such sorrow is inconsistent with the work of Hum^liation When the
Sinner is humbled, he sees himself emptied of himself, and sees his own heart
dead in sin; this could not be, if he had any gracious sorrow for sin; if there
were true sorrow for sin, there must be love to God, a spiritual understanding,
a new heart, a divine principle put into the man; for nature cannot produce any
such effect.

2. Because Faith is the first act of Grace. If the man had a gracious
principle, he would immediately Entertain Christ and the Gospel; after a man
has received a principle of Regeneration, the first way that it works in is by
drawing the heart to Christ; when men's hearts are changed, and a new Nature put
into them, it does not first work in a way of sorrow for sin, or thirsting
after Gods Glory, or delighting in Holiness; but always the first act of Grace
is to close with Christ: God leads him into the exercise of this, that he may
be justified, Romans 5.1. If he did any other gracious act before this, it could
not be accepted, for the person is not accepted before Faith: All
Sanctification is the fruit of Faith, Acts 26.18.

Soon after the Soul is brought to lie at Gods foot, he is wont to give an
account of his Closing with Christ; that God has revealed Christ to him and
drawn his heart to him, and he does accept of Christ. In this Case it is best,
(...)

1. To examine whether his faith be right. And in this work there is no weight
to be laid on it, whether it was in Hearing, Reading, Praying or Meditating,
that God gave one right to him; God does not confine himself to any of those
ways: neither is there any weight to be laid on it, whether it was by any
particular word or without it; if it be according to the Word it is sufficient;
nor must we lay weight upon it, whether it were by a word of promise, or some
other passage of the G^spel, nor whether he had one word came to him or many
Sometimes many promises flow in, one after another, in abundance; but special
Enquiry is to be made, [1.] What condition he was in just before, whether he
was wholly emptied of himself, or found any imaginary goodness in himself; if
his humiliation was right, there as no doubt of h^s faith: [2.] Whether by that
light that was given him, he saw Christ and Salvation offered to him, or
whether he saw that God loved him and pardoned him; for the offer of Grace, and
our acceptance goes before pardon, and therefore much more before the knowledge
of it: [3.] Whether he saw a glorious fullness in Christ, a sufficiency for the
greatest sinners, so as to make him admire the excellency of Christ: [4.]
Whether the Offer came with Divine Authority, whether he saw God calling of him
so that he could not but accept thereof.

2. If upon Enquiry the Case be more doubtful, as it may be, partly because
some things were not so clear to himself, or because he has forgotten some
material thing, and cannot speak to it. It may be well to tell him, That if it
be right, he will see more of it; when God begins to make a discovery of
Christ, he will not leave men' but is wont to show them more. The path of the
just is like the morning light, etc. Prove. 4.

3. If the Case be plain, it is best to encourage him, though there is no need to
be positive. But he may be told, That it is hopeful that God has drawn his
heart to Christ, and made a gracious change in his Soul; and that if he does
indeed believe on Christ, he shall certainly be saved; his sin don't make such
a breach between God and him, as to hazard his Salvation.

4. To warn him to depend still on the free Grace of God in Christ; he must
expect many dark hours and times of temptation, but his way must be, to grow in
the knowledge of Christ; he must not think, that now he shall always live a
life of joy and comfort. Satan will be busy with him, and he will have many
workings both of carnal confidence and unbelief; and he must get more and more
convinced of his own righteousness, and the fullness of Christ; if he live many
years, he must never expect any thing to glory in but Christ Jesus: And he is
likewise to be warned, That he live up to the mercy of God to him; that he
don't fall into a languishing and pining condition, but maintain the life and
power of Godliness, that so he may not expose himself to temptation and
darkness, and that he may not dishonor the Holy Name of God; showing forth the
virtue of him that has called him out of darkness into his mavelous light.

There be TWO particular CASES that do require a particular Consideration.

The Frst CASE is, When the Minister is sent for by a man upon his Sickbed.
The first thing to be done is to get an understanding in what condition the
person is. For though a man that does not know his Case may speak several
things that may be safe and profitable: whatever his Condition is; yet the more
knowledge there is of the state of the man, the more advantage he is under to
speak pertinently.

I. If it be plain that the man is in a Natoral Condition, it is most proper to
insist upon these three things:

1. That he has a present absolute necessity to be at peace with God: that if
he should dye in a Natural Condition, he will be for ever undone: It is very
fit he should be rememored of his sinful life, and the dreadfulness of that
punishment that hangs over his head; which may be set before him in an
affecting manner, that if it be possible he may be terrified, and made sensible
of those Eternal Miseries that are coming upon him.

2. That he may not rest in any thing short of Jesus Christ M^n in such a Case
are like a man drowning, ready to catch hold of any thing that comes near; they
are ready to have a dependence upon their Privileges, upon their Parentage,
upon their sorrow for their misspent life and upon their purposes to live better
if God do raise them up again; he must be led into an understanding of the
strictness of the Law of God and the vanity of all ca^^l confidences.

3. That there is a glorious way of Life prepared by Christ Christ Jesus has
fulfilled the Law, and wrought out Eternal Salvation for us, that the Gift of
God is Eternal Life; and that the mercy of God is free, and God does not refuse
any that do hearken to the Call of the Gospel, that God will as readily receive
him if he comes to Christ, as if he were likely to live many years, and do
service to God in the World.

And if his particular temptations may be discerned, care must be taken to
remove them; if he be under any special discouragement or any flattering
delusion, the snare if it be possible must be broken; he must be showed the
vanity of that temptation. Such light must be held out, that if God will bless
it he may be delivered.

If at that time, or any other afterward he does pretend to believe in Christ,
it is very meet that he be cautioned that he does not deceive himself; for
sickbed Repensances are seldom true. Many persons that made great pretensions
when sick, have proved very badly after their recovery.

II. If it be doubtful whether the man be in a Natural Condition, or Converted,
as there may be some occusion to hope because of his profession, because of his
estimation among men; because of an orderly carriage, and yet occasion to fear,
because there is no great evidence of Grace, either in his Conversation before,
or discourse at present: Sometimes there is more grounds for hope, sometimes
for fear. These three things may safely be spoken to him.

1. The Doctrine of the Law and Gospel may be set before him. They may be
somewhat explained and cleared up: It is fit men should be remembered of the
Rule they are to be judged by. Many times when the Rule is clearly laid down.
Conscience makes application, and witnesses to men how it is with them, Heb.
4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword,
etc.

2. Promises may be applied conditionally. He may be told, That if he have been
thoroughly broken off from himself, and brought to rely upon Christ, God has
accepted of him; that if his heart have been drawn by Gospel Encouragements to
rely on Christ, he is out of danger; that if Gods Glory be upon his heart
indeed, he is an heir of Glory; he may be told, that only his own Conscience
can tell what the workings of his heart have been: That if he be not mistaken,
but has indeed made Christ his refuge, all his sins are pardoned.

3. He may be warned that he do not deceive himself. It may be meet to remember
him, that the heart is deceitful; that many false hearts do go hoping out of
the World, that there be several things that do resemble Faith, and every Grace
may be counterfeited: That he had need to beg of God to discover things plainly
to him: That it would be a dreadful thing to be mistaken; and so he may be
charged that he do not trust in any thing in himself, but betake himself alone
to Christ.

III. If it be considerably plain, that he is Converted and Gracious; either
from his known eminency in Religion, or from an account that he gives of
Communion with God, or discoveries of Christ, and gracious workings of his
heart: It may be very meet, To comfort him with those great and precious
promises that God has made, to remember him of the freeness of Gods Grace, and
the preciousness of the Blood of Christ; he may be minded of those things that
are the pillars of our Faith, and the foundations of our comfort; how God in
all Ages of the World has proposed this way of Salvation in this way the Saints
of Old have lived and dyed: How the Faithfulness of God stands engaged for
their Salvation, that their sins and iniquities are cast behind Gods back; this
must be understood or spoken upon a supposition, that their work is a through
work.

In Case he desires the Minister to tell what he judges about his sincerity; it
may be suitable to tell him, that as far as he can discern, his heart is
upright, and that the root of the matter is found in him; he must tell him that
he has no infallible knowledge, God alone does know the hearts of men, there is
no depending on his judgment, but so far as he can perceive, his Soul has been
renewed by the Spirit of God.

If the man has any particular temptations, it is very suitable to remove them;
he may be under temptation, because he has great deadness, a great deal of
pride and hypocrisy; because he has not had so much dscovery of the favor of
God, as he perceives others have had; because many others have been mistaken;
because God has afflicted him very much; because he is withdrawn now in the
time of his Sickness: Such particular temptations are to be answered. It may be
showed to him, that the dealings of God are various with his people; that such
things are not inconsistent with Grace, that the best way is to live upon the
free mercy of God in Christ.

The OTHER CASE is, when such persons as have made an high profession of
Religion for a long while, are in darkness about their Condition.

In this Case, the first care of the Minister must be, to get satisfaction
concerning the state of the person, whether he be Regenerate or not. Not but
that many things may be spoken that may be profitable to them, whether they be
sincerely Godly or no: But if the Minister do not know their condition, he
cannot apply proper remedies; and he may speak that which may be very dangerous,
if he supposes the man to be Unconverted, when he is Converted; he may torment
him, and discourage him needlessly; if he supposes the man Converted when he is
not, he may do him much damage by comforting him up in a false way; therefore
it is very needful that he do get what satisfaction he can about their
condition, that so he may be helpful to them in their distresses.

In order to his passing a right judgment upon their condition, he must be
careful that he do not lay too much weight upon it, that they have been in
Church Fellowship many years, that their Carriage has been orderly, that they
are well accounted of where they live, for these are (...) fallible signs, such
things are common to Saints and Hypocrites; though these things may be grounds
of Charity; but a Minister had need have better grounds to go upon when he
comforts up persons with hopes of Reconciliation.

Neither must he lay too much weight on bad signs, that are not demonstrative;
if the man do not know the time of his Conversion, or first closing with
Christ, if he have any notable blemish, if he be not well accounted of, the
Minister may not draw any peremptory conclusion from thence that he is not
Godly; yea, if he do judge himself confidently to be Unconverted, it is best to
enquire somewhat further in it. It is best discovered by three sorts of
Enquiries.

1. Whether they have passed through the several steps of the work of
Conversion. Some can give so full an account thereof, as will abundantly
satisfy the Minister, that the work is right; some are so strangely to seek,
that he may be much confirmed, that they have no grace; in some others after
they have given what account they can, the work is more dubious.

2. Whether they have lived a life of Sanctification. There is great diversity
in the measures of Sanctification that men have attained unto: very Holy men
live an holy life, and by Enquiring what knowledge they have of God? Whether
they prize the Glory of God? Whether they hate all Sin? Whether they do draw
their encouragement from Christ? Whether they love Holiness, for Holiness sake?
What Conflict they have with Pride, Unbelief, a self-righteous Spirit and
Self-love? A Minister may come to comptent satisfaction whether they be in a
state of Grace or not; in discoursing such things with them, a man may many
times feel the workings of a spirit of Holiness.

3. Whether they have had sensible Communion with God. God is wont at times to
draw nigh to the Souls of his People, sometimes in Meditation, sometimes in
Prayer, and in other Ordinances; and to make discoveries of himself, and of
Jesus Christ to their Souls, and to draw their hearts to him; and if there has
been any thing considerable that way; the Minister may be well satisfied of
their good Estate.

In Case the Minister be satisfied that the man is not Converted, he must use
his prudence to judge whether it will be for the man's profit, that he do in
plain Terms tell him so; sometimes it may be a prejudice and a means to
exasperate him. Sometimes there is no such danger, but he may freely tell him
what he judges, and the reasons of his jugment.

But in case he do not see it his way to tell the man his thoughts concerning
him, yet he ought in conscience in the wisest way he can, put him into the
understanding of his own condition: He may not suffer the man to go away with
an opinion, that he ^inks well of him, much less may he leave him ignorant of
such rules whereby he may come to understand his condition; it becomes him to
lay such signs of trial before him as are most likely to bring him to sight of
himself, and convince him of his Dangerous Estate.

In case the Minister be satisfied on good grounds about the man's good Estate:
He ought to endeavor to clear it up to the man, laying convincing light before
him; and answering those temptations that make it doubtful to the man himself;
and also to direct him in such ways, wherein it is hopeful that God will help
him and deliver him from his Temptations.

FINIS.

