AN EXHORTATION To All: To use Utmost Endeavors to obtain A Visit of the God
of Hosts, FOR THE Preservation of Religion, and the CHURCH, upon Earth.

In a SERMON Preached before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Honorable
COUNCIL and Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in N. E.
on May 26. 1714. being the Anniversary Day of the ELECTION of COUNSELORS of
the said Province.

By SAMUEL DANFORTH, Pastor of the Church in Tanton.

Isaiah lxiii. 15. Look down from Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of thy
Holiness, and of thy Glory: -- BOSTON: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Samuel
Gerrish, at his Shop on the North side of the Townhouse. 1714.

Published by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL

Isaac Addington, Sec
BOSTON, June 4 th. 1714.
An EXHORTATION to All: To use Utmost Endeavors TO Obtain a Visit of the God
of Hosts.
PSALM LXXX. 14. Return, we beseech Thee, O God of Hosts: look down from
Heaven, and behold, and Visit this Vine.
THE State of the Church of Israel, when this Psalm was Penned, was very
Calamitous (as appears from the Matter of the Psalm it self) both with respect
unto Sins and Judgments. And the whole Psalm is a Prayer in the Name and Behalf
of the Church, unto God for Deliverance. In the Verse before us, we may
consider,

1. THE Description of the Church Prayed for, by that Metaphor of a Vine. To
Explain which we may observe,

(1.) THAT Jesus Christ Himself as Mediator, God-Man, and as Head of the Church
is the True Vine, Joh. 15.1. Christ compares Himself to a Vine according to His
usual Custom of taking Similitudes from things Common and Obvious; such were
Vines in Judea, Deuteronomy. 8.8. Planted by the sides of their Houses, Psalm. 128.3.
Probably of that House where Christ was when He spoke those words. Christ is
the Principal Vine, for whose sake the Church of Israel was compared to a Vine
or Vineyard, because out of that Church the Messiah was to come who is the True
Vine. Christ is that Vine, as God-Man, Mediator, to whom the Father has given
this Prerogative to have Life in Himself, Joh. 5.26.

AND to be a quickening Spirit unto those implanted into Him, and who are given
to Him to be His Members, 1 Cor. 15.45. Christ is therefore likened to that
which is the chief part of a Vine, Namely the Root and Stock, when as His
Members are but like the Branches. Christ as He is Man is of the same Nature
with the Branches, as He is God He supplies the Branches with Spiritual Life
and Grace. The Humane Nature of Christ is as the Conduit through which the
Gifts of the Holy Spirit flow unto His People. As Mediator He both Merited
Grace for Men, and Infuses Grace into Men; and more truly and perfectly
nourishes Believers unto Eternal Life, than a Vine does its Branches; as an
Head of influence unto them. Christ is then the true and proper Vine, others
but secondarily so; and depending on Christ, and deriving all their Spiritual
Life from Him; and obtaining all they have, for His Sake: And that they are
Vines in any sense is because God the Father to Glorify His Son, has given
them to Him in an Everlasting Covenant, to be brought unto Union and Communion
with Him.

MANY Phrases in this Psalm, may be referred to Christ; He is Gods Joseph,
Verse 1. to whom belongs the Right of Primogeniture; to be the First born of
every Creature. He is the Man of Gods Right Hand, v. 17. Gods Benjamin, who is
Exalted to sit at Gods Right Hand, and if this glorious Benjamin were not
there, we should not be admitted to see Gods face. He it is whom God the Father
has made Strong for Himself* v. 15, 18. Who did stand and feed in the Strength
of the Lord and in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, Micah 5.4. And
as Christ intended to make His Church conformable to Himself; so in some
respect, He would be like to His Church; therefore He would be the Branch, the
Vine, the Fruit of the Earth, and would be brought out of Egypt, v. 8. Math.
2.15. So that Gods dispensations to His Church were Typical of the Messiah in
many things: Therefore also the same Title of a Vine, comprehends both Christ
and His Church; as the Name of Christ is also given to His Mystical Body the
Church, 1 Cor. 12.12.

NOW God the Father has Engaged Himself to be the Husbandman, when Christ
condescends to be the Vine; the Father will and does always manifest His
gracious Presence with Christ as Head of the Church, to Assi^t and Help Him and
Strengthen Him: and out of Respect and Love to the Lord Jesus Christ it is,
that the Father takes any Notice in a way of Pity, Compassion and Grace, of any
Men or Societies of Men upon Earth.

(2.) THE Invisible Church of the Elect are likened to a Vine or Vineyard:
The^^ are the Branches ingrafted into Christ. It is an intellectual Mystical
Vineyard; The Mystical Paradise of God, partly in Heaven, and partly on Earth.
As God Planted an Earthly Paradise in the Garden of Eden, which did excel all
the rest of the Earth; so since the Ruin of Mankind by Adam's Apostasy, God
will have a Remnant among fallen Mankind in every Age and Generation, to be His
Vineyard, Garden, Orchard (or Eden, Eccl. 2.5.) depending on and United unto
Christ, the Second Adam: For God in His Infinite Wisdom so ordered the things
of the first Creation, that they might be Natural Types of what He would do in
the New Creation of all things by Christ.

THE Church is Gods Vineyard, which His Own Right Hand has Planted, v. 8, 15.
It is a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. Planted and Formed for Himself, to show
forth His Praise, Isai. 43.21. Set apart for His Own peculiar Use, Service and
Delight; The Church owns no other Master but Christ, reserves all her fruit for
Him, and keeps faithful to Him. Those Planted into this Vineyard, though by
Nature they are Wild Plants, and of the Wild Olive, yet are made Noble Vines
and a Right Seed, by Effectual Calling and their Implantation into Christ. The
Creating Power of Gods Right Hand is put forth in infusing Grace into them:
Man's Nature brings not forth the fruits of the Spirit without the Skill and
Husbandry of Him that made it: We are therefore called Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor.
3.9. The Seeds of the fruits of Righteousness must be Sown in us by Gods
Spirit, and Grow in us by His Blessin^ (...) so that as Israel were not the
Natives of (...) but God fetched His Vine from a-far off, even from Egypt; So
Grace is not the Natural Growth of our Corrupt Hearts; but is Transplanted into
us from a further Place, even from Heaven. And although the first Planting of
Virtue and Piety in Men be not without some bitterness, (our Inoculation into
Christ is not without Incision;) Yet the Growth of it is Pleasant and the fruit
Sweet, and Wholesome, even as the fruit of the Vine, refreshing the Heart of God
and Man. Variety of precious Graces and ^^rtues are implanted in them which are
all Useful and make them fruitful in Good Works: And as the fruit of the Vine
was used in Sacrifices, so the Good Fruits of Believers are a sweet Smelling
Sacrifice unto God. They are made sensible that they are Weak and Worthless
Creatures in and of themselves, (as a Vine is not Timber fit for Service, Ezekiel.
15.1, 2. Fit for nothing but to be cast into the Fire; unless it bear fruit)
yet being Vines Planted into Christ Himself, the fattest Soil; and
under-propped by the Grace and Spirit of Christ Strengthening and Supporting of
them; and the Excrescencies of Corruption being continually lopped off by their
Careful Vinedresser, Joh. 15.2. And being Watered every Moment from Heaven by
the fresh Influences of the Spirit, Isai. 27.2, 3. They become Plants of
Renown, among whom Christ Loves to Walk: and He delights Himself with the
Observation of the Flourishing of this His Vineyard, Cant. 6.11.

THIS Church of the Elect is the true Israel of God, verse 1. His Peculiar
People on Earth, His Joseph, Gods First born among the Children of Men, to whom
all Church Priviledges belong as their Birthright for their Saving Good: They
are Christ's Flock, v. 1. Gods Benjamin; And like Benjamin, full of Changes,
sometimes a Benoni a Son of Sorrow, and afterward of Joy; The Son of Gods
Right Hand, whom He Loves as dearly as a Man does his Right Hand, or the Apple
of his Eye, whom God is always ready to Lead and Govern by His Right Hand; and
to whom He Swears by His Right Hand that He will be their Preserver, Isai.
62.8. Israel are often called Collectively Gods Son, as Hos. 11.1. And His
First born, as if the whole Multitude of them were One Person, Exodus 4.22, 23.
As here they are compared to One Vine.

(3.) THE Visible Church of God on Earth is Gods Vine. And Gods Transactions
with the Church Visible do Outwardly resemble the Spiritual and Invisible
dealings of God with the Church of the Elect: and there-unto are afforded
Outward Means* and Privileges for the Saving Good of Gods Elect among them.

THIS Visible Church was built upon Christ the Messiah; that first Promise, in
Genesis 3.15. Being the Foundation of the Church and of the whole Worship of God
therein. Christ has seen His Seed in all Ages past, and shall still ^ee His
Seed in all Ages to come. The great Work of God in all Ages is to be Planting
Vineyards or Churches, where there are none; and to Preserve those Churches
which He has already on Earth, and to restore them where they are under
decays. Though Christ's Church on Earth be a Weak and Feeble People, yet He makes
them Strong for Himself, defending them against the Gates of Hell, keeping an
Hedge of Protection about them, and guarding them by Armies of Angels, and so
caring for them that the whole World may discern, that His special Care and
gracious Providence is concerned for their Good, more than for the rest of
Mankind.

AND the Dispensations of God toward Israel in Transplanting them out of Egypt
into Canaan, and Erecting a Church State and Ordinances among them (which the
former part of the Psalm does mention) are in some kind of Similitude acted
over again in New Testament times in all Ages of the Church; and will still be
again acted over while the World continues.

(4.) Particular Churches are the Ministerial Vineyards of Christ, for the
Exercise of Divine Worship, Ordinances, and Discipline, like so many particular
Enclosures under the Inspection of particular Keepers, which make up and
constitute the Visible Catholic Garden of the Church. And each particular
Professor of Religion (whether Sound or Unsound) is a Branch in Christ Visibly,
Joh. 15. And each Christian has a Vineyard (namely his own Soul) to keep and
look after, Cant. 1.6.

2. IN our Text is supposed, That the present State of Gods Vineyard then in
the World, was very Distressed and Calamitons. They were fed with the Bread and
Drink of Tears, and that in great Measure, verse 5. Afflictions and Sorrows
were their constant Diet, so that they could not refrain from mixing Tears with
their Food: Though they had Scarcity of Bread; yet had Trientals, treble Measures
of Tears. [ Shalish,] Notes a Cup four times as big as the usual Cups they
drink in, so that they drank Tears in Flagons, rather than in Cups.

THEY were made a Strife to their Neighbors, verse 6. Their Enemies Strove
among themselves which should make a spoil and a prey of them; and those who
once were Neighbourly and Kind to them, now took occasion to quarrel with them,
and they had now almost as many Enemies as they had Neighbors. Israel, out of
carnal Policy, joined with their Neighbors in false Worship, and refusing to
be Reformed by the Repeated Warnings sent them from God by His Prophets;
therefore (because their Ways pleased not the Lord) God made their Friends turn
to be their Enemies, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48, etc.

AGAIN, Their Enemies Laughed among themselves, verse 6. Made sport of, and
delighted themselves in the Calamities of Israel: So the People of the Earth
make Merry when the Two Witnesses are slain, Rev. 11.10. Sampson was called for
to make Sport for the Philistines, Judge. 16.25. Israel were justly made a
Derision and Hissing among the Nations after they forsook God, Psalm. 44.13, 14.
and 79.4.

AGAIN, The Hedge of Divine Protection was removed, and all that passed by took
liberty to Pluck at them, v. 12. This came to pass as an Accomp^^shment of the
Divine Comminations against them, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Isai. 5.5. Impure and Savage
Nations, fierce and furious Enemies like wild Boars and Beasts, Endeavored to
root up this Vine, and extirpate the true Religion.

THUS Gods Vine was cast as 'twere into the Fire, v. 16. Cut down, and become
like the burning Bush which Moses saw, all in a flame, likely to Perish
utterly, without a Miracle of Mercy prevented its Ruin, and Total overthrow,
v. 16. They Perish at the Rebuke of thy Countenance. And God seemed to be angry
with the very Prayers of His People, v. 4. Though they sought deliverance with
strong Cries and Tears, yet obtained it not: but God in anger delivered them up
into the Hands of their Enemies, Psalm. 39.11. One Frown of Gods Face was (like
the Scorching Wind we had this last Year Aug. 20. 1713.
) sufficient to blast, wither and dry up the tender Plants of His Vineyard.
They hoped that their Prayers would have ascended like Incence and been as a
Sweet Smelling Sav^u^ unto God: But the Smoke of Gods anger against them
discovered that fair flattering Words would not Pacify a Provoked God.

3. IN our Text is set forth the Resolution of the true Israelites, the Remnant
of Sincere Believers yet left in this Vineyard of the Church, Not to give over
Crying to God for Relief and Help; but to persist in Penitential Prayers to Him
even to the last Gasp; resolving to go no where else for Help; and being
Satisfied and fully Convinced that One Look, One Smile, One Visit from Heaven
would suffice to Recover the Vine from its Apostacies and Calamities.

THE DOCTRINE therefore, under which the Text may be Explained is this.

THAT Sincere Believers will Persevere in their Applications to the Lord God of
Hosts (notwithstanding all Repulses given to their former Addresses) for a
Gracious Visit from Heaven to be made unto His (...) upon Earth, as the only
and the Suff^^^ent Rel^ef against Impending Ruin by Sins and Judgments.

THE Plants in this Vineyard of the Church are Reasonable Creatures; and in
Gods Visible Vineyard on Earth in times of greatest Degeneracy, there will in
all Ages be left a Remnant who belong to the Election of G^^ce who being
Effectually Called and Savingly United to Christ the Head and Root of the Vine
(for the Root of this Vine is in Heaven, though the Branch^s while in a Militant
State, are on Earth) These are true Penitents who are Mourners in Zion for the
Iniquities thereof, Gods Remembrancers, who stand in the Gap to keep off
desolating Judgments by their Prayers and Pleadings with God: They will give
God no rest Day or Night, but will plead with Him for Mercy as long as they
have a Tongue, and Breath to Speak; and if their Breath fails, yet will even
then give a Look by Faith toward His Holy Temple in Heaven; and God knows the
Meaning of their broken Sentences when they are almost out of Breath; He knows
the Sense of their Looks and of their Stretched-forth Hands: and though He delay
long, yet graciously Suffers Himself to be overcome at last, and quasi,
Commanded by their Prayers; seeing they will not let Him alone, He yields to
their Importunity, yea He Assists them by His Spirit in Pouring forth their
fervent Prayers, and is so delighted with the Work of His Own Hands in their
Hearts, that He Suffers them, as it were, to govern the whole World by their
Prayers; seeing their Petitions are agreeable to, and coincident with His
Glorious Ends, and designs which He proposes to Himself in Upholding and
Governing all things.

1. LET us Consider the Object to whom their Prayers are directed. The Lord God
of Hosts. GOD the FATHER, SON, and HOLY SPIRIT; who has Supreme Power, who
has all Creatures to Militate under Him, and can easily Vanquish the force of
Enemies. He Sits Chief over the Angelical Cherubims, verse 1. And has His
peculiar Residence in Heaven, v. 14. On whom the Church might depend for
Salvations when all Earthly Helps failed them.

THE Church of the Jews placed all their Hopes in the Messiah (when their Case
was most deplorable,) that at His Coming He would restore all things; And as
God the Father who sent Christ, is called, The Lord of Hosts, Zech. 2.8. So
also is Christ Himself, who was sent by His Father. He sits between the
Cherubims, Noting that His Throne is in the Third Heavens Surrounded with
Angels; yea the Angels themselves partly constitute His Throne, on which He
Sits.

THUS in our Prayers unto God for His Vineyard on Earth, Our Faith ought to be
acted distinctly on God the Father, the Husbandman, Vine-dresser, and Owner of
the Vineyard; On the Lord Jesus Christ, the Root and Head of Influence to His
Church; And on the Holy Spirit, by whom the Father and Son do Work peculiarly
for the good of the Church.

2. THE Matter or Substance of their Petitions.

(1.) Return. Gods promise to dwell in the midst of Israel, was on Condition
that they kept His Precepts, Lev. 26. When they neglected this their Duty, they
were liable to be forsaken of God, Jer. 7. Upon their Apostacies, God withdrew
from them, turned away from them, hid Himself from them, carried Himself as if
He took no Notice of their Afflictions, took no Care of them, and had no
Compassionate Regard to them.

THE Church then Prays here for the Tokens and Evidences of Gods Returning unto
them in a Way of Pity, Favor and Mercy. Its called, Gods Coming to Save them,
verse. 2. Unless God did after a Sort Come from Heaven to Save them by His
Efficacious Presence on Earth, they could not expect to be delivered out of the
Depth of Apostasy and Calamity which they were fallen into.

(2.) LOOK down from Heaven and behold this Vine. Hitherto God seemed to be so
Angry with them that it seemed as if He would not design to Look on them, nor
would give them a good Look, and would not Look after them, as if He cared not
what would become of them.

THE Thing Prayed for then, is, A Gracious Look of Divine Providence, and Look
of Pity and Commiseration, as in Isai. 63.15. Look down from Heaven, and behold
from the Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory: Where is thy Zeal, and
thy Strength, the Sounding of thy Bowels and of thy Mercy toward me? Are they
Restrained? God is said to Look down from Heaven when He Pities their Case, who
are Extremely Afflicted beyond all Measure, and gives them such Remarkable
Help, that None can doubt but that their Deliverance comes from Heaven: Psalm.
102.19. For He has Looked down from the Height^h of His Sanctuary, from the
Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth; to hear the groaning of the Prisoners, to
loose those that are appointed to Death.

SO great is the Insolency and Cruelty of the Enemies of the Church; that
Believers know if they could but prevail with the God of Heaven to turn His
Eyes toward them, and Look upon their Distressed Case, He could not refrain
from Helping and Pitying them, when no Eye is left on Earth to Pity them; and
they know that One Look from Heaven is sufficient to turn their Enemies into
Confusion. When God once said, That (...) had seen the Oppression of Israel,
then Deliverance was not far off, Exodus 3.7, 9.

(3.) VISIT this Vine. I shall chiefly improve the Time remaining, in
Explaining what is meant by the Divine Visit, or Visitation here Prayed for.
And it may perhaps be Pleasant as well as Profitable to those who have Learned
the Hebrew Grammar to hear the Word (...) Explained, which they have often
repeated.

1. OBSERVE, That the Word (...) commonly Notes the Acting of a Superior
toward an Inferior. When Inferiors Visit their Superiors (as Children do
Visit their Parents) it is to Comfort them with their Company, or to receive
Counsel or Reproofs from them, to obtain Direction in their difficult Cases
from their Aged Experience, and to obtain from them Supplies of their Wants:
(And thus Men are said to Visit God when in Trouble, Isai. 26.16.) And to pay
their Duty, and Reverence to their Superiors. But Superiors Visit their
Inferiors in a way of Pity and Care: So the Apostles Visited the Churches, and
the Shepherds Visit their Flocks, to provide for them, and to redress what is
amiss, Jer. 23.2. Now the Visit here Prayed for, is requested of Him who is
called the Shepherd of Israel, v. 1. The great Owner of the Vineyard, who in
and by His Covenant with them had Undertaken the Office of a Shepherd, to Feed,
Lead and Govern them, and to Rectify and Reform what was amiss among them.

2. THE Word (...) is commonly used to Note, the Acting of God toward His
People for their Good.

INDEED sometimes a Day of Divine Visitation signifies, a Day of Calamity and
Destruction which comes upon the Wicked and Impenitent, Isai. 26.14. Hosea 9.7.
As there is a Common Visitation of all Men by a common Death, Numb. 16.29. So
there are more Special and Signal Days of Visitation, by Strange and Unusual
Deaths, and by Desolating Judgments, Isai. 10.3. Jer. 5.9, 29.

BUT in our Text is meant, A Merciful Visit for the Restoration and Recovery of
the Church from Sins and Judgments. Thus God is said to have Visited Hannah,
when She bare Three Sons, 1 Samuel 2.21. And to Visit the Earth, when He Waters
and Enriches it, Psalm. 65.9. The Visit Prayed for is that of a Father afforded
to his Children, which is with Pity and Compassion, with Care and Faithfulness,
as well as with Power to Help them. Such a Visit Joseph promised that God would
give to Israel: Genesis 50.24, 25. God will surely Visit you* and bring you out of
this Land, unto the Land which He Swear to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Exodus 3.16. I have surely Visited you and seen what is done to you. Exodus 4.31.
When they had heard the Lord had Visited the Children of Israel, and that He
had Looked on their Affliction, then they bowed their Heads and Worshipped.

3. A DIVINE Visit oftentimes signifies, A Remarkable, and sometimes a
Miraculous Appearance of God, in bestowing Mercies on His People; or in
Delivering them out of Trouble. A Divine Visitation is Real and Efficacious, an
Actual Accomplishment of Mercy for them; and not a bare Preparation for Action.
The Ordinary, Common Visitation of God does preserve Men's Life and Spirit, Job
10.12. But there are more Special and Peculiar Visits of God afforded to His
People by the more than Ordinary Emanations of the Power, Wisdom, Grace, and
Spirit of God; when their Case, as to Men, Means, and ordinary Helps, seems
desperate.

4. THIS Phrase of Visiting is Especially used to Express the Gracious Actings
of God toward His Church, in and by CHRIST, who is GOD Incarnate. When God
sent His Son into the World to take upon Him the Nature of Man, then God is
said to have Visited His People: Luke 1.68. Through the tender Mercy of our
God, the Day Spring from on High has Visited us, v. 78. What a Wonderful Visit
was this* That He who was God should Visit the Nature of Man, and Advance it
into Union with the Divine Nature!

AGAIN, The Time of Christ's Bodily Presence and Abode on Earth, is peculiarly
called a Day of Visitation, Luke 19.44. Because thou knew not the Time of
thy Visitation. Luke 7.16. A great Prophet is risen up among us, and God has
Visited His People.

5. THAT which the Church hoped would be the Happy Effect of such a Gracious
Visit from Heaven, may be collected from several Requests made in this Psalm.
As,

1. IN General, they hoped for all Manner of Salvations, by such a Visit of the
God of Heaven, v. 2, 3. Visit us, O Lord, and we shall be Saved, then our
Sorrow will be turned into Joy, v. 7, 19.

2. MORE Particularly, Such a Visit would Turn them again, v. 3. i. e. Bring a
Happy Turn upon them, it would cause a Return of their former Prosperous State
unto them: They should thereby be recovered from their fainting Fits, who were
now at Deaths door.

OR thus, Such a Divine Visit will Turn us again to our God by Unfeigned
Repentance, and Recover us from our Apostacies: Visit us, O Lord, and then we
shall be turned unto thee from our Sins, Jer. 31.18. Lam. 5.21.

3. SUCH a Divine Visit will Quick^^ us, v. 18. And Recover us from that Death
which has been upon our Piety and Prosperity: It will make our dry Bones to
come to Life again; It will revive Gods Work, the Work of Religion among us; So
shall we call upon Thy Name, and Worship Thee according to Thy Will, in Spirit
and Truth. So shall we not go back from Thee, v. 18. But a stop will be put to
our Apostasy from God. The Messiah when He Visits us, will Restore all things,
put all things into Order again, will Subdue our Iniquities, and Reform our
Evil ways.

6. LET us Consider Some of those Glorious Operations of God in an Uncommon way
of Mercy, which may bear the Name of such a remarkable Visit of God from
Heaven, afforded to His Vine on Earth.

1. WHEN the God of Hosts works by the Hosts of Heaven, the holy Angels, for
the good of His Vine; That is a remarkable Visit. Thus after Rabshakehs Railing
and Blasphemy, the Churches Enemies were found all dead Corpses, being
destroyed by an Angel. Also when by the holy Angels God stirs up good Motions
in the Hearts of Men, and Spirits them to Engage in, and Perform some work for
God. An Angel assisted Darius in wielding his new gotten Empire, Dan. 11.1.
Angels assisted in raising up and afterward rasing to the ground those mighty
Empires of Persia and Grecia, Dan. 10.13, 20, 21. All which changes on the
Empires were ultimately for the sake and benefit of the Church of God: for God
can readily part even with an Earthly Kingdom, and give it for His Churches
good: So dear and precious is His Vine unto Him: And God has Invisible
State-Ministers (even the Holy Angels) to bring about the Fates of Kingdoms and
Empires.

2. WHEN Suitable Means and Instruments are Unexpectedly raised up and afforded
for the Restoring Religion, Peace and Order to the Church of God on Earth. God
remarkably Visited Israel in raising up Moses, to be their Instrumental
Savior, and in preparing him for Civil Government by a Learned Education; also
in raising up Joseph to be a Father and Shepherd unto Israel in Egypt; So He
raised up Judges in Israel to deliver them, who were filled with the Spirit in
a more than ordinary measure. David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosophat, Hezekiah,
Nehemiah, Ezra, Zerobbabel were raised up to promote Temple-work, and to set
forward the Work of Reformation with all their might. In New Testament times
the Apostles were in an Extraordinary manner acted by the Holy Spirit, and made
willing and able to Undertake that great Work of Gospellizing the World, which
was then overspread with Paganism and Idolatry. In such Instruments Gods
People see the Face of God shining Mercifully upon them.

ALSO when God ordains Praise and Promotes His Own Glory, even by Instruments
as unlikely as Babes and Sucklings, Psalm. 8.2. And by things accounted foolish
by Carnal Men, and things Weak, and Base, and by things which are not, does
confound the Wise and the Mighty, and does bring to naught things which are, 1
Cor. 1.25 -- 29. And by Men of a Modest and Meek Spirit carries on His Work
Succesfully, so that they are not daunted and discouraged from their Duty, by
the browbeatings of Imperious Spirits; which shows that they are Acted and
Assisted by a Spirit beyond their own, and that God is with them of a Truth.

IN such a Day of Divine Visitation God is wont to Communicate Ministerial
Gifts in an Eminent Manner on Gospel Ministers, in Increasing the Number of
Preachers, and Increasing their Abilities, and Increasing their Forwardness and
Diligence in their Work. When God gives the Word, great is the Army of them
that Publish it, Psalm. 68.11. An Army of Laborers are sent forth into Gods
Vineyard when He has a great Harvest to gather in. In such a Day His Spirit is
not merely Given, but Poured forth, in the Gifts of it, most plentifully on
such as are to carry on His Work, Acts 2.16, 17, 18. And they have a Spirit of
forwardness to double their Diligence in the Work of Christ's Kingdom in such a
Day and Season, and to act with more than usual Presence, Courage and Vivacity;
their Hearts being Lift up in the ways of the Lord; They are pressed forwards
and go bound in the Spirit about Gods Work; They set forth with full Sail,
having the fresh Gales of the Wind of Gods Holy Spirit to carry them along
through most Arduous Affairs to promote the Glory of God, and the Good of His
Vineyard: And sometimes even Youths or Young Men are so strengthened with Might
in the Inner Man, as that they faint not in the Work of God. Even in great, and
almost Apostolical Enterprises and Services for God; as in Planting of Religion
where it was not before.

3. WHEN God gives His Vine such a Visit from Heaven, He is wont to give great
Success to the Labors of His Servants whom He Calls and Appoints to Labor in
His Vineyard.

(1.) AT such a time God is wont to make a People Willing to be Reformed, by
the Efficacy of His Spirit on their Hearts. They are made to be of a Teachable
Spirit, and desirous to know and be Instructed wherein they have offended God,
and provoked Him to withdraw from them, and what it is that God would have
them to do, that they may obtain the Returns of His Presence unto them again;
Now Pars est Sanitatis, ^elle Sanari. The Work of Reformation will go on with
delight when the People are generally Willing to be Healed and to Turn from the
Error of their Ways, being Convinced of the Necessity of it to prevent the
Total Ruin of this Vine. It was a Visit of God to the Hearts of the People,
which made them readily to fall in with the Leaders and Rulers in proceeding to
a Public Reformation in the Days of Josiah, Hezekiah, and Nehemiah, so that
they would Excite the Rulers to set about this good Work, and Strengthen their
Hearts and Hands therein, Saying, Arise, this matter belongs unto thee, be
Strong and do it. Where-upon,

(2.) ALL Ranks and Orders of Men that Fear God are made to Unite in Promoting
the Welfare of this Vine, when God thus Visits them from above. Its a
remarkable Work of God to Unite the Hearts of good Men in determining what
ought to be done for the Promoting of Religion, the Reforming of Vice, and
Encouraging Virtue, and in Practicing what they have agreed upon for the good
of the Lords Vineyard; that as they see Eye to Eye, so they draw all one Way;
and readily to bury all lesser Jarrs and Animosities, rather than the Glory of
God and the Work of Christ should be Obstructed or Neglected.

AND in such a time Men of an Inferior Rank have been Signally Animated to
give good Advice and seasonable Reproofs unto Others, so far as became their
Stations: Yea in such a Day of Visitation, even Infants have had such
Impressions on their Hearts as to cry out Hosanna to the Son of David: And
Young Persons on their Deathbeds have been Extraordinarily assisted to give
most wholesome and profitable Warnings and Advice to their Companions, for their
Awakening to Repentance.

(3.) IN order here-unto God has been will not to give His People Remarkable
Warnings, to awaken them out of their Security, to stir them up to Prepare to
meet the Lord: As by many Sudden Deaths, Removal of Aged Christians, Amazing
Fires, Pinching Scarcities, Epidemical Sicknesses, Perplexing Turns in Humane
Affairs; and when God is about to Revive His Work in a particular Place, or
among the Body of a People; He does Sanctify those Warnings, and cause the
Hearts of Men to be deeply Affected with the Dispensations of His Providence;
and to consider that there is no Shelter for them against the Calamities
impending, but only in God; and no Expectation to be Safe and Secure in the
Evil Day, but by making Friends with Heaven, and Maintaining a good
Correspondence with that Friend we have in the Court of Heaven, our blessed
Lord JESUS CHRIST.

(4.) THIS Success of the Laborers in Gods Vineyard consists, in the Upholding
of Religion where it is Set up, and in Planting and Propagating of it to other
Places. It is the good Hand of God Working for His People, which provides
Pastors after His Own Heart for His Church, Successively from Age to Age; so
that when Fathers in the Ministry have left the World, yet the Churches of
Christ on Earth have not been left destitute of Qualifyed Persons to Feed them
with the Bread of Life, and to Lead and Guide them according to the Rules of
the Gospel.

AGAIN, It is a gracious Visit from Heaven that Causes this Vine to Propagate;
so that as People are Multiplied, Churches also should be Multiplied: and more
Ministerial Vineyards and Gardens Enclosed, for our Lord Jesus to take delight
in, and to walk in the midst of.

THAT remarkable Breathing of the Spirit in the Day of a Merciful Visit by the
God of Heaven, which Quickens and Revives Grace in the Hearts of Old Disciples,
does commonly gain home some Others unto Christ, which were not Converted
before: As that Sermon which much Affects an Old Christian, is likely to be a
Means of Converting Sinners unto God. And the Increase of the Church by New
Converts does tend to freshen and quicken Grace in Old Disciples, Cant. 7.12,
13. When the Vineyard flourishes, and the tender Grape appears and the
Pomegranate buds forth, which is a Proof of Christ's Special Presence with His
People, Reviving His Work among them; then the Affections and Delights of
Gracious Souls are abundantly enlarged, and drawn forth after Christ, so that
they want words to Express how dearly they Love the Lord Christ.

AND the Propagation of Religion to Plantations formerly Ungospellized is
Preparatorily attended with the Revival and Fresh Springing up of Religion in
Places where it was before; The Church (like a Mother) has many Thro^s and
Pangs, in order to the bringing forth more Children to her Husband Christ;
Namely, the renewed Exercise of Humiliation and Repentance, and Pleading and
Wrestling with God by Faith in Prayer for the Converting, and Gospellizing of
Other Places; And the fresh Breathings and Pourings out of Gods Spirit on His
People, who make up His Vineyard on Earth, is a Prognostic that Christ has a
Marriage Day at hand, wherein He will Espouse some Other People to Himself,
Even such as knew Him not, and that called not on His Name: and that His
Church, like a flourishing Vine, shall Spread forth its Branches over the Wall,
and Extend it self to those who before were not within the Pale of the Church.

OH! what luculent Evidences of a Visit from Heaven are given forth in Planting
the Gospel in Places where it never was before Settled, so that all must
Confess, Verily God has wrought this, and not Man! When the worst sort of
Sinners are changed into Saints Suddenly and Surprizingly; and of Opposers
become Promoters of Religion. Was it not strange that Israel coming out of
Egypt should be willing to lay themselves under Bond and Covenant-Engagements
to Keep and Obey all Gods Commandments, before they knew in particular what God
would Enjoin them?

AND although in this Age, we expect not Apostles to be raised up, acted by an
infallible Spirit; yet it is Easy to grant that unto remarkable Success granted
to Men in the use of ordinary Means, there is often required a greater
Concurrence of Gods Communicative Power, than in those that are Extraordinary.
The Weakness of Instruments tends to set forth the Greatness of the Power of
God put forth by them.

4. WHEN the Lord God of Hosts Looks down from Heaven and Visits His Vine on
Earth, He does remarkably Remove, Divert, and Overcome the Opposition made to
His Work. The Gates of Hell are always engaged in Opposition to the Gospel
Kingdom, Math. 16.18. The Gospel could never make Entrance on the Kingdom of
Satan, did not God Remove and Divert the Powerful Oppositions made to it. The
Erecting of a Church State among Israel, was like the Creation of a New World,
the Making a New Heaven, and a New Earth, Isai. 51.15, 16. And this was a Day
of Visitation to them. Hence its said, Heb. 3.7. To Day if you will hear his
Voice, etc. Sometimes remarkable Rebukes are given by Frights and Terrors of
Conscience to Restrain those Labans, who would stop Gods Jacobs in their
Purposes to build Altars to the Lord, and Set up His Worship. There is
sometimes a Day of Judicial Visitation, wherein the Chaff, Briars, Thorns and
Weeds; the Sticks and Stones, which offend the Vines, and hinder their growth,
are Picked up and thrown out of this Orchard and Garden of the Lord; Those who
are obstinately bent to oppose Gods Work, God has a Day wherein to Remove
them, and by terrible things in Righteousness does sometimes answer the Prayers
of His People for the flourishing of His Vine on Earth, Psalm. 65.2. Also God
does Restrain the Wrath, Bound and Limit the Malice of His Enemies, and
Disappoint their Crafty Projects whereby they Endeavor to Circumvent, Prevent,
and Obstruct all good Designs. The Wisdom of God herein, is in these Latter
Ages especially Exerted rather than His Power. And the astonishing Hardness of
Heart judicially inflicted on some at such a time, is also a sign that it is a
Day and Season of a Divine Visitation. When there be Instances of some that are
Provoked, Enraged, Tormented by that Word which Converts Others, Rev. 11.10.
Who are cut to the Heart to see the Gospel flourish and the Kingdom of Christ
prevail; and who do grow worse under all Divine Cultivations; that Sentence is
past upon them, He that is Unjust and Filthy, Let him be so still, Rev. 22.11.
The Preremptory Opposition which such make to the Ways and Truths of God is a
proof that their Consciences are scorched with it.

5. IN such a Day of Divine Visitation of the Vineyard, God is will not to Prune
and Lop off the Exuberancies and Excrescencies of the good Vines, which hinder
their Growth and Fruitfulness. God Sanctifies those Afflictions to them which
He Exercises His Vineyard with, to Humble them and to cause Grace to take the
deeper Root down-wards in their Hearts, that they may bring forth more and
better Fruits Upwards. Some forward Humoursome Saints, after God has taken
them in hand, and Pruned and Purged them by Afflictions, do become very Humble,
Patient, Meek and Holy Christians: Others almost ruined by a Worldly Spirit,
after Divine Purgations become of a Public Spirit, and forward to do Service
for God; The Contentious are made Peaceable, yea become Peacemakers; and the
Selfish made Generous, and the Slow and Dull and Sluggish Christian quickened
and made forward and ready to every good Work. At such a Time when there is a
Revival of Religion by gaining New Converts unto Christ, Aged Christians are
wont to Experience a New and Second Conversion in their Souls, wherein the
whole Work of Repentance and Faith is Repeated and Exercised over again in them.

6. SUCH a Visit from Heaven for the Reviving and Reforming of Gods Vine on
Earth, is attended with Remarkable Preservations, Deliverances and Outward
Prosperity. The Fence and Hedges about the Vineyard are anew Repaired. The
Church (yea the World) always fares the better, even in Outward respects, when
Religion Revives, and when this Vine does flourish. Never any Plantation or
Nations fared the worse for having Gods Vineyard Planted among them.

7. WHEN the Lord of Hosts does in Mercy give His Vineyard on Earth a Visit, He
does not tarry with them merely for a Night as a Traveller and a Wafaring Man,
but Makes His Abode with them. He grants them Days, yea Years of His gracious
Visitation and Presence with them, Hos. 9.7. Jer. 11.23. He does not merely
come Once to look upon His Vine; but Often Returns to Set things in order that
it may flourish; He gives forth Repeated Effusions of His Spirit, and renewed
manifestations of God in His Glory, when He is resolved to build up Zion, and
to have His Work carried on to Effect. God will not suffer His tender Plants to
be Nipt in the Bud, though Satan Endeavor it by His Power and Stratagems.

8. WHEN He who is called the Desire of all Nations does come and Visit His
Vine, and cause it to Spread and Propagate, there are usually great
Concussions, Convulsions, and Shakings among the Nations; God then Shakes the
Heaven and the Earth, the Sea and the Dry Land; and proportionably in a lesser
degree, the Planting and Propagating of Religion in any dark Corner of a Land
is not without Convulsions among them ordinarily.

BUT it is time to Proceed to some APPLICATION.

(...) us all be Exhorted to Endeavor by Prayer, and all ^^her Proper Means to
Obtain such a Visit from the Lord God of Hosts unto His Vine, which His Own
Right Hand has Planted in this Land.

LET us Consider,

1. THAT Nothing short of such a Divine Visitation can Recover the Church from
Apostacies and Calamities. All the Power of Men and Angels, cannot turn a
Degenerate Plant into a Noble Vine, nor Recover a Degenerate Church, nor Revive
Dying Religion. The use of other Means of Gods Appointment, will avail nothing
'till God Himself do come down from Heaven by His Gracious Efficacious
Presence, to work with us, by us, in us, and for us. Indeed God accepts of the
good Will and Desires of His People, and of their Weak Endeavors to do what
they can for the Promoting His Kingdom and Interest on Earth, and we have
reason to be ashamed of our Slothfulness and Backwardness to do what we might
do in our several Capacities to Promote Virtue and Holiness (for who knows but
that God would as it were Step down from Heaven, to work with us, and by us, if
we did Strenuously Engage in His Work?) But the Virtue and Power of Man is
Weakness it self, yea, Nothing; It is God who brings all to pass, which is done
for the good of His Vine. Act. 3.12. Paul may Plant and Apollo may Water, but
God alone gives the increase. When Israel by their Sins had ripened themselves
for Ruin, the Judgments of God came upon them, even in those times wherein
they had Godly Rulers, and good Kings, and extraordinary Prophets, who used
utmost Endeavors to Reform them, and so to prevent Impending Judgments from
being Executed upon them; Vain then is the Help of Man to Save us from Sins and
Judgments: If God forsake a People they are Undone, and their Case becomes as
desperate as if they were already cut down and cast into the Fire, v. 16. When
a People are Entered into a way of Apostasy and Backsliding from God, though at
first their Motion be slow and gradual, yet at length they (like the Possessed
Swine) run down hill violently and grow worse and worse in a little time:
Facilis Descensus Averni. What a Multitude fell away to Idolatry in Rehoboam's
time? How many did Mahomet Seduce in a little time? Sometimes the Apostasy
(which is a sort of Conspiracy against Religion) prevails to such a height as
to carry all before it; In such a time Iniquity abounds and none dare or care
to oppose it: and none but God can stop Men in their Career of Sin, and turn
them back from their Evil Courses; their Hearts being fully set in them to do
Evil; None but God can turn them about and cause them to set their Faces to
Seek the Lord God of their Fathers.

2. IT is the Absence and Withdrawing of God from His Vineyard, that is the
Reason why all things are out of Order therein. When the Master and Owner of a
Garden is long absent, Fences and Hedges soon decay, and the Garden and Orchard
yields little Fruit for want of Digging, Pruning, Weeding and other good
Husbandry, which the Masters Eye and Presence would from time to time carefully
bestow upon it. The Sins of Gods Visible People Provoke Him to hide Himself
from them, yea to forsake His Vineyard; we first forsake God by our Sins,
before the Lord forsake us; and when we loose the gracious Presence of God, we
soon loose both our Piety and Prosperity. How soon will ill Weeds spring up and
grow a-pace in the Vineyard, and have remarkable Success in Promoting an
Apostasy from God; and all Attempts for Reformation are unsuccessful, when God
is departed from Israel. The Means of Grace are Evanid when the Spirit of God
is withdrawn. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Ye cannot Prosper, because ye have forsaken the
Lord, He has forsaken you: After Israel forsook the Lord, He deprived them of
skilful Pilots to direct them, of Pious Priests to intercede for them; the
destroying Angel arrested them and delivered them up, to the Fowls of the Air,
and Beasts of the Field; and the Land of Canaan which God gave their
Forefathers was delivered up to the most wicked of the Heathen; first to the
Romans, then to the Saracons, and at last to the barbarous Turks: and because
they rejected Christ, the Light of the World, are Judicially given up to grope
in the very Sunshine of the Gospel, like blind Men that cannot see a beaten
Path.

3. CONSIDER, That the Return of the Lord God of Hosts, in a way of Mercy to
Look down from Heaven and Visit His Vine in and by the Son of His Right Hand,
is Sufficient to Recover His People from the Lowest depths of Apostasy from
God, and from the worst of Miseries and Calamities. God can o every thing; with
Him all things are possible; Nothing is too hard for God. One Look and Visit of
this Great Physician heals the worst and most incurable Maladies. He can open
the blind Eyes, mollify the hardest Hearts, and heal the most grievous
backslidings of His People. He may at all times say, Veni, vidi, vici. When the
Lord is pleased to pour out of His Spirit abundantly upon a People and rain
down Righteousness upon them; when He waters it from above with the fresh
influences of His Spirit, then the Vine shall revive and spring up as the
Grass. When God comes to us from Heaven, and brings much of Heaven with Him to
His People on Earth, then they shall be Saved, verse. 3, 7, 19. Where Christ
comes, Salvation comes; so He said to Zacheus, This Day is Salvation come to
thy House; The Lord never comes empty handed; wherever He sets up His Throne,
His Train fills the Temple, He brings a Train of Mercies with Him for Soul and
Body; There I will meet with thee and bless thee. Gods Meeting with His People
never goes alone, without bestowing blessings upon them.

4. CONSIDER, After what Manner we should Pray for such a Divine Visit.

(1.) WE should Pray Humbly and Penitently. We should be deeply sensible of our
Unworthiness that the Lord of Hosts should give us so much as one good Look, or
that He should come under our Roofs; and that it is infinite Condescension in
the High and Lofty One, to come and dress our Wounds, and bind them up for us;
seeing our Sins deserve that the Lord should cast us off for ever: We should
Mourn for our Sins whereby we have Provoked the Eyes of His Glory to turn away
from us; and have provoked Him to stop His Ears against our Cries, and to hide
His Face from us and to frown upon us with the Rebukes of His Countenance.
However, we should humbly spread before Him our Lamentable State, our decays in
Grace and Fruitfulness, that the Vineyard goes to decay and is almost dead; and
we should spread before Him our Miseries and Distresses, that we are Undone,
without His Helping Omnipotent Hand be put forth for the Revival of Religion;
We should Prostrate our Selves at the Feet of Divine Mercy, resolving if we
Perish, that it shall be in the Posture of Penitent Supplicants at the Throne
of Grace for the Returns of Gods Mercy to us. Who knows but that the Merciful
God who heard the gronings of Israel, Exodus 1.24. and had respect to them; will
also be moved to Compassionate our Case?

(2.) OUR Prayers should be conjoined with Holy Purposes and Endeavors to
Reform our Evil Ways, by the Help of God. Would we have the Great GOD come and
Visit our Hearts, and our Houses, and our Churches, we should then Prepare for
His Coming, by cleansing our Hearts, Houses and Societies, from all that is
filthy and ungrateful to Him; from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit: Put all
things in Order, if we intend that the King of Glory should come in and walk
and dwell among us. Let us find out what the Sins are which keep God at a
distance from us, which Separate between our God and us, and Provoke Him so
much, that He will not give us a good Look. We should cease from doing Evil,
and learn to do well, that so the Lord without diminution of the Glory of His
Holiness, may Return unto us in Mercy. Those who continue Obstinate Sinners and
hate to be Reformed, instead of Praying in a Right manner to the Lord to Return
to us, do practically say to the Almighty, Depart o^^ of our Coasts. How dare
any but the truly Contrite put up this Prayer in our Text, That God would Look
from Heaven and behold them, and their behaviors? Those who are going on in a
Course of Sin, care not that a God of Infinite Holiness should behold and
observe their Wickedness.

(3.) OUR Prayers for a Divine Visit should be Fervent and Importunate. Wrestle
with God in Prayer, take no denial at His Hand: Oh! let us Cry mightily to
Heaven for One Good Look more, the Smiles of His Countenance upon us, and that
He would Return to us and leave a blessing behind Him; Plead with God, Lord,
Have Thou no Mercy in Store for this Generation? Have Thou Utterly cast off and
abhorred them? Art Thou resolved not to bestow of Thy Spirit upon them? etc.
But How shall we plead in Prayer for such a Visit?

1. PLEAD we for the Sovereign Grace of God to be Exerted toward us, that
which is undeserved by us, and for which we can make no Recompense: Let us
Plead thus, O Lord, will it not Glorify Thy Sovereign Grace and Mercy, to
Revive Thy Work among such a Degenerate People, to remove the Iniquity of our
Land in One Day? Zech. 3.9. Will not that be a Glorious Days work indeed? Will
not the Lord gain as much Glory to His Great Name, by Pardoning our Sins,
giving us Repentance, and by Pruning and Purging His Vineyard, as He can gain
to His Justice by giving us up to our own Hearts Lusts, thereby to ripen our
Selves for Ruin?

2. LET us Plead for a Divine Visit, in the Name and for the Sake of the Son of
Man, the Son of Gods Right Hand; who is the Root and Head of the Vine, yea most
properly He is the Vine it Self. Let us Exercise Faith in our Lord Messiah, our
Great Friend in the Court of Heaven, to Intercede with God for us, that such a
gracious Visit from Heaven may be afforded unto us on Earth. The Reason why
Christ did no mighty Works in some Places, during His Bodily Presence on Earth,
was because of their Unbelief, who dwelt in those Places; Let us strive against
Unbelief and Labor for a Lively Exercise of Faith on the Promises of the
Covenant and on Christ in the Promises; for God has engaged to Return again to
His People when they Return to Him, and Seek Him with their whole Hearts: So in
Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my Reproof; and then Behold (beyond your deserts, and
beyond your hopes, and to your Admiration) I will pour out my Spirit upon you.
Let us plead that Promise made by God the Father unto Christ, That He shall see
His Seed, or have a Visible Vine upon Earth in all Ages, notwithstanding all
the Power and Policy of Hell whereby it is opposed. Let us plead the Interest
which the Lord Christ has in the Church on Earth, and the Glory that redounds
to Christ the Mediator, by the Preserving, Propagating and Flourishing of His
Vineyard on Earth: It is the only Garden, Orchard (or Eden) which Christ has
on Earth, wherein He takes delight to Walk, and Recreate Himself.

3. LET us plead with God that it is the Vineyard, which His Own Right Hand
has Planted, v. 8, 15. It is such a Work, wherein the Glorious Power of Gods
Own Right Hand appears in every Age, to Plant Religion where it was not, and to
Preserve it where it has been Planted* and to Revive it where it is Decayed
and Languishing. Let us then plead with God that He would not forsake the Work
of His Own Hands, That that Work (which above all other Works He appropriates
to Himself, to be His Own Work) may appear to His Servants; that Work which He
is pleased to call His Glory, may appear to the Children of His Servants; that
Work of Establishing Religion among us, which is the Beauty and Comeliness of
the Lord our God put upon us; may flourish more and more as an Evidence of a
Divine Visit granted unto us Psalm ^^ 6.17 Let us plead with God and put Him in
Remembrance of this, That it is the great End and Design of Divine Providence
in disposing of Kingdoms, and in all the Turns and Fates that attend them, to
promote the good of His Vine upon Earth; and were it not for Gods Vineyard upon
Earth, what would the whole World be but an Hell upon Earth. Where Religion
flourishes, all other good Interests Prosper: But as Religion decays, so a
People may conclude that things will go ill with them. This Vineyard of the
Lord on Earth He has an Eye and Regard to, in all other of His Works, and as
it were lays aside all other Works, that He may Mind the good of His Vine; Yea
He dispences Blessings, and Curses to Men, according to that regard or
disregard which they have to His Vineyard on Earth. Genesis 12.3. I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee. Let us then plead with
God thus, Lord, Thou know how few there be in the World that Fear Thy Name,
that Profess Religion, that bring Honor to God their Creator, to Christ their
Redeemer; Thou have reserved to Thy Self but a Little Spot of Ground on Earth
to be Thy Garden Enclosed; and all the Rest of the World are suffered to go on
in their Own Ways to Thy Dishonor; and will Thou not Stand by those that Stand
for Thee? Will Thou not Honor them that Honor Thee? Shall Satan prevail and
leave Christ no Garden-Spot on Earth to Walk in? For Thy Name Sake, Let it not
be so!

5. CONSIDER, Some Motives to Excite us in our Prayers to God for such a
Gracious Visit. We have the Command of God given forth to us, to put up this
Petition Daily, Thy Kingdom Come! Unto which Command we should manifest our
ready Obedience. We have the Example of the Church in our Text set before us
for our Imitation, to Pray for the Lords Vineyard the Church, when under
greatest Distresses and Degeneracies. We have the Promises and Prophecies of
the Scripture, wherein Mercy is Stored up for the People of God; we have the
Predictions of the future Glory of the Church, and some Pledges of it before
Hand, Psalm. 72.6, 7, 8. In the Days of Christ the True Solomon, The Righteous
shall flourish, there shall be abundance of Peace, He shall have dominion from
Sea to Sea, and from the River to the Ends of the Earth. The taking down the
Partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles whereby the Vine of the Church was
made to spread its branches over the Wall; did not take in the whole World into
the Lords Vineyard, at Once; but there is still a distinction to be made
between the Church and the rest of the World which lies in Wickedness; between
a Religious People by a Visible Profession, and the rest of the World that are
Perishing for want of Vision; therefore Gods dealings with some particular
Nations and People may yet in times to come resemble His Dispensations toward
Israel, in taking them to be a Select People to Himself, in Forming them to be
a People peculiarly for Himself to show forth His Praise, by Erecting His
Visible Kingdom in all the Privileges, Ordinances and Worship thereof among
them. Let us then be moved to Pray in Faith, and with Hope and Expectations of
the Glorious Things which are Spoken of, concerning Zion the City of our God.

ANOTHER Motive may be turned into an Expostulation with our own Souls. Are we
Willing that Gods Mystical Paradise, His Garden of Pleasure upon Earth should
be quite Defaced, Razed and Extinguished? Are Aged Christians willing that
Religion should dye with themselves? No sure, we dare not harbor such Cruelty
in our Hearts! Let us then Cry mightily to God for the Preservation of His
Vineyard, that Religion may be Propagated to the Succeeding Generation, by new
Descents of the Lord God of Hosts from Heaven, by new and plentiful Effusions
of His Spirit on all Flesh! We cannot find in our Hearts, to be willing that
Religion should take its flight from our Land, or that the Vineyard of Christ
here should be under a Divine Dereliction! Let us then Cry fervently to God to
Revive His Work among us in the Midst of the Years: that it may not be charged
on us, that we by our Luke* warmness, and Slothfulness and other Sins
Contributed to the Ruin of these Churches, and drove away the gracious
Presence of God from this His Vineyard.

LET me add Another Motive; Namely, That we might Enjoy more of Heaven upon
Earth were it not our own Faults. We might have more Visits from the Lord God
of Hosts and the Man of His Right Hand, did we fervently Pray for them; For
Christ has promised to give His Holy Spirit to those that Ask it of Him; What
God has wrought by some Glympses of His Gracious Aspect from Heaven in some
Persons, Families and Plantations for the Reviving of Religion, demonstrates
what He could and would do more generally and abundantly, when there is a
general Application in a right manner made to Him for this Mercy. May we not
esteem it a good Omen that the God of Hosts will lengthen out the Day of His
gracious Visitation unto us (unless by our Apostacies persisted in we refuse
His Company) even in this Century also, seeing He has so ordered in His
Providence, that this New and Famous House should be Erected, wherein we now
Assemble, in the Metropolis of our Province, for that best of Uses, the
Celebration of Divine Worship; and that this House should with such Expedition
and Success be Completely finished, in a Day of many and great Distresses upon
us, whereby Occasion has been given to many to show their Love to God and His
House by their Liberal Donations toward this Building; withal Exercising their
Faith and Hope that God will still build up His Mystical House and Vineyard in
this Land, and that in this House we shall Enjoy much of Heaven upon Earth, the
Manifestations of God to our Souls, and those delights appropriated to His
Mystical Paradise.

6. AND Lastly, Consider, Who they are that should more especially concern
themselves for the Obtaining such a Visit from Heaven to be made to His
Vineyard upon Earth, and more particularly to the Vine which the Lord of Hosts
by His Own Right Hand, (working by remarkable Providence) has Planted in this
Wilderness. Now all Sorts of Men are Ranked into Rulers and Subjects: and
something might Pertinently be Spoken from this Subject to them all.

AS to those in Chief Rank among us in the State and in the Church, My Innate
Modesty forbids me, to say much; Yet I shall not wholly Pretermit the usual
Custom of saying something with suitable Brevity.

AND in the First Place, My Speech may be directed to His Excellency, Our
Governor in Chief, who has been betrusted with the Care of the Lords Vineyard
in this Land for many Years past.

EXCELLENT SIR, We Acknowledge the great Mercy and Kindness of our GOD, who
has moved the Heart of the QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty, to Empower and
Improve Your Excellency, to Lead, Guide and Govern us; and that the Lord has
Preserved Your Life hitherto, and Your Abilities of doing Eminent and
Remarkable Services for His Vineyard, in defending it against the Boars and
Wild Beasts of Heathen Adversaries, and our other Neighboring Enemies, during
the late Long War; and in Managing the Civil Affairs of this Province so as
that the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts therein has Enjoyed Tranquillity
hitherto; and in giving forth Proclamations and Exhortations to Your People
here from time to time to Excite and Encourage them to Set about the Work of
REFORMATION; and in Countenancing and Encouraging the Propagation of Religion,
the Planting it in the dark Corners of our Land, and the Upholding of it where
it was Planted. We heartily render our Thanks to Your Excellency for these
Favors; and believe Your Excellency does Esteem it Your Glory, and a
Sufficient Reward of it Self, that the Lord of Hosts is Pleased to Accept of
such Your Desires and Endeavors to Promote the Flourishing of His Vineyard in
this Land: and that on th^se Accounts All the Churches of this Province Salute
You; and Pray for You^ Prosperity. God grant we may have always such a
GOVERNOR, who like Moses is daily Lifting up his Hands and Heart to GOD in the
Heavens, for the Prosperity of these Churches: For the Fervent Prayers of
Rulers keep off dismal Strokes from a People.

NEXTLY; TO the Honorable Members of Her Majesty's COUNCIL, and of the House
of Representatives: I would only add, That as You have hitherto, so We trust
you will still, hold on and continue in your Pious Endeavors to Promote the
Flourishing of Religion in this Land, the Suppression of Vice, the
Encouragement of Virtue, the regulating of Disorders, the Composing of
Differencies, that Arise; that you may be able to say, That All that could be
done by Men in your Stations, according to the best of your Abilities, for the
good of this Vine, You have Endeavored to be found in the Performance thereof:
May the Lord God of Hosts Accept of your Endeavors, and give them Success
through His blessing upon them!

THIRDLY; TO My Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry: I take leave in
all Humility to say, That when the Lord of Hosts intends a Remarkable Visit to
His Vine on Earth, He is wont to Raise up Ministers and fill those that are the
Standing Ministry in His Churches, in a more than Common Measure with His Holy
Spirit; so that they are carried forth with more than usual Courage,
Forwardness, Diligence and Activity in their Station, for the Restoring and
Preserving Religion in their several Charges; they have at such a time peculiar
Impressions from Above, both as to the Subjects they are to handle, and as to
the manner of treating of them; Their Faculties and Abilities are quickened and
enlivened, their Ministerial Gifts and Graces Enlarged, their good Affections
and Zeal Increased, and their Watchfulness over their Flocks to Promote their
Spiritual Good more abundant than before; and a Spirit of Prayer is in such a
Day of Visitation Poured out upon the Ministry in a High Degree, and the Bent
of their Souls is to Promote Religion, to Convert and Edify Souls, and they are
made Resolute in this Work, to Pursue and Prosecute it, notwithstanding all the
Oppositions and Discouragements that attend them therein. And they are forward
and ready to Reform whatever is amiss in themselves, that they may become
Patterns to the Flocks of Christ, Exemplary in Good Works, and as Shining
Lights in a dark World. Blessed be God who has Supplied His Churches with such
a Ministry hitherto; and let us all Cry to Heaven that such a Ministry may be
continued unto these Churches Successively; and that God will be pleased to
Accompany their Labors with His blessing.

FOURTHLY; TO Aged Christians: Give me leave to say; You are the Peculiar
Friends and Ancient Acquaintance of the God of Heaven, who are yet left on
Earth; Oh! therefore Improve your Interest in God to Prevail with Him to Look
down, and Come down, and Visit this His Vine!

FIFTHLY; TO the Churches of New England: who have been and are yet the
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, who enjoy the Privileges of His Visible Kingdom
the Tokens of His Presence, the Ordinances of His House; and in that respect
have from the first Founding of our Churches, and first Planting of this
Vineyard, enjoyed a Day of Divine Gracious Visitation; and although we have
Experienced great Decays and Declensions, the loss of our First Love, and the
Withdrawings of Gods Spirit; so that the Churches sometimes Complain of their
Barrenness, that Few are Converted and New Born to Christ, and the Work of
Christ is sometimes under Sensible and Visible Languishments; yet we have
reason to Bless God who gives some Revivals of His Work, sometimes in One
Church, and sometimes in Another; and from thence should be Encouraged to plead
with God for a more General Effusion of His Spirit upon all His Churches, that
all Parts of His Vineyard may Flourish; even the dark Corners of our Vineyard,
that they may have Wisdom to Know the Day of their Visitation, and to Accept of
the Gospel Offered to them, and bid Welcome to Our Lord Jesus Christ, who
Offers to come and dwell among them; lest they should Provoke God to Visit them
in Judgment and Fury.

LASTLY; TO Impenitent Sinners and Hypocrites: Let me say, What will you do in
the Day of Visitation? For when God gives His Vineyard a Visit in Love, in
order to its Fruitfulness; Oh! what danger are they in who are as Dry and
Withered Branches; they are as Thorns and Briars in the Vineyard, that hinder
the Flourishing of Religion in the Places where they Live? They may justly
expect to be plucked up by the Roots, Cut down and Cast into the Fire; unless
speedy Repentance and Reformation prevent it.

Having thus after my Weak manner, given you the Explication of the Text, with
some Application, as by Divine Leave and Help, Let us all as One Repeat it in
way of Supplication; Return, we beseech Thee, O God of Hosts: Look down from
Heaven, and behold, and Visit this Vine.

FINIS.

