THE American Defense Of The Christian Golden Rule, Or An Essay to prove the
Unlawfulness of making Slaves of Men.

By him who Loves the Freedom of the Souls and Bodies of All Men, John Hepburn.

Printed in the Year 1715.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader;
IT is not singularity or Ostentation that I appear in Print, but my Christian
Duty, in Honor to God, and the Salvation and well being of the souls of men,
in the Detection of the Antichristian Practice in making Slaves of them who
bear the Image of God, viz. their fellow, Creature, Man; A Practice so cruel
and inhumane, that the more it is thought upon by judicious men, the more they
do abhor it; It being so vile a contradiction to the Gospel of the blessed
Messiah.

And if our Negro-Masters were put to it, to bring an Instance that a man
denied the Christian Faith, I think they could not bring a stronger Instance,
then that he was found in the Practice of making Slaves of men. And
furthermore, I doubt not, but this may be to some a very unwelcome Theme, and
they would wonder to find their beloved Deti^ah, the making Slaves of Negros,
and others rejected, although the more moderate Christians do full well know,
that. I (...) the Truth on my side. And if these Lines should come to the
Island of Great Britain (my native I and) I hope the sincere Christians there
of all Sects will commend my Christian care, in detecting so gross a corruption
as this, crept in by reason of the Fa^e and Gains it brings to our American
Christians; And I hope the learned Christians there will admonish their
American Brethren, for putting such an Affront upon the ever blessed Messiah,
and his glorious Gospel as this their Practice does, in making Slaves of Men.

This Practice cannot but be very offensive to sincere and honest hearted
Christians, that this Practie should be heard among the Heathen, to harden them
in such heathenish Practices.

And now, Reader, I am going to show thee a Wonder, and that is, this thirty
years that I have been in America, this Practice has been carried on almost in
profound silence, which it is like the Negro-Masters will take it the harder to
be opposed now. It is true, John Tillotson of Canterbury has two Sermons in
print concerning Restitution, and he tells them there, that they cannot have
Admittance into Heaven without making Restitution of the wrong done to there
fellow Creatures. And if this be applied to the wrong done to Negroes, I have
Bishop Tillotson on my side. This and many other excellent things have dropped
from the Pen of that (in many things, no doubt, an) excellent man.

And Cotton Mather calls the Inslaving of Negroes, A crying Sin in the Land.

And George Fox printed against this Practice, and sent it to the
Barbadoes-Quakers. Such was the early care of this excellent man above forty
years ago; But his Christian Admonition was rejected. It is true, there are
some excellent souls among them still, who came out of Old England, that have
kept their Integrity, namely John (...), Thomas Chalkley, and others, who when
they see this Abomination acted by their American Brethren, they openly bear
Testimony in their public Assemblies, and declare against it (as I am credibly
informed) There was another Paper Printed by (I think) G. Ke^th his Party at
Philadelphia; and half a Sheet was printed against this Practice at London,
called the Athenian Oracle, But the most of all those writings I doubt are
destroyed by Negro-Masters, that the Reader will find them almost as scarce to
be found as the Phoenix Egg. And last-of all, I have appeared against this
Practice although I have lain dormant above th^^ thirty years; for the which I
acknowledge my Failure before God and man, and (...) desire forgiveness of God,
and next I desi^^ the forgiveness of man; for the reason that I was silent so
long, because I waited for my ^etters to undertake the work; and i^ (...) had
appeared in this Work, it is like I ha^^ been silent still.

Now whether they will hear or forbear for the future, I hope to be clear of
their Blood, and if they will not repent and ma^^ Restitution, I cannot help
it; for I have faithfully warned them of their Danger; For (...) earnestly
contended for the Truth, and honestly declared against this Enriching Sin, in
making Slaves of Men. And now I think to end my Preface as I began it, and that
is, I chiefly design the Honor of God, and next the Welfare and Salvation of
Souls. If happily I might be instrumental to deter any one Soul from being
caught with this enriching Sin, or instrumental of the Repentance o^
Restitution made by one Soul that is and already guilty, then I desire they
should give God the Glory, and I make no Question in having my Reward.

And now to find the Longitude,
Many a Man has gone about,
But the Perpetual Motion,
Our Negro Masters have found out.
New Jersey, 1 st Month, 1714 John Hepburn.

The American Defense Of The Christian Golden Rule.
Argument the First.
THe more a Man becomes conformable to the Attributes of God, the more just and
holy he is, and the more beloved of God, and consequently a more perfect
Christian.

First, then, God has given to man a FreeWill, so that he is Master of his own
Choice (whether it be good or evil) and will in no way force and compel the
Will of man; yea, not unto that part which is good, far less unto evil,
notwithstanding his Attribute of Omnipotence. And seeing then, it is thus with
God and his Creatures, we ought also to do so by our fellow mortals, and
therefore we ought not to force and compel our fellow creatures, the Negroes,
Nay, not although we judge it for them a better way of living; For when we
force their will, this is a manifest Robbery of that noble Gift their bountiful
Creator has given them, and is a right down Contradiction to the aforesaid
Attributes of God, and consequently an Antichristian Practice And so, those
that oppose God and his Attributes, they may expect to incur his Displeasure;
So they may find a pregnant Instance in Pharaoh and his Egyptian Taskmasters.

2 dly. This Practice contradicts Christ's command, who commanded us, To do to
all men as we would they should do to us, or as we would be done by. Now the
buying and selling of the Bodies and Souls of Men, was and is the Merchandise
of the Babylonish Merchants spoken of in the Revelations. Now the Tyranizing
over and making Slaves of our Fellow Creatures, the Negroes, every one knows,
or may know, this is not the way they would be done unto.

Now, I have shown you, first, That this Practice opposes God and his
Attributes, and 2 dly, That it opposes Christ and his Command; And what is this
in Effect but to bid Defyance, and to live in Opposition to Christ and his
Gospel? and if so, it is a high Degree of an Antichristian Life and Practice.

And now, my beloved Friends, who are concerned in this Practice, as you love
the Welfare of your immortal Souls, I entreat you (for it is for your sakes I
labor) not lightly to look over these considerations, if ye think to receive a
Reward for the Deeds done in the Body; For how will ye answer when ye are
brought before Gods Tribunal, and there appear naked and bear before the Son of
Man, if ye have lived and dyed in Opposition to his everlasting Gospel, for the
confirmation of which, for our Sakes, cost him his precious Life, and now for a
little worldly Interest, got in Opposition to Christ and (...) Gospel, by the
Bondage and Inslaving of Negroes; the very Reading of which is enough to make
all Hearts concerned to tremble. The very thoughts of this makes me declare,
for all the Riches and Honors of this world, I would not be found in this
Antichristian Life and Practice.

3 ly, I have showed before, That GOD, who is no respecter of persons, has
given to all men a Freedom of their Wills, to pitch upon their own choice, for
both Soul and Body, which are the only parts, next unto the Life, the free
donation of our heavenly Father, in this terrestrial world; But it would seem
by the Negro-Masters Practice and Arguments, that God did miss the matter, by
his Wisdom, when he gave the Negros (his Creatures) the Freedom of their Wills;
but our Negro-Masters have found out, by their Inginuity, how to mend this
(seeming) Defect, in two respects, to wit, that is to rob them of their
Freedom, and make them Bondslaves and their Posterity forever. And in the next
place, they can highly enrich themselves by the Bargain; by the unparallelled
and never enough lamented Bondage and Slavery of those poor Creatures and handy
work of God, And can afford to keep themselves with white hands, except at some
Times they chance to be be sparkled with the Blood of those poor Slaves, when
they fall to beating them with their twisted Hides and Horse-whips, and other
Instruments of Cruelty, too barbarous here to relate, all done in the name of
their deservings and correction. And furthermore, they can afford (by their
beloved Diana, their Slaves) to go with fine powdered Perriwigs, and great
bunched Coats; and likewise keep their Wives idle ( Jezebel^^ like) to paint
their Faces, and Puff, and powder their Hair, and to bring up their Sons and
Daughters in Idleness and Wantonness, and in all manner of Pride and
Prodigality, in deek^ng and adorning their Carcasses with pufft and powdered
Hair, with Ruffles and T^p-knots, Ribbands and Lace, and gay Clothing, and
what not; All, and much more, the miserable Effects produced by the Slavery of
Negroes; and their Slaves in the ^^lest Rags, much ado to cover their
nakedness, and many of them not a Shirt upon their Backs, and some of them not
a Shoe upon their Foot in cold Frosts and Snow in the Winter Time, that many of
them have their Feet and other members frozen off, by reason of their Cruel
Usage; and some of them must lie by the Fire among the Ashes, or be driven out
to lie in Huts out of Doors among the worst of their Dogs, for some of the
finest of their Dogs they permit to lie in the bed with themselves.

And they accomodate their Slaves which such Names as these, T^by, Mando,
Ming^, Jack, Hect^r and Hagar, and such like Names they give to their Dogs and
Horses.

And when their Masters see fit they will hang them up by their Thumbs, and
then command another Negro to beat him so long, as his Master sees fit; this he
must not refuse to do, if it were his own Father, nay, further, they will force
them to be very Hang-men; And notwithstanding of all this, some of them must go
with a hungry Belly, and that which they do get to eat (ye need not doubt but
it) is the worst the House affords.

Now all that fear God cannot but know that those men who use such Cruelty are
not only (...) of the Fear of God, but are even destitute of humane Civility,
and Pity and Mercy; Therefore their Example can be no more a Rule for keeping
Slaves than it is for using such inhumane Cruelty, which all sober Men abhor;
For it cannot be expected that men of such Cruelty have much regard to the
lawfulness of what they do, and it is great Pity that men who are naturally
more moderate and merciful should be led to the Practice of an unlawful thing
by the Example of the vilest of men.

But to return to the Servants of such cruel Masters; By this Description all
may see, that they are put under an unavoidable Necessity of ^inning to
maintain self-Preservation, an Instinct of Nature belonging to all the
Creatures of God; So self-preservation puts them to steal, rob, and lie, and
many other sinful Actions; nay, some of them when they see themselves
surrounded and trappaned with all the Miscries aforesaid, and many more, then
they go into Despair, and miserably (...) themselves, and some their Masters,
to get rid of their Tortures and miserable Slavish Life There was one of them (
I think) within less then two years ago, shot himself which a Gun, near his
Masters House, within a few miles off the place where I write this lamentable
story.

Now for those heinous Sins, as Lying, stealing, Robbing, and Self-Murder; they
cannot escape Punishment, by the Justice of God. Now as I have said before,
they being put under such necessity of sinning, and they themselves being but
Infidels, I desire the Negro-Masters to inform me, who must answer for all
these abominable Sins?

And now, Reader, I have given thee a small View of the Usage and Treatment of
these poor miserable Slaves; for if I would enlarge upon their Usage, I need
write nothing else to swell up a Book to I know not what bigness; The parting
of Man and Wi^e being such a heinous sin committed by the Negro-Masters, I
cannot pass by; The parting the Husband from the Wife, and the Wife from the
Husband, and their Children from them both, to make up their Masters Gains,
they force them thus to break the seventh Command, and commit Adultery with
other strangers, or other men's Wives or Husbands. These and the like Usages, is
enough to make them believe, there is no God at all, and harden them in
Idolatrous Worship, and make them blaspheme against the holy God, that he takes
not immediate Vengeance on such notorious Offenders. And here are the first
three Commands broken, occasioned by their Masters. And the breaking the fourth
is evident to all; for some, for want of Food and other necessaries, for all
their hard weeks Labor to enrich their Master, for to maintain
Self-preservation, puts them to work on the First Day of the Week, to supply
their pure Necessities, and so break that which their Masters call the
Christian Sabbath. And so, here is all the Commands of the first Table broken
by them, occasioned by the Cruelty of their Masters. And their Children being
sold from their Parents, they unavoidably cannot honor them; and here is the
breach of the fifth. And to get rid of their miserable Tortures, many kill
themselves and others; and here is the breach of the Sixth. The parting of Man
and Wife makes them commit Adultery with others; and here is the breach of the
Seventh. To maintain Self-preservation, they unavoidably must steal; and here
is the breach of the Eight. Then they run away to avoid their Tortures, and
when they are caught their Master will ask them, Do you not deserve to be hung
up and Beat? and here they must bear False witness against themselves (which is
worse than against their Neighbors) and say, yes, I do, we serve to be hung up
and Beat; and here is the breach of the ninth. And when they are in great
necessity of Food and Raiment, and have it not of their own, they unavoidably
must covet it of their Neighbors, and here is the breach of the Tenth.

Now Reader, here are all the Ten Commands of God (occasioned by their Masters)
broken by them. This is such a Charge, that I doubt it will be too hot or too
heavy for the Negro-Masters to answer.

And now that those Christians who in their Baptism did engage to keep all gods
holy commands, should not keep them, but break them themselves and for their
own Gains, do lay all manner of unavoidable Necessities upon their Slavs to
break them also; This is a poor encouragement for Godfathers indeed.

I may truly say, as Nestori^s did, who (...) Archbishop of Constantinople,
and was banished from them by the prevailing Party in his Time, to the
outermost part of the Roman Empire among the Barbarians, because he said and
taught. That Mary ought not to be called the Mother of God, but the Mother of
Christ, and that it could not go down with him to say, that God was a year old,
or a Month, or a Day old, etc. As we may read in that great Book called
Eusebius. And when he found great Kindness from those Barbarians he wrote a
learned and eloquent better to those Christians that banished him, to this
Effect, that For his Banishment he could undergo it patiently, but his Fear and
Lamentation was, that their Actions should go unto the Heathen, that thereby
they should be imboldened in Heathenism, and give them Advantage to blaspheme
against Christ and the Christian Religion; And so advised them not to be a stop
and a Hinderance to that glorious Gospel that had cost so many Lives for the
spreading and advancing of it.

Now, I can truly say, that this is my concern as it was the concern of
Nestori^^, that ever the Actions of our American Negro-Masters should go unto
the Turks and other Heathen Nations, to harden them in Mah^metant'm and other
Heathenism, and to imbolden them to blaspheme against Christ and his Gospel,
and the purest Christianity.

I wish this may come to be the concern of our Negro-Masters, That they be not
hinder^^^, but Advancers of the glorious Gospel, and then I am sure they will
be loath to do to any other Man what they would not be done by themselves.

Now, it is not unpossible but that an American Negro Master and a Turk should
meet and discourse this Point betwixt them, And the Turk should say, I am well
pleased, Brother that you and we agree so well in this Point, viz. in making
Slaves of them we can have the Mastery over; And I doubt not but many of us
have been at a stand whether it may not be a sin to use our fellow Creatures so
cruelly: but now I think it is Time to give over such Doubts, when we see it so
mightily practiced by the Christians, I mean the American Christians; I make
this Distinction, because it is not practiced in Europe.

And now, Brother, I would argue a little plainer with you, How comes it to
pass, that you find Fault with us for making Slaves of Men, when you your
selves do the same? How can that be an evil and a sin in us, which is a
Christian Practice among your selves? And I hear, that when any of your Slaves
turns Christian, and is baptized and receives the Christian Faith, you keep
them in perpetual Slavery for all, and so they have no encouragment to turn
Christian upon that score, which shows to me, that you have but a small Esteem
for your Religion, or at least are very lukewarm for Proselytes.

This is worse then Turks; for when any of our Slaves turn, and embraces the
Mah^metan Faith, they are no longer Slaves, but presently set free, and many
Times preferred to Places of Trust and Dignity, such zeal have we for
Proselytes, and our Religion.

And how comes it that you differ among your selves in this Practice? for there
are some zealous men among you, that both dispute and write against you, and
they declare it to be an Antichristian Practice; And the Christians in Europe
do not practice it. And I have heard that the Gospel was, Glory to God in (...)
Highest, and Peace and Good Will ^o all Men upon Earth, and that ye should do
to all men as ye would they should do to you. And if this be the Gospel of the
blessed Messiah, I will tell you plainly, I took upon you to be apostatized in
this Point, and I would advise you either to embrace the rest of our Mohammedan
Practices (and then we would receive you) or otherwise to walk more closely to
the Rules and Practice of Christianity; and not to content your selves with a
Name, and to be a perpetual Scandal to the rest of Christians.

So far Mohammedan.

ANd now, Christians of after Ages to come, Its not unlikely, but ye may meet
with the Force and Assaults of Negro-Masters, as we in this Age have done, (And
so, Christian, defend thy self as we have done before thee) And so to cloak
their Impiety, and to make the best S^ew of Pretenses they can, they may thus
begin.

Negr^ Master. Had not Gods People (in all Ages) bond Slaves, bought with their
Money?

Christians Answer. So had they their many Wives and Concubines, and I see no
more Reason to plead for Slaves then to plead for many Wives and Concubines.

Negro Master. It is true, we have as good Grounds for the one as for the
other, and I will freely acknowledge that if the many Wives and Concubines
would bring in such Advantage to us as our Negro-Slaves do, I doubt not but we
should plead as st^fly for the one as for the other; But the many Wives and
Concubines not being advantagous, we in Discretion drop that part of our
Argument, and keep close to that which brings us Gains? So I need not enlarge
to trouble my self to cite every chapter and Verse, for I take it for a Maxim,
That all the Old Testament, where it treats upon that subject, is upon our
side; and I have heard some of us allege out of the New Testament, that
Ph^lem^^ was a Slave, but since I have read Pools Annotations on the Place, I
will not be so unmanly as to assert it as a Proof; I think I have Proof enough,
that have the Old Testament, although I meddle not with the New.

And now I think I have proved by Scripture, that keeping of Slaves was
practiced of Old; And now I intend to show that it is according to the
Christianity of our Times, First by the consent and agreement of all the several
Sects of Christians.

I begin then with the famous Bishops of England (who are not ignorant of our
Negro- Practice) who by their Christian care do send their Missionaries hither
to America, to teach the Inhabitants here the Principles and Practices of
Christianity; And it is evident those Missionaries do make their Gains by Negro
Slaves, and have their Houses crawling black with them, by which they set an
Example to others to follow their s^eps; And not a word of Sin in all this. And
I never heard that a Bishop ever wrote a word against it; by which I think it
is evident that the making Slaves of Negroes is according to
Church-Christianity.

And Secondly, I can show by that famous and zealous Sect of Presbyterians, who
have been diligent followers of the Principles and Practices of the
Reformation, witness the Rejecting the (...) Mass Book, and many other Roman
Superstitions, so kind kindly entertained (as they think) by some of their
Protestant Brethren; and a People very zealous in their Lives and Church
Discipline; and yet both Preachers and People do jointly agree with the Church
in making Slaves of Negroes.

Thirdly, I can show by that pious Sect of Anabaptists, Witness some of them
their Modesty in Apparel, and their Dexterity in the Point of Water Baptism, in
telling the rest of Christians in Print, that they do cheat the World in the
Point of Infant Baptism; but they very Lovingly embrace this Practice in making
Slaves of Negroes.

Now if the Church, and Presbyterians, and Baptists did but agree so lovingly
in other Points as they do in making Slaves of Negroes, I think they might be
styled One Community.

Now, if those several Sects of Christians and their unanimous Agreement in
this Practice of making Slaves of Negroes, as I have already showed, does not
amount to a Proof, I know not what will,

Christians Answer, I do confess this is a Proof, that some of all those
several Sects do Practice this Point of Impiety, which I would readily have
confessed without a word of Proof, except what mine Eyes have seen; For all
these Sects of People both by Principle and Practice do Fight, and Kill, and
take away the Lives of many Thousands in Battles, for their enriching of
themselves, and for their own Advantages, and therefore it is no Wonder that
all those Sects agree so well in making Slaves of Negros, or others whom they
can get the Mastery over (for their own Advantage.)

But as this is very foreign from Christianity, and out of the Peaceable
Gospel of the blessed Messiah (for worrying, Tearing and Killing are the marks
of Dogs, Wolves and Bears, which is the Practice of those aforesaid Sects of
Christians, as they call themselves: but the Innocence of Lambs and Doves was
and is the Characteristick of Christians) so I think this is sufficient to
overset what was alleged for a Proof by the Practice of all those severol
Sects of Christians for enslaving of their fellow Creatures the Negros For I
thought the Gospel had not been Cruelty but had been Innocence, Love, Meekness,
Patience, Long-Suffering, and plenteous in Forgiveness, and other Emblems of
the Attributes of God, and that Christians were to give (...) Backs to the
Smiter and their C^ecks to them that pluck off the Hair.

But I have a further Answer for you, and that is, I utterly deny that either
Churchmen or Presbyterians have generally agreed in making Slaves of Negros;
For some of both have preached and some have printed against it here in North
America; And some that have had Negroes their Conscience would not allow them
to keep them for Slaves, but after some Time of Service they set them free.

Hence I infer, That making Slaves of men is an evil so abominable in the
nature of it that men whose Principles are so large as to allow of Killing men,
cannot allow of making Men Slaves, accounting it worse to Rob men o^ their
Liberty and Labor, who have done them no harm, then it is to kill them that
rise up against them.

And hence I infer, that none would believe it lawful, if they were not either
blinded with the love of Gain, or with the plausible Pretenses o^ such as are.

Negro Master. Hold! I think I have another Proof, which, according to your own
Argument I think will bind you. There is another numerous and famous sect of
Christians, called Quakers, who by their Practice do show that they have all
those aforesaid Marks which thou have nominated, and therefore by consequence
of your Argument the only true and real Christians, and yet there is no People
more forward to make Slaves of Negros than they are; And now, if they be
infallibly guided in all the other Principles and Practices of Christianity,
one would think they could not be erroneous in this, viz. in making Slaves of
Negros. And now, although all my other Arguments should fail, yet this last,
one would think, should silence you.

Christians Answer. This, I confess, is the greatest Wonder, to see a People so
conformable to the rest of the Principles and Practices of Christianity,
induced by the Example of the looser Sorts of Christians, to embrace an
enriching Sin, and sacrifice that command of Christ, to do to others what they
would not be done by.

And yet I cannot see how they can be a Proof in this, above all other
Christians, especially when it is thought by some of the honest hearted among
them, that about the eleventh Year of the eighteenth Century the most of them
Sacrificed their primitive Innocence, when they so lovingly agreed and joined
with the other Sects to pay the Soldiers their proportion of Wages to go in
the Expedition against their Neighbors of Canada; And when they loose their
lnnocence, I know not what they keep that is lovely among them.

But here I must make a Distinction; There was an honest hearted Remnant among
them, that suffered joyfully the spoiling of their Goods in that Day, for the
Answer of a good Conscience, and the Defense of the Ancient Innocent Principle,
in Denying the use of the Carnal Sword, Although it was not permitted to be
recorded of suffering for the Truth, because the most numerous Party of them
was guilty; But if the Reader, or any other, should come to question, whether
they denied the Use of the carnal Sword in any sense, for Proof of this, I
refer such to their Wr^tings, Particularly to Robert Barclay's Apology, and to
the Key wrote by William Penn, Where the Reader may see that they deny the Use
of the Carnal Sword in any sense, yea, even in self-preservation, or so much as
in Self-Defence, such Innocence was once maintained among them, which made
Robert Barclay say, that it was their Innocent Lives and Practice that
convinced him before he inspected into their Principles. The Innocent Lives of
that People was the motive that convinced this pious learned man. He did not
then see them lanching out Money to pay Soldiers to go and kill their fellow
Creatures, nor did he see any of them making Slaves of Negroes; These and the
like Practices were very remote from that Innocent and harmless People, called
Quakers in Robert Barclays convincing day.

Negro Master. What have we to do with such far-fetch't Proofs? or what was in
Barclay's Day? I love to keep at home, and the Practice of our American
Christians; Are there not famous men here among the Quakers? and yet they are
both Merchants and Masters of Negroes. But I think to argue this Point a little
more closely; For before the eleventh year of the eighteenth Century (which is
the year thou mentionedst) that they could not be a proof in this Point, more
then other Christians, because they joined with other Sects (in the Wars
against Canada) they had Negro Slaves. But I will bring you to another
Instance, viz. All the Time preceding that forementioned Year, particularly
One thousand six hundred ninety two, when Andrew Hamilton was Governor of the
Jersies, Did not all the Quakers refuse to pay the Soldiers to fight against
the French at Albany? for the which Refual, great Havoc was made of their
Goods by Constables. Were not all the Quakers at Amboy strained, excepting one
man that paid to maintain the Wars at Albany? And thou say, it was no wonder
that this man afterward became a Negro-Master; For he was the first of that
People that ever I heard of, that sacrificed that Innocent Principle (as thou
call it) and did pay the Rate that was raised to maintain the Albany War.
Were they not all strained in Freehold? And did they not suffer in Shrewsbury?
was their not a Barrel of Pork rolled out of one of their Cellers in
Shrewsbury, because they refused in any sense to have a hand in the Wars of
Albany? And yet, all this Time of their Innocence, they did not forget their
Interest, but did become Negro-Masters.

I know Practice and Example will go a great way in Education, and why should
it not go as far in Argument? and if it do, I have the less to do but make a
short Review how I have Prove by the Practice and Example of all that diversity
of Sects of our American Christians, and lastly and mainly by our American
Quakers.

Now, if what I have said do not amount to perfect Proof that we may make
Slaves of Negros, or any other that we can get the Mastery over, I think the
Roman Catholics forever may be silent to bring in the Example and Agreement of
the East and West-Orthodox, to be a Proof in that Point of the Real Presence.

Christians Answer. There is a good Body o^ People without the Bounds of your
Instance and that is the German-Quakers, who live in German-Town near
Philadelphia, Who to their renowned Praise be it spoken) have above all other
Sects in America, kept their Hands clean from that vile Oppression and
enriching Sin of making Slaves of their fellow Creatures, the Negros, as I was
credibly informed by one of themselves, and so have particular Men of all Sects
kept themselves free from this enriching sin.

But now I come to your Instance of Ninety Two, that the Quakers were all
Innocent then, excepting one Man. This amounts to no more then this, that they
were an excellent People in that day, far exceeding other Sects of Christians,
and yet were most shamefully overtaken with this enriching Sin, in breaking
Christ's Command in making Slaves of Negros, which they would be loath to be
done by. Ay, but I have a further Reply to make to you upon that Head (which I
think will utterly overturn all that you have said upon it) The Quakers had
before that Time, embraced Magistracy, which cannot be upheld without the
Carnal Sword, whereby they being apostatized from their primitive Innocence and
Purity, and become, in that like the rest of the World, it is no Wonder to see
them in a Practice so ag^eable to it, in making Slaves of their fellow
Creatures for their Gain and Advantage.

For it was the making Slaves of Negroes, to enrich themselves, and the
embracing of Magistracy, which could not be excecuted without the carnal Sword,
which were the two pincipla Baits that Catched many of that once most Worthy
People.

Thus far the Negro-Master and the Christian in in after Ages.

And now, Christ an Reader, If thou have any tender Love to that harmless Lamb,
the innocent Messiah, and his harmless and innocent Gospel, thou can not but
see that the making Slaves of Negros is an abominable Antichristian Practice.
And ( Christian) I will tell thee, It will be very much if I get not a Lash
with their Tongues, as they used to lash the Backs of their Slaves (and that I
doubt not was with little Mercy some times) especially when there is such an
Affront as this offered to their most beloved black Diana.

There is one thing more, and then I think to take my leave at present, of our
Negro-Masters, and that is, I earnestly invite them to Repentance; But how to
attain to their Repentance, is the Question, for such a heinous sin; for they
will find it to be a sin of the Second Table, that is, in plainer words a sin
against God and Man both; And I am of Opinion, that such Sins cannot be
repented of without Restitution made to them that they have wronged; for until
the Cause he removed, I know not how the Effect should cease. But they that
live and dye without making Restitution to them that they have wronged, how
they can expect the Forgiveness of God, I leave this to the Reader to judge,
and then they cannot blame the Writer for a false Construction. But if it
should happen that a Reader should construe, that if the Negro-Masters do not
make Restitution to the Negroes for the wrong that they have done them, the
Forgiveness of God cannot well be obtained, and then leave it to the
Negro-Masters to judge of the Consequence.

The next thing that comes into Consideration, What and if our Negro-Masters
should live and dye without making any Restitution at all, to their miserable
Slaves whom they have so unjustly wronged? The Question then will be, Whether
they may expect ever any Restitution at all? I Answer This Question in the
Affirmitive, That they may certainly expect it.

But for the further understanding of this Answer, I suppose then that God has
allotted unto all Mankind an Inheritance of Eternal Life, and has written their
Names in the Book of Life, and this appears by the frequent mentioning of it in
Scripture, of the blotting their Names out of the Book of Life, which could not
be, except their Names were first written therein; and so all Men may expect to
enjoy their Fathers Gift, the Inheritance of Eternal Life, except they forfeit
the same in sinning against God, or sinning against God and Man, and then their
Names are blotted out, as God said unto Moses, Him that sins against me, him
will I blot out.

And now I come to the Restitution again, and say, It cannot stand with the
Justice of God that the Negroes or the wronged shall have no Restitution at
all; and seeing then that they must be restored of the Wrongs that they have
suffered, it must be restored out of the Property of him that has wronged
them; and this Property is his Interest of Eternal Life; and such a proportion
of this as will be equivolent to the Wrongs done unto the Negroes or any
others, must go to make up this Restitution; for they will have it.

For they will have it made up out of your Portion in Glory, if you have any
left for your selves; and if you have not, you may expect so much the more
Torment; and if the Negros or Wronged have no Portion left in Glory to be
increased by it, they may expect to have so much the less Torment;

For God will right all Wrongs, and do Justice between all his Creatures; and
what is not in our Power, God does not require, but he will not forgive what we
have in our Power to amend, and will not do it, so Reason says. And this is the
Period of that Branch, the Doing Wrong to Man; But the other Branch, viz. The
Sinning against God, our Negro-Masters cannot make Restitution to God for the
Sin committed against him, and therefore must Suffer the Punishment due for
such a Sin; and I know no way for our Negro Masters to escape any thing of
this, so long as the Attributes of God are Righteousness and Justice, Except
they Repent and make Restitution.

But if any Negro Master should dislike any thing of this my Answer, I grant
him the Liberty which I take, and that is, to answer it himself; And if they
have any Truth on their side, I desire them to bring it to the open View of all
Men.

Reader, I here also present thee with the Christian Labors of another Hand,
and also that Answer, called, The Athenian Oracle, first printed at London And
I think to end with the saying of the Wise man, That A three- ^old Cord is not
easily broken.

And so, the Negro-Masters may here see,
Some of their Dangers in E^ernitie.
For there is no Repentance in the Graves,
Of the Wro^gs done unto heir Negro-Slaves.
The present time is their Repentant-Day;
When that is done, I have no more to say.
If they persist in their ungodly Gains,
I Am like to get my Labor for my Pains.
I Will come to a close, hoping they will amend,
In giving God the praise; and so I End.
J. H.

Arguments against making Slaves of Men.
Argument I.
THE using Men's Labor, and not paying them the Value of it ( except the
Labourer gives it) is unjust and therefore unlawful.

But the making Slaves of Men (whether Negroes, Indians, or others) is Using
their Labor, and not paying them the Value of it.

Therefore the making Slaves of Men is unlawful.

Arg. 2. Violence is (in ordinary Cases) unlawful, But making Slaves of Men
(against their (...)) is Violence.

Therefore making Slaves of Men, is unlawful.

Arg. 3. Punishing Men without Respect to any (...) they have done, is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, is punishing Men without Respect to any Evil they
have done, Therefore the Making Slaves of Negros (...) unlawful.

We should think it a sore Punishment to be made Slaves our selves

Arg 4. To make men Prisoners, who have (...) no Law, is (in ordinary Cases)
unlawful. But to make Slaves of Negros, is to make men Prisoners, who have
broke no Law to deserve it. Therefore to make Slaves of Negros is unlawful.

Arg. 5. Compelling Men to that which will surely bring them to Punishment, is
unjust and unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, is compelling men to that which will surely bring
them to Punishment. Therefore making Slaves of Negros is unlawful.

It is a general Observation among the Negro Masters, that Negros will not be
good without often Beating, and that may be (many times) very severe.

Arg. 6. To banish men their Country, who have committed no Fault to deserve
it, is unlawful.

But to make Slaves of Negros, is to banish men their Country, who have
committed no Fault to deserve it. Therefore, to make Slaves of Negros is
unlawful.

Arg. 7. The necessary laying before Men Temptations to sin, is sinful and
unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, is a necessary laying before men Temptations to
Sin. Therefore the making Slaves of Negros, is sinful and unlawful.

Experience proves this, by the Scores of Negros that have murdered themselves,
for no other cause but because they were made Slaves and banished their Country.

Arg. 8. Man-stealing (deserves Death by the Law of GOD, and) is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negroes is Man-stealing. Therefore making Slaves of
Negros is unlawful.

Arg. 9. Parting Man and Wife (procures Gods Curse, and) is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros is (often times) Parting Man and Wife. Therefore
making Slaves of Negros is unlawful; and Those that buy them, partake in the
Sin.

Object. They are Heathen, and make no Scruple of it in their own Country.

Answer. The more need to avoid doing those things which harden them in their
Heathenish Wickedness, and to avoid partaking with them, and making them Worse.

Arg. 10. That which brings People into unnecessary Danger of their Lives, is
unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, brings People into unnecessary Danger of their
Lives. Therefore making Slaves of Negros, is unlawful.

How many live in Dangers, and how many have lost their Lives by their own and
their Neighbors Negros? For they knowing themselves Slaves, care little for
their Lives, and fear little those Offenses for which they must be put to Death.

Arg. 11. That which cannot be done without Cruelty, is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Men for gain, cannot be done without Cruelty. Therefore
making Slaves of Men for Gain, is unlawful.

We should account it the greatest Cruelty and Robbery to be so dealt by
ourselves.

Arg. 12. The using Men as if they were Beasts, is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, is using Men as if they were Beasts.

Therefore making Slaves of Negros, is unlawful.

Arg. 13. To deface the Image of GOD, is unlawful.

But Robbing Men of their Freedom, is Defacing the Image of GOD.

Therefore Robbing Men of their Freedom, is unlawful.

Arg. 14. To make Slaves of those to whom our Savior has commanded that his
Gospel should be preached, is unlawful;

But to make Slaves of Negros, is to make Slaves of those to whom our Savior
has commanded that his Gospel should be preached. Therefore to make Slaves of
Negros, is unlawful.

Arg. 15. To encourage others to make Slaves of our fellow Christians, is
unlawful.

But to make Slaves of Negros, is to encourage the Mahometans to make Slaves of
Christians. Therefore to make Slaves of Negors, is unlawful.

Arg. 16. That which is a Stumbling Block to Unbelievers, and a hinderance to
their Conversion is unlawful, and one of the Worst of Evils. But making Slaves
of Negros (or indians) is a Stumbling Block to Unbel^evers, and a Hinderance to
their Conversion. Therefore making Slaves of them, is unlawful, and one of the
worst of Evils.

Arg. 17. That which Weakens the Arguments of Christians against the Heathen,
and has a Tendency to cause some Weak Christians to turn Mohammedan, is unlawful.

But To make Slaves of Negros, does all this. Therefore to make Slaves of
Negros is unlawful.

Christians are inexcusably required to make the Innocence of their Lives a
strong Argument to convince such as know not the Truth, Mat. 5. v. 16. But by
this Violence (which was one of the Sins of the Old World) and other vices, the
Heathen will see no more Excellency in our Religion then in their own.

Ar. 18. The doing by others as we would not be done by, is Sinful and unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, is doing by others as we would not be done by.

Therefore the making Slaves of Negros, is unlawful.

Arg. 19. That which occasions Men to murder one another, is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, occasions them to murder one another.

Therefore making Slaves of Negros, is unlawful, and one of the Worst of Evils.

The Negros make War, and murder one another to take Captives to Sell for
Slaves.

Arg. 20. That which brings a Reproach upon our holy Religion is unlawful.

But making Slaves of Negros, brings a Reproach upon our holy Religion.
Therefore the making Slaves of Negros, is unlawful.

Object. Negroes are more happy when Slaves then free.

Answ. If that were true, so are some White Men; but is this a Rule to make
them Slaves? But for once, we will suppose what some Men say to be true, That
gives a Negro has Freedom and give him the Gallows. It is when they are brought
into a Country that does not agree whith their Constitution (as might be
largely shown) and this shows it the more unlawful to bring them.

Obj. 2. But they Murder one another, and Tyra^^^ Cruelty over their Captives
in their own Country; and it is a Merciful Deed to bring them into a Land of
Safety, although they be made Slaves by it.

Answ. 1. That is also too much used among Christians, and so the same Argument
may be used by the Turks to justify their making Slaves of us.

2. If we can help them and prevent such Cruelty, it ought to be by Teaching
them better Examples.

3. Our Taking of their Captives, does encourage them the more in such
Practices.

4. By buying their Captives, we become Partakers with them, and harden them by
our Example.

5. Let it be put to the Conscience of such as buy them, whether (ordinarily)
any part of their Motive be to help the Miserable? or whether it be purely and
only for Gain?

Obj. 3. It is better for a Captive to be made a Slave then to be Murdered.

Ans. 1. I never heard that when a Man saved his Neighbors Life, he was to
have him or sell him and his Posterity for Slaves. Suppose he were at cost to
do it, a less Reward may compensate that

2. Suppose he had never been a Captive but for the sake of your Buying him,
And suppose some others have been killed for the sake of the ^rice, where is
the Kindness then?

Obj. 4. Some Men could not get their Living, if it were not for their
Negro-Slaves.

Ans. 1 st. Poverty does not make Robbery lawful.

2. Poor Men that cannot get their living without them are not able to buy them.

3. If a man be able to labor, he can so well earn a poor Living (at least)
for himself, as his Negro (who cannot labor without Food) can earn a poor
Living for himself. And if a Man cannot Labor, his Neighbors are indebted to
(God that they) help him.

Obj. 5. A Slave that has a good Master has a more comfortable Life than his
Master, he being free from care.

Ans. Your way to prove this Argument is to give up your self and your Children
to be Slaves to good Masters, and have nothing of your own, and labor as the
Negros do, who have good Masters; For if it be not an Argument for your self,
how can you force it to be an Argument for another?

Some Negros by being brought into a Christian Country, learn the Christian
Faith, and to some of them it becomes the Means of their Salvation, which does
Ten Thousand times compensate the Slavery of their whole Life.

Ans. Some Men that are hanged, are brought to Repentance by the Expectation of
their Speedy Death; Is this a Rule to hang all Persons that take little care
for their Salvation because GOD sometimes (in his mercy) brings good out of
evil?

2. We will acknowledge that such Masters as take a diligent care in this, do
far better then such as use their Negros as if they were Cattle.

3. I have not heard of one Master in five hundred that do so much as bring
their Slaves to the public worship of God.

4. Grant that you are instrumental of their Salvation, Is it not Simony in the
superlative Degree, when you not only take your Reward of them, and that in
this World, and that no less will satisfy you for a little good Counsel, etc.
than all they have in the World, and their Children after them? And if you will
be paid (so excessively) in this world for this good Work, I know not how you
can expect your Reward in the Next.

Obj. 7. Canaan was to be a Servant of Servants.

Ans. 1 st. A Prophesy of what men will do, is neither a Command nor Permission
to do it.

[2. It is very unlikely that near one quarter the World [ viz. all the Negros]
should be the Posterity of Canaan, who were almost rooted out of the World by
Joshua; and also that another Quarter of the World, viz. the Indians of
America, should be his Posterity too; yea, and the Indians of the East Indies
also (for which of them also they make Slaves.)

3. It was not said it should be so to the End of the World.

4. The Canaanites were Servants to the Children of Israel (the seed of Shem)
in buiding Cities and Raising Cattle for them: and so were the Carthagenians to
the Romans (the seed of Japhet) who soon after received the Gospel.

Obj. 8. The Children of Israel had Lisence from GOD to make Slaves of the
Heathen.

Ans. 1. This was peculiar to the Jewish Nation, and no part of the Moral Law;
and if any Society of Men can produce the like Lisence to them, immediately
from God, and prove it, let them keep Slaves also.

2. Then the Church was restrained to that People, but now the Gospel is
commanded to be taught unto all People and Nations every where.

Obj. 9. Perhaps one Sort of People (if they object here as they do in another
case) will say, There is no place in the Bible that has such Words Thou shall
not make Slaves, etc.

By a Retortion, I would Answer, No place has these Words, Mahomet is a false
Prophet, etc.

Motive 1. Riches gotten by wronging the Labourer, is cursed, s^e James 5. v.
2,3,4,5. A terrible place to such Men!

Mot. 2. Killing Men, must be punished with Death, because man was created in
the Image of God, Genesis 9. v. 3,4,5,6. And Man-stealing must be punished with
Death; And why? but because Freedom, which only makes Knowledge useful, is a
part of Gods Image.

Mot. 3. If we say, we know him, and keep not his Commandments, we lie, and the
Truth is not in us, 1 John 2. v. 4. One of his Commandments is To do as we
would be done by, Luke 6. v. 3.

Mot. 4. There are several Curses applied to the Effect of making Slaves of
Negros, as the Parting Man and Wife, etc.

Mot. 5. There are several Capital Crimes attending it, as Murder,
Man-stealing, etc.

Mot. 6. It is a Breach of several Commands at once, As of the Eight, in
wronging them of their Labor; of the Ninth, in the Reproach of Slavery; of the
Sixth, in Violence and Access to murder; of the Seventh, in Access to Adultery,
by parting Man and Wife, and so causing them to marry others; of the First,
Second and Third, by bringing a Reproach upon the Name of GOD in our holy
Religion, and so hardening Idolaters; in some, of the Fourth, in giving them no
Time to play, but on the Lords Day.

Mot. 7. We condemn Robbers as worthy to dye, because they Beat-Men, and
sometimes kill them, to take their Money from them. And we beat the Negros, and
take them Captives, and banish them from their Country forever, and take their
Wives and Children from them, and sometimes Cause their Death, and all to get
their Labor from them; which is as much worth as their Money. Can the greatest
Robbers and Pyra^es Out-vi^^us?

Mot. 8. How will our Religion look among the Heathen! who can judge of it, and
of God and of Christ (in whom we believe?) no other way then by our Practice.
Is this the way to win them? which we are bound to endeavor; But can we expect
it, while we appear to them the Worst of Men!

Can we think that God will take this Reproach to his Name, and his Truth, and
not be satisfied in taking Vengeance upon us. And that it may be in the ^ight
of the Heathen.

Mot. 10. What a Cursed Gain will this be, if (...) be the Price of Immortal
Souls! Had we instead of Giving them the Worst of Examples, endeavored to
learn them Christ, from the Time we first knew their Country, what good night
have been done!

Mot. 11. Suppose the Case be yet uncertain, (...) leaving of this Practice,
there is no Danger; but who would venture so great injustice upon ^ncertainty!
And stop the Course of the Gospel?

Mot. 12. So long as you do it, not knowing but that it is a sin, so long it is
in you a sin; (...) it were in it self innocent, Romans 14. Ult. ^woord^
Proposal. 1. That Subscriptions be taken of all Masters that will set their
Negros free, and of the Number of Negros so to be set free, that they may be
sent to their own Country.

Prop. 2. That Subscriptions be taken, what ^uch Man (Negro Master, or others)
will give (...) defray the Charge of sending the Negros ^ome.

Prop. 3. That such Negros as had rather serve their Masters, then go home, may
be kept still it being their Free Act, and it not being safe (...) have them
free in this Country)

Prop. 4. That the uttermost Pains be taken (...) instruct them in the
Principles of Christian ^eligion, that (if by the Grace of God they may be
Savingly converted) they may be instrumental to convert their Countrymen (...)
home; And who knows how much God may bless such Pious Designs, and how much
(...) Christian self denying Example may conduce (...) open the Eyes of those
poor Heathen.

And such as are savingly converted, the lo^^ of Christ will constrain them to
do their utmost (...) convert their Contrymen when they come to them.

Mot. 13. If this Course be instrumental t^ save one Soul, it will a thousand
times counte^ vail the Cost.

Mot. 14 The least we part with for the Cause of Christ shall have an hundred
sold Reward beside Eternal-Life, see Mat. 10. ult. Mark. (...) v. 30.

Mot. 15. What Pains will men take, and cross the Ocean for worldly Gain! If we
will not do something like it for Spiritual, it is a sign (...) have no part
therein, See Mat. 6. v. 21. etc.

Mot. 16. What Glory will it be to Eternity to have been instrumental toward
saving on^ Soul? How much more, toward saving many (...) see Dan. 12. v. 3. etc.

Mot. 17. It would be a sad thing in the Day of Judgment to have men's Undoing
their whole life, to answer for.

Mot. 18. I know of no other way to make them Restitution for the wrong done
then (but the Cost of sending them home to be part, if they desire it) and
without Restitution (where it is possible and the Wrong known we know of no
Pardon, See L. ^it. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. etc.

Mot. 19. We disgrace our selves, and our Religion, showing our selves to be
partial and unreasonable, We condemn the Turks for making Slaves of us, and we
make Slaves of others. We condemn and punish our Negros for seeking by ^unning
away to get their Freedom, and yet we should justify our selves, and one
another, in doing the same, if we were Slaves to the Turks, or any others.

Now, if any one can answer all this, and keep a good Conscience in it, I am
content. But if that be done, I have one Motive more.

Mot. 20. When the Country grows full of People, and also abounds which Negros,
poor People will want Employ, and must either beg or steal for their Living,
which will be no pleasant thing to Rich or Poor; and Rich men's Children are
sometimes Poor (especially if their Estate be gotten by Wronging the Labourer)
and (if they Regard not the Honor of GOD) I believe they would be loath to
have their Children hanged for Thieves.

But I am amazed to think Christians (so called) who keep Negros as if they
were Cattle, and had no Soul! Who neither Teach them themselves, nor bring them
to Gods Worship, As if they feared the loss of their Money by their Negros
Salvation.

These Things I ofter to Consideration, desiring wise Men to give their
Judgment; so I have no desire to hinder my Countrymen (...) any Lawful Gain,
but cannot believe it lawful to make men Slaves, but I see all these Arguments
fully answered, Except they ha^ rather be Slaves, than to go home to their own
Country.

Written by a Native of America, Sept. 14. 1713.

THE Athenian Oracle, The Second Edition, Printed at London. 1704. Vol. 1. Page
545 -- 548.
Quest. W Hither Trading for Negros, i. e. carrying them out of their own
Country into perpetual Slavery, be in it self Unlawful, and especially contrary
to the great Law of Christianity?

Ansm. Sir, After a mature and serious consideration of the Question proposed,
I am for the Affirmative, and cannot see how such a Trade (though much used by
Christians) can be any way justified, and fairly reconciled to the Christian
Law. And here, first let me propose my Reasons, and then Answer such weak Pleas
(...) use to be made for it.

1. I take it to be contrary to the great Law of Nature, of doing unto all Men
as we would they should do unto us; and which, as our Savior tells us (Mat. 7.
22. 22.) Is the sum of the (...) and the Prophets. For let us put the Case to
ourselves, and consider what it would be for a Man to be stolen away from his
Native Country and hurryed into perpetual Bon^age; Or to have a Child snatched
from his Embraces, and so used and then see if this Trade and practice can be
any way reconciled to this Rule. And surely they that have the Gospel, and yet
sin against the very Laws of Nature; shall have a severe punishment at the Day
of Judgment, than those poor ^illy Wretches that have only that di^ Light to
guide them. And perhaps those poor Wretches in Chains, when Death shall make
them free; may rise up in Judgment, and condemn those more cruel and unnatural
Men tha^ so unjustly deprive them of that Liberty which GOD and Nature had
given them.

2. It Is plainly contrary to the Word of God and forbidden both in the Old
Testament, and in the New; See Exodus 21. 16. He that stealth a Man and seileth
him, or if be found in his hands he shall be surely put to Death. The
prohibition is general; He that Steals any Man whatsoever, without
distinction; whether one of their Brothers, or a Stranger; a mere Heathen, or a
Pagan: He shall be surely put to Death; the punishment is Capital, and good
reason for it. For if he that sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be
shed: surely Liberty is as dear as Life it self. Yea, he that intends to sell a
Man into some kind of Bondage, would do him a greater kindness to free him from
a miserable Life. And I am well assured, this is (...) case of some of those
poor Wretches, with a witness.

Again, In the New Testament St. Paul, 1 Timothy 10. joins the Man-stealer with
the most (...) and unnatural Sinners; Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of
Mothers, and Def^lers of themselves with Mankind.

3. Its Practice is a Disgrace to Christianity, (...) makes the Name of Christ
to be blasphemed amongst the Gentiles, and (in all likelihood) hinders the
Propagation of the Christian Faith (...) the World. For I am verily persuaded,
that (...) a fair and honest Trade and Commerce had been carried on amongst
them, and no violence (...) been done to their persons: Christianity must have
gotten as great footing by this time amongst them, as it has amongst the poor
In^^dels of New England: Or, at least, they might have been in a great
forwardness to receive that holy Doctrine; which now they hate and abominate
for the sake of this practice of Christians amongst them. -- And Woe be to that
Person, that shall by any means hinder that blessed design for which Christ
came from Heaven; and both Himself, his Apostles, and many Primitive Christians
spent their dearest blood to promote; viz. to have the Mind and Will of GOD
known unto the World.

But perhaps some may make light of this, and persuade themselves, they have
sufficient pleas to vindicate the Practice. I know indeed many times, when a
man's Interest lies in the Balance; a very weak Plea and light Ex^^^ will pass
for a weighty Reason: But for (...) part (who am a person indifferent, and
altogether unconcerned that way) I could never (...) receive any Answer or
Excuse that could rais^ in me the least doubt of the Unlawfulness of i^ -- That
which I have heard pleaded for it, (...) to this Effect; viz.

Plea 1. We deny the Charge, we do not Steal them: but make a lawful Purchase
of them.

Ans^. Purchase them (for Toys and Baubles perhaps you may: but lawful I am
sure you cannot. For they which Sell them do Steal them, or take them away by
violence. And you know the Proverb, The Receiver is as bad as the Stealer. We
are they that call our selves Christians, that Encourage them in such Evil
Practices. Our Law (in many Cases) looks upon the Accessory as bad as the
Thief. I am sure the Law of God does Prove. 29. 24. Whos^ (...) Partner with a
Thief, hates his own Soul. And the holy Psalmist charges it as a great crime,
when we see a Thief, to consent with him, Psalm. (...) 18. The Learned and Pious
Bishop Hall, in his Decade of Cases of Conscience, Decade 1. Ca^ 10. p. 66.
Resolves this Case; That to buy those Goods, which we know, or have just cause
to suspect, are stolen or plundered; is no better than to make our selves
accessory to the Thief; If you do it with an intention to possess them as your
own ( i. e. not return them to the right Owner) For what do you else but (...)
facto, partake with that Thief which stole them, and encourage him in his loud
practices; since, according to the old Word, If there were ^o Receivers, there
would be no Thieves.

Plea 2. But most of them are taken Prisoners of War, by one petty Prince from
another; and sold by the Conqueror.

A. But who are commonly the cause of this War, or what do they commonly ^ight
about, but to gain the Booty of the Field; Slaves to be Sold? -- And I am
credibly informed, it is usual for the Traders in this unlawful Commodity, to
send Presents to some petty Prince among them, to make War with his
Neighboring Prince, to take such Prisoners, and furnish their Cargo: And who
then must answer for all this Blood and Injustice?

Plea 3. Those Men are more Heathens than Pagans?

A. Pray, What then? What have we to do with them? Have they not a common Right
to those Temporal Blessings, which an indulgent Creator has given them, as well
as we? Is Dominion founded in Grace? May a man that is pleased to call himself
a Christian, under that Notion, wrong or molest such as had not the Happiness
to be born in a Christian Country? Did our Lord and Master (though the Lord of
the whole World) give us any such Example, when in the World? And does not the
Apostle bid us do good unto all Men, and especially to the household of Faith?
Though we ought to be kinder to our Brother Christian; yet surely we ought to do
good; or, at least, to do no wrong to mere Pagans and Infidels.

Plea 4. Did not the Jews buy Slaves? How often do we read of the Bond-Servant
bought with their Money in the Jewish Law? And may we not do what God's own
People did?

A. I answer, First, in the general, That the Judicial Law of Moses (whereof
this about Bondslaves, is one) is made void, and no Rule, (further than it
carries a moral Reason with it) for Christians to walk by; who (as says the
Apostle) are not under the Law, but under Grace. But,

2dly. Let us deal with those poor Negros as the Jews were comman^ed to do with
the Heathen. 1. When they had bought them, they were obliged to bring them up
in the true Religion. See Genesis 17. 12, 13. God commands Abraham, He that is
born in thy House, or bought with Money of any Stranger which is not thy seed;
such an one must needs be Circumcised, and brought into Covenant with GOD. 2.
Whilst they were in the House, they were to be kind and loving toward them;
and it is often repeated, Be kind unto Strangers, for you yourselves were
Strangers in the land of Egypt.

Plea. 5 The Law of our Land al^ows it.

A. The Law of our Land is so far from allowing it, that if an Infidel be
brought into this Kingdom, as soon as he can give an Account of the Christian
Faith, and desires to be Baptized; any Charitable lawful Minister may do it:
and then he is under the same Law with other Christians -- As for our Islanders
abroad; from whence they came, who carried them thither, and what kind of
Christians the most of them are; need not inform you. It Is their great Diana,
by this Craft they have their aim. And therefore we can never expect that they
should make any private or By- Laws against it. But if the Law be ever to much
silent in this Case; He that will do any thing that the Law (which can never
provide in all Cases) does not plainly forbid: would be but a bad Subject, and
I Am sure, a Worse Christian.

Lastly, They say, They thereby make them, those useless Creatures, to become
greatly advantageous to Mankind; bring them into a happier Condition: and many
of them become good Christians. etc.

A. How dare we pretend to order things better than an All-Wise Lawgiver has
plainly commanded us? Or think to put those poor Wretches to better Uses, than
an all-wise Providence seems as yet, to have designed them for? If they came
freely, what need a Cargo be carried to purchase 'em? What need of Chains, and
Bolts, and Fetters? And why do many of those poor Wretches endeavor to starve,
or destroy themselves, or leap overboard: If so mighty glad of being carried
into perpetual Slavery? Or if they find themselves happier under their Bondage,
than in their own Country, what is the reason that when one of their
Fellow-Slaves dies, all the rest sing, and rejoice, and dance about him, as
foolishly concluding he is happily returned to his own Country? And th^^ some
of them may be admitted to become Christians, it is more than the Seller knows,
or any was obliges the Purchaser to; Neither can that (...) for the rest. And
surely, methinks, what ha^ been said, should be enough to convince all such as
are not resolved beforehand, that they will not be convinced: or at least, to
render the Case extraordinary dubious; and then the safe^ part is to be chosen;
especially in this Case where (if we are afterward convinced we have done those
poor Wretches any wrong) We can never make them Restitution.

A Short ANSWER To that Part of Predestination Which Asserts, That Christ dyed
for none but the Elect, And that none are Redeemed and Saved by Him but the
Elect only.

Wherein is clearly Discovered, plainly Demonstrated and substantially proved.
That all those who were chosen and elected to Salvation by Gods eternal Decree,
have neither Right, Title nor Interest in Christ nor Christianity, nor in any
other Means whatsoever, that God foreordained for Man's Salvation, except only
their eternal Predestination, Election and Decree. And all that were more than
th^se were useless, unnecessary and superfluous to them, and were to doubt Gods
Decrees.

Written in love for the benefit of Mankind, 1707. By Thomas Lowry.

Jer. 9. 23. Thus says the Lord, Let not the Wise (...) glory in his Wisdom,
neither let the Mighty (...) glory in his Might; let not the Rich Man glory
(...) his Riches, but let him that glories, glory in (...) that he under
stands and kno^eth Me, that I am (...) Lord which exercise Loving Kindness,
Judgment (...) Righteousness in the Earth; for in these things delight, says
the, Lord. Rev. 2. 2. I know thy Works, and thy Labor, (...) thy Patience, and
how thou can not bear (...) which are Evil; and thou have tried them (...)
say they are Apostles, and are not, and have (...) them Liars. A short Answer
To that part of Predestination which asserts, that Christ died for none but the
elect, neither are any other redeemed and saved by him but the elect only.
TO say that Christ dyed for none but the Elect only, and that his Death was
Effectual for none but only the Elect, is a vain and ridiculous story, so long
as you affirm, That from all Eternity they were elected and decreed to
Salvation; such then as were made so sure of their Salvation, stood in (...)
need of a Savior to die for them, as I hope (...) shall make appear. For
according to the doctrine of your own Principle of Predestination, and the true
consequences thereof, Christ died (...) for those that were so elected, nor was
there (...) need of his Death upon any such account, (...) we conclude, that
the Laws and decrees of God, are less authenticle, and more unstable then the
Laws and Decrees of men; for the Laws and Decrees of the (...) and Persians
could not be altered, see the Book of (...); and if the Laws and Decrees of
Earthly (...) so firm, sure and certain, how much more then, firm, sure and
stable, are the Laws and Decrees of the great and mighty (...) of Heaven and
Earth?

It is in vain for you to object, (...) those Elect, (...) Adam; that says
(...) to the purpose; (...) high they had fallen Ten Thousand times, it was
Impossible that they could be (...). Wise King Solmon tells you, (...) Seven
Times, and rises again (...) Ah! they Fell but once in Adam, if it was so as
you say it was. We know that it is a common thing among men, to forgive the
first fault of Children and Youth, and they were not then come to their infant
(...) by thousands of Years after the Fall of Adam. What, my friends! will you
make God more rigid and cruel to his Children, then earthly men are to their
Children? But whether they fell or not Fell, is not the matter in debate at
present, but whether the Election and Decrees of GOD, were Authentic, sure and
certain, or not (...) is the business that is here to be taken notice of and
examined. Therefore either the Decrees of God are authentic, or they are not
authentic, choose which you please. To say the last; viz. That the decrees of
God are not sure and authentic, were most absurd and blasphemous. Therefore
the (...) must be inevitably ^ranted. Then, Christ dyed not at all for the
elect, for these who were Decreed to Salvation could never be lost, as I have
already said. So then the true consequence of your doctrine of Predestination,
is, that Christ dyed in vain, yea that he dyed not at, all for the elect; for
the elect were secure enough without his dying for them; for so long as God is
God, the Decree is sure and their salvation certain without the death of
Christ. So then if (...) made such a Decree as you say he did, in vain was the
Law and the Prophets, in vain was all that Christ did, and all the labors of
his Apostles and all good men were to no purpose. In vain is all Religion; In
vain is all your preaching, praying, singing and reading, and what else you
practice. All is but lost labor. For the Decrees of God cannot be broken nor
altered. Now then, according to your doctrine of Predestination the case stands
thus with every individual man and Woman, If one be decreed for perdition, let
him live Never so holy and righteous a life hell and damnation is their
portion, for the Decree cannot be broken.

Again, if one predestinate to life, should live, Never so wickedly, heaven and
happiness is their portion, for the Decree cannot be altered. Is not this
ric^^y to reward the door of evil with good, and the doer of good with an evil
reward. Is not this to call light darkness, and darkness light, which is
ridiculous. All which ^rises naturally from your doctrine of predestination, as
you hold it.

Is it not strange then that these absurdityes and their inconsistence with God
scripture and reason are not seen into and redressed. Again is it not a great
dishonor to God to have the stability of his decrees questioned, as though he
could not decree the elects salvation without the death of his Son? Is not this
to question his omnipotency, and run him to that pinch, either to break his
Decree, or then to deliver up his well beloved Son to such an ignonunious death
as he under-went.

What! my dear Friends, must God send forth his only Son, in whom he is well
pleased, to ransom from Hell, Death and Destruction, those whom he had elected
from all Eternity, for that single Slip in Adam, which they knew nothing of?
otherwise his decrees were vain, fallible and insignificant, notwithstanding
they were made by an Omnipotent Power from all eternity. Oh! is it not a wonder
that men are not ashamed of such absurd Doctrine.

Again, is it not a great dishonor done to JESUS Christ to say, that be died
for* those that stood in no need of him to die for them, who were so sure of
Salvation as the Predestination, Election and Decree of an omnipotent Power
could make them, such wanted no Savior to die for them, for such never were,
are, nor can be lost.

And now, my Friends, if you think that you are that elect, or a part of that
elect, it is by what is here made most plain and sufficiently evident, that you
can lay no claim to Christ, nor reap any benefit by his meritorious Death and
Sufferings, nor expect Salvation from him; for you are sure enough without him;
for as sure as there is a God in Heaven, as sure are they of Salvation whom he
elects and decrees to Life from all Eternity, without the death of his Son. And
therefore it is in vain for you to expect Salvation from Christ, in so doing
you do but deceive your selves. You may look after God and his eternal Decree
for that, and not from Christ; for if it be true, that you are in the number of
that early Elect, you are sufficiently secure, blow the Storm which way it
will; you need not be beholden to Christ, you do but thereby provoke God to say
to you, as Christ said to his Disciples, O ye of little faith, why do ye doubt?
And therefore you may make up your account with your early Decrees, and not
with Christ.

For Christ was not concerned with you, for ye were never Lost. For the Work
that Christ had to do, was to seek and to save that which was lost, and not
that which was not, nor could not be lost. The certainty of which he plainly
declares himself, he was not sent but to the l^st Sheep of the House of Israel,
Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. Mat. 10. 6. and 15. 24. and Luke 4. 18. These are his
own Words; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel to the Poor; he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, To
preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, To preach the acceptable Year of the
Lord. Read those places, with Isa. 61. 1. (...). and see if it be not true, and
that you have no interest in Christ, is as clear as the noon Day which has no
clouds.

We see here that a part of Christ's Work was to preach the acceptable Year of
the Lord; and to whom he was to preach it, his own Words are very plain; and by
the acceptable Year I understand, that God without respect of Persons was
willing to receive into his love and favor every one that was willing to cease
to do evil, and learn to do well, and believe in Christ the M^ssiah and Savior
of the World, who came to seek and save such as were gone astray and played the
prodigal, with all such as he mentions. So that you see that it was none of
those that were elected from all eternity; for they were safe in all weathers.
But you have neither Day, Month nor Year that is acceptable to preach to any
but your selves, it may be that you may understand a few more then yourselves
to make up the elect, but that you know best. But this I know, that you have
damned, reprobated, and made Vessels of Wrath of all mankind, if your say so,
could do it, except as I have just now excepted.

Endless are the Absurdities that may be raised from your Principles and
Doctrine. You say, the Scripture is your Rule, and the only Rule, but in effect
you Rule the Scriptures, and not the scriptures you; for your Doctrine and
Principles are quite another thing from the Scripture. But more especially in
(...) Principle and Doctrine of Predestination, as is sufficiently evident from
these few Words in answer to this one particular, viz. That Christ died for
none but whom you call the Elect, and that none were nor are redeemed by him
but only them. Oh! here is but little Love and Charity either to God or Man.

Furthermore, for you to think or say, That Christ died for those elect of whom
you speak, is a grand error, and a great mistake in you; I doubt ye have only
dreamed so, and are not yet wakened out of sleep. The sign or signal is given,
you may take the Alarm as you see cause, but if you be in the number of that
early Elect, of which you talk, then are you sufficiently safe and secure,
nothing can alarm you; but if you are not, then are you warned, so that God is
clear of your blood, and so am I, as will yet further appear from what follows.

Neither have you any real foundation for this your assertion in holy
Scripture, and I do not believe that you shall find such an expression from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelations, as that, to wit, That
Christ died for none but the Elect. It may be you may perhaps find it in some
old corrupt Catechism or Confession of Faith, but not in the Bible, for the
whole current of Scripture is against you therein.

For any that God did from Eternity elect to Life, wanted not Christ to die for
them, they were such as could never wander nor go astray, being the first born
of Eternity, that never played the prodigal, nor could they stray, being so
well fenced in with a triple Wall, viz. as first, The Wall of Predestination,
secondly, The Wall of Election, and lastly, The unpassable Wall of a Decree,
made by an Omnipotent Power. So that neither your Elect nor you, (if you reckon
your selves of that number) could never wander nor go astray, so long as God is
GOD, as I have already sufficiently proved. And so, for shame, never more
hereafter doubt nor question God or his Decrees, left ye be turned one amongst
the Unbelievers to seek sanctuary elsewhere, for your ingratitude and
Mis-belief.

So that ye may plainly see and understand, that it was another Elect then you,
one of a latter date then from all Eternity, That Christ was concerned with, to
seek and to save, to gather, build and instruct in all things necessary to
their salvation in order to eternal Life.

Well, my Friends, how do you Relish this discourse? do you not think it
strange to see your selves at once turned away from both Christ and
Christianity, to seek Salvation and Religion suitable to your necessity; for in
Christ and Christianity you can expect neither, so long as you are in that
belief, viz. That God did choose a certain Number of Mankind to Salvation, and
all the rest he Reprobated and Damned, making them Vessels of Dishonor, and
objects of his Wrath forever, they having do^^ neither good nor evil, and that
this was do^^^ before they were in being, how long a time it was before, no
Angel nor Man can tell. As al^^ all your other Absurdities which ye hold, too
tedious here to mention.

Again, they say, As God appointed the Elect to glory, so has he fore ordained
all the means thereunto, that is to say, he foreordained a Cup of Life and
Salvation for the Elect, but a Cup of Death and wrath for all the rest of
mankind. O Uncharitable and Wicked Assertion! most dishonorable to God, and
most pernicious to Mankind; I deny it, as most absurd, and so will God and all
good Men.

To say, that God foreordained any other means for the Salvation of the Elect,
then what he foreordained for all Mankind in general, I also deny it, as a
false and vain story; for God has freely given and granted to all Mankind
(none ^^cepted) the benefit of Christ, who tasted Death for every man, and he
is the common salvation or Propitiation. And God wills the salvation of all
men, without respect of Persons. And he has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, etc. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Where then is the Reprobation of all mankind, except
that (...) that you call the Elect? Here is a very great pinch for you.

If God be sincere in his words, then is your story of Reprobation false, and
you are found to be false witnesses against God; but God must be true in his
words, and all that say other-^ays are ^yars; for who will not rather be^^^ve
Gods general Declaration, then your private ^^^ertion? but this is a little
degression.

I say then, because Christ tasted Death for every man, and God wills the
salvation of all men; These two put together, makes Salvation possible to all
Mankind, and puts every one in a capacity of Life, so that not so much as one
need to be lost, of all mankind; for every one that will, is welcome to eat of
the Bread of Life, and drink of the Water of Life freely.

And Christ himself has promised, That whosoever comes to him, he will in no
ways cast out and his call by his spirit is universal; deny it if you dare.

Neither is it said in holy scripture, That God so loved the Elect, but it is
expressly said, God so love the World etc. That is, all the People in the World,
without respect of Persons, for with God there is no respect of Persons.

Again, for you to say, that these whom God did from all eternity (very early
indeed) predestinate, elect, and Decree to Life and Salvation, that they stood
in need of any means to Salvation, is a story as vain and ridiculous, as that
other assertion (where you affirm, that Christ died for none, nor none are
redeemed by him, but to Elect, only! Is not this to question Gods Varacity and
Decrees? Those Elect wanted no Means no more then they wanted a Savior to die
for them, as I have made appear.

But what Means must you have? The death of his well beloved Son? for shame, is
that the Means you want, beside that what you already have? If that be it, you
are not like to have it although that be your Chiefest Means; for I tell you
again, that I have already substantially proved, that you have neither part,
nor lot, or portion, nor interest in Christ, till you change our Opinion, and
Embrace the true Christian faith, till then content your selves with what
security you already have, for if you be in the ^lumber of that early Elect,
you are above the use of all means, and so consequently want ^one.

But that I may yet make this matter a little ^ore plain both to you and others
also, I say then, have you not the Word, Hand, and ^eal, that is, the
Predestination, Election and Decree of an Omnipotent Power for your security;
and they that have that, have enough, (...) other Means is superfluous and
unnecessary, there that is, nothing else is wanting, and therefore take notice,
your incredulity is a reflection upon God, but much more upon your selves;
(...) on you, that ye could not be content; lust his innocent Son suffer for
you, and be sacrificed to your misbelief? The word of an ^^thly King will go
very far among men, and (...) great matters, and he that has it, thinks
himself secure without Hand or Seal; and were (...) not Impertinent, if not
presumption, in any (...) desire the Kings Hand and Seal to confirm ^is Word?
Would he not take it very ill? (...) how much more if the death of his only son
should be required for confirmation of his promise? But you have both Gods
Word, (...) as it were Hand and Seal to confirm his promise, and yet you must
have for your (...), the death of his Innocent Son also. You might have relied
on his word; for on whomsoever he bestows the noble gift or eternal Life, he
will never retract his Word; for the Gifts and Calling of God are without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29. And now, my Friend, I must tell you, that by a
wrong-Idea, dark Imaginations, and false Conceptions of God, you have given a
false Representation of him, very unlovely, by what you attribute and ascribe
to him. By which ye have rendered the GOD of all Love and Mercy to be more
cruel then the Savages of the Desert; for it is most certain, that they most
carefully nourish and bring up their young ones until they bring them to
perfection. And even the Sea Monsters draw forth the breasts and give suck to
their young. But you say of God, that he has destroyed all his young ones (but
a few whom you call the Elect) by an eternal Decree or fore-ordination, an
infinity of years before they were in being, by which you have denied to all
Mankind, but your selves, any benefit of Christ, or any other means whatsoever
relating to their salvation. And is not this a black portraiture that you have
drawn of the infinite goodness.

Now, if one were in the company of either Turk, Jews or Heathen, De^t, or
Atheist, and should tell them of such a story, How would they laugh and ^ear at
such nonsense, and mock and deride Christianity. Oh! how ridiculous is your
Principle and Doctrine? it is a wonder that you are not ashamed of it.

But it seems the wickedness and absurdity thereof never enters your
Consideration, or that the love of filthy Lucre has blinded your minds and
understandings which is as a thick cloud that interposes betwixt you and the
glorious light of the Sun. This cloud of Darkness and Covetousness has too
long troubled the Christian World (if not other places beside) to the great
detriment and prejudice of many; and too long have you entertained very harsh
and uncharitable Thoughts both of God and all Mankind (by your fruits ye are
known) except your selves, or it may be a few more (as I have already said) but
by the uncertainty thereof it gains the less credit with many people. But be it
true or not, the case is now altered, and you are turned off from all interest
and benefit of Christ, you being that early Elect; and the Pit that you ^iged
for others, you are fallen into it your selves, and as you have done to others,
so is it done unto you.

True and righteous are thy Judgments, O Lord, thou King of Saints, And thou, O
Lord, art free and clear of all such cruelty, partiality and respect of
Persons, and thy integrity is unquestionable; for thou have given the ben^fit
of Christ to all Mankind, and if they will they may all come and eat of the
Bread of Life, and drink of the Water of Life, without Money and without Price,
yea, even the wickedest man that lives. The which may be matter of exceeding
great and joyful News to all People upon earth (and can be nothing else but the
everlasting Gospel, after such long and great darkness that has been over the
earth, and has, as it were Eclipsed the Sun, by which the heavenly influences
of the celestial Bodies has been denied to Mankind in general. Howbeit, the
Lord has had his own, in all Ages of the World, whose intelect or
understanding has not been clouded) but if any shall chance to miss of this
noble gift and benefit of Christ, the fault is their own, and their destruction
is of themselves. Hos.

But now, my Friends, do not deceive your selves, and that you may not be
deceived, I have News to tell you, which ye never heard of before, to wit, what
ever Means God foreordained for Man's salvation, was not for your early Elect,
for they were secure, as I have substantially proved; For they never played the
Prodigal, but were always in their Fathers House, and never offended him by
going astray, and all that their Father has is theirs, but what the Father
pleases to bestow upon poor prodigals, and such like necessitated Persons, of
all Ranks and degrees, of all sorts and sizes whatsoever, But do not you
begrudge that, for the has enough for you and us both. Wherefore you may rest
your selves contented, and I will go and try to find out the true Elect, an
Elect of a later date then from all eternity, even Gods Elect for whom Christ
came, and with whom Christ was concerned

The next thing then under consideration, is she elect that Christ was
concerned with, whom he came to seek and to save, whom he did and does and
shall at last gather from the four Winds of Heaven into his everlasting
Kingdom. It is not those who never went astray, nor wandered from their Fathers
House. It is not those who never played the prodigal, it is not the whole, for
such need no Physician; nor is it the Righteous, for they had no need of him;
neither could it be those whom they say God from all Eternity did choose, elect
and decree to salvation, for such could never go astray, as I have
substantially proved. Seeing then that none of all those, nor any part of
those, are that elect with whom Christ was concerned, where then be they, and
who and what are they? I answer, They are such as were lost, and gone astray in
the wilderness of this World, they are troubled, perplexed, and persecuted by
this World; they are the wanderers up and down, whom the Men of this World
think not worthy to live in it. But to be more particular, they are the poor
and needy, the hungry and thrifty, and such as were heartily willing to take
Christ's Cross upon them, and follow him in the Regeneration. And these were
chiefly such as Fishers, Tanners, Tent-makers, Shepherds and Taylo^s, with
other Mechanics: As also such of all Ranks and qualities of People, as were
willing to renounce this world with all the superfluous vanities th^ireof, and
follow him through all difficulties into his everlasting Kingdom, and all such
as did prefer Heaven to Earth, and Life eternal to life Temporal, see Christ's
own Words Luke 4. 18. 19. Isa. 61 verse. 1. 2.

They are the sick and diseased, the Blind and the Lame, the Deaf and the Dumb,
and such as were possessed of Devils; And such as were Sinners, Publicans and
Prodigals, etc. and such as Christ himself in that respect having not whereon
to lay their head. These were they with whom Christ was concerned, and of whom
he was to gather an Elect, and to raise the fabric of the new Creation, and a
Church without spot or wrinckle, holy, harmless and undefiled, a Present to the
Father. These are the Church that is created a new in Christ JESUS, the new
Creation o^ Kingdom of Christ the Messiah. These are the Church of which GOD
did foreknow of, before the gathering of it, and every one of them he did
predestinate or sore-ordain, that they all should be conform to the Image of
his Son, that he, viz. Christ might be the first born among many Brethren: He
the Head and Captain, and they the Members and Soldiers; He the Builder and
they the Building, he himself being the chief corner stone thereof.

Now therefore God did afore-ordain or appoint, that every one of that new
Creation, every stone of that new Building, every Member of that Church without
spot, every subject of that Kingdom of the Messiah should be conform to Christ,
their Captain, in Holiness and Righteousness, in Innocence and Meekness, in
Submission and Self denial, etc. And every one of them must purify themselves
as he is pure; otherways they could not be listed Soldiers under Christ's
Banner. And when all the Work of Christ is accomplished, and all his Dominions
and Kingdom is perfectly established and subject unto him, then shall he render
it up unto the Father, and the Son himself shall be subject (or a subject of
that Kingdom) and GOD shall be all in all.

And now, my dear Friends, My advice to you all is, that you renounce that evil
Principle, and all the absurdities thereof, and all other Absurdities that you
hold, and all harsh thoughts of God, and come over to the pure Christianity,
and list your selves Soldiers under Christ's Banner, where you shall find
Protection and a Kingdom which shall never have an end. This briefly is the
true and only Means for you; This is the right Way to go in, and certain Means
for all Christians to use. This is the Means which God has foreordained or
appointed for all that would be Heirs with Christ and fellow Citizens of the
New Jerusalem.

Thus you see what Means God appointed or foreordained for the Elect, with
whom Christ was concerned: which Means is altogether useless, unnecessary and
superfluous to such as were elected from all eternity. And it is my earnest
desire unto the Lord, on your behalf, that your Eyes may be opened to see the
things that concern the everlasting Peace and Welfare of your Immortal Souls.
And as you come to apply your Minds to that divine Light, Spirit, Grace or
Power which God has Implanted or placed in you, ye shall see the Wonderful
Things of GOD, and his dealing with the Children of Men.

Farewell, I wish you no worse then my self, and I am and shall remain your
true and most assured Friend.

By the Word Mankind, I mean both Men and Women.

Good News to all Parents Of such Children, As die in their Infant state, etc.
The safety and Salvation of Children, and Idiots, sufficiently proved from
Scripture and Reason, in Answer to the following Query, to wit,
SInce the holy Scripture does so plainly declare, that they who Labor shall
receive a Reward, and that must be the proper act and deed of every one of us,
and without the performance thereof, there is no promise of salvation to
neither Man nor Women, How then shall Children and Idiots be saved, who are not
capable to labor in their Lords Vineyard?

1. I answer, first, How they are saved, seems to be a secret not yet revealed,
and secret Things belong to GOD, but notwithstanding the secrets of the Lord
are with those that love and fear him, and therefore so far as our Reason and
Judgment is enlightened by GOD, so far may we look into that Mystery; for there
is nothing relating to our Salvation, th^^ is needful for us to know, that is
not either revealed, or else we are put in a capacity (...) find it out our
selves.

2. Answer. Children in their Infant-state ar^ holy, harmless, innocent and
righteous, other ways Christ would never have made that Comparison, that those
that would enter into Heaven m^st become as little Children. And in that
innocent state Children are not capable of any Law and where there is no Law,
there is (...) Transgression. And it is very inconsistent with the Love and
Righteousness of GOD, (...) condemn any holy, innocent and Righteous Person.
Neither are Idiots capable of any Law, and where no Law is, there can be (...)
Transgression. And therefore Children and Idiots are beyond the reach of
Condemnation for Justice cannot take hold of them.

3. I Answer, That whereas the holy Scripture ^aith expressly, That every One
shall receive a Reward according to the deeds done in the (...) whether good or
evil, This cannot be spoken (...) Children and Idiots, who are not guilty (...)
matter of fact; neither can it be said to the^^ Go work in the Lords Vineyard;
neither (...) they capable of any command, and far less work, and therefore no
Condemnation to the^ for a man that has but one Leg cannot go far in a Day, a
Week, or a Year, as that (...) can go which has two Legs, and it was most
unreasonable to require it; neither can that has no Legs, go with him that
has two legs; even so, both Men and Women have (...) and reason to go upon,
but Children and Idiots have neither.

Obj. But notwithstanding that they are not guilty in (...) of faith, yet by
reason of their original sin, (...) will take hold of them, and condemn them.

I answer. Tush! that is but a vain story, for I cannot be saved by the faith of
another, neither shall I be condemned for the sin of another, for it is the
deeds that I do in the (...) that will save or damn me; for notwithstanding
that both God and Christ has done their part, in order to my salvation, yet if
I neglect to do my part, I shall be damned, for (...) that both GOD and Christ
has done. So ^^at it is the Soul that Sins that shall die, (...) not the Son
for the Father, Ezekiel. 33. So ^uch in answer to this Objection for the
undeceiving of the simple. So that we see when (...) Scripture speaks of
Rewards, according to the deeds done in the body, it must be understood matter
of fact, and speaks to such Persons are capable to exercise their Reason and
(...), which Children and Idiots are not, and therefore they are not concerned
with those scriptures which so speak. And it were unreasonable to rank them in
with those to whom (...) scriptures speak.

Fourthly, I answer, It is wonderful to consider how far the Virtue, efficacy
and power (...) the meritorious Acts of Christ may be extended. Our great
Learned Doctors of Theologic (...) extend the sin of Adam to the utter most
bounds of the Earth, by which all mankind are infected, even those who never
knew (...) heard of such a Man as Adam, and this (...) say is by Imputation,
that is, God Impute the sin of Adam to all his Posterity; and if the case will
stand thus, as well to those (...) did not, as those who did sin after the
similitude of Adams Transgression.

Others of them say, Adams sin is convey^^ by generation; others say, there is
a seed of (...) transmitted down from Adam to all his posterity. But they are
all of them mistaken.

I say then, to remedy that evil, and to me^^ what Adam marred, God sent forth
his Son ma^^ of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. Who himself became the great Sacrifice,
Propitiation and Atonement for all the Offspring of Adam, and tasted death
for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. That all Mankind might be put in a capacity of Life.
An^ whether these Doctors will or nill, the effici^^ of Christ's Death and
Suffering will extend ^^^self as far and further then the Sin of Adam and this
makes the matter broader then it (...) Long. But yet, this is not all, the
power (...) virtue of Christ is yet of a far Larger extent (...) the holy
Apostle tells us, that by him all things were established whether they were
things (...) Heaven or things on Earth.

And some are of that opinion, he went down and brake open Hells Gates and set
at liberty all the damned Souls: and it does very well consist with Reason;
otherwise, to what purpose went he to preach to the spirits Prison; for if he
did not set at liberty those spirits, his preaching was to no purpose, and
(...) benefit them nothing; as also that he established the holy Angels, from
falling. Such (...) Honor, and Dignity God has invested (...) withal, for his
Humility, Obedience and self-denial. Phil. 2 8. 9. wherefore God has (...)
highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name. So that it
may be (...) of Christ, that he is God of Gods, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and next and immediate to God himself. But when he says, (...) Things
are put under him, it is manifest that (...) is excepted which did put all
things under him, (...) Cor 15. 27. So wounderfully far is the Power (...)
Virtue of Christ extended, without any limitation, (except as is excepted)

And now, as concerning Children and Idiots, (...) what should hinder this
mighty Power (...) Virtue to extend it self (if need be) to children and
Idiots, since he did show such expressions of his Love to little Children, whom
(...) took in his Arms and blessed them, and (...) Suffer little Children to
come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

There is no fear then that Christ will cast ^way such holy, harmless,
righteous and innocent Creatures, as little Children are. For they having so
little time here, and so small a portion of this World, so that in justice and
equity they can never miss of Heaven, therefore we (...) not doubt of their
salvation; for as sure as ever God gives any Creature a being, as (...) he
provides for its well being, things suitable its Nature, that unless the
Creature forfeit (...) Right there unto by Transgression, which Children are
not capable to do, therefore as sure as (...) have a being, as sure are they
of a Reward from God, and that must be in Heaven, (...) it is not in Earth.

And as for Idiots, they seem to be (...) under the same circumstances with
little Children, for they have but a small portion, a little comfort in this
World, therefore it see to me that nothing but heaven can make the Retaliation;
and as they have a being, as (...) may they expect Gods Reward; and what (...)
that be, below Heaven and Happyness?

Fif^ly. I answer. If we seriously consider this great and mighty power (...)
Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, in things relating to the
Government and gathering, Instruction and protection of (...) Church; and
seeing it is so, he can easily Impute or apply (if need be, as I have already
hinted) his Merits to Children and Idiots whereby they may be saved.

But the case is not so with Adult Person that is, such as are come to Age, and
are capable to exercise their Reason and sense, by which they may discern
between good and evil, the Salvation runs in another Channel, for if (...) will
not work, they (...) not (...), (...) they (...) (...) Labor in the Vineyard,
they shall receive (...) wages; if they will not improve their Talent, they
shall have no Reward; and they that will not work in Summer may starve in
Winter, etc.

For there is no Salvation without Regeneration; and No Cross, no Crown. Now it
is not so with Children and Idiots, they need not (...) regenerate who never
were degenerate; they that are not capable of Commands and Instruction are not
capable to do work; but Children and Idiots are not capable of Instruction and
commands, E^go, etc.

Sixthly. I answer, If we consider the great and mighty Power of an Omnipotent
Being, we will find no difficulty of the salvation of Children and Idiots, how
that by his spirit (if they stand in need) they may be inwardly taught and
instructed in all the points of Christianity and of Christ, and how he can save
by the greatness of his Power, and various means which we are ignorant of,
neither is it needful for us to know. And though we may think it very strange and
mysterious, yet it is but a small thing in the Eyes of him that knows how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, even he that ^ormeth the
Mountains, and creates the Winds, and tells unto man his Thoughts, who by
his mighty Power stretched out the Heavens, and laid the Foundation of the
Earth, and sets bounds to the spacious Sea, who makes the Sun, Moon, and Stars
to keep their courses, who made Heaven and Earth, and Seas, and all that is in
them, great Governor of the Universe, and Captain General of all the Hosts
thereof, and by the greatness of this Power it shall be made known to every one
of those heavenly inhabitants, how and by what means they did attain to such
unspeakable Felicity and Life eternal, whereby their joy shall continually
increase, and their Hearts and Mouths filled with Hallelujahs unto the Lord.

Seventhly I answer. The will of Children and Idiots are bounded by the Will of
God, neither are they free-agents until they come Gradually to the use of their
Reason and Sense, and while they are thus Bounded, they are free of sin and
transgression, and all their Actions are according to the will of God, and not
their own, so long as they are under his Tuition and Government. And we may
assure our selves, that whomsoever God bounds and makes us depend upon him, he
bounds all to good, so that they can do no evil, therefore it is written, he
that is born of God cannot sin, or sins no^. And because they are not
capable to love themselves and things temporal, more then God and things
eternal, we need not fear their welfare.

Eighthly. I answer. Children are not of that Number which need a Savior, they
want no Savior, they never sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression,
they never went astray nor played the Prodigal; Children and Idiots were never
sick, therefore need no Physician; they are the righteous, whom Christ came not
to call. He was not concerned with them, nor they with him. They are all
Virgins, they never were defilled; and therefore they must be the ^44000 which
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. They were always in their Fathers House,
and never offended him; they certainly must be the 99 which never did wander.
And therefore (...) there be; as some say there is, a certain Number of Mankind
chosen by God, whom he from all Eternity did predestinate, Decree and elect
(...) Life and Salvation, I say, if that be true; as some affirm it is, Then
may we assure our selves, (...) be certain, that Children and Idiots are (...)
Number that were so elected and decreed (...) Life and Salvation; which is a
great and grievous disappointment to the predesti^arian (...) for they thought
that they themselves were that Number that were so chosen of God, but now they
may see they are not; which is heavy News and cold Comfort for them, yet (...)
Warning that they may look about them in time, and consider what to do, before
it is too late.

Ninthly. I answer, Children and Idiots are in (...) actual possession of that
which is Good, viz. Holiness, Righteousness, Innocence and Peace, of which four
the Kingdom of Heaven does consist. This Proposition I shall prove, first from
Scripture, and secondly, from Reason, Deuteronomy. 23, 24. Children are Gods blessing.
Psalm 127. 3. Lo, Children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward. And verse (...). The Man that ^ath them is said to be happy,
Mark, 10. 13. 14. 15. 16. And the Apostle Paul says, That Children are holy.
If it had not been so, Christ would (...) have taken them up in his arms and
blessed th^^ and said, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, no^ Paul said, They
were holy. Secondly, They wh^ are in the actual possession of any thing, cannot
be dispossessed but by a legal decision, but Children are in the actual
possession of righteousness, etc. against such there is no Law. (...) Tim, 1.
9. It is the free, and not the bounded agents that offend the Lord, and because
the^ are free, no force, violence nor constraint (...) put upon their wills,
and yet Act that which is evil, notwithstanding they have both power and
knowledge to do otherwise, and to Act thus is the sin of a free Agent.

Now a bounded Agent cannot sin, because his will is bounded by the will of his
Lord, and and the will of his Lord he knows he is bonnd to do and he willingly
does it, and consequently never blameworthy.

Of this Order, Rank or Class, is all young Children and Idiots, whose will is
always bound by the Will of God, until they come to the years of discretion,
and gradually receive the use of their Reason and senses.

At which time such as are fit for the holy War, and to work in the
Lords-Vineyard, are turned out free Agents, the rest, being righteous are taken
away from the evil to come. Isa. ^7. 1, 2. according to the good will and
pleasure (...) him that wisely knows how to order and dispose of all his
Creatures, and wills the salvation of all mankind, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2. Pet. 3. 9.
Whereby we may plainly and clearly see that the salvation of Children and
Idiots are after another way, and runs not directly in that Channel in which
our salvation does. For we that are free agents and come to the use of our
Reason and sense, must fight the Lords Battles, labor in his Vinyard, improve
our Talents, trim our Lamps, put on the wedding Garment, etc. and work out our
salvation, Phil. 2. 12. all which Children and Idiots are not capable of, as I
have already said. And I say and do affirm, that life and good, and death and
evil is set before all free Agents, but it is not so with Children and Idiots.

Tenthly. I answ. The whole Attributes of God oblige him to give a Reward to
Children and Idiots, because they are his own Children; for we are all his
Children by Creation, although many of us be unworthy of such a Father, and of
such a high and noble Pedigree, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Isa. 51. 1. For what man is there
in the whole Universe that can or will cruelly and bloodily murder his own
young innocent Child, he knowing it certainly to be his own? such a man then so
cruel would be a monster, and not a man; nor do I think that the very worst of
men would willingly and wittingly be guilty in matter of fact.

Again, contrary ways, what man is there among the Sons of Men, that will be so
unnatural as not to give, his own Children a portion of his goods, according to
his ability? year it is natural for the Parents to provide for their Children,
2 Cor. 12. 14. And seeing the case is so among Men, how then can we have less
charity to our Lord and Maker, (the very fountain it self of all Love and
Goodness) then to our fellow Creature? beside what is here said, this tenth
Answer is enough totally to confound original sin and eternal Reprobation, and
will clear God of them both. But this is a little digression, but I am near a
close.

Again, I say, to do no evil is to do good; and think no evil, is an Act that
is good. So here is matter of fact, which is their own proper Act and deed
worthy of reward. Again, they are innocent and righteous, holy and harmless,
and meek and lowly in spirit, all which make up the wedding Garment, with which
they are clothed, and their Lamps trimed, and being so ready shall enter in
with the Bridegroom into everlasting Bliss.

Thomas Lawry

SALVATION WITHOUT Outward Baptism Substantially proved from the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. In Opposition to that new Argument or
Assertion, to wit, No Promise of Salvation without Water Baptism.

Written in love to the Children of Men, July 1 st, 1709. By Thomas Lowry.

Look unto Me and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth, for I am God, and there
is none else, Isa. 45. 22. Salvation without Outward Baptism, etc.
IN the holy Scriptures, the Doctrine of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
there is many promises of Salvation without the least mentioning of one word of
water Baptism, as Deuteronomy. 28 to v. 16. Ezekiel. 18. and 33. not one word of
Water Baptism. Isa 55. 7. Mich. 6. 8. compared with Deuteronomy. 10 12. with hundreds
of places to be ^ound in the Old Testament. Neither are such promises wanting
in the New Testament, Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30. compared with chap. 5. v 3. to 12.
and chap. 10 v. 37, 38, 39. Mark 8. 34. Luke 9 23, 24. in all these not so much
as one word of Water Baptism; whereby we may plainly see that it is not the
many and diverse Washings or Baptisms that will do our business, in order to
attain eternal Salvation We must deny our selves and put on Christ's Yoke, and
follow him in the Regeneration, to which is annexed the Promise of Life and
Salvation, without one word of Water Baptism; that is, we must deny Pride, and
all the Superfluities and vain Customs of this world, and enter the
Regeneration, bearing our daily Cross, and they that are faithful until death
shall then receive a Crown of Life, though they have never been baptized with
Water.

Again, Jo^. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. In all this Conference there is not one
word of Water Baptism, and yet he directs the Woman how she might attain
Salvation; he neither bids her go to the Priests, nor yet to his Disciples, nor
yet to John to be baptized with water, but in plain words tells her how she may
be saved. The Woman taken in Adultery, whom Christ did absolve, he gave her no
command to be baptized with Water, but like a harmless Lamb, in a few words,
shows her the only true way to Salvation, Go and sin no more. And it is very
observable, that of the Multitude whom he cured, he never directed one of them
to be baptized with Water, as well knowing how insignificant that sign or
ceremony was to Salvation, and therefore himself baptized none with water, nor
yet so much as once makes mention of it in all his long and unwearied
Preachings. Again, the man that was blind from his Birth, John 9. whom Christ
cured, ^e neither commanded, counseled nor advised him to water baptism, who
for his noble and valiant testimony to Christ was by the proud Priests and
learned Rabbis of the Jews cast out of their Society. In this distress Christ
finds him out, and takes him into his, upon his acknowledgment of his Belief,
verse 38. By which it plainly appears, that Salvation is annexed to believing,
to all that are under the Gospel Dispensation. And it will be yet more clear
and plain if these Passages of Scripture be duly considered, Mark 1. 15. The
first thing that Christ preached was, Repent and believe the Gospel. And John
5. 24. and 6 29. This is the work of God, that ye do believe. Mark 9. 23. All
things are possible to him that believes. Then is Salvation possible without
outward Baptism. And John 16. 16. He that believes shall be saved. John
3.15,16,17,18. and verse. 36. and 6.35. v. 40. and 11.25. and 14. 12. and 20.
31. Oh! how great is the strength of true Belief!

Now, every one of these Citations (with many more besides) have a faithful
Promise of Salvation annexed to every one of them, by him that could not lie,
without the least regard had to Water Baptism; nor have they relation to
Water Baptism, neither have these Promises any dependence upon it; which
evidently appears from Peter's own confession, Acts 10. 34,44. These having
received the true Baptism, there was no more need of any sign or ceremony of
Water, since they had received the substance; for as the Day breaks the Shadows
fly away; neither had Peter any command in all his Commission so to do, nor to
use any Jewish Rites or Ceremonies among the Gentiles; the truth of this will
yet further appear from the Instructions of the whole Church of Jerusalem to
the Gentiles, and Paul, who was the great Apostle of the gentiles, declares in
plain words, That he had no Commission to baptize with Water.

But now look back to Mark 16. 16. and Mat. 28. 19. from whence, they say, they
have their Commission for Water Baptism; but I deny there is any Command in
Mat. 28. 19. for water Baptism, nor yet in Mark 16. 16. nor any mention made
there of Water Baptism; for their Salvation and Damnation is annexed to
Believing or Dis-believing the Gospel, without any dependence on Baptism,
unless it be the true one that purges away all sin, but Water Baptism cannot
purge away one sin, so insignificant is it to Salvation; and therefore down
falls to nothing that new Assertion, viz. No promise of Salvation without
Water Baptism.

Again, Mat. 19 16. there came one to Christ, and said, Good Master, what good
thing shall I do, that I may have eternal Life? Christ said unto him, If thou
would enter into Life, keep the Commands, and sell that thou have, and give
to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in heaven, and come and follow Me.
Here is a most sure and certain Promise of Salvation without Water Baptism,
backed with two Witnesses more, to wit, both Mark and Luke, Mark 10. 21.
besides his former Instructions, Christ bids him take up his Cross and follow
him. The same Instructions are recorded in Luke 18. 18. And this threefold
Cord is not easily broke, and a fourfold Cord is yet more stronger; for there
is both Christ and the three Evangelists that are one entire Testimony, That by
keeping Gods Commands, by dispossessing our hearts and affections of the world
by true belief, and taking up the Cross (for No Cross, No Crown) and following
the Example of our blessed Savior, to all which is annexed most sure and
certain Promises of Salvation, without Water Baptism; for if it had been ^o
needful to Salvation as this new coined Argument would have us to understand,
Christ would never have omitted the propagation of it, all the while he taught
on earth. I say, this new coined Argument or Assertion (or rather a dream of
some dark Imagination to maintain self-Interest) is so smooth and cunningly
devised, that in the ears of ignorant People it passes for good Coin
unquestioned, and makes the simple believe they have gotten that which indeed
they have not got, which is very detrimental to the advancement of Christ's
Kingdom here upon earth.

And therefore my dear Friends and Brethren, If interest were set aside, and
the true Baptism preached and propagated through the world, I mean the baptism
of the holy Ghost, that purifies and cleanes the heart, and burns all sin, and
makes the old Fabric a new Creation, a fit Temple for God to dwell in, this is
the Substantial Baptism, which has the certain Promise of Salvation to all
that receive it, and abides in the operation of it, without the Sign or
Ceremony of Water Baptism. And how beneficial would this be to both the learned
and unlearned. O! how it would advance the Interest and kingdom of Christ upon
earth. And so all the Lovers of God and seekers of his Glory, the good of their
Neighbor, and the eternal well-being of their Immortal Souls, would become
Preachers of Righteousness, either in words or actions, and some in both, till
the earth were full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Seas,
Isa. 11. 9. The Air would become temperate, the blustering Winds moderate, the
mighty Raging and Roaring of the Seas calmed, and the extremes of Heat and Cold
abated, and the Earth be like Paradise, and all Creatures would rejoice in the
goodness of the Lord; Isa. 55. and chap, 65. 16. to the end; and so no more
great Sums of Money paid for preaching, for all would be taught of God. And
great will be the Peace of that day. To further on this blessed state is to
help the Lord against the mighty, not with carnal but spiritual weapons, for
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. But to turn to a
conclusion from this digression, I say, to conclude this Brief consideration, I
think, I may safely say of Water baptism, as the Apostle Paul said of
circumcision, 1 Cor. 7. 19. says he, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but keeping Gods commands; so it is neither the having, nor
the wanting of Water baptism that makes a true Christian, but a new creature, 1
Cor. 7. 19. compare with Gal. 2. 7. and 5. 6. for without the regeneration of
all that is degenerate, there is no Salvation, nor entrance into Gods Kingdom.

And therefore since Christ and his Apostles were the true Presidents and
Patterns of Christianity, it must Inevitably follow from thence* that all the
Articles of the Christian faith were commanded and practiced by Christ and his
Apostles: But baptism with water, in the Name of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, was neither commanded nor practiced by Christ nor his Apostles, and
therefore is no article of the Christian faith among us Gentiles And as those
other Arguments from Scripture, so this last from Reason, is most infallibly
true and certain.

What sins we are to Remit, and what we are not to Remit, are clearly and
plainly Resolved in answ* to the following Questions.
Quest. 1. A Re we Obliged to remit or forgive all Injuries done against Our
Person, Property or Reputation, without Repentance or Retaliation, if it be in
the power of the Injurer?

Answer. All Injuries ignorantly and undesigningly done by the Injurer, against
our Person or Reputation, we are obliged to Remit without Repentance; but
Injuries against our Property are not to be remitted without Retaliation or
Restitution, if it be in the power of the Injurer. For the first of these, we
have a President from Christ and his Followers, Luke 23 34 Acts (...) 60. but
for the last I know no President; but Injuries designedly done by the Injurer
against our Person, Property or Reputation, are not to be Remitted without true
Repentance, as also the Restitution or Reparation of that part of our Property
in which we were injured; We may, if we please, Remit all Injuries whatsoever
without Repentance or Restitution, but we are not bound to do it, by any Law or
Command that I know of; for if God should command us to Remit all Injuries^
without either Repentance, Retaliation or Restitution, then he himself i hereby
obliged to do the like, for Examples sake; for Christ faith, If we forgive Men
the^^ Trespasses, our heavenly Father will forgive our Trespasses; and if so,
where is the Damned and Reprobated Persons? For if all Offenses be Remitted
both by God and Man, then no Hell nor Damaution; to assert which were absurd,
and repugnant both to Scripture and Reason; for true and unfeigned Repentance
is the Foundation Ground or Pillar upon which Forgiveness or Remission is
built, to which God, Scripture and Reason do agree.

Now if we are to Remit, as is already said, then it be^^oveth us to know from
what sort of Ignorance these Offenses and injuries do proceed; for there is two
sorts of Ignorance, viz. one sort of Ignorance is not in our power to help, as
for instance, We behold the glorious Sun, Moon and Stars, but we cannot tell
what Matter they are made of. The second sort of Ignorance is that which God
has put in our power to help, by the assistance of his Grace and Spirit, which
he never with-draws from none, no, not the worst of men, so long as he allows
them to breathe on his earth. So that our Negligence, Unwatchfulness and
Misimproving our Talent is all our own Fault, and therefore the Apostle ^aith,
That when you might have been (...) of others, you have need of one to teach
you the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12. For, (...) the
first sort of ignorance we are not accountable; for our God commands us nothing
but w^^t is possible for us to do; but for the last sort of Ignorance, we are
and must be accountable which puts us all upon our uttermost Diligence in a
Search after Wisdom; for ignorance will be no Excuse in matters that we might
have known, or ought to know. So that from this last sort of ignorance must
proceed all the Offenses and Injuries that we are to Remit. And this brings me
to a second Question.

Quest. 2. Those Jews which crucified Christ, was it not in their power to know
that they did evil in so doing? or was it in their power to know? If the first,
how could they be condemned for their utter inability? If the last, how comes
it to pass that Christ prayed for Pardon of those ^ins which these Jews either
knew, or might have known them to be sin?

Answ. It cannot be the sins of Knowledge that Christ prayed be to forgiven;
see what is said against such Wickedness, 1 Samuel 3. The sins of the House of
Eli shall no^ ^e purged with Sacrifice, etc. Neither could it be Willful sins
that Christ prayed might be Remitted; For Willful sins there remains no
Sacrifice, Heb. 10. 26. Neither could it be Presumptuous sins that Christ
prayed might be Forgiven; for that seems to be a greater sin than either of the
two former, 1 Samuel 1^ 23 Psalm. 19. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Neither could it be the
sin of that sort of Ignorance which is not in the power of Man to help, which
Christ prayed for the Remission of, for that could produce no sin, as I have
already hinted; for our God is so righteous, so just, so merciful and loving a
Father to all his Creatures, that he will not charge them with Impossibilities,
no more than he will o^ can cease to be God. Nor do I think that Christ
levelled his Petition against any of these four ^ins, but only against our
careless, sloathful and negligent improvement of these divine Gifts and Graces
which we have received of God to work out our Salvation by.

Quest. 3. But if Christ did himself remit, and also prayed to God that he also
would remit those Sns of Ignorance, which these Jews did commit in crucifying
of Christ; and if we are bound by the Rules of Christianity to follow Christ's
Example, will not this Doctrine open a door to a careless and ignorant way of
living; and he that is most Ignorant may Lay claim to the greatest Privilege
in Remission, and so plead Christ's Example therein? Here is a pinch indeed.

Answ. What sins we are to remit, and what sins we are not to remit, I refer to
the forepart of the Answer to the first Question; as also, if all Offenses and
Injuries were to be remitted, both by God and Man, then would there not be lost
one of all the Offspring of Adam; and consequently, neither Hell nor
Reprobation; This I also refer to the Answer of the first Query. And now, to
shut up close that open door to a Libertine kind of life, let all People know
(if there be any such as do not know) that God is a free Agent, and may, if he
please, remit all sins and Offenses whatsoever done against him, but without
true and unfeigned Repentance, and forsaking the evil, and cleaving to that
which is good, there is neither Precept, President nor Example for any such
thing in all the holy Scriptures, that I know of; but on the contrary it is
expressly said, That GOD by no means will clear the guilty, but will render a
Reward to every one according to their deeds, Exodus 23. 7. and Chap. 34. 7. 1.
Cor. 3. 8. 2. Cor.. 5. 10.

And as for Man, he being made in the likeness of God, he also is a free Agent,
and may, if he please, remit all Offenses and injuries done against him, but he
is not bound to do so, by any Law or Command, as I have already said. These two
joined together, do make such a strong Bolt to bar that Door, that there can be
no entrance there to any Libertine kind of life. Therefore let none presume to
offend or dishonor God, or disgust and injure their Neighbor, and so pretend
their Ignorance was the cause; but let such remember, that it is said, there is
no Darkness nor shadow of Death where the workers of Iniquity can hide
themselves, Job. 34. 21, 22. Chap. 31. 4. And the Eyes of the Lord run to and
fro through the Earth, beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15. 3. Job. 34.
21. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

It Is true, there was a time of Ignorance, in which it is said God wincked at,
but now he commands all to repent and turn to their Maker, he having given a
more fuller and clearer dispensation then what he had formerly done.

And therefore none need to pretend Ignorance, for every one has Light and
Grace sufficient, it they will make use of it, to rule and regulate their Life
and Conversation by.

Now may it not be supposed, that th^se times of Ignorance at which God winked,
(here spoken of by the Apostle Paul, Acts 17. 30.) commenced from Adams Fall,
to the Resurrection of Christ, or rather among the Gentiles from the beginning
of Idolatry, till that time that Peter was sent to Cornelius the Centurion, who
was a Gentile, and having received his Commission, after he had seen the vision
of the Sheet that was let down from Heaven by the four Corners thereof, which
things done, Peter neither makes Objection nor Delay to proclaim and preach the
Gospel of Christ to and among the Gentiles, which was glad Tidings to all
Christians, and put an end to those times of Ignorance at which God wincked,
Acts. 17. 30.

Now the Certainty and Circumstances of this Commission makes that in Mat. 28.
the more doubtful; for if that be certain, as some suppose, then what need was
there either of Peter's Vision or Commission, Acts 10 11. C^^p^^rs And thus the
Partition Wall that was betwixt Jew and Gentile, is totally broken down,
according to ^eters own words, Act, 10. 34. 3^. And therefore he that is the
great LORD both of Jew and Gentile, without respect of Persons, commands all
men every where to Repent of the evil, and turn to the good, Isa. 55. 7.
without which there is no Promise of Salvation to neither Man nor Woman; for no
Cross, no Crown.

So having said what I think needful, in answer to that Question, easing of
that Pinch, and barring of that pretended Door, I shall shut up this brief
Discourse, in the words of the Prophet, Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old
for the King, it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the Pile thereof
is fire and much Wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does
kindle it.

Now, if the Love of God and a serious Consideration of these Words, do not
fright and deter People from sinning, such must needs be in a miserable
Condition; For if this do it not, I know not what else will do it; however,
here is mentioned the final Doom in the future state, most Impartially, to
Rich and Poor, High and Low, Noble and Ignoble, and to all the Workers of
Iniquity.

Thomas Lawry.
June 1^. 1709.
Postscript.
Christian Reader,
AS I would not be sound in Flattery, so I would not be Remiss in my Duty in
giving this Author his true value, who, when thou have ^ead his Treatise, and
^eest what a high esteem and tender Regard he had of the glory of GOD, and the
Everlasting wellbeing of the Souls of all Men, thou can not but esteem him to
have been a worthy Author; for in the place where he was known, his pious
innocent Life and Practice did bespeak his worth far above all the
Commendations that a Postscript can give of him. But unto strangers that knew
him not, I honestly declare unto them, for harmlessness and Innocence, within
the bounds of my knowledge, I know not his fellow upon Earth, excepting one
other Man; and he has left this Mite of his as a Token of his Love he had to
the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and for the benefit and well-being of their
Immortal Souls. And he was a diligent Searcher into the innocent and harmless
Principles of Christianity, and also of the many Absurdities, Falsehoods and
Errors that were crept into the Name of the Christian Faith, and particularly
this of Reprobation, that ever God did Reprobate any of his Creatures,
especially his Creature Man, who was made in his own Image; this assertion
being so dishonorable to God and pernicious to his Creature Man, he looked upon
this to be a Monster, and so has used his Christian endeavor in its Detection.

And if any Predestinarian should pretend to answer the Labors of this worthy
Author, I desire them to tell the world whether Man be not a free Agent, that
is to say, man has a free Will to pitch upon his own Choice in things relating
to his Salvation or Condemnation, either by his Creator or by any other
secondary Causes produced by Omnipotency, to frustrate him of his free choice?
And whether or no God has not furnished out his Creature Man by his Grace,
completely, whereby he is in enabled to perform his Creators Requirings, yea or
nay? And if not, why does God require of his Creature Impossibilities? Or
whether he be made a bounded Agent, according to this following Example.

I suppose that a Carpenter with great pains and labor did make a Cart-wheel,
and when he had made it, gave it a command to get up and run toward the Sun
rising; it having no Power given it, it naturally lies still, and disobeys its
Makers command; and then the Carpenter under the pretense of its Disobedience,
to show his power over his Creature, should violently fall upon his Wheel and
dash it to pieces. If there were any such man as this to (...) found, how would
wise Men deride him for his Folly and Madness? Now I desire to know if they see
any such betwixt God and his Creatures?

These things, and many more of the like nature, I must be Resolved in before I
yield up the Cudgels, and my self a Captive to Predestinarians.

John Hepburn.

Advertisement to the Reader.
IN a Book written by the Anabaptists, called The Fallacy of the Quakers, out
of which Book I took the occasion to propose some Difficulties in the Point of
Water Baptism, to be Resolved by them, for I take them to be the ablest
Mannagers of that Point of any of the Water-Baptists, and did give it them at
their yearly Meeting at Middletown in New Jersey, 1712. and likewise this
present year 1714. at the same place, but they have given me no Answer. I
desire then that the Anabaptists, or any of the other Sects of Water Baptism,
to Resolve the Difficulties I have proposed, they all being a like concerned;
Which Proposals are as follows, viz.

Friend Silby;
I Have seen thy Book, called, The Fallacy (...) the Quakers; in which thou
asserts, Christ Baptism to be with Water; and if so, I desire thee to Resolve
me some Difficulties, viz. No Man is bound to believe any Article of Faith, but
what was commanded by Christ, and practiced by his Apostles; but Baptism with
Water was not commanded by Christ, nor practiced by the Apostles in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. By which I argue* This can
be no Article of the Christian Faith. But in page 9, 10. thou say, it is
commanded, Matthew. 28. and 19. because the Teaching there commanded was outward,
and so the Baptism, there commanded, was such as they were capable of
administering, which was with Water; but the Baptism or giving of the holy
Ghost, was not in their power, for that was the Prerogative of Christ; so I
must believe this Consequence, That Water was intended, though not incerted to
be an Article of Faith.

(...) Answer. This indeed, seems weighty, if it was not for the Penman of the
8th Chapter of the Acts 8. 17, 18. where he tells us, That Simon Magus seeing
that by laying on the Hands of the Apostles, the holy Ghost was given, etc. But
if thou ^ilt give a Consequence for Faith, thou must ^^ke a Consequence. Well
then, I Will suppose ^^y Consequence to be true for once. viz. That Christ
commanded his Apostles to baptize with Water, in the Name of the Father, and of
the ^on, and of the holy Ghost. Now I desire to know where they practiced this
Command, viz. Water Baptism in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, which was the Baptism commanded by Christ; and if thou can
not show this, thou must say they disobeyed the Command of Christ, and did
introduce and practice another Baptism of their own Contrivance, which was not
the Baptism of Christ. And if so, by the Parity of Reason, we may on as good
Grounds believe, that they have introduced another Gospel, which was not the
Gospel of Christ; and then, I pray, what validity is in Mat. 28. And here is a
Consequence for thee to believe, and I think on as good Grounds as thy
Consequence, That Water's there intended, although it be forgot to be
mentioned. And if the Anabaptists can embrace a Human Invention without a
Primitive President, in Scripture, for their Practice, how can they blame
others for the same of Infant Baptism?

Now if these things be Resolved fairly and rationally, I shall for the future
be obliged to the Resolvers or Resolver.

New Jersey, 5 th Month, 1714 J. H.

THE END.

