A Sorrowful Spectacle. In Two SERMONS, Occasioned by a Just Sentence of DEATH,
on a Miserable Woman, for the MURDER of a Spurious Offspring. The ONE
Declaring, The EVIL of an HEART HARDENED, under and against all Means of GOOD.
The OTHER Describing, The Fearful Case of such as in a Suffering Time, and much
more such as in a Dying Hour, are found without the FEAR of GOD. With some
Remarkable Things, relating to the Criminal; proper for All to be Informed of.

By Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S.

Act. XX 2^. (...) BOSTON. Printed by T. (...) and T (...) for Samuel Gerrish,
on the North Side of the Townhouse, in King Street, 1715

The OCCASION.
WHAT gave Occasion to the SERMONS here Exhibited, was an Amazing Instance of
what the poor Children of Men abandoned unto Ignorance and Wickedness may be
left unto! A Prodigious Instance of that Hardness of Heart, which especially
the Sins of Unchastity, accompanied with Delays of Repentance, do lead unto.

Margaret Gaulacher, an Irish Woman, arrived the last Winter from Cork in
Ireland, a Servant, that soon found a Place in a Family where she would not
have wanted Opportunities and Encouragements for the Service of GOD.

She had been by her part in a Theft brought into Trouble in Ireland; and after
her Transportation hither, it was not long before she was found in Thievish
Practices.

Ere she had been long here, it was begun to be suspected, that she was with
Child, by a Fornication; But she so Obstinately all along denied it, that at
last she must feel the Effects of her Obstinacy.

She was delivered of her Illegitimate, when she was all alone; and she hid the
Killed Infant out of the way; which was within a little while discovered.

Of her Behavior in the Time of her Imprisonment, and of the Means used for
her Good, there is an Account given in our SERMONS.

The Woman was of a very Violent Spirit; and the Transports and Furies thereof,
sometimes were with such Violence, as carried in them, one would have thought,
an uncommon Degree of Satanic Energie.

By'nd by, she would bewail her Passions, and promise to indulge herself no
more in such Passionate Outrages.

One who owns himself to be a Roman Catholic, affirms to me, that she
privately Declared herself unto him, to be in her Heart, of his Religion; But
she never would own any thing of that unto the Ministers who visited her with
the Means of her Salvation.

A Gracious and Worthy Servant of God, Mr. Thomas Craighead, (a Faithful and
Painful Minister of the Gospel, who came from Ireland, much about the same time
that she did) having Instructed her, and used many Charitable Endeavors for
her Good, was desired by her to be near her at her Execution; who accordingly
Prayed with her there, and continued his Instructions unto the Last.

She said little, but referred herself to the Paper which had been read
Publicly in the Congregation just before.

And yet she Frowardly let fall one Word, which did not seem very consistent
with it; For which fretful Strain of Impatience, being rebuked, she added, Then
the Lord be Merciful unto me! and spoke no more.

All that remains for us to do, is to leave her in the Hands of a Sovereign
GOD, whose Judgment, and not ours, has the Disposal of her; and make the best
Improvement we can of such a Tragical Spectacle; for which the ensuing SERMONS
are some Essays.

But, I ought now if I can, to Refresh my Readers, with something that shall be
more Agreeable, more Comfortable; have less to Trouble them; something that may
be the Reverse of so shocking a Spectacle, as has here given Troublesome Idea's
unto them.

Looking among my Reserved Memorials, I find an Excellent Handmaid of the Lord,
a bright Candidate of the Heavenly Glory, finishing her Holy Life, in such
Remarkable Circumstances, that I cannot withold a Brief Relation of the Matter.

Some while ago, there died in our Salem, a Gentlewoman whose Name was Mrs.
Rix, the Daughter of the Reverend Mr. Skeleton, (one of the Two first Ministers,
that Illuminated the First of the Churches in the Massachuset Colony;) A
Gentlewoman of Real Piety, and of equal Patience; and one who had been a
Disciple of the Cross, and had endured much Affliction, especially by Sickness,
with much Submission to the Will of God. Some while before she died, her
Valuable Pastor, (the Reverend Mr. Nicholas Noyes,) gave her a Visit, wherein
the Holy Minds of both, had their grateful Entertainments. Particularly, she
told him, That there had newly appeared unto her, several Shining Persons, who
told her, That they were not now come for her, but on that Day six Weeks hence,
they would come for her, and fetch her away with a Glorious Equipage. And then
she immediately asked her Pastor, I pray Sir, what is the meaning of the Word
EQUIP AGE? I don't remember that I have heard that Word EQUIP AGE! -- Her
Pastor with his usual Wisdom, (though wondering at what she said, and pondering
(...) in his Heart,) advised her by no means, to build her Hopes, on any
Visionary Matters, but have them forever* Built on the sure Foundation, which
the Covenant of Grace, declared in the Gospel, afforded for them. She gave him
abundant Satisfaction that she did so. But yet she kept in an Heavenly Manner,
Praying, and Waiting, and Longing, to see her long Six Weeks expired; and
precisely at the Expiration thereof, she died.

My Readers, I could not withhold (...)* Passage from you; nor forbear
observing to you, That a Soul filled with the Love of GOD, and a Pleasure in
all possible Obedience and Conformity to the Will of GOD, and a dislike of
every thing that may be Displeasing to Him: A Soul that (...), and Admires, and
Adores, the Blessed JESUS, and Believes on him for all Good, and has a
perpetuated course to Him as the Fountain (...) A Soul, that is full of (...)
toward all the Children of Men and cannot h^rbour the least (...) or Malice
against any Neighbors, no, be they never so Injurious ones, but will delight
in seeing, and in serving of their Prosperity: Such a Soul, is very sure of
being ere long fetched away to the Heavenly World with a Glorious Equipage.
Whatever becomes of the Soul, which has never Sweat out the Poison of the Old
Serpent, this is a Soul, that may Rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God,

Cotton Mather.

The worst of Plagues; What it is, and How to shun it. BOSTON: 29 d. III m.
1715.
Prove. XXVIII. 14. He that hardens his Heart shall fall into Mischief.
WHO can hear these (...), without (...) Heart aching at the Hearing of (...)
Who can without a Trembling Soul, have the Thunder of these Words in his Ears,
and not earnestly (...) the Stroke of such a (...) Who among us will upon (...)
forbear the just Exclaim (...) my Flesh Trembles for (...) afraid of thy Judge
(...).

The Books written (...) Solomon, seem to have those two Titles assigned unto
them. Eccl. XII. 10. Acceptable Words, and Words of Truth. It has been thought
by some, That when Solomon speaks of his, Verba Delectabilia, or, Acceptable
Words, he may mean his Book of Canticles. And when he speaks of his, Verba
Fidelia, ^or, Words of Truth, he may mean his Book of Proverbs. Behold, One of
those Words of Truth, which we are to Believe and Receive, as Faithful sayings,
and worthy of all Acceptance.

The Verse before us, is like that Miraculous Pillar, which gave Con^^ct unto
Israel in the Wilderness; It has a Bright side, and a Dark side, belonging unto
it. On the Bright (...) of this Oracle, we see the Shelter, the safety, the
universal Happiness of the Godly Man. Happy is the Man that fears always.

There is indeed a Fear that is far from any Happiness. Not Happy, but
Wretched, the Man who fears w^^ther the Mercy of God in Christ can be
extended unto so great a Sinner as he knows himself to be. Not Happy, but
Foolish, the Man, who torments himself with Fears of those Evils, whereto we
are Obnoxious in this present Evil World. Not Happy, but Faulty is the Man; who
by the Fears of Death spoils (...) Joys of Life. Not Happy, but Reprehensible
is the Man, who lets his Heart sin^ with Fears that the Church of God shall
utterly Sink. When we are in the Covenant of Grace, it will be an unhappy Thing
for us to Fear that, (...) one Article of it shall not be (...) unto us. There
is also a (...) Fearfulness, which is an Unhappiness to them that Labor under
(...). But then, Oh! Happy the Man, who has the Fear of God always Govern^^^
his Heart and Life. Happy (...) who never lays aside a (...), and of the Evils
(...) he exposed by (...), who fears always, (...) ^^ceived by his own Heart,
(...) Deceitful above all Things, Happy (...) Man, who fears always, lest
this World so Entangle him, as to make him neglect the Affairs of another and a
better World. Happy the Man, who fears always, lest when he has Lovely Things
about him, he set his Love too much upon them. Happy the Man, who fears
always, lest he shall give at last, but a poor Account of the Talents whereof
he is Accountable.

But now let us take a view of the Dark side, which threatens Mischief and
Misery to the Wicked Man. The Character of a Wicked Man is, He hardens his
Heart. And the Consequence hereof is, He falls into Mischief.

The DOCTRINE before us will be.

An Hard-hearted Sinner, will fi^ (...) by Hardening his own Heart, (...) get
nothing but Mischief and (...) for his Portion. There are some Awful
PROPOSITIONS, which we must now attend unto.

The First PROPOSITION.
An Hard-hearted Sinner* is no unusual Spectacle. Hardness of Heart is a
Spectacle too frequently to be seen among the Sinful Children of Men.

But, what is an Hard Heart? And what are the Symptoms of it?

You know, in general; There is a Metaphor in the Phrase. An Hard Heart is a
Soul, that has Dispositions, wherein the Properties of a Stone are answered.
The Heart means (...) which like the Bowel that we call. The Heart, is within
us. It Is our Inner Man. The Hardness of the Heart, is allusive to the Hardness
of a Stone. As hard as a Stone, is a Proverbial Speech. An hard Heart has in
the Sacred Scripture this Denomination* Ezekiel. XI. 19. A Stony Heart Yet, It Is
an Heart compared (...) Stone, which is the most (...) in all ^he Fossil Tribe;
even (...) We read, Zech. VII. 12. They have made their Hearts as an Adamant
Stone. The Qualities of a Stone are then to be enquired after. O look Inward;
Enquire within; and, Commune with thine own Heart. My, Friend, If thy Heart
have these Qualities, it is an hard Heart; and it is time for thee to cry out,
God be Merciful to me, an Hard-hearted Sinner!

First. An hard Heart, is an Heart very Dull of Understanding in the Word of
God; not brought quickly to understand the Truths and Things of Religion. We
read; Mar. VIII. 17. Perceive ye not yet; neither understand? Have ye, your
Heart hardened? Sometimes the Heart of a Man apprehends no more than a Stone, of
those Things, which are The Things of our Peace. It Is an hard Heart that is
thus Unapprehensive, so Inadvertent. Thus we read, Mar. VI. 52. They considered
not, for their Heart was hardene^, Many a Man does not consider what the Word
of God speaks unto him not consider what Errand ^he came into the World upon,
or how to behave himself in the World; not consider how soon he may go out of
the World, nor what will become of him when he is gone out of the World. Alas,
the Heart of this Man is hardened. An hard Heart is the same with a slow Heart.
We read, Luke XXIV. 25. O Fools, and slow of Heart to believe. An Heart slow to
take in right Notions about the Glory of GOD, the Beauty of CHRIST, the Damage
of SIN, and the Reasonableness of Religion; an hard Heart it is! An Heart that
is hard to be instructed in the Affairs of the Kingdom of God. An hard Heart is
a Sottish one. A blind Mind goes with an hard Heart. We read, Joh. XII. 40. He
has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their Heart. O you that sit under the
Means of Knowledge, but still remain Souls without Knowledge, and know very
little of (...) Points which to know is Life (...), you have the Light shining
about you our not entering into you; no, (...) than into a Stone; you have cause
to cry out, Oh! the hardness of my Heart! What will become of me!

Secondly. An hard Heart is an Heart not easily impressed upon; what the Word
of God will not easily make any good Impression upon. Sometimes the Word of God
makes a Deep Impression upon the Heart; yea, the Heart is Conformed unto the
Word of God, as if it were cast into the Mould of it. So we read, Romans VI. 17.
Ye have obeyed from the Heart, that Form of Doctrine whereinto ye were drawn.
This is not an hard Heart; It is an Heart of Wax, rather than an Heart of
Stone. But now, an hard Heart is one; that Hears the Commandments of God, but
will take no Notice of them; will not obey them, will not observe them. It
hears the Promises of God, but it is not affected with them; the Consolations
of God are small unto it. It hears the Threatenings of God, but it is not
affrighted at them; it Mocks at the Fear: The great God says; Jer. XXIII. 29.
Is not my Word like an Hammer, which breaks the Rocks in pieces. But many an
Heart under the Knocks of that Hammer, is never broken by them. The Sinner is
earnestly called upon, To forsake the ways of Sin; to Embrace his only Savior;
To come into the Covenant of God. He stirs no more than a Stone. The Loud Calls
of Heaven are made unto him, to Arise and call upon his God, and set upon the
Practice of Prayer, and form unalterable Resolutions of Piety; As Good speak to
a Stone! He is nothing the better, for sitting under the good Word of God. All
Counsils, all Rebukes, all Exhortations are thrown away upon him. O hardness of
Heart! There is an Heart that will not Conform unto the Word and Will of God;
An Inflexible Heart; An Unpliable Heart; An Heart from which the Demands made
in the Word of God have that Return. As for the Word spoken to me (...) of the
Lord, I will not hear (...) it. What shall be said of such (...). We read Isa.
XLVIII. 4. I know, that thou art Obstinate; and thy Neck is an Iron Sinew, and
thy Brow Brass; An Heart ^as hard as Iron and Brass; O Hard-hearted Obstinacy!
Unperswadeableness is Hard-heartedness. The Children of Unperswadeableness are
Hard-hearted ones. We read of An Heart hardened from the fear of God. An Heart
that will not be persuaded heartily to Fear God, and Seek Him, and Serve Him;
This is an Heart that is Hardened.

Thirdly. An hard Heart is an In^ensible one; an Heart that has no Sense,
either of Blows given to it, or of Loads lying on it. A Man has the Blows of
the Divine Wrath given to him. An hard Heart keeps him Insensible of the Blows.
He is Afflicted, but he is not Amended. He is Incorrigible under his
Affliction. The Rod is employed upon him; and yet his Foolishness departs not
from him. After his Chastisements, he is as Carnal, as Worldly, as Profane, as
he was before. Though his Estate be broken, his Heart is not broken. He meets
with Losses one after another; but he has his Heart as much set upon the World
as ever it was, and he maintains as little Communion with God as ever he did.
It may be said of many People, This People do not Return to him that Smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Is not such an Heart, harder than
a Rock? It Is verily so! A Rock yielded Water, when smitten with the Rod of God
and of Moses. Here is a Rock that yields not one Tear of Repentance, though the
Rod of God has smitten it! We read, Jer. V. 3. O Lord, Thou have smitten them,
but they have not grieved; Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive Correction* They have made their Faces harder than a Rock; They have
refused to return. The Man that gets no Good by the Calamities inflicted on
him; one who does neither Discern the Hand of God, nor Answer the End of God,
in Calamitous Dispensations; write upon ^im, This Man has a very hard Heart
within him. Again; A Man has the Loads of his own Guilt lying upon him. An hard
Heart keeps him Insensible of the Loads. The Curse of the Law, is enough to
break the Stoniest Rock upon the Face of the Earth. Yea, He that is the Rock of
Ages, becoming a Surety for us, when the Curse fell upon Him, He cried out, Oh!
Let it pass from me; It Is Insupportable! The Sinner is under the Curse; and he
complains not of it. He is yet in his Sins; and yet he does not cry out, My
Iniquities are an heavy Burden, too heavy for me! O! It Is an hard Heart that
can lie under unpardoned Sin, and never ^ay to Heart, the Sin, and the Folly,
and the Danger of it. We read of such a thing as that; 1 Timothy IV. 2. A
Conscience Seared with an hot Iron. The Heart has now a prodigious hardness
upon it. A Man can Sin, and fall into no Remorse, no Sorrow for the Sin. He can
go on in Sin, and be wholly unconcerned, though he remain unreconciled unto God.
He has a vast Heap of Sins, which are to be proved on him, and he is to be
Judged for them at the Tribunal of God: But he is past Feeling, and goes on to
Sin with all Greediness. Most certainly, there is an hard Heart in such a
Sinner: Plain, very Plain, the Diagnosticks of the Malady.

The Second PROPOSITION.
The Sinner of an hard Heart, is one who hardens his own Heart. He confirms his
own Hardness by a presumptuous Resolution to go on (...) Sin.

There is a Natural hardness of Heart, which we are all Born withal. The Stone
of the Heart is an Hereditary Distemper. But then, there is an Acquired
hardness of Heart, which is when Men do Confirm and Augment and Increase their
hardness, by going on to Sin with an high (...) against the Lord.

We will enquire more Particular (...) When, and How, does a (...) his Heart?

He does it, Ah! wretched Sinner, Thou do it, in such Things as these.

First. A Sinner does Render and Proclaim himself Hard-hearted in Sin, when he
has made himself Impudent in it. We read of some; Ezekiel. III. 7. They are
Impudent and Hard-hearted. Where there is a Brow of Brass, there is an Heart of
Stone. A Sinner has hardened his Heart, when he has got an hearty Courage for
Sin, and is grown so Courageous in it, as that he can Sin Openly, and
Publicly. If Men Declare their Sin like Sodom, they hide it not; and it may be
said unto them; as in Jer. III. 3. Thou have a Whores Forehead, thou refusest
to be Ashamed. Confident Creature, If thou had not made thyself Hard-hearted,
thou would be more Ashamed. The hardness of Heart, arrives to a more
considerable Obduration, when a Sinner can express a more singular Defiance of
the Infinite GOD, a what he does. Those People have (...) their Hearts, of whom
the Holy One may say, as in Isa. LXV. 3. It Is a People that provokes me to
Anger, continually to my Face. People that can Sin in the special Presence of
GOD; People whom the nearest Relation to GOD will not restrain from the
grossest Impieties; People that will go reeking to or from the Table of the
Lord, under the unrelenting Appetites of the vilest Impieties; Church Members
that under a Mask of Religion will carry on a Course of Adulteries, or of
Dishonesties. And so have those People, who are so Hardy as to make their
Appeals to GOD for the Vindication of their Innocence, when GOD knows the
Matters to be Unjust and Untrue, wherein He has been so daringly Appealed unto.
O Hard-hearted Monster; What an hardenss of Heart have thou contracted, in
(...) thou can say, God knows, -- a (...) to be so or so, when thou do
thyself know that it is not so!

Secondly. A Sinner has hardened his Heart in Sin, when he will (...) to Sin,
with the utmost Hardiness, though he has the Light and Voice of his Conscience
Reclaiming of him. To be so Hardy in Sin, as to trample on all the
Remonstrances of Conscience against it, is to harden ones Heart in Sin. We find
it Exemplified; 2 King. XVII. 13, 14. The Lord testified against them, saying,
Turn from your evil Ways: Yet they would not hear, but hardened their Necks.
Conscience, the Deputy of God, pleads in his Name with many a Man, Oh! Do not
the Abominable Thing! And yet, the Abominable Man will do that Thing. Such a
Man has hardened his own Heart unto a Degree that is Horrible! A Sinner hardens
his Heart when he omits those Things, whereof his Conscience tells him, This is
Commanded of GOD! But he yet more hardens his Heart, when he commits those
Things, whereof his Conscience tells him, This is Forbidden by GOD! It may now
be said of such, -- what we read, Zech. VII. 12. They have made their Hearts as
(...) Adamant Stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the Words which the
Lord of Hosts has sent by His Spirit. There are those, that will not forbear
Sinning, though their Conscience do stand before them with a flaming Sword, as
the Angel did before Balaam; and say, Thy Way is Perverse before God; The Wrath
of God will fall upon thee in this evil Way. O Desperate hardness of Heart!
Wherein does the Heart of a Devil differ from it! Foolhardy, Self-hardened
Sinner; What would thou do if thou could? What less than push an Impotent
Stab upon the Almighty GOD Himself? What less than stretch out thy Hand against
God, and strengthen thyself against the Almighty, and run upon Him, upon the
thick Bosses of His Buckler!

Thirdly. When a Sinner has an Impenitent Heart, then he has h^rdened his
Heart. Those Things go, together; Romans II. 5. Thy Hardness and Impenitent
Heart. A Sinner does harden his Heart, when he will by no Admonitions be
brought home unto God, from all his Wanderings in the Wilderness of Sin. A
Sinner is told, That Sin is an evil and a bitter Thing. He hardens his Heart,
if notwithstanding this, he will persist in Sin. He is told, That a CHRIST is
the One Thing that is Needful. He hardens his Heart, if a CHRIST and His Great
Salvation, be still neglected with him. He is told, That the Ways of Piety are
pleasant Ways. He hardens his Heart, if still he remain a Stranger to these
Ways. But, Oh! What have I now brought the Matter to! All that continue in
their Unregeneracy, will find themselves included in the Charge. Unhappy
Sinners, you stand every one of you all Indicted for this; That you have
hardened your own Hearts: else you could not be what you are. There is no
Unregenerate but what comes under that Unhappiness; Jer. IX. 26. Uncircumcised
in Heart. Some that have been opened after their Death, have upon the
Dissection had a Stone found in their Heart; a Stone without a Metaphor. Ah,
poor Unregenerate; Open thy own Heart now while thou art alive. A Stone will be
found in that Heart of thine. Thou have thyself hardened it into a Stone. The
Petrifaction is owing to thy own Iniquity.

The Third PROPOSITION.
Mischief will be the effect of this. An Hard-hearted Sinner by hardening his
own Heart, falls into a Mischief that will render him very Miserable.

But what is that Mischief, which a Sinner by hardening his Heart will fall
into?

Truly, All that Mischief which any Sinner has cause to be Fearing always.

To use more of Particularitie.

First. A Sinner by hardening his own Heart, falls into that matchless
Mischief, that fearful Mischief, a penal hardness of Heart, Inflicted 'by the
Judgment of God upon him. O Mischief whereto there is none to be equalled! We
read of one, who hardened his own Heart; And ano^ it came to that; Exodus XIV.
8. The Lord hardened the Heart of Phara^^ It Is true, so far as hardness of
Heart is a Sin; the Holy GOD is not the Author and Father of it. We man say,
It Is not of the Father. We must say, No Man is tempted of God unto it. And yet
there is an active Providence of God about that hardness of Heart, the Mischief
whereof a Sinner that hardens his own Heart will fal^ into. [See Psalm. CV. 25.]

First. The Holy GOD in His Righteous Providence, withdraws His Grace from the
Sinner that hardens his own Heart, and then, O Sinner what an Horrid hardness
of Hear^ will soon seize upon thee! GOD hardens the Heart of such a Sinner not,
Infundendo Malit^^^; (...) but Non Infundendo Gratiam; not by Infusing of Sin,
but by withholding o^ Grace. It Is enough, that it shall be said, as in Deuteronomy.
XXIX. 4. The Lord has not given you an Heart GOD never owed His Grace unto a
Reprobate Sinner: And the Sinner in hardening his own Heart, Sinfully sleights
that Grace. How Justly, how Justly, and Unexceptionably, does the Holy GOD, now
deny His Grace unto the Sinner, and leave the Sinner to be filled with his own
ways! But Oh! ^he wondrous hardness of Heart, which unavoidably follows upon
this Dereliction of God! When the Sun withdraws, all Things Harden apace. Men
by hardening their own Hearts, ^o Grieve the good Spirit of God: The Grieved
Spirit hereupon withdraws from them: When He withdraws, their Hearts will
harden, how Heinously, how Hideously!

Secondly. When a Sinner hardens his own Heart, the Righteous Providence of an
Holy GOD, will cast before the Sinner such Objects, as he shall Abuse to
strengthen the hardness of his Heart, how Perniciously, how Exceedingly! As the
Potter sets his Clay in the Sun, and it is hardened here; so the great God,
before whom we are, as the Clay before the Potter, [And, whom He will, He
hardens!] when a Sinner hardens his own Heart, the great* God is provoked
then to set him in very hardening Circumstances. Perhaps, the Sinner shall now
be hardened, by being left in the Hands of Wicked Company. Among all the
Engines of Hell, there is not upon the Face of the Earth a greater Hardener!
It Is from a Dispensation of the Holy God, that the Sinner becomes intimately
Acquainted with Company that shall teach him the Arts of Sin, and spur him to
the Practice of them; Company that shall instill into him Notions that dispose
him to Atheism, and prepare him for all manner of Sin and Blasphemy; Company
that shall prejudice him against the Best Men and Things, and so lay the Dark
Fetters of Death upon him. So becoming a Companion of such Fools, Sinner, Thy
Heart is hardened, and thy Immortal Soul destroyed. But then, there is another
dismal Occasion which brings an hardness upon the Heart of many a Sinner, which
is forever to be deplored. It is in the Scandalous Falls of such as have made a
fair and high Profession of Christianity. By the Disposal of God, it comes to
pass, that when a Sinner has been hardening his own Heart, his Lot shall be
cast, where some that every body thought First-Rate Christians, fall into
Scandalous, Amazing, Infandous Actions. The Devil knew, what a Game he should
pray, when he drew those Persons into such Actions! The perverse Use the Sinner
makes of what he sees, is to conclude; Well, All Religion is a Cheat. If I do
the worst Things in the World, I do nothing, but that in which the greatest
Pretenders to Religion indulge themselves! The Foolish Sinner is now hardened,
and the Bars of the Pit are about him forever!

Thirdly. A Sinner that hardens his own Heart, is by the Righteous Providence
of the Holy GOD, left in the Hand of Satan; And Oh! what a Satanic Hardness
will the Heart of such a Sinner be soon congeled into! Of Impious ones, we
read, 2 Cor. IV. 4. The God of this World has Blinded their Minds. It Is the
same, who hardens their Hearts. An Ahab will be hardened with a Vengeance when
the Lying Spirit shall have a Permission for the Seducing of him. An hardened
Heart is a seared Heart. But it is the Devil, that brings from Hell, those Hot
Irons, by which the Heart of a Sinner comes to be so Hardened and Seared.
Anatomical Observations have told us, That the Stone whereof some have died,
being opened, a Snake has been found in it. When the Heart of a Sinner is
hardened, there is the Old Serpent in the Stone, to make it so. A Sinner by
hardening his own Heart, Invites the Devil to take Possession of it. What the
Sinner Invites, that the Holy GOD Permits. Yea, There is a Sentence now passed
from the spotless Throne, That it shall be so But, Oh! What an hard Heart will
that be, which has the Devil filling of it! Forlorn Ananias, If Satan fill thy
Heart, what, what will thou come to?

But then, Finally. When God Judicially gives a Sinner up to hardness of Heart,
what Sin will there be, which the Sinner will not fall into? It Is a dreadful
Word; LXXXI. 12. I gave them up unto their own Hearts Lust, and they walked in
their own Counsels. Oh! the Snares and Pits into which now their Walk will
carry them! The Doom which the Holy GOD now passes on the hardened Sinner, is;
He is Unjust, and he shall be still Unjust. He is Filthy, and he shall be
Filthy still! The Sinner is now left unto the enslaving Power of Sin: He will
now serve diverse Lusts; and he will now stick at no Sin that shall be proposed
unto him. Is not here Mischief enough! And an Introduction to all the Mischief
imaginable; Mischief surpassing all Imagination! For,

Secondly. A Sinner by hardening his own Heart, must also fall into all that
Mischief, which every S in, as well as an hard Heart has entailed upon it. SIN,
what is the Wages of it? Our youngest Children have this Instruction given
them, as part of the Milk for our Babes; The Wages of Sin is Death. Now, this
Death, yea, all of this terrible Death, is what a Sinner by hardening his Heart
will fall into: All the Curse due to Sin; all the Woe brought by Sin; all the
Wrath to which by Sin the Sinner becomes obnoxious. Verily, O Hard-hearted
Sinner, Nothing less than Destruction will be thy Portion; A Destruction from
God, if thou were not horribly Hardened, would be a Terror unto thee. Lo, the
Great GOD utters His Voice, and that a mighty Voice, in those Words; XXIX. 1.
He that being often Reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without Remedy.

There are Temporal Mischiefs and Ruins, whereto Sinners do by hardening their
Hearts in Sin, expose themselves. There is that Word fulfilled upon them; Ezekiel.
VII. 26. Mischief shall come upon Mischief unto them. Their Sin brings a
Mischief on their Estate; It is a Fire that consumes their Substance. It brings
a Mischief on their Esteem: A Wound and a Dishonor do they get by it, and a
Reproach that will not be wiped away* It brings a Mischief on their Bodies: God
makes them S ick in Smiting them for it. Spiritual Plagues accompany these
Mischiefs. The Sinners plunge themselves into Blindness, into Madness, into
foolish and hurtful Lusts. They are given up to vile Affections. They are left
unto the most Self-undoing Follies. They keep Cutting and Wounding themselves
among the Monuments of the Dead, and there is no binding of them. It will not be
long before the Execution of that Word falls upon them; Romans II. 5. After thy
Hardness thou treasurest up unto thyself Wrath against the day of Wrath, God
will e're long break the Heads of the Hard-hearted Leviathans. e're long, the
hardened Heart shall be thrown into the Devouring Fire, and Everlasting
Burnings, where, who can dwell? Oh! What Heart can endure a Dwelling there? Ah!
Heart of Stone, e're long thou shall be thrown between the direful Milstones of
the Revenges of God; and how miserably Ground unto Powder there! O the
Mischiefs! O the Mischiefs! O the sore Plagues and of long Continuance, in
which an hardened Heart will terminate! The End of it will be in Miseries that
will never have an End!

APPLICATION.
I. Most certainly, it very much behooves us, to Examine ourselves, Whether we
are not Hard-hearted and Self-hardened Sinners before the Lord. Some there are,
who have a Lovely softness of Heart. It may be said of them, as in 2 Chronicles.
XXXIV. 27. Thine Heart has been Tender. Shall I find out these Heirs of
Blessedness? They are those who have a yielding Soul; a Soul ready to yield
unto the Demands of GOD; They say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Yea, or
to bear? They are afraid of All Sin; troubled at All Sin. The Sins that seem
Little to others, are Grievous to them; A vain Word Grieves them; A base
Thought Grieves them. To say no more; They perceive the hardness of their own
Hearts; They bewail it* They bemoan it; It makes them cry out, O wretched one
that I am! To these Tenderhearted ones there belong the great Consolations of
God! Comfort ye, Comfort ye, this my People, says the Lord. But then there are
some, upon whom a Sinful hardness of Heart is very Conspicuous, very Notorious,
very Distinguishing. Of these my Context shall direct us to make some
Discovery. The Verse before my Text, is, a notable Passage. He that covers
his Sins shall not Prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have
Mercy: And now* it follows, He that hardens his Heart shall fall into
Mischief. Be it now known unto you. If you will retain your Sins, and not
confess them, not forsake them, upon those Calls unto Repentance, which you are
Entertained withal, you are the Sinners that harden their Hearts. But Oh! what
Mischiefs do you lie open to? Concerning the Hearers of our Blessed Savior, we
read; Mar. III. 5. He looked round about on them with Anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their Hearts. He now looks round about our Congregation; and
where he sees any-still going on in their Sins, He says upon them, Oh! The
grievous hardness of Heart, which these poor Sinners are under the power of!

II. But I am now, to Address you, with an EXHORTATION, which I shall bring you
in Terms which the Holy Spirit of God has prepared for you; even those Terms;
Heb. III. 7, 8. To Day if you will hear His Voice, harden nor your Hearts. And,
Oh! that the Holy Spirit would this Day set in, to make this Exhortation become
Effectual! O Thou irresistible Spirit of*Grace, Do thou break our Hearts, and
make us Tremble at all those Things that will harden them.

That our dear People may take a due Course, to be delivered from the Mischiefs
of an hardened Heart, let them now hearken to the Counsels of God.

First. Look up to GOD your SAVIOR, for so great Salvation. Oh! Pray hard, Oh!
Cry hard, unto the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, that He would save you from
an hard Heart, and give you an Heart of Flesh. You have a sweet Promise of such
a Blessing; Ezekiel. XXXVI. 26. A new Heart will I give unto you, and a new Spirit
will I put within you; and I will take away the Stony Heart out of your Flesh,
and will give you an Heart of Flesh. O plead so Gracious a Promise; and urge; O
my God, Be it unto me according to thy Word; and let a soft Heart be given to
me! It is not in Men or Means, to Soften an hard Heart. As they said of Old,
Who shall roll away the Stone from the D^o^ of the Sepulcher? Even so, may we
say, Who shall take away the Stone from the Heart, which keeps it Rotting in
the Grave of a sinful Estrangement from God? Verily, None but GOD can do such a
Thing. It Is a Creating Work. As he said, Create in me a Clean Heart, O God; so
must we say, If ever I have a soft Heart, O God, it must be of thy Creating in
me! He that can change a Stone, into a Child of Abraham, and none but He, can
change an Heart of Stone, and rescue a Sinner from the Mischiefs of it. O
Hard-hearted Sinner, look upto thy SAVIOR. Be not so Stouthearted, as to be
always f^r from this Righteousness*

Secondly. There are Heartbreaking Meditations, which you are to be advised
unto; There are Specificks against an hard Heart in the Meditations. Of the
Things which are harddened by the Cold and Frost of our Winter, we read; Psalm.
CXLVII. 18. He sends out his (...) them. It might indeed be (...) breaking
Subject for your Meditations; How Foolishly and Fearfully have I ruined myself
by my Sins against the Glorious God! It might be a yet more Heartbreaking
Subject for your Meditations; What a shameful Disingenuity has there been, and
how Ungratefully have I done, in my Sins against the Glorious GOD? But then
proceed, and Meditate on what the Word of God has declared unto you, concerning
His Infinite Mercy, ready to Receive and Pardon you after all your Sins.
Methinks, the sending forth of this Word, should Melt your Hearts within you.
Behold the Heart of your Savior yearning over you; Behold Him shedding His
Heart-Blood for your Sins; Hear Him calling to you, O poor Sinner, yet come
unto me, and I will not cast thee out. Certainly, to Meditate on such a Word,
will Melt your Hearts within you. My Friend, What an Heart have thou, if
steeping it in the Blood of thy Savior dissolve it not!

Lastly. Beware, Oh! Beware of such Things, as will have a Tendency to harden
your Hearts; Beware of all Heart-hardeners, and as you love your Souls avoid
them.

Take the Warnings of God If you are in hazard of having your Hearts hardened
by the Society of any Ungodly People; Shun them, Fly them, no longer Assotiate
with them; Oh! Forsake the Foolish and live. Be warned therewithal, That all
Sins against Knowledge are mighty hardeners of the Heart; The oftener you Repeat
such known Sins, the more will you harden your Hearts. But no Sins have a more
fatal Efficacy this way, than the Sins of Unchastity. Ah! Bewitching Sins, How
do you take away the Heart of them that Wallow in you! What Infatuations do
they bring upon those tha^ venture on them! When People have once abandoned
themselves unto the Sins of Unchastity, with what hardness of Heart will they
slight a^ the Calls of Heaven, to Reform their Evil-doings? With what
Stupidity do they go on from one Vileness to another, and wax worse and worse?
How Stupidly do they lay aside all Consideration of their own Interest; and
become like Bruit Beasts, and anon Perish in their own Corruption! God leaves
them; Satan takes them; Nothing will bring them to any Good. When they are in
Chains for their Wickedness, even then they will Repeat it, being held in the
Chains of their Wickedness.

Of this we have a very Tragical Instance now before our Eyes. One who by
hardening her Heart has brought herself into wonderful Mischief; and continues
to harden her Heart, after the wondrous Mischief has come upon her like a
Whirlwind from the Lord.

Ah, poor Creature; Thou have been Guilty of many Sins, and Heinous ones. But,
Oh! Don't add this to all the rest, this Comprehensive one, this Atrocious one;
To harden thy Heart after all, and so to bind all fast upon thy Soul forever.

God has done a dreadful Thing upon thee, in leaving thee to a Crime for which
thou art now as one Wicked overmuch, to Dye before thy Time, and e're twenty
five Years have rolled over thee, the Sword of Justice with an untimely Stroke
must cut thee off. But it will be a much more dreadful Thing, if thou art left
after all unto an hard Heart, that will not Repent of thy Abominations, and of
thy Bloodguiltiness.

If thou had not hardened thy own Heart exceedingly, Oh! what Things would be
seen upon thee; other Things than are yet seen upon thee! Verily, A soft Heart
would Mourn and Weep and Bleed, for a Life sweell'd away in Sin against the
Glorious GOD. A soft Heart would soon Drown thee in Tears, from the View of the
doleful Things thy Sin has brought upon thee. A soft Heart would make thee own
the Justice of God and Man in what is now done unto thee; and would Silence thy
Froward and Fretful and Furious Gnashing upon such as thou have no Cause to
treat with so much transported Fury.

It breaks the Hearts of the Good People in the Place, to see thy Deplorable
State: They are concerned, when they see thy Lamentable State: But above all,
to see, that thou art thyself no more concerned for it; no more affected with
it; so little Broken in Heart. And shall not thy own Heart at length be Broken,
when thy own State comes into thy Consideration?

One once could say, God makes my Heart Soft, and the Almighty Troubles me. And
will it not make thy Heart Soft, when thou think on the amazing Trouble,
which thou shall feel from the Wrath of the Almighty GOD, if thou Dye in thy
Sins? Verily, All the Sorrows thou see here, are but the Beginning of
Sorrows, if thou art not by a broken Heart prepared for the Salvation of God.

But then, What an Heartbreaking Thought is this? Margaret, There is yet Mercy
for thee, if thou will not by an hard Heart refuse the Mercy; The Mercy, through
which Rah^^ the Harlot perished not; The Mercy, through which Mary Magdalene had
her many Sins forgiven her; This Mercy is ready to do Wonders for thee. A
Merciful Savior Invites thee; O come unto me, and I will do Wonders for thee.

Come and fall down before Him, and beg the Blessings of a soft Heart at His
Gracious Hands. I know not of any Advice that can be so Proper, or so Needful
for thee, as this; No Prayer of so much Importance to be made by thee as this.

The Ignorance which lays Chains of Darkness upon thee, is a sore Encumbrance
on thy Essays for turning to God. Yet thou art not so Ignorant, but thou can
make this Petition to thy SAVIOR. Lord, soften this hard Heart of mine! And,
Lord, Bestow a New, and a Clean, and a Soft Heart upon life! And, God be
Merciful to me a Sinner; yea, an Hard-hearted Sinner!

Now, May the Gracious Lord accordingly look down upon thee.

The Grand Concern, of Suffering and of Dying People. BOSTON, 9 d. IV m. 1715.
Luke XXIII. 40. Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art under -- Condemnation?
WE have before us, what calls not only for our Attention, but also for our
Astonishment. Who can behold the Son of God in our Flesh; becoming Obedient
unto the Death of the Cross, that so the (...) which the sinful Children of Men
have by their Sin offered unto the Law of God, might be (...) by so matchless a
Sacrifice! (...) behold, the Just suffering for the Unjust, and one most Holy,
Harmless, Undefiled, (...) from Sinners, treated as if He had been the Chief of
Sinners? Who can behold this, and not be Astonished at it? The Justice of the
Infinite GOD, never Triumphed so Gloriously* But one signal Article in the
Humiliation of our dear Savior, was the fulfillment of that Prophecy; Isa.
LIII. 12. He was (...) with Transgressors. His Adversaries contrived this
Ignominy for Him, that there should be Two Capital Offenders Crucified with
Him; An Ignominious Infliction, whereof the Pagan Deriders of Christianity, as
long after as the Days of Hieroc^es, made their Advantage. The Criminals,
doubtless were not simple Thieves; A Flagellation with Restitution would have
been all their Punishment, if Theft had been all their Crime. It seems, as if
they had been Robbers and Cutthroats; too dangerous Creatures, to have their
Live; indulged unto them. What was done in, and for, and by, one of these
Malefactors, is what will call us to be still Astonished. Of these two
Malefactors, wherein some find a Type of those two People, the Jews and the
Gentiles; the one continued an obdurate and obstinate Wretch, and as he lived
so he died, Abandoned of God. The other became a true Penitent, and an
astonishing Monument, of what the Sovereign Grace of God may do for the worst
of Sinners in the World. He employed the last six or seven Hours of his Life on
the Cross, at such a rate, that one may see the whole Race of Christianity run
in half a Day and the Ground wonderfully swallowed in a most expeditious Piety.
The common Opinion is, That the Grace of God first found him here; and that he
came to the Cross, no other than a finished Villain, but was here in his last
Moments turned into a Child and Saint of God. But some rather incline to the
Opinion. That the Spirit of God, might (...) him, and very much Enlighten him,
and Rectify him, while he was in the Gaol, none can say how long before his
Execution; and that he might come to the Cross in some degree, furnished with
that Principle of Grace, which now broke forth, in its most lively and wondrous
Operations. Be it how it will; Here is a Specimen of what Sovereign Grace may
do, for a Sinner in the last Moments of his Life; yea, of what Sovereign Grace
may do for a Malefactor who dies (...) the Gallows!

The first Effort, which we see of the Divine Principle, in the Soul of this
Penitent, is, His Rebuke upon his Fellow-sufferer. He saw and heard the
Outrages of the Monster; he (...) his Outrageous Affronts unto the Glorious
Redeemer, whom his own Soul now Glorified as the Son of God, and the (...) of
the Dead; (...) he Faithfully and Zealously (...) him for his Behavior* where
(...) he proclaimed that the (...) of God (...) horribly wanting in him*

An Ingenious Man some Ages ago, wrote a Learned Book, about, The Metamorphosis
of an Highway Man into an Apostle. And he brings in Christians, like Bees,
gathering of Delicious Honey, from the Flowers growing in the Field, which the
History of the Penitent Thief affords unto us. Christians, you are this Day to
join with me in that Employment. Here is Honey out of the Rock!

I have read a Rhetorical Flight, calling this Penitent Thief, The Firstborn
among the Children of a Crucified Savior. I do not wonder, that I find
Chrysostom calling him, A Prophet, and Athanasius calling him, A^ Evangelist.
It is indeed a very Remarkable Thing, That when our Savior was forsaken of all
His Disciples, and when He had not one left in the World openly to appear for
Him, a Conver^ed Thief is employed (...) Preacher of His Glories. Ah! Lord,
Rather than there shall be none to Preach, thy Glories, there shall be
Instruments called for that Work from Quarters th^^ none could have imagined!
The Cross itself shall be so far from stopping the Preaching of the Gospel,
that you shall find it admirably done from the very Cross itself. You are now
to hearken unto a Sermon preached from the Cross. Never had there been such a
Sermon heard from such a Pulpit before; Never such a Preacher! A Thief turned
into a Saint. A Prisoner turned into a Minister; into a sort of an Apostle. A
Bloody Enemy of God, become the only Believer and Confessor of His Christ,
openly appearing in the World. Oh! the wonderful Changes wrought by the Grace
of our God! Methinks, an^ extraordinary Matter, may be expected from such an
extraordinary Preacher. You may look to be Entertained with something that
shall be well worthy of your Observation.

Behold, a Sermon preached unto a Malefactor, a Poor, Blind, Hardened
Malefactor under Sentence of Death ^ea, now arrived unto the last Moments of
his Life under the Execution of the Sentence. It Is preached by one, who had
been Guilty of the same Crimes; but was come unto the Repentance, which would
assure the pardoning Mercy of God unto him. They that begin to Fear God
themselves, are sollicitous to bring others unto the Fear of God; but none
more, than such as have been Wicked with or like themselves; none so much as
their Companion^* in Wickedness. Our Penitent here, commends unto his Dying
Brother, the only. Thing that can secure the Welfare of a Soul after Death;
procure a Safety to a Never-dying Soul; and Reproves his want of that Thing,
It Is, The Fear of God.

The DOCTRINE which I am now to give you, is;

As the RELIGION which bring^ (...) SALVATION, is to FEAR GOD; so it is (...)
Grievous Thing for People in a Suffering Time, and a yet more Dreadful Thing
for People in a Dying Hour, to be without the FEAR OF GOD. I. The first
observable Thing that now occurs unto us, is; That Real, Vital, Saving RELIGION
does consist in the Fear of God; A Religious Fear of the Glorious God.

The Thing which the Convert Inculcated on his Friend under Condemnation, is,
All that Religion, which will bring unto Salvation. The Term used for it, is,
The Fear of God. The Censure due to a Man of no ^eligion, is; Thou do not
Fear God.

There are some general Expressive; and Instructive Terms, by which the Whole
of Practical Religion is described unto us. It is called, The (...) of God, a
Trust an Hope, a Delight in Him, a (...) of God, and (...) Calling on Him. It
is called, (...), and Repentance, and Newness of Life, and, A good Conversation
in Christ and, A patient Continuance in (...) doing. Oh! Make a Trial of
yourselves by these Discriptions of Religion; Try, See, Find, whether the
Experience of such Things will Entitle you to the Denomination of Truly
Religions.

But, the Fear of God, is one of those notable Terms. And now, Come ye Children
who would Profess Religion, and be found the truly Religious Children of God; I
will (...) you what is that Fear of God, which is demanded of you.

First. In true Religion, the Fear of the Divine Displeasure, whereto all
Sinners are obnoxious, drives a (...) unto the JESUS, who saves His People from
their Sins. The Fear of God contains in it, a Fear of His Displeasure, to which
we are by Sin become obnoxious. One that has the Fear of God, can say, Lord, My
Flesh trembles for fear of thy Displeasure, and I am afraid of the Judgments to
which my Sin exposes me. But so far the Devils themselves may go; They tremble;
worse than Devils they who do not so! But (...) Fear wherewith we are to be
moved, must put us upon doing what we are to do, that we may be Saved. It must
cause our Flight unto the only SAVIOR. This is the Fear of God in the right
Notion of it. Thus you have been taught it in Psalm. CXLVII. 11. The Lord takes
Pleasure in them that fear Him, that hope in His Mercy. It is the MESSIAH of
God, in and by whom His Mercy reaches us. A Fear without Hope of that Mercy, is
the Despair of them that are cast into outer Darkness. The Fear which Awakens
and Animates our Flight unto that Mercy, (...) the Fear of God in the True,
Clear, (...) Operation of it.

Ah, Soul fallen from God! Thou must see thyself by thy Sin lying (...) to the
Anger of God! A strange ^^^ishment waiting for thee, O worker of Iniquity.
Hearken to this. Destruction from God must be a Terror to thee; Thou have cause
to be terribly Distressed in the Apprehensions (...) it. In this Distress, a
Glorious CHRIST is to be set before thee, (...) thy only Savior! A JESUS, who
Delivers from the Wrath to come. It Is requisite, that thou fly unto thy JESUS
as thy only Refuge. Look unto the Sacrifice of thy JESUS for thy Propitiation.
Look unto the Righteousness of thy JESUS, for thy Justification. Put thyself
under the Conduct of thy JESUS, that thou may be brought unto Life Eternal.
This (...) the Fear of God. Here, here is true Religion. Unto one who does
this; there shall be fulfilled that Word* Mal. IV. 2. Unto you that fear (...)
Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with Healing in his Wings. Truly,
They that Fear the Name of (...) are they that have their Eye to (...) Sun of
Righteousness, and g^t (...) the shadow of His Wings, for (...) Healing of all
that is amiss in (...) Condition. Gloriously this (...) God, shining in our
Convert (...) Cross. ^^st thou fear God; O (...) rate Soul? Yes, Thy Look (...)
His JESUS to be thy Savior; (...) declare thy Fear of God.

Secondly. In True Religion, the Religious Fear of (...) against God, Restrains
and Governs the Soul, and makes every Sinful Thing, a Fearful and an Hateful
Thing unto the Soul. When the Fear of Sin Restrains and Governs the Mind
exceedingly, then the Man Fears the Lord exceedingly. The Fear of Sin, is (...)
main Ingredient in the Fear of God. We read. Prove. VIII. 13. The fear of the
Lord is to hate Evil. The Man who Fears God, is one who shuns Evil; one who has
an Horror of SIN, as the worst Evil. Whatever such a Man takes to be a Sin, he
is afraid of it; he would not be more afraid of a Fiery Furnace. A Temptation
to Sin, is rejected by such a Man, with a vast Abhorrence of it.

The Fear of Sin in True Religion, issues from an Awe, and an awful Sight which
a Believer has of some Things that are not ^een.

First; The Presence of GOD, is Awful to a Man that Fears Him. The Fear of God
will make a Man Realize the Eye of God. One that Fears God, is under the Power
of this Apprehension; O Lord, Thou art acquainted with all my ways: O Lord,
There is not a Word in my Tongue, but thou know it: O Lord, Thou know my
Thoughts afar off. This makes him afraid of every Sin; afraid of even the most
Secret Sin. If a Sinful and Vicious or Foolish Thought break into his Mind, he
is afraid of affording it a Lodging there. An Omnipresent GOD, is much
Considered, much Reverenced, by the Man that, Fears Him. Such an one may say, I
have set the Lord always before me. He Labors, he Watches, he Wishes, That he
may behave himself always as before the Lord.

Again; The Judgment of GOD is Awful to such a Man. The Fear of God assures a
Man of a Judgment to come; and it makes him Tremble at the Apprehension of
being Pronounced, Guilty, in that Judgment, The time of the Dead, when they
shall be Judged, is the Time, when a Reward shall be given to them that Fear
God. They that Fear God, have their Eye much on the Time, when the Dead shall
be Raised and Judged, and on the Reward which is then to be given to the
Children of Men. One that Fears God, is very Thoughtful of the Day, when we
must every one stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; the Day when God will
bring every Work into Judgment. The Dread of this Day, is to such a Man, The
Terror of the Lord. His great Study is, Oh! That in the Day of God, I may give
up my Account with Joy, and not with Grief! Oh! That I may do nothing that may
prove to my Disadvantage in the Day when I give up my Account unto God! The
Fear of God is not in the Man, who is not so disposed, so affected. I am sure,
in the Convert on the Cross, these things were very Visible.

Thirdly. True Religion, which Fears God, will Religiously and Conscienciously
endeavor to Serve God. The Worshippers of GOD, are called, Those theat fear
Him. The Worship and Service of GOD, is called, His Fear. We read of one, Act.
X. 2. He was a Devout Man, and one that feared God, and prayed unto God always.
The Fear of God will put a Man upon all the Devotions of a Godly Life. The Fear
of God will bring forth Prayer to God: Secret Prayer, Private Prayer, Public
Prayer; All Prayer with Perseverance in it. When Men cast off this Fear, then
they restrain Prayer. The Fear of God, will fill the Life of a Man with Work
for God. It will make a Man Abound in the Work of the Lord. It will make a Man
Diligent in the Work of both His Callings, the Spiritual and the Temporal.
Continual Acknowledgments of God, are in the Endeavor of the Man that Fears
Him. We are so called upon* Prove. XXIII. 17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord
all the Day long. It Is done in our conformity to that Rule of Piety,
Acknowledge the Lord in all the Ways. This Fear of God will bring a Man to that
Persuasion, I have to do with God in every Thing. And from so sweet a Root, as
the Fear of God, there will issue and flourish a Love to Man. The Fear of God
will make a Man afraid of doing or wishing any Hurt unto his Neighbor; It will
make him contrive to be a Blessing in his Neighborhood; It will make him a
Good Man, and a Doer of Good. This, this is to Fear God.

But, certainly, you can scarce hear these Instructions, without expecting two
Things to be immediately pressed upon you.

First. O view yourselves in this Impartial Glass, and see what you are Try and
see, whether you have the Fear of God in you, or no. It was enquired; Psalm.
XXV. 12. What Man is he that fears the Lord? Let every one of us make the
Enquiry, Am I the Man that fears the Lord? Let there be no such Token of Death
upon us, as may give Cause for our being so questioned thereupon, Do not thou
fear God? Examine, Whether upon the Question, you can say, Yes, I prize CHRIST,
I hate Sin, I walk with GOD, and Labor to please Him. Oh! be not at Rest until
you come to this.

Secondly. You see, and, Oh! will you not seek, a Blessing of which you have
cause to be exceedingly, unspeakably desirous. It Is, The Fear of God. A Man
cannot infuse the Fear of God into his own Heart. It is the Grace of GOD. Oh!
Let us make our Supplication to GOD, for this Grace. If any of you lack this
Wisdom; this Beginning of Wisdom, -- Let him Ask it of God. It was an hopeful
Character of some; Neh. I. 11. Thy Servants who desire to fear thy Name. Oh!
may all of you come into it; and make that Petition, O Great GOD; Let there be
an Heart in me to fear thee! It Is a Petition to be made Importunately, to be
made Continually!

II. The Second observable Thing which we have before us, i^; That when People
who suffer Evil Things, continue to do Evil Things, it argues that the Fear of
God is wanting in them. Oh! Grievous Thing! Did the Sun ever look upon a more
Grievous Thing! Ah, Forlorn Soul, wherein such a Grievous Thing shall be
exemplified! When a poor Man Condemned unto various and grievous Miseries, went
on in Gross Mis^arriages, and the Cross itself would not make him turn unto
God, this procured that Righteous Reproof unto the miserable Creature, Do not
thou fear God? It showed great Want of the Fear of God.

Let us a little Inform ourselves, How it is.

First. Some that suffer very sad Things, do not Reform the Sins, which have
brought their Sufferings* It may be said of some, as in Jer. V. 3. O Lord, Thou
have Consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction. Our
Afflictions come to us, with a Message from God. The Message, and Language of
them, is; Oh! Repent of thy Way, and of thy Doings, which have procured these
things unto thee; Of the Wickedness, which has procured thee all this
Bitterness. Yet many Afflicted ones there are, whose Afflictions do not bring
them to Repentance. Their Iniquity is not thereby Purged, and the Fruit thereof
is not the taking away of their Sin. The Duty they Omitted before their
Afflictions, though they are Afflicted, yet they continue in their Omission of
it. The Trespass they committed before their Afflictions, though they are
Afflicted, yet they continue in their Commission of it. Though they have born
Chastisement, they are not Inquisitive what those Offenses may be, for which
they have been Chastised; and they do not say, What is meet surely to be (...)
unto God, I will not Offend any more* Though the Holy One have Stricken them for
their Sinning against Him, yet they are not more afraid of Sinning, than
formerly. Though God be vexing them with all Adversity; (...) it an Evil World
unto them, (...) they are not more weaned (...) Love of the World. Though (...)
an Afflicted Life, yet they do not lead a more Prayerful, a more Fruitful, a
more Heavenly Life; a Life of more Communion with God. Though the Rod be Employed
upon them, yet they do not Hear the Red. They have their Cross, but no
Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness growing upon it.

Secondly. Some who Sinned before they Suffered, fall into New and more Sins,
after their Sufferings. Evil Men wax worse and worse under those Things, which
they should have grown Better upon. We read of such (...) Incurable; 2 Chronicles.
XXVIII. 22. In the time of his Distress, did he Trespass yet more against the
Lord. There are many Fools, who because of their Transgressions, and because of
their Iniquities, are Afflicted. And yet they add new Transgressions, and add
new Iniquities, unto the old Score of their Enormities; This they do after
their Afflictions. They have Sinned, and they have Smarted; And, for all this
they have Sinned still; and they have added new Sins unto the vast Heap of
their Provocations; and been more Sinful, in further Out-breakings, and
Outrages of Impiety. It Is especially thus, when People do like the Wicked Thief
on the Cross, Blaspheme God under their Afflictions; When they are full of
Discontent, full of Impatience, full of Murmuring under their Afflictions; full
of Envy against those who do not endure the like Afflictions; When they take
Indirect Courses to escape their Afflictions, unlawful Methods to abate their
Afflictions. That ever the World should have such Monsters in it!

Thirdly. Such Incorrigible ones discover themselves to be destitute of the
Fear of God. We may on this occasion say that in Psalm. XXXVI. 1. The
Transgression of the Wicked says within my Heart, There is no fear of God
before his Eyes. The Charge may be very plainly proved upon them.

First. If we see Suffering^ upon (...) People, God expects that (...) Him, and
improve in all (...) upon such Admonitions. Thus we read; Zech. UI. 7. I have
cut off the Nations, -- I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive
Instruction. Surely then, if we do not receive Instruction from Suffering upon
ourselves, it is plain, that we do not Fear God. When others are Scourged, God
expects that we should all Hear and Fear, and no more do Wickedly. Surely then,
if they that are under the same Condemnation, go on to Sin under their
Scourges, these do not Fear God. There can be no doubt of this!

Secondly. They who get no Good by their Sufferings, forget that they have to
do with God in their Sufferings. Were People sensible that God sends their
Sufferings on them, and comes looking for the Fruit of His Dispensations, they
would certainly get some Good by them. We read, Job V. 6, 8. Affliction comes
not forth of the Dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground. -- I
would seek unto God. Were we sensible, that we have to do with an Higher than
all Second Causes in our Sufferings, they would certainly bring us nearer to
God. But now, if Men cast off the Sense of God, it is plain, they also cast off
the Fear of God. It is undoubtedly, so.

Thirdly. They that are Incorrigible Sinners under Sufferings, are
unquestionably Unconverted Sinners. We read; Psalm. CXIX. 71. It is good for me,
that I have been Afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. It is then good
for us that we have Suffered any Humbling Things, when we are quickened in and
by our Sufferings, to Learn, and to Love, and to Do the Statutes of God. There
is a true Conversion to God, in doing so. Under Sufferings, to be brought into
the Frames, and unto the Rules of a New Creature; under Sufferings, to be
brought into the Covenant of God, and of His Grace, and unto a consent unto all
the Articles of (...) under Sufferings, to Embrace a Precious CHRIST, in all
His Offices, for and with all His Benefits; And under Sufferings to have all
Sin rendered Abominable to us; This is to get Good by Sufferings. But they who
are Strangers to these things, are Unconverted Sinners. And all Unconverted
Sinners, are Strangers to the Fear of God. Unto every Unconverted, and
Unregenerate Soul, Thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and my Fear is not in
thee, faith the Lord God of Hosts. This cannot be questioned.

Lastly. Sinners Incorrigible under Sufferings, proclaim themselves without
Fear that the Justice of God, may yet bring more heavy Sufferings upon them.
They make a Fearless, Darring, Hardy Challenge to the Justice of God. God
threatens them who are Incorrigible under their Sufferings, at that rate; Lev.
XXVI. 23, 24. If ye will not be Reformed by these Things, then will I Punish
you yet seven times more for your Sins. God will go on, Punishing the
Incorrigible Sinner, and Multiplying His Plagues upon him, until he has
destroyed the Sinner wonderfully. God will go on still in His Inflictions, if
the Sinner will go on still in his Trespasses. Yea, It Is the tremendous
Commination of God; After thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, O Incorrigible
Sinner, thou shall find thou have been treasuring up Wrath against the Day of
Wrath, and thy woeful Portion will be in the Perdition of Ungodly Men. But, the
Incorrigible are not afraid of what a just God will do unto them. No, you
Wretches, whose Heart Strings are Sinews of Iron, you Fear it not! This fully
proves the Indictment, That the Malefactors have not the Fear of God before
their Eyes.

These Things cannot well go off, without this Direction unto us. My Brethren,
Give this Demonstration; that you have the Fear of God; Having suffered Evil
Things, do not persist, Oh! no longer persist, in Doing any Evil Things. Be
prevailed withal, to make this Use of all your Sufferings. Consider, What is
the Errand which the Affliction I now suffer is come upon? Make that Request
unto God; Job X. 2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. But then,
Repent, Oh! Repent of the Miscarriages, which have procured such a Suffering
for you. It is a memorable Word; Rev. III. 19. As many as I Love, I Rebuke and
Chasten; be Zealous therefore, and Repent. Christians, If you grow more Zealous
of all good Works, and Repent of all your Evil Works, there has been the
mavelous Love of God, in Rebuking and Chastening of you. Conform to the Will,
Comply with the Call, of Him, who sends all your Sufferings, as His Messengers,
upon you. Be Sollicitous for nothing so much as this; Oh! that my Sufferings
may not be lost upon me! This will Demonstrate, That you Fear God. And, O Lord,
How great is thy Goodness, which thou have laid up for them, who so do Fear
(...)!

III. The Third (...) Thing, in which the (...) the Trumpet is to wax yet
Louder and Louder unto us, is this: It Is a Dreadful Thing for any one to Dye
without the Fear of God.

Why was the Convert so much in Earnest, that his poor Friend might have in him
the Fear of God? Why, He was just a Dying. He was to Dye that Afternoon. If he
Died before he had the Fear of God wrought in him, he must pass into a very Bad
Condition after Death. Had it not been so, to what purpose had it been so
earnestly to inculcate the Fear of God upon him! Truly, If any Man Dye, before
he have a Soul Impregnated, Rectified, Purified, by the Fear of God, the least
that can be said, is; It had been good for that Man, that he had never been
Born. If the Life of Man come to an end, before the Fear of God has begun to
Regulate his Life, his Death will bring a dreadful Change upon him. It Is a fear
(...) Thing for a Soul to go (...) of the World, not marked with the Fear of
God for Blessedness in another (...) Never, never was there heard a mo^^
Astonishing Thunderclap, than that Word; Joh. VIII. 24. Ye shall Dye in your
Sins. This, this will be the Fa^e of them, who Dye without the Fear of God.
They Dye in their Sins, and their Death is a Trap-door, that lets them down
into horrible Miseries.

The Pulpit must now become a Sinai. And since you are now to stand before a
Flaming Mountain, Be afraid, O ye Sinners in our Zion; Let Fearfulness also
Surprise you, O ye Hypocrites thereof. I am to tell you;

First. The Future State will be a Dismal State unto them, whose Death finds
them in ill Terms with God. We have all possible Assurance, that after Death
Men pass into a Future State. After Death a Judgment. A Redeemer, who by Rising
from the Dead, asserted Himself to be the Eternal Son of God Incarnate, has
assured us of it. The Future State, as it will be Inconceivably Happy to some,
so it will be Unutterably Doleful to others. It will have such a Distribution
as that; Matthew. XXV. 46. The Wicked shall go away into everlasting Punishment;
but the Righteous into Life Eternal. Particularly; There are some, who at their
Death have their Spirits turned among Devils: One may almost say, turned into
Devils. They are confined unto very uneasy Confusions: Rueful Chains of
Darkness are laid upon them. They languish under the amazing Terror of a Wrath
to come; a Fiery Indignation that shall one Day Devour them. He will one Day
Raise them from the Dead: But it will be, that He may inflict a Second Death
upon them; and a Death which will have in it, a Torture suitable to the Demerit
of their Offenses: A Torture whereto all the Racks and Fires here, are but
Metaphors. A Guilty Conscience will remain in their Spirits, and the Wrath of
God therewith forever Torturing of them. Thus, even thus, the Enemies of God
are to be dealt withal.

Secondly. The People whose Death finds them without the Fear of God, are such
as Dye in ill Terms with God: And, Oh! What, what will the Future State be unto
them! We read; Psalm. XC. 11. Who knows the Power of thine Anger? Even according
to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. Men shall be treated by the Wrath of God,
according to the Fear of God which there has been in their Souls. By the fear
of God Men get from under His Wrath. But if they are without the fear of God,
they have His Wrath forever abiding on them. For,

First. If People Dye without the fear of God, they Dye Unpardoned: And this
Entails the formidable Wrath of God upon them. We read; Psalm. CIII. 11, 12.
Great is His Mercy toward them that fear Him. He removes our Transgressions
from us. But if People do not fear God, their Sins are lying on them, sticking
to them; not one of a Thousand, alas, not one of their many Thousands, removed
from them. The Wrath of God therefore falls upon the Man, who Dies without the
fear of God. He is not at Peace with God, and so he cannot avoid the Wrath of
God. But, Oh! How dreadful a Thing to fall under the Wrath of the LORD GOD
ALMIGHTY! How fearful a Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God! The
Wrath of God sometimes lays People under incredible Torments in this World. But
undoubtedly, the Tormenting Blows and Scalds, which the Wrath of God will give
unto the Children of Wrath in the World to come, will exceed all that is ever
seen in this World. Oh! Never yet were those unsearchable Treasures of Wrath so
broken up, that any People alive upon Earth, have had a full Display thereof.
But there is this Terror of the Lord added unto the dismal State of it Sinner
lying under this Wrath; We know no Period of it! The Lamentations will not be,
All our Days are passed away under thy Wrath. No, The Days will Never, Never,
Never be All passed away. Nor will they be Days neither. They will be Nights
rather than Days. It Is all utter Darkness. There will be Blackness of Darkness
forever. O Dreadful! To be Exiled from GOD! And with an everlasting Exile! To
be made Vessels of Wrath, wherein the Wrath of God against Sin, shall hang up
Everlasting Monuments and Spectacles! This is the Portion of them who Dye
without the fear of God: This the Heritage of them who do not get into the
Favor of God before they Dye.

Secondly. If People Dye without the fear of God, they Dye with a Vene^^ious
Nature still unchanged; and so they carry an Eternal Fuel for the Wrath of God
into Eternity with them. We read, Romans VIII. 7. The Carnal Mind is Enmity
against God. Until the fear of God come into the Mind, the Sinner has a Carnal
Mind that remains uncured in him. Now there is no prospect for the Cure of that
Carnal Mind, when a Sinner is fallen under the Revenges of God, for his Enmity.
No, He that is Unjust will still be Unjust; and he that is Filthy will be
Filthy still. A perpetual Enmity to God is then rivetted into the Mind of the
Sinner; Never, never (...) be gotten out. But what will be the Consequence of
this Enmity? It must needs make the Future State a very Dismal one. A perpetual
Enmity to God, must needs involve the sinful Wretch in a perpetual
Wretchedness. No Comfortable Visions of God can be allowed unto him, whom God
counts for His Enemy. Continual Rebukes from God, will be thundered upon him.
Irregular Passions will keep his Enraged Soul in a perpetual Storm. His Desires
will never be gratified, but be always creating of Troubles unto him. He will
Hate God, and God will Vex him; and the Vengeance of Heaven will be perpetually
Triumphing over him. This it is to Dye without the Fear of God: This must they
look for, who Dye without Wisdom.

And now, Oh! the Importunity, the Fervency, the Energy, which the EXHORTATION
should be urged withal!

See to it, O all ye People, every one ^f you, See to it, That you Dye not
without the fear of God, and, Alienated from the Life of God.

My Hearers, We are every one of us all, under a Condemnation of Death. Know
you not? Alas, you are obliged every Day to see the Execution of it; It is
appointed unto Men once to Dye. The irreversible Sentence is gone out from the
Mouth of God; So Death has passed upon all Men, for that all have Sinned.

What? My Friend, Under this Condemnation, and not Fear God! O our Dying
People, -- And I Address every one of you all, under that Appellation; O our
Dying People, Why will you Dye, and not get the Fear of God into your Souls
before you Dye?

First. There are None of you, but for ought you know, may Dye very Speedily,
yea, may Dye very Suddenly. Unto the Youngest and unto the Strongest of you
all, and unto them that are most ready to put far away the Evil Day, it may be
said, as in Prove. XXVII. 1. Boast not of To- Morrow, for thou know not what
a Day may bring forth. Children, It highly Concerns every one of you, to Retire
this very Evening, and Commune with your own Hearts; and ask, Have I yet
attained unto the fear of God? -- Ask, Is my Soul yet Renewed with the fear of
God? And send up your Cries from the Dust unto the Lord; Even those Cries;
Psalm. LXXXVI. 11. Lord, engage my Heart to fear thy Name. You are not sure that
you have one Week more to Live. It Is Time to lay hold on a Mercy, for the
ensuring whereof you are not sure of having any more Time allowed unto you.

Secondly. There are Some of you, who know, that you are just going to Dye.

Aged People surely cannot but know this. I am therefore to say unto you; An
Aged Person without the fear of God, Oh! It Is one of the most Melancholy Sights
that can be looked upon. What? Past Fifty, and come to the Use of Glasses, and
flying down to the Grave, with the Haste of an Eagle to the Prey; and still
without the fear of God! Oh! Lamentable! I entreat you, I entreat you, Syrs, to
make Haste in lifting up your Cries unto God. Oh! God of all Grace, Implant thy
Fear in my Soul before I die! Oh! Let not my Death surprise me, before the
Grace of thy Fear has Enlightened me! And Oh! be at no Quiet, until you feel
the Working of it. Your Epitaph will else quickly be that; Eccl. IX. 3. Madness
is in their Heart while they Live, and after that they go to the Dead.

But of those who are sure of having the Arrest of Death presently served upon
them, there is none that has a more affecting Assurance of it, than a poor
Daughter of Death, who is this Afternoon to have her Soul Required of her. Ah!
poor Creature! Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art under a Condemnation, to
a Tragical Death which is to be this Afternoon executed on thee; and within
three or four Hours, thy Soul will be Required of thee; within three or four
Hours thy Soul must make its Appearance before a Terrible GOD! Oh! What, what
will be the Condition of that Perishing Soul, if no Fear of God be found in it,
when it Appears before Him? --

There is indeed a vast Abundance even to a Profusion, of Instructions,
bestowed more Privately on such Malefactors as Dye among us: No Place upon
Earth does equal this Place for that Exercise of Charity. And this poor
Creature has had a very particular Share thereof: Not only have the Ministers
of the Gospel done their Part, in Visiting of her, but also many Private
Christians have done theirs, in a most Exemplary manner. As of old in Jerusalem
it was the Usage of the Ladies, to (...) for the Dying Malefactors, that (...)
which was called, The (...) the Condemned, so the Young Gentlewomen here in
their Turns, h^^e Charitably gone to the Prison (...) Day for diverse Weeks
together, and because of her not being able to Read, have spent the Afternoons
in Reading Portions of the Scriptures, and other Books of Piety, to this
Condemned Woman, and giving their Excellent Counsils unto her. Nevertheless, we
choose in a more Public way also to direct a few Words of our Sermons, unto
such Persons; when we have them among our Hearers; Because, the Preaching of
the Gospel, is the Grand Ordinance of our Savior, for the Conversion of a
Sinner from the Error of his way; and we would wait upon our Glorious LORD, in
that way which he has Ordained, hoping, still hoping, to see a Soul saved from
Death!

Wherefore once more, O miserable Woman, entering into an Eternity to be
trembled at; Once more, thou shall hear the Joyful Sound of the Gospel,
inviting thee to the Fear of God, and the Faith of thy only Savior. And if
there be not in this Last Essay, a more saving Impression from the Glorious
Gospel of the Blessed God made upon thee, than thou have yet felt from any
former ones, -- Oh! the dreadful, dreadful Consequences! What will become of
thee! -- Can thy Hands be Strong, or can thy Heart endure, in the View of what
a Terrible GOD will order for thee? -- Behold, Ah! poor Margaret, Behold a
mighty Congregation of People, with Hearts Bleeding for thee, and Wishing and
Praying and Longing to see the fear of God making some Discoveries in thee. And
shall thy Heart still remain unaffected with thy own Condition; discovering
still a total Estrangement from the fear of God! No Tears are enough, Tears of
Blood were not enough, to be employed on so prodigious a Spectacle!

I am sorry, I am sorry, that I find myself obliged so much to speak it. Even
since thou have been under Condemnation, thou have not feared God. Not many
Hours are passed, since I saw in thee, so much Rage, and so; Unrighteously
harbored, and so Indecently Vomited, against some Virtuous Children of God,
that it (...) too Evident, this fear of God had not yet begun to soften thee.

But if the fear of God enter not into thy Soul, before thy Soul be driven out
o^ thy Body, which will be now, -- alas, before many Minutes more be expired,
thy Desolate, Forsaken, Miserable Soul, can have no part in the Kingdom of God.
My Soul cannot be safe, if I forbear to tell thee so!

Ah, poor Creature, Art thou wiling to Dye unreconciled unto the God, whom thou
have Affronted with infinite Provocations? To Dye, and fall into the Mouths of
Dragons, who have so long poisoned thee, and enslaved thee? To Dye and be cast
into the Eternal Burnings, from whence the Smoke of the Torment will ascend
forever and ever? What? Shall all the Means of Good, which in a Religious Place
have, been used for thee, with hopes that they might find out one of the Elect
of God, serve only to aggravate thy Eternal Condemnation at the last? Oh!
Dreadful Consideration!

But, Oh! Be Astonished at it! There is yet a Door of Hope set open for thee;
It will for one Hour it may be, stand open yet! Oh! Be full of Astonishments at
such an Heart-melting Declaration, as is now to be made unto thee. A
Compassionate SAVIOR, is yet willing, to Cleanse by Soul with His Blood, from
the Sins, which by casting off the fear of God thou have fallen into; yet
wiling to create in thee a Clean Heart, ^^at shall be filled with the fear of
God, if he be sought unto; yet calling to thee, O look unto me and be Saved!
And yet affording unto thee that Encouragement, in Joh. VI. 27. He that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

And, Oh! What will thou now ^o under these Astonishing (...)? Will thou not
improv^^ these few Minutes with a most (...) industry and Agony? Do (...) ^e no
longer such an Hard-hearted Prodigy! Fall down before thy SAVIOR, and cry out;
O my Savior; Take pity on my Soul, and now at the Last, let Sovereign Grace
break forth, with a good Work of thy fear in my Soul! Cry out, O my Savior,
Let my Sin be all pardoned, and let all Sin be as Abominable unto me, as it is
unto all that fear thy Name! Let thy Outcries pierce the very Heavens.

But, be it known unto thee, If the fear of God be in thee, it will be a thing
more Bitter than Death unto thee, that thou have Sinned against His Glorious
Majesty; Thy Malice against every Neighbor will be extinguished; Thou will
submit with Patience, to the Punishment of thy Iniquity; And thou will be an
Holy, Humble, Thankful Soul, and quite another Creature! -- God of His Infinite
Mercy make thee so!

Though I have now no more to say unto this poor Creature; yet I have something
to say unto all this Congregation of God; and her Circumstances ^urnish me with
an Awful Occasion for it.

I wish, Oh! I wish, the Testimonies of a thorough Repentance in her, were more
Conspicuous. But I would make the best Use I can, of what Little has been
obtained.

This Woman in her better Frames, has very Voluntarily over and over again,
testified her Desire, to do what Good may be done, by an Instrument, that she
has put into my Hands; Signed with her own, before several Witnesses, after
every Clause thereof had been distinctly Considered with her. An Instrument
which* I shall now Read unto you. --

A Miserable Death is hastened upon me, for my Sins against the Almighty God. I
own the Justice of the Almighty in what is come upon me; and I own also the
Justice of the Government (...) Executing the Sentence of (...) which cuts me
off. I have (...) to be amazed at the Mercy (...) Lord, in providing a Savior
for so great and vile a Sinner. I fly to Him, that my Sins may be all pardoned
for the sake of His Blood, and that I may be delivered particularly from the
Bloodguiltiness wherewith I am justly Chargeable; and also that He would give
me a New Heart, and make all my Sins Bitter and Loathsome to me.

I am sensible, That without a true Repentance, I must Perish under the
dreadful Wrath of God: And woe to me, if I Dye in my Sins. But I am informed,
That in Repenting of my Sins, I shall do well to warn other Sinners against
such things as have been the undoing of my Soul.

I do therefore declare, That I believe God has been greatly Offended at me,
for the Sins of an Unbridled Tongue; whereof Swearing and Cursing is to be
particularly reckoned; and for my Profanations of His Holy Sabbaths. But the
Sin which above many lies heavy on my Mind, is my Disobedience and Rebellion
against my Parents; A Sin against which I would have all to be warned, that
would not come to an untimely End.

I also Bewail before the Lord, and His People, the Sins of Unchastity, which
have led me on to the Ruin that is now come upon me. Little do poor Creatures
consider, when they are once got into the Unclean ways of Unchastity, what they
shall come to.

Being forsaken of God, I attempted in Murderous Ways, to Destroy my Unborn
Infant. God saw my Wickedness, and would not let me succeed in those Attempts;
but (...) me to such a Neglect of my Newborn Infant, as has made it a just
thing that I should now Dye for the Murder of it.

God ^e Merciful to me a Sinner: and make my Warnings Profitable to other
Sinners.

The Violent Passions whereinto this Woman has been Transported since her calm
and free Exhibition of this Instrument, leave us at a perfect Loss what to make
of her. We can do no more, but leave her to the unknown Mercy of God.

But my Hearers, You can yourselves now generally make agreeable Remarks, on
this Instrument; And you will not let such an uncommon Engine of Piety be lost
among you.

But, I hope, Undutiful Children especially will tremble at the Spectacle which
God this Day hangs up for them all with a Trembling Soul to look upon.
Undutiful Children, How often, how often have you now heard from the Gallows,
those doleful Eiulations, Disobedience to Parents is what brings to this! Yea,
it is a wonderful Thing I am now to tell you. This poor Creature here, cannot
now forget it. In a mad Rage once, [Horrible to be spoken!] she Cursed her own
Mother. And her enraged Mother then uttered that Imprecation upon her, I wish
thou may Dye upon the Gallows! And now, see what it is come to! Oh! do not
you go on in your Disobedience. If you have given your Parents cause to
Complain, that you have made Heavy Hearts for them, Repent of what you have
done; and Obey them, Oblige them, Comfort them. What will the Holy GOD else
leave you to? Child, If thou will not hearken to my Counsil, I know that God
has determined, He will destroy thee!

And, Oh! that all Profane Delays of Repentance, might after this appear more
Frightful, from a fresh and a black and a stupendous Experiment, that has been
made of the Danger in them. This poor Creature, upon her very first
Imprisonment, had the best Advice that could be given unto her, to spend her
Time unto the best Advantage. But a vile Person in the Prison persuaded her,
that he should make his Escape, and would carry her off; and all should be
well. I know not how to relate the Hideous Hardness of Heart, which this
Foolish Persuasion betrayed her to. But I cannot perceive any of all her
Follies, to be now more Cruciating to her, than what were the Fruit of this
Persuasion. Particularly, That now she minded nothing of Repentance, until her
Condemnation; And God knows, what poor Work she has made of it since, though the
Honorable Judges have Mercifully allowed so much Time unto her. -- O
Procrastinating Sinners, If by secure Delays of Repentance, you so Vex the Holy
Spirit of God, as to procure His Departure from you, what Hardness of Heart may
you be given up unto! Woe to them, when I depart from them, says the Lord.

But now at last, Shall the Sins of Unchastity undergo one Contusion more? Good
God, make it an Effectual one!

Abominable Sins! The Sins where of our Holy JESUS, has from Heaven sent this
Notice to us, I hate there! The Sins, which the Holy Scripture points out, as a
fatal Ditch, a filthy Pit, set open for the Abhorred of the Lord. How
Mischievous the Abominations! What Wounds, what Wounds, do they leave upon the
Souls of Men! What Wounds upon all their Interests! What Infatuations do
accompany them! Oh! the Hideous Havoc, which the Sins of Unchastity make among
the polluted Children of Men! The Ruins which they undergo from the Fleshly
Lusts, that War against our Souls!

Ah, Tempted Souls; I don't propose that you should make any Rash Vows, under
the Anguish which the ^^lthy Fires may give unto you. I know, you will break them
if you do. But the best Proposal is, To Humble yourselves in the Dust before
the Lord. What else can you do, when the Serpents of the Dust are Coiling about
you? From thence, lift up your, Cries unto your Savior, O my dear Savior, I
shall Sin against thee, if thou forsake me. Oh! Forsake me not utterly* Oh!
Pity me; Oh! Rescue me. The Blood of thy Cross has purchased for me the Death
of my Inordinate Lusts. Oh! Give me the Grace, which thy Death has purchased
for me. Let my Lusts all Dye before it! O Succor my Tempted Soul; And, O Holy
Spirit of Grace, do thou take Possession of me, and Purify me, Purify me
Wonderfully! Thus keep Crying to your Holy Lord. Who can tell, how He will Send
from above, how He will Take you, how He will Draw you out of many Waters!

I cannot but think, That there is a Voice of God unto the Country in this
Thing; That there should be so many Instances of Women Executed for the Murder
of their Bastard-Children. There are now Six or Seven such unhappy Instances,
that are upon Record, and made Pillars of Salt in Printed Memorials. Lo, God
^^nds out. His Voice, and that a mighty Voice, in these Things. Lord, Help us
to understand thy Meaning in them.

Certainly, There is a Loud Voice and Call from God unto Good Men, to consider
more than ever; What Sacred Exorcisms are to be used, that the Unclean Spirit
may be suppressed in the Land.

Most certainly, There is this Voice of GOD: Let all People beware how they
give way to lesser Beginnings in the Sins of Unchastity. Oh! People cannot see,
where they shall stop, if once they give the Reins to Impetuous Impurities.

Most certainly, All of us that may upon Reflection find any Stumbles into the
Sins of Unchastity, may now hear this Voice of GOD unto us; O Bewail your
Impurities; and Abhor yourselves before an Holy GOD; and get the Cleansing
Blood of your Savior sprinkled on your Souls. And may we not apprehend one
thing more! Several Bastard-Children have been Murdered in this Place; But
there has not unto this Day been any Detection of the Murderers. There is this
Day a Voice of GOD, and lo^, it is a mighty Voice, unto th^se Bloody Creatures;
Oh! Let not the Patience, and Forbearance of God be lost upon you, Wonder at
it, That God has not all this while delivered you up, to the Sword of Justice.
Let the Long-suffering of God be for your Salvation. O Turn to God, with (...)
Repentance, lest He leave (...) something that all the People shall be (...) at!

I have done. I have these Faithful Warnings in the Hands of GOD, for Him to
make them Efficacious. O Glorious LORD, Give thou, for Thou alone can (...)
an Efficacy to them!

FINIS.
The Divine Compassions Declared and Magnified: To Engage and Encourage the
greatest Sinners unto a Speedy and Earnest Repentance. A SERMON, Preached at
the Lecture in BOSTON, June 2. 1715. Upon the Sorrowful Occasion of a Miserable
Woman present, under Sentence of Death for the Murder of her Spurious Infant.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN, A. M.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet and T. (...) for Samuel Gerrish, on the North Side
of the Townhouse, in King Street, 1715.

The Divine Compassions Declared and Magnified, To Engage and Encourage the
greatest Sinners to a Speedy and Earnest Repentance.
EZEKIEL. XVIII. 23. Have I any Pleasure at all that the Wicked should die? says
the LORD GOD: and not that he should return and live?
THESE Words are among the many Endearing Arguments and Addresses, wherewith
the Great GOD persues wilful and obstinate Sinners; if it ^ight be possible at
last to softe^ 'em unto Repentance.

THE Wicked Jews had (...) a strange Opinion of the Blessed (...) as if he took
all Advantages against 'em, to Punish 'em; and particularly that they suffered
for their Fathers Sins It was become a kind of Proverb among 'em, though it
carried a plain Reproach and Impeachment of the Divine Judgments; that the
Fathers had eaten four Grapes, and the Children^ Teeth were set on Edge. The
Objection was Foolish as well as Profane; for it is no ways Unjust in GOD to
inflict Temporal Evils upon the Children for their Parents Sins: For a great
many present Punishments of the Sins of Parents, do by a natural and
unavoidable Tendency involve their Posterity in Calamities and Miseries.

IN the Chapter GOD asserts in General His own Sovereignty and Justice that all
Souls are His, and that the Soul that Sins shall die. But more especially there
are four things pretty much insisted on; as Mr. Henry divides the Chapter: That
it shall (...) ill with the wicked Man, though he ha^ a good Father; that it
shall ^e we with the good Man, though he had a wicked Father; that it shall be
well with Penitents, though they began never so ill; and that it shall be ill
with Apostates, though they began never so well.

UNDER the Third of these Heads our Text falls; Have I any Pleasure at all that
the Wicked should die? says the Lord GOD: and not that he should return from
his ways and live?

LET us attentively Consider, Who it is that speaks, and What is said. Says
the Lord GOD: He it is that speaks from Heaven, and see that you refuse Him
not. What Attention, Reverence, Fear and Faith do we owe unto His Words?
whether of Grace or of His Anger and Wrath.

OBSERVE the Thing sai^^ and the Form wherein it is clothed. Have (...)
Pleasure at all? No, (...) not the least, that the Sinner (...): But on the
contrary, (...) instantly, unspeakably Pleasing (...) Great and Holy GOD, that
(...) from his evil ways and live* (...) He desires, this would delight Him;
this He aims at, and endeavors in all His Addresses unto perishing Souls for
their Salvation.

HE can Appeal to Sinners themselves and refer it to them to judge, Have I any
pleasure at all that the Wicked should die? Besides the vehement Negation on
God's part herein implied, it is as much supposed that the Sinner cannot deny or
oppose the Truth of what is here affirmed. So that the Doctrine before us is
this:

Doct. That the Lord our GOD has given us the utmost Assurances, that He has no
pleasure at all in the Death of Sinners, but on the contrary, that He earnestly
desires their Repentance and Salvation. IN speaking to this Doctrine, I shall
only 1. Premise a few Words for the stating and limiting the Truth asserted;
and then 2. Exemplify, Illustrate and prove it by an Induction of undeniable
Instances.

I. I would Premise a few Words for the Stating and Limiting the Truth before
us: Which may serve as so many Negative Propositions, to tell us what is not
meant to be affirmed. As,

1. IT is a most certain Truth, that GOD has Pleasure in hating Sin. He has the
highest Complacency in His own Holiness, the Rectitude of His own Nature; and
consequently in the Aversations of that Holy Nature: He is not a God that can
have Pleasure in Wickedness, neither can Evil dwell with Him; He hates all the
workers of Iniquity. Psalm. 5. 4. Even a sanctified Nature on Earth, so far as
its measures of Sanctification are, does more or less find great Pleasure in
its Aversations to Sin. They that love the Lord hate Evil. There are all the
Pleasures of Love to GOD in the hatred of Sin. All (...) is not Grievous and
Painful; all (...) Regular and truly Natural, is (...) and Pleasant: Pain
proceeds only from the Irregularity of a thing, its being Wrong. The
Blessedness and Joy of GOD is in His own Holiness. The hatred of Sin is
therefore Essential to GOD and to His Blessedness. So that though GOD has no
Pleasure that the Wicked should die, yet has He Pleasure in hating the Wicked,
as such, and their ways: The Wicked and him that loves Violence His Soul
hates. Psalm. 11. 5.

2. MOREOVER, God has Pleasure in Glorifying His Justice in all the Demands of
it against the Wicked. The Justice of GOD is an Attribute Essential to Him. It
necessarily follows upon the Rectitude and Holiness of His Nature, together
with His Dominion and Government. If there be one most Holy Lord and Governor
of the World, I Am sure that it is Essential to Him to Punish Sin at such Times,
and in such Manner and Circumstances, as His Wisdom, Purity, the Order and Good
of the World, and His own Honor and Glory do direct unto. So far God's
Punishing Sin by a necessity of Nature is Intelligible, and Certain; and no
farther can I apprehend it. GOD's Holiness, Honor and Justice is dearer to Him
than a thousand Worlds; Pereat Mundus sed fiat Justitia; let the World be Burnt
up, but let Justice be Glorified. The Goodness and Mercy of GOD can have no
Pleasure in any Display of itself, any further than is consistent with the
Satisfaction and Glory of Justice. They do not Lust against each other; oppose,
repine at, or glory over one another: No; they agree, unite, and are both
Glorious in the Exaltation of either. Goodness in GOD is as much for the
Preservation of the Rights of a Holy and Wife and Perfect Administration of
Government, as strict Justice is; and Justice delights in the Exaltation of
Mercy these preserved, as much as it does in the Inflictions of the Punishments
which they call for. Hence GOD is just to forgive, as well as to punish. It is
as Delightful to GOD to glorify His Justice as His Mercy. The one is as dear to
Him as the other. They never Rival, but infinitely Delight in each other. St.
James has a Passage that may be easily mis-understood: Jam. 2. 13. Mercy
rejoiceth against Judgment. If you should understand this of Mercy in GOD, it
could be only spoken Popularly; as among Men Mercy shown to the Evil that
deserve it not, seems to get the Victory and Ascendant. But indeed the Apos^^e
there speaks of Mercy in Man, when that is in its Display and Exaltation,
triumphing over the Wickedness and Enmity and Injuries of others; it gives a
Person Comfort and Rejoicing in his prospect of the Judgment of God: For he
shall have Judgment without Mercy, that shows not Mercy; and Mercy rejoiceth
against Judgment. So that it is not spoken of the Mercy of GOD rejoicing
against His Judgment; but of the Grace of Mercifulness in the Saint, enabling
him to rejoice against the threatening and Condemnation of the Law.

TO return from this Digression. Though GOD has no Pleasure that the Wicked
should die, yet has He Pleasure in Glorifying His Justice in all the Demands of
it upon the Wicked: That is infinitely Pleasant to Him.

3. LET it be also further observed, as another great Maxim of Truth; That GOD
has ineffable Pleasure in fulfilling and performing His Word. Whether it be the
Promises or the Threatenings thereof; the Words of Grace or those of Terror.
They are both the unchangeable Truths of GOD, and according to His most Blessed
and Perfect Nature; and the Pleasure of GOD is equal in the fulfillment of
either. As for GOD His Work is Perfect; He is a GOD of Truth and without
Iniquity, Just and Right is He. He has not more Pleasure in holding the
Universe in its Order, than He has in fulfilling of His Words; the Word which
threatens the Wicked with Death. Yea the Heavens and the Earth shall pass away,
sooner than one Jot or Tittle of God's revealed written Truth. More settled is
this than the Ordinances of Heaven, and the Beauty and Glory of the Universe
more depends on this than on their Order and Motion. Hence it is that He will
Laugh at the Calamity of the Wicked, and Mock when their Fear comes. Prove. 1.
25. There can be no room for Pity when Holiness Justice and Truth stand forth
and demand Execution. GOD is Plenteous and Abundant in Truth as well as Mercy
and Goodness. Just and True are His Ways, true and right His Judgments, and
therefore He necessarily takes Pleasure in them. The strength of Israel cannot
lie nor repent, for He is not a Man that He should repent. Psalm. 89. 34.
Neither will I alter the thing that is gone out of my Mouth.

4. AND lastly. We must also lay down this for an undoubted Truth, That the
Sufferings of the damned cannot give God Perturbation or Disrest. Though GOD has
no Pleasure that the Wicked should die, yet if they die in their Sins it gives
Him no Inquietude, Uneasiness or Disturbance. He is Over all blessed for ever.
GOD lives in a full Complacency and in everlasting Rest. Uninterrupted, and
never to be diminished is His Satisfaction in Himself: With Him is the Fountain
of Light, and there can be no Darkness at all near Him.

GOD is liable to no Passion, or disorder of Affection. Heaven is the Temperate
Region. Humane Passions have their Transports and their Pain; and to accomodate
Himself to us and affect us God speaks of Himself after the manner of Men; but
let us beware of thinking GOD altogether such as ourselves. What is imperfect
in us, we must infinitely remove from GOD, when we conceive and speak of Him.
We may as well make to ourselves a Graven Image of Humane Form and call it GOD,
because that GOD has spoken of Himself as having an Eye to see, an Ear to hear,
a Mouth to speak, and a Hand to strike; as conceive of GOD after the
Imperfection of our own Souls in the workings of their Affections. The first
would be only to make a Dead Lifeless Image of GOD; the last to impute Evil and
Moral Disorders to Him.

IF we Punish from Anger it roils us: if Pity remain it grieves us. If Joy
seizes us, and Love work strongly in us, they overcome us almost: But much more
if Wrath and Hatred move us, we suffer most ourselves in the Punishments we lay
on others. But it is not so with God: Though we read of His Wrath, yet must we
not suppose or imagine any Painful Impression on the Divine Mind. He neither
feels the Miseries He pities; nor is vexed at the Sins which He detests. The
Divine Mind is ever Serene, Calm and Impassible; and we must abstract all that
in our Conceptions of Him, which spring out of the Imperfection either of
Nature or Happiness.

SO far I have labored to State and Limit the Truth before us; to clear and
deliver it from those Cavils and Objections that may rise against it in our
Minds. Though GOD has no Pleasure that the Wicked should die, yet it is
infinitely Pleasurable to Him to hate Sin, to glorify His Justice, and to
perform His Truth and Threatenings against Sin; and the Miseries of them that
perish are no grief or offense of Heart unto Him.

II. I now pass unto the Second Thing propounded, which is; To illustrate,
prove, and exemplify the Doctrine by an Induction of diverse Instances: all
which shall confirm and show that GOD has given us abundant Assurances that He
has no Pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but in their Repentance.

1. AND as it is fit, I will begin, first with the positive Affirmation hereof
in the Word of GOD. And this is instead of a thousand other Proofs, if GOD had
said it: His Truth endures ^^ro out all Generations. Yea the GOD of Truth has
passed it into an Oath, which is the highest Confirmation and ^n End of all
Strife or Dispute; It shows the Immutability of His Counsel, wherein it is
impossible for GOD to change; and so is a Ground for the strongest Confidence,
and Consolation to them that fly for Refuge from Guilt and the Avenger of Blood
to lay hold on the hope of Forgiveness and Life Eternal. Now this Oath we have
in Form and express Terms: Ezekiel. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the
Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked
turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will
ye dye, O House of Israel? How solemn is this Assurance given to Sinners? and
what could GOD do more to assure them? Is it not a wonderful Condescension in
the Great GOD to superadd His Oath unto His Word? to swear to what He had once
said, that so His Word might make the deeper Impression on us? whereas any one
Word of GOD, the Eternal Truth is instead of ten thousand Oaths. Therefore He
swears by Himself, there being no Greater to swear by: As I live, says the
Lord, I have no etc. GOD is Sincere and Faithful in all that He says; He deals
plainly with us and speaks what He intends: His Words are the true Image and
Declaration of His Mind. And He has told us of Himself, that He would have all
Men to be saved. 1 Timothy 2. 4. that He is not willing that any should Perish,
but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9.

NOW shall we believe GOD, or shall we make Him a Liar? shall we scruple and
doubt after His positive Word is passed? No; let GOD be true; let His Word be
magnified, in GOD let us praise His Word! that Word by which the World stands!
until the time come when the Angel lifts up his Hand to Heaven hereafter and
swears by him that lives for ever and ever, that time shall be no mercy and
then by the same word shall all things be dissolved.

2. GOD has given assurance to Sinners that He has no pleasure in their Death,
in the Revelation which He has given us of His own merciful Nature. When He
descended to Proclaim His Name to Moses, in how many Attributes of Grace was
it, as the Savior of Sinners and ready and abundant to Pardon? The Lord
Gracious and Merciful, Long-suffering and abundant in Goodness; keeping Mercy
for thousands etc. How many Words are here heaped up to show how much the
glory, nature and will of GOD is in the Salvation of Sinners, their Repentance
and Pardon? Mercy, Grace, Patience, Goodness, Faithfulness all glorified in
forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. And to Magnify this the more to
Sinners for their Comfort and to draw forth their confidence therein, and
adorations thereof, we read that He is (...) in Mercy, and plenteous in Mercy;
of the greatness of His Mercies, and the multitude of His Mercies; His manifold
Mercies and His tender Mercy; and all employed for the help and relief of
perishing Sinners. P^al. 51. 1. According to the multitude of thy tender
Mercies, blot out my Transgressions.

3. THE Relation wherein GOD stands to His Creatures, may afford Assurance unto
Sinners that He has no pleasure in their Death, save only as the Honor,
Holiness and Justice of His Government do necessitate it.

WE are all the Work of His Hands: One GOD created us. Now GOD has implanted in
us, a natural and necessary, but most free chosen and delightful Regard to our
own; whether our own, Works, or our Offspring. We desire to see those that come
of us Happy; in all their Afflictions we deeply share and are afflicted; it is
very painful to us to see them suffer; On the other hand, How does it please us
to see them Happy? what Content have we in their doing and faring well? how do
we Rejoice in their Prosperity? And has not GOD a higher and superior Regard,
think we, to all His Works?

DO we not esteem it a proper suitable and wi^e Inclination in Us? most
Beneficial and most Just? Certainly it is. But far more Necessary is the High
Creator, the Father and Preserver of all things! If His tender Mercies were not
over all His Works, what would become of them?

WHAT wise Man has pleasure in the Destruction of his own Work? when he has
done it with any Degree of Art, bro't it to some great Perfection, and to an
equal Usefulness and Service? Does he not cherish it and tender it? And are not
the Glorious and perfect Works of GOD dearer to Him, and more precious in His
Sight?

TRUE, To His own Honor and Glory, the Ends of His Holiness Wisdom and
Justice, and the common Good of all His Creation, it is meet and good that a
Million of Creatures be thrown away in a day into an Eternal Perdition: for
what are these unto the Honor and Government of GOD? and to His Glory from
Infinite Millions of Holy and better Creatures, and their joynt-happiness? It Is
but as an Achan sacrificed out of the Congregation to the Justice of Heaven,
and for the Preservation of the Whole! But otherwise, the GOD who made us, the
Rock that formed us, certainly bears a very gracious Inclination to us and our
happiness: the Misery of His Creatures can in it self alone be no pleasure to
Him.

SEE the Context: v. 4. Behold, all Souls are mine; As the Soul of the Father,
so also the Soul of the Son is mine; the Soul that sins it shall die. God,
the Father of Spirits, is a lover of Souls; He thro'ly knows the Excellency and
price of them; and what the loss and what the Misery of His Immortal
Workmanship is; and it cannot be pleasing to Him to behold it.

[THEREFORE He at first Created Man on Earth, as He did the Angels in Heaven in
a state of Holiness and Happiness. It was His pleasure that we should have
lived happy for ever. He made all things Good, and formed Man in His own Image.
He planted the Tree of Life, the Sacrament of Immortality, in the midst of
Paradise; He forbad and warned Man of one baneful Tree set there to try and
prove his Obedience and Gratitude to his Creator. Death and Misery was thus
forbidden in the Causes of it; Life and Happiness were before given and the
careful Preservation of them was thus required. It was with great Displeasure
that He saw Man naked and ruined. What is it that you have done? said He -- and
drove them out of Paradise into Labors and Sorrows, in a World which their Sin
had blasted. The Creators Rest was glorious, when He saw all things that He had
made, and behold they were very Good and Happy; and this would have been the
Rest of His Soul for ever to have seen His Creatures ever have remained so
under His Blessing.

TO Conclude, GOD had no pleasure in the Fall of Angels, nor of Man; He made
them both Happy: He has pleasure in the Angels that stand, and in the Sinners
whom His Grace recovers. He chose not their Sin and Ruin, though He permitted
their own profane Choice; and for it He cursed them in His Wrath and sore
Displeasure.]

4. THE very Threatenings of the Law against Sin, the Threatening of Eternal
Death in case of Impenitence in Sin, shows that GOD has no pleasure that the
Sinner should die, but that he repent and live.

THE Intention of the Threatening is in Mercy to the Sinner, to prevent his Sin
and Destruction: it is to deter and affright us from Sin, that so the woeful
Effects thereof may not fall upon us. GOD shows us the Evil of Sin, and what a
dangerous thing it is to commit it, that we may tremble at the Motion of it,
and fly therefrom.

CAN we think that He who warns us of our Danger desires that it should befall
us? No, far from it: It were the most cross and perverse Imputation that can
be; most absurd, and also most ungrateful and bafe.

THE Threatening does not make the Effect of Sin to be what it is: No; that had
been the same without the Publication of the Curse. That the Wicked shall die
is founded in the very Nature of Sin; the Holiness and Essential Dominion of
GOD make that Necessary.

It is not owing to the Absolute and mere Will of GOD, that he who Sins shall
die; but to the Holiness and Rectitude of the Divine Nature, and to the wise
and Righteous Administration of His Government.

THE Threatening of God's Word only lets us know what will be and must be in
case of Sin; what the Wisdom and Justice of GOD make Necessary. And why is this
made known to us by the Word, but for our Warning; that we may not by Sin, and
by continuance therein, bring Death and Damnation upon our selves.

LET us look into Humane Governments and their Laws. These ordain Death in many
Cases as the Sanction necessary to the Ends of Government, or to (...) merit of
the Crime. But shall we think now that it is the Will and Pleasure of the
Government that any should commit these Capital Crimes and suffer Death
therefore? Or when the Judges legally Condemn the Convicted Person, and see that
the Malefactor be Executed, does it follow that they have pleasure in the
Criminals Death? No, GOD forbid. Yet the Provision of the Law, and the
Execution of it is Wise, Necessary, Good; and a tender Care for the Public. It
is to prevent Transgression that Death is made the Punishment; and for this End
the Punishment is told and warned of? and the Meaning hereof can be no other
than this -- that the Authority have no pleasure that any should transgress and
Suffer; but however it pleases rather that a Transgressor do suffer than that
Right and Wrong, Good and Evil be Confounded; the Order of the World and the
Welfare of it lie at the Mercy of every Licentious Wretch.

THUS the Threatening of Death against Sin shows that GOD has no pleasure that
the Sinner should die.

AND the Juditial Executions of Providence in this Life do really speak the
same thing. Providence hangs up one Criminal in Chains for Warning and Terror
unto others. As of old the Reason of the Severities and Executions of the Law
was this; Deuteronomy. 13. 11. And all Israel shall hear and fear and do no more
wickedly. The Tragic End of one may thus prevent the Transgression and
Perishing of many others. The Terror of the Punishment strikes many with Horror
at the Though It of the Fact. Smite the Scorner, and the Simple will beware.

IT may be a Mercy to the Body to cut off a Gangreen Member; and so to the
Community to stone an Achan. The Public Justice may be Inexorable to a private
Criminal, because the public Compassions to the whole Community prevails. It is
Expedient that one Man should die, and that the whole* Nation perish not. The
Sinner may bring it to that sad pass as to himself, that the Divine Justice may
fix on his Eternal Ruin and cut him off in his Sin; and yet the Wise and
Gracious GOD may Mercifully order and turn it to the saving many other Souls
from Death.

5. GOD's sending His own Son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to die for
us, is the highest Argument of all that He has no pleasure that the Sinner
should die. No greater Testimony could GOD give of His Desire of our Salvation.
And therefore has He no pleasure that the Sinner should die, because His Soul
has the utmost Complacency and fullest Satisfaction in the Death of Christ; by
whom we have received the Atonement.

THE express End of the Incarnation and Sufferings of the Son of GOD was to
save Souls from Death. And what a Price was this for a Soul! now was the Heart
of GOD set upon saving Sinners? We see HIM of whom are all things, and by whom
(...) all things, sent upon the Work of our Redemption from Sin and Death. What
a Desire then had GOD thereof?

THIS Divine and Glorious Person submitted for this End to the deepest
Humiliation and Abasement, to bitter Sorrows and to an accursed Death. He was
made Sin and a Curse to deliver us from the same. He paid in Ransom for our
Souls His own Life, His precious Blood. Not only did the Son of GOD become Man,
but a Sacrifice to satisfy the Justice of GOD for Man's Sin. And therefore did
His Father love him, because He laid down His Life for us. What pleasure then
has He in the Life and Salvation of poor Sinners?

WHY else has He provided for it at such an Expense of Grace? and why is the
Call, the Offer, Tender and Promise of Life through Him so earnestly urged on us?
Had GOD desired our Death He might have left us in our Blood, and never have
said unto us, Live. But we see that He had pleasure in the Death of His own
Son, rather than we should die in our Sins. 1 Jo. 4. 9. In this was manifest
the Love of GOD, because He sent His Only-begotten Son that we might live through
Him.

6. AND lastly. It may be argued from Stories of Scripture Penitents, that the
Holy GOD has no pleasure that the Sinner should die, but rather that he repent
and live. Where is the Instance of a Penitent whom GOD has not readily and with
pleasure received and pardoned? When David had so hainously sinned, yet did he
no sooner confess, but GOD remitted. When Peter had so hainously denied Christ,
but thereupon had wept bitterly before GOD, his Sin was never once mentioned
against him by his Savior. When Manasseh humbled himself greatly before GOD,
the Lord GOD of his Father, though he had before exceeded in wicked
Transgressions, yet was the Lord entreated at his Tears.

WITH what Tenderness and Mercy did Christ ever receive the Penitent Sinner?
The Woman at His Feet, washing them with her Tears, how did He as it were
forget, and forbid the Mention of her Sins? The weeping Person also bro^t to
Him for His Condemnation, how gently did He reclaim, by confounding her more
guilty Accusers?

WHEN the Publican stood Abased in the Temple, Imploring Mercy in deep
Confusion of Soul, and smiting on his own Breast from the Conscience of Guilt
and Fear of Wrath; how graciously was he dismissed with a Pardon? And when the
Prodigal returned unto his Father from his Rebellion and his Riot, saying,
Father I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son; how tenderly was he received? Luke 15. 20. And when he was
yet a great way off his Father saw him, and had Compassion on him, and ran, and
fell on his Neck and kissed him. What Joy and Pleasure, Mirth and Feasting,
Music and Dancing also followed that blessed Evening? v. 23. Bring hither the
fatted Calf and kill it, and let us eat and be Merry; for this my Son was dead
and is alive again, he was lost and is found.

THESE Instances are so many strong Proofs of GOD's Pleasure, not in the Death
of Sinners, but in their Repentance.

USE I. WE see the Adorable Goodness of the Lord our GOD, the Glory and Riches
of His Grace and Mercy. The Exaltation of it lies in this, That though Sin be
infinitely hateful to Him, and provoking, yet that he seeks and endeavors the
Repentance of Sinners with so great Desire. O how glorious, how dear and
amiable should this render the Name and Ways of our GOD unto us! Mic. 7. 18,
19. Who is a GOD like unto Thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by
Transgression --? He retains not His Anger for ever, because He delights in
Mercy. He will turn again, He will have Compassion upon us: He will subdue our
Iniquities: and Thou will cast all their Sins in the depth of the Sea.

II. WE learn what Compassion we owe unto the Wicked, and how we should
endeavor their Repentance and Salvation. It should be a most sorrowful thing
to us to see Men Sin against GOD and damn their own Souls. There should be Joy
on Earth as there is in Heaven over one Sinner that repents. Our hearts
desire and prayer for others should be that they may be saved, and we should
count our selves happy if we may be any ways Instrumental therein. This is true
Love to Men, true Devotion toward GOD.

III. OUR Doctrine brings Conviction to the Wicked, the Ungodly and Impenitent,
and on diverse Accounts do they stand Condemned by it.

1. AS having pleasure in their own Death. GOD says to them, Why will you die?
This He Charges upon you, and justly Complains of it. He says, You hate your
own Soul, you love Death. O how Unnatural and worse than Brutish is this? A
natural brute Beast flies from Death, and from everything that hurts its Life;
but mad as Men are, they Murder their own Souls, void equally of pity and of
fear.

2. OUR Doctrine reproves and condemns all them thao have pleasure in the Sins
of others: whether Tempting them to Sin, Approving them, Indulging them in it,
or Rejoicing at it and Insulting over them. The latter is as barbarous, as the
former treacherous; but all Impious. Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the Judgment of
GOD, that they who do such things are worthy of Death, not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him -- for
whom Christ died.

3. Satan is highly pleased and gratified in thy Sin and Impenitence. He
desires thy Damnation: he seeks thy Death. You grieve and offend GOD, and
Murder your self, to gratify his Spleen; to satisfy his Lust against thy Soul.
As the Fowler is pleased to see the Bird taken in his Snare; as the Lion is
pleased when he is devouring the Prey, or as a malicious Enemy when he has his
will and lust upon his hated Foe; so is the Devil pleas^d in the Ruin of thy
Soul. There is Joy in Hell at thy Sin, and in thy Destruction.

4. THY Damnation will be owing to thy self at last, thy own wilful Choice of
Death in the Causes of it. Thou art a Self-destroyer, and can have no Excuse,
nor lay the Blame of thy Eternal Misery on any one but thy self. Thou have a
Devil and art Mad, he goes about to kill thee. With the furious Demoniac thou
stabbest thy self. You act against the deepest Principle in Nature, even
Self-preservation. A Devil let loose upon you could not do you more hurt than
you do to your self. False, pitiless, cruel and base to your self. And such
Reflections will be your exquisite and eternal Torment.

IV. ON the other hand, The Doctrine is full of Comfort and Encouragement to
every poor and contrite Spirit, that trembles at GOD's Word, feels the plague
of its own Heart, and fears the Wrath of GOD; that is mourning in the
Conscience of Sin, and in the Apprehension of the Curse due thereto.

IS Sin your Burden, GOD your Fear, Grace your Desire? and do you doubt whether
GOD will delight to show thee Mercy? let me rebuke thy Unbelief, and warn thee
of the Wickedness thereof.

THOUGH your Sins are many, great and heinous; though they may have been long
persisted in and often repeated; yet GOD seeks thy Repentance, and desires you
would turn and live: He would glorify His renewing Grace, and His pardoning
Mercy upon thee. Have you considered and turned? then all your Transgressions
shall not be mentioned against you; you shall surely live, you shall not die.

TRUE, You deserve Death for past Sins, and GOD might have struck you dead in
'em, if He had any pleasure in your Death: but He spares you, and continues the
Offers of Grace, Pardon and Life to you.

OUR Text for ever forbids and rebukes Despair, would revive the Spirit of the
Humble, and encourage them that are of a fearful Heart: It would lift up the
weak hands, and strengthen the feeble knees; make the lame man to leap as an
Heart, and the tongue of the dumb to sing.

V. AND lastly, Let the Use be in an earnest Exhortation unto Repentance. The
Use which the Context makes for us: v. 31, 32. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new Heart and a
new Spirit; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? For I have no pleasure in
the Death of him that dies, says the Lord GOD: wherefore turn your selves,
and live ye.

I will only urge this by these two Considerations.

1. THE Goodness of GOD should lead you to Repentance. GOD seeks your
Repentance from the most tender Compassion to thy poor Soul. O let it soften
thy hard Heart: do not harden it against the Mercies of GOD: let Divine
Goodness win and melt it: let thy Savior's love to thy Soul, constrain and
draw forth thy Soul unto Him again Let the Tears and Blood of thy Savior
affect thee. It is a dreadful Case to perish in contempt and in spite of
Infinite Mercy it self, laboring to hinder thy Ruin.

2. IF the Goodness of GOD cannot lead thee to Repentance, then GOD will have
pleasure in they Eternal Damnation. He would not now have you die; it would
please Him to see you repent and live; but if you despise and slight this His
Goodness, and continue to do so, and die Impenitent, the Wrath and Vengeance of
GOD will then take place, and have its Satisfaction. He that made you will not
have Mercy on you, and He that formed you will show you no Favor.

TURN or die. O might the Word fasten on the foolish Heart of every one that
goes on still in his Trespasses. Think not at last of finding Mercy, nor of
dying in Peace, though you for the present go on in Sin: the Lord will not spare
you, but the Anger of the Lord and His Jealousy will smo^k against that Man,
and all the Curses of the Law shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall blot out
his Name from under Heaven. Jer. 13. 14. I will not pity, nor spare, nor have
Mercy.

FOR our Text and Doctrine we have the Oath of GOD; As I live says the Lord
GOD, I have no pleasure that the Sinner should die: but have we not His Oath
too for the Impenitent Sinners Destruction? Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41. For I lift up my
Hand to Heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my glittering Sword, and
mine Hand take hold on Judgment; I will render Vengeance to mine Enemies, and
will reward them that hate me.

BUT I cannot Conclude without casting an Eye of tender Compassions on the poor
Condemned Person before us; and O that GOD would please to Enable her to
apprehend the abounding Riches of His Glorious Grace and Compassions to the
chief of Sinners, and glorify the same unto her.

YOU have heard, poor Margaret, (and O might it be to your everlasting Comfort
and for your eternal Salvation that you have heard) that the Holy and most
Merciful GOD has no pleasure at ^ll that the Sinner should die, but that the
Sinner do repent and live. Now why should not your Soul be overcome, and all
the Wickedness thereof, by the Mercies of GOD? why should not thy hard Heart be
softened and melted into floods of Tears for thy Sins, that the pardoning Mercy
of GOD may be magnified toward thee!

(...) your Sins more in number and kind, and more heinous than they are; were
thy Soul fouler and more stained with lust and with the guilt of blood too than
it is; (though it be very bad, and how can you think it could be worse than it
is?) yet there is no reason for thee to despair of GOD's Mercy. It is only thy
own hardness and Impenitency that can exclude thee from it. The glorious GOD
pities thee, the People of GOD pity thee; O miserable Woman pity thy self, have
compassion on thy own Soul, and cry mightily to thy Savior that thou may
find Mercy.

NEITHER GOD nor Man have pleasure in thy Death. Thy Judges on Earth have no
pleasure in thy Condemnation and Execution, but they cannot answer it to GOD or
Man to spare thee and suffer thee to live. The Murderer by the Law of GOD must
surely be put to Death, and he that sheddeth man's blood by man must his blood
be shed. But though it be unavoidable that you must die by the Hand of Justice
here, yet let me however tell thee that GOD has no pleasure in your Eternal
Death. Indeed GOD has infinite pleasure in hating your Sin, and in glorifying
His Justice in all the Demands of it against you if you continue Impenitent;
God will with Ineffable pleasure fulfill and execute all His Threatening against
Impenitent Sinners, and your Eternal Sufferings in Hell will never give Him any
perturbation and disrest. But GOD has as much pleasure in fulfilling all His
gracious Promises to the repenting Sinner, the penitent Believer in Jesus
Christ. Say unto them, as I live, says the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure, etc.

WHEREFORE Believe me, Margaret; (or rather Believe the true and Merciful GOD,
who has said it in His Word, and revealed so much of His own Merciful Nature to
thee that thou may believe it; and has given His own Son to die for the
chief of Sinners, and has chosen many such unto Eternal Salvation by him)
Believe me I say, in what I therefore speak to you from the Blessed GOD; If you
do at last die in your Sins and perish for ever (...) is (...) ^our (...) have
pleasure in your own Death and Eternal Destruction, and none else but the Devil
who has Instigated you to commit the deadly Sins which you have done; none but
that Enemy of your Soul will be pleased and gratified in your final perishing.

THY Damnation will be owing at last to thy self, thy own Choice thy own
Wilfulness. You will not ^^pent and be saved. You will not go to Christ that you
may have Life. Turn you, turn you, why will you die?

IT is true you cannot change your own heart, nor give your self Repentance, nor
can we work it in you: But GOD can do it by His Word and Spirit: O might it
please Him to do it now, or at least before you die, that you may not die for
ever and ever; that the second Death may not have dominion ^ver you.

BUT let me tell you what GOD will bring you to if ever He give you Repentance
unto Life. He will make Sin infinitely odious to thy Soul and very bitter. He
will make thee very vile and loathsome in thy own Eyes. He will fill thy Soul
with bitter Sorrow and Mourning for thy Sins; and with deep Humiliation and
Abasement before Him and in the sight of all Men as not worthy of the least
Mercy from Him, but of Wrath unto the uttermost: He will fill thy Mouth with
agreeable Confessions against thy self, unto the Glory and Honor of His
Justice and Holiness, and to thy own shame and confusion of Face; which justly
belongs to thee. Instead of vain Excusings of thy self, and hard Reflecting
upon others, GOD will bring thee if He shows thee Mercy to own and fear His
Justice, and to lay thy hand upon thy own heart and smite there, and say, GOD
be merciful to me a vile Criminal, that deserve no Mercy! O will thou not thus
fear GOD, being under His Condemnation, and that most justly!

AND after GOD has shown thee the Cursed Nature and Demerit of Sin, and thy own
great Sinfulness, and wro't thee into the bitterest Mourning and deepest
Humiliation ^n that account; so that thou shall ^^eely confess, that if He damn
thee ^or ever He is most holy and just in doing so; then He will also discover
^o thee the Glory of His own Grace and Mercy in saving such a wretch as thou
^rt; in pardoning such Guilts as thine are. He will bring thee to admire and
adore His Love in Christ Jesus to poor miserable Souls! He will make Christ
Glorious in thy Eyes, and Precious to thy Soul. You will be Amazed at it, and
Confounded within your self, to think -- did the ^on of GOD come and die for
me? did Christ come and shed His blood for me? will GOD look upon such a one as
I am? ^ay I find Mercy before a Holy GOD ^^ter all my Pollutions and with these
^^ains of Blood upon my Soul? O the Admirable Goodness of a Holy GOD! O the
Excellency and Loveliness of my Savior! O the transporting Hope of finding
Mercy yet at last! so the poor dying Thief on the Cross turned himself to
Christ and said, Lord, remember me! and so he ^eard Christ say in answer to his
Prayer, To day thou shall be with me! Ah poor Margaret, why should not you lift
up your Soul unto your Savior in His Kingdom, and make that Prayer? and why
may not you hear that Answer from His glorious Lips?

O that thy Soul were prepared for the Consolations in Christ! that God might
pour the soft healing Oil into thy wounded Soul! that there were a contrite
Heart to seek receive and feel it! How wretched and miserable are you if you
must die next week without a Sign or any Sense of GODs having savingly touched
thy Heart! How can you think of dying without Repentance and without the hopes
of a better Life? without a suitable sense of thy Sin, or hope of an Interest in
Christ, and the Mercy of GOD through Him!

THE greatest Compassion and Tenderness to thee at present is, to awaken in
thee, if it might be possible, a sense of the Terrors of GOD, and of His Wrath
impending over thee, unless you find Grace from Him to make your Escape
therefrom by true Repentance and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. If your Wounds
be not Opened they will never be Cleans'd, and if they be not cleans'd they can
never heal, but will Gangreen and Rot.

WHEREFORE, In the Name of GOD I beseech you to confess your Sins and repent;
even all the Sins of your whole Life, but especially those which have bro't you
to this tragic End and accursed Death. And Fear, O fear and tremble lest by
Impenitence and hardness of Heart you fall and sink under the Wrath and Curse
of GOD in tho Eternal World which is to come; (...) that second and more
dreadful Execution of a poor Soul which is after ^eath; for what is the hanging
of a dying Body on a Gibbet to the casting of an Immortal Soul into the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone which is the second Death.

WOMAN! If you will earnestly seek to Christ for Mercy, Pardon and Cleansing
through His Blood. He will with a great deal of pleasure give you of His Grace
and Spirit, and prepare you for His Eternal Mercies! but if you do it not
Instantly, having but a few Days more to live, the Holy Jesus who has died to
save Sinners will say concerning you, My Soul shall have no pleasure in thee,
but in thy Eternal Death: which GOD of His Infinite Mercies in Jesus Christ
forbid and have Mercy on thy Soul.

FINIS.

