THE Debtors MONITOR, Directory and Comforter: OR, The Way to get and keep OUT
OF DEBT. In Three SERMONS.

By Samuel Moodey M.A. Pastor of the Church at York, N. E.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish at his Shop at the North side
of the Townhouse. 1715.

TO THE READER.
IF I should Insinuate into my Weaker Readers Credulity, That I think the
following Sermons Unworthy to see the Light, I might Expect from the more
Discerning, this Convictive Reply [If you did indeed so judge, (...) was in the
Power of your Hand to have kept them in the Dark.]

Discourses of Morality are not Incoherent with Christianity: If the later be
the Soul of Religion; yet is the Body an Essential Part of a M^n: Nor is it out
of Season to Preach up this Branch of Righteousness, The Paying of Pecuniary
Dues: Which when I had done in the Course of my Ministry; A Good Gentleman, on
his Journey, being Informed of An Essay to show People how they might get and
keep out of Debt; did me the Honor to Request a Copy for the Prefs. It was
Objected, That as the Public needed no Help from Hence, so the Matter was
Formed according to some Peculiar Circumstances of this End of the Country, and
of this Town in Particular. It was Replied. That my Compliance however might be
of ^ore General Service at such a Time as This And further Pleaded that -- But
(...) Short; I did not see Reason, Finally to Resist the Worthy Solicitor's
Artful Importunity.

We in the Borders of the Country are glad of Barley Cakes, and if for a
Change, such Provision is set before You in the Town, it may Serve, at least to
make your White Bread relish the better. Let us together, Look Up for a
Blessing on the Portion of wholesome Food Seasonably set before us; And if of
Gods Providing, Not to be Refused, but Received with Thanksgiving: And let him
that Serves it up, have Your Prayers.

S. M.

Pay thy Debts AND Live of the Rest.
II. Kings IV. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Now there cried a certain Woman of the
Wives of the Sons of the Prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy Servant my Husband
is dead, and thou know that thy Servant did fear the LORD: and the Creditor
is come to take unto him my two Sons to be bond men.

And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what have thou in
the house? And she said, Thine handmaid has not any thing in the house, save
a pot of oil.

Then he said, Go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy Neighbors, even empty
vessels, borrow not a few!

And when thou are come in, thou shall shut the door upon thee, and upon thy
Sons, and shall pour out into all those vessels, and thou shall set aside that
which is full.

So she went from him, and shut the door upon her, and upon her sons: who
brought the vessels to her, and she powed out.

And it came to pass when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son,
Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is not a vessel more. And
the oil stayed.

Then she came and told the man of God, and he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay
thy de^^, and live thou and thy children of the rest.


THE Words read consist of two general Parts; a ^^plaint, and the Answer to it.

1. We have the Pitiful complaint of a Poor distressed Widow, to the Prophet
Elisha. She was a Prophets Widow; yet Poor in the World. Her Husband was a Good
Man; yet he died in Debt, more than he was worth. Now, it seems, there was a
Custom among the Jews, for Parents, who were Poor, and not able to Pay their
Debts, to sell their Children to the Creditor for the Payment: Or, at least,
the Creditor would take them as Bond-Servants, to Answer the Debt; taking
Advantage of that Law, Exodus 21.2, 7. and Lev. 25.39. Of which Law or Practice,
a certain Creditor, here in our Text, was taking the Advantage, and finding no
Estate, was already come to take this Widows two Sons, as Bondmen. And to whom
should the Widow of one of the Sons of the Prophets go, in her Distress, but to
him that was a Father to them, and Interested himself in the concerns of their
Families? To him therefore she Repairs, who had also observed this Good Woman's
Deceased Husbands Piety in Particular; which is a Plea to enforce her Suit, v.
1.

2. You may observe how readily, and with what Fatherly tenderness, the man of
God receives the Complainant; and how Effectually he Relieves her Distress.
(1.) He lends an Ear to her lamentable Cry; is touched at the heart to hear her
sad Case, and moved, both in Sympathy with the distressed Widow, and in
Commiseration toward her Fatherless Children. And Elisha said, What shall I do
for thee? v. 2. (2.) He puts her into a way how to get out of Debt; and make a
comfortable Living; without Selling either of her Sons into Bondage, v. 3. to
the 7. Where you may observe yet more Particularly: [1] The Direction be gives,
v. 3, 4, 7. Go borrow vessels -- shut the Door -- etc. [2] Her ready and exact
compliance with the Word of Direction, and her good success herein, v. 5, 6.



But that which made her ready Obedience, Diligence and Exactness in following
the Direction given, so valuable, was her Faith; it was the Obedience of Faith.
She Believed, and therefore she thus acted. She did not tell the Holy Man of
God that he mocked her, in bidding her fill so many vessels out of one, and
larger out of a lesser: but does as she is bidden, and leaves the success to
the Almighty. O Woman! Great was thy Faith! Nor is the Prophet's concern for a
Poor Distressed Debtor, to be over looked, in the Doctrinal handling of the
Text: for it is Exemplary. But the main thing considerable for our Present
Instruction and Encouragement, is the Seasonable and Effectual care of Divine
Providence, to Deliver the Distressed out of their Straits; by chalking out the
way of Duty, and making it the Way of Relief. What is further necessary for
Explication, and Accommodation of this Extraordinary, to more Common Cases, may
fall in to be Considered, under some or other of the Seven following Doctrines,
which the Seven Verses of our Text do, without any Wresting, yield; as freely
as the Pot did its Oil; until all the vessels were full. From the Outcry here
made, and the Occasion of it, We Infer, for our first Doctrine; DOCT. I. That
it is a sad and lamentable thing to be doeply in Debt. (And, from the Instance
here given, it also follows) DOCT. II. That this may be the Case of such as
fear GOD. DOCT. III. Debts must be Paid, though all go for it. (The Prophets
search for Goods, and her concealing nothing, withholding nothing, shows it.)
DOCT. IV. God can help His People out of Debt, though they owe more than they are
worth. (He that can work Miracles can work Mercies.) DOCT. V. We may not expect
help from the Lord, but as we follow His Direction, in the use of all Proper
Means. DOCT. VI. If we [thus] believe and trust in God, He will enable us to
Answer, both the Demands of our Creditors, and the Necessities of our Families:
We shall have wherewith to Live Honestly, and Comfortably. DOCT. VII. Such as
are Distressed by reason of Debt, are Objects of Pity and Charity; and Good
People will Compassionate their Condition, and Consider what may be done for
them.


To Each, in Order.

I. DOCT. That it is a sad and lamentable thing to be deeply in Debt.
It is so Represented by God, and found so to be, by Men.

1. The Word of God sets it forth as a sad thing to be in Debt. Men of Broken
Fortunes, are Men of Restless Spirits; put to their Shifts, and not knowing
what to do: 1 Samuel 22.2. And every one that was in Debt, and every one that was
Discontented gather themselves unto him; and be became a Captain over them: And
there were with him about four hundred Men. It Is to be feared, These did not at
first follow David, because he was a Man after Gods own heart: but as an
Enteprizing Soldier, and Self banished Wanderer; One whose Case appeared
Desperate; A sit Leader, as they thought, for Desperate Debtors. And they were
willing to go seek their Fortune with him in the howling Wilderness, on
desolate Mountains; in Dens and Caves of the Earth, and among wild Beasts, though
they knew also that the W^ath of the King would pursue them: For they feared no
Man no^ Beast, so much as their angry ^re^^tors. In that Parable also of a
certain King, (Mat. 18.23 --) Who would take account of his Servants; does our
LORD set forth the sad P^^^^exities, and woeful Consequents or being in Debt;
For, When he had began ^o Reckon, one was brought unto him which ought him ten
thousand Talents. But for as much as he had not to Pay, his Lord commanded him
to be Sold, and his Wife and Children and all that he had, and Payment to be
made. The Servant therefore fell down and Worshipped him, Saying, Lord, have
Patience with me, and I will Pay thee all. -- Here we have one Debtor in a
lamentable Plight; and, Presently, an other in a worse; for the Creditor laid
hands on him, and took him by the Throat, Saying, Pay me what thou owe. --
Nor could this miserable Debtor, though it was no great matter he Owed, find the
least Compassion, or prevail for an Hours For bearance; but to Prison he must!
and lie in Goal till Payment be made! Then, in the last Place (For not being
concerned, here, with the main Scope of the Parable, I consider not the
Connection: I say, in the third and last Place) the Case of the Debtor is most
Forlorn: -- He is delivered to the Tormentors, -- v. 34.

And thus, both in the Old Testament and the New, is the Case of a Debtor
Represented as sad and lamentable, by God Himself; who also, frequently calls
the worst thing in the World, by this Name; even our Sin, Forgive us our Debts,
Mat. 6.12.

2. Such as are deeply in Debt, do feelingly La^ent the sadness of their Case.
They must needs do so, unless they are ^oast feeling. What their Self-bemoaning
Complaints are, when they sit or walk alone; or as they lie musing on their
Beds, we cannot tell: Nor do we hear the Words of their Mind, when they talk
with themselves, in a Multitude of short Parentheses, which interrupt not the
sense of their daily Converse, in Conversation, at Home and Abroad. But, to
their Familiars, they must, some times, ease their burdened Spirits: and from
others they cannot always hide the Perturbations that are within.

He did not express his own Sentiments only, whom I have heard thus bewailing
his Case; How happy should I think my self, (said the Good Gentleman) were I in
the Case of the Plainest Mechanic, or Day-labourer, that eats his own Bread,
having Sweated for it; and then sweetly falls a sleep on his Flock-Bed, or
perhaps Straw-Bed, and awakes again at Liberty, fearing no Officers Approach,
nor Creditors unanswerable Demands: While I am perplexed, cruciated and
distracted, on the Wreck of my own Tumultuary Thoughts.

3. The Forecast and Circumspection of Others to shun this Infelicity;
together with the Self-denial they Practice, and the hard Shifts they make to
keep themselves clear of Debts and Bonds; is a further Evidence that this
Doctrine is True: So that without so much as naming the many Temptations that
accompany, and the long Train of sad Consequents that follow this Pernicious
Guest, once Admitted and Entertained in our House. I pass to the Application.

I. USE. To be Out of Debt then is Matter of Thankfulness. In that,

1. This Freedom is, in it self, a Rich Enjoyment of Life, and attended with
many Advantages. Though a Man has but a Competency, necessary Food and Raiment,
plain and homely fare, but still his own; it is Comfortable; it is Honorable.
And when, by the Blessing of God on the Diligence of his Hand, and Frugal
Management, (For his God does Instruct him how to order his Affairs with
Discretion) he has something to spare, he can give of his Own to the Poor;
whiles such as are deeply in Debt, and withold from the Creditor his Due, can
but give away another Man's Goods without his leave; so not, therein, Lend to
the Lord, who hates Robber^ for an Offering: But will Repay the truly
Charitable; and make him still more and more able to do Good in his Generation;
which is the most Desirable thing in the World: I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice. Yea, the Disentangled Christian is at Liberty for both; He can also
Wait on the Lord without Distraction, in the Public and Private Duties of
Religion; and in his Patience Possess his Soul.

2. These and all the other happy Fruits of this Exempt Case, are owing to the
Lord, in continual Returns of Gratitude. For, is it not the Lord who gives all,
and secures what He gives; stops up the Leaks in our Estates, and preserves us,
not only from Ill-handling by others; but even from the Ill-husbandry of our
own Hands: who also Exempts us from Impoverishing Afflictions, or pays all
Charges, and makes up our Losses. Now, all Thanks are owing to God for this;
and if we Sacrifice to our own Nets, withholding from the Lord His Due; How
soon may we put Him upon Recovering His Glory by Distraint and making us to
know the worth of such a Favor, by the want of it.

II. USE. By way of Cautionary Direction; Particularly to Young Beginners in
the World: That they carefully shun a thing so sad and lamentable.

1. Shun, therefore, Bad Company and Idleness. Company-keeping will both
Morally and Efficiently, Meritoriously and Effectually Undo you, Much Time
slips away in Ill Company, wherein nothing is gotten, and much is also spent;
the Gains of what time has been profitably improved: A Man's business, the mean
while, suffering not a little, for want of his Eye as well as Hand: And many a
Rash thing done, when the Brain is heated, and the Heart made foolish: The Soul
and Gods Glory all the while neglected, and much Sin committed; and so,
impoverishing Judgments and blasting Strokes Procured: For God has not only
foretold Vain Company-keepers what such a Course will bring them to; but also
threatened what He will bring upon them. Prove. 6.6, -- 11. Go to the Ant, thou
sluggard, confider her ways, and be wise; which having no guide, overseer or
ruler, provideth her meat in the Summer. -- How long will thou sleep, O
sluggard? when will thou arise --? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep. So shall thy Poverty come as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. Certainly, though sometimes, slowly,
and always irresistibly. Be not among Wine-bibbers, among riotous eaters of
flesh. For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty, and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags, Prove. 23.20, 21. Chap. 28.19. He that tilleth his
land shall have plenty of bread: But he that follows after vain persons shall
have poverty enough. Now the Event shall make appear which shall stand; the
Word of God or the idle Companykeepers vain Hope.

2. Proportion your Expenses, to your Ability; Your layings Out, to your
Incomes. Cut your Coat according to your Cloth: You must not make a Delicate
Appetite, an ambitious Mind, or others Example (who have great Estates, or
little Prudence, and less Conscience) the Rule, by which to measure your Garb,
and Housekeeping. No Man should desire to seem Richer or more Honorable than
he really is; nor lavish out for the Present, What, hereafter, he shall wish,
in his Necessities, he had reserved for his Relief. It Is safest to under do:
Store is no sore. Losses, Disappoinments, and Sickness may come; or Charges,
otherwise grow on the Family. Be therefore very Frugal: Get what may be gotten;
Save what may be saved: Gather up the Fragments which remain, that nothing be
lost, Joh. 6.12. Mind that Word, -- That Nothing be Lost. There is more in it
than many ever did well consider. It is the Word of Him that shall Judge us
all; and the Word by which the Wastful Person and Spendthrifts shall be Judged
and Condemned: Joh. 12.48. -- The Words that I have spoken shall Judge him in
the last Day.

3. Depend not on Probable Gains or Increase, as if they were Certain: Say not,
My Trade will bring me in so much a Week, and that is so much a Year; for thou
may be taken off by Sickness to Morrow, or Lameness the next Day, or on the
Third, by Distraction, Temptation, Corporal Blindness; or any one of a Thousand
other ways, in which Purposes are broken off. Sum not up, then, your Winters
Work before the Spring. Reckon not on full Barns at Harvest, as soon as thou
have emptied thy Sacks in the Field. Leave also the Gain of thy Merchandise to
the Disposal of Providence: Then you will in Purchasing, Building, etc.
consider what you have in Hand (or as Good as in Possession) not what you have
only in Hope; and so, rather keep within Bounds, then venture to the utmost
Verge of your Ability: This is to sit down, and count the Cost, Luke 14.28.

III. USE. Is it sad! sad! to be in Man's Debt, and owe a little Money? What is
it then, to be in GOD's Debt, and exposed to the Arrest of Divine Justice for
the Millions of Millions that you Owe your Great Creditor, into whose Revenging
hands you have forfeited your Lives and Souls; Yea, being Unbelievers, you are
Cast and Condemned already, Joh. 3.18. And, This Night may thy Soul be required
of thee: Then to Prison thou must go without Bail or Main Price. A Prison,
where thou shall not live on Bread and Water; but eat Fire and Brimstone; and
drink the Dreggs of Divine Wrath and Fury without any Goal Delivery, or so much
as the Remotest Hope thereof, Math. 5.25. For Ten hundred thousand Years
Duration, twice told, cannot lessen the Debt one Farthing. In Pecuniary Debts,
the Creditor cannot come on a Man's Person after he is Dead: But He that has the
Power of Death, which is the Devil and Satan, is Gods Jailer to seize and clap
up in Prison such as die in Gods Debt. A Debtor may possibly, defraud his
Creditor, abscond from Justice, or Bribe Injustice to Protect him; and, if
nothing else will do, he can fly his Country; and may, Perhaps, get abundance
of Riches in an other Land: But, Whither shall the Sinner fly from Gods
Presence; or whom shall he get to Protect him from the Wrath of the Almighty?
Thus having Proved it to be a Sad and Lamentable thing for a Man to be Deeply
in Debt; and improved the first Doctrine both Temporally, and to this Spiritual
Use; I Pass to the Second.

II. DOCT. Though it be a sad and lamentable thing to be in Debt; yet is it,
sometimes, the very Case of such as Fear GOD.
This comes to pass through Divine Providence, and Humane Imprudence.

1. By the Providence of GOD; all whose Ways and Works, as well as Word and
Law, are Holy, Just and Good. The Supreme Being Acts by Uncontrollable
Prerogative; and in Unaccountable Sovereignty: But He is our Father, and, as
Wisdom Directs, so Love is at the Bottom of all; and shall appear in the End.
This Evil in the City, or Country, is of the Lord; by Impoverishing, Public
Calamities; or more particular Affictive Dispensations: Burnings, Ship arecks,
and Debts, Cross Accidents; Disappointments, a thousand ways, And, if any of
Gods Co^ldren are Heirs to Estate; Involved, by the In prudent Management of
their Predocessors, through Excessive he^^cies, to be Paid; or otherwise,
howsoever Entangled; this also is by the Providence of Gods

(...).

2. This Evil is not only and altogether of the Lord. His Providence is
Sportless; but our Improvidence is not so: We are, oftentimes, the Faulty
Gauses of our Miserable Entanglements. Good honest People are not always Wise
for this World, Luke 16. 8. They have neither skill to manage Business, nor
Fore-sight-to prevent Damages: Are Credulous and Unwary: Meaning so honestly
themselves and Speaking the Uprightness of their Hearts; they think this Man
means as he says; that will be as good as his Word; and a third, that has
Advantage against them, will never be so Barbarous as to improve it to their
Ruin. They make losing Bargains: and, from misguided Compassion, or
Overperswasion, are, perhaps, betrayed into Ruinous Sur^tiship: Prove. 2^.26,
27. Be not thou one of them that strike bands, or of them that are Su^^ties for
Debes. If thou have nothing to pay, why should be take away thy Bed from under
thee.

Now the Point, thus briefly Confirmed and Illustrated, is Improveable both for
Caution etc Consolation.

1. USE. For double Caution: That we neither Asperse the Providence of God; nor
Rashly Censure our Neighbor.

1. We may not Presently Conclude our Neighbor either Deserted of God, or
guilty in himself, because we see him Behind-hand in the World, fallen into
Decay; in Debt and Insolvent: Remembering that this was the very Case of One
that feared God above many, and was Noted for his Piety; even this Son of the
Prophets, and Child of God.

Are not the Circumstances of some Persons Peculiar?. They have more Chargeable
Families, and yet a less Profitable Calling then many others; at least, their
Trading brings them in but small Gains: and, Perhaps, they never had the
Advantage of being beforehand, or so much as clear of Debt, to keep so. It Is
much easier to keep ones standing on this World of Glass and in these slippery
Times; then, having lost Foot-hold, to get fixed; or being slidden clown the
Hill, to get up again: It Is so in Temporals, as well as in Spirituals.

2. Yet must we not lay all on Providence; that so we may conceal, excuse or
extenuate our own Imprudence: Imprudence, (...), and Negligence too, if not
Extravagance, is sometimes to be charged home on a Man's Self; though he be
otherwise Godly, in the Main.

II. USE. For Consolation to such as fear God; however Involved by His
Providence, and their own Imprudence; or want of greater Frugality; which for
the Future (we promise our selves) shall be mended. The Temptation, truly is
Exercising, for the Present; Yet, why should you be Dejected?

Seeing,

1. You have no other Spot, but that of Gods Children: Yea, How can you forbear
Rejoicing?

Knowing,

2. That your Spiritual Debts, to the Law of Works, are all Paid by the Surety
of a better Covenant; and you Owe not one Farthing to Revenging Justice. There
is still a Debt of Gratitude; but Christ our Universal Sponsor, stands bound
for the Discharge of that also. And, Who, now, shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? It is God that Justifyeth: Who is he that Condemns? It
is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again; who is even at the Right
Hand of God; who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.33, 34. Does the World
accuse? Does Conscience accuse? Does Satan accuse; Yea; Does the Righteous Law,
or Divine Justice it self accuse? Your Answer is Ready: It Is but turning to
Christ and saying in Faith; But, Thou shall Answer, LORD, for me.

There is yet another Word of Consolation, for Poor Debtors; It is this: 3.
That seeing God brings His Own into Debt; doubtless there is good to be gotten
by such a Dispensation of Providence.

In general; Its one of the Ways by which God will Humble His People, and
Prove them, that He may do them Good in their Latter End. This Thorny Way
proves a Right Way to some, unto the Heavenly Canaan: Gods choice makes it so;
for it is not a thing by us to be chosen. This, as well as other Thorns and
Troubles in the Flesh, is Useful more ways than One; but especially to Wean us
from this Cursed World! Before Sin entered, it was a Blessed World! but since
God Cursed the Ground for Adams Sin (ours in him) it has brought forth these,
as well as every other Sort of Entangling and Pricking Briars and Thorns. Yet
this is our Comfort; that we shall, not only get safe through all in a little
time; but also get some Saving, and therefore Lasting Good, by them. If all
things, then this sad thing shall work together for good to such as love God,
being Called according to his Purpose. And these Spiritual Comforts are better
than Silver or Gold; though they will not Pay our Pecuniary Debts; which yet,
Must be Paid.

III. DOCT. Debts must be Paid though All go for it.
If all a Man has will Answer his Debts, he must be willing to dispose of it,
to the best Advantage, for the Discharge of them, on the Demand of his
Creditors. This is Abundantly Evident, both from Scripture and Reason: Romans
13.6, 7, 8. -- You Pay Tribute, because it is a due Debt. But this is to
Rulers; therefore the Apostle adds; Render to all their Dues, v. 7. Even the
whole of what is due; to this Creditor and that; one part after an other, till
we Owe nothing to any Man, v. 8. Owe no Man any thing, but to love one another.
Indeed Love can never be all Paid: We owe nevertheless to our Neighbor for
what we have Paid him. Nor can I Love my Neighbor as my self; or do unto my
Creditor as I would have my Debtor do unto me if I neglect to Pay my Debts; or
Pay but some of them, and but partly Pay them; nor that in Season: For I my
self would be Paid both in full, and in Season. The Rule I have mentioned is
founded in Natural Reason: It Is one half of the Moral Law: Most Evident to the
Light of Nature: So that if I were Reading a Lecture of Meral Philosophy, in a
School of Ethnicks, I must needs gain this Self-evident Point on their
Consciences. But if it needs further Sanction from the Gospel, Christ has not
been wanting to Enforce it: Mat. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets. And truly, if the Laws of this Province are the Result of Reason and
Wisdom, as well as Power and Authority, in our Councillors and other
Legislators; then it follows from the Law-Book (not only from the Book of the
Law and Gospel). That every Man ought Voluntarily to Pay his Debts; which else
those Laws will Exact of him.

It may be further Argued; If it be our Duty readily to Lend, freely to Give
away, and to help Others out of Debt (as in some Cases, it is, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Mat.
5.42. E^b. 4.28.) Then, no doubt, it is our Duty to Pay where we Owe, and
Discharge our own Debts. Again; If Borrowing of our Neighbor (as the Empty
Vessels, in our Text were borrowed) only for present use, we are obliged, in
Justice as well as Gratitude, to Return what we have so Borrowed; because, though
we had a ^ight given as of using yet the right and property of the thing is
still in the Lender: Hence it follows that we are equally bound to Pay what we
have Engaged; because the Sum or Matter of the Engagement is really his, whose
Debtor we are. If, in Bargains of Exchange (suppose it to be one Horse for
another) we should be at willing to Deliver as Receive: Then Dobts by Book or
Bond, to the Merchant, Trades man, Farmer, etc. are to be as cheerfully
Discharged to Indemnifie the Creditor as they were Contracted voluntarily, to
our own (at leaft supposed) Advantage. Yet again; (for we are dull of learning
so Plain a Lesson, not loving this Debt-Book; and must have Line upon Line:)
If, having taken away what is another Man's, without his leave, Restitution must
be made, or there is no Remission; then must we not detain another Man's Due,
which is his in Right, as much as what he has in Possession. The Argument holds
equally, in Case of a Pledge, or any thing whatsoever of our Neighbors,
lawfully sallen into our Hands. I will add but two or three supposed Cases more
in my Homely way, and such as are still Granted on all Hands, further to
Confirm or Illustrate this Self-evident Truth, That Debts are Due; or, That Men
are bound to Pay all their Debts. If, having Money in our hands, we are bound
to Pay our Ferriage, our Entertainment on the Road, or what we otherwise take
up, and where we Owe; then having Moneys worth, House, Land, Stock, Goods, we
are a-like bound (as this Widow was directed) to Sell, that we may Pay our
Debts: And, (to have done with this Tedious, if not Needless Argumentation) If
we Grant that any Part, (suppose a Quarter, or one Half) of what we Owe, should
be Paid, on the Terms forementioned; We cannot deny the Equity or Necessity of
Discharging the whole: because the other three Quarters or last Half is as Due
as the First. In short; Either a Debt is not Due, than which nothing can be
more absurd, or it ought to be Paid; and if ever, why not then when it comes to
be as Due as ever it can be? viz. In Debts by Bonds, or Equivalent Bargains at
the Day Prefixed; and in Book Debts once in Three, Six, or Twelve Months;
according to Agreement, the allowed Custom of Places, or Dealers, and according
to the Golden Rule, first mentioned, of Doing as we would be done unto; and not
Dealing as we would not be Dealt by: For the Rule holds both Affirmatively and
Negatively; and is Applicable to Time as well as Thing.

I. USE. Hence, Such as being deeply in Debt though not Insolvent, have been at
their Wits End, not knowing which way in the World, at once to Answer the
Demands of their Creditors, Conscience, and Family; are Instructed in their
Duty; the Rule whereof, I will suppose them, on the hardest Terms, willing to
comply with. Could they know what God would have them to do, would they not do
it; though it were to Sell themselves out of House and Home? Yes: For they have a
good Conscience, willing to live Honestly. And is it not Evident from what you
have heard, That Debts must be Paid though All go for it: If all a man has will
Answer his Debts, he must be willing to Dispose of it, to the best Advantage,
for the Discharge of them; on the Creditors Demand. Sell all, to the very
Clothes on their Back; which no Creditor will be so Barbarous as to strip them
of: Yet, how they can keep their Chargeable Suite of Apparel, and lie in Debt
from Year to Year, to the great wrong of their Creditors without the Injustice,
and even Beggary of wearing other Folks Clothes without their leave, is not
very easy to be Understood.

Obj. If this Doctrine be put in Practice, we must come to Beggary, sure enough.

Ans. If God, in His Providence, has thus brought you; or if you, by
Extravagance or imprudence have brought your selves to Poverty, Poor you must
contentedly be, 'till the Blessing of God on your Diligence Enrich you. Some
would fain be Rich whom God would have to be Poor; or, it may be, sees it beft
and safest for them so to be: Its no Sin to be Poor; but to lie in Debt, is a
Sin. Others would seem Rich, that are worth nothing: Let things, I beseech you,
be as God would have them, and appear as they are. Why may not such as have
nothing run Scores or Hundreds in Debt, to make a fair show and flourish, for a
while, with as much Honesty as you would fain still keep up your Port with what
is. ^^^ure, another Man's. Or why shall I not trust Providence for my (...)
Br^^d after I have given every ^san his own, tho I should then have nothing
left; as well as those who never had any thing before hand; yet committing
themselves to God, in the way of well-doing, Verily they Live, and are Fed,
Psalm. 37.3. If you cant live at their Rate, and if it be not fit you should;
God can Provide for you, according as the necessity of your Case shall Require;
yea, He is Good and will do it: Nor shall you forfeit His Mercy by doing
Justly. The greater Hazard you seem to run, for Conscience sake; the more you
engage His Goodness and Faithfulness. Would to God that I could prevail with
you to make the Trial!

II. USE. What we have heard sharply Rebukes such as are well able to Pay their
Debt, and (...) altogether negligent, at least, if not abstina^e^^ Refusing:
This is dreadfully aggravated when they are Poor honest Laborers that are thus
Defrauded and Oppressed pressed by the Rich: Jam. 5.4. Behold, the Hire of the
Laborers -- which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and the cries -- are
entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

III. USE. Lastly; What has been said Condem^eth, and may well Terrisie such as
make haste to get into Debt, but take no due care to Pay what they Owe: Inftead
thereof, they run further and further in; till, at length, they grow Desperate;
And their Consciences, I fear, are seared, as with an hot Iron. If they have
any Convictions, at any time, they know how to Drown them, by opening the sluice
of their Throat, and letting in a Flood of Strong-drink. May not such, amidst
their ill doings, do well to Pause a little, and consider these two Things.

1. Whether Satan has not a Design upon them, to Ruin their Souls; while they
are Ruining their own Bodies, and Credit, Eftates and Families. Be sure the
Devil has much Advantage upon them every way. I know but of two sorts of Men in
the Gospel World, that are more past Recovery than some of these last
Described; and they are Blasphemers against the Holy Ghost, and Heretics; for
the former of which we must not knowingly Pray, and the latter, being given up
to strong Delusins to believe a Lie, Sin out of Conscience. But now, as for
these Desperate Wretches, with whom, in this last Use, I have to do; How has
the Fowler of Hell wound, and wound, and wound them in his net, which
encompasseth them with a sevenfold enclosure: If they think at any time of
getting loose, it seems, even to themselves impossible: The Truth is, they
cannot endure to Consider the Matter: And yet, if they would Consider but this
one thing more, there might be Hope for them: viz.

2. Whether, if they go on thus to wrong their Bodies and Souls, Themselves and
Families; their Creditors, their Country, their Profession and their God;
whether, I say, they shall not have a sad Reckoning shortly, to make up with
their Great Creditor, and His Book keeper, their own Conscience. The Merchant
has a Book, the Shopkeeper has a Book, the Tradesman has a Book; wherein all
they take up, and call or send for, is placed to their Account: And, are there
not as many Books to be Opened at the Last Day? Conscience Writes in order to
Witnessing; GOD Writes in order to Judgment: and does not Satan too Write, in
order to Accusation? Methinks whiles God is thus Reasoning with thee out of His
Word, of Unrighteousness, Intemperance, and Judgment to come your Stout Hearts
should tremble: And if Conscience be indeed touched, never expect a more
Convenient Season to call for these and such like Considerations: However, I
must have done with them for this Time; leaving them, and such as they may most
nearly concern, unto God and their own Conscience, while, I Pass to the Fourth
Doctrine.

IV. DOCT. That God can help His People out of Debt, although they should owe
more than they are worth.
Whether we consider it as an Act of Power, or as an Act of Bounty, God [can]
do it: He can both find in His Heart to do it, and He can find a Way to do it.
The Lords Hand is not shortened, nor His A^m weary: He can work Marvellously,
Miraculously, now as well as for His Church and Children of Old; Particularly
for the Poor D^btor, who Cries to Him for Help. He can take from His Rich
Enemies, and give to His Indigent Children; Or incline His People to help one
another. The Hearts of Rich Creditors are in His Hand; and they shall, when
soever He is pleased to Move on their Hearts, Remit a part, or the whole of the
Debt, to such honest Debtors as by His Providence are fallen into Decay, and
become Insolvent; Or at leaft, by putting so plain and ingenuous an
Acknowledgment into the Debtors Mouth, when he has touched his Conscience, and
is sending him to make his humble Submission, as shall melt the Compassionate
Heart of his Creditor, and procure a little longer forbearance, till all
possible, goodmeans are further used, with more fervent Supplications for a
Blessing. The Lord can order Unexpected Accessions to our Estate, in the
Revolutions volutions of his Common Providence; or, by a special Blessing,
increase our Little to Great Substance. You may think of other Ways, not
reducible to any of the Heads above hinted: And God has still other Ways
innumerable, unimmaginable; for in Wisdom as well as Bounty, not only in
Spirituals, but in Temporals also, can He do exceeding abundantly above what we
can ask or think.

I. USE. If this Doctrine be True, it is worthy of Credit: If it be from Heaven,
why should we not believe it?

Obj. We Question not either His Power or Wisdom; but the Purpose of His Will.
He can help us out of Debt; but whether He be willing to do it, is Uncertain.

Ans. And is it so easy a thing to believe the Alsufficiency of GOD! We may,
more easily be deceived in our selves, about our Faith. What did the Doubting
Israelites say, (and are not we their Natural Brethren in Unbelief?) Psalm.
78.19 Can God furnish a Table in the [Wilderness?] When they were in Egypt they
had not called it in Question; And when they should get into the Plentiful Land
of Canaan, they Question^d not but they should be Provided for: But, Can God
furnish a Table (with Bread and F^esh) in the Welderness? If we Question not
the Power of God; How is it that when Means seem to Fail, our Hearts and Hopes
sail too? As if Omnipotence could not do as much for us by small, as greater
Means; and work as well without as with Means; yea, quite above and contrary to
Means. If thou can believe, said Christ to One who requested of him to Help,
if He could, Mark 9.22, 23. After this Example then (for so far the Father of
the Dumb Child was right) let us Weep for our Unbelief, and cry first to have
Help there; and then it shall be to us according to our Faith.

But you confess that you Doubt of Gods Willingness to help you out of Debt;
and what Reason for that? Is not God your Father? And has not His Christ put an
Argument into your Mouth, wherewith to Plead with Him? Mat. 7.11. If ye, being
Evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children; how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him. But more of this under
the next Doctrine. I shall only add here; that He has once helped you out of
Debt, when you owed more than all this Visible World is worth, and had not one
Farthing to Pay; and that in a way that no Man or Angel could have though it of; at
a Price which a Thousand Worlds could not Equal, in Condescentions
Unparalled, and infinitely above all Comparison; and all unasked: Now, having
given us Christ; How shall be not with him also freely give us all things? Romans
8.32. For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was Rich,
yet, for your s^kes, he became Poor, that ye, through his Poverty, might he Rich.
And after all this, can we Question His Readiness to Help us in our Temporal
Straits? Did He Empty His Treasures, and go to Prison for us; and give his Back
to the Smiters, and endure Hell-Torment, in His Conscience, for us: and can He,
after all, deny that Relief we need; which is as easy to Him as a words
Speaking, or the turn of a Hand.

II. USE. This Doctrine, Spi^itualized, may yield some Relief ^o Distressed
Consciences; Convinced of Sin, and having their Spiritual Debts set in order
before them, not knowing, for the Present, but Divine Justice will take the Law
of them: Guilt Binds them over to the Last Tribunal: They are condemned
already, and foretold their Dcom, Mat. 25.41. -- Depart from me ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. They have tried every
way of Escape, that they could think of; Evasions Excuses, Confession,
Reformation Restitution, Abstinence, Strictness in Duty, Cries with Tears, for
Mercy; yet no Relief: A dismal Prospect is before them of the Number and
Aggravations of their Sins, the breadth and strictness of the Law, the black
Horrors of Gods Prison, and the Judge Appearing Inexorable! Now here is what
will effectually Salve all; God has laid help upon One who is Mighty to
Save-Christ is able to Save to the Uttermost. It has pleased the Father that in
him should ^ll Ful^^ss dwell. And him that comes unto him, he will in no wise
cast out. He has Bottomless Treasures of Merit ( Gold tried in the Fire) that
are of no other Use to Him, but to Pay off believing Sinners Debts. So that
unless thou Owe more than CHRIST is worth; thou haft nothing to Fear, though
thou have nothing to Pay; and nothing else to do, but to go to Christ as thy
Surety and to the Father through Him, for a full Discharge: which, if thou
finally Refusest to do Mercy ^^self cannot Save thee: But we Return to show
unto Literal and Temporal Debtors how the Lord is wont to Help out of Pecuniary
Debts.

V. DOCT. We may not expect Help from GOD, but as we follow His Direction, in
the Use of all Proper Means.
And,

1. We must do what we can, though it he never so little. But,

2. If more can be done, in any Lawful and Expedient Way; we must not spare any
Though It, Pains, or Petience.

Reason 1. God does not Help in Spiritual Cases (where me^ can do less) but by
Means to be used by us: For, though He works in us to will and to do, of his
good pleasure; yet must we Work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Reas. 2. This also is His usual Way in all Temporal Cases, 1 Chronicles. 22.16,
Arise therefore and be Doing, and the Lord be with thee. The Scriptures do
abound with Examples to this Purpose, as much as in any one thing, that can
readily be named. Jacob was industrious, and God blessed him. Do Good -- and
verily thou shall be fed. Work with your Hands and ye shall be Supplied, and
have where with to help others: Yea, and even in Miracles, that are Gods Work
Peculiarly, Man must commonly do something, all that is within his compass:
Lift up thy Rod: Speak to the Rock: Stretch forth thy hand over she Sea, and
divide it: Prophecy to the Wind: Stretch forth thy [withered] hand. And when
Christ had so many Thousand to feed and fill by Miracle; yet, -- Bring me the
five loaves and two fishes. So in the Instance of our Text; God does not make
Money of the Stones, or Moneys worth of Nothing; but increases the Pot of Oil,
which the Poor Debtor had in the House; and she and her Sons must be busily
employed, in doing all that can be done by them. Then, lastly, to the very Case
of Approving our selves honest in Paying our Debts: See 1 These. 4.11, 12. -- Do
your own Business -- work with your hands (as we commanded you) that ye may
walk bonestly -- and have back of nothing.

Reas. 3. Otherwise God should seem to indulge Negligence when He requires
Diligence; and so be Divided against Himself. It is the Diligent Hand that
gathers in, because its works are blessed: Nor has the Blessing of God (though
His Common Providence may) ever enriched, either the folded hand; or the hand
stretched out in Deceit and Oppression.

And now, (not any further, and more Particularly to add, how it is most for
Gods Glory, and Man's Good, we should help our selves, that God may help us)
Before I Improve this, I would Doctrinally speak also to the next Point; and
then Apply them together.

VI. DOCT. If we [thus] Believe and Trust in God, we shall not only live
Honestly, but Comfortably: He will enable us to Answer both the Demands of our
Creditors, and Necessities of our Families.
As in the Widows Case Related in the Text: She believed in the Lord, so her
heart was quieted. She Believed His Prophet, and the works of her hands were
prospered to Astonishment.

If we should, a little more Particularly, Review so wonderful an Example,
Written afore-time for our Admonition, and Encouragement in these hard Times,
it might contribute something toward the Illustration of the Truth in hand, and
facilitate our Receiving of it.

It may help our Unbelief, to consider,

1. What this Pattern for Debtors did Not do. (...) did not Fret against God,
who had smitten her good Husband by Death, and threatened her poor Fatherless
Children with Bonds, who should have been the Comfort of her Solitude, and
Support of her Age; and her self, to be left, for all what, at first view,
appeared, not only a Widow and Childless, but Moneyless, and Friendless: yet we
hear not (...) a Murmuring Word (...) proceed out of her Mouth; no, nor does
she utter any Railing Speeches against the Creditor, how hard so ever he was in
prosecuting her. She denies not the Debt, nor Refuses to Pay. She makes no
flattering Promises to the Person, into whose Books she was gotten so deep, of
what she was neither likely, nor careful to Perform: Nor does she take any
indirect or unwarrantable course, to Evade or Discharge what was Due.

2. Consider and Mark well what she did. She did as the Man of God Directed
her. She was willing to Pay her Debt; and willing to part with all her Living
(Alluding to Mark 12.44.) if that would have done: Ready and willing to hear
and Practice her Duty, in this hard and dubious Case: for no sooner is she put
in a way to get out of Debt, but out she goes, and about she runs, and sends a
b^rrowing, from one House to another, gathering together all the Empty Vessels
that could be had in the Neighborhood: Then, that she may not Deviate, in the
least Point, from the Directions given her; She Shuts the Door upon her self
and two Sons; ordering one of them to be ready with an Empty Vessel, while his
Brother is carefully setting a-side the Full. Her self, all the while, ftouping
to the work of Pouring out the Precious Liquor, from the springing Jarr, 'till
not an Empty Vessel is left; nor does she stop where the Oil stayed, but goes
to the Prophet again, that she may know further what God would have her to do;
and accordingly makes her Ma^ket, doubtless, as quick as she could, and to the
best Advantage; that she might clear with the Creditor, and put her self with
her Children in a way to earn an honest livelihood, for the Future.

Q. Who would not do more than all this for balf her Gain?

A. If thou Believe, as this Woman did; it shall doubtless be to thee
according to thy Faith. The Hints of your Duty, that have been already given,
and the more full and thorough Direction to be added, are [your] way out of
Debt, as the abovementioned was hers: and though the Practical Part of yours be
a longer and rougher way; yet the Theory is more^easy. It Is harder to believe
that one shall pour Barrels of Oil out of a small Pot or Jarr, than to believe
that our Diligent Hand shall not wait in vain on the Lord for His Blessing; who
is as much inclined by His Gracious Nature, and Self-obliged by His free
Promise, to help His needy and distressed Suppliants and Dependents, now, as
ever, Nor should Miracles ever have ceased, in the Church, if ordinary Means,
with sometimes an Extraordinary Blessing, must needs have been Deficient.

How can we imagine the Father of Mercies Unwilling to make His Children easy
and comfortable? Or that He will fail to deliver them out of Temptation, when
that which they are chiefly concerned for, even in this very Matter, is His
Glory: They could bear Poverty contentedly, if they had wherewith to live
Honestly. Whilst they Plead God's Honor, and Religious Cause, which suffer by
reason of their Inability to Render unto all their Dues; surely He will Regard
and not despise their Prayer; for, He cannot deny Himself. Yea, He would have
us to know that besides the many Promises He has made; even our Confidence in
him does as it were bring Him under further Obligations: 1 Chronicles. 5.20. -- They
cried to God -- and be was entreated of them, because they put their trust in
Him. He shall help and deliver them -- because they trust in him. E^^n Generous
Men will say, Such an one Depends on me for Succor and Supply; and I must not
frustrate his Expectations: Now, shall Men, who are Evil, and when they are not
obliged by any near Relation or express Promise, thus express themselves; and
can the Fountain of all Goodness, whose begotten and beloved Children we are,
at once forget to be Gracious, Fatherly and True? No, we shall find that it is
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in Man: -- Better to trust
in the Lord than to put confilence in Princes, Psalm. 118.8, 9. Who often cast
off their Dependants: Be sure they can give no such Security as God has done,
that He will never leave us nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5. Yet, because we are apt
to Stagger at the Promise through the weakness of our Faith, the Lord is pleased
to confirm it by a Solemn Asseveration. Jer. 39.18. I will surely deliver thee
-- because thou have put thy trust in me, says the Lord. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye ask the Father, in my Name, He will give it you -- For
the Father Himself loves you. Joh. 16 23, 27. And may we not ask this very
thing of the Father in Christ's Name, that a way may be found for the Discharge
of our Debts, and Supply of our Wants? Then we may not Pray for [our] Daily
Bread; for we can scarce eat our own Bread, till we have given every Man his
own. And can a Father deny his Children Bread, when he has it by him? If that
could be supposed, and more; even that the Tender Compassions of a Mother
toward her sucking Child, the Son of her Womb, should fall; yet may we be sure
of obtaining from the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, what we ask in
His Name, by the Spirit of Adoption; especially when we enforce our Suit by the
Double Plea of what Christ at our Surety, has Done and Suffered for the Glory
of God; and what God has already done in our Favor, for His Dear Sons Sake.

1. The Son of God, Assuming our Nature, and acting in our stead has brought
Immeasurable and F^erbesting Revenues of Riches, Honor und Glory to the Crown
of Heaven. And as the Consideration of this may prevail with our backward
Hear^^ to Believe, so we shall more certainly prevail with God for further
Mercy, for these smaller Temporal Favors which He knows we need, and can so
very easily give; while we urge,

2. That seeing He has, on Christ's Account, delivered us from going down to
the Pit, and made us Heirs to an Eternal Inheritance; Pardoned Million of Sins,
(so many of them Capital Crimes) and clothed as with a perfect Righteousness:
In a Word, Crossed His Book of Accounts with us, and opened His Spiritual
Stores unto us; seeing He has done all this; and will give us Heaven in
Possession, a few Days hence; surely He cannot deny His helping Hand to
deliver us out of Debt, and put us in a way to live Honestly and Comfortably.
But still I must suppose that you take the Precaution of the foregoing Doctrine
with these Sweets; Not expecting Help of the Lord, but as you follow His
Direction in the use of all proper Means. And now the way is open to a Fruitful
Application of both together.

I. USE. Hence we find the Cause why some Persons lie in Debt, and get out,
though they feel the misery of their lamentable case, and even envy the Felicity
of such as have kept themselves clear.

1. Either, God is carrying on a Controversy with them, for some known or
unknown Sin; lived in, or unrepented of, and which, it may be, they cannot bear
to be told of. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Zechariah,
the Son of Jehoidah, the Priest, which stood above the People, and said unto
them; Thus says GOD, Why transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord, that ye
cannot Prosper? Because ye have forsaken the Lord, He has also forsaken you.
And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones. -- If, I regard
Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. Psalm. 66.18. Now, if neither
your Prayers are heard, nor your Endeavors prospered, till you have searched
out and removed the ground of Gods Controversy with you; no wonder that all
your struggling sinks you the deeper into these Quick-sand: Beg of God, then, to
show you wherefore he contendeth with you; and having found out the Achan that
has troubled your House, disturbed your Peace, and turned the Friendly
Providence of God to fight against you; let Execution be done. -- Get thee up,
(says the Lord to Joshua, when he was in humble Prostration, and fervent
Importunity, making suit for Isreal's Prosperity) Get thee up; wherefore lie
thou thus upon thy Face, Israel has sinned -- Josh. 7.10, 11. Or else,

2. They trust in their own Wisdom, Providence and Diligence; not duly Relying
on the Lord, in the way of Duty and Endeavor. Not needing any Directions from
the Pulpit, for their Conduct in their Secular Business; which they understand
better than any body can tell them: As if Second-Table-Duties were beyond the
Minister's Line.

3 Or, Perhaps (on the quite contrary) they Presume on the Help of Divine
Providence, some way or other, to deliver them; though they neglect proper Means,
or, at least, are not thorough in the use of them: Which leads to another Use.

II. USE. For Direction to Debtors; in Relation to their Duty toward God,
their Creditors, themselves, and their Families.

The first Head of Directions may Reser, more immediately to God. And,

Dir. 1. As your being thus Entangled is a Penal Evil, you must Acknowledge and
submit to the Aflicting Hand of God therein. Amos 3.6. Remembering that you are
Indebted to His Mercy, that it is no worse; and more still, for any Hope, that
it shall be better; most of all for that He has (so would we sain Hope) given
you an Heart, bent to Discharge Duty, in this sad Case, to God and man, to your
selves and Families; be the issue what it will; and I am sure it cannot but be
well. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?

Dir. 2. Give God the glory of His Power and Riches, Rev. 5.12. As One Able to
do exceeding abundantly above what we can either ask or think: and say; though I
cannot tell what He [will] do, as to my present, perplexed Circumstances; yet I
know that he can do every thing: Is any thing too hard for God? Sometimes
Faith, only in the Power of God, has been the Condition of Relief, Proposed and
Accepted: Believe ye that I am able -- If thou will thou can make me clean,
Mat. 8.2. Chap. 9.28. However, Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name,
for His Power and Alsufficiency.

Dir. 3. Refer the whole matter to His Wisdom and Goodness. You may be sure He
can neither mistake your case, nor Hurt such as trust in Him, Jer. 25.6. Leave
the Matter, I say, with the Lord; yet not with a cold Indifferency; for, Faith
without Operation is Dead; as well as Presumptuous, when it wants Submission.
Plead with God, and Fill your Mouth with Arguments. Plead your Covenant.
Relation to Him, and His Gracious Promises to You: Plead the Interest of His
Glory, and Religious Cause, which are concerned nearly. Tell the Lord, you
desire to be at Liberty to Serve Him without Distraction, and to do Good in
your Generation. But the best Plea of all, (as was hinted before) and the most
Prevalent way in the World of arguing with God, is to Plead for Christ's Sake,
urging both what our Surety, our near Kinsman has done for Golds Glory; and
what God has been pleased already to do for us on Christ's Account.

The Second Head of Directions, Relates to your Creditors: To avoid Hard
Censures, on the one Hand; and Soft Flatteries, on the other.

Dir 1. Censure not your Creditors too hardly, though they should, be somewhat
severe upon you. Put your self into their Case: Would you not have your just
Due? It may be your Case is indeed theirs: They are Debtors as well as you; and
have Creditors as sharp on them: -- However it is hard for them, and
unreasonable in you, that they should be out of their Money from one Year to
another: that they should not be allowed to do what they will with their own;
and that you should live upon them, whether they will or no.

Dir. 2 Don't, by any means Flatter your Creditors with fair Promises, or
plausible Pretenses, of what you are either unable, or unwilling, and never
likely to make good unto ^h^m: This Deceit will but the more Exasperate them,
when the Fallacy appears. But Resolve to Deal Honestly; at least, thus far; to
tell them the plain Truth: Or, if you conceal any thing, which you are not
obliged presently to Discover; let it be in order to that further Liberty,
which you are resolved to improve for their Interest. In a word, be Honest, as
far as your Estate will go; what ever comes of it.

Q. May I not keep my Estate in my Hands, and improve it, in order to the
Gradual Discharge of my Debts?

A. 1. With the Creditors Allowance you may; having any tolerable Prospect of
doing something to Purpose.

2. But you may not live and spend on your wasting Estate, which is not so much
yours as his to whom you owe it. Much less may you be Ambitious of putting on
State, as formerly, or as others; 'till at last you shall have nothing left.
You must Pay while you can, and as much as you can, and as fast as you can;
till you owe no man any thing but to love one another. For this Apostolical
Injunction is one of the Fundamental Laws of the Blessed Jesus His Religion.
And if you have nothing else left you, when all your Debts are Paid, but
Charity to your Neighbor, and Hope for your self; and that only for the next
Life; yet are you Rich and Happy, being out of Debt though out of Credit too. All
the World cannot Cheer a Man, like. the Testimony of a good Conscience; Heb. 13
18 -- We trust we have a good Conscience, willing to live Honestly: And this
was the Apostles rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12. A Peaceable and Quiet Life is the
Effect of all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. And the Work of Righteuosness
shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for
ever, Isai. 32. V. 17.

Obj. But what shall they do who owe much, and have nothing to Pay?

A. They must Pay Submission, for the present, and promise more substantial
Payment as soon as ever they shall be Able. In the mean time, they must
willingly Fare hard, as well as Work hard; and Pray hard too; that they may be
as Good as their Promise. But this brings us to, The Third and Last Head of
Directions; which has more Direct Reference to our selves and Families.

Dir. 1. You would do well to Search and Try your Hearts and Ways, that you may
Discover how far your Sins of Omission or Practice, Personally or Relativel,
Considered have Efficiently and Meritoriously procured this Infelicity, this
sad Perplexity, that now Distresseth you: Waiting on God, as Elihu Directs Poor
Job, Chapter 34.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
Chactisement, I will not Offend any more, that which I see not teach thou me;
if I have done Iniquity, I will do no more.

Therefore,

Dir. 2. Flatter not your selves with Vain Hopes of Disentangling your selves
by any Unwarrantable Methods of Getting: Ezekiel. 22.12, 13 -- Thou have Greedily
Gained of thy Neighbor, by Extortion; and have forgotten me, says the Lord
God. Behold therefore, I have smitten mine Hand at thy Disbonest Gain, which
thou have made, -- Either, by the Blast of God, it shall Wither away, Job. 4.9
Hag. 1.9. Or, which is worse, it shall bring a Curse on what was otherwise
given by Providence, and gotten by Honest Labor and Traffic: Yea, the Curse
shall get into your very Bowels, and Burn as it were Fire. Who would run his
Fingers into a Burning Crucible, for Gold; or buy Goods, how Cheap soever, that
just come out of an House Infected with the Plague? There are many Ways of
Dishonesty; Be Warned against them all: Venture not on any thing that is
Dubious: But there is One Thing which, without Doubt, is a Breach of many Laws
and Rules at Once, which I must therefore Warn you to Shun, by Resisting all
Temptations to it, how Plausible and Urgent soever. And I will Borrow a
Trumpet, because I have none so Shrill, or certain in Sound, as what I find
Sounded by a Faithful Watchman; who, standing on the Walls of our Jerusalem, in
the End of our former Wars, discovered and gave Solemn Warning of this Danger,
in the following Words; And when, alas, when will our Indian Traders Apply to
themselves that Commination in Hab. 2 15. Woe to him that gives his Neighbor
Drink; that put thy Bottle (thy Rhum-Bottle) to him, and make him Drunken
also. While there has been a most Observable Blessing of God on the Preachers
of Truth to the Indians, all the World may Observe a Judgment of God upon the
Sellers of Drink to the Indians. I pray, what have the Estates of such Men
generally come to? Do; Trade on; ye Merchants of Souls, or more truly, ye
Butchers of Souls; till the Judgments of God have caused you to Trade your
selves into Beggary at the last! But know that the Blood of Souls will be found
on your Skirts. It is not very long ago, that an unusual Accident in a Part of
this Province did Affright the Neighbors into some Serious Thoughts of this
Matter. Several Indigns were made horribly Drunk by the Drink which the English
had Sold unto them. Returning home over a little Ferry, Eight of them were
Drowned; and Three Months after they were Drowned (from December to March) one
of their Dead Bodies came ashore, very near the Place, where they had been
Supplied with their Drink; and lying on the Shore, it Bled so Plentifully, as
to Discolor the Water and Sand aboutit. Upon which the Considerable Spectators
though it on that Scripture, The Stone shall cry out of the Wall, against him that
gives his Neighbor Drink. They though it there was a loud Cry of Blood! Blood!
against some Wicked English in this Matter.

May not the Cutler, as Warrantably Sell a Sword to a Madman, or the
Apothecary, Rats-Bane to a Poor Tempted Wretch, that he verily thinks, intends
to Poison himself, as for any to Sell Rhum to the Indians (or English either)
when they may be sure they will Wrong their Bodies, their Souls and their God,
with it.

Dir. 3. Being thus Resubved, that you will have nothing to do with plainly
Sinful, or Questionable and Unsafe Methods of Deliverance; and to Practice
according to the Seven Preceding Directions so far as you are convinced that
they are according to the Word of God and Right Reason; though the common
Practice of the Country be quite otherwise. I say, being ^h^^ Fixed in your
Reselution to (...) the Way of Duty (while others are either Sirting down in
Despair, or using Carna. Policy) Perplex not your selves about Events; but wait
for a Good Issus; Which, (1) May be much sooner than you oan easily Believo^^.
Or, (2) If at should be a longer time, you have present Peace, and the conain
F^u^^ of Waiting will be Preciou and Lasting to your (...) and your. Yea (...)
if you should Die in Debt, that cannot shut you out of Heaven any more than it
did one of the Sons of the Prophet^, who left his Fatherless Children with God.
And his Widow, by Trusting in the Lord, in the Way of Duty, got wherewith to
Clear all, and live Woll. Yet such asleave their Families under a Load of Debt,
Disproportionable to their Estates; know not what Trouble they Entail.

III. USE. What we have heard may give us some light in the Way of getting our
Spiritual Debts Crossed out of God's Book.

1. As we cannot Deny, so we may not Excuse or Extenuate our Debts to God; but
Acknowbedge. them to the Extent. How, First of all, we Sinned in the Garden,
and thereby not only lost our Original Righteousness, but corrupted our whole
Nature, and contracted Aversations from all that is Holy, Just and Good; and as
Universal a Disposition to all Impiety and Iniquity: yea and both Heigtned too
(which is dreadful to think of) because of the Divine Injunctions and
Prohibitions Romans 7.7. -- 14. And then, we must be as free and as full in
Consessing of, and Contrition for our Numberless, Actual Transgressions, the
Dents that we have Personally Contracted, by Sins of Childhood, Youch and Riper
Years; against Law or Gospel; in I bought Word, Deed; whether more Secretly, or
Openly Perpetrated: Omi^^o^^ and Failings in Regard of the Duties of both our
Callings and every Relation and Condition; as to Matter, Manner, or End: Our
Own and our Ob^^. Mon's Sins, Made O^^ by ou^ furthering, or not ^indering, not
Rep^oveing, not Bewalling -- And all aggr^va^^ from the Means and Mercies (...)
we have Abuf^d; Solemn (...) fr^quent Warnings slighted, Repeated, gracious
Offers Refused; Conscience Violated; the Spiris Quenched, and the Blood of the
Covenant Trampled under Foot. And on such Heads as these must we Expatiate, in
our Confessions.

2. Sentence being already past according to Law, and Judgment entered up, (Joh.
3.18.) Having, Pleaded Guilty, we must Justify the Sentence, and Acknowbedge
Judgment.

3. As we have nothing to Pay, and there is no other Sponsor in Heavean or
Earth but Christ (as was intimated in Sp^ritualizing the Fourth Doctrine) so we
can expect no Relief throught this One Mediator; if we are Neglignet and
Dilatory.

(1.) We must be willing to do our Utmost. Abstaining from the External Acts of
Sin, and Praying for an Inward Principle of Grace; Avoiding Occasions of, and
Resisting Temptations, to our Bosom Sin especially: Using the Means of Grace
more Universally, Constantly and Diligently; begging Incessantly, and with all
Importunity for a Blessing, and waiting for a Gracious Answer. But when we have
done all this, and much more; we must have a care how we set down one Farthing
Paid; while we are thus Industriously only Seeking after and beseeching our
Surety, who is to have the sole Honor of Responding our Account. (2.)
Remembering always that Delays are Dangerous For, [1.] Does not Death frequently
Prevent Delaying Sinners? And a Purpose of Repentance To Morrow, will not Save
thee from Hell, if thy Soul should be required of thee this Night. [2.] Nor can
we leave our Spiritual Debts to be Discharged by our Heirs, or Successors,
after our Decease. [3.] Our Account does not stand the same in God's Book, from
One Year to another: but besides thousands of subjoyned Articles, Daily, for
New Opportunities, and Mercies taken up, and misspent; the Former are by
Impenitence persisted in, Increased in Value, though not in Number: so that there
will be Interest upon Interest to Pay for old Book-Debts, besides our Running
continually further and further on a New Score, till at last, the Tempter will
change his Note, from, No haste yet! it is Time enough! to, All Is in Vain, it is
now too late.

If this be a Digression, it is time to Return, and Consider what may be further
said and done, that Poor Debtors may have some Relief under, and deliverance
out of their Distress.

VII. DOCT. Such as are Distressed by reason of Debts, are Objects of Pity and
Charity; and Good People will Compassionate their Condition, and Consider what
may be done for them. As Good Elisha Here.
Debtors are of two Sorts.

1. Some are Diminished and brought Low by the Holy Pravidence of God; who are
Chargeable, neither with Slothfulness nor Prodigality: Now, These are the most
Proper Objects of Charity.

2. Others have made themselves Poor by bearkening to Satan's Temptations,
following after vain Persons, living in Pride and Luxury; running into Debt, to
support these and other Chargeable Lusts, without Care or Conscience how they
should get out again. And even these too, are to be Pitied; for their Case is
no less Sad, but a great deal more Lamentable than that which the former sort
are in; who are not only Redeemed from the Curse of the Law; but, having
received the Adoption of Sons, are under the Gare and Promise of a Father, who
does interest himself in all their Concerns, even the smallest of their
Domestic Affairs: and is both Able and Willing to Support them under, and
Deliver them out of their Deepest Plunges, and the most Inextricable Labyrinths
of their Temporal as well as Spiritual State: While these Double Debtors, if
they go on a little longer (as on they seem Resolved to go) the Great Lawgiver
and Judge will send His Officers, both to take into safe Custody their Bodies,
so as to have them forthcoming at the General Jail-delivery of the Grave; and
to Cast their Souls and Bodies into a worse Prison, out of which they can, by
no means come, till they have Paid the Uttermost Farthing. They must Suffer and
Sweat it out in Hell: even their Money-Debts, that they have Sinfully
Contracted, and never made any Conscience of Discharging, must thus be Paid at
laft. To these then, if we have any Bowels of Compassion, let it appear
Speedily, or it will be neither Seasonable nor Beneficial.

Q. But, How are we to express our Pity to such?

A. 1. Not by putting Weapons into their hands, till they are come to
themselves; for Madness is in their Hearts. To Give or Lend them, unless, in
Extremity, to keep them from Perishing, is but to Fortify Satan's interest in
them.

2. By Praying for them, and giving Counsel to them; if they are not altogether
turned into Dogs and Swine. And when sense of Misery shall compel them to Seek
the Remedy, in good earnest; then these Returning Prodigals will come under the
Former Denomination, at least so far, as to be Subjects capable of our Help and
Succor. And when God has forgiven them, well may their Brethren forget all
past Extravagancy, though they will find it hard to forgive themselves, and must
remember what they have been and done, and lest undone, and set their hearts
upon, to keep them Humble, Watchful, Prayerful.

Q But you will still be Inquis^tive, What may further be done for these
Supposed Penitents, now joined with the other, (...) Criminal, or Honest and
Innocent Debtors?

A (...) with God, that what has been (...) the fore going D^ctrines (...) and
H^^p them. We have been ^^st now D^^cted to Pray for them; and in our Prayers
joy us humbly Beseech the Lord to ble^^, th^se C^un^^s and (...) unto them; and
sind out a way for their (...). If Christians did less allow themselves in
mutual Consures; and more abound in Prayers one for another; We should better
Answer the worthy Name by which we are called, find more inward Peace and
Comfort, and be Fellow-He^per, as III. Joh. 5, to the II.

2. Be Helpful also by more Particular Advice, suiting their Vartous Cases. God
has given more Wisdom and Foresight to some than to others, and these Gifts
are not Y^^rs, ^ut the Churches; not for your se^^es only, but for the Use of
your B^^thren. You cannot say but, in some other Respects, you have, or ma^^
have need of them; and they must not say that they have no need of you in the
Prosent Case: For, Th [Mystica] Body is not one Member but many. And the Eye
cannot say to the Hand. I have no need of thee: nor again, be Head to the Feet,
We have no need of you, 1 Cor. 12.14, 21. Go then to thy Weaker Brother; at
lest now in this Time of Tempration Disanimated; His weak hands han^^ing down,
through Discouragement, not knowing which way in the World to turn: Go to him,
and give him a little Wise and Friendly Advice. Don't you think, sometimes,
What might be done to good Pu^pose, were. You in their Circumstances? They
Perhaps are Bewildred and only need a Pilot; and your Conduct would be as
acceptable as seasonable: However give a Word of Counsel; that is Cheap, and
Pray God to give you Prudence in giving it, them Hearts to take it, and His
Blessing with it. You know not what Good you may do. I am not setting Busy-Bodi
sin other men's Matters a-work; but stirring up the modest and backward (who are
commonly the best Qualisied for such a work) only to Interpose in some singular
and almost Desperate Cases.

Again,

3. Let such as are Able to do more, not stop here; but Press on their own
Consciences that Law in, Levit. 25.35, 36, 37. (with the Morality of it, which
is still Obligatory) And if thy Brother be w^xen Poor and fallen in Decay with
thee; then thou shall Relieve him: Yea though he be a Stranger or Sojourner,
that he may live with thee. Take thou no Usury of him, or Increase: but fear
thy God; That thy Brother may Live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy Money
upon Usury, nor lend him thy Victuals for Increase. A late Expositor's Remark
on the Place is this; Poor Debtors must not be Oppressed. If thy Brother be
waxen Poor, and have occasion to borrow Money of thee for the necessary Support
of his Family, take thou no Usury of him either for Money or Victuals. And thus
far this Law binds still; but could never be though it binding where Money is
borrowed for Purchase of Lands, Trade, or other Improvements, for there it is
Reasonable that the Lender share with the Borrower in the Profit. The Law here
is plainly intended for the Relief of the Poor, to whom it is sometimes as
great a Charity to Lend freely, as to Give.

The same Argument is used to Enforce this Precept, that Prefaceth all the Ten
Commandments, v. 38. I am the Lord your God which brought you out of Egypt.
And for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in
all that thou put thy Hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.10. Prove. 19 17. He that has
Pity on the Poor, lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given will he
pay him again. Then shall the King say to them on His Right Hand, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World. For in Feeding, Clothing, and Comforting my needy and Imprisoned
Members, Ye have done it unto Me. -- Which is the Sum of the Reason given, of
that Glorious Sentence, in the Great Dar, when it will be worth something to be
Owned thus, and Crowned before Angels and Men, by our D^ar and Dread Sovereign.
And I need not tell you that these three Scriptures, last mentioned, as well as
that out of Leviticus, are Applicable to the Present Case, of Relieving Poor
Debtors. I speak not of the Devils Poor, who have spent their Time, Strength
and Estates in his Service; and now he has given them Poverty and Disgrace as
their Wages: Part in Hand; till they shall Receive their full Earnings, when
their Work is done. Rev. 18.7. Unless they are Returning Prodigals, as we
before Distinguished.

I. USE. What we have heard under this last Doctrine, Reproves two Sorts of
Persons.

1. Such as are so far from having put on, as the Elect of God, Bowels of
Mercy; that they have even put off Humanity it self, and show no Compassion to
their Fellow Creatures, how Miserable so ever they are Circumstanced; though,
in all Probability, next door to utter Ruin. These care for none but
themselves. And because they are Resolf'd to Contribute nothing toward the
Relief of any; They make one General Sentence in the Judgment of
Uncharitableness, to serve Indifferently for all Poor Distr^ssed Debtors;
Either they are Foolish, or Prodigal; or else their seeming Honesly and Pretty
is but a Cover for their Hyp^^^is^; and some hidden Iniquity has B^asted their
Ettare: When, its very likely, God is but trying the distressed Debtors Faith
and Patience, and others Charity. But supposing the worst; Is not a
Self-Destroyer to be Pitied? Are we not All such? Hes. 13.9.

2. They also are worthy of Rebuke, whi are Guilty of Foolish and Ruinous Pity
on the other Hand. These would have the Distressed Helped in their Estates to
the Hazard of their Souls; Or put in a way to Advance their Pri^ate Interest,
though never so much to the Prejudice and Disadvantage of the Public.

II. USE. Is it Singular Charity to help People out of Debt, and to put them in
a way to Live Honest y and Comfortably? Then let not such as they be Stirred up
to Irgage in so God W^rk, be Corsur^d U^c^aritanly The Motion may be of God:
And if such are Encouraged may not one, or two or a few do a great ^eal of
good? If any thing will make Men Good Husbands, what I now Reser to is not
altogether unlikely to do it; if it be Safely and Prudently Managed: It may put
new Life and Courage into such as were quite Dead-hearted, and keep Men from
growing Desperate. Yet are such Helpers liable to Hard Censures, from such as
are thus helped, or others, through Envy and Uncharitableness.

1. As if they sought themselves only. Indeed they had need look well to their
End; Otherwise they have no Reward of their Heavenly Father: But How can I
Judge of another Man's Principles and Ends? This is Gods Prerogative, who sees
into the Heart.

2. As if they Endangered their Estates. And here, truly needs all the
Precaution Imaginable. And I had need Repeat to you that Cantion of Wisdom,
Prove. 22.26, 27. Be not thou one of them that strike Hands, or of them that are
Sureties for Debts. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy
Bed from under thee? In which two things are Obvious.

(1.) That we Venture not so much, as that the loss of is should Ruin us.

(2.) That we Venture not at all, where there is not a Probability at least, of
Attaining some good End. Much less to Ruin our Estates and Families, (a piece
of Injustice worse than Paganism) by Encumbring our selves with the Debts of
Impenitent Prodigals; with whom we cannot Associate our selves or Contract any
Intimacy, without very great Hazard; for as they often need, so they will Urge
and Press their Friends to be Bound for them, that they may (as one Expresses
it) Cheat their Neighbor, to feed their Lusts; and by keeping up a little
longer, may do the more damage at last, to those that give them Credit. But
it is time for me to hasten unto,

The Conclusion.
If I did, after the Divine Influences had fixed my Thoughts on this Subject,
Raise your Expectations of an Answer to the Case [What shall Distressed Debtors
do that they may Libe Honettly and Comfortably?] It was on no worse a Design
than to Allure you, more Generally, to the Posts of Wisdoms Doors; where you
may expect an Answer of Peace from Him that having Promised, can Command the
Blessing, on the Scriptural Methods that have been Proposed, to which I shall
only Add Two or Three Things by way of more Indesinite Improvement of the
Doctrines; or for,

General Application.
1. If you bring not what you have Heard Home upon your Consciences, it cannot
Answer the End Proposed. There must be a Personal Application of what has been
Spoken: Conscience must be very Plain, and say to whom it may Concern, Thou art
the Man. Thus and thus thou have Done: This and that thou have to do: Herein
Deny thy Self; therein beware of the Tempter. This is laying and binding the
Plaster on the Sore, the Wound being searched; and this is taking down the
Pills, one after another; which is a good Step toward a Cure: but if the
Plaster stick not, or the Pills be only chewed, and spit out, because they are
Bitter; what good can either do? Nor is this enough; for, (to follow the
Metaphor) besides the Renewed Application of Proper Medicines; Abstinence from
hurtful Meats, Drinks or Fruits; and all care to avoid taking Cold: And in some
Cases Wakefulness and much Exercise: I say besides all this, which requires
that the Patient be Active also; there must, in Our Mystical Cure, be Constant
Tho'tfulness, and a Mind rightly disposed. Physic will work whether you think
of it or not; Balsome will, by its innate, sanative Quality, Heal the Flesh;
though the Heart be set against God and His Church; and the wounded Man desires
to be made whole, only that he may show his Enmity to both, by renewing the
Fight: But in the Present Case Faith and Sincerity are necessary Ingredients;
for who will ever stop his Ears against the Dictates of Carnal Reason, (which
are so Contradictory to the Directions given) till the Wisdom of the Fleshly
Mind be brought into Subjection to Faith, and before the Single Eye of
Sincerity discover the Light of Spiritual Reason, in the Methods of Divine
Wisdom, fetched out of the Sacred Dispensatory of the Scriptures. A Compound of
Scripture mixed with Faith that Works by Love, and Honest Simplicity with Godly
Sincerity, is a Receipt that has never once failed.

2. Make Conscience of Something else, or you will never trouble your Consciences
much about Paying your Debts. Indeed God may begin here, and Convince the
Sinner of Unrighteousness toward his Neighbor, so leading him up, by this one
Stream, to the Fountain of all Impiety and Iniquity: But you must Examine your
selves whether you be in the Faith; The Spirit Convinces of the Sin of
Unbelief, Job. 16.9. Come to an Account with your Self first, about your
Spiritual Debts, and then Reckon with God through Christ: The Credit God has
given Him, on His Book, over against the Believing Penitent's former Large and
Black Account, is infinitely more than sufficient to Balance all. And in a
Word, Make Conscience, hence forward, of Discharging Duty toward God, your
Neighbor, and your own Souls, in Every thing; or you are truly Conscientious,
with Godly Sincerity, in Nothing.

3. On Supposition that your Case is not Reached, as to some Singular
Circumstances of it, in any thing that has been said; It seems Advisable that
you make it a Case of Conscience; and lay it Speedily before some Able Divine;
and Skillful Casuist, for an Answer. But this is spoken on Presumption also
that you are willing to Know and Do your Duty. Otherwise I must further Reason
with you out of the Scriptures. Know you not, (says the Apostle) that the
Unrighteous shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God? What is all our Outside show
of Religion, and seeming. Devotion toward God worth, if we are Unjust and
Dishonest in our Dealings with Man? What does it Profit, my Brethren, though a
man say be has Faith, and have not Works, Can Faith Save him? Good God! If this
be so; And, If the Righteous are scarcely Saved, Where shall Thousands (were it
only for this Branch of Unrighteousness, Careless lying in Debt) Where shall so
many Thousands of Ungodly Sinners as ar^ to be found in the Gospel World; where
shall they, if timely Repentance prevent not, at last Appear?

Q. Is there any Hope for One that cannot be willing to Know and Do his Duty;
Laments his Unwillingness, and jet is Unwilling still?

A. Yes, a great deal more, than of Him that needs no Instructor, nor ever is
heard to Complain of a ^^^nd Mind and obstinate Will. Your Way is short, You
must carry your Prejudie'd Mind, Reluctant Will, and Carnal Heart to the Lord
Jesus; as we carry broken Tools, or disordered Engines to the Artificer that
made them, to get 'em Mended and Rectified; and it is but for Christ to say, I
will, be ye clean, and move Regularly; and the Clock work of our Souls is all
in Good Order presently; Psall 110 v. 3. Thy People shall be Willing in the day
of thy Power.

The End of the Third Sermon.
FINIS.
BOOK'S Printed for and Sold by Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop on the North side
of the Townhouse, in King's-Street, Boston.
A Humble Discourse of the Incomprehensibleness of GOD. In Four SERMONS,
Preached at the Lecture in Boston. 1714. Some of the Honors that Religion does
unto the Fruitful Mothers in Israel. Meditated upon the Birth, and Preached at
the Baptism of a Child. Boston Jan. 16.1714, 15. Both by Benj. Colman, A.M.
Sacramental Exercises, Or, The Christian's Employment, Before, At, and After
the Lord's Supper. By Jabex Earl. Practical Religion Exemplified in the Lives
of Mrs. Mary Terry, Who Dyed December. 8. 1708. In the Eighteenth Year of her
Age. And Mrs. Clissould, Who Departed this Life the 12th. of December. 1711. In
the Twenty-Ninth Year of her Age. By Thomas. Reynolds. Recommended by Increase
Mather, D. D. Meditations on the Sanctification of the Lord's Day: And on the
Judgments which attend the Profanation of it. To which is added, Seasonable
Meditations both for Winter and Summer. By Increase Mather, D. D. A Treatise
concerning the Lord's Supper: With Three Dialogues for the more full
Information of the Weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament. By Thomas
Doolittel, M. A. Honey out of the Rock, Flowing to Little Children; That they
may Know to refuse the Evil and choose the Good. Certain Select Hymns, For the
Use of such, taken from those of the Excellent? Mr. Isaac Watts, as more
peculiarly Adapted for their Instruction. A Monitor for Communicants. An Essay
to Excite and ^^^ist Religious Approaches to the Table of the Lord. Offered by
an Assembly of the New-English Pastors, unto their own Flocks, and unto all the
Churches in these American Colonies: With a Solemn Testimony to that cause of
GOD, and Religion in them. The Third Edition. Price 4 d. Single, and 3 s. per
Dozen. The Religion of the Closet. The Young Secretary's Guide: Or, A Speedy
help to Learning. In Two Parts. The Fourth Edition, with large and useful
Additions. By Thomas, Hill, Gent.

