Shaking Dispensations.

An ESSAY Upon the Mighty SHAKES, WHICH The Hand of HEAVEN, has given, and is
giving, to the WORLD. With Some Useful Remarks On the Death of the French King,
Who left off to make the World a Wilderness, and to destroy the Cities thereof;
on the Twenty-first of AUGUST. 1715. In a SERMON on that Great Occasion, At
BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND. 13 d. VIII m. 1715.

By Cotton Mather, D.D. and F.R.S.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green. Sold by S. Gerrish, at his Shop at the N. side of
the T. House. 1715.

Shaking Dispensations, Considered.
BOSTON-Lecture. 13 d. VIII m. 1715.
Haggai. II. 6, 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, --

And I will shake all Nations, --


IT is a Passage Occurring in very Ancient Records; Psalm. LXXIV. 14. Thou
brakest the Heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat unto the
People inhabiting the Wilderness. When the People of God Enjoyed the
Satisfaction of seeing a Pharaoh taken out of the World, then was that Word
accomplished.

The Man to whom Statues were Erected, with the Title of, The Immortal Man,
upon their Pedestal, is by the stroke of Death now laid in the Grave.

The King who suffered himself to be blasphemously called, The Almighty, is
crushed like a Worm under the foot of the Lord God Omnipotent.

The Tyrant, who about Thirty Years ago boasted on his Medals, [ O Mighty Man,
boasting in Mischief!] That he had brought about the Conversion of Twenty
Hundred Thousand, whom he called Heretics; You know by what Unparalled
Barbarities; You know to what Abominable Idolatries; -- He is now buried under
that Epitaph; The Man of the Earth shall Oppress no more.

Certainly all the Servants of God in the World, will on this Occasion adore
the Hand of the Glorious GOD, breaking in pieces the Head of a Leviathan.

Sure I am, If after the Setting up of Popery in the Plantations, had been
Engaged unto him, when we had a Popish King upon the Throne, (as has been since
discovered,) a most Seasonable Revolution had not prevented ^is taking
Possession of this Country, we had found him a Leviathan. The Jaws of the
fiercest Crocodile would have been full of Tender Mercies, in Comparison of his
Merciless Cruelties.

An Entertainment for the People Inhabiting the Wilderness, is to be Considered
on this Occasion. Our God provides an Entertainment for us. And what can more
agreeably, or more deliciously Entertain us, than a View of the Wonderful
Shakes, which the Great God is upon giving to the Nations, yea, to all Nations,
upon such a Dispensation!

Our Prophet Haggai under the Inspirations of God, animated a discouraged and a
dilatory People, to go on with rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem. To this
Purpose, a Greater Glory is promised for the Second, than had been Enjoyed by
the Former Temple. A Greater Glory! Not in regard of a Pompous and Splendid
Appearance. Nor do I take the Story that Josephus gives us, of what was done by
Herod the Great, unto it, for to be much better than a Romance, of Incredible
and Ill-designed Exaggerations. But the Greater Glory, was to be in the Coming
of the Messiah thither; in the Presence and Preaching of the Son of God
Incarnate there.

Concerning this Coming of our Savior, we have here Two Things remarked.

First; It was to be in a little while. It Was indeed Five hundred Years off.
But then, three thousand and five hundred Years had passed since the First
Promise of it. What remained, was but a little while, to what had already
passed. It is but a little while unto Him, with whom a Thousand Years is but as
One Day.

Secondly; All Nations were to be Shaken, to prepare them for such a Blessing.
The Fulfillment of the Promise was to be brought on with very Shaking
Dispensations. The Shake upon all Nations, is here Metaphorically described,
and perhaps also distinguished, by a Shake upon the Heavens, or the Upper
World; and upon the Earth; both the Sea and the Dry Land, which belongs unto
the Earth; or the Lower World.

This is what we are now to pay Regard unto.

There are Times, wherein the Glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth, will Shake the
Nations of the World; yea, Shake both Heaven and Earth in the disturbed
Nations.

My Text shall be a little more particularly Explained, before my Doctrine be
prosecuted.

A King of Persia comes out against the Greeians, with the biggest Army that
ever was heard of: But besides his Army at Land, his Navy at Sea, was horribly
defeated. So did the Lord shake the Earth and the Sea! After this, Alexander
the King of Greein, does annoy and destroy the Persians; and by his Victorious
Arms, he made all the Nations to Shake. The Successors of that Emperor,
dividing the Empire, fell out among themselves; Especially the Kings of the
North and of the South; of Syria, that is, and of Egypt; who made the Nations
to Shake still by their Bloody Wars. After this, the Romans Invaded and
Conquered Grecia: And at ^^ngth Civil Wars fell out among the Romans
themselves; in which Wars there were some terrible Sea Fights. Thus the Lord
made the Sea, and the Dryland, and all Nations to Shake. Finally, the Romans
brought a Desolation upon the whole Jewish State, both Civil and Sacred;
wherein the Lord Shook, not the Earth only, but the Heavens also.

Our First Enquiry now shall be,

HOW it is that our Glorious LORD, will Shake the Nations, yea, Shake both
Heaven and Earth about them?

First. There are Times wherein Shakes are given to the Corporeal World; Heaven
and Earth Literally taken, are wonderfully Shaken, and unto the Terror of the
Nations.

The God that formed all things, has put all Things into an incomparable Order.
But sometimes the World may be put somewhat out of the Order wherein it is
ordinarily carried on. When the course of the World is altered, by any
Extraordinary work or change upon it, then does the Great God give a Shake unto
it.

Can Heaven be shaken? Yes. Prodigious Thunderings and Lightnings in Heaven,
are some shaking of Heaven. Thus the Lord shook Heaven, at the giving of the
Law, when the Thunders and Lightenings were such as to make Moses himself cry
out, I exceedingly fear and quake. Of this we read; Psalm. LXVIII. 8. The earth
shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of the Lord. And so, when the
Stars in their Courses fight against the Enemies of God, by raising any
Destructive Tempest upon them; Heaven is then shaken in it and for it. There is
also a shaking of Heaven, when any real Prodigies do there show themselves: for
so we may suppose there sometimes do, without our falling into the whimsies of
a fanciful and credulous Livy about them. The Learned Man, who wrote against
the Regard of all such Things, afterward owned unto one to whom I have the
Honor to be related, That he had overdone. Those Things that are called,
Fearful sights and great signs from Heaven; There is a shaking of Heaven in
them. We read, Mat. XXIV. 29. Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of
the Heavens shall be shaken. When Blazing Stars, do in their Elliptic Motions
make their Descents toward us, and threaten a Mischievous Brush unto us, then
do Stars fall from Heaven. But then, most properly, then most awfully, are the
Powers of the Heavens shaken; when the Angels of the Heavens are put upon doing
unusual Things among us. The Heavenly Powers may go so far out of the common
Road, as to break in upon us, and Visibly, or Audibly, and Sensibly do Strange
Things among the Children of Men; There is a wonderful shaking of Heaven in
such Things. It shakes Heaven, when the Angels do come out of Heaven, with
Apparitions, or with Operations, whereat Flesh and Blood falls into a
consternation. Heaven is then shaken; when the Heavenly Host is upon such
Motions as cause just Amazement; and perhaps the Tongues of Men become the
Tongues of Angels. -- It becomes me to stop here; and Step into Lower Regions.

The Earth is to be Shaken too. It Is very particularly so, when what we call an
Earth quake happens. Our Lord shakes the Earth, when He causes the Upper lays
thereof to Quake, by the Subterraneous Fires getting Head beneath 'em. In an
Earthquake there comes to pass that, whereof we read; Job IX. 6 He shakes the
earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof do tremble.

Thus again the Lord shook the Earth at the Giving of the Law; when the whole
Mountain Quaked greatly. The Songs among the People of God many Ages after,
celebrated that Earthquake; They Sang, O God, The Earth trembled and shook. Of
all the Plagues inflicted by God upon a Polluted World, that of an Earthquake
is the most formidable. It may seem admirable, that it is not Enumerated among
the Plagues in Deuteronomy. Some think, It Is because the Lord has more
peculiarly reserved this transcendent Judgment for the Times and the Crimes
under the New Testament. And yet in the Old Testament also we find it
Exemplified. Very singularly notable was that whereof the Prophet Jeremiah, [I
say, the Prophet Jeremiah, because I take the Six last Chapters of what we have
in the Book of Zechariahs Prophecies, to have been indeed Jeremiahs:] takes
notice, in Zech. XIV. 5. Ye fled from before the Earthquake, in the Days of
Uzziah, King of Judah. The Jewish Historian relates, That this roaring Earth
quake tore down an High Hill, which rolling for diverse furlongs did no little
Damage to the Kings Palace and Garden, and the roof of the Temple Split open so
that the Sun shone into it. Be sure; The Earthquakes which accompanied the
Crucifixion and the Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS, deserve an Eternal
Commemoration: The Modern Travelers, who are far from Fancies and Whimsies,
and at the same time of the most unspotted Veracity, do on the Split Rocks
thereabouts at this very day, find a very probable Commemoration of it. It Is
notorious, That the Sea, as well as the Dry Land, bears a Part when an
Earthquake is in its Agitations. A Troubled Sea is then perceived at a
distance from the Shore; and near the Shore the Sea so retires, that the
Channels of the waters are seen, and what no Eye ever saw before, is
discovered. When God shakes the Sea and the dry Land, the Sea withdrawes, and
the Dry Land, which it once covered, is for a while Exposed. Every body knows
these Things, I shall say no more about them.

Secondly. The Political World; there are Times wherein Shakes are given to
That also; The terrified Nations feel Heaven and Earth if you take them
Figuratively, most wonderfully Shaking about them. God shakes all Nations; and
He shakes Heaven and Earth in doing so. According to the Language of the
Orient, by Heaven and Earth, are meant Superiors and Inferiors among the People.

The Shaking of Heaven, What is this? Truly, Any Great Alteration in a
Government may be counted so. Kings are called Suns. Rulers under them are
called Stars. When Suns or Stars are Extinguished, and put out and pulled down,
and laid in the Dust; when God Covers the Sun with Blackness, and makes the
Stars dark, and brings darkness upon the Land, as it was denounced of old unto
the Land of Egypt; Surely, Heaven cannot but be shaken in it. Especially, when
such surprising Mutations fall out, that Men who are the most Faithful
Witnesses of our Savior, shall hear a great Voice from Heaven, Come up hither;
and shall put off their Sackcloth, and be advanced into Authority, and have
power over the Nations; the Heaven of those Nations must be shaken with a
Witness, in those Works of God. Astonishing Mutations came upon the Roman
Empire, when a New Set of Men, and a Good Set, had the management of it thrown
into their Hands; And it is thus painted out; Rev. VI. 12, 13. Lo, There was a
Great Earth-^^ake; and the Stars of Heaven fell (...) the Earth, and the Heaven
departed as a scroll, when it is rolled together.

But the Church State of any Nations, or People, is peculiarly the Heaven of
that People. A Settling of Churches is called, a Planting of Heavens. The
Pastors of Churches are called, The Stars of them. When Faithful Ministers are
silenced, it is expressed so; Dan. VIII. 10. A casting down of the Stars from
the Host of Heaven, and a stamping on them. The Changing of a Church State, is
a shaking of Heaven. When the Religion of a People is assaulted, their Heaven
is then shaken: And if it be the Religion of God, in that shaking of Heaven,
there are Dragons who try with their Stings, to annoy the Stars of Heaven. Or,
Suppose it a False Religion; The Abolition of Judaism, of Paganism, of Popery,
has always been with a Mighty shake of Heaven, in the Country, where the False
Religion has been abolished. Verily, To dissolve a Church State, and bring a
New Face upon a Church by Law Established, or to lay aside Constitutions of
Consequence to a Church State; This is to shake Heaven over the Heads of the
People concerned in it. The Gospel, is Eminently the Firmament of Heaven spread
over the Church of God. Where the Gospel comes to be brought in, and set up,
and spread out, as the Rule of all Administrations in the Church; It Is done with
a shaking of Heaven over the Heads of the People there.

And may not the Earth be shaken too! It may be so. Then is the Earth shaken,
when there are great Stirs among the Common People. Sore Distresses among a
People have this Description given of them; Isa. XXIV. 19, 20. The earth is
utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved
exceedingly; The earth reels to and fro like a Drunkard, and is removed like a
Cottage. Tumults, and Ferments and Uproars among a People, are a Shaking of the
Earth, as well as the Roaring of the Sea, in the Prophetic Schemes of speaking.
We Read of such Things as those; Luke XXI. 25. Upon the earth distress of
Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring. Sometimes, there are
violent Commotions among the People. There are Tendencies to quite another
Condition of Things; It may be said, The Nations are Angry; The Factions, the
Clashes, the Clamours, are full of Menaces. Now the Waters roar and are
troubled, and the Mountains do shake (the Great Ministers are frighted) with
the swelling thereof. So does God shake the Earth; and the Sea, as well as the
Dry Land, has a deep share in the Convulsions upon the Nations.

Thirdly. Deaths and Wars are Two very considerable Strokes, whereby the Great
God gives very considerable Shakes unto the Nations.

The Deaths of Chief Men give a Shake to the State which those Great Men
Supported. The Fall of Pillars makes the House to shake, at the Supports
leaving of it. And no Pillars do stand so firm, that the Mighty One, before
whom every Sampson is less than a Moth, cannot throw them down. The World
Shakes, when He throws them down. When a King died, and it was cried out, How
is the Mighty fallen? It was then said, Psalm. LX. 2. Thou haft made the Earth
to tremble. Sometimes One Life has upon it, Inexpressible Dependencies! The
frail Thread of One Life, the Affairs of whole Nations, depend upon it. The
Prince Dies; His Breath goes forth; he returns to his Earth; In that very day
his thoughts perish: And in that very Day, what a Shake is given to many
Nations! -- O Memorable Month of ANGUST, How mavelous thy Demonstrations of
it! How mavelous thy Demonstrations of it!

But, if Wars arise, -- then the Nations are yet more dreadfully Shaken, and in
the Shaking they are dashed One against another. It shakes the World, when
Things are at that sad pass: Mat. XXIV. 6, 7. Ye shall hear of Wars, and
Rumors of Wars, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom.
It is very suitably added, There shall be Earthquakes in diverse places.
Especially, If Civil Wars arise among a People, and God sets Egyptians against
Egyptians, and they fight every one against his Brother and against his
Neighbor, such a People is horribly shaken in their Divisions. It is foretold;
Hag. II. 21, 22. I will shake the Heavens and the Earth; and I will overthrow
the Throne of Kingdoms, and they shall come down every one by the Sword of his
Brother. When there were diverse Competitors for the Crown of Israel, we read;
The Earth trembled. Such Competitions bring on Shakes, the Issues whereof are
such as no Man alive could have imagined. But indeed all Wars are a Shaking and
Sifting sort of Things, unto the Nations that are involved in them. Nations are
Shaken, when Swards are Furbished, when Swards are Brandished; They are a
Troubled Sea, when there is no Peace unto them.

Fourthly. The Angels of our Glorious LORD, even His Mighty Angels, are
considerable, though invisible Instruments, in the Mighty Shakes which He gives
unto the Nations. The Shakes that are given to the World, are so many Turns,
given to the Wheels, that carry on what is a doing in the World. We are
hastening to a Kingdom that cannot be moved; But as yet we are in a World, in
all Parts whereof, [all the Four Parts!] The Wheels are moving and shaking
perpetually. And we find; Ezekiel. X. 9. The Wheels are by the Cherubims. One says
well, The Angels are capacious Wheels, that move in the great Clock of the
World. The Wheels of Providence, that Shake the World, and Change it
Marvellously are very much managed by the Ministry of the Angels, whom God has
made Ministering Spirits, to wait about the Throne of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
When a Great King, the Ravager on the Liberties of the World, was Dethroned, it
gave a Great Shake unto the World. But how was it brought about? We read; Dan.
IV. 23. A Watcher, and an Holy One, comes down from Heaven, and says, Hew the
Tree down, and destroy it. Was it not the Angel Gabriel, that helped Alexander
in Shaking the World, until it was turned upside down! I am sure, he said, He
would, no less than Two Hundred Years before it was done. The Descent of
Angels, uses to make all Tremble where they come. The Trembling of the World is
very much owing to this; The Angels Descend; and they Shake Nations, and Shake
Kingdoms, and Shake Empires, and set all a-shaking before the Lord.

It is by a Secret Work of the Glorious LORD on the Spirits of Men, that shakes
are given, and wondrous Turns brought upon the World. Our LORD secretly
disposes the Spirits of Men, to push on Amazing Changes in the Nations. Nations
are strongly and strangely Spirited, sometimes one way, sometimes another. The
Spirit of a Nation is an Irresistible Thing. It will shake down Thrones, that
seem to stand upon Rocks. It will shake a Nation out of a Slavery, as well as
into it. It will shake Idolatry into a Nation or out of it. It will bring back
abdicated Superstitions, or it will drive them out again. When the Spirit of a
Nation shall be set that way, ^n Establishment that said, Who shall bring me
down to the Ground? Shall see Obadiahs Prophecies Fulfilled upon it. But now
the ANGELS of the Glorious LORD; these have an unknown Instrumentality, in
Raising or in Laying the Spirits of Nations. In such Things, The Heavens do
Rule; that is to say, The Angels of the Heavenly World. O Bless the Lord, ye
his Angels, for the use he makes of you, in his Kingdom which Rules over all!

But our Next Enquiry must be, to the Nations. By their Prayers, they do, as it
were, Jog that Almighty Arm, that sets all a-shaking. As we read, Act. IV. 31.
When they had Prayed, the place was shaken: So when the People of God in a
Place, have been a Praying, it falls to Shaking thereupon. When the Prayers of
the Saints have been Offered, with the Incense of our Savior at the Golden
Altar, the Next News is, There are Thunderings and Lightni^ and an Earthquake;
The Great G^ shakes Heaven and Earth, with Horrend^ Concussions upon it. Yea,
sometimes a few Praying Servants of God; it may be One Isaias; by lifting up
Fervent Prayers; Yea, and in secret Places too; -- may obtain shakes upon whole
Nations, for whom they are the Remembrancers of the Lord. A Moses distressed
for the Congregation of God, may give this Account; In my Distress, I called
upon the Lord, and I cried unto my God. What follows? Then the Earth shook and
trembled; the Foundations also of the Hills moved and were shaken.

But especially, When the People of God, are under grievous Oppression; and
they sigh by reason of Bondage, and they cry, and their cry comes up to God by
reason of the Bondage^ Anon, at the Cry of the Oppressed, God so Shakes the
Nations, that at length His People have just Liberties granted unto them.
Nations are often set against the Allowance of Just Liberties, unto the more
pure Worshippers of God, and Practisers of Genuine and Primitive Christianity.
But God by shaking the Nations does perplex and confound their Interests, and
bring such Necessities upon them, that He Forces them to let His People go and
Serve Him, and not far^ the worse for doing so.

Yea, sometimes the Nations must be shaken, to prevent their Combinations to
destroy the People of God. Were the Tranquillity of the Nations uninterruped,
they would combine and unite, for the Extirpation of what they call by the Name
of Heresy. What would become of the Northern Heresy? Lord, They have taken
crafty counsel against thy People, and consulted against thy Hidden Ones; They
have said, come, let us cut them off; Their Name shall be no more in Remembran^
God finds them something else to^ shaking of them: He Rocques and She Nations,
and keeps His People Q^ doing so. [See, Jer. L. 33, 34.]

Thirdly. Our Glorious Lord sh World, that He may advance His ow^ dom in the
World. The Kingdom (...) our Savior, lies at the Bottom of the which the World
is overturned wit^

Sometimes a Reformation is to be (...) in a Nation; But no Reformation^
wrought in the Nation without for^ rough Shaking of it. When there^ of
Antichrist rivetted into a Cons^ there must be a deal of dreadful to pull it
out. There may be Ho^ have got the Antichristian Leprosy s^ rooted in them,
that they must (...) shaken down before it can be gotten

When the Walls of Jericho are^ there must be an Earthquake to tumb^ down, and
swallow them up. A^ pass on, O People of God, unto that remains for the People
of God. corrupt Hierarchy of the Jewish Na^ere fond of their Ceremonies,
where(...) Growth of Christianity suffered a woe(...) struction. For that very
cause our ^r said; I will shake not the Earth only, (...) Heaven. It was that
nothing but ^itutions of our Savior might come in ^om of what He would have to
come ^n Abrogation.

^re may be much of Chaff in the ^h of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. ^tis prophesied;
Matthew. III. 12. He, ^Fan is in His Hand, will thereughly His Floor. But verily,
it must be with ^han a little shaking, that the Fanning will be carried on.

^at I am going to Speak, I would ask ^e Attention unto it. Were I in a (...)
full of Kings, I would Speak what I ^th a Demand of a Just Attention to it.
could the Speaker, find a Voice that (...) reach as far as the Last Trumpet,
This ^t it would require a Great Attention to. ^en the Glorious LORD shakes not
the only, but also Heaven, it is [Heb. XII. 27.] That those things which cannot
be shaken may remain. There are some Excellent Things, which cannot be shaken,
but the more they are Studied, and the Wiser and the Better they are who Study
them, the more they will be approved of. And what are those Excellent Things?
They are, The MAXIMS of the EVERLASTING GOSPEL.

There are certain MAXIMS directly calculated for the Grand Intentions of,
Glory to God in the Highest, and, Peace on Earth from Good Will among men.
Those MAXIMS, -- to dig them out from that Mountain of God, our Sacred
Scriptures, and run the Oar into Wedges of Gold; a more comprehensive Service
to the Church, and the whole World, cannot at this Day be thought upon. They,
and those that adhere to them, shall one Day, become a Great Mountain, which
the whole Earth shall be filled withal.

MAXIMS there are, wherein all the Children of God are United, whatever
Different Persuasions in other matters may alienate them from One another.
MAXIMS they are, wherein all that are Cordially United, and Live accordingly,
are to be Esteemed the Children of God. All the People of God, must come to an
Explicit Union in these MAXIMS; and know no other Terms of Communion, than
these Terms of Salvation; and the Privileges, the Emoluments, all the
Expressions of Brotherly Charity, which of Right belong to all Good Men, as
well in the Church as in the State, are to be granted unto all that Embrace
these Glorious MAXIMS. A Church built upon any other Foundation than these
undoubted Sayings of our Savior, is not well-founded; No, It shall first or
last, be wonderfully Shaken, and Great will be the fall thereof! GOD will one
day bring His People to Embrace One another upon these Generous MAXIMS; and to
keep the Lesser Points in a due Subordination to them; and manage their
controversy on the Lesser Points with another Spirit, than what has been too
frequent among the Disputers of this World. And all Invasions upon the Throne
of the Great GOD in the Conscience of Man, will be abominated.

The World will not presently come to This; One Year will not bring them to it.
But it may be infallibly foretold unto you, God will go on to Shake all Nations
until they come to This. GOD will Overturn, Overturn! And, O Unrighteous
Nations, O Foolish People and Unwise; You shall never see Rest until you come
to This.

There shall be Men Qualified like, and Influenced by, the Angels of God; These
Boanerges and Sons of Commotion, shall fly through the midst of Heaven, having
this EVERLASTING GOSPEL, to Preach unto the Inhabitants of the Earth. And our
Glorious LORD will shake Heaven, and shake the Earth, and shake all Nations,
till this Gospel be complied withal. That Glorious Cry, Babylon is fallen, will
ensue upon it!

APPLICATION.
And now, O Christians, what should be our Behavior at the Times, wherein we
see our Glorious LORD so Shaking of the Nations?

I need not call upon you to look for Shaking Times: We see them, we feel them,
we are in the midst of them; we shall shortly be more than ever so. The Things
that cannot be shaken, but must be introduced, cannot be otherwise introduced.

Earthquakes without a Metaphor will be Multiplied; More horrid than any of the
past Sicilian or Italian ones. Even Geneva too has been very lately approached
with them, and a whole Village newly Swallowed up. Ominous Things they will be!
Statequakes will become yet more Universal.

When our Lord was Leading forth His People from their Egyptian Captivities and
Idolatries, there seems to have been an Earthquake assisting their Passage though
the Divided Waters. We read, Psalm. LXXVII. 18, 19. As if the Earth trembled and
shook, when the Way of God was in the Sea, and His Path in the great Waters. My
Friends, Our Lord will certainly and speedily lead forth His People, from the
midst of their worse than Egyptian Entanglements. Pardon me, that I tell you;
I am verily persuaded, we are now at last entering into an Earth quake that will
give Assistance unto it.

This I am certain of, we are bidden to look for such a Thing as that; Rev.
XVI. 18. A great Earthquake, such as has not been since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great an one.

Well, but the Enquiry must be made; In such Times, how are we to behave our
selves?

First. Let us make sure of having the Great GOD our Savior, even our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, for our Friend; under every Shaking His Friendship will be our
Safety. In Shaking Times, Luther would say, Let us go Sing the Forty-sixth
Psalm. If we are in the Favor of our Savior, we may Sing that Psalm, Oh! How
Comfortably, Oh! How Triumphantly! What though the Earth be removed? We have the
Lord of Heaven for our Friend, and we have Heaven to retreat unto. What though
the Mountains fall? We have Him for our Friend, unto whom the Biggest Mountains
are no more than the smallest Atoms; and we shall our selves be like Mount
Zion, that cannot be moved. What though the Sea roar, and swell, and rise, till
it strike the very welkin? The Lord on High, is Mightier than the Noise of many
Waters, than the Mighty waves of the Sea,

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Rock of Ages. There is no Shaking of that Eternal
Rock. Oh! Run to the Rock: Fly to the Rock! Become United unto our Savior with
a Lively Faith in him; and we are in a Felicity that Never, Never, Never can be
shaken. He says to us, My Brethren, as David said unto Abiathar, With me thou
shall be in safety.

Let us be strong Believers on. High Admirers of, our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The
Men that are so, are the Favorites of the Lord: His Mark shall be on these His
Favorites; No Shake of the World shall hurt those, that have that Mark upon
them.

Secondly. Why should not Shaking Times be Praying Times? Prayer has before now
made an Earthquake. We read, Act. XVI. 25, 26. At midnight Paul and Silas
prayed: And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the Foundations of
the Prison were shaken. Who knows, but that the true Disciples of our Lord may
now see that Great Earthquake, which will Shake the very Foundations of all the
Confinements unjustly put upon them: and ere long the Doors will be opened, and
Every ones Bonds be loosed? Certainly in such an Earthquake, and when whole
Nations are shaking, then Prayer will be a singular preservative. Prayer! Ah,
why so much Slumber, and so little Prayer, when we have the World so shaking
about us!

I have read of a Town in Switzer-land, once utterly ruined in an Earthquake,
All except one piece of an House, in which a devout Man happened then to be at
Prayer with his Family. The Decree of the Infinite GOD seems to be this; Yet
once more, I will shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. At such a Time
there is that Voice from Heaven to the Earth; Zeph. II. 2, 3. Before the Decree
bring forth; -- Seek ye the Lord, all ye Meek of the Earth.

Thirdly. When all Things are Shaking, Let it be our Consolation, that it is
our Glorious LORD, who does all that is done, and has all at His Dispose.

Who was it that said, I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and all Nations?
Our Apostle has expressly told us, It was the Lord JESUS CHRIST; Heb. XII. 26.
Whose Voice shook the Earth, at Mount Sinai; but now He has promised, -- as
you have heard.

When it is a Time for Heaven and Earth, and all Nations, to be so shaken, that
Heaven and Earth shall come together; Now, Let the Children of Zion be Joyful
in their King! O Zion, Thy King, even the Glorious Head of the Church, and He
that will not give Zion cause to say, My Lord has forgotten me: -- It Is He that
has the Ordering of all that comes to pass; And all shall be well-ordered. He
will do all things well, -- You may depend upon it! The Sentence which the
Emperor Maximilian wrote upon his Table; You may take it, and make it your
Comfort, and Feed and Live upon it; If God be for us, who can be against us?

What shall we say? O Lord, we know, that thou can do every thing. The People
of God, may need some Shakes to be given unto the World, for their Advantage;
And such as can be given by none but an Arm that can do every thing. But such a
Mighty Arm has our Savior. You read, His Voice shook the Earth. It is the
Voice of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, whom we are to see this Day upon a Threne High
and Lifted up, -- His Voice that Shakes the World. If He do but Utter His
Voice, or if He do but Speak the Word, there shall every thing be done, that
His People can wish for. We read, The Kingdoms are moved, when He Utters His
Voice, and the Earth Melts before it.

A Powerful Nimrod, that has made Nations to shake with the Terror of his Arms:
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST can easily shake such an one down into his Grave.

HE has newly done so. And I must conclude, with bespeaking of your due Respect
unto HIS Hand, in what has been done.

What has been spoken may be enough, to Introduce the REMARKS, which it may be
our Duty and Wisdom to make, on the Mighty shake of the Nations, which is to be
Observed, and Expected from the Fall of one, who has been as great a Troubler
of the Nations, as ever was in the World. -- How art thou cut down to the
Ground, which d^ast weaken the Nations! --

When the Grand Monarch of Babylon came to his end, the Spirit of God
instructed his People, to make their Acclamations upon it; How has the
Oppressor ceased! The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked. Hell from
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: -- Thy Pomp is brought
down to the Grave. Thou saiast in thy Heart, I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God; I will sit in the sides of the North; I will be like the most
High: yet thou shall be brought down to the sides of the Pit. They that see
thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man,
that made the Earth to tremble, and did shake the Kingdoms!

We ha^ ^hen the Direction of Heaven, as narrowly to look upon the fall of that
Grand Monarch, who valued himself upon being the Eldest Son of the Romish
Babylon; and consider what our Glorious God would have us to learn, or to hope,
upon (...) Occasion so great, and so greatly longed for.

Far, far would we be from any indecent Insulting the Ashes of the Dead; though
we may let fall some Terms of Justice to a Memory, which the Word of God has in
Express Terms damned unto a Putrefaction. The Tyrant, who took delight in
offering inhumane Abuses unto the Dead Bodies of the Children of God, as well
as to the Sepulchers of Princes, when, like those at Heidelbergh, they came in
his way, shall be treated by us with more of Decency, than he has any claim
unto.

Decency! -- But not such as will carry in it a Trespass on the Rules of Piety.
It will be a Trespass upon them, to forbear calling him, A very wicked man, who
was a thousand Times worse than him, whom the Prophet Ezekiel called, A prefane
and wicked Prince of Israel.

There are Men and Things, which all, that would pay a due Homage to Virtue,
ought never to mention without some Expressions of Dissatisfaction at them. And
the Historians, who relate the Actions of such Satanick Wretches, as, for
instance, the two Founders of the Grecian, and Roman Empires, as if they were
the Exploits of Heroes worthy the Illustrious Title of Conquerors, and not
rather as the Crimes of Ambitious, Rapacious, Infamous Murderers; These pay a
respect unto Vice, which ought not to be forgiven in them.

Louis the XIV. stands the very first in the List of the Men, whose Actions
will not have a just Account given of them in Histery, until the Day, wherein
the Hay, and Stubble shall be consumed.

Nor shall I now make an Essay of a Satyr upon one, who has outdone all the
Subjects of it, that ever were in the World; Yet allow me to say, With what
Eyes do you think, the Holy Angels have looked upon such a Man! Yet Allow me to
say, What is it, that the Call, Rejoice, O ye Heaven's, was made upon!

All that I Essay to do, is to employ the few Minutes, that are now left unto
me in a few Glances on some Things, which we ought not to let the Hand of God,
that has at length shaken down, a Tree of longer standing, and more baneful
Influences, than that in the Visions of the Chaldean Emperor, to pass, without
our taking some Useful Notice of them.

Instructions of a Relish beyond the Honey of Canaan are to be found in the
Carcass of the Lion, that is now torn to pieces by a Stronger than he!

Behold, O Sinful Nations, Behold, what a Scourge your Sins have brought upon
you. If it be enquired, as it was of old, Why one so unworthy of it, was placed
upon such a Throne? As it was then, so it must now be answered, The Sins of the
World made them worthy of such an one. Your Sins produced him, your Sins
prospered him; your Sins kept him alive; and not the Prayers of Popish
Idolaters for his Life; your Sins, which drowned the Voice of all the Prayers,
which the best of Men sent up to Heaven against him. The great God points you
to him, with such an Int^mation as that -- O Ass^tan, the red of my Anger, the
stuff of my Indignation; against the People of my Wrath have I given a charge
to take the sports, and to take the prey, and to tread them down as the Mire in
the Streets! Reform your Sins, O Scourgea Nations, left others be raised up to
carry on the Work of inflicting the Divine Vengeance upon you. Be more willing
to take the casy Take of your great Redeemer upon you, and submit unto the
Seepter of his Righteousness, left he deliver you up unto the Lust of hideous
Tyrants; lest that curse come still upon you, Set a wicked man over them; lest
Kings, whose Title may truly run, By the Wrath of God, may long Reign over you.

In the Conduct of the most Ungrateful among Men, there is a loud Voice from
God unto the Protestant World; Cease ye from Man; and, Put not your trust in
Princes! On the Birth of Louis XIV, the Protestants slattered themselves, that
an Adeonatus, a gracious, and a wondrous Gift of Goa was (...) unto them: they
foolishly boasted, that their Prayers had obtained the Gift. Ah! Poor People!
How terribly have you been convinced of your Delusion! From this Time, Away
with your Vain Thoughts; and look for less from Vain Men, than you use to do!

The Pratestants were they, that set, and kept the Crown on the Head of this
their Monarch; Notwithstanding this; yea, for this very Reason, [so Reason goes
with such!] he set himself to destroy the Protestants. Never had the
Protestants an Enemy, and a Destroyer like unto him! He was the first born of
those Kings, who make the Times Perilous, because Men shall be Unthankful,
and set themselves to persecute, and extirpate, and overwhelm the People, to
whom they are most of all endebted for the Thrones, which they are an eternal
Disgrace unto. Do you not overhear your Inthroned Savior calling to you; Your
faithful Adherence to me would not be requited so!

To secure a King on their side, as a Dead Weight against the Roman Catholics,
the Protestants fell into rank Torism, and made their Monarch Absolute, with a
Present of their All unto his Arbitrary dispasal, and a Promise of Obedience
without Raserve; only reserving their Consciences unto God. The Tyrant accepted
their Offer; but added, he would have the Command of their Consciences too.
And, Thank themselves, they could not then Help themselves. God from Heaven in
this Thing plainly calls unto you, O (...) People, beware of Sinful
Compliances! And methinks, We have also a sufficient Warning against all
Tory-Principles.

How much Hurt one Man may do! How much Good one Sinner destroy! It will be
found, there was very little of this whole World, but what one Way or other
fared the worse for that One Man, who is now Dead, and all his Malice dead with
him. -- Mortui non Mordent. They that have made their calculations upon, The
Desolation of France demonstrated, or have seen something of the Miseries in
which Life is endured, by the Subjects there; know a little what his own
Kingdom suffered from him. A Reflection might be made upon it, How much Good
one Man may do!

A Constantine; a -- A Day will come, when Mankind will be blessed with as
General Benefactors. Roll on apace, O Golden Age; Why tarry the Wheels of thy
Chariots!

In the mean Time, O Christianity, How shamefully have thou seen thy Name
dishonored! The style of, Most Christian, arrogated by the Greatest Adversary
of a Glorious Christ, and of real Christianity, that ever was in the World!
One, whose Debaucheries have been in the most Public Manner avowed by him; and
yet, Most Christian! One, who broke his Faith in more frequent and flagrant
Instances, than ever any Prince among the worst of Infidels; and yet, Most
Christian! One, who had the Guilt of more Blood lying upon him, than ever any
Man, that breathed upon the Face of the Earth; and yet, Most Christian! Most
Christian, and yet invade, and ravage with Fire and Sword, the Christian
Provinces in his Neighborhood; and in his Declaration of War against those
Provinces, have the ridiculous Vanity to say, That his Glory was the Cause, for
which be made the War.

Such a Murderer not only to be called, Most Christian, but also to accept the
Title of, The King of Glory! when it was with a most shocking Blasphemy given
unto him.

When shall we see the Rescue of that Worthy Name from such gross
Misapplications! It must be asserted, and there will be a Time, when the
Assertion shall be executed; No Impious Man is to be accounted A Christian: The
Practice of Imprety, will forfeit the Name of a Christian.

To see such a Man descend, Sicca Morte! -- A Man of such Inhumanities, and of
so Vicious a Character, yet shining to a great Old Age, in all the Grandeurs of
Empire! A Man of such Treacheries, and such Cruelties, and such Matchless
Outrages against Heaven, and Pillages upon Mankind, go on prosperously to a
great Old Age! Such an one sit upon a Throne longer than any one, that our
common Records have ever mentioned! This Man brought by long Wars to the very
Point of an astonishing Revolution; and yet by the Ministry of that very
Nation, which had most humbled him, suddenly restored into a condition to give
Law unto the whole World, and put into the Possession of a greater Empire, and
Revenue, than ever the Old Assyrian pretended unto! By'nd by to die quietly in
his Bed: not expire with the Horrors, and Outcries of a Dying Maximinus. One
cannot but with some concern make Job's Enquiry; Wherefore does the wicked
live, become old, yea, mighty in Power; their seed established in their sight
with them! [On the Throne of Spain it is so!]

These Things would be Inexplicable, if there were not Another World; and a Day
to come, wherein God will Judge the World. This Thought sets all to Rights. In
the Circumstances of the French King the Glorious God invites us unto this
Thought; compells us unto it. It is come to this, If there be a just God, there
must be another World! A Voice goes forth from Varsailles, and, Lo a Mighty
Voice, that reaches to the Ends of the Earth; Children of Men, There is another
World; and a Judgment to come, which is to be trembled at!

But what is now to be looked for! Upon the Demise of the old Babylonian
Monarch, the next Thing was, The whole Earth is at Rest, and is quiet; they
break forth into Singing. But it must not yet come to that, God will yet shake
all Nations before it comes to that! However a Mighty Turn to the Disadvantage
of the Antichristian Interest is now to be looked for.

The Greatest Persecuter, that ever the Church of God had in the World, is now
called away by the Almighty JESUS, whom he has Persecuted. All the Teu
Primitive Persecutious have been outdone by that, which the French Molech has
carried on; out done in the vast Numbers; and in the horrible Successes; and in
the barbarous Cruelties, of the Executions. It may be hoped, that the Miserable
People, who are to this Day languishing under these unparalleled Persecutions,
may see some Relaxations of them. He that Opened not the House of his
Prisoners, is dragged into his Prison. We that have sent up thousands of ardent
Prayers to Heaven for it, cannot but be filled with the Praises of our God,
when we shall hear proclaimed Liberty to the Captives, and the Opening of the
Prison to them that are bound. Yea, the Persecuted Religion of our Savior
shall ever long revive, and expand, and flourish; and they that have ragear
against it shall find, that they have Imagined a vain thing. --

This I am sure of; There is a Day coming, when the Spirit of Persecution shall
be shaken out of the Church; and all Parties of Christians, even the Uppermost,
as well as the rest every where, shall be ashamed of it: Persecuting Laws, and
Persecuting Tests, will be no more known in the World.

Such Flourishes as those with which the Great Austin, (for a Disposition to
Oppress, will make a Wise Man talk and act like a Mad Man,) did in a
contradiction to his Former and Wiser Sentiments, defend the Persecution of the
Donatists; the Reading whereof was that which [horrible to be Spoken!] brought
over the French Tyrant unto that infandous Persecution, which yet, we may hope,
will issue no worse than Di^clestans! -- I say, such fallacious Colors and
such bewitching ones, will ere long lose their efficacy, and the Party that
shall be Uppermost, will no more be under the power of the strong Delusion.

It has been Frequently, and very Publicly, and with great Assurance foretold
unto you, That all the Attempts from the House of Bourbou, as well as those
from the House of Austria, in grasping after the Universal Monareby of Europe,
shall come to nothing; A Blast from God upon them shall defeat them, shall
confound them wonderfully. The boundless Ambition of France made very strong
Efforts toward that Universal Monarchy; but how remarkably have they been
blasted of God? Several Times the late King has had an Opportunity in his hands
to have seized upon it. But by an Amazing Infatuation from God upon him, he
slipped his Opportunity. And now his Mortality, and God beginning the Vintage of
his Vengeance on the Antichristian Interest, with cutting off the Spirits of
the Princes in his Family, gives a Mortal Blew to all such Expectations.

Instead thereof, it has been long since foretold, that there shall be a Great
Earthquake, wherein the Tenth Part of the Papacy shall fall; and the
Tremendous, and Stupendous Earthquake shall issue in wondrous Glory to the God
of Heaven. France was in time the Tenth, and Last of those Ten Kingdoms, which
have composed the Great City of the Mystical Babylon. Who can tell but now may
be the time for that Great Earthquake, which will be followed with the Changes,
that are to be hastened upon all the Ten Kingdoms; and the Vials of the Wrath of
the Almighty to be poured out upon all the Antichristian Interest! God grant it
may be so!

The Deliverances of the British Nation, and of the whole Protestant Interest,
and, O New England, thy Deliverances too, how much are they the Immediate Work
of God! -- Brought about by the Immediate Hand of God! -- Brought about in the
most Critical Moments, that could have been imagined -- The Enemy said, my Lust
shall be satisfied upon them O our God, Thou did then stretch out Thy Right
Hand; the Earth swallowed them!

The vast Things done for Unworthy Nations, and for out selves of all the most
Unworthy, in what has now fallen out, Sirs, We know not now, but we shall know
hereaster.

This I will say unto you; Doubtless there has now been seen the Kingdom of
Darkness in the most horrid Exhibition of it, that ever was in the World;
because the most Glorious Reverse of it is going ever long to be Exhibited But
how Long, O Lord, Holy and True! --

However I hope no Wise, and Good Man will count it Ill Manners in us, to
fulfill that Word this Day, Prove. XI. 10. When the Wicked perish there is a
shouting upon it. Certainly, when the People of God were Singing the Praises of
God, because a Bloody Pharaoh was dashed in pieces by the right Hand of the
Lord, he would have been thought an odd sort of an Israelite, who should have
remonstrated upon it; Since Pharaoh is dead, you ought not to blacken the
Memory of so great a Man! If he did in any thing the part of a Bad Man, there
have been worse than he. And I know not, why we should be so tender to the
Memory of his Antitype, as to distinguish our solves into a suspicious Cha^er,
by Fuvenrable Expressions of a Vile (...) or to forbear saying on the present
Occasion, O Lord, Thou art Glorious in Holy(...) and Fearful in Praises!

The very First Time that an Hallelujah occurs in the Bible, it is upon (...),
-- Let the Sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and let the Wicked be no more.
Among all the Depredators upon Mankind, I suppose, they that wish well to the
Throne of King GEORGE, Our most Rightful and Lawful King, Whom GOD Long
Preserve, and unto the whole Protestant Interest in the World, can hatdly call
to mind any One whose Departure did more deserve to be Celebrated with an
Hallelujah.

FINIS.

