A MODEL For Erecting a Bank of Credit; WITH A DISCOURSE In Explanation thereof.

Adapted to the Use of any Trading Country, where there is a Scarcity of
MONEYS: More Especially for His Majesty's Plantations in AMERICA.

Quo Communius co Melius. LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1688. Reprinted at
BOSTON in New England, in the Year, 1714.

The Preface to the READER.
THE Difficulties, which the Trade of this Province labors under, by reason of
the Scarcity of Money, having rendered it necessary that some Expedient be found
out to supply that Deficiency: A Scheme of a Bank of Credit founded upon a Land
Security, (...) been accordingly Projected; and will be humbly offered to the
Consideration of the General Assembly, at their next Session.

Now, in as much as things of this Nature (though recommended in Europe, by long
Experience of their general Usefulness and Benefit, to the Places where they
are Established) yet may be here in hazard of not meeting with that Regard and
Encouragement they deserve, for want of a due Information concerning them: And
there having been many Years since Printed in London, a Projection of much the
same Nature with that prepared here; (though not so Beneficial to the Public, or
on so Solid a Foundation,) yet setting forth in a Plain and Familiar way, not
only the Nature, but the Feazibleness and Utility of such a Fund of Credit; it
was judged Convenient to Re-print the same here, that so all Persons might have
an Opportunity of gaining an Insight into it: It being rationally Concluded,
That such a Bank being made to appear to be of Necessity to us in our present
Circumstances, and of great and general Benefit; there is no Publick-spirited
Person but will set to his helping Hand, to Promote the Establishment of the
same.

Boston, Feb. 26. 1713/4.
A MODEL for Erecting a Bank of Credit Lumbard and Exchange of Moneys* Founded
on Lands, Goods, and Merchandises: To be undertaken and managed by Persons of
good Reputation, Prudence and Estates, in a voluntary Partnership, as other
Merchantly Affairs: Adapted for the Use of any Country, or Trading part, where
there is a Scarcity of Moneys; and, in want thereof, they are constrained to
Truck, or Barter by Commodities, and c. wherein is Discoursed,

1. Some things by way of Premise, touching Banks in General. 2. The Definition
of such a Bank. 3. The Constitution. 4. The necessary Rules to be observed. 5.
The particular Advantages thereof, to those that shall voluntarily deal with
such a Partnership. 6. Some of the most material and pertinent Queries and
Objections thereto, Resolved and Answered. 7. The Conclusion by may of
Animadversion, upon the whole: Briefly.
Of the First, viz. Some things premised (...) Introduction, touching Banks in
general.
MOney, whether Gold or Silver, is but a measure of the value of other things;
yet has, for a long Succession of Ages (especially in the Civilized and
Trading part of the World) obtained to be the usual, and best known means of
Interchange.

This measure and way of Interchange, was originally occasioned by the
experimented inconveniences of common Barter; in which way, unless both the
Parties dealing, have like occasion, reciprocally, of each others Commodities,
the less necessitous Over-reaches the greater, by imposing the price of both,
to his own advantage, and the others detriment, which is not equal; nor can
there be Equality where there is no common Standard between them.

But, whether the Mines fail, or Men have not been so foreseeing and
industrious to bring in, to most Countries, a sufficiency of Money or Bullion,
wherewith to manage their increasing Trades, or, that Traders, for want of
other Returns, have been necessitated, for Balance of the Surcharge of Goods
imported, to remit the Coyns of some Countries into others: Or, for other
Causes (not necessary on this occasion to be further inquired into) it is now so
hard to come by, in some places, for carrying on of Trade, to answer the
vastness of Men's attempts, and aims of increase in Merchandise, as that its
found, in many Countries, insufficient in this Age of the World: And that has
put diverse Persons and Countries, upon contrivances how to supply that
Deficiency, by other Mediums; some of which have happily pitched upon that of
Banks, Lumbards, and Exchange of Moneys by Bills, which have thriven with them.

The two former of these, viz. Banks and Lumbards, have been set on foot in
diverse Trading Countries, by their respective Public Undertakings, and have
succeeded to their abundant Enriching. Perhaps others have thought, that would
have occasioned the overflowing of Moneys amongst them: Especially if they
raised the Values of Gold and Silver above the common Standard; but as they
have been mistaken, or their Surfeit of Trade has obscured the visibility of
it; and protracted more rational Considerations of Redressing, till it has
proved almost Fatal, to the impoverishing of their Countries: So the other have
really experimented, that their Banks have been, as well with other Countries,
as amongst themselves, of greater Value than the Species of Gold and Silver:
And yet, such Places drain away the said Species from the other, who under
those mistaken apprehensions have Courted it, as the only real good thing for a
Country.

The Third, viz. that of Exchange of Moneys, has been for the most part
managed by the respective Merchants of all places; who in their particular
Dealings and Correspondences (fore-laying Advantages to themselves thereby)
have unaccountably controlled it, and vary it often, in each Annual Revolution.

It Is not to be doubted, but that all Three of these may be accommodated and
improved, to the Public Advantage of any Country: Especially, if managed in
Partnership by Private Hands, being persons of known Integrity, Prudence and
Estates: subjecting the annual Profits accruing thereby to the answering the
Injury, damage, or loss, by their undertaking.

The best Foundation for such an Attempt, is, that of Real and Personal
Estates, instead of the Species of Gold and Silver. For, as a Bank of Moneys is
liable to many casualties and hazards; so, the hoarding up of Moneys in Banks,
necessitates the taking out the more Bills; which is one Malady this Proposed
Bank will cure.

We shall therefore, at present, begin with, and principally discourse of the
two first of these: viz. The Bank of Credit, as it may be rendered susceptible
of the Second, viz. The Lumbard, conjunct: accounting both the one and the
other to be founded as aforesaid, viz. On Lands or Real Estates mortgaged, and
staple durable Goods, and Merchandises deposited: such as any Countries
Products and Manufactures will by Art and Industry produce and furnish.

Here might be also discoursed, A Lumbard for the Poor, by some called, Mons
Pietatis: But that is fitter to be the Handmaid of the other; for, 'twill be too
poor to encourage an undertaking by it self, or for a beginning: Neither will
there be any such necessity thereof, when this Bank is settled; forasmuch as
this will employ most of those, who are usually maintained in Idleness, if they
will betake themselves to Industry, at such moderate wages as would enable them
to live comfortably, without exposing their Imployers to like Poverty with
themselves. And besides, this Bank of Credit and Lumbard, when understood, and
received in any Country with general Approbation, will in due time render
that, as also the Third, viz. that of the Exchange of Moneys by Bills, the more
intelligible, and as useful.

Of the second Particular, viz. The definition of such a Bank.
A Considerable number of Persons, some of each Rank, Trade, Calling and
Condition, especially in the principal Place or Places of Trading in any
Country, Agree voluntarily to Receive as ready Moneys, of and from each other,
and any Persons in their ordinary dealings, Bank-bills of Credit, Signed by
several Persons of good Repute, joined together in a Partnership, given forth
on Lands of good Title mortgaged, and staple unperishing Goods and
Merchandises, deposited in fitting places to be appointed by the Partnership
for that purpose; to the value of about one half, or two thirds of such
respective Mortgages and Deposits: Which said Bills, through their experimented
usefulness, become diffused by mutual consent; and passing from one hand to
another, in a kind of Circulation, and under reputation of so certain a Fund,
have at least equal Advantages with the Current Money or Coin of any Country,
attending them, to all who become satisfied to deal with them.

Q. But it may be said by some, This is a very brief Account, and requires
further Explanation. We are yet Strangers to the Nature, and requisite
Constitution of a Bank of Credit, and what lies on us to do, in order to our
being made partakers of any benefits or advantages thereby, to such as shall
voluntarily comply therewith; nor do we see clearly our Security in so doing,
nor upon what terms. Pray inform us of these things, so far as we may be safely
guided into the way, and unto the end of it. Also, in case this Bank should
terminate, how we shall be dealt withal, in the closing up of Accounts, so as
may be without damage, either to the Bank, or to our Selves. We doubt not but
you have as well Considered the End as the Beginning. Though if it prove useful,
we can see no cause why a thing of so great Advantages as are suggested, should
procure any persons ^ll-will, or Weariness of it. And we are also satisfied,
that an Affair of this nature, wherein the Persons and Estates of so many shall
be involved (as it seems probable will be where it once gets footing) cannot
suddenly (...) knocked off, but with inconvenience.

Answ. The clearing these Doubts you will find in the particulars following.
Therefore now,

Of the third Particular, viz. The Constitution of this Bank.
IT is proposed that there be One and Twenty persons (or less) in the
Partnership of this Bank: whereof Seven to be called Principal Managers; Who,
or any Three or more of them may have the power of managing and governing the
whole affair, according to the Constitution and Rules thereof; and Fourteen
Deputies to be employed by them as Accomptants, Surveyors, Appraisers,
Store-keepers, and c. All of them to be persons of good and general Reputation,
for Integrity, Prudence and Estates: But, forasmuch as, at the first entrance
upon such an affair, it may not be needful to engage so many; that any Seven of
them (more or less) may be conceived sufficient to begin the same; and manage
it, until, by the coming on of Business, it shall be judged necessary and
encouraging, to settle the Full, or some greater Number of them. These may all
be engaged by Articles of Agreement, and Covenants in Partnership, to attend
thereon, and be responsible for their doings, according to such Constitution
and Rules in that behalf.

These are to receive all Proposals from any persons touching their having such
Credit there-out as they shall desire upon their said Estates of Lands or Goods
respectively* and to contract and agree with them therein* a^ such Values, and
for such Time (...) shall judge the Security proposed of either (...) to draw
up, and perfect such (...) Mortgages, Grants and (...) thereof as Lands or
Goods respectively (...) require; and perfect the Counterparts thereof, ^o the
Mortgagers and Depositors.

They are also to cause the said Mortgages and Deposits to be laid up and
stored, respectively, in as safe and convenient Rooms, and, Warehouses, and c.
as shall be without exception, to prevent damage of Weather, Robbery, Fire,
Water, or Vermin of any kind, whereby they may be impaired, or dampnified, and
all this, under the trust and custody of such numbers of the said Partners, as
no opportunity can be taken to impair or lessen the Security, unless they
should all agree therein; which cannot reasonably be imagined being such as are
proposed. But, for the better Security thereof, there may be continual Watching
on all such places; and it will be the Interest of all persons, any way
concerned in the affairs and profits of such a Bank, to be careful to prevent,
and to give Advertisement of any attempt made to the impairing and prejudicing
thereof, for that their livelihood and dependences will much consist in their
preserving it in the greatest Repute; which upon the least violation, by those
who are engaged in the management and trust thereof, will be utterly lost, and
the Bank fall to the Ground.

These Partners aforesaid, must also enter into and oblige themselves by
Covenants to, and with other Persons to be called Assessors of the Bank, and
Conservators of the Constitution, Rules and Instructions to be observed in the
management thereof, for their diligence and faithfulness, in the Discharge and
Execution of their respective trusts, according to the said Constitution: and
inviolably to observe the same, and all the Rules thereof.

The said Assessors have also the Oversight and Control of the whole Affair:
To see the same be so managed: and to that end are daily to inspect the
Management thereof; and that the said Rules be duly observed on both parts,
viz. as well on the part of the persons dealing with them, as of the Managers
themselves, in every branch of the Bank, that all be done with justice and
Impartiality between them; to settle differences, in case any happen; and in
the absence of the Managers, may supply that defect, by their Personal
transacting the same things, or allowing others as their Deputies. Also,

Each of the said Partners must deposit Moneys and other Estate in the Bank as
a Stock or Fund, of their own; which be a further Security and Obligation upon
them, for their upright dealings; For thereby every of themselves become
Personally Interested, and concerned to be careful in every thing, that they
keep the Rules; and all Persons concerned in the yearly Profits thereof are
liable, according to the Constitution, to answer the damages, as far as their
respective shares thereof extend.

Of the fourth Particular, viz. The necessary Rules to be observed in this Bank.
1. I N primis, That the Partners in the Management of the affairs of the said
Bank do ^it in some convenient Place, of the chief Trading Town of each
Country, from day to day, and at such hours as the business and occasions
thereof shall require; to receive Proposals from any persons, touching their
having such Credit as they shall desire; and for drawing up and perfecting such
Bank-bills, Mortgages, Bills of Sale and Defezances thereof, as Lands or Goods
respectively shall require: Also for giving Information and Satisfaction
concerning the Security, Benefits and Advantages accruing thereby, to such as
shall desire to deal with them therein; and to take Subscriptions for that
purpose.

2. Item, That whatsoever person shall propose to Mortgage or Deposit any
staple Goods or Merchandises, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of a clear and
good Title, to the said Partnership, may have such and so many Bills delivered
to him as shall amount to about the Value or Sum of one half, or two thirds of
the said Estates; or more or less, according as his Occasions shall require,
and the nature of the Depositors security will admit. Paying for the use of the
said Bills, after the rate of Four Pounds per Cent. per Annum, in like Bills,
at the end of every Six Months, for so long time as he and they shall agree for
the same.

3. Item, That if at the Expiration of the Term agreed for, the Mortgager or
Depositor shall desire the continuance thereof, for such further time as the
Partnership shall judge the nature thereof will admit, the same shall be
allowed upon the same Terms; and if any person shall desire to redeem them
sooner than the time agreed on, he shall have liberty so to do, paying only for
such time as they continue deposited or unredeemed. And shall b^ allowed to pay
in any even Sums (not being under Ten Pounds) in part thereof, if he shall
think fit so to do, to lessen his Debt and Charges.

4. Item, That the Redemption thereof be by Bank Bills of Credit, or such other
Deposits as the Partnership shall approve of. But if by Moneys in Specie, that
there be an Addition of Forty Shillings more in every Hundred Pounds paid in
Money, than in the said Bills: For they desire not the engrossing of Coin, or
streightning men's Occasions thereby.

5. Item, That if it shall happen that any Payments shall be paid in ready
Money, such persons as having any of the said Bills in their hands, which they
would have Exchanged to answer their occasions for Money, and shall seasonably
desire the same, shall be accommodated therewith, upon the delivery up of Bills
to such Value.

6. Item, That there be One or more persons allowed by the Partnership, in the
nature of Merchant-brokers, to Correspond between the persons who have, and who
want Moneys, and Bills respectively, to assist their respective Occasions.

7. Item, That if any person shall not Redeem his Pledge, or Pay his Interest
at the respective times agreed on (being of Goods or Personal Estate, the
continuance whereof may be hazardous) the Partnership, giving Notice thereof,
may Sell the same at the best Rates they can get, either in ready Money, or
Bank-bills, rendering the overplus to the Depositor.

8. Item, That if any Person be Robbed of, or lose any Bill or Bills, by
accidents of Fire, Water or otherwise; he may have them renewed, if he
forthwith apply to the Partnership, and make a voluntary Oath thereof, before a
Magistrate, expressing the Number, Value and Date of each Bill or Bills; and
securing the Partnership against all after demands for the same Bills: It
appearing by the Bank-books, that such Bill or Bills were issued thereout, and
have not been returned.

9. Item, That all Bank Bills of Credit be Signed by two or more of the said
Partners, (whereof one to be a principal Manager) who are thereby held, to
oblige themselves, and all and every their Partners of the said Bank, to accept
the same for so much Current Moneys as shall be in them respectively mentioned,
in Payment, for Redemption or Purchase of any Estate in the said Bank,
according to the Rules thereof: and that all such Bills be duly entered, in
Books to be kept for that purpose, and the Indented Counter-part thereof filed,
before the same be issued.

10. Item, That all Goods deposited, be laid up and stored in such safe and
convenient Rooms, Warehouses or Cellars, Yards or Docks respectively; for
preventing damage of Weather, Robbery, Imbezlement, Fire, Water, or Vermin of
any kind, whereby they may be impaired, and be under such custody and continual
care, as will probably render them more safe than in any Persons particular
Custody, or Warehouse.

11. Item, That the Charge of Ware-house-room be reasonable, with respect to
the bulkiness or value of the Deposit; and be agreed upon between the Parties
to, and inserted in, each Contract. In which respect it will be easier to many,
than to hire Warehouses of their own.

12. Item, That all Persons having any Deposits in Bank-ware-houses, and c. may
have liberty, at seasonable hours, and in the presence of known Persons, to be
entrusted for that purpose, to view their Goods, that they be not imbezled, or
dampnified, and to provide against the same: Also to show them to their
Chapmen; and shall be assisted therein by the Romagers or Porters employed by
the Partnership.

13. Item, That in case the Creditors of this Bank shall agree to desire, and
accordingly Declare in Writing, That there be a Determination put thereto: Or
if on any other account whatsoever, the Determination thereof shall be judged
necessary, by the Proposers and Managers of this Bank, and so declared in
Writing (which cannot be without allowance and ascertaining of a reasonable
Time betwixt the said Creditors and Partnership for closing up the same, and
the Accounts thereof, so as may be without damage to any or either of them:)
That, as no Person is or shall be compelled to accept Bank-bills of Credit,
unless he shall voluntarily agree so to do, and for no longer time, nor
otherwise than he shall so consent: So, no man paying his praemium and charges
aforesaid, for the Credit he has, shall be compelled to Redeem his Pledge,
being of Personal Estate, sooner than the time contracted for, and the nature
of the Deposit shall require: And to the end the Mortgager of Lands, of
unquestionable good Title, may not be distressed, to his undoing, in case he
should, by reason of such Declaration, be suddenly called upon to Redeem the
same, (which may be impossible for him to do in some, Years, through the scarcity
of Moneys,) That all and every Mortgager of Lands, in such case, shall or may
have and take Six Years Time, from and after such Declaration aforesaid, to be
allowed unto him, his Heirs and Assigns, for Redemption of his Lands; he or
they paying after the rate of Six Pounds per Cent. per Annum, in ready Moneys,
at the end of every Six Months, for the continuance of the Credit he had
thereupon, from such Time as the said Declaration shall be perfected, until he
shall Redeem the same: And that the Partners of this Bank shall or may have and
take one full Years time more, from the Expiration of the said Six Years, to be
allowed unto them, for Selling the said Lands, or such of them as shall not,
within the said Six Years, be Redeemed: whereby they may be enabled to Receive
in, and Exchange all Bank-bills then granted forth, into the now Current Coin
or Moneys of this Country, or other Moneys, being not of more intrinsique
Value than what now passes: Or otherwise sati^ie for the same by such
proportions of the said remaining Lands or other Effects, as shall be judged to
be of equal Value: Paying to all the Creditors who shall then have any Bills in
their hands, after the same rate of Interest for so long time, after Publishing
the said Declaration, as the said Bills shall remain in the said Creditors
hands Unoccupied; with Deduction and Allowance only of the Praemium contracted
for, as aforesaid; and that such Bank-bills, as before such Declaration made,
have been given forth, upon the Real or Personal Securities aforementioned
which remain in the Possession of the said Bank, may and shall be esteemed, and
pass as current Moneys, of the Value of the present Coin, in all Receipts and
Payments whatsoever, during the said Term.

14. Item, That the foregoing Rules be attended and observed by all and
singular Persons concerned therein, and who shall propose to deal with, and
accept the Bills of Credit issued by the Managers of the said Bank of Credit,
Lumbard and Exchange of Moneys proposed to be erected in any Place, and managed
by persons in Partnership, as other Merchantly affairs.

Of the fifth Particular, viz. The Particular Advantages of such Persons as
shall voluntarily deal with the said Partners, in these affairs; which will
appear in several Instances.
First Instance.
A Country Chapman has Lands, suppose worth to be sold for 400 l. and being
willing to enlarge his Trade and Dealings, or make Improvement on his Lands, as
far as his estate will enable him. Or having bought Goods, which he is
indebted, and cannot otherwise pay for, he Mortgages his Land to the
Partnership for 200 l. more or less; and thereupon receives several Bank-bills
of Credit, for 200 l. and c. of several Values from Twenty Shillings, and so
upwards, to answer his Occasions.

With these he buys such Goods as he pleases, or pays his Debts for what he
formerly bought of the Wholesale Shopkeeper, or Ware-house-keeper, in such
Town or Towns of Trade as shall fall into this way of Dealing; and, having
Bank-bills to deliver for them, which are of better Value by 40 s. in the 100
l. than Moneys, with this Society, as is herein evinced; he buys much Cheaper
than he could upon his own Credit, or with Moneys in Specie.

The Shopkeeper goes to the Merchant, who thus agrees, and buys of him other
Goods, with the same or other like Bills; wherein he reaps the same advantage
as he gave his Chapman.

The Merchant buys Corn, Beef, Pork, Fish, Hops, Lumber, Pitch, Tarr, Rozin,
Skins, Furs, or any other of the Countries Products or Manufactures, of the
Husbandman, Grazier, Artificer, or Maker thereof.

The Husbandman, and c. If a Farmer of Lands, pays his Rent, and purchases more
young Cattle of his Neighbor, for Breed or Fatting. Or,

If an Owner of Land, and has not sufficient Stock to improve it, he also
Mortgages his Land, and has Credit to furnish himself. Or,

If he has sufficient Stock, and perhaps more than his present Farm can
maintain, he has his eye upon a Neighboring Farm, or piece of Land that would
be Sold; he Mortgages his own Land in the Bank, and has Credit to buy the
other.

If then he want Stock, he may also Mortgage the Farm or piece of Land last
purchased; and have Credit to enable him fully to Improve and Stock both,
Whereby he doubles his Yearly advantages, and if he can then content himself to
live as frugally, and be as industrious as before, he may soon compass to pay
off his Debt, and redeem his Land. Or, he may continue the Credit he ha^, and
take out more upon the Additional improvement; and thus increase his Purchases
and Estates, as long as such an help is afforded.

Second Instance.
The like may be done for carrying on the opening and working in any Mines,
Minerals or Quarreys of Stone, Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper, and c. thus, viz. The
Mine and Lands wherein the same is, may be Mortgaged as aforesaid, to supply
the Owner thereof with Bills of Credit, for paying his Workmen, in any Sum of
Twenty Shillings, or above.

As fast as any of these Metals, and c. are wrought fit for Sale, if a Chapman
be wanting, the Metal may be brought into the Bank, and the Owner receive
Bank-bills to the value of about two thirds thereof, as aforesaid, to enable
him to proceed on his Works: And the Metal lying in Bank is there readier for a
Market than elsewhere, in his own Private-house or Warehouse, at very
reasonable rates for lying there, and may with allowance of the owner, be sold
in his absence, by the Merchant-broker before mentioned, at such current Rates
as he shall set, and he become Creditor for so much to be discompted or paid
him, whenever he shall call for it.

Third Instance.
A Weaver of Cloth, Serge, or Linen, and c. is employed in any Workhouse
erected, or to be erected, to carry on those respective Manufactures: Also
other Manufactures, and Artificers, in Rope-making, Cables, Rigging, Sails,
Anchors, or any other Materials for the Fishing-trade, Merchants, or building
of Ships, and c.

The Owner of such Workhouse, or Materials respectively, consents to Mortgage
the same, for One or Two Hundred Pounds, more or less, in Bank-bills, as the
Work shall require, and the Value of the House or the Materials will admit.

With these Bills, the Work-master or Overseer, buys Wool, Worsted, Yarn,
Hemp, Flax, Dying-stuffs, Iron, Timber, Lumber, and c. of the Merchant,
Ware-house-keeper, Countryman, or other Seller; and finishes 40, 60, or 100,
pieces, and c. more or less of any of the said Commodities; which when wrought
up for a Market; if he want a Chapman, he brings into the Bank Warehouses, as
aforesaid; or such Yards, Docks, or other Places, as they shall appoint or
agree: Takes up new Credit upon them, and leaves them there to be Sold, at his
own rates, as aforesaid. Or,

A considerable parcel of Wool, Cotton, Yarn, Flax, Hemp, Oil, Dying-stuffs,
or other Goods for his use, are offered to Sale; he may pay one third thereof
by his Wrought-up-goods Unsold, and bringing these Commodities into the Bank,
may receive Bills of Credit for paying the other two thirds; which he may take
out, in parcels, as he brings in any new wrought up Goods, or has occasion to
use them for working up more; and the Bank-ware-houses will be to him as
Black-well Hall, etc. in London to the Clothiers, to assist his Sale of them
without his trouble: For thither will all Merchants have encouragement to come,
to seek supplies for Transportation, and find Goods always ready. Other
Instances might be multiplied, but by these it appears,

1. That the Manufacturer, and c. loses no time in looking out a Chapman.

2. Is always furnished with Credit to buy his Materials at the best hand.

3. The Merchant never trusts, nor Warehouse keeper: Or, if he do, the plenty
of Bills expedits his Chapmans Sale, and consequently his Payments. Whereby,

4. He has encouragement and stock presently to look out for more of the same,
or other useful Merchandises.

5. Sends forth the said Metals, Clothes, Stuffs, Linen, and c. amongst other
Merchandises of the Product of his Country, or Imported.

6. Makes return of Bullion, Moneys, or other useful Goods, which are presently
bought off with Bank-bills. Or,

7. He may store them up in Bank Warehouses, and receive present Credit,
wherewith to send out again And,

8. Thereby be enabled (at least) to double, or treble his yearly dealings, and
receive proportionable advantages. This,

1. Increases and quickens Merchandising and Trade.

2. Promotes Shipping and Navigation. Which,

3. Increases the Public Duties, and consequently the Revenues.

4. Imploys the Poor in the Minings and Manufactures forementioned.

5. They get Moneys by these Employments.

6. That inables them to buy up all necessaries for Clothing, Victuals, paying
of Debts, and c.

7. This helps the Consumption of, as well their own Commodities, as other
imported Goods and Merchandises: for no Man, that has wherewith to buy, will
go naked or be hungry, and c.

8. This helps to civilize the Ruder sort of People; and incourages others to
follow their Example in Industry and Civility.

9. Thus all sorts of Persons become enabled to live handsomely, and out of
Debt, and that prevents multiplicity of Lawsuits, and Troubles to the
Government: but none of these advantages may be expected, out of the small
Pittance of Cash, that now is, ever was, or likely will be in any Country,
unless assisted in Trade, and enriched by the help this Bank proposes. And so
we pass to the Consideration

Of the sixth Particular, viz. The answering some few of the most material
Pertinent Queries, and Objections touching this Bank, viz.
Q 1. C An I have Monyes for Bank-bills, when I have occasion?

Answ. 1. It Is not propounded to be a Bank of Moneys (which is liable to
inexpressible and unforeseen hazards) but of Credit to be given forth by Bills;
not on Moneys advanced, as in other Banks; but (on Lands or Goods, as
aforesaid,) to supply such as cannot get Moneys (by reason of its scarcity)
with whatsoever may be had for Moneys. Yet,

Answ. 2. As often as any persons Redeem their Lands, or Goods, they must do it
in Bank-bills, or with Moneys. If in ready Moneys, the Partnership may exchange
Bills therewith, to such as desire it; as is before provided by the Rules.

Answ. 3. However, this Bank is no occasion of streightning men that would have
Moneys; but leaves them free; and in this case, the Merchant-brokers of the
Bank will be helpful, between those who have and who want Moneys, and Bills
respectively; as is likewise aforementioned in the said Rules. But,

Answ. 4. If it be made to appear to you, that others who have Moneys, will be
willing to change your Bank-bills into those Species of Gold and Silver, and
thank you for offering them the occasion (though the Bank Partnership do it not)
you will have no cause to decline the other advantages proposed: Especially if you
may both be gainers by the Exchange. Now, if I owed you 500 l. to be paid in
Silver, which I could not do, but should propose to pay you in Gold, at the
intrinsique Coined Value, which if you part with again will yield you Five
Pound profit, or more: Would you then refuse Gold?

Obj. But how will you apply this, to make it Credible? Sol. Thus, Whoever has
any Payment to make in Bank, which (in probability if such Bank take effect in
any Country) will be every Man that deals in above Twenty Shillings at a time)
will find, that we must pay Forty Shillings more, in every Hundred Pounds of
ready Money, than in Bank-bills of Credit; as per the forementioned Rules of
the Bank) which is about Five-pence benefit to the Exchanger, in every 20. s.
No doubt then of having Moneys (by a little inquiry of the Merchant-broker) at
the Value contained in the Bills, of all such as must redeem their Mortgages,
and Deposits. But,

Bills, wherever Banks have been erected (though Money Banks) have always been of
better Value than Moneys in Specie. Whereof three Reasons may be given.

(1.) For the ease of Compting and Carriage; and preventing damage to the
Receiver, by Counterfeit, Clipped, Light or Base Coin: (Which is obvious to all.)

(2) For safety in Traveling, Laying up, and c. As visible as the other.

(3.) For the advantage that is to be made by the Exchange, on the account of
such Conveniences. Whereof take two Examples, viz.

(1.) The Bank-bills of Holland are ordinarily better than Moneys, by at least
Three Pounds per Cent. And,

(2.) Those in Venice, by Twenty Pounds per Cent. and Laws made there to keep
them from rising higher; for they were once at 28. l. per Cent. and not without
some difficulty Reduced to Twenty; so that each Bill of 100 l. is now Current
at 120. l.

Obj. But how is that Possible or Credible?

Sol. There is this account rendered of it (which has confirmation by many other
Instances that might be given, concerning the current Prices of many
Commodities, which have not so much of intrinsique value in them,) viz. The
State of Venice propounded the Erecting a Bank to consist of Two Millions of
Ducats: Accordingly Moneys were brought in, Bills given out for the same
Value; and a stop put to the receiving, or giving out any more of either.

The Usefulness of these Bills was suddenly found to be such in the practice
and employment of them, upon the three forementioned Accounts, that every Man,
at one time or other, found his Affairs required them: So, that at first, such
Bills would not be parted with for Money, under Ten Shillings per Hundred
Pounds; And no sooner was that become the Current Rate, but they were
successively raised, by Ten Shillings at a time, till they came to be in every
ones Estimation, 28. l per Cent. better than Moneys in Specie; and so passed
accordingly. Whereupon,

The State of Venice enacted several Laws against their passing so high: which
failing to accomplish what was required, at length they conceived it necessary,
in order to the bringing down the Price, to propose the giving forth Bills for
Three Hundred Thousand Ducats more: By which means they brought it back to
Twenty Pounds per Cent. (which pleased the People) and there fixed it, as to its
rising higher afterward, by a severe Law; since when, it stands so to this
Day: And this is no more than what is familiar in the Price of other things,
viz. Diamonds, Rubies, Pearls, Horses, Pictures, and c. which have their
Estimation from the various Pleasures and Fancies of Men, and c.

And, if it be demanded, what induced that State to allow it so high?

The Answer is easy, viz. The State of Venice had made use of the Moneys
deposited, in their Public Occasions (where observe the hazard of a Money
Bank) and, having promised for Satisfaction of Creditors, to raise the like
Sum, if they should have occasion for it, reap this advantage, of their Peoples
high Opinion of Bills, that, they are thereby assured, that never, will any
Creditor come to ask them 100 l. for a Bill of 100 l. when he may have 120 l.
from any other hand. A notable way to pay a vast Debt. But, by means hereof,
the Creditor has no other Fund or Security but the States Word: For, there is
not one Ducket for them in Bank.

Q. 2. My Lands or Goods are already Mortgaged for Moneys, at a higher Rate of
Interest; and the Mortgage^ will not take Bills. Can such a Bank help me?

Ans. There may be Persons, of whom you may be informed at the Bank, who will
advise and assist you therein: If there be Moneys in the Country to be had.

Q. 3. I have neither Lands nor Goods, but a Trade, by which I could live
comfortably if I had a small Stock; and I could afford to give a greater
Interest, and have Friends that would help me too, upon my own Bond: But they
have not Moneys. Which way shall I be helped?

Ans. If your Friends have Lands or Goods, they may have these Bank-bills of
Credit, at Four Pounds per Cent. per Annum, to Lend you at such Rates as you
can agree: Whereby they also may be gainers, and have encouragement to help you.

Much more might be said upon this Subject, but these seem to be sufficient,
for encouraging an attempt: And, the experiments of the things suggested will
give such clear Demonstrations of the Usefulness, Advantage, Necessity and
Security of such Banks, in most places, beyond all others that have been
hitherto put in practice, as those who are not so prompt to receive things into
their understandings by the Notions of them, or are prejudiced by mistaken
apprehensions about them, and thence raise many impertinent Objections (not
worth scribbling) may be presumed will follow others Examples, in well-doing,
when those are observed to thrive who go before therein.

We shall therefore, for the Conclusion, which is the last Particular
mentioned, to be Discoursed, Sum up all, in this general Assertion, viz.
THat there will arise many more Conveniences and Advantages, by this Bank, to
such Countries where they shall be erected, than have been enumerated, in the
several foregoing instances; or, well, can be.

1. By this, the Trade and Wealth of any Country is established upon its own
Foundation: and upon a Medium or Balance arising within it self, viz. The Lands
and Products of such Country, and not upon the Importation of Gold or Silver;
or the Scarcity or Plenty of them, or, of any thing else Imported from Foreign
Nations, which may be withheld, prohibited, or enhansed, at the Pleasure of
others.

2. The Native Commodities of such Countries will thus become improved to a
sufficiency (at least) for their own Use; and thereby afford a comfortable
Subsistence to many ingenuous and industrious Persons, in such Countries, who
know not how to Subsist: Especially such as are Banished, or enforced to
forsake their Native Countries, by reason of the heat of Persecution, upon the
account of Religion.

3. It will not be in the Power of any, by Extortion and Oppression, to make a
Prey of the Necessitous.

4. The Fishery of such Countries, as lie convenient for it, may be improved:
and the Navigation and Shipping increased, for Use or Sale.

5. The Public Revenues thereof, in consequence of these, will be augmented.

6. The Rents of Lands, yea, the Purchase value thereof, will rise: For, the
Plenty of Money, or a valuable Credit equivalent thereunto, and the Lowering of
Interest, must necessarily have that effect.

7. It will supply the defect or scarcity of Moneys in Specie, until by the
settling of Manufactures, and c. (which this Bank proposes) the Products of such
Country for Exportation shall come to Balance or Exceed the value of it is
Importations* which afterward will necessitate the bringing in of Moneys, as
fast as the want thereof has carried it away. For, the true ground of the
Plenty or Scarcity of Moneys in any Country, is not the high or low Value of
the Money (as some erroneously conceive) but, that the Value of Goods Imported
from other parts has been greater than that of the Export. The Balance whereof
must necessarily be answered with Moneys, and for the same Reason, Reversed,
the Export of Goods when bro't to exceed the value of the Import, must, as
necessarily bring it back again to such proportion as the Export can be raised.
And whatsoever other means may be suggested for furnishing of Moneys, must be
fruitless, for, there will abide no more than such proportion; let what Value
will be put on Moneys above the Current Price thereof in other Countries with
whom they shall Trade; which may be further Evidenced, if this hint thereof be
not sufficiently intelligible. To which may be added, That the less need there
is of Moneys in Specie, by reason of such Current Credit, the more will be the
increase of Money it self; as is manifest in Holland, Venice, and all Places
where Bank-credit supplies the defect of those Species; least, the Money that
remains in such Countries, will be at greater liberty for such petty occasions
as cannot be so well accommodated by Bills.

In Order therefore, and as Praevious to the Entering upon such an Affair, it is
requisite that other Queries be Propounded and Resolved, viz.

Q. 4. How shall it come to be known whether a sufficient number of Persons, of
all Ranks, Trades and Callings, will deal with this Bank? The Reasons of which
Inquiry are these, viz.

(1.) It will be of use to the undertakers of such Bank to know it, for their
encouragement in their entrance upon this affair. And,

(2.) To such others as would take the Bills, if they were satisfied they could
buy such Goods, and c. as they want, with Bills, at as easy rates, as if they
had ready Moneys to give.

Answ. 1. It will be requisite, that a short Declaration be tendered to be
Subscribed by some Persons of all Ranks, Trades and Callings; signifying that
they will accept the said Bank-bills of Credit, in their ordinary future
dealings of Buying and Selling, or other Traffiquing affairs, whereupon they
are to receive Moneys, for so much ready Moneys as shall be in such Bills
mentioned, upon the Terms and according to the Rules of the Bank: Saving to
every man his Specialties, and particular Contracts.

Ans. 2. That such as shall so declare themselves, by Subscription (or
otherwise) may be put into Alphabetical Lists, and, such as take forth Bills
may be informed of the Names of the said respective Persons, their Trades or
Callings, and Places of Habitation. But,

Q. 5. It may be further inquired, viz. What if some sorts of Persons requisite
for a universal Circulation of Bills, will not, in all cases, engage to accept
Bank-bills: but some will wholly Refuse them, and Cry up Moneys, inhans'd to a
higher Rate than they pass at in other Countries, etc. Others will be for
either, or both, as they find it for their Advantage, etc.

Answ. Its not necessary that all should, in all cases, oblige themselves to
Bills, as long as there is Moneys to be had: But if there be not a sufficiency
of that for carrying on of Trade, and c. as, this Bank hinders not the Currency
of Moneys, but that may be employed as far as it will go, (which, for the most
part, during the Scarcity of it, will be in small dealings,) so, the Bills will
be found useful to supply the defect. The needful proportion whereof will soon
be understood; and each Person will cast his Business, and make his Contracts
accordingly: And consequently, this need not hinder, or discourage the attempt;
if there be a competent number of each, or most sorts, that cannot, otherwise,
deal as they would.

Q. 6. And, if any shall inquire, What Number of Merchants and other Tradesmen
may be sufficient (at first erecting such a Bank) to assist a Circulation of
Bills in Trade, in case some should, not only withdraw from, but, obstruct, and
misrepresent the Affair, or Persons managing it, as not having the Public
Approbation, or Sanction of the Authority of a Country, which they may suggest
to be necessary? It Is Answered,

Answ. 1. A few Merchants in any Country who are general Traders (by the help
this Bank proposes, in the foregoing Instances,) may be sufficient to give
encouragement for the Entrance upon this Affair; and so many Shopkeepers,
Artificers, and c. as must and will deal with them.

For,

Answ. 2. It may reasonably be presumed, that, many, in the practice of the
thing, will apprehend the necessity, usefulness, and security thereof, who
cannot easily take it up in the Notion, or by Discourse* and that such will
come in by Degrees: for, if, (being Merchants) they stand out, such of their
Chap-men as shall find it their interest to ^ell for Bills, must buy again of
others who will take them in payment; and finding themselves well used by such,
will hardly return where they have been refused: and, if of other Professions
they must either Sell little, or do it on Trust, or wait for payment till
moneys grow more plentiful; whilst others carry away the whole Trading among
them.

Ans. 3. This part of the Merchants Calling, is, in every respect as Free and
Lawful for any to undertake, and needs no more of Public Encouragement or
Countenance, than that part of buying and selling (at home or abroad) with or
for ready Money, Time, or Barter, which they better understand and practice.
And the managers hereof may as well expect a Benefit by it as the others:
Forasmuch as it will no less take up their time to attend; and will be an
improving the Trade of any Country, no less than the other: And lastly, has
its Hazards attending it; for the Profits accruing thereby, are, in the first
place assigned, by the Constitution and Rules thereof, for making good all
Losses and Damages that may happen, in the Management of this Affair.

De te Narratur, N. A.

FINIS.

