A SERMON FOR THE Reformation of Manners.

Being designed as A SUITABLE EXHORTATION To Enforce the Reading of the KING's
Royal PROCLAMATON For the Encouragment of Piety and Virtue, and for the
preventing and punishing of Vice, Profaneness and Immorality.

Romans XIII. 4. He is the Minister of GOD unto thee for Good.

BY BENJAMIN COLMAN, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Boston. N. E.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump, for Samuel Gerrish, on the North
Side of the Townhouse. 1716.

To the READER.
THE following Discourse pretends to no more than to give a few Hints on the
serious Truths therein propounded to the Consideration both of Magistrates and
People on the present Occasion. It is left to the Judicious Reader to clothe
the Skeleton with flesh and skin, and to give it a proper Complexion in his own
more Enlarged Meditation. But if it may be of any Use to teach Transgressors
GOD's ways and to minister unto their Conversion; or if it may so far be
Accounted of as a Concio ad Magistratum, as to put MAGISTRATES in mind of their
Duty, to propound more than ever with an Actual Intention the Glory of GOD and
the Good of Souls in their Administering Justice; and indeed excite Them to get
some happy Experience of their own Conversion to GOD; it will then answer a
very noble End and have a most happy Effect.

Magistrates and Ministers can do nothing more Laudable than to Unite their
pious Endeavors, with Zeal and Prudence, to serve the Interests of Piety and
Virtue among their People. And it is the least Expression of Loyalty to GOD and
to the King, readily and heartily to Obey the Commands we have from the Throne
to do so. Let us return our Dutiful Prayers for the Life of the KING and of his
SON; that like the Reign of Solomon so His present MAJESTY's may bear some
Image of the Holiness and Happiness of the Kingdom of CHRIST: that the
Mountains may bring peace to the People, and the little Hills by Righteousness:
that in His days the righteous may flourish, and a Foundation be laid for
abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures.

A SERMON For the Reformation of Manners, etc.
Psalm LI. 13. Then will I teach Transgressors thy Ways, and Sinners shall be
Converted unto Thee.


IN these Words David speaks not only as became a Penitent and a Convert, a
Prophet and a Preacher, but also as became his Royal Dignity and State, the
King of Israel. Not only is it the part of the Priesthood, but it belongs also
to the Prince and the Civil Ruler, to endeavor the Reclaiming of
Transgressors, and the Conversion of their People from Sin unto GOD.

IT being therefore Recommended to me to day by the Honorable the GOVERNMENT
over us, to read publicly unto You the ROYAL PROCLAMATION Emitted by our
Sovereign Lord the KING, for the Encouragment of Virtue and Piety, and for the
preventing and punishing of Vice Profaneness and Immorality, and to Enforce the
same with a suitable Exhortation to you; I have chosen these Words of the Royal
Prophet, King DAVID, to usher in the most pious Resolution and Declaration of
our Protestant King; in which like David He would teach Transgressors GOD's
ways, and would have Sinners converted unto Him.

YOU are therefore preached to rather from the Throne to day than from the
Pulpit: But indeed from the Throne of GOD (by whom Kings reign, and by whose
Laws they are to govern) from his High Throne you are always taught.

IN these Words of Holy David you may Observe,

I. A gracious Purpose and holy Resolution: I will teach Transgressors thy
Ways. It is no ways below a Prince to do this; but it is the special Duty and
Office of a Prophet always to be doing it. Who would not hearken to, learn of
and obey such a Teacher? Where the Word of a King is there is Power. He speaks
from GOD, a Greater KING, whose Name is dreadful.

BUT whom would the King of Israel teach? the Sinner and the Transgressor? the
Profane and Impious? Yes: for the King is also the Lawgiver and the Judge.

AND what would He teach them? GOD's ways. The Ways of Religion and Holiness:
GOD's Laws and Commandments: the way of Life and of Salvation.

TRULY a most pious and Princely Care for the Good and Welfare of his People,
and a most devout and worthy Regard to the Will and Honor of GOD.

TRANSGRESSORS might fear the Wrath of such a Religious King, and look to be
punished with Severity; but He would first have them Instructed carefully and
taught their Duty, and then if they still go on to transgress he would see the
Laws in force against them duly Executed. This was David's Purpose and
Resolution.

II. OBSERVE the End which He proposes, and the good Effect which He promises
to Himself, in teaching Transgressors GOD's ways: And that is their Conversion
unto GOD. The most kind, the most noble and generous Intention that one could
possibly have. And a most natural Effect of Divine teaching. For why are we
taught GOD's ways, but to turn our feet into His Testimonies?

HAPPY the People whose Prince labors their Conversion from Sin into the Holy
ways of Religion and true Godliness. Such a Prince is indeed the Father of his
People, and in GOD's stead. He rules for GOD and in his Fear.

BUT as the Conversion of Transgressors from their evil ways, was David's aim
and desire, so he persuades himself of Success, and expresses a humble
Confidence through Grace that it would be so: Sinners shall be converted unto
Thee.

MAN proposes well very often, but GOD only knows the Event. Especially is it
thus in persuading men, whose hearts are only in God's hand. How often are we
ready to promise our selves great Success, but how vain are our Expectations
for the most part! However, it is nobly proposed, and GOD is to be Confided in
that Sinners shall be converted while they are taught GOD's ways. For the
Conversion of Sinners is the very End of Teaching.

III. IN the Text we may observe Something referred to and supposed, on the
Supposition whereof it is that David forms his present holy Resolution and
Expectation: Then will I teach -- says He. When should it be? what does this
Then refer to?

IF you look into the Psalm you find it to be the most Eminent of his
Penitentials. He had been himself a Great Transgressor in the matter of Uriah:
this he confesses and bewails and implores the forgiveness of and to be cleansed
from the pollution of: He was now a happy Penitent and pardoned, but not ready
to conclude so of himself suddenly: He begs therefore in the Verses before my
Text that GOD would clear up to him the Truth of his own Repentance and
pardoned state, his own Renovation and GOD's Reconciliation, and so restore
unto him the Joy of his Salvation, and then (says he) will I teach
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be Converted unto thee.

PENITENTS have been some of the best Teachers. They can speak feelingly, by a
sad and by a happy Experience. In Gratitude to God who has forgiven them they
will teach others, and who will teach with more pathos, pertinence, tenderness
and power? This is the Teaching which we might trust will convert Transgressors.

Here then we learn these three Truths.

I. Transgressors must be taught GOD's ways. II. In teaching them GOD's ways we
must propose and aim at their Conversion to Him. III. We had need get some
happy Experience of our own Conversion, and GOD's free Forgiveness of our own
Sins, in order to our teaching others the ways of GOD, with any hope of being
Instrumental to convert them.
I do not propose any full Discourse on either of these great and copious
Truths, but only a general Reflection or two on one and other of them.

I. TRANSGRESSORS must be taught GOD's ways. But who are Transgressors? and
what are GOD's ways? and who must teach them? and why must they needs be
taught? and how must it be done? (...) Very briefly.

1. WHO are Transgressors? A general and full Answer to this the Apostle John
gives us 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits Sin transgresses the Law, for Sin is
the Transgression of the Law. So that whoever lives in any sinful way, in any
known and allowed course of Disobedience to the Will and Word of GOD, he is a
Transgressor. We are called Transgressors from the womb, and that most truly,
being born in Sin and by Nature under the Power and Rule of it. Every Act of
sin, and any one Act of it, makes a Man a Transgressor in the sight of GOD and
of his own Conscience. The best man that lives is a heinous Transgressor in the
impartial Judgment of his own Heart: for in many things we offend all, and he
that offends in one point is guilty of all. Job 13.23. How many are my
Iniquities? make me to know my Transgression and my Sin.

BUT to be sure the Text means at least Impenitent and Unconverted Sinners; and
it may be more especially the openly Irreligious, lewd and profane. In this
gross sense our Savior was numbered with Transgressors. And for such the Law is
made; for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for
unholy and profane. 1 Timothy 1.9. i.e. to restrain from such Ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, by revealing the wrath of GOD from Heaven a against it;
or to doom them unto Everlasting Destruction in case of final Impenitence
therein.

LET us then understand here by Transgressors all Impenitent and ungodly
Sinners, both secret and open: the last are Transgressors in the sight of men,
the first before GOD.

2. WHAT are GOD's ways? which must be taught to Transgressors, and which they
need to learn. I answer

First, GOD's ways are the holy Precepts, Rules and Directions of his written
Word, his revealed Will; wherein the Indispensible Duty of sinful Man is laid
down, what he must be and do to be saved. In these are contained the whole Way
of Holiness, the way of life, the way to Heaven Luke 10.25, 26. Or

Secondly, GOD's ways may here in particular mean the Manner of his dealing
with Souls in bringing them to Repentance, and graciously pardoning them upon
their Repentance; together with the Necessity of instant Repentance, and the
dreadfulness of His Wrath in case of final Impenitence. The penitent and
pardoned David had well learned these Holy Lessons, and was well able to
Instruct Transgressors both in the way of GOD's convincing a Soul of Sin,
renewing him to Repentance, and sealing to him his pardon. He would now teach
to Sinners their way unto GOD by Repentance, and GOD's ways of Mercy and Grace
toward them that repent. Psalm. 66.16. Come all you -- and I will declare what
GOD has done for my Soul: I cried unto him with my Mouth (say, under the pains
of Guilt) and he was extolled with my Tongue, (under the Joyful sense of his
pardoning Mercy.)

TRANSGRESSORS need to be taught these things, that they may "neither fearlesly
persist in their ungodly Courses, nor under the Conviction of the Evil of them
despair of finding Mercy. Transgressors must be taught how evil and bitter a
thing it is to transgress GOD's Laws; and how CHRIST has finished
Transgression, and made an End of Sin, and made Reconciliation for Iniquity.

3. WHO must teach Transgressors GOD's Ways? I will, said David. Let us every
one answer like him for our selves, and say -- So will I, and so will I. We all
may do it, and ought to do it, each one in his own place. Every man in his own
line is his Brothers Keeper, Monitor and Teacher. But more particularly,

First, IT is the Immediate Office of the Ministers of Religion to teach
Transgressors GOD's ways. They are Called and Separated unto this very Work.
GOD has ordained that there be an Order of men Devoted to Instruct others in
his Will, to admonish them not to dare to offend against it, to require them to
Observe it, to declare his Wrath against the Disobedient, and his Mercy to them
that obey him. Necessity is therefore laid upon Us, and woe unto us if we preach
not the Gospel; which is a Doctrine of Repentance and the Remission of Sin, as
CHRIST Himself came to call Sinners to Repentance.

Secondly, Magistrates are also ordained of GOD to be His Ministers in the
Gates, there to teach Transgressors his ways. So Moses, Joshua, and the Judges
of Israel, Samuel, David and Solomon; Asa, Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah; Josiah,
Nehemiah, etc. taught their People the way of the LORD. And the same is
Incumbent on the Christian Magistrate, even to require of their Subjects
Obedience to the Divine Laws, and to punish the open Contempt and Violation of
them. The Legislature teach GOD's ways in the Good Laws they Enact for the
promoting his Worship and true Religion, Morality and Virtue among their
People, and for the punishing of Irreligion and Profaneness, vice and
wickedness. And while They do this and rule according to Godliness, it is as
much Irreligion and as sure Damnation to disobey Them, as it is not to comply
with the Word which we preach. And this seems the real Scope of what the
Apostle teaches us in that famous place, Romans 13.1, -- 5. Let every Soul be
subject to the Higher Powers. For there is no Power but of GOD: The Powers that
be are ordained of GOD. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of GOD; and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.
For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works but to the evil. Will thou then not
be afraid of the Power? do that which is good and thou shall have praise of the
same: For he is the Minister of GOD to thee for Good. But if thou do that which
is evil be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister
of GOD, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Thirdly, I might go on and say, Christians must teach every one his Nei'bour,
and every one his Brother, saying, Know the LORD, and let us walk in his ways.
You are a People of Religion, and are to watch over one another in love, as
Brethren in Christ: You must love your Brother in your heart, and not suffer
Sin upon him, but must in any wise rebuke thy Nei'bour. We must be Exhorting
one another daily while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin. 1 These. 5.14. Now we exhort you Brethren, warn them that
are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, -- and ever follow
that what is good both among your selves and toward all men.

IN particular, Relatives should teach one another GOD's ways: Parents their
Children, Husbands their Wives, Masters their Servants; every One his Household
as Abraham and David did theirs, to keep the way of the LORD.

THUS we may be all of us Teachers to one another, being our selves taught of
GOD naturally to care for each others Souls. And if any one be a Transgressor
and he come in our way, let us wisely tell him the Evil of his way and the
Misery therein; the Excellency of GOD's ways, and the Necessity of his
Conversion into them. But

4. WHY must Transgressors needs be taught? The Reasons are too many to give
them all, and too obvious to need almost to name them. For is not the Word of
GOD written, and the Preaching thereof ordained, for this very End? The Law is
nigh thee, even in thy hand and heart and mouth; and is to dwell richly in us,
teaching and admonishing one another; being profitable for Doctrine, for
reproof, for Correction and Instruction in Righteousness.

MOREOVER, The Relations wherein GOD has set us one toward another cannot be
otherwise answered, or the Duties of them discharged according to his Will and
unto his Glory. He has made us of one Blood, made us together his Covenant
People, set us in our Offices and in a Christian Brotherbood, told us how we
must carry it one to another and fulfill the Law of love, please and honor him,
do good and be Blessings in the World, and be blessed our selves for Evermore.

TRANSGRESSORS are so hard to learn, dull of hearing and slow of heart, to
believe, that therefore they should the rather be taught. And Compassion to
their Immortal Souls should be instead of a thousand Arguments with us, to be
at any pains to teach them. How do we hate 'em in our hearts if we suffer them
to perish in the ways of Sin? It were more Inhumane and barbarous than to let a
blind man go over a Precipice, and not tell him his danger or set him in his
way: or to see a Madman stabbing himself and not hold his hand.

Finally, The good Order of the World, the peace and welfare of Mankind,
require that Transgressors be taught GOD's ways. The Foundations of the World
are else out of course, and the Earth and all its Inhabitants must dissolve.
This bears up the Pillars of it, -- I said unto the Fools deal not foolishly,
and to the wicked lift not up the born.

THERE would be no living here on Earth, if it were not for the Instruction and
Government which GOD has set up among men. Our Sabbaths and the Preaching of
GOD's Word are an unknown Good to a wicked World though so few are converted; and
so is the Restraint that lies on Mankind for fear of the Sword of the
Magistrate and the lash of humane Laws.

BUT the last and chief Reason why Transgressors must be taught GOD's ways is
their Conversion and Salvation: of which hereafter.

5. And lastly, HOW must we teach them? I answer

1. AUTHORITATIVLY. For it is in GOD's cause, and in his stead, and we may be
bold, as an Inferior Officer may command in the King's Name. Magistrates may
not fear a Multitude, nor Ministers the Faces of any. Our Lord taught as one
having Authority, and he has vested his Ministers in his own Authority: Tit.
2.15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority, let no man
despise thee.

2. THE Great and powerful Motives of Religion must be taught together with the
Doctrines and Rules of it: the Penalty with the Precept, the Promises and
Threatenings together with the Commandments. Life and Death, the Blessing and
the Curse must be set before men, together with the Statutes and Judgments. So
Moses denounced unto Israel that they should surely perish quickly in case of
Disobedience and Impenitence: and so said the Apostle, Knowing the Terrors of
the LORD we persuade men.

3. WE must teach Transgressors with Meekness and Love, Affection and Entreaty.
What will ye, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, shall I come unto you with
a Rod? or in love and in the Spirit of Meekness? He had Authority to do the
one, in case of Contumacy; and Goodness eno' to choose the other in case there
were any hopes of prevailing on them by kindness and Gentleness. Read the
Character of the LORD's Servant, 2 Timothy 2.24. The Servant of the LORD must not
strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
Instructing them that oppose themselves, if GOD peradventure will give them
Repentance. And accordingly the Apostles of our Lord JESUS have left us this
Example: I beseech you by the meekness and Gentleness of CHRIST: As though GOD
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead: Wherefore though I might be
much bold in Christ to Enjoin thee that which is Convenient, yet for Love-sake
1 rather Entreat thee. So Gentle is the Gospel toward Sinners and Saints,
amidst all its Authority and Terrors.

4. TRANSGRESSORS must be taught with all Long-suffering: patience as well as
lenity. 2 Timothy 4.2. God bears long with the perverseness and Obstinacy of men,
and still waits on them to be gracious. Number. 14.11. How long will this People
provoke me? how long shall it be ever ye believe me? We continue therefore in
our Work, from Sabbath to Sabbath, and Year after Year, in Season and out of
Season, and line must be upon line, and precept upon a precept, here a little
and there a little: It may be they will yet hearken and receive Instruction!
When shall it once be?

5. And lastly, IF Transgressors will not learn GOD's ways, but openly defy and
violate his Commandments, They must then be taught as Gideon taught the men of
Succoth, with the briars and thorns of the Wilderness. I mean, That open
Transgressors fall under public Church Censures, and under the lash of the
Civil Law; both which are ordained by GOD for the opening men's Ears to
Discipline, and to command them to return from Iniquity. So the censured
Corinthian was humbled and restored: and so Hymeneus was delivered to Satan
that he learn not to blaspheme. And so has the LORD commanded, Them that Sin
rebuke before all, that others may fear. And for the same Reason is the Civil
Magistrate the Minister of GOD, and the Penalties of the Civil Law are GOD's
Ordinance, -- that all Israel may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly.

AND thus have I briefly said, who are Transgressors? and what are GOD's ways?
and who must teach them? and why they must needs be taught? and how it must be
done?

BUT the two last of these Enquiries may receive a farther Answer in the next
Observation.

II. IN teaching Transgressors GOD's way we must propose and aim at their
CONVERSION unto GOD. This is the End of Divine Teaching: to turn men from
darkness to light, and from the power of Sin and Satan unto GOD. The Ministry
of the Word serves unto this glorious End, and this we must propose in all
other Occasional Instructions unto any. This is instead of a thousand Reasons
why we should teach, and why sinners should hear and learn: And this gives us a
Rule and Direction how to teach, namely, so as may best tend to the Conversion
of men from the ways of Sin. How seriously therefore, and with what Earnestness
and Importunity, Affectionatness and Solemnity, should we teach you GOD's Ways?

INDEED our Solemn Assemblies were a ridiculous Pageantry if it were not that
the Conversion of Sinners is the thing propounded in them. And for want of this
Actual Intention it is that the Worship of so many is a Mockery. Moreover, The
Severity of a Godly and strict Discipline in the Church, and those of Humane
Laws in the punishment of Transgressors against the State, were a vain thing if
it were not to reclaim men from their evil ways, and reform them.

WHETHER therefore it be that we teach Sinners from the Pulpit, or whether it
be the Lawgiver who does it, or the Judge; or whether it be that Christians
privately instruct and admonish them that transgress against GOD; both one and
other ought to propose and act for this one End, to Convert a Sinner from the
Error of his way, and to save a Soul from death, And this very thing should
make Instructions and Reproofs welcome unto Sinners, whereon in public or in
private: Let the righteous smite me it shall be a kindness, let him reprove me
it shall be an excellent Oil, etc.

I wish truly that Teachers and Reprovers of every sort, as well as those that
are Admonished and corrected by them, would propose and act for this one End,
the spiritual and Everlasting Good of Souls. It is to be owned that Ministers
themselves are too often Defective in this Actual Intention, though it be the
very End of their Ministry. And more is it to be Apprehended, that the
Generality of those who come to hear have not at all their own Conversion and
Salvation at heart. The Law of the LORD is perfect, converting the Soul; i. e.
perfectly fitted to this End: yet how rarely is it effectual upon the Souls of
Sinners? Truly Brethren, the fault lies either on Us who preach, or on You that
hear, or on both together. Either we don't eno' propose and act for your
Conversion to GOD, or You your selves don't do it.

BUT then, Is it our Care alone to minister to the Conversion of Souls? by no
means. You that are Parents, when you teach your Children the way of the Lord,
is it not to beget them again unto God? And let Children hearken to their
Father that begat them and unto the Law of their Mother that bare them, that by
the Blessing of GOD on their good Instructions and Charges they may betimes be
born again. Take heed that all this pious and tender Care of your Parents for
your Souls be not lost, and turn at last to your greater Condemnation, and you
mourn at the last, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised reproof,
and I have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined my Ear to them
that instructed me.

BUT then there is the other great Instance, wherein it is to be feared that
least of all have the world of Mankind any Apprehension of any pious Intention
for the Conversion of Sinners: soil. the legal Conviction and Judicial
punishment of Transgressors, by the Civil Magistrate and Judge. Never the less
it is certain that Christianity obliges those in the Magistracy to propose even
the Conversion of Criminals and Malefactors from their vile ways unto those of
Virtue and true Godliness: And convicted Sinners ought to accept of their
public Punishments and Shames as so meant: Which though it may seem strange
Doctrine and a ridiculous Expectation in a corrupt World, yet is in it self the
most Just and Reasonable thing in the world; and renders Magistracy so much the
more wirthy of the Ordination of a Holy GOD, and the Benefit of it so much the
more Apparent in a Christian State. For if the Civil Powers are ordained of God
not only for the present peace and good Order of the world, but also in some
measure for the Eternal Welfare of men; so much the more Venerable are they to
a people of Religion. Nor is here any Clashing of Orders; for as the Ministry
of the Word though it directly serve to the bringing Souls to a better Life, yet
abundantly serves to the peace and good Order of the World at the same time, so
though the direct and Immediate End of Civil Government be the outward peace,
tranquillity and Felicity of the People, yet it has also really a further Aim,
Influence and Effect, even in the Religion and spiritual Good of its Subjects.

THUS Humane Laws serve under the Divine, and by That these are to be framed,
and to It to be subordinated. So Moses and Aaron are Brethren, and join in
bringing the Israel of GOD on toward Canaan; though it is JESUS only that gives
'em Rest. And therefore the Subjection of the LORD's People must be Religious
and Conscientious: for the Law of GOD is one and the same in the mouth of the
LORD's Prophet, or His Judge: Do People then reverence their Ministers and the
Word of GOD, in their Mouth? and shall they not pay a higher Reverence to their
pious Rulers, and to a Divine Sentence in the Mouth of their KING? 1 Timothy 2.1,
2, 3, 4. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men: for Kings and for all
that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness and Honesty: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of GOD our
Savior; Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of
the Truth. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the LORD's sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors
as unto them that are sent by Him, for the punishment of evil doers and for the
praise of them that do well: For so is the Will of GOD that with well doing ye
should put to Silence the Ignorance of foolishment.

ONE more Observation lies before us from the Text, and a very Serious one it
is, and with it I shall shut up my Discourse.

III. THAT they whose Office it is to teach unto others GOD's ways, and who are
to minister to the Conversion of Transgressors unto GOD, had need to get some
comfortable Experience of their own Conversion, and of GOD's free Forgiveness of
their own Sins. Then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, says David in the
Text; soil, When thou LORD have renewed and forgiven me; when thou shall
graciously give to me the happy Sense of my Pardon and Cleansing.

TRULY my Brethren, how shall we take upon us to teach others, with any
prospect of Success, if we are not our selves taught of GOD! with what face or
decency can we expect that GOD should own us in this great Service, or Men
regard us, if we our selves are the servants of Sin! Not but that GOD sometimes
uses them that are wicked to do good unto the Souls of others. But what Comfort
can there be in this? if after I have preached unto others I my self should be
a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. to be Instrumental to the bringing others to that
Salvation, which we are never like to come unto our selves! how can one bear to
think of it? Wherefore take heed to thy self, and unto thy Doctrine (as the
Apostle writes to Timothy) that thou may both save thy self and them that
hear thee. 1 Timothy 4.16.

IT can never be expected that we shall be hearty, earnest and vigilant in
seeking the Conversion of others, if we have never felt our own misery and
perishing state without the saving and free Grace of GOD, nor had any
Experience of the Work of Conversion in our own Souls. If we have not cared for
our own Souls, how shall we for the Souls of others! If we have never been
apprehensive of our own Danger in an unconverted State, how shall we be zealous
for another's Deliverance from wrath? Or how shall we speak aright of the Grace
of GOD to others, if we know nothing of it experimentally our selves? How shall
we Encourage others to go unto a SAVIOR whom we have never sought unto for
Mercy our selves? nor received any Mercy from? Yea, to the wicked GOD says,
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant into thy Mouth? seeing thou hate Instruction and castest my words
behind thee. Psalm. 50.16, 17. And again, Thou therefore which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Romans 2.21. Apply this to every sort of Teacher, for
the Preacher of the Word is not the only Teacher whom the Reproach bears upon:
It falls as hard on others. Parents, who command your Children to know and keep
the way of the LORD, are you Irreligious? Man that tellest thy Nei'bour of the
Blemish in his Eye, have thou a Beam in thy own? You that by Commission search
out and punish Immoralities in others, are you vicious, lewd or unjust your
selves? Sit thou like Ananias to judge others according to Law, and
breakest thou the Law thy self? Thus the Rule holds universally among
Christians, and obliges in the Civil Order as well as in the Sacred. Thou, when
thou art Converted strengthen thy Brethren.

BUT if we have found Grace and Mercy from GOD to turn to Him from our own
Sins, then may we in our places with good Assurance and Confidence teach the
way of GOD to others. For how can we but speak the things whereof we know the
Certainty, Necessity and Excellency by a happy Experiance and deep Conviction
in our own Souls? The things that have been freely given to us of GOD, and
wro't in us by his Holy Spirit, we shall be ready to declare unto others. We
shall speak feelingly of them and so affectingly; out of the Abundance of our
own hearts into the hearts of others.

HENCE Penitents have been ever some of the best Preachers to Sinners: So were
David and Solomon, Peter and Paul; who had both felt the Guilt and bitterness
of Sin, and known the Freeness and Riches of the Grace of GOD; and how to
direct others in the way wherein the Spirit of GOD had led them, and to comfort
them with the Comforts wherewith they themselves had been comforted of GOD. 1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all Long-suffering for a pattern to them that should hereafter
believe on him to Life Everlasting.

LET us then make sure first of our own Conversion to GOD, and then lay out our
selves for the Conversion of others.

YOU that are Converted, teach others. YOU that are to Teach, be you Converted.
YOU that are Transgressors, do you learn.
AND may the SPIRIT of GOD lift up a Standard, under which many may appear, to
rise up for Him against the Evil doers.

THE late Zeal of the Justices of the Peace in this Place to find out and
suppress Vice has been very laudable. Be Encouraged from GOD to go on, and may
He give you Wisdom and Prudence, Courage and Resolution, Integrity and a hearty
Indignation of that which you declare against, that all Iniquity may stop its
mouth.

THUS I have ended my own Sermon, and am now to read to you a Better, from the
Superior MINISTERS of GOD and of Religion, the POWERS which GOD has set over
us: first from the KING in Supreme, and then from the Immediate GOVERNMENT of
the Province.

AND if what I have already said may be Accepted as a Suitable EXHORTATION to
Enforce the Religious Commands of the Government; and if Transgressors may be
Converted to GOD by one Means or other, we have our Proposed End, and shall not
lose our Reward.

HERE the Royal Proclamation of the KING, and that of the Government were read.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Samuel Gerrish, written by the Reverend Mr. Benjamin Colman.
PRactical Discourses upon the Parable of the Ten Virgins, being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment.

The Government and Improvement of Mirth according to the Laws of Christianity:
In three Sermons: 1. of Civil and Natural Mirth. 2. Carnal and Vicious. 3.
Spiritual and Holy.


A Humble Discourse of the Incomprehensibleness of GOD: in four Sermons.

A Gospel Ministry the rich Gift of the Ascended Savior to his Church:
preached on a Day of Prayer kept by His Congregation, to implore the Divine
Conduct and Blessing with them, in their Election of Another into the Pastoral
Office among them.

Some of the Honors that Religion does unto the fruitful Mothers in Israel;
Meditated upon the Birth, and Preached at the Baptism of a Child.

The Divine Compassions declared and magnified, to Engage and Encourage the
greatest Sinners unto a speedy and Earnest Repentance: preached upon the
Sorrowful Occasion of a Miserable Woman present under Sentence of Death for the
Murder of her Spurious Infant.

A devout and humble Enquiry, into the Reasons of the Divine Council in the
Death of Good Men. Meditated on the Death and preached on the day of the
Interment of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Bridge.


