Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip's WAR WHICH Began in the Month of
June, 1675. AS ALSO OF EXPEDITIONS More lately made Against the Common Enemy,
and Indian Rebels, in the Eastern Parts of New England: WITH Some Account of
the Divine Providence TOWARD Benj. Church Esqr

By T. C.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, in the Year, 1716.

TO THE READER
THE subject of this following Narrative offering it self to your friendly
Perusal; relates to the Former and Later Wars of New England, which I my self
was not a ^^le concerned in: For in the Year, 1675. that unhappy and bloody
Indian War broke out in Plymouth Colony, where I was then building, and
beginning a Plantation, at a Place called by the Indian^ Seconit; and since by
the English, Little Compton. I was the first English Man that built upon that
Neck, which was full of Indians. My head and hands were full about Settling a
New Plantation, where nothing was brought to; no preparation of Dwelling House,
or Out-Housing or Fencing made, Horses and Cattle were to be provided, Ground
to be cleared, and broken up; and the uttermost Caution to be used, to keep my
self free from offending my Indian Neighbors all round about me: While I was
thus busily Employed, and all my Time and Strength laid out in this La^^ious
Undertaking; I Received a Commission from the Government to engage in their
Defense. And with my Commission I received another heart inclining me to put
forth my Strength in Military Service. And through the Grace of GOD I was
Spirited for that work, and Direction in it was (...) i^ me day by day. And
although many of the Actions that I was (...) in, were very Difficult and
Dangerous, yet my self and those that (...) wi^^ me Voluntarily in the Service,
bad our Lives, for the most part, wonderfully preserved, by the overruling
Hand of the Alwighty, from first to last; which does aloud bespeak our Praises:
And to declare His Wonderful Works, (...) our Indispensible Duty. I was ever
very sensible of my own Littleness and Unfitness, to be employed in such Great
Services; but calling to mind that GOD is STRONG, I Endeavored to put all my
Confidence in Him, and by His Almighty Power was carried through every
difficult Action: and my desire is that His Name may have the Praise,

It was ever my Intent having laid my self under a S^lemn promise, that the
many and Repeated Favors of GOD to my self, and those with me in the Service,
might be published for Generations to come. And now my great Age requiring my
Dismission from Service in the Militia, and to put off my Armor; I am willing
that the Great and Glorious works of Almighty GOD, to us Children of Men,
should appear to the World; and having my Minutes by me; my Son has taken the
care and pains to Collect from them the Ensuing Narrative of many passages
relating to the Former and Later Wars; which I have had the perusal of, and
find nothing a-^^ss, as to the Truth of it; and with as little Reflection upon
any particular person as might be, either alive or dead.

And seeing every particle of historical Truth is preci^us; I hope the Reader
will pass a favorable Censure upon an Old Soldier, telling of the many
Ran-Counters he has had, and yet is come off alive. It (...) Remember what a
great Number of Families in this and the Neighboring P^^vinces in New England
did during the War, enjoy a great measure of Liberty and Peace by the hazardous
Stations and Marches of those Engaged in Military Exercises, who were a Wall
unto them on this side and on that side. I desire Prayers that I may be enabled
Well ^o accomplish my Spiritual Warfare, and that I may be more than Conqueror
through JESUS CHRIST loving of me.

Benjamin Church.

Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip's WAR which began in the Year, 1675.
With the Proceedings of Benj. Church Esqr
IN the Year 1674. Mr. Benjamin Church of Duxbury being providentially at
Plymouth in the time of the Court, fell into acquaintance with Capt. John Almy
of Rhode Island. Capt. Almy with great importunity invited him to ride with
him, and view that part of Plymouth Colony that lay next to Rhode Island, known
then by their Indian Names of Pocasset and Segkonate. Among other arguments to
persuade him, he told him, the Soil was very rich, and the Situation pleasant.
Persuades him by all means, to purchase of the Company some of the Court grant
rights. He accepted his invitation, views the Country, and was pleased with it;
makes a purchase, settled a Farm, found the Gentlemen of the Island very Civil
and obliging. And being himself a Person of uncommon Activity and Industry, he
soon erected two buildings upon his Farm, and gained a good acquaintance with
the Natives: got much into their favor, and was in a little time in great
esteem among them.

The next Spring advancing, while Mr. Church was diligently Settling his new
Farm, stocking, leasing and disposing of his Affairs, and had a fine prospect
of doing no small things; and hoping that his good success would be inviting
unto other good Men to become his Neighbors; Behold! the rumor of a War
between the English and the Natives gave check to his projects. People began to
be very jealous of the Indians, and indeed they had no small reason to suspect
that they had formed a design of War upon the English. Mr. Church had it daily
suggested to him that the Indians were plotting a bloody design. That Philip
the great Mount-hope Sachem was Leader therein: and so it proved, he was
sending his Messengers to all the Neighboring Sachem:, to engage them in a
Confederacy with him in the War.

Among the reft he sent Six Men to Awashonks Squaw-Sachem of the Segkonate
Indians, to engage her in his Interests: Awashonks so far listened unto them as
to call her Subjects together, to make a great Dance, which is the custom of
that Nation when they advise about Momentous Affairs. But what does Awashonks
do, but sends away two of her Men that well understood the English Language (
Sassamon and George by Name) to invite Mr. Church to the Dance. Mr. Church upon
the Invitation, immediately takes with him Charles Hazelton his Tennants Son,
who well understood (...) Language, and rid down to the Place appointed: Where
they found hundreds of Indians gathered together from all Parts of her
Dominion. Awashonks her self in a foaming Sweat was leading the Dance. But she
was no sooner sensible of Mr. Churches arrival, but she broke off, sat down,
calls her Nobles round her, orders Mr. Church to be invited into her presence.
Complements being past, and each one taking Seats. She told him, King Philip
had sent Six Men of his with two of her People that had been over at
Mount-hope, to draw her into a confederacy with him in a War with the English.
Desiring him to give her his advice in the case, and to tell her the Truth
whether the Umpame Men (as Philip had told her) were gathering a great Army to
invade Philips Country. He assured her he would tell her the Truth, and give
her his best advice. Then he told her it was but a few days since he came from
Plymouth, and the English were then making no Preparations for War; That he was
in Company with the Principal Gentlemen of the Government, who had no Discourse
at all about War; and he believed no tho'ts about it. He asked her whether she
though it he would have brought up his Goods to Settle in that Place, if he
apprehended an entering into War with so near a Neighbor. She seemed to be
some what convin'd by his talk, and said she believed he spoke the Truth.

Then she called for the Mount-hope Men: Who made a formidable appearance, with
their Faces Painted, and their Hair Trimmed up in Com^fashion, with their
Powder-horns, and Shot-bags at their backs; which among that Nation is the
posture and figure of preparedness for War. She told Mr. Church, these were the
Persons that had brought her the Report of the English preparation for War: And
then told them what Mr. Church had said in answer to it.

Upon this began a warm talk among the Indians, but 'twas soon quashed, and
Awashonks proceeded to tell Mr. Church, that Philips Message to her was, that
unless she would forthwith enter into a confederacy with him in a War against
the English, he would send his Men over primely, to kill the English Cattle,
and burn their Houses on that side the River, which would provoke the English
to fall upon her, whom they would without doubt suppose the author of the
Mischief. Mr. Church told her he was sorry to see so threatening an aspect of
Affairs; and steping to the Mount-hopes, he felt of their bags, and finding
them filled with Bullets, asked them what those Bullets were for: They
scoffingly replied to shoot Pigeons with.

Then Mr. Church turned to Awashonks, and told her if Philip were resolved to
make War, her best way would be to knock those Six Mount-hopes (...) head, and
shelter her self under the Protection of the English: upon which the
Mount-bopes were for the present Dumb. But those two of Awashonks Men who had
been at Mount-hope expressed themselves in a furious manner against his advice.
And Little Eyes one of the Queens Council joined with them, and urged Mr.
Church to go aside with him among the bushes that he might have some private
Discourse with him, which other Indians immediately forbid being sensible of
his ill design: but the Indians began to side and grow very warm. Mr. Church
with undaunted Courage told the Mount-hopes they were bloody wretches, and
thirsted after the blood of their English Neighbors, who had never injured
them, but had always abounded in their kindness to them. That for his own part,
though he desired nothing more than Peace, yet if nothing but Was would satisfy
them, he believed he should prove a sharp thorn in their sides; Bid the
Company observe those Men that were of such bloody dispositions, whether
Providence would suffer them to Live to see the event of the War, which others
more Peaceably disposed might do.

Then he told Awashonks he thought it might be most advisable for her to send
to the Governor of Plymouth, and shelter her self, and People under his
Protection. She liked his advice, and desired him to go on her behalf to the
Plymouth Government, which he consented to: And at parting advised her what
ever she did, not to desert the English Interest, to join with her Neighbors
in a Rebellion which would certainly prove fatal to her. [He moved none of his
Goods from his House that there might not be the least umbrage from such an
Action.] She thanked him for his advice, and sent two of her Men to guard him
to his House; which when they came here, urged him to take care to secure his
Goods, which he refused for the reasons before mentioned. But desired the
Indians, that if what they feared, should happen, they would take care of what
he left, and directed them to a Place in the woods where they should dispose
them; which they faith-^elly observed.

He took his leave of his guard, and bid them tell their Mistress, if she
continued steady in her dependence on the English, and kept within her own
limits of Sogkonats, he would see her again quickly; and then hastened away to
Pocasset, where he met with Peter Nunnui^, the Husband of the Queen of
Pocasset, who was just then come over in a Canoo from Mount-hope. Peter told
him that there would certainly be War; for Philip had held a Dance of several
Weeks continuance, and had entertained the Young Men from all Parts of the
Country: And added the Philip expected to be sent for to Plymouth to be
examined about Sasamon's death, who was Murdered at Assawomset-Ponds; knowing
himself guilty of contriving that Murder. The same Peter told him that he saw
Mr. James Brown of Swanzey, and Mr. Samuel Gorton who was an Interpreter, and
two other Men who brought a Letter from the Governor of Plymouth to Philip. He
observed to him further, that the Young Men were very eager to begin the War,
and would fain have killed Mr. Brown, but Philip prevented it; telling them
that his Father had charged him to show kindness to Mr. Brown. In short, Philip
was forced to promise them that on the next Lord's Day when the English were
gone to Meeting they should rifle their Houses and from that time forward kill
their Cattle.

Peter desired Mr. Church to go and see his Wife, who was but up the! ^ill; he
went and found but few of her People with her. She said they were all gone,
against her Will to the Dances; and she much feared there would be a War. Mr.
Church advised her to go to the Island and secure her self, and those that were
with her; and send to the Governor of Plymouth who she knew was her friend;
and so left her, resolving to hasten to Plymouth, and wait on the Governor:
and he was so expeditious that he was with the Governor early next Morning,
though he waited on some of the Magistrates by the way, who were of the Council
of War, and also met him at the Governors. He gave them an account of his
observations and discoveries, which confirmed their former intelligences, and
hastened their preparation for Defense.

Philip according to his promise to his People, permitted them to March out of
the Neck on the next Lord's Day, when they plundered the nearest Houses that the
Inhabitants had deserted: but as yet offered no violence to the People, at lest
none were killed. However the alarm was given by their Numbers, and hostile
Equipage, and by the Prey they made of what they could find in the forsaken
Houses.

An express came the same day to the Governor, who immediately gave orders to
the Captains of the Towns to March the greatest Part of their Companies, and to
rand^z^ous at T^^^^^^, on Monday Night, where Major Bradford was to receive
them, and dispose them under Capt (now made Major) Cutwo^th of Si^u^te. The
Governor desired Mr. Church to give them his Company, and to use his interest
in their behalf with the Gentlemen of (...). He complied with it, and they
Marched the next day. Major (...) desired Mr. Church with a commanded party
consisting of English and some Friend-Indians. to March in the Front at some
distance from the Main body. Their orders were to keep so far before, as not be
in sight of the Army. And so they did, for by the way, they killed a Deer,
flead, roasted, and eat the most of him before the Army came up, with them. But
the Plymouth Forces soon arrived at Swanzey, and were posted at Major Browns
and Mr. Miles's Garrisons chiefly; and were there soon joined with those that
came from Massachusetts, who had entered into a Confederacy with their Plymouth
Brethren, against the Perfidious Heathen.

The Enemy who began their Hostilities with plundring and destroying Cattle,
did not long content themselves with that game. They thirsted for English
blood, and they soon broached it; killing two Men in the way not far from Mr.
Miles's Garrison. And soon after, eight more at Mattapiset: Upon whose bodies
they exercised more than brutish barbarities; beheading, dis-membring and
mangling them, and exposing them in the most inhumane manner, which gash'd and
ghostly objects struck a damp on all beholders.

The Enemy flushed with these exploits, grew yet bolder, and skulking every
where in the busnes, shot at all Passengers, and killed many that ventured
abroad. They came so near as to shoot down two Sentinels at Mr. Miles's
Garrison, under the very Noses of most of our Forces. These provocations drew
out the resentments of some of Capt. Prentices Troop, who desired they might
have liberty to go out and seek the Enemy in their own quarters. Quarter
Masters Gill and B^lcher commanded the Parties drawn cut, who earnestly desired
Mr. Churches company: They provided him a Horse and Furniture (his own being
out of the way) he readily complied with their desires, and was soon Mounted.

This party were no sooner over Miles's Bridge but were fired on by an
Ambuscado of about a dozen Indians, as they were afterward discovered to be.
When they drew off the Pilot was Mortally wounded, Mr. Belcher received a shot
in his knee, and his Horse was killed under him, Mr. Gill was struck with a
Musket-ball on the side of his belly; but being clad with a buff Coat and some
thickness of Paper under it, it never broke his skin. The Troopers were
surprised to see both their Commanders wounded, and wheeled off. But Mr. Church
persuaded, at length stormed and stamped, and told them 'twas a shame to run,
and leave a wounded Man there to become a Prey to the barbarous Enemy. For the
Pilot yet sat his Horse, though so mazed with the Shot, as not to have sense to
guide him. Mr. Gill seconded him, and offered, though much disenabled, to assist
in bringing him of. Mr. Church asked a Stranger who gave them his company in
that action, if he would go with him and fetch off the wounded Man: He readily
consented, they with Mr. Gill went, but the wounded Man fainted and fell off
his Horse before they came to him; but Mr. Church and the Stranger dismounted,
took up the Man dead, and laid him before Mr. Gill on his Horse. Mr. Church
told the other two, if they would take care of the dead Man, he would go and
fetch his Horse back, which was going off the Cassey toward the Enemy; but
before he got over the Eassey he saw the Enemy run to the right into the Neck.
He brought back the Horse, and called earnestly and repeatedly to the Army to
come over and sight the Enemy; and while he Good calling and persuading, the
skulking Enemy returned to their old stand, and all discharged their Guns as
him at one clap, though every shot mis^d him; yet one of the Army on the other
side of the river received one of the b^lls in his foot. Mr. Church now began
(no succor coming to him) to th^^^ it time to retreat: Saying, The Lord have
Mercy on as, if such a handful of Indians shall thus dare such an Army.

Upon this 'twas immediately resolved, and orders were given to March down into
the Neck, and having passed the Bridge, and Cassey, the direction was to extend
both wings, which being not well headed, by those that remained in the Center,
some of them mistook their Friends for their Enemies, and made a fire upon them
on the right wing, and wounded that noble Heroic Youth Ensign Savage in the
thigh; but it happily proved but a flesh wound. They Marched until they came to
the narrow of the Neck, at a Place called Koekkamuit, where they took down the
heads of Eight English Men that were killed at the head of Metapoiset-Neck, and
for upon Polls, after the barbarous manner of those salvages. There Philip had
staved all his Drums, and conveyed all his Canoo's to the East side of
Metapoiset-River. Hence it was concluded by those that were acquainted with the
Motions of those People, that they had qui^ted the Neck. Mr. Church told ^em
that Philip was doubtless gone ever to Pocasset side, to engage those Indians
in Rebellion with him: which they soon found to be true. The Enemy were not
really beaten out of Mount hope Neck, though 'twas true they fled from thence;
yet it was before any pursued them. 'Twas but to strengthen themselves, and to
gain a more advantageous Post. However, some and not a few pleased themselves
with the fancy of a Mighty Conquest.

A grand Council was held, and a Resolve past, to build a Fort there to
maintain the first ground they had gained, by the Indians leaving it to them.
And to speak the Truth, it must be said, That as they gained not that Field, by
their Sword, nor their Bow; so 'twas rather their fear than their courage, that
obliged them to set up the marks of their Conquest Mr. Church looked upon it,
and talk of it with contempt, and urged hard the pursuing the Enemy on Pocasset
side, and with the greater earnestness, because of his promise made to
Awashonks, before mentioned. The Council adjourned themselves from Mount-hope
to Reboboth, where Mr. Treasurer Southworth being weary of his charge of
Commiss^r General, (Provision being scarce and difficult to be obtained, for
the Army, that now lay still to Cover the People from no body, while they were
building a Fort for nothing) retired, and the Power and Trouble of that Pos^
was left with Mr. Church, who still urged the Commanding Officers to more over
to Pocasset side, to pursue the Enemy, and kill Philip, which would in his
opinion be more probable to keep possession of the Neck, than to tarry to build
a Fort. He was still restless on that side of the River, and the rather because
of his promise to the Squaw Sachem of Segkonate. And Capt. Fuller also urged
the same, until at length there came further order concerning the Fort. And
with all, an order for Capt. Fuller with Six files to cross the River to the
side so much insisted on, and to try if he could get Speech with any of the
Pocasset or Sogkonate Indians, and that Mr. Church should go his Second. Upon
the Captains receiving his orders, he asked Mr. Church whither he was willing
to engage in this interprize: To whom 'twas indeed too agreeable to be
declined; though he thought the enterprise was hazardous enough, for them to have
more Men assigned them. Capt. Fuller told him that for his own part he was
grown Ancient and heavy, he feared the travel and fatigue would be too much for
him. But Mr. Church urged him, and told him, he would thearfully excuse him,
his hardship and travel, and take that part to himself, if he might but go; for
he had rather do any thing in the World than stay there to build the Fort.

Then they drew out the Number assigned them and Marched the same Night to the
Ferry, and were transported to Rhode Island, from whence the next Night they
got a passage over to Pocasset-side in Rhode Island Boats, and concluded there
to dispose themselves in two Ambuscado's before day, hoping to surprise some of
the Enemy by their falling into one or other of their Ambusments. But Capt.
Fullers party being troubled with the Epidemical plague of lust after Tobacco,
must needs strike fire to Smoke it; and thereby discovered themselves to a
party of the Enemy coming up to them, who immediately fled with great
preciptation.

This Ambuscado drew off about break of day, perceiving they were discovered,
the other continued in their Post until the time assigned them, and the light
and heat of the Sun rendered their Station both insignificant and troublesome,
and then returned, unto the place of Randezvous, where they were acquainted
with the other parties disappointment, and the occasion of it. Mr. Church calls
for the breakfast he had ordered to be brought over in the Boat: but the Man
that had the charge of it confessed that he was a-sleep when the Boats-men
called him, and in haste came away and never thought of it. It happened that
Mr. Church had a few Cakes of Rusk in his Pocket, that Madam Cranston (the
Governor of Rhode-Island's Lady) gave him, when he came off the Island, which
he divided among the Company, which was all the Provisions they had.

Mr. Church after their slender breakfast proposed to Capt. Fuller, That he
would March in quest of the Enemy, with such of the Company as would be willing
to March with him; which he complied with, though with a great deal of scruple,
because of his small Number, and the extreme hazard he foresaw must attend them.

But some of the Company had reflected upon Mr. Church, that notwithstanding
his talk on the other side of the River, he had not shown them any Indians
since they came over. Which now moved him to tell them, That if it was their
desire to see Indians, he believed he should now soon show them what they
should say was enough.

The Number allowed him soon drew off to him, which could not be many, because
their whole Company consisted of no more than Thirty Six. They moved toward
Sogkonate, until they came to the brook that runs into N^nn^q^^^q^^ Neck, where
they discovered a fresh and plain Track, which they concluded to be from the
great Pine Swamp about a Mile from the Read that leads to Sogkonet. Now says
Mr. Church to his Men, If we follow this Track no doubt but we shall soon see
Indians enough; they expressed their willingness to follow the Track, and moved
in it, but had not gone far before one of them narrowly escaped being bit with
a Rattle-snake: And the Woods that the Track lead them through was haunted much
with those Snakes; which the little Company seemed more to be afraid of than
the black Serpents they were in quest of, and therefore bent their course
another way; to a Place where they thought it probable to find some of the
Enemy. Had they kept the Track to the Pine Swamp they had been certain of
meeting Indians enough; but not so certain that any of them should have
returned to give account how many.

Now they passed down into Punkatees Neck; and in their March discocovered a
large Wigwam full of Indian Truck, which the Soldiers were for loading
themselves with; until Mr. Church forbid it; telling them they might expect
soon to have their hands full, and business without caring for Plunder. Then
crossing the head of the Creek into the Neck, they again discovered fresh,
Indian Tracks, very larely passed before them into the Neck. They then got
privately and undiscovered, unto the Fence of Capt. Almy's Pease-field and
divided into two Parties, Mr. Church keeping the one Party with himself, sent
the other with Lake that was acquainted with the ground, on the other side. Two
Indians were soon discovered coming out of the Pease-field toward them: When
Mr. Church and those that were with him concealed themselves from them, by
falling ^lat on the ground: but the other division not using the same caution
were seen by the Enemy, which occasioned them to run; which w^^n Mr. Church
perceived, he shew'^ himself to them, and called, telling them he desired but
to speak with t^^^, and would not hu^^ them. But they run, and Church pursued.
The Indians c^im'd v^^^^^a Fence and one of them facing about discharged his
^^ece, ^^t wi^hont e^fection ^^e En^^^^ One of the English Soldiers ran up to
the ^ence and ^^^d upon him that ^^ad discharged his Piece; and they concluded
by the ve^^ing they heard that the Indian was wounded; but the Indians soon got
into the thickets, whence they saw them no more for the present.

Mr. Church then Marching over a plain piece of Ground where the Woods were
very th^^k on one side; ordered his little Company to March at double distance,
to make as big a show (if they should be discovered) as might be. But before
they saw any body, they were Saluted with a Volly of fifty or sixty Guns; some
Bullets came very surprizingly near Mr. Church, who starting, looked behind
him, to see what was become of his Men, expecting to have seen half of them
dead, but seeing them all upon their Legs and briskly firing at the Smokes of
the Enemies Guns, (for that was all that was then to be seen) He Blessed God,
and called to his Men not to discharge all their Guns at o^^^, lest the F^^^^y
should take the advantage of such an opportunity to run upon them with their
H^tches.

Their next Motion was immediately into the Pease field. When they came to the
Fence Mr Church ^^d as many as had not discharged their Guns, to clap under the
Fence, and lie close, while the other at some distance in the Field flood to
charge; hoping that if the Enemy should creep to the Fence to gain a shot at
those that were ^arging their Guns, they might be surprised by those that lay
under the Fence. But casting his Eyes to the side of the Hill above them; the
hill seemed to move, being covered over with Indians, with their bright Guns
glittering in the Sun, and running in a circumference with a design to surround
them.

Seeing such Multitudes surrounding him and his little Company; it put him upon
thinking what was become of the Boats that were ordered to attend him: And
looking up, he spied them ashore at Sandy-point on the Island side of the
River, with a number of Horse and Foot by them, and wondered what should be the
occasion; until he was afterward informed, That the Boats had been over that
Morning from the Island and had landed a Party of Men at Fogland, that were
designed in Punkatees Neck to fetch off some Cattle and Horses, but were
Ambuscado^^, and many of them wounded by the Enemy.

Now our Gentleman's Courage and Conduct were both put to the Test, the
incourages his Men; and orders some to run and take a Wall to shelter before
the Enemy gained it. It Was time for them now to think of escaping if they knew
which way. Mr. Church orders his Men to strip to their white Shirts, that the
Islanders might discover them to be English Men; and then orders Three Guns to
be fired distinct, hoping it might be observed by their friends on the opposite
Shore. The Men that were ordered to take the Wall being very hungry, stopped a
while among the Pease to gather a few, being about four Rod from the Wall; the
Enemy from behind it hailed them with a Shower of Bullets; but soon all but one
came tumbling over an old hedge down the bank where Mr. Church and the rest
were, and told him that his Brother B. Southworth, who was the Man that was
missing, was killed, that they saw him fall; and so they did indeed see him
fall, but 'twas without a Shot, and lay no longer than till he had opportunity
to clap a Bullet into one of the Enemies Forehead, and then came running to his
Company. The meanness of the English's Powder was now their greatest
misfortune; when they were immediately upon this bese^ with Multitudes of
Indians, who possessed themselves of every Rock, Stump, Tree, or Fence that was
in sight, firing upon them without ceasing; while they had no other shelter but
a small bank and bi^ of a water Fence. And yet to add to the disadvantage of
this little handful of distressed Men; The Indians also possessed themselves of
the Ruins of a Stone-house that over looked them, and of the black Rocks to
the Southward of them; so that now they had no way to prevent lying quite open
to some, or other of the Enemy, but to heap up Stones before them, as they did,
and still bravely and wonderfully defended themselves, against all the numbers
of the Enemy. At length came over one of the Boats from the Island Shore, but
the Enemy plied their Shot so warmly to her as made her keep at some distance;
Mr. Church desired them to send their Canoo ashore to fetch them on board; but
no persuasions, nor arguments could prevail with them to bring their Canoo to
shore. Which some of Mr. Churches Men perceiving, began to cry out, For God's
sake to take them off, for their Ammunition was spent, etc. Mr. Church being
sensible of the danger of the Enemies hearing their Complaints, and being made
acquainted with the weakness and scantiness of their Ammunition, fiercely
called to the Boats-master, and bid either send his Canoo ashore, or else
begone presently, or he would fire upon him.

Away goes the Boat and leaves them still to shift for themselves. But then
another difficulty arose; the Enemy seeing the Boat leave them, were reanimated
and fired thicker and faster than ever; Upon which some of the Men that were
lightest of foot, began to talk of attempting an escape by flight: until Mr.
Church sollidly convinced them of the impracticableness of it; and encouraged
them yet, told them, That be had observed so much of the remarkable and
wonderful Providence of God hitherto preserving them, that encouraged him to
believe with much confidence th^^^^ed would yet preserve them; that not a b^^^
of their head should fall (...) ground; bid them be Patient, Courageous and
Prudently sparing of their Ammunition, and be made no doubt but they should
come well off yet, etc until his little Army, again resolve one and all to stay
with, and stick by him. One of them by Mr. Churches order was pitching a flat
Stone up an end before him in the Sand, when a Bullet from the Enemy with a
full force stroke the Stone while he was pitching it an end; which put the poor
fellow to a miserable start, till Mr. Church called upon him to observe, How
God directed the Bullets that the Enemy could not hit him when in the same
place, yet could hit the Stone as it was erected.

While they were thus making the best defense they could against their numerous
Enemies that made the Woods ring with their constant yelling and shouting: And
Night coming on, some body told Mr. Church, they spied a Sloop up the River as
far as Gold-Island, that seemed to be coming down toward them: He looked up
and told them Succor was now coming, for he believed it was Capt. Golding,
whom he knew to be a Man for business; and ^^^ld certainly fetch them off, if
be came: the Wind being fair, the Vessel was soon with them; and Capt. Golding
it was. Mr. Church (as soon as they came to Speak one with another) desired him
to come to Aneber at such a distance from the Shore that be might veer out his
Cable and ride a float, and let slip his Cano^ that is might drive ash^re;
which directions Capt. Golding observed, but the Enemy gave him such a warm
Salute, that his Sail^, Color, and Stern were full of Bullet holes.

The Canoo came ashore, but was so small that she would not bare above two Mea
at a time; and when two were got aboard, they turned her loose to drive ashore
for two more: and the Sloops company kept the Indians in play the while. But
when at last it came to Mr. Churches turn to go aboard, he had left his Hat and
Cutlash at the Well where he went to drink when he fist came down; he told his
Company, He would never go off and leave his Hat and Cutlash for the Indians;
they should never have that to reflect upon him. Tho 'he was much diffwaded
from it, yet he would go fetch them. He put all the Powder he had left into his
Gun (and a poor charge it was) and went presenting his Gun at the Enemy, until
he took up what he went for; at his return be discharged his Gun at the Enemy
to bid them farewell, for that time; but had not Powder enough to carry the
Bullet half way to them.

Two Bullets from the Enemy stuck the Canoo as he went on Board, one grazed the
hair of his Head a little before; another struck in a small Stake that stood
right against the middle of his Breast.

Now this Gentleman with his Army, making in all 20 Men, himself, and his Pilot
being numbered with them, got all safe aboard after Six hours engagement with
300 Indians; whose N^mber we were told afterward by some of themselves. A
deliverance which that good Gentleman often mentions to the Glory of God, and
His Protecting Providence. The next day meeting with the rest of their little
Company whom he had left at Pocasset, (that had also ^ small skirmish with the
Indians, and had two Men Wounded) they returned to the Mount-hope Garrison;
which Mr. Church used to call the loosing Fort. Mr. Church then returning to
the Island to seek Provision for the Army, meets with Alderman, a noted Indian
that was just come over from the Squaw Sachem's Cape of Pocasset, having
deserted from her, and had brought over his Family: Who gave him an account of
the State of the Indians, and where each of the Sagamo^es head quarters were.
Mr. Church then discoursed with some who knew the Spot well where the Indians
said Weetamores head quarters were, and offered their Service to Pilot him.
With this News he hastened to the Mount-hope Garrison. The Army express^d their
readiness to embrace such an opportunity.

All the ablest Soldiers were now immediately drawn off equipped and dispatched
upon this design, under the Command of a certain Officer: and having Marched
about two Miles, viz. until they came to the Cove that lies S. W. from the
Mount, where orders was given for an halt. The Commander in Chief told them he
thought it proper to take advice before he went any further; called Mr. Church
and the Pilot, and asked them. How they knew that Philip and all his Men were
not by that time got to Weetamores Camp; or that all her own Men were not by
that time returned to her again? With many more frightful questions. Mr. Church
cold him, they had acquainted him with as much as they knew, and that for his
part be could discover n^^^hing that need to discourage them from Proceeding,
that he thought it so practicable, that he with the Pilot would willingly lead
the way to the Spot and hazard the brant. But the Chief Commander insisted on
this, That the Enemies number were s^ great, and he did not know what numbers
more might be added unto them by that time: And his Company so small, that he
could not think it practicable to attack them. Added moreover, That if be was
sure of killing all the Enemy, and knew that be must life the Life of one of
his Men in the action, he would not attempt it. Pray Sir, then (Replied Mr.
Church) Please to lead your Company to yonder Windmill on Rhode Island, and
there they will be out of danger of being killed by the Enemy, and we shall
have less trouble to supply them with Provisions. But return he would, and did,
unto the Garrison until more strength came to them: And a Sloop to transport
them to the Fall River, in order to visit Weetamores Camp. Mr. Church, one
Baxter and Capt. Hunter an Indian, profer'd to go out on the discovery on the
left Wing; which was accepted; they had not Marched above a quarter of a Mile
before they started Three of the Enemy. Capt, Hunter wounded one of them in his
knee, whom when he came up he discovered to be his near kinsman; the Captive
desired favor for his Squaw, if she should fall into their hands, but asked
none for himself, excepting the liberty of taking a Whiff of Tobacco, and while
he was taking his Whiff, his kinsman with one blow of his Hatchet dispatched
him. Proceeding to Weetamores Camp, they were discovered by one of the Enemy,
who ran in and gave Information; upon which a lusty Young Fellow lest his Meat
upon his Spit, running ha^^ily out told his companions, he would kill an
English man before he eat his dinner: but failed of his design, being no sooner
out but shot down. The Enemies sires, and what shelter they had was by the Edge
of a thick Cedar Swamp, into which on this Alarm they betook themselves; and
the English as nimbly pursued; but were soon commanded back by their Chieftain
after they were come within hearing of the Cries of their Women, and Children,
and so ended that Exploit. But returning to their Sloop the Enemy pursued them
and wounded two of their Alen. The next day returned to the Mount-hope Garrison.

Soon after this, was Philips head Quarters visited by some other English
Forces; but Philip and his gang had the very fortune to escape that Weetamore
and hers (but now mentioned) had: they took into a Swamp and their pursuers
were commanded back. After this Dartmouths distresses required Succor, great
Part of the Town being laid desolate, and many of the Inhabitants killed; the
most of Plymouth Forces were ordered thither: And coming to Russels Garrison at
Poneganset, they met with a Number of the Enemy that had surrendered themselves
Prisoners on terms promised by Capt. Eels of the Garrison; and Ralph Earl that
persuaded them (by a friend Indian he had employed) to come in. And had their
promises to the Indians been kept, and the Indians farely treated, it is
probable that most if not all the Indians in those Parts, had soon followed the
Example of those that had now surrendered themselves; which would have been a
good step toward finishing the War. But in spite of all that Capt. E^ls,
Church, or Earl could say, argue, plead, or beg, some body else that had more
Power in their hands improved it; and without any regard to the promises made
them on their surrendering themselves, they were carried away to Plymouth, there
sold, and transported out of the Country; being about Eight-score Persons. An
action so hateful to Mr. Church, that he opposed it to the loss of the good
will and Respects of some that before were his good Friends. But while these
things were acting at Dartmouth, Philip made his escape, leaving his Country,
fled over Taunton-River, and Reboboth-Plain, and Petuxet-River, where Capt
Edmunds of Providence made some spoil upon; and had probably done more, but was
prevented by the coming up of a Superior Officer, that put him by. And now
another Fort was built at Pocasset, that proved a troublesome and chargeable as
that at Mount-hope; and the remainder of the Summer was improved in providing
for the Forts and Forces there maintained, while our Enemies were fled some
hundreds of Miles into the Country, near as far as Albany. And now strong
Suspicions began to arise of the Narraganset Indians, that they were ill
affected, and designed mischief; and so the event soon discovered. The next
Winter they began their Hostilities, upon the English. The United Colonies then
agreed to sent an Army to suppress them: Governor Winslow to command the Army.
He undertaking the Expedition invited Mr. Church to command a Company in the
Expedition; which he declined, craving excuse from taking Commission, he
promised to wait upon him as a Reformado through the Expedition. Having rid with
the General to Boston, and from thence to Reboboth. Upon the Generals request
he went thence the nearest way over the Ferries, with Major Smith to his
Garrison in the Narraganset Country, to prepare and provide for the coming of
General Winslow; who Marched round through the Country with his Army proposing by
Night to surprise P^mham a certain Narraganset Sachem) and his Town; but being
aware of the approach of our Army made their escape into the deserts. But Mr.
Church meeting with fair Winds arrived safe at the Major's Garrison in the
evening. And soon began to inquire after the Enemies Resorts, Wigwams or
Sleeping Places; and having gained some intelligence, he proposed to the
Eldriges, and some other brisk hands, that he met with, to attempt the
Surprising of some of the Enemy to make a Present of to the General, when he
should arrive: which might advantage his design; being brisk blades, they
readily complied with the motion, and were soor upon their March. The Night was
very cold, but blessed with the Moon; before the day broke they effected their
exploit, and by the rising of the Sun arrived at the Major's Garrison, where
they met the General and presented him with Eighteen of the Enemy they had
Captived. The General pleased with the exploit, gave them thanks, particularly
to Mr. Church, the mover and chief actor of the business; and sending two of
them (likely Boys) a present to Boston; smiling on Mr. Church, told him, That
he made no doubt but his Faculty would supply them with Indian Boys enough
before the War was ended.

Their next move was to a Swamp which the Indians had Fortifyed with a Fort.
Mr. Church rid in the Generals guard when the bloody engagement began; but
being impatient of being out of the heat of the action, importunately begged
leave of the General that he might run down to the assistance of his friends,
the General yielded to his request, provided he could rally some hands to go
with him. Thirty Men immediately drew out and followed him: They entered the
Swamp and passed over the Log, that was the passage into the Fort, where they
saw many Men and several Valiant Captains lie slain: Mr. Church spying Capt.
Gardner of Salem amidst the Wigwams in the East end of the Fort, made toward
him, but on a sudden, while they were looking each other in the Face, Capt.
Gardner settled down, Mr. Church stepped to him and seeing the blood run down
his cheek lifted up his Cap and calling him by his Name; he looked up in his
Face, but spoke not a Word, being Mortally Shot through the head; and observing
his Wound, Mr. Church found the ball entered his head on the side that was next
the Upland, where the English entered the Swamp. Upon which, having ordered some
care to be taken of the Captain, he dispatched information to the General that
the best and forwardest of his Army that hazarded their lives to enter the
Fort, upon the muzzle of the Enemies Guns, were Shot in their backs, and killed
by them that lay behind. Mr. Church with his small Company hastened out of the
Fort (that the English were now possessed of) to get a Shot at the Indians that
were in the Swamp, and kept firing upon them. He soon met with a broad bloody
track, where the Enemy had fled with their Wounded men; following hard in the
tract, he soon spied one of the Enemy, who clapped his Gun across his breast,
made toward Mr. Church, and beckned to him with his hand; Mr. Church
immediately commanded no Man to hurt him, hoping by him to have gained some
intelligence of the Enemy, that might be of advantage; but it unhappily fell
out that a Fellow that had lag'd behind coming up, shot down the Indian, to Mr.
Church's great grief and disappointment. But immediately they heard a great
shout of the Enemy, which seemed to be behind them, or between them and the
Fort; and discovered them running from tree to tree to gain advantages of
firing upon the English that were in the Fort. Mr. Churches great difficulty
now was how to discover himself to his Friends in the Fort, using several
inventions, till at length gained an opportunity to call to, and inform a
Sergeant in the Fort, that he was there, and might be exposed to their Shots,
unless they observed it. By this time he discovered a number of the Enemy
almost within Shot of him, making toward the Fort; Mr. Church and his Company
were favored by a heap of brush that was between them and the Enemy, and
prevented their being discovered to them. Mr. Church had given his Men their
particular orders for firing upon the Enemy; and as they were rising up to make
their Shot, the before mentioned Sergeant in the Fort called out to them, for
God's sake not to fire, for be believed they were some of their Friend Indians;
they clapped down again, but were soon sensible of the Sergeants mistake. The
Enemy got to the top of the Tree, the body whereof the Sergeant stood upon, and
there clapped down out of sight of the Fort, but all this while never discovered
Mr. Church, who observed them to keep gathering unto that Place, until there
seemed to be a formidable black heap of them. Now brave boys (said Mr. Church
to his Men) if we mind our bits, we may have a brave Shot, and let our sign for
firing on them, be their rising up to fire into the Fort. It was not long
before the Indians rising up as one body, designing to pour a Volley into the
Fort. When our Church nimbly started up and gave them such a round Volley, and
unexpected clap on their backs, that they who escaped with their Lives, were so
surprised, that they scampered, they knew not whether themselves; about a dozen
of them ran right over the Log into the Fort, and took into a sort of a Hovel
that was build with Poles, after the manner of a corn crib. Mr. Church's Men
having their Catteridges fixed, were soon ready to obey his order, which was
immediately to charge and run on upon the Hovel, and over-set it, calling as he
run on to some that were in the Fort to assist him in over-setting of it; they
no sooner came to Face the Enemies shelter, but Mr. Church discovered that one
of them had found a hole to point his Gun through, right at him; but however
encouraged his Company, and ran right on, till he was struck with Three
Bullets, one in his Thigh, which was near half of it cut off as it glanced on
the joint of the Hip-bone; another through the gatherings of his Breeches and
Draws, with a small flesh Wound; a third peirced his Pocket, and wounded a pair
of Mittins, that he had borrowed of Capt. Prentice; being wrapped up together
had the misfortune of having many holes cut through them with one Bullet: But
however he made shift to keep on his Legs, and nimbly discharged his Gun (...)
them that wounded him: being disinabled now to go a step his Men would have
carried him off, but he forbid their touching of him, until they had perfected
their project of over-setting the Enemies shelter; bid them run, for now the
Indians bad no Cuns charged. While he was urging them to run on, the Indians
began to shoot Arrows, and with one pierced through the Arm of an English Man
that had hold of Mr. Churches Arm to support him. The English, in short, were
discouraged, and drew back. And by this time the English People in the Fort had
began to set fire to the Wigwams and Houses in the (...), which Mr. Church
labored hard to prevent; they told him, They had orders from the General to
burn them; he begged them to forbear until he had discoursed the General; and
hastening to him, be begged to spare the Wigwams, etc. in the Fort from fire,
told him, The Wigwams were Market proof, being all lined with Baskets and Tubbs
of Grain and other Provisions, sufficient to supply the whole Army, until the
Spring of the Year; and every wounded Man might have a good warm House to lodge
in, which other-ways would necessarily perish with the Storms and Cold. And
more-over, that the Army had no other Provision to trust unto or depend upon;
that be knew that Plymouth Forces had not so much as one Biscake L^ft, for be
bad seen their last dealt out, etc. The General advising a few Words with the
Gentlemen that were about him, Moved toward the Fort, designing to ride in
himself, and bring in the whole Army. But just as he was entering the Swamp, one
of his Captains meet him, and asked him, Whither he was going? He told him into
the Fort; the Captain laid hold of his Horse, and told him, His Life was worth
an bundred of theirs, and he should not expose himself. The General told him,
That he supposed the brunt was over, and that Mr. Church had informed him that
the Fort was taken, etc. And as the case was circumstanced he was of the Mind,
that it was most practicable for him, and his Army to shelter themselves in the
Fort. The Captain in a great heat, replied, That Church ly'd; and told the
General, That if he moved another step toward the Fort he would shoot his
Horse under him. Then brusled up another Gentleman, a certain Doctor, and
opposs'd Mr. Chureh's advice, and said, If it were complied with, it would kill
more Men than the Enemy had killed; for (said he) by to Morrow the wounded Men
will be so stiff that there will be no moving of them: And looking upon Mr.
Church, and seeing the blood flowing a pace from his Wounds, told him, That if
he gave such advice as that was, he should bleed to Death like a Dog, before
they would endeavor to stench his blood Though after they had prevailed
against his advice, they were sufficiently kind to him. And burning up all the
Houses and Provisions in the Fort; the Army returned the same Night in the
Storm and Cold: And I Suppose every one that is acquainted with the
circumstances of that Nights March, deeply laments the miseries that attended
them, especially the wounded and dying Men. But it mercifully came to pass that
Capt. Andrew Belcher arrived at Mr. Smiths that very Night from Boston, with a
Vessel laden with Provisions for the Army, who must otherwise have perished
for want Some of the Enemy that were then in the Fort have since informed as,
that near a third of the Indians belonging to all that Narraganset Country were
killed by the English, and by the Cold that Night, that they fled out of their
Fort so hastily that they carried nothing with them: that if the English had
kept in the Fort, the Indians had certainly been necessitated, either to
surrender themselves to them, or to have perished by Hunger, and the severity
of the Season. Some time after this Fort-sight a certain Soghonate Indian
hearing Mr. Church relate the manner of his being wounded, told him, That he
did not know but he himself was the Indian that wounded him, for that he was
one of that company of Indians that Mr. Church made a Shot upon when they were
rising up to make a Shot into the Fort; they were in number about 60 or 70,
that just then came down from Pumhams Town, and never before then fired a Gun
against the English; that when Mr. Church fired upon them he killed 14 dead in
the Spot, and wounded a greater number than he killed, many of which dyed
afterward with their wounds, in the Cold and Storm the following Night.

Mr. Church was moved with other wounded men over to Rhode Island, where in
about a Months time he was in some good measure recovered of his Wounds, and
the Fever that attended them. And then went over to the General to take his
leave of him, with a design to return home.

But the Generals great importunity again persuaded him, to accompany him in a
long March, into the Nipmuck Country, though he had then Tents in his Wounds, and
so Lame as not able to Mount his Horse without two Men's assistance.

In this March the first thing remarkable was, they came to an Indian Town,
where there were many Wigwams in sight, but an Icy Swamp lying between them and
the Wigwams, prevented their running at once upon it as they intended: there
was much firing upon each side before they passed the Swamp. But at length the
Enemy all fled, and a certain Moobegan that was a friend Indian, pursued and
se^'d one of the Enemy that had a small wound in his Leg, and brought him
before the General, where he was examined. Some were for torturing of him to
bring him to a more ample confession, of what he knew concerning his
Countrymen. Mr. Church verily believing he had been ingenious in his
confession, interceeded and prevailed for his escaping torture. But the Army
being bound forward in their March, and the Indians wound somewhat disinabling
him for Traveling, 'twas concluded he should be knocked on the Head:
Accordingly he was brought before a great fire, and the Moobegan that took him
was allowed, as he desired, to be the Executiner. Mr. Church taking no delight
in the Sport, framed an arrant at some distance among the baggage Horses, and
when he had got some Ten Rods, or thereabouts from the fire, the Executioner
fetching a blow with his Hatchet at the head of the Prisoner, he being aware of
the blow, dodged his aside, and the Executioner missing his stroke the Hatchet
slew out of his hand, and had like to have done execution where 'twas not
designed. The Prisoner upon his narrow escape broke from them that held him,
and notwithstanding his Wound made use of his Legs, and hap'd to run right upon
Mr. Church, who laid hold on him, and a close skuffle they had, but the Indian
having no Clothes on slipped from him, and ran again, and Mr. Church pursued the
Indian, although being Lame, there was no great odds in the Race, until the
Indian stumbled and fell, and they closed again, skuffled and sought pretty
smartly, until the Indian by the advantage of his nakedness slipped from his
hold again, and set out on his third Race, with Mr. Church close at his heels,
endeavoring to lay hold on the hair of his Head, which was all the hold could
be taken of him; and running through a Swamp that was covered with hollow Ice, it
made so loud a noise that Mr. Church expected (but in vain) that some of his
English friends would follow the noise, and come to his assistance. But the
Indian hap'd to run a-thwart a mighty Tree that lay fallen near breast-high,
where he stopped, and cried out a loud for help; but Mr. Church being soon upon
him again, the Indian seized him fast by the hair of his Head, and endeavoring
by twisting to break his Neck; but though Mr. Churches wounds had somewhat
weakened him, and the Indian a stout fellow, yet he held him well in play, and
twisted the Indians Neck as well, and took the advantage of many opportunities,
while they hung by each others hair gave him notorious bunts in the face with
his head. But in the heat of this skuffle they heard the Ice break with some
bodies coming a-pace to them, which when they heard, Church concluded there was
help for one or other of them, but was doubtful which of them must now receive
the fatal stroke; anon some body comes up to them, who proved to be the Indian
that had first taken the Prisoner. Without speaking a word, he felt them out
(for 'twas so dark he could not distinguish them by sight) the one being
clothed, and the other naked, he felt where Mr. Churches hands were fastened in
the Netops hair, and with one blow settled his Hatchet in between them, and
ended the strife. He then spoke to Mr. Church and hugged him in his Arms, and
thanked him abundantly for catching his Prisoner; and cut off the head of his
Victim, and carried it to the Camp, and giving an account to the rest of the
friend Indians in the Camp, how Mr. Church had seized his Prisoner, etc. they
all joined a mighty shout.

Proceeding in this March, they had the success of killing many of the Enemy:
until at length their Provision failing, they returned home.

King Philip (as was before hinted) was fled to a Place called Scattacook,
between York and Albany, where the Mo^bags made a descent upon him and killed
many of his Men, which moved him from thence.

His next kennelling Place was at the falls of Connecticut River, where
sometime after Capt. Turner found him, came upon him by Night, killed him a
great many Men, and frighted many more into the River, that were hurled down
the falls and drowned.

Philip got over the River, and on the back side of the Wetuset-hills meets
with all the Remnants of the Narraganset and Nipmuck Indians, that were there
gathered together, and became very numerous; and made their descent on Sudbury,
and the Adjacent Parts of the Country, where they met with and swallowed up
Valiant Capt. Wadsworth and his Company, and many other doleful desolations, in
those Parts. The News whereof coming to Plymouth, and they expecting probably
the Enemy would soon return again into their Colony: The Council of War were
called together; and Mr. Church was sent for to them, being observed by the
whole Colony to be a Person extraordinarily qualified for and adapted to the
Affairs of War. It Was proposed in Council that least the Enemy in their return
should fall on Rehoboth, or some other of their Out-Towns, a Company consisting
of 60 or 70 Men should be sent in to those Parts; and Mr. Church invited to
take the Command of them. He told them, That if the Enemy returned into that
Colony again, they might reasonably expect that they would come very numerous;
and that if be should take the Command of Men, he should not lie in any Town or
Garrison with them, but would lie in the Woods as the Enemy did: And that to
send out such small Companies against such Multitudes of the Enemy that were
now Mustered together, would be but to deliver so many Men into their hands, to
be destroyed, as the Worthy Capt. Wadsworth and his Company were. His advice
upon the whole was. That if they sent out any Forces, to send not less than 300
Soldiers; and that the other Colonies should be asked to send out their
Quota's also; adding, That if they intended to make an end of the War, by
subduing the Enemy, they must make a business of the War, as the Enemy did; and
that for his own part, he had wholly laid aside all his own private business
and concerns, ever since the War broke out. He told them, That if they would
send forth such Forces as he should direct to, he would go with them for Six
weeks March, which was long enough for Men to be kept in the Woods at once; and
if they might be sure of Liberty to return in such a space, Men would go out
cheerfully. And he would engage 150 of the hest Soldiers should immediately
List Voluntarily to go with him, if they would please to add 50 more; and 100
of the Friend Indians; and with such on Army he made no doubt but he might do
good Service; but on other terms he did not incline to be concerned.

Their reply was, That they were already in debt, and so big an Army would
bring such charge upon them, that they should never be able to pay. And as for
sending out Indians, they thought it no ways advisable, and in short, none of
his advice practicable.

Now Mr. Churches Consort, and his then only Son were till this time remaining
at Duxborough, and his fearing their safety there (unless the War were more
vigorously engaged in) resolved to move to Rhode Island; though it was much
opposed both by the Government, and by Relations But at length, the Governor
considering that he might be no less Serviceable by being on that side of the
Colony, gave his permit, and wished he had Twenty more as good Men to send with
him.

Then preparing for his Removal, he went with his small Family to Plymouth to
take leave of their Friends; where they met with his Wives Parents, who much
persuaded that She might be left at Mr. Clarks Garrison, (which they supposed
to be a mighty safe Place) or at least that She might be there until her soon
expected lying-inn was over (being near her time.) Mr. Church no ways inclining
to venture her any longer in those Parts, and no arguments prevailing with him
he resolutely set out for Taurton, and many of their Friends accompanied them.
There they found Capt. Pierce, with a commanded Party, who offered Mr. Church
to send a Relation of his with some others to guard him to Rhode Island. But
Mr. Church thanked him for his Respectful offer, but for some good reasons
refused to accept it. In short, they got safe to Capt. John Almy's house upon
Rhode Island, where the met with friends and good entertainment. But by the
way, let me not forget this remarkable Providence. viz. That within Twenty-four
hours or there abouts, after their arrival at Rhode Island, Mr. Clarks Garrison
that Mr. Church was so much importuned to leave his Wife and Child at, was
destroyed by the Enemy.

Mr. Church being at present disinabled from any particular Service in he War,
began to think of some other employ; but he no sooner took a tool to cut a
small stick, but he cut off the top of his Fore finger, and the next to it,
half off; upon which he smillingly said, That he thought he was out of his way,
to leave the War; and resolved he would to War again. Accordingly his Second
Son being born on the 12th of May and his Wife and Son like to do well, Mr.
Church embraces the opportunity of a passage in a Sloop bound to Barnstabl^;
who landed him at Sogkon^sset, from whence he rid to Plymouth; arrived there on
the first Tuesday in June: The General Court then sitting, welcomed him told
him they were glad to see him Alive. He replied, He was as glad to see them
Alive, for he had seen so many fires and smokes toward their side of the
Country since he left them, that he could scarce eat or sleep with any comfort,
for fear they had been all destroyed. For all Traveling was stopped, and no
News had passed for a long time together. He gave them account, that the
Indians had made horrid desolations at Providence, Warwick, Petuxit, and all
over the Narra anset Country, and that they prevailed daily against the English
on that side of the Country. Told them, he longed to hear what Methods they
designed in the War. They told him, They were particularly glad that Providence
had brought him there at that juncture: For they had concluded the very next
day to send out an Army of 200 Men, two third English, and one third Indians,
in some measure agreeable to his former proposal; expecting Boston, and
Connecticut to join with their Quota's. In short, It was so concluded. And that
Mr. Church should return to the Island, and see what he could Muster there, of
those that had moved from Swanz^y, Dartmouth, etc. So returning the same way he
came; when he came to Sogkonesset, he had a sham put upon him, about a Boat he
had bought to go home in; and was forced to hire two of the friend Indians to
paddle him in a Canoo from Elsabeths to Rhode Island.

It fell out that as they were in their Voyage passing by Sogkonate-point, some
of the Enemy were upon the Rocks a fishing; he bid the Indians that managed the
Canoo to paddle so near to the Rocks as that he might call to th^se Indians;
told them. That he had a great mind ever since the War broke out to speak with
some of the Sogkonate Indians, and that they were their Relations, and
therefore they need not fear their hurting of them. And he added, That he had a
mighty conceit that if be could gain a fair Opportunity to discourse them, that
he could draw them off from Philip, for he knew they never heartily loved him.
The Enemy hollowed and made signs for the Ca^oo to come to them: But when they
approached them they skulked and ^hid in the clifts of the Rocks; then Mr.
Church ordered (...) Canoo to be paddled off again, least if he came too near
they should sire upon him. Then the Indians appearing again, beckn'd and called
in the Indian Language, and bid them come ashore, they wanted to speak with
them. The Indians in the Canoo answered them again; but they on the Rocks told
them, That the surff made such a noise against the Rocks, they could not hear
any thing they said. Then Mr. Church by signs with his hands, gave to
understand, That he would have two of them go down upon the point of the beach
(a place where a Man might see who was near him) accordingly two of them ran
a-long the beach, and met him there; without their Arms excepting that one of
them had a Lance in his hand; they uged Mr. Church to come ashore for they had
a great desire to have some discourse with him; He told them, if he that had
his weapon in his hand would carry it up some distance upon the beach and leave
it, he would come ashore and discourse them: He did so, and Mr. Church went
ashore, halled up his Canoo, ordered one of his Indians to stay by it, and the
other to walk above on the beach, as a Sentinel to see that the Coasts were
clear. And when Mr. Church came up to the Indians, one of them happened to be
honest George, one of the two that Awashonks formerly sent to call him to her
Dance, and was so careful to guard him back to his House again; the last
Sogkonate Indian he spoke with before the War broke out; he spoke English very
well. Mr. Church asked him where Awashonks was? he told him in a Swamp about
three Miles off. Mr. Church again asked him, What it was he wanted that he
hollowed and called him ashore? he answered, That he took him for Church as
soon as he heard his Voice in the Canoo, and that he was very glad to see him
alive, and he believed his Mistress would be as glad to see him, and speak with
him; he told him further, That he believed she was not fond of maintaining a
War with the English; and that she had left Philip, and did not intend to
return to him any more; he was mighty earnest with Mr. Church to tarry there
while he would run and call her: but he told him no; for he did not know but
the Indians would come down and kill him before he could get back again; he
said, if Mount-hope or Pocesset Indians could catch him, he believed they would
knock him on the head: But all Sogkonate Indians knew him very well, and he
believed would none of them hurt him. In short, Mr. Church refused then to
tarry, but promised that he would come over again, and speak with Awashonks,
and some other Indians that he had a mind to talk with.

Accordingly he appointed him to notify Awashonks, her Son Peter, their Chief
Captain and one No^^pash (an Indian that Mr. Church had formerly a particular
respect for) to meet him two days after, at a Rock at the lower end of Capt.
Richmonds Farm; which was a very noted place; and if that day should prove
Stormy, or Windy, they were to expect him the next moderate day. Mr. Church
telling George, that he would have him come with the Persons mentioned, and no
more. They giving each other their hand upon it parted, and Mr. Church went
home, and the next Morning to New port, and informed the Government, what had
passed between him and the Sogkonate Indians. And desired their permit for him
and Daniel Wilcock, (a Man that well understood the Indian Language) to go over
to them. They told him, They thought he was mad, after such Service ^s he had
done, and such dangers that he escaped, now to throw away his Life, for the
Rogues would as certainly kill him, as ever he went over; and utterly refused
to grant his permit, or to be willing that he should run the risque.

Mr. Church told them, That it had ever been in his thoughts since the War
broke out, that if he could discourse the Sogkonate Indians, he could draw them
off from Philip, and employ them against him; but could, till now, never have
an Opportunity to speak with any of them, and was very loathe to l^se it, etc.
At length, they told him, If he would go, it should be only with the two
Indians that came with him; but they would give him no permit under their
hands. He took his leave of them, Resolving to prosecute his design; they told
him they were sorry to see him so Resolute, nor if he went did they ever expect
to see his face again.

He bought a Bottle of Rhum, and a small role of Tobacco, to carry with him,
and returned to his Family. The next Morning, being the day appointed for the
Meeting, he prepared two light Canoo's for the design, and his own Man, with
the two Indians for his company. He used such arguments with his tender, and
now almost broken hearted Wise, from the experience of former preservations,
and the prospect of the great Service he might do, might it please God to
succeed his design, etc. that he obtained her consent to his attempt; and
committing her, his Babes and himself to Heavens protection. He set out, they
had from the Shore about a League to paddle; drawing near the place they saw
the Indians setting on the bank, watring for their coming. Mr. Church sent one
of the Indians ashore in one of the Canoo's, to see whither it were the same
Indians whom he had appointed to meet him, and no more; and if so to stay
ashore and send George to fetch him. Accordingly George came and fetched Mr.
Church ashore, while the other Canoo played off to see the event, and to carry
tidings if the Indians should prove false.

Mr. Church asked George Whether Awashonks and the other Indians he appointed
to meet him were there? He answered they were. He then asked him, If there were
no more than they whom he appointed to be there? To Which he would give him no
direct answer. However he went ashore, where he was no sooner landed, but
Awashonks and the reft that he had appointed to meet him there, rose up and
came down to meet him; and each of them successively gave him their hands, and
expressed themselves glad to see him, and gave him thanks for exposing himself
to visit them. They walked together about a Gunshot from the water to a
convenient place to sit down. Where at once a-rose up a great body of Indians,
who had lain hid in the grass, (that was as high as a Man's waste) and gathered
round them, till they had closed them in; being all armed with Guns, Spears,
Hatchets, etc. with their hair trimmed and faces painted, in their Warlike
appearance. It was doubtless somewhat surprising to our Gentleman at first,
but without any visible discovery of it, after a small silent pause on each
side, He spoke to Awashonks and told her, That George had informed him that see
had a desire to see him, and discourse about making Peace with the English. She
answered, Yes. Then said Mr. Church, It is customary when People meet to treat
of Peace to lay aside their Arms, and not to appear in such Hostile form as
your People do: desired of her that if they might talk about Peace, which he
desired they might, Her men might lay aside their Arms, and appear more
treatable. Upon which there began a considerable noise and murmur among them in
weir own Language. Till Awashonks asked him, What Arms they should lay down,
and where? He (perceiving the Indians looked very surly, and much displeased)
Replied, Only their Guns at some small distance, for formality ^ake. Upon which
with one consent they laid aside their Guns, and came and sat down.

Mr. Church pulled out his Callebash and asked Awashonks, Whether she had lived
so long at Wetrset, as to forget to drink Occapechees; and drinking to her, he
perceived that she watched him very diligently to see (as he thought) whither
he swallowed any of the Rhum; he offered her the Shell, but she desired him to
drink again first, He then told her, There was no poison in it, and pouring
some into the Palm of his hand, supped it up and took the Shell and drank to her
again, and drank a good Swig which indeed was no more than he needed. Then they
all standing up, he said to Awashonks, You wont drink for fear there should be
poison in it: And then handed it to a little ill looked fellow, who catched it
readily enough, and as greedily would have swallowed the Liquor when he had it
at his mouth; But Mr. Church caught him by the throat and took it from him,
asking him, Whether he intended to swallow S^ell and al^? And then handed it to
Awashonks, she ventured to take a good hearty dram, and passed it among her
Attendants.

The Shell being emptied, he pulled out his Tobacco, and having distributed it,
they began to talk.

Awashonks demanded of him, the Reason why he had not (agreeable to his promise
when she saw him last) been down at Sogkonate before now; Saying that probably
if he had come then according to his promise, they had never joined with Philip
against the English.

He told her he was prevented by the Wars breaking out so suddenly. And yet, he
was afterward coming down, and came as far as Punkateese, where a great many
Indians set upon him, and fought him a whole afternoon, though he did not come
prepared to fight, had but Nineteen Men with him, whose chief design was to
gain an Opportunity to discourse some Sogkonate Indians. Upon this there at
once arose a mighty Murmur, consused noise, and talk among the fierce locked
Creatures, and all rising up in an hubbub; and a great surly locked fellow took
up his Tomh^g, or wooden Cutlash, to kill Mr. Church, but some others prevented
him.

The Interpreter asked Mr. Church, if he understood what it was that the great
fellow (they had hold of) said? He answered him, No. Why, faid the Interpreter,
He says, you killed his Brother at Punkateese, and therefore he thirsts for
your blood. Mr. Church bid the Interpreter tell him that his Brother began
first: That if he had kept as Sogkonate according to his desire and order, he
should not have hurt him.

Then the chief Captain commanded Silence, and told them, That they should talk
no more about old things, etc. and quelled the tumult, so that they sat down
again, and began upon a discourse of making Peace with the English. Mr. Church
asked them, What Proposals they would make, and on what terms they would break
their League with Philip? Desiring them to make some Proposals that he might
carry to his Master's, telling them that it was not in his Power to conclude a
Peace with them, but that he knew that if their Proposals were reasonable, the
Government would not be unreasonable, and that he would use his Interest in the
Government for them. And to encourage them to proceed, put them in mind that
the Pequo^s once made War with the English, and that after they subjected
themselves to the English, the English became their Protectors, and defended
them againft other Nations that would otherwise have destroyed them, etc. After
some further discourfe, and debate, he brought them at length to consent that
if the Government of Plymouth would firmly engage to them, That they, and all
of them, and their Wives and Children, should bave their Lives spared, and none
of them transported out of the Country, they would subject themselves to them,
and serve them in what they were able.

Then Mr. Church told them, That he was well satisfied the Government of
Plymouth would readily concur with what they proposed, and would sign their
Articles: And complementing them upon it, how pleased he was with the thoughts
of their return, and of the former friendship that had been between them, etc.

The chief Captain rose up, and expressed the great value and respect he had
for Mr. Church; and bowing to him said, Sir, If you will please to accept of me
and my men, and will head us, we will fight for you, and will help you to Philips
Lead before Indian Corn be ripe And when he had ended, they all expressed their
consent to what he said, and told Mr. Church they loved him, and were willing
to go with him and fight for him, as long as the English had one E^emy left in
the Country.

Mr. Church assured them, That if they proved as good as their word they should
find him their's and their Children's laft friend. And, (by the way) the
friendship is maintained between them to this day.

Then he proposed unto them, that they should choose five men to go straight
with him to Plymouth: They told him, No; they would not choose, but he should
take which five he pleased: some complements passed about it, at length it was
agreed, They should choose Three and he Two. Then he agreed, with that he would
go back to the Island that Night, and would come to them the next Morning, and
go through the Woods to Plymouth. But they afterward objected, That this
traveling through the Woods would not be safe for him; the Enemy might meet with
them, and kill him, and then they should lose their friend, and the whole
design ruined beside. And therefore proposed, That he should come in an English
Vessel and they would meet him and come on board at Sogkonate-point, and Sail
from thence to Sandwich: which in fine, was concluded upon.

So Mr. Church promising to come as soon as he could possibly obtain a Vessel,
and then they parted. He returned to the Island, and was at great pains and
charge to get a Vessel, but with unaccountable disappointments, sometimes by
the falseness, and sometimes by the faint-heartedness of Men that he bargained
with, and something by Wind and Weather, etc.

Until at length Mr. Anthony Low put into the Harbor with a laden Vessel
bound to the Westward, and being made acquainted with Mr. Churches case, told
him, That he had so much kindness for him, and was so pleased with the business
that be was engaged in, that be would run the venture of his Vessel and Cargo,
to wait upon him. Accordingly, next Morning they set Sail with a Wind that soon
brought them to Sogkonate-point; but coming there they met with a contrary
wind, and a great swelling See.

The Indians were there waiting upon the Rocks, but had nothing but a miserable
broken Canoo to get aboard in. Yet Peter Awashonks ventured off in it, and with
a great deal of difficulty and danger got aboard. And by this time it began to
Rain and Blow exceedingly, and forced them away up the Sound; and then went
away through Bristol Ferry, round the Island to New-port, carrying Peter with
them.

Then Mr. Church dismissed Mr. Low, and told him, That inasmuch as Providence
opposed his going by Water, and he expected that the Army would be up in a few
days, and probably if be should be gone at that juncture, it might ruin the
whole design; would therefore yield his Voyage.

Then he writ the account of his transactions with the Indians, and drew up the
Proposals, and Articles of Peace, and dispatched Peter with them to Plymouth;
that his Honor the Governor if he saw cause might sign them.

Peter was set over to Sogkonate on the Lords day Morning, with orders to take
those men that were chosen to go down, or some of them at least with him. The
time being expired that was appointed for the English Army to come, there was
great looking for them. Mr. Church on the Monday Morning (partly to divert
himself after his fategue, and partly to listen for the Army) Rid out with his
Wife and some of his friends to Portsmouth, under a pretense of Cherrying; but
came home without any News from the Army: But by Midnight, or sooner, he was
roused with an Express from Maj. Bradford, who was arrived with the Army at
Pocasset. To whom he forth with repaired, and informed him of the whole of his
proceedings, with the Sogkonate Indians. With the Majors consent and advice, he
returned again next Morning to the Island in order to go over that way to
Awashonks, to inform her that the Army was arrived, etc. Accordingly from
Sachueeset-Neck, he went in a Canoo to Sogkonate; told her Maj. Bradford was
arrived at Pocasset, with a great Army, whom he had informed of all his
proceedings with her. That if she would be advised and observe order she nor
her People need not to fear being hurt by them. Told her, She should call all
her. People down into the Neck, least if they should be found straggling about,
mischief might light on them. That on the Morrow they would come down and
receive her, and give her further orders. She promised to get as many of her
People together as possibly she could. Desiring Mr. Church to consider that it
would be dissicult for to get them together at such short warning. Mr. Church
returned to the Island, and to the Army the same Night: The next Morning the
whole Army Marched toward Sogkonate as sar as Punkateese; and Mr Church with a
few Men went down to Sogkonate to call Awashonks, and her People to come up to
the English Camp; as he was going down, they met with a Pocasset Indian, who
had killed a Cow and got a Quarter of her on his back, and her Tongue in his
Pocket; who gave them an account, That he came from Pocasset two days since in
company with his Mother and several other Indians now hid in a Swamp above
N^mquid; disarming of him, he sent him by two Men to Maj. Bradford, and
proceeded to Sogkonate: they saw several Indians by the way skulking about, but
let them pass. Arriving at Awashonks Camp, told her, He was come to invite her
and her People up to Punkateese, where Maj. Bradford now was with the Plymouth
Army, expecting her and her Subjects to receive orders, until further order
could be had from the Government. She complied, and soon sent out orders for
such of her Subjects as were not with her, immediately to come in; and by
Twelve a Clock of the next day, she with most of her Number appeared before the
English Camp at Punkateese. Mr. Church tendered the Major to Serve under his
Commission provided the Indians might be accepted with him, to fight the Enemy.
The Major told him, his Orders were to ^^prove him, if he pleased, but as for
the Indians, be would not be concerned with them. And presently gave forth
orders for Awashonks, and all her Subjects both Men, Women and Children to
repair to Sandwich, and to be there upon Peril, in Six days. Awashonks and her
chiefs gathered round Mr. Church, (where he was walked off from the rest)
expressed themselves concerned that they could not be confided in, nor
improved. He told them, 'twas best to obey Orders; and that if he could not
accompany them to Sandwich, it should not be above a Week before he would meet
them there; That he was confident the Governor would Commission him to improve
them. The Major haflened to send them away with Jack Havens, (an Indian who had
never been in the Wars) in the Front with a flag of Truce in his hand. They
being gone, Mr. Church, by the help of his Man Toby (the Indian whom he had
taken Prisoner, as he was going down to Sogkonote) took said Toby's Mother, and
those that were with her, Prisoners. Next Morning the whole Army moved back to
Pocasset. This Toby informed them that there were a great many Indians gone
down to Wepoiset to eat Clams, (other Provisions being very scarce with them;)
that Philip himself was expected within, 3 or 4 days at the same Place: being
asked, what Indians they were? He answered, Some Weetemo^es Indians, some
Mount-hope Indians, some Narraganset Indians, and some other Upland Indians, in
all about 300. The Rhode Island Boats by the Majors order meeting them at
Pocasset, they were soon embarked, it being just in the dusk of the Evening,
they could plainly discover the Enemies fires at the Place the Indian directed
to; and the Army concluded no other but they were bound directly thither, until
they came to the North End of the Island, and heard the word of Command for the
Boats to bare away. Mr. Church was very fond of having this probable
opportunity of surprising that whole Company of Indians embraced: But Orders,
'twas said, must be obeyed, which was to go to Mount-hope and there to fight
Philip. This with some other good opportunities of doing spoil upon the Enemy,
being unhappily missed. Mr. Church obtained the Majors Consent to meet the
Sogkonate Indians, according to his promise. He was offered a Guard to
Plymouth, but chose to go with one Man only, who was a good Pilot. About Sun
set he with Sabin his Pilot mounted their Horses at Reboboth, where the Army
now was, and by two Hours by Sun next Morning arrived safe at Plymouth: And by
that time they had refreshed themselves the Governor and Treasurer came to
Town. Mr. Church giving them a short account of the affairs of the Army etc.
His Honor was pleased to give him thanks for the good and great Service he had
done at Sogkonate, told him, He had confirmed all that be promised Awashonks,
and had sent the Indian back again that brought his Letter. He asked his
Honor, Whether he had any thing later from Awashonks? He told him he had not.
Where upon he gave his Honor account of the Majors orders relating to her and
hers, and what discourse had passed pro and con about them; and that he had
promised to meet them, and that he had encouraged them, that he thought he
might obtain of his Honor a Commission to lead them forth to fight Philip. His
Honor smilingly told him, That be should not want Commission if be would
accept it, nor yet good English men enough to make up a good Army. But in
short, he told his Honor the time was expired that he had appointed to meet
the Sogkonates at Sandwich. The Governor asked him, when he would go? He told
him that afternoon, by his Honors leave. The Governor asked him, How many Men
he would have with him? He answered. Not above half a dozen, with an order to
take more at Sandwich, if he saw cause; and Horses provided. He no sooner moved
it, but had his number of Men tendering to go with him, among which was Mr.
J^b^z Howland, and Nathanael Southworth; they went to Sandwich that Night;
where Mr. Church (with need enough) took a Nap of Sleep. The next Morning with
about 16 or 18 Men proceeded as far as Agawom, where they had great expectation
of meeting the Indians, but met them not; his Men being discouraged about half
of them returned; only half a dozen stuck by him, and or mised so to do until
they should meet with the Indians. When they came to Sippio^m River, Mr.
Howland began to tire, upon which Mr Church left him, and two more, for a
Reserve at the River, that if he should meet with Enemies and be forced ba^k,
they might be ready to assist them in getting oves the River. Proceeding in
their March, they crossed another River, and opened a great Bay, where they
might see many Miles along shore, where were Sands and Flats; and heating a
great noise below them toward the Sea. They dismounted their Horses, left them
and crep'd among the bushes, until they came near the bank, and saw a vast
company of Indians, of all Ages and Sexs, some on Horseback running races,
some at Football, some catching Eels and Flat-fish in the water, some
Clamming, etc. but which way with safety to find out what Indians they were,
they were at a loss. But at length, retiring into a thicket. Mr. Church
hollowed to them; they soon answered him, and a couple of smart young Fellows,
well mounted, came upon a full Career to see who it might be that called, and
came just upon Mr Church before they discovered him; but when they perceived
themselves so near English Men, and Armed, were much surprised, and tacked
short about to run as fast back as they came forward, until one of the Men in
the bushes called to them, and told them his Name was Church, and need not fear
his hurting of them. Upon which, after a small pause, they turned about their
Horses, and came up to him; one of them that could speak English, Mr. Church
took aside and examined, who informed him, That the Indians below were
Awashonks, and her company, and that Jack Havens was among them; whom Mr.
Church immediately sent for to come to him, and ordered the Messenger to inform
Awashonks that he was come to meet her; Jack Havens soon came, and by that time
Mr. Church had asked him a few Questions, and had been satisfied by him, That
it was Awashonks, and her company that were below, and that Jack had been
kindly treated by them; a company of Indians all Mounted on Horse back, and
well Armed came riding up to Mr. Church, but treated him with all dew respects.
He then ordered Jack to go tell Awashonks, that he designed to Sup with her in
the Evening, and to lodge in her Camp that Night. Then taking some of the
Indians with him, he went back to the River to take care of Mr. Howland: Mr.
Church being a Mind to try what Metal he was made of, imparted his notion to
the Indians that were with him, and gave them directions how to act their
parts; when he came pretty near the Place, he and his English Men pretendedly
fled, firing on their retreat toward the Indians that pursued them, and they
firing as fast after them. Mr. Howland being upon his guard, hearing the Guns,
and by and by seeing the motion both of the English and Indians, concluded his
friends were distressed, was soon on the full Career on Horseback to meet
them, until he perceiving their laughing mistrusted the Truth. As soon as Mr.
Church had given him the News, they hasted away to Awashonks. Upon their
arrival, they were immediately conducted to a shelter, open on one side,
whither Awashonks and her chiefs soon came and paid their Respects: and the
Multitudes gave shouts as made the heavens to ring. It being now about
Sunsetting, or near the dusk of the Evening; The Netops came running from all
quarters laden with the tops of dry Pines, and the like combustible matter
making a hugh pile thereof, near Mr. Churches shelter, on the open side
thereof: but by this time Supper was brought in, in three dishes, viz. a
curious young Bass, in one dish, Eels and Flat-fish in a second, and Shellfish
in a third, but neither Bread nor Salt to be seen at Table. But by that time
Supper was over, the mighty pile of Pine Knots and Tops, etc. was fired, and
all the Indians great and small gathered in a ring round it. Awashonks with the
oldest of her People Men and Women mixed, kneeling down made the first ring
next the fire, and all the lusty, stout Men standing up made the next; and then
all the Rabble in a confused Crew surrounded on the outside. Then the chief
Captain stepped in between the rings and the fire, with a Spear in one hand and
an Hatchet in the other danced round the fire, and began to fight with it,
making mention of all the several Nations and Companies of Indians in the
Country that were Enemies to the English; and at naming of every particular
Tribe of Indians, he would draw out and fight a new fire brand, and at his
finishing his fight with each particular firebrand, would bow to him and thank
him; and when he had named all the several Nations and Tribes, and fought them
all he stuck down his Spear and Hatchet, and came out; and another stepped in and
acted over the same dance, wi^h more fury, if possible, than the first; and
when about half a dozen of their chiefs had thus acted their parts, The Captain
of the Guard stepped up to Mr. Church and told him, They were making Soldiers
for him, and what they had been doing was all one Swearing of them, and having
in that manner engaged all the lusty stout men. Awashonks and her chiefs came
to Mr. Church; and told him, That now they were all engaged to fight for the
English, and he might call forth all, or any of them at any time as be saw
occasion to fight the Enemy; and presented him with a very fine Firelock Mr.
Church accepts their offer, drew out a number of them, and set out next Morning
before day for Plymouth, where they arrived safe the same day.

The Governor being informed of it, came early to Town next Morning: and by
that time he had English Men enough to make up a good Company, when joined with
Mr. Churches Indians, that offered their Voluntary Service to go under his
Command in quest of the Enemy. The Governor then gave him a Commission, which
is as follows,

CAptain Benjamin Church, you are hereby Nominated, Ordered, Commissioned, and
Empowered to raise a Company of Volunteers of about 200 Men, English and
Indians; the English not exceeding the number of 60, of which Company, or so
many of them as you can obtain, or shall see cause at present to improve, you
are to take the command and conduit, and to had them ^orth new and ^^^eafter,
at such time, and unto such places within this Colony, or else where, within
the confederate Colonies, as you shall think fit; to discover, pursue, fight,
surprise, destroy, or subdue our Indian Enemies, or any part or parties of them
that by the Providence of God you may meet with; or them or any of them by
treaty and composition to receive to mercy, if, you see reason (provided they
be not Murderous Rogues, or such at have been principal Actors in those
Villainies:) And forasmuch as your Company may be uncertain and the Persons
often changed, You are also hereby empowered with advice of your Company to
choose and Commissionate a Lieutenant, and to establish Sergeants, and Corporals
as you see cause: And you herein improving your best judgment and discretion
and utmost ability, faithfully to Serve the Interest of God, His Majesty's
Interest, and the Interest of the Colony; and carefully governing your said
Company at home and abroad: these shall be unto you full and ample Commission,
Warrant and Discharge. Givers under the Public Seal, this 24th Day of July,
1676.

Per Jos. Winslow, GOV.

Receiving Commission he Marched the same Night into the Woods, got to
Midd^^b^^ry before day, and as soon as the light appeared, took into the Woods
and Swampy thickets toward a place where they had some reason to expect to
meet with a parcel of Narraganset Indians, with some others that belonged to
Mount-hope: Coming near to where they expected them, Capt. Church's Indian
Scout discovered the Enemy, and well observing their fires, and postures,
Returned with the intelligence to their Captain, who gave such directions for
the surrounding of them, as had the direct effect; surprising them from every
side so unexpectedly, that they were all taken, not so much as one escaped. And
upon a strick examination, they gave intelligence of another parcel of the
Enemy, at a Place called Munponset-Pond Capt. Church hastening with his
Prisoners, through the Woods to Plymouth, disposed of them all, excepting only
one J^ff^ry, who proving very ingenious and faithful to him, in informing where
other parcels of the Indians hat boured Capt. Church promised him, that if he
continued to be faithful to him, he should not be Sold out of the Country, but
should be his waiting man, to take care of his Horse, etc. and accordingly he
Served him faithfully as long as he lived. But Capt. Church was forthwith sent
out again; and the Terms for his encouragement being concluded on: viz. That
the Country should find them Am^^nition and Provision; and have half the
Prisoners, and Arms, they took: The Captain and his English Soldiers to have
the other half of the Prisoners, and Arms; and the ^^lian Soldiers the loose
Plunder. Poor encouragement (...) But after some time it was mended.

They soon Captivated the Munponsets, and brought in, not one escaping. This
stroke he held several Weeks, never returning empty handed. When he wanted
intelligence of their Kennelling Places, he would March to some place likely to
meet with some travelers or ramblers, and scattering his Company, would lie
close; and seldom lay above a day or two, at the most, before some of them
would fall into their hands: Whom he would compel to inform, where their
Company was; and so by his method of secret and sudden surprises took great
Numbers of them Prisoners.

The Government observing his extraordinary courage and conduct, and the
success from Heaven added to it, saw cause to enlarge his Commission; gave him
power to raise, and dismiss his Forces, as he should see occasion; to
Commissionate Officers under him and to March as far as he should see cause,
within the limits of the three United Colonies: to receive to mercy, give
quarter, or not; excepting some particular and noted Murderers: viz, Philip and
all that were at the destroying of Mr. Clark's Garrison, and some few others

Major Bradford being now at Taunton with his Army, and wanting Provisions;
some Carts were ordered from Plymouth for their supply, and Capt. Church to
guard them. But he obtaining other guards for the Carts, as far as
Middleborough, ran before with a small Company, hoping to meet with some of the
Enemy, appointing the Carts and their guards to meet them at Nem^sout about an
hour after the Suns rising next Morning: he arrived there about the breaking of
the daylight, discovered a company of the Enemy; but his time was too short to
wait for gaining advantage; and therefore ran right in upon them, Surprised and
Captivated about 16 of them: who upon examination, informed, That Tispaquin, a
very famous Captain among the Enemy was at Assawompset, with a numerous Company.

But the Carts must now be guarded, and the opportunity of visiting Tispaquin
must now be laid aside: The Carts are to be faithfully guarded, left Tispaquid
should attack them.

Coming toward Taunton, Capt. Church taking two men with him, made all speed
to the Town; and coming to the River side, he hollowed, and inquiring of them
that came to the River, for Maj Bradford, or his Captains; he was informed,
they were in the Town, at the Tavern. He told them of the Carts that were
coming, that he had the cumber of guarding of them, which had already prevented
his improving opportunities of doing Service. Prayed therefore that a guard
might be sent over to receive the Carts, that he might be at liberty; resusing
all invitations and persuasions, to go over to the Tavern to visit the Major:
he at length obtained a guard to receive the Carts; by whom also he sent his
Prisoners to be conveyed with the Carts to Plymouth, directing them not to
return by the way they came, but by Bridgwater.

Hastening back he purposed to Camp that Night at Assawompset Neck. But as soon
as they came to the River that runs into the great Pond through the thick Swamp
at the entering of the Neck; the Enemy fired upon them, but hurt not a Man.
Capt. Churches Indians ran right into the Swamp and fired upon them, but it
being in the dusk of the Evening, the Enemy made their escape in the thickets:
The Captain then moving about a Mile into the Neck, tock the advantage of a
small Valley to feed his Horses; some held the Horses by the Bridles, the rest
on the guard looked sharp out for the Enemy, within hearing on every side and
some very near; but in the dead of the Night, the Enemy being out of hearing or
still, Capt. Church moved out of the Neck (not the same way he came in, least
he should be Ambuscado'd) toward Cushnet, where all the Houses were burnt; and
crossing Cushne River being extremely fategued, with two Nights and one Days
ramble without Rest or Sleep; and observing good forage for their Horses, the
Captain concluded upon bai^ing, and taking a Nap. Setting Six Men to watch the
passage of the River, two to watch at a time, while the other slept, and so to
take their turns; while the rest of the Company went into a thicket to Sleep
under the guard of two Sentinels more. But the whole Company being very drowsy,
soon forgot their danger, and were fast a-sleep, Sentinels, and all. The
Captain first awakes, looks up, and judges he had slept four Hours, which being
longer than he designed, immediately rouses his Company, and sends away a file
to see what were become of the watch at the passage of the River, but they no
sooner opened the River in sight, but they discovered a company of the Enemy
viewing of their tracts, where they came into the Neck; Capt. Church and those
with him soon dispersed into the brush on each side of the way, while the file
sent, got undiscovered to the passage of the River, and found their watch all
fast a sleep: but these Tidings thoroughly awakened the whole Company. But the
Enemy giving them no present disturbance, they examined their Snapsacks, and
taking a little refreshment, the Captain orders one party to guard the Horses,
and the other to Scout, who soon met with a Track, and following of it, they
were bro't to a small company of Indians, who proved to be Little Eyes, and his
Family, and near Relations, who were of Sogkonate, but had forsaken their
Country men, upon their making Peace with the English. Some of Capt. Churches
Indians asked him, If he did not know that fellow? Told him, This is the Rogue
that would have killed you at Awashonks Dance; and signified to him that now he
had an opportunity to be revenged on him. But the Captain told them, It was not
English-mans fashion to seek reverge; and that he should have the same quarter
the rest had. Moving to the River side, they found an old Canoo, with which the
Captain ordered Little Eyes and his company to be carried over to an Island.
Telling him, he would leave him on that Island until be returned; and lest the
English should light on them, and kill them, be would leave his cousin
Light-foot ( whom the English knew to be their Friend) to be his guard. Little
Eyes expressed himself very thankful to the Captain. He leaving his orders with
Light-foot, returns to the Rivers side toward Poneganset, to Russ^l* Orchard,
coming near the Orchard they clapped into a thicket and there lodged the rest of
the Night without any fire; and upon the Morning light appearing, moves toward
the Orchard, discovers some of the Enemy, who had been there the day before,
and had beat down all the Apples, and carried them away; discovered also where
they had lodged that Night, and saw the ground where they set their baskets
bloody, being as they supposed and as it was afterward discovered to be with
the flesh of Swine, etc, which they had killed that day: They had lain under
the Fences without any fires; and seemed by the marks they lest behind them to
be very numerous, perceived also by the dew on the grass that they had not been
long gone; and therefore moved a-pace in pursuit of them Traveling three
Miles, or more, they came into the Country Road, where the track parted one
parcel steered toward the West end of the great Cedar Swamp, and the other to
the East end. The Captain halted and told his Indian Soldiers, That they had
heard as well as he, what some Men bad said at Plymouth about them, etc. That
now was a good opportunity for each party to prove themselves: The Track being
divided they should follow one, and the English the other, being equal in
number. The Indians declined the Motion, and were not willing to move any where
without him; said they should not think themselves safe without him. But the
Captain insisting upon it, they submitted; he gave the Indians their choice to
follow which track they pleased; they replied, They were light and able to
Travel, therefore of be pleased there would take the West Track. And appointing
the Ruins of John Cooks House at Cushnet for the place to meet at; each Company
set out briskly to try their Fortunes. Capt. Church with his English Soldiers
followed their Track until they came near entering a miery Swamp, when the Capt.
heard a Whistle in the Rear, (which was a note for a halt) looking behind him,
he saw William Fobes start out of the Company and made toward him, who
hastened to meet him as fast as he could; Fobes told him they had discovered
abundance of Indians, and if he pleased to go a few steps back he might see
them himself: he did so, and saw them across the Swamp, observing them, he
perceived they were gathering of Hurtle-Berries, and that they had no
apprehensions of their being so near them; The Captain supposed them to be
chiefly Women, and therefore calling one Mr. Dillano, who was acquainted with
the ground, and the Indian Language, and another named Mr. Barns; with these
two Men he takes right through the Swamp as fast as he could, and orders the reft
to hasten after them. Capt. Church with Dillano and Barns having good Horses,
spurred on and where soon among the Thickest of the Indians, and out of sight of
their own Men: Among the Enemy was an Indian Woman (who with her Husband had
been drove off from Rhode Island) notwithstanding they had an House upon Mr.
Sanford's Land, and had planted an Orchard before the War; yet the Inhabitants
would not be satisfied till they were sent off; and Capt. Church with his
Family, living then at the said Sanfords, came acquainted with them, who
thought it very hard to turn off such old, quiet People: but in the end it
proved a Providence and an advantage to him and his Family, as you may see
afterward. This Indian Woman knew Capt. Church, and as soon as she saw him
held up both her hands and (...) ^^nning toward him, crying aloud, Church,
Church, Church. Capt. Church bid her stop the rest of the Indians, and tell
them, The way to save their Lives was not to run, but yield themselves
Prisoners, and be would not kill them; so with her help, and Dillano's, who
could call to them in their own Language, many of them stopped and surrendered
themselves; others scampering and casting away their baskets, etc. betook
themselves to the thickets, but Capt. Church being on Horseback soon came up
with them, and laid hole on a Gun that was in the hand of one of the foremost
of the company, pulled it from him, and told him he must go back. And when he
had turned them, he began to look about him to see where he was, and what was
become of his Company, hoping they might be all as well employed as himself,
but could find none but Dillano, who was very busy gathering up Prisoners; the
Captain drove his that he had stopped to the rest, inquiring of Dillano for
their Company, but could have no news of them. But moving back picked up now
and then a skulking Prisoner by the way. When they came near the place where
they first started the Indians, they discovered their Company standing in a
body together, and had taken some few Prisoners; when they saw their Captain,
they hastened to meet him: They told him they found it difficult getting through
the Swamp, and neither seeing nor hearing any thing of him, they concluded the
Enemy had killed him, and were at a great loss what to do. Having brought their
Prisoners together they found they had taken and killed 66 of the Enemy. Capt.
Church then asked the old Squaw, What company they belonged unto? She said,
They belonged part to Philip, and part to Qunnappin and the Narraganset-Sachem,
discovered also upon her declaration that both Philip and Qunnappin were about
two Miles off in the great Cedar Swamp; he enquired of her, What company they
had with them? She answered, Abundance of Indians: The Swamp, she said, was
full of Indians from one end unto the other, that were settled there, that
there were near an 100 men came from the Swamp with them, and left them upon
that plain to gather Hurtle-berry's, and promised to call them as they came
back out of Sconticut-Neck, whither they went to kill Cattle and Horses for
Provisions for the company. She perceiving Capt. Church move toward the Neck,
told him, If they went that way they would all be killed. He asked her,
Where-about they crossed the River? She pointed to the upper passing place.
Upon which Capt. Church passed over so low down as he thought it not probable
they should meet with his Track in their return; and hastened toward the
Island, where he left Little Eyes, with Light-foot. Finding a convenient place
by the River side for the Securing their Prisoners, Capt Church, and Mr.
Dillano went down to see what was become of Capt. Light-foot, and the Prisoners
left in his charge. Light-foot seeing and knowing them, soon came over with his
broken Canoo; and informed them, That he had seen that day about 100 Men of the
Enemy go down into Sconticut Neck, and that they were now returning again: Upon
which they three ran down immediately to a Meadow where Light-foot said the
Indians had passed; where they not only saw their Tracks, but also them:
Where-upon they lay close until the Enemy came into the said Meadow, and the
fore-most sat down his load and halted until als the company came up, and then
took up their loads and marched again the same way that they came down into the
Neck, which was the nearest way unto their Camp; had they gone the other way
along the River, they could not have missed Capt. Churches Track, which, would
doubtless have exposed them to the loss of their Prisoners, if not of their
lives. But as soon as the Coast was clear of them, the Captain sends his
Light-foot to fetch his Prisoners from the Island, while he and Mr. Dillano
returns to the company, sent part of them to conduct Light-foot and his company
to the aforesaid Meadow, where Capt. Church and his company met them; crossing
the Enemies Track they made all have, until they got over Mattapoiset-river,
near about sour Miles beyond the ruins of Cooks House, where he appointed to
meet his Indian company, whither he sent Dillano, with two more to meet them;
ordering them, that if the Indians were not arrived, to wait for them.
Accordingly, finding no Indians there, they waited until late in the Night,
when they arrived with their booty. They dispatched a Post to their Captain to
give him an account of their Success; but the day broke before they came to
him: And when they had compared Successes, they very remarkably found that the
number that each Company had taken and slain, was equal. The Indians had killed
3 of the Enemy, and taken 63 Prisoners, as the English had done before them,
both English and Indians were surpised at this remarkable Providence, and were
both parties rejoicing at it; being both-before afraid of what might have been
the event of the unequal Success of the parties. But the Indians had the
fortune to take more Arms than the English. They told the Captain, That they
had missed a brave Opportunity by parting; They came upon a g^^at Town of the
Enemy, viz Capt. Tyasks company, (Tyasks was the next man to Philip) They fired
upon the Enemy before they were discovered, and ran upon them with a shout; the
Men ran and left their Wives and Children, and many of them their Guns: They
took Tyasks Wife and Son, and th^'t that if their Captain and the English
company had been with them they might have taken some hundreds of them: And now
they determined not to part any more.

That Night Philip sent (as afterward they found out) a great Army to way-lay
Capt. Church at the entering on of Assawompset Neck, expecting he would have
returned the same way he went in; but that was never his method to return the
same way that he came; and at this time going another way he escaped falling
into the hands of his Enemies. The next day they went home by Sapican, and got
well with their Prisoners to Plymouth.

He soon went out again; and this stroke he drove many Weeks; and when he took
any number of Prisoners, he would pick out some that he took a fancy to, and
would tell them, He took a particular fancy to them, and had chose them for
himself to make Soldiers of; and if any would behave themselves well, be would
do well by them, and they should be his men and not Sold out of the Country. If
he perceived they looked surly, and his Indian Soldiers called them
treacherous Dogs, as some of them would sometimes do, all the notice he would
take of it, would only be to clap them on the back, and tell them, Come, come,
yu^^k wild and surly, and mutter, but that signifies nothing, these my best
Soldiers were a little while a go as wild and surly as you are now; by that
time you have been but one day along with me, you will love me too, and be as
brisk as any of them. And it proved so. For there was none of them but (after
they had been a little while with him, and see his behavior, and how cheerful
and successful his Men were) would be as ready to Pilot him to any place where
the Indians dwelt or haunted (though their own Fathers or nearest Relations
should be among them) or to fight for him, as any of his own Men.

Capt. Church was in two particulars much advantaged by the great Engish Army
that was now abroad. One was, that they drove the Enemy down to that part of
the Country, viz. to the Eastward of Taunton River by which means his business
was nearer home. The other was that when ever he fell on with a push upon any
body of the Enemy (were they never so many) they fled expecting the great Army.
And his manner of Marching through the Woods was such, as if he were discovered,
they appeared to be more than they were. For the always Marched at a wide
distance one from another, partly for their safety: and this was an Indian
custom, to March thin and scatter. Capt. Church inquired of some of the Indians
that were become his Soldiers, How they got such advantage often of the
English in their Marches through the Woods? They told him, That the Indians
gained great advantage of the English by two things; The Indians always took
care in their Marches and Fights, not to come too thick together. But the
English always kept in a heap together, that it was as easy to hit them as to
hit an House. The other was, that if at any time they discovered a company of
English Soldiers in the Woods, they knew that there was all, for the English
never scattered; but the Indians always divided and scattered.

Capt. Church now at Plymouth, something or other happened that kept him at
home a few days, until a Post came to Marshfield on the Lords day Morning,
informing the Governor that a great Army of Indians were discovered, who it
was supposed were designing to get over the River toward Taunton or
Bridgwater, to Attack those Towns that lay on that side the River. The
Governor hastened to Plymouth, raised what Men he could by the way, came to
Plymouth in the beginning of the forenoon Exercise; sent for Capt. Church out
of the Meeting House, gave him the News, and desired him immediately to Rally
what of his Company he could; and what Men he had raised should join them. The
Captain bestirs himself, but found no Bread in the Storehouse, and so was
fore'd to run from House to House to get Household Bread for their March; but
this nor any thing else prevented his Marching by the beginning of the
afternoon Exercise; Marching with what Men were ready he took with him the Post
that came from Bridgwater to Pilot him to the ^^ace, where he tho'the might
meet with the Enemy. In the Evening they heard a smart thing at a distance from
them, but it being near Night, and the firing bu^ of short continuance, the
missed the place and went into Bridgwater Town. It seems, the occasion of the
firing, was, That Philip finding that Capt. Church made that side of the
Country too hot for him, designed to return to the other side of the Country
that he came last from. And coming to Taunton River with his company, they
felled a great Tree across the River for a Bridge to pass over on: and just as
Philips old Uncle Akkompoin, and some other of his chiefs were p^^ffing over
the Tree, some brisk Bridgwater Lads, had Ambush'd them, fired upon them, and
killed the old man, and several others, which put a stop to their coming over
the River that Night.

Next Morning Capt. Church moved very early with his Company which was
increased by many of Bridgwater that listed under him for that Expedition, and
by their Piloting, he soon came very still, to the top of the great Tree which
the Enemy had fallen across the River; and the Captain spied an Indian sitting
upon the stump of it on the other side of the River; and he clapped his Gun up,
and had doubtless dispatched him, but that one of his own Indians called
hastily to him, Not to fire for he believed it was one of his own men; upon
which the Indian upon the stump locked about, and Capt. Churbes Indian seeing
his face perceived his mistake, for he knew him to be Philip; clapped up his Gun
and fired, but it was too late, for Philip immediately threw himself off the
slump, leaped down a bank on the side of the River, and made his escape. Capt
Church as soon as possible got over the River, and scattered in quest of
Phi^^p, and his company; but the Enemy scattered and sled every way; but he
picked up a considerable many of their Women and Children, among which was
Philip's Wife, and Son of about Nine Years Old. Discovering a considerable new
Track along the River, and examining the Prisoners, found that it was Qunn^ppin
and the Narragansets, that were drawing off from those parts towarcs the
Narraganset Country, he inquired of the Prisoners, Whither Philip were gone in
the same Track? they told him, They did not know, for he sled in a great fright
when the first English Gun was fired, and they had none of them seen or heard
any thing of him since. Capt. Church lest part of his Company there to secure
the Prisoners they got, and to pick up what more they could find; and with the
rest of his company hasted in the T^ack of the Enemy to over-take them, if it
might be, before they got over the River, and ran some Miles along the River
until he came unto a place where the Indians had waded over; and he with his
Company waded over after them up to the Arm pits; being almost as wet before
with Sweat as the River could make them: Following about a Mile further, and
not overtaking them, and the Captain being under a necessity to return that
Night to the Army, came to an halt, told his Company, he must return to his
other men. His Indians Soldiers moved for leave to pursue the Enemy (though he
returned;) said, The Narragansets were great Rogues, and they wanted to be
revenged on them for killing some of their Relations; named, T^kkam^ns
(Awashonks Brother) and some others. Capt. Church bad them go and prosper, and
made Light-foot their chief, and gave him the title of Captain, Bid ^h^m go and
quit themselves like men. And away they scampered like so many Horses. Next
Morning early they returned to their Captain, and inf^^med him, T^^t they had
come up with the Enemy, and ki^'d several of them, and b^^g^^ him T^^^^en of
them Frison^^; were mighty proud of their Exploit, and r^joyced much at the
opportunity of avenging themselves Capt. Church sent the Prisoners to
Bridgwater, and sent out his Scouts to see what Enemies or Tracks they could,
discovering some small Tracks he follows them found where the Enemy had kindled
some fires, and roasted some ^lesh etc. but had put out their fires and were
gone. The Captain followed them by the Track, putting his Indians in the Front;
some of which were such as he had newly taken from the Enemy, and added to his
Company. Gave them order to March softly, and upon hearing a whistle in the
Rear to sit down, till further order. Or upon discovery of any of the Enemy to
stop, for his design was, if he could, discover where the Enemy were, not to
fall upon them (unless necessicated to do it) until next Morning. The Indians
in the Front came up with many Women and Children, and others that were faint
and tired, and so not able to keep up with the Company; these gave them an
account that Philip with a great number of the Enemy were a little before.
Capt, Churches Indians told the others. They were their Prisoners, but if they
would submit to order and be still no one should burt them They being their old
acquaintance, they were easily persuaded to conform. A little before Sun set
there was a halt in the Front until the Captain came up, and they told him,
They discovered the Enemy: He ordered them, to dog them and watch their motion
till it was dark. But Philip soon came to a stop, and fell to breaking and
chopping Wood, to make fires: and a great mise they made. Capt. Church draws
his company up into a ring, and sat down in the Swamp without any noise or
fire: The Indian Prisoners were much surprised to see the English Soldiers;
but the Captain told them, If they would be quiet and not make any disturbance
or noise, they should meet with civil treatment, but if they made any
disturbance, or offered to run, or make their escape, be would immediately kill
them all; so they were very submissive and obsequious. When the day broke Capt.
Church told his Prisoners, That his Expedition was such at this time that be
could not afford them any guard: Told them, They would find it to be their
interest to attend the orders he was now about to give them; which was, That
when the fight was over, which they now expected; or as soon as the firing
ceased, they must follow the Tracks of bis Company and come to them. (An Indian
is next to a blood-hound to follow a Track.) He said to them, It would be in
vain for them to think of disobedience, or to gain any thing by it, for he had
taken and killed a great many of the Indian Rebels, and should in a little time
kill and take all the rest, etc. By this time it began to be so light, as the
time that he usually chose to make his on set. He moved sending two Soldiers
before to try if they could privately discover the Enemies postures. But very
unhappily it sell out, that the very same time Philip had sent two of his as a
Scout upon his own Track, to see if none dogged them; who spied the two Indian
men, and turned short about, and sled with all speed to their Camp: and Capt
Church pursued as fast as he could; the two Indians set a yelling and howling,
and made the most hideous noise they could invent, soon gave the Alarm to
Philip and his Camp; who all sled at the first tidings, left their Kittles
boiling and Meat roasting upon their wooden Spits, and run into a Swamp with no
other Breakfast, than what Capt. Church afterward treated them with. Capt.
Church pursuing, sent Mr. Isaac Howland with a party on one side of the Swamp,
while himself with the rest ran on the other-side, agreeing to run on each
side, until they met on the further end* placing some men in secure Stands at
that end of the Swamp where Philip entered, concluding that if they headed him
and beat him back, that he would take back in his own Track. Capt. Church and
Mr. Howland soon met at the further end of the Swamp (it not being a great one)
where they met with a great number of the Enemy, well armed, coming out of the
Swamp. But on sight of the English they seemed very much surprised and tacked
short. Capt. Church called hastily to them, and said, If they fired one Gun
they were all dead men; for he would have them know: bat he bad them hemmed in,
with a force sufficient to command them; but if they peaceably surrendered they
should have good quarter, etc. They seeing both Indians and English come so
thick upon them, were so surprised that many of them ^^ood still and let the
English come and take the Guns out of their hands, when they were both charged
and cocked. Many both Men, Women and Children of the Enemy were imprisoned at
this time; while Philip, Tispaquin, T^toson, etc. concluded that the English
would pursue them upon their Tracks, so were way-laying their Tracks at the
first end of the Swamp, hoping thereby to gain a shot upon Capt. Church who was
now better employed in taking his Prisoners and running them into a Valley, in
form something shaped like a Punch-bole, and appointing a guard-of two files
trible armed with Guns taken from the Enemy. But Philip having waited all this
while in vain, now moves on after the rest of his company to see what was
become of them. And by this time Capt. Church was got into the Swamp ready to
meet him; and as it happened made the first discovery, clapped behind a Tree
until Philips company came pretty near, and then tired upon them, killed many
of them, and a close skirmish followed. Upon this Philip having grounds
sufficient to suspect the event of his company that went before them, fled back
upon his own Track; and coming to the place where the Ambush lay, they fired on
each other, and one Lucus of Plymouth, not being so careful as he might have
been about his Stand, was killed by the Indians. In this Swamp skirmish Capt.
Church with his two men which always ran by his side as his guard, met with
three of the Enemy, two of which surrendered themselves, and the Captains guard
seized them, but the other being a great stout surly fellow, with his two locks
tied up with red and a great Rattle-snake skin hanging to the back part of his
head, (whom Capt. Church concluded to be Totoson) ran from them into the Sw^mp
Capt Church in person pursued him close, till coming pretty near up with him,
presented his Gun between his Shoulders, but it missing fire, the Indian
perceiving it, turned and presented at Capt. Church, and missing fire also;
their Guns taking ^et with the Fog and Dew of the Morning; but the Indian
turning short for another run, his foot trip'd in a small grapevine, and he
sell fl^t on his face; Capt. Church was by this time up with him, and struck
the Muzzle of his Gun an inch and half into the back part of his head, which
dispatched him without another blow. But Capt. Church looking behind him saw
Totoson the Indian whom he though it he had killed, come flying at him like a
dragon: But this happened to be fair in sight of the guard that were set to
keep the Prisoners, who spying T^toson and others that were following of him,
in the very seasonable juncture made a shot upon them, and rescued their
Captain; though he was in no small danger from his friends bullets, for some of
them came so near him that he though it he felt the wind of them. The skirmish
being over, they gathered their Prisoners together, and found the number that
they had killed and taken was 173 (the Prisoners which they took over Night
included) who after the skirmish came to them, as they were ordered.

Now having no Provisions, but what they took from the Enemy, they hastened to
Bridgwater, sending an express before to provide for them, their Company being
now very numerous. The Gentlemen of Bridgwater met Capt. Church with great
expression of honor and thanks, and received him and his Army with all due
respect and kind treatment.

Capt. Church drove his Prisoners that Night into Bridgwater Pound, and set his
Indian Soldiers to guard them. They being well treated with Victuals and
drink, they had a merry Night; and the Prisoners laughed as loud as the
Soldiers, not being so treated a long time before.

Some of the Indians now said to Capt. Church, Sir, You have now mads Philip
ready to dye, for you have made him as poor, and miserable as be used to make
the English; for you have now k^lled or taken all his Relations. That they
believed he would now soon have his head, and that this bout had almost broke
his heart.

The next day Capt Church moved and arrived with all his Prisoners safe at
Plymouth. The great English Army were now at Taunton, and Maj. Talcot with the
Connecticut Forces being in those parts of the Country, did considerable spoil
upon the Enemy.

Now Capt. Church being arrived at Plym^uth, received thanks from the
Government for his good Service, etc. many of his S^uldiers were disbanded; and
he though it to reft himself a while being much fategued and his health impared, by
excessive hearts and colds, and wading through Rivers etc. But it was not long
before he was called upon to Rally, upon advice that some of the Enemy were
discovered in Dartmouth woods. He took his Indians, and as many English
Volunteers as presented, to go with him, and scattering into small parcels. Mr.
Jahez Howland (who was now, and often his Lieutenant and a worthy good
Soldiers) had the fortune to discover and imprison a parcel of the Enemy. In
the Evening they met together at an appointed place, and by examining the
Prisoners, they gained intelligence of Totosons haunt; and being brisk in the
Morning, they soon gained an advantage of Totosons company, though he himself
with his Son of about Eight Years old made their escape, and one old Squaw with
them, to Agawom his own Country. But Sam Barrow, as noted a Rogue as any among
the Enemy, fell into the hands of the English, at this time. Capt. Church told
him, That because of his inhumane Murders and Barbarities, the Court had
allowed him no quarter, but was to be forthwith put to Death, and therefore he
was to prepare for (...). Barrow replied, That the Sentence of Death against
him was just, and that indeed he was ashamed to live any longer, and desired no
more favor than to Sm^ke a Whiff of Tobacco before his Execution. When he had
taken a few Whiffs, he said, He was ready; upon which one of Capt. Churches
Indians sunk his Hatchet into his Brains. The famous Totoson arriving at
Agaw^m, his Son which was the laft which was left of his Family (Capt. Church
having destroyed all the rest) sell sick: The wretch reflecting upon the
miserable condition he had bro't himself into, his heart became as a stone
within him, and he died. The old Squaw slung a few leaves and brush over him,
and came into Sandwich, and gave this account of his death, and offered to show
them where she lest his body; but never had the opportunity, for she
immediately fell sick and died also.

Capt. Church being now at Pl^mouth again weary and worn, would have gone home
to his Wife and Family, but the Government being Solicitous to engage him in
the Service until Philip was slain, and promising him satisfaction and redress
for some mistreatment that he had met with: He fixes for another Expedition; he
had soon Volunteers enough to make up the Company he desired and Marched through
the Woods, until he came to Pocasset. And not seeing nor hearing of any of the
Enemy, they went over the Ferry to Rhode Island, to refresh themselves. The
Captain with about half a (...) in his company took Horse and rid about eight
Miles down the Island, (...) Mr. Sanf^rds where he had left his Wife; who no
sooner saw him but fainted with the surprise; and by that time she was a little
revived, they spied two Horse men corning a great pace. Capt. Church told his
company that those men (by their riding) came with Tidings. When they came up
they proved to be Maj Sanford and Capt. Golding; who immediately asked Capt.
Church, What be would give to bear some News of Philip? He replied, That was
what he wanted. They told him They had rid bard with some hopes of overtaking
of him, and were now come on purp^se to inform him, That there was just now
Tidings from Mount-hope; An Indian came down from thence (where Philips Camp
now was) on to Sand point over against Trips, and hollowed, and made signs to
be fetched over; and being fetched over, be reported, That be was fled from
Philip, who (said he) has killed my Brother just before I came away, for giving
some advice that displeased him. And said, he was fled for fear of meeting with
the same his Brother had met with. Told them also, That Philip was now in
Mount-hope Nick. Capt. Church thanked them for their good News, and said, he
hoped by to Morrow Morning to have the Rogues head. The Horses that he and his
company came on standing at the door, (for they had not been unsaddled) his
Wife must content her self with a short visit, when such game was ahead; they
immediately Mounted, set Spurs to their Horses, and away. The two Gentlemen
that bro't him the Tidings, told him, They would gladly wait upon him to see
the event of this Expedition. He thanked them, and told them, he should be as
fond of their company as any Men's; and (in short) they went with him. And they
were soon as Trips Ferry (with Capt Churches company) where the deserter was;
who was a fellow of good sense, and told his story handsomely: he offered Capt.
Church to Pilot him to Philip, and to help to kill him, that he might revenge
his Brothers death. Told him, That Philip was now upon a little spot of Upland
that was in the South end of the miery Swamp just at the foot of the Mount,
which was a spot of ground that Capt. Church was well acquainted with. By that
time they were got over the Ferry, and came near the ground half the Night was
spent, the Capt. commands a halt, and bringing the company together, he asked
Maj Sanford and Capt. Goldings advice, what method was best to take in making
the onset, but they declining giving any advice, telling him, That his great
Experience and Success forbid their taking upon them to give advice. Then Capt.
Church offered Capt. Golding, that he should have the honor (if he would
please to accept of it) to beat up Philips headquarters. He accepted the offer
and had his allotted number drawn out to him, and the Pilot. Capt Churches
instructions to him were to be very careful in his approach to the Enemy, and
be sure not to show himself until by day light they might see and discern their
own men from the Enemy. Told him also, That his custom in the like cases was to
creep with his company on their bellies, until they came as near as they could;
and that as soon as the Enemy discovered them they would cry out; and that was
the word for his Men to fire and fall on. Directed him when the Enemy should
start and take into the Swamp, they should pursue with speed, every man
shouting and making what noise they could; for he would give orders to his
Ambuscade to fire on any that should come silently. Capt. Church knowing it was
Philips custom to be fore-most in the flight, went down to the Swamp and gave
Capt. Williams of Situate the command of the right wing of the Ambush, and
placed and Englishman and an Indian together behind such shelters of Trees,
etc. that he could find, and tock care to place them at such distance as none
might pass undiscovered between them, charged 'em to be careful of themselves,
and of hurting their friends: And to f^^e at any that should come silently
through the Swamp: But it being somewhat further through the Swamp than he was
aware of, he wanted men to make up his Ambuscad^; having placed what men he had
he took Maj Sanford by the hand, said, Sir, I have so placed them that us (...)
p^^^^l^d Philip (...) them. The same moment a Shot whistled over their heads
and then the noise of a Gun toward Philips Camp. Capt Church at first though it it
might be some Gun fired by accident: but before he could speak, a whole Volley
followed, which was earlier than he expected. One of Philips gang going forth
to ease himself, when he had done, looked round him, and Capt. Golding thought
the Indian looked right at him (though probably 'twas but his conceit) so fired
at him, and upon his firing, the whole company that were with him fired upon
the Enemies shelter before the Indians had time to rise from their sleep, and
so over-shot them But their shelter was open on that side ne^t the Swamp, built
so on purpose for the convenience of flight on occasion. They were soon in the
Swamp and Philip the foremost, who starting at the first Gun threw his Petunk
and Powder horn over his head, caught up his Gun, and ran as fast as he could
scamper, without any more clothes than his small breeches and stockings, and
ran directly upon two of Capt. Churches Ambush; they let him come fair within
shot, and the English man's Gun missing fire, he bid the Indian fire away, and
he did so to purpose, sent one Musket Bullet through his heart, and another not
above two inches from it; he fell upon his face in the Mud and Water with his
Gun under him. By his time the Enemy perceived they were way laid on the east
side of the Swamp, tacked short about. One of the Enemy who seemed to be a
great surly old fellow, hollowed with a loud voice, and often called out,
iootash, iootash, Capt. Church called to his Indian Peter and asked him, Who
that was that called so? He answered, It was old Annowon Philips great Captain,
calling on his Soldiers to stand to it and sigh stoutly. Now the Enemy finding
that place of the Swamp which was not Ambush'd, many of them made their escape
in the English Tracks. The Man that had shot down Philip, ran with all speed to
Capt Church, and informed him of his exploit, who commanded him to be Silent
about it, and let no man more know it, until they had drove the Swamp clean;
but when they had drove the Swamp through and found the Enemy had escaped, or at
least the most of them; and the Sun now up, and so the dew gone, that they
could not so easily Track them, the whole Company met together at the place
where the Enemies Night shelter was; and then Capt. Church gave them the news
of Philips death; upon which the whole Army gave Three loud Huzza's. Capt
Church ordered his body to be pulled out of the mire on to the Upland, so some
of Capt. Churches Indians took hold of him by his Stockings, and some by his
small Breeches, (being otherwise naked) and drew him through the Mud unto the
Upland, and a doleful, great, naked, dirty beast, he looked like. Capt. Church
then said, That forasmuch as be bad caused many an English man's body to lie
unburied and ret above ground, that not me of bis bones should be buried. And
calling his old Indian Executioner, bid him behead and quarter him.
Accordingly, he came with his Hatchet and stood ever him, but before he struck
he made a small Speech directing it to Philip; and said, He bad been a very
great Man, and bad made many a man afraid of him, but so big as be was be would
now chop bis AS for him; and so went to work, and did as he was ordered. Philip
having one very remarkable hand being much scarr'd, occasioned by the splitting
of a Pistol in it formerly. Capt. Church gave the head and that hand to
Alderman, the Indian who shot him, to show to such Gentlemen as would bestow
gratuities upon him; and accordingly he got many Penny by it. This being on the
last day of the Week, the Captain with his Company returned to the Island,
tarryed there until Tuesday; and then went off and ranged through all the Woods
to Plym^^th, and received their Praemium, which was Thirty Shilling^ per head,
for the Enemies which they had killed or taken, instead of all Wages; and
Philips head went at the same price. Methinks it is scanty reward and poor
inconragement; though it was better than what had been some time before. For this
March they received Four Shillings and Six Pence a Man, w^^ was all the Reward
they had, except the honor of killing Philip. T^^^^^ in the latter end of
August, 1676

Capt. Church had been but a little while at Plymouth, before a Post from
Reboboth came to inform the Government, that old Annawon, Philips chief Captain
was with his company ranging about their Woods, and was very offensive and
pernicious to Reboboth and Swansey. Capt. Church was immediately sont for
again, and treated with to engage one Expedition more; he told them, Their
incour^gement was so poor he feared his Soldier, would be dull about going
again: But being a hearty friend to the cause, he Rally's again, goes to Mr.
Jabesh Howland his old Lieutenant, and some of his Soldiers, that used to go
out with him; told them how the case was circumstanced, and that he had
intelligence of old Annawon's walk, and haunt, and wanted hands to hunt him;
they did not want much entreating; but told him, They would go with him, as
long as there was an Indian left in the Woods. He moved and ranged through the
Woods to Pocasset. It being the latter end of the Week, he proposed to go on to
Rhode Island and rest until Monday. But early on the Lords day Morning, there
came a Post to inform the Captain. That early the same Morning a Canon with
several Indians in it passed from Prudence Island to Poppasquash Neck. Capt.
Church though it if he could possibly surprise them, he might probably gain force
intelligence of more game; therefore he made all possible speed after them: the
Ferry boat being out of the way he made use of Canoo's: But by that time they
had made two fraights, and had got over the Captain, and about 15 or 16 of his
Indians, the Wind sprung up with such violence that Canoo's could no more pass.
The Capt. seeing it was impossible for any more of his Soldiers to come to
him, he told his Indians, If they were wi^^^g to go with him, be would go to
Poppasquash, and see if they could catch some of those Enemy Indians. They were
willing to go, but were sorry they had no English Soldiers; so they Marched
through the thickets that they might not be Discovered, until they came unto the
Salt Meadow, to the Northward of Bristol Town, that now is. Then they heard a
Gun, the Capt. looked about, not knowing but it might be some of his own
Company in the rear; so halting till they all came up, he found 'twas none of
his own Company that fired. Now though he had but a few Men, was minded to send
some of them out on a Scom. He moved it to Capt. Light foot to go with three
more on a Scout; he said he was willing provided the Captains man Nathanael
(which (...) an Indian that they had lately taken) might be one of them,
because he was well acquainted with the Neck, and coming lately from among
them, knew how to call them. The Capt. bid him choose his three companions, and
go; and if they came across any of the Enemy not to kill them if they could
possibly take them alive; that they might gain intelligence concerning Annawon.
The Capt. with the rest of his company moved but a little way further toward
Poppasquash, before they heard another Gun, which seemed to be the same way
with the other, but further off. But they made no ha^ until they came unto the
narrow of Poppasquash Neck; where Capt. Church left three men more, to watch if
any should come out of the Neck, and to inform the Scout when they returned
which way he was gone. He parted the remainder of his company, half on one side
of the Neck, and the other with himself went on the other side of the Neck,
until they met; and meeting neither with Indians nor Canoo's returned big with
expectations of Tidings by their Scout: But when they came back to the three
men at the arrow of the Neck, they told their Captain the Scout was not
returned, had heard not seen any thing of them, this filled them with tho'ts
what should become of them; by that time they had sat down and waited an hour
longer, it was very dark, and they despaired of their ^e^urning to them. Some
of the Indians told their Captain, I boy feared his new man Nathanael had met
with bis old Mount hope friends, and was turned Rogu^. They concluded to make
no fires that Night, (and indeed they had no great need of any) for they had no
Victuals to cook, had not so much as a morsel of Bread with them. They took up
their lodging scattering, that if possibly their Scout should come in the
Night, and whistle (which was their sign) some or other of them might hear
them. They had a very solitary, hungry Night; and as soon as the day broke they
drew off through the brush to (...) hill without the Neck, and looking about them
they espied one Indian man come running some what toward them, the Captain
ordered one man to step out of the brush and show himself. Upon which the
Indian ran right to him, and who should it be but Capt. Lightfoot, to their
great joy. Capt. Church asked him, What News? He answered, Good News, they were
all well and bad caught Ten Indians, and that they guarded them all Night in
one of the Flanker; of the old English Garrison; that their Prisoners were part
of Annawons company, and that they had left their Families in a Swamp above
Mattapoiset Neck. And as they were Marching toward the old Garrison Lightfoot
gave Capt. Church a particular account of their Exploit viz. That presently
after they left him, they heard another Gun, which seemed to be toward the
Indian burying place, and moving that way, they discovered two of the Enemy
fleeing of an Horse. The Scout claping into the brush, Nathanael bid them sit
down, and he would presently call all the Indians thereabout unto him. They
bid, and be went a little distance back from them and sat up his no^e and
bowled like a Wolf: One of the two immediately left his Horse and came running
to see who was there; but Nathanael bowling lower and lower drew him in between
those that lay in wait for him, who seized him; Nathanael continuing the same
note, the other left the Horse also following his mate, and met with the same.
When they caught these two they examined them apart, and found them to agree in
their Story, that there were Eight more of them come down into the Neck to get
Provisions, and bad agreed to meet at the burying place that evening. These two
being some of Nathanaels old acquaintance, be had great influence upon there,
and with bis intiting Story, (telling what a brave Captain be had, how bravely
he lived since be had been with him, and how much they might better their
condition by ^^^^ing to him, etc.) persuaded and engaged them to be on his
side, which indeed now began to be the better side of the bedge. They waited
but alittle while before they espied the rest of theirs coming up to the
burying place, and Nathanael soon bowl'd them in as be had done their wates
before. When Capt. Church came to the Garrison, he met his Lientenant and the
rest of his Company; and then making up good fires they fell to roasting their
Horse-beas, enough to last them the whole day, but had not a morsal of Bread;
though Salt they had which they always carried in their Pockets, which at this
time was very acceptable to them. Their next motion was toward the place where
the Prisoners told them they had left their Women and Children, and surprised
them all, and some others that were newly come to them. And upon examination
they held to one Story that it was hard to tell where to find Annawon, for he
never roosted twice in a place. Now a certain Indian Soldier that Capt. Church
had gained one. ^ be on his side, prayed that he might have liberty to go and
fetch in his Father, who he said was about four Miles from that place, in a
Swamp with no other than one Young Squaw; Capt. Church inclined to go with him,
thinking it might be in his way to gain some intelligence of Annawon; and so
^^king one English Man and a few Indians with him leaving the rest there, he
went with his new Soldier to look his Father; when he came to the Swamp, he
bid the Indian go see if he could find his Father: he was no sooner gone but
Capt. Church discovered a Track coming down out of the Woods, upon which he and
his little company lay close some on one side of the Track and some on the
other. They heard the Indian Soldier make a howling for his Father; and at
length some body answered him, but while they were listening, they thought they
heard some body coming toward them, presently saw an old man coming up with a
Gun on his Shoulder, and a young Woman following of him, in the Track which
they lay by: They let them come up between them, and then started up and laid
hold on them both. Capt. Church immediately examined them a part, telling them,
What they must trust too if they told false Stories: He asked the young Woman,
What company they came last from? She said, from Capt. Annawons. He asked her,
How many were in company with him when she left him? She said, 50 or 60. He
asked her, How many Miles it was to the place where she left him? She said, She
did not understand Miles, but he was up in Squannaconk Swamp? The old man who
had been one of Philips Council, upon examination, gave exactly the same
account. Capt. Church asked him, If they could get there that Night? He said,
If they went presently and traveled stoutly, they might get there by Sunset.
He asked, Whither he was going? He answered, That Annawon had sent him down to
look for some Indians, that were gone down into Mount-hope Neck to kill
Provisions: Capt. Church let him know that those Indians were all his
Prisoners. By this time came the Indian Soldier and brought his Father and one
Indian more. The Captain was now in great straight of mind what to do next he
had a mind to give Annawon a visit, now knew where to find him, but his company
was very small, but half a dozen men beside himself, and was under a necessity
to send some body back to acquaint his Lieutenant and company with his
proceedings. However he asked his small company that were with him, Whither
they would willingly go with him and give Annawon a visit: They told him, They
were always ready to obey his commands. (...) ^ut withal told him, That they
knew this Capt. Annawon was a great Soldier; that he had been a valia it
Captain under Asuhmequn, Philips Father, and that he had been Philips Chieftain
all this War; a very subtle man, and of great resolution, and had often said,
that he would never be taking alive by the English; and moreover they knew that
the men that were with him were resolute fellows, some of Philips chief
Soulders; and therefore feared whether it was practicable to make an attempt
upon him with so small a ^^^dful of assistants as now ^^ure with him. Toll him
further, That he would be a pict^ that after all the Great Things be had done,
be should throw away his Life at last. etc. Upon which he replied. That he
doubted not Annawon was a subtle and valiant Man: that he had along time but in
vain sought for him, and never till now could find his quarters and he was very
loath to miss of the opp^rtunity; and doubt not but that if they would
cheerfully go with him the same Almighty Providence the^ had hitherto protected
and befriended them would do so still, etc. Upon this with one consent they
said, They would go. Capt. Church then turned to one Cock of Plymouth, (the
only English Man then with him) and asked him, What he thought of it? Who
replied, Sir, I am never afraid of going any where when you are with me. Then
Capt. Church asked the old Indian, if he could carry his Horse with him? (for
he conveyed a Horse thus far with him:) He replied that it was impossible for
an Horse to pass the Swamps. Therefore he sent away his new Indian Soldier
with his Father and the Captains Horse to his Lieutenant, and orders for him to
move to Taunton with the Prisoners, to secure them there, and to come (...) in
the Morning in the Rehoboth Road, in which he might expect to meet him, if he
were alive and had success. The Captain then asked the old fellow, if he would
Pilot him unto Annawon? He answered, that he having given him his life he was
obliged to serve him. He bid him move on then, and they followed: The old man
would out-travel them, so far sometimes that they were almost out of sight:
looking over his Shoulder and seeing them behind, he would halt. Just at the
Sun was setting, the old man made a fall stop and sat down, the company coming
up also sat down, being all weary. Capt. Church asked, What News? He answered.
That about that time in the Evening Capt. Annawon, sent out his Scouts to see
if the Coast were clear, and as soon as it began to grow dark the Scouts
return. And then (said he) we may move again securely. When it began to grow
dark the old man stood up again, Capt. Church asked him, if he would take a Gun
and fight for him? He bowed very low and prayed him not to impose such a thing
upon him, as to fight against Capt. Annawon his old friend. But says he, I
will go along with you, and be helpful to you, and will lay hands on any man
that shall offer to hurt you. It being now pretty dark they moved close
together; anon they heard a noise, the Captain stayed the old man with his
hand, and asked his own men what noise they thought it might be? they concluded
it to be the poundding of a Mortar. The old man had given Capt. Church a
description of the Place where Annowon now lay, and of the Difficulty of
getting at him: being sensible that they were pretty near them, with two of his
Indians he creeps to the edge of the Rocks, from whence he could see their
Camps: he saw three companies of Indians as a little distance from each other,
being easy to be discovered by the light of their fires. He saw also the great
Annawon and his company, who had formed his Camp or Kennelling place, by
falling a Tree under the side of the great clefts of Rocks, and sitting a row
of birch bushes up against it, where he himself, and his Son, and some of his
chiefs had taken up their lodging, and made great fires without them, and had
their Pots and Kittles boiling, and Spits roasting. Their Arms also he
discovered, all set together in a place fitted for the purpose (...) an end
against a stick lodged in two crotches, and a Mat placed over them, to keep
them from the wet or dew. The old Annawons feet and his Sons head were so near
the Arms as almost to touch them: But the Rocks were so treep that it was
impossible to get down, but as they lowered themselves by the bows, and the
bushes that grew in the cracks of the Rock. Capt. Church creeping back again to
the old man, asked him If there was no possibility of getting at them some
other way? He answered, no. That he and all that belonged to Annawon were
ordered to come that way, and none could come any other way without difficulty
or danger of being shot. Capt. Church then ordered the old man and his daughter
to go down fore most with their baskets at their backs, that when Annawon saw
them with their baskets he should not mistrust the intregue; Capt. Church and
his handful of Soldiers crept down also under the shadow of these two and
their baskets, and the Captain himself crept close behind the old man, with his
Hatchet in his hand, and stepped over the young man's head to the Arms, the young
Annawon discovering of him, whipped his blanket over his head and shrunk up in a
heap: The old Capt. Annawon started up on his breech, and cried out Howoh, and
despairing of escape throw himself back again, and lay silent until Capt.
Church had secured all the Arms, etc. And having secured that company, he sent
his Indian Soldiers to the other fires and companies, giving them
instructions, what to do and say. Accordingly, they went into the midst of
them: When they discovered themselves who they were, told them that their Capt.
Annawon was taken, and it would be best for them quietly and peaceably to
surrender themselves, which would procure good quarter for them: Otherwise if
they should pretend to resist or make their escape, it would be in vain, and
they could expect no other but that Capt. Church with his great Army, who had
now entrap'd them, would cut them to pieces: told them also if they would
submit themselves, and deliver up all their Arms unto them, and keep every man
his place until it was day; they would assure them that their Capt. Church who
had been so kind to themselves when they surrendered to him, should be as kind
unto them. Now they being old acquaintance, and many of them Relations did much
the readier give heed to what they said, and complied and surrendered up their
Arms unto them, both their Guns and Hatchets etc. and were forthwith carried to
Capt. Church. Things being so far settled, Capt. Church asked Annawon, What he
had for Supper, for (said he) I am come to Sup with you. Tanbut (said Annawon)
with a big voices, and looking about upon his Women, bid them hasten and get
Capt. Church and his company some Supper; then turned to Capt. Church and asked
him, Whether he would eat Cow-beaf or Horse beaf. The Captain told him Cow-beaf
would be most acceptable: It was soon got ready, and pulling his little bag of
Salt out of his Pocket, which was all the Provision he brought with him; this
seasoned his Cow beaf so that with it and the dried green-corn, which the old
Squaw was pounding in the Mortar, while they were sliding down the Rocks, he
made a very hearty Supper. And this pounding in the Mortar proved lucky for
Capt. Churches getting down the Rocks, for when the old Squaw pounded they
moved, and when she ceased to turn the corn, they ceased creeping, the noise of
the Mortar prevented the Enemies hearing their creeping: and the corn being now
dressed supplied the want of Bread, and gave a fine relish with the Cow-beaf.
Supper being over, Capt. Church sent two of his men to inform the other
companies, that he had killed Philip, and had taken their friends in Mount-hope
Neck, but had spared their lives, and that he had subdued now all the Enemy (he
supposed) excepting this company of Annawons, and now if they would be orderly
and keep their places until Morning, they should have good quarter, and that he
would carry them to Taunton, where they might see their friends again, etc. The
Messengers returned, that the Indians yielded to his proposals. Capt. Church
though it it was now time for him to take a Nap, having had no sleep in two days
and one night before; told his men that if they would let him sleep two hours,
they should sleep all the reft of the night. He laid himself down and
endeavored to sleep, but all disposition to sleep departed from him. After he
had lain a little while he looked up to see how his Watch managed, but found
them all fast a-sleep. Now Capt. Church had told Capt, Annawons company as he
had ordered his Indians to tell the others, that their lives should all be
spared, excepting Capt. Annawons, and it was not in his power to promise him
his life, but he must carry him to his Masters at Plymouth, and he would
entreat them for his life. Now when Capt. Church found not only his own men,
but all the Indians fast a-sleep Annawon only excepted, whom he perceived was
as broad awake as himself; and so they lay looking one upon the other perhaps
an hour; Capt. Church said nothing to him, for he could not speak Indian, and
though it Annawon could not speak English; at length Annawon raised himself up,
cast off his blanket, and with no more clothes than his small breeches, walked
a little way back from the company: Capt. Church though it no other but that he had
occasion to ease himself, and so walked to some distance rather than offend him
with the stink: but by and by he was gone out of sight and hearing; and then
Capt. Church began to suspect some ill design in him, and got all the Guns
close him, and crowded himself close under young Annawon, that if he should any
where get a Gun he should not make a sho^^ him without indangering his Son;
lying very still a while waiting for the event: at length, he heard some body,
coming the same way that Annawon went. The Moon now shining bright, he saw him
at a distance coming with something in his hands, and coming up to Capt.
Church, he fell upon his knees before him, and offered him what he had bro't,
and speaking in plain English, said, Great Captain, you have killed Philip, and
conquered his Country for I believe, that I and my company are the last that
War against the English, so suppose the War is ended by your means; and
therefore these things belong unto you. Then opening his pack, he pulled out
Philip: belt curiously wrought with Wompom, being Nine inches broad, wrought
with black and white Wompom, in various figures and flowers, and pictures of
many birds and beasts. This when hung upon Capt. Churches shoulders it reached
his ancles. And another belt of Wompom he presented him with, wrought after the
former manner, which Philip was wont to put upon his head; it had two flags on
the back part which hung down on his back: and another small belt with a Star
upon the end of it, which he used to hang on his breast; and they were all
edged with red hair, which Annawon said they got in the Muhhogs Country. Then
he pulled out two horns of glazed Powder, and a red cloth Blanket: he told
Capt. Church, these were Philips Royalties which he was wont to adorn himself
with when he sat in State. That the though it himself happy that he had an
opportunity to present them to Capt. Church, who had won them, etc. spent the
remainder of the night in discourse; and gave an account of what mighty success
he had formerly in Wars against many Nations of Indians, when served
Asu^mequin, Philips Father, etc. In the Morning as soon as it was light, the
Captain Marched with his Prisoners out of that Swampy Country toward Taunton,
met his Lieutenant and Company, about four Miles out of Town, who expressed a
great deal of joy to see him again, and said, 'twas more than ever he expected.
They went into Taunton, were civily and kindly treated by the Inhabitants,
refreshed and refted themselves that night. Early next Morning, the Captain
took old Annawon, and half a dozen of his Indian Soldiers, and his own man,
and went to Rhode Island, sending the reft of his Company and his Prisoners by
his Lieutenant to Plymouth. Tarrying two or three days upon the Island, he then
went to Plymouth, and carried his Wife and his two Children with him.

Capt. Church had been but a little while at Plymouth, before he was informed
of a parcel of Indians, that haunted the Woods between Plymouth and Sippican
that did great damage to the English in killing their Cattle, Horses, and
Swine; and the Captain was soon in pursuit of them: Went out from Plymouth the
next Monday in the afternoon; next Morning early they discovered a Track; the
Captain sent two Indians on the Track to see what they could discover, while he
and his Company followed gently after, but the two Indians soon returned with
Tidings that they had discovered the Enemy sitting round their fires, in a
thick place of brush. When they came pretty near the place, the Captain ordered
every man to creep as he did; and surround them by creeping as near as they
could, till they should be discovered, and then to run on upon them and take
them alive, if possible, (for their Prisoners were their pay:) They did so,
took every one that was at the fires, not one escaping. Upon examination they
agreed in their Story, that they belonged to Tispaquin, who was gone with John
Bump, and one more, to Agawom and Sippican to kill Horses, and were not
expected back in two or three days. This same Tispaquin had been a great
Captain, and the Indians reported that he was such a great Pouwau, that no
bullet could enter him, etc. Capt. Church said, He would not have him killed,
for there was a War broke out in the Eastern Part of the Country, and he would
have him saved to go with them to fight the Eastern Indians. Agreeably he left
two old Squaws of the Prisoners, and bid them tarry there until their Capt.
Tispaquin returned, and to tell him, that Church had been there, and had taken
his Wife, Children, and company, and carried them down to Plymouth; and would
spare all their lives, and his too, if he would come down to them and bring the
other two that were with him, and they should be his Soldiers, etc. Capt.
Church then returned to Plymouth, leaving the old Squaws well provided for, and
Biscuit for Tispaquin when he returned: Telling his Soldiers, that he doubted
not but he had laid a Trap that would take him Capt. Church two days after went
to Boston; (the Commissioners then sitting) and waited upon the Honorable
Governor Leverett, who then lay Sick; who requested of Capt. Church to give
him some account of the War: who readily obliged his Honor therein, to his
great Satisfaction, as he was pleased to express himself; taking him by the
hand, and telling him, if it pleased God he lived, he would make it a brace of
a hundred pounds advantage to him out of the Massachusetts Colony, and would
endeavor the reft of the Colonies should do Proportionably; but he dyed within
a Fortnight after, and so nothing was done of that nature. The same day
Tispaquin came in and those that were with him, but when Capt. Church returned
from Boston, he found to his grief that the heads of Annawon, Tispaquin, etc.
cut off, which were the last of Philips friends. The General Court of Plymouth
then sitting sent for Capt. Church who waited upon them accordingly, and
received their Thanks for his good Service, which they Unanimously Voted, which
was all that Capt. Church had for his aforesaid Service.

Afterward in the Year 1676. in the Month of January Capt. Church received a
Commission from Governor Winslow, to Scour the Woods of some of the lurking
Enemy, which they were well informed were there. Which Commission is as follows:

BEing well informed that there are certain parties of our Indian Enemies,
(remains of the People, or Allies of Philip, late Sachem of Mount-hope, our
Mortal Enemy) that are still lurking in the Woods near some of our Plantations,
that go on to disturb the Peace of His Majesty's Subjects in this and the
Neighboring Colonies, by their frequent Robberies, and other Insolences. Capt.
Benjamin Church is therefore hereby Nominated, Ordered, Commissioned, and
Empowered to raise a Company of Volunteers, consisting of English and Indians;
so many as he shall judge necessary to improve in the present Expedition, and
can obtain; And of them to take the Command, and Conduct, and to lead them
forth unto such place or places within this or the Neighboring Colonies, as he
shall think fit, and as the Providence of God, and his Intelligence may lead
him; To Discover, Pursue, Fight, Surprise, Destroy, and Subdue our said Indian
Enemy, or any party or parties of them, that by the Providence of God they may
meet with; Or them, or any of them to receive to Mercy, if he see cause
(provided they be not Murderous Rogues, or such as have been principal granted
to the said Capt. Church, and others, to Arm and set cut such of our friendly
Indians, as he is willing to Entertain. And forasmuch as all these our Enemies
that have been taken, or at any time may be taken by our Forces, have by our
Courts and Councils been rendered lawful Captives of War, and condemned to
perpetual Servitude; this Council do also determine and hereby diclare, That
all such Priso^ers as by the blessing of God the said Captain and Company, or
any of them, shall take, together with their Arms, and other Plunder, shall he
their own, and to be distributed amongst themselves, according to such
agreement as they may be at one with another: And it shall be lawful, and is
hereby warrantable for him and them to make Sale of such Prisoners as their
perpetual Slaves; or otherwise to retain and keep them as they think meet,
(they being such as the Law allows to be kept:) Finally, the said Capt. Church
herein improving his best judgment and discretion, and utmost ability,
faithfully to Serve the Interest of God, his Majesty's Interest, and the
Interest of the Colony; and carefully governing his said Company at home and
abroad; these shall be unto him full and ample Commission, Warrant and
Discharge. Given under the Public Seal. January 15th. 1676.

Per Josiah Winslow, GOV.

Accordingly Capt. Church accompanied with several Gentlemen and others went
out, and took diverse parties of Indians; and in one of which Parties there was
a certain old man whom Capt. Church seemed to take particular notice of, and
asking him where he belonged, who told him to Swanzey; the Captain asked his
name, who replied, his name was Conscience; Conscience said the Captain
(smiling) then the War is over, for that was what they were searching for, it
being much wanting; and then returned the said Conscience to his Post again at
Swanzey, to a certain person the said Indian desired to be Sold to, and so
returned home.

A further Account of the Actions in the more later Wars against the Common
Enemy and Indian Rebels in the Eastern Parts, under the Command of the
aforesaid Capt. Benj. Church.
IN the time of Sir Edmund Andr^ss's Government, began that bloody War in the
Eastern Parts of New England; so that immediately Sir Edmund sent an Express
for Capt. Church; who then being at Little Compton, received it on a Lords Day
in the afternoon Meeting; going home after Meeting, took his Horse and set out
for Boston, as ordered; and by Sun rise next Morning got to Brantry, where he
met with Col. Page on Horseback, going to Weymouth and Hingham to raise Forces
to go East; who said he was glad to see him, and that his Excellency would be
as glad to see him in Boston so early: so parting, he soon got to Boston, and
waited upon his Excellency; who informed him of an unhappy War broke out in the
Eastern Parts; and said he was going himself in Person, and that he wanted his
Company which him: But Capt. Church not finding in himself the same Spirit he
used to have, said, he hoped his Excellency would give him time to consider of
it. He told him he might; and also said that he must come and Dine with him.
Capt. Church having many acquaintance in Boston, who made it their business
some to encourage, and others to discourage him from going with his Excellency.
So after Dinner his Excellency tock him into his room and discoursed freely;
saying that he having knowledge of his former Actions and Successes; and that
he must go with him, and be his Second, with other encouragements. But in
short, the said Capt. Church did not accept, so was dismissed, and went home.

Soon after this was the Revolution, and the other Government Reassumed; and
then Governor Broadstreet sent for Capt. Church to come to Boston, as soon as
his business would permit: Where-upon he went to Boston, and walted upon his
Honor; who told him he was requested by the Council to send for him, to see if
he could be prevailed with to Raise Volunteers both English and Indians to go
East; for the Eastward Indians had done great spoil upon the English in those
Parts; giving him an account of the Miseries and Sufferings of the People
there: Capt. Churches Spirits being affected, said, If he could do any Service
for his Honor, the Country, and their relief, he was ready and willing: His
advice was asked, How he would act, he said, He would take with him as many of
his old Soldiers as he could get, both English and Indians, etc. The Gentlemen
of Boston requested him to go to Rhode Island Government to ask their
assistance: So giving him their Letter, and about 40 s. in Money, he took leave
and went home to Bristol on (...) Saturday; and the next Monday Morning he went
over to Rhode Island, and waited upon their Governor, delivering the Letter,
as ordered; prayed his Honor for a speedy answer: who said, they could not
give an answer presently; so he waited upon them till he had their answer; and
when he had obtain it, he carried it to the Boston Gentlemen; who desired him
to Raise what Volunteers he could in Plymouth Colony, and Rhode Island
Government, and what was wanting they would make up out of their's that was
already out in the Eastern Parts. The Summer being far spent Capt. Church made
what dispatch he could, and raised about 250 Men Volunteers, and receiving his
Commission from Governor Hinkley, which is as follows, viz.

The Council of War of their Majesty's Colony of New-Plymouth in New England.
To Major Benjamin Church, Commander in Chief.
WHereas the Kenneb^ck and Eastern Indians with their Confederates, have openly
made War upon their Majesty's Subjects of the Provinces of Maine,
New Hampshire, and of the Massachusetts Colony, having committed many barbarous
Murders, Spoils and Rapines upon their Persons and Estates. And whereas there
are some Forces of Soldiers English and Indians now raised and detached out of
the several Regiments and Places within this Colony of New-Plymouth, to go
forth to the assistance of our Neighbors and Friends of the aforesaid
Provinces and Colony of the Massachusetts, Subjects of one and the same Crown;
and to join with their Forces for the repelling and destruction of the common
Enerny. And whereas you Benjamin Church are appointed to be Major and Commander
in Chief of all the Forces English and Indians detached within this Colony, for
the Service of their Majesty's as aforesaid. These are in their Majesty's Name
to Authorize and Require you to take into your care and conduct all the said
Forces English and Indians, and diligently to intend that Service, by leading
and exercising of your Inferior Officers and Soldiers, commanding them to
obey you as their Chief Commander; and to pursue, sight, take, kill or destroy
the said Enemies, their Aiders and Abetters, by all the ways and means you
can, as you shall have opportunity. And you to observe and obey all such Orders
and Instructions as from time to time you shall receive from the Commissioners
of the Colonies, the Council of War of this Colony, or the Governor and
Council of the Massachusetts Colony. In Testimony whereof the Public Seal of
the said Colony of New-Plymouth is here-unto affixed. Dated in Plymouth the
Sixth day of September, Anno Dom. 1689. Annoque Regni Regis et Reginae
Willielmi ^t Mariae Angliae, etc. Primo.

Thomas ^inkley, President.

And now Marching them all down to Boston, then received his further Orders and
Instructions: which are as follows,

Boston, Septem. 16th. 1689, To all Sheriffs, Marshalls, Constables, and other
Officers Military and Civil, in their Majesty's Province of Maine.
WHereas pursuant to an agreement of the Commissioners of the United Colonies,
Major Benjamin Church is Commissionated Commander in Chief over that part of
their Majesty's Forces (levied for the present Expedition against the Common
Enemy) whose head quarters are appointed to be at Falmouth in Casco Bay. In
their Majesty's Names. You, and every of you are required to be a^ding and
assisting to the said Maj Church, in his pursuit of the Enemy, as any Emergency
shall require; and to Impress Boats, or other Vessels, Carts, Carriages,
Horses, Oxen, Provision and Ammunition, and Men for guides etc. as you shall
receive Warrants from the said Chief Commander, or his Lieutenant so to do: You
may not fail to do the same speedily and effectually, as you will answer your
neglect and contempt of their Majesty's Authority and Service at your uttermost
Peril. Given under my Hand and Seal the Day and Year above Written. Annoque
Regi Regis et Reginae Willielmi and Mariae Prinno.

By Thomas Danforth, President of the Province of Maine.

By the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts Colony.
To Major Benjamin Church.
WHereas you are appointed and commissioned by the Council of War of the Colony
of New-Plymouth, Commander in Chief of the Forces raised within the said
Colony, against the Common Indian Enemy, now ordered into the Eastern Parts to
join with some of the Forces of this Colony; for the prosecution, repelling and
subduing of the said Enemy. It is therefore Ordered that Captain Simon Willard,
and Capt. Nathanael Hall, with the two Companies of Soldiers under their
several Command belonging to this Colony, now in or about Casco Bay, be and are
hereby put under you, as their Commander in Chief for this present Expedition.
And in pursuance of the Commissions severally given to either of them, they are
Ordered to Observe and Obey your orders and directions, as their Commander in
Chief until further Order from the Governor and Council; Or the Commissioners
of the Colonies. Dated in Boston the 17th day of September, Anno Dom. 1689.
Annoque Regni Regis et Reginae Guilielmi et Mariae Angliae, etc. Primo.

S. Bradstreet, GOV.
Past (...) ^^^^cil, Attest Isaac Addington, Secr.

By the Commissioners of the Colonies of the Massachusetts, Plymouth and
Connecticut,
for managing the present War against the Common Enemy. Instructions for Major
Benjamin Church Commander in Chief of the Plymouth Forces, with others of the
Massachusetts put under his Command.
IN Pursuance of the Commission given you for their Majesty's Service in the
present Expedition against the Common Indian Enemy, their Aidors and Abettors;
reposing confidence in your Wisdom, Prudence and Fidelity in the trust
committed to you, for the honor of God, good of His People, and the security
of the Interest of Christ in His Churches, expecting and praying that in your
dependence upon Him, you may be helped and assisted with all that Grace and
Wisdom which is requisite for carrying you on with Success in this difficult
Service; and though much is and must be left to your discretion as Providence and
opportunity may present from time to time in places of attendence: Yet the
following Instructions are commended unto your observation, and to be attended
so far as the State of matters with you in such a transaction will admit. You
are with all possible speed to take care that the Plymouth Forces both English
and Indians under your Command be fixed and ready, and the first opportunity of
Wind and Weather, to go on board such Vessels as are provided to transport you
and them to Casco, where if it shall please God you arrive, you are to take
under your care and command the Companies of Capt. Nathanael Hall, and Capt.
Simon Willard, who are ordered to attend your Command, whom together with the
Plymouth Forces, and such as from time to time may be added unto you; you are
to improve in such way as you shall see meet, for the discovering, pursuing
subduing and destroying the said Common Enemy, by all opportunities you are
capable of; always intending the preserving any of the near Towns from
incursions, and destruction of the Enemy, yet chiefly improving your men for
the finding and following the said Enemy abroad, and if possible to find out
and attach their head quarters and principal Randezvouz, if you find you are in
a rational capacity of so doing; the better to enable you thereto, We have
ordered two men of War Sloops, and other small Vessels for transportation, to
attend you, for some considerable time. You are to see that your Soldiers Arms
be always fixed, and that they be furnished with Ammunition, Provisions and
other necessaries, that so they may be in a readiness to repel and attach the
Enemy. In your pursuit you are to take special care to avoid danger by
Ambushments, or being drawn under any disadvantage by the Enemy in your Marches
Keeping out Scouts and a forlorn before your main Body, and by all possible
means endeavoring to Surprise some of the Enemy, that so you may gain
intelligence. You are to Suppress all Mutinies and Disorders among your
Soldiers, as much as in you lies, and to punish such as disobey your Officers,
according to the rules of War herewith given you.

You are according to your opportunity, or any occasion more than ordinary
occurring to hold correspondence with Major Swain, and to yield Mutual
assistance when and as you are capable of it, and you may have reason to judge
it will be of most Public Service; and it will be meet you and he should agree
of some Signal whereby your Indians may be known from the Enemy. You are to
encourage your Soldiers to be industrious, vigorous, and venturous in their
Service, to search out and destroy the Enemy, acquainting them, It is agreed by
the several Colonies, That th^^ shall have the benefit of the Captives and all
lawful Plunder, and the (...) of Eight Pounds per head, for every fighting
^^dian man slain by the^, over and above their Stated wages; the same being
made appear to the Commander in Chief, or such as shall be appointed to take
care therein. If your Commission Officers or any of their should be slain, or
otherwise incapable of Service, and for such reason ^^smist, you are to appoint
others in their room, who shall have the like wages, and a Commission sent upon
notice given, you to give them Commissions in the mean (...). You are to take
effectual care that the Worship of God be kept up in the Army, Morning and
Evening Prayer attended as sar as may be, and as the Emergencies of your
affairs will admit, to see that the holy Sabbath be duly Sanctified. You are
to take care as much as may be to prevent or punish Drunkenness, Swearing,
Cursing, or such other Sins, as do provoke the anger of God. You are to advise
with your Chief Officers in any matters of Moment, as you shall have
opportunity. You are from time to time to give intelligence and advice to the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, or Commissioners of the Colonies of
your proceedings and occurrence that may happen, and how it shall please the
Lord to deal with you in this present Expedition.

If you find the Vessels are not likely to be Serviceable to you, dismiss them
as soon as you may.

Capt. Silvanus Davis is a prudent Man, and well acquainted with the affairs of
those parts, and is writ unto to advise and inform you all he can.

Such further Instructions as we shall see reason to send unto you, you are
carefully to attend and observe, and in the absence of the Commissioners, you
shall observe the orders and instructions directed unto you from the Governor
and Council of the Massachusetts.

Given under our hands in Boston, Sept. 18. 1689. Tho. Hinkley John Walley
Thomas Danforth, President. Elisha Cook Samuel Mason William Pi^kin.


The First Expedition, East.
BEing ready, Major Church embarked with his Forces on board the Vessels
provided to transport them for Casco, having a brave Gale at S. W* and on
Friday about 3 a clock they got in sight of Casco Harbor; and discoursing two
or three small Ships there, not knowing before whether they were friends or
enemies; whereupon the said Commander Maj Church gave orders that every man
that was able should make ready, and all ly close, giving orders how they
should act in case they were Enemies: He going in the Ma^^ Sloop, together with
the Resolution went in first, being both well fitted with Guns and Men; coming
to the first, hailed them, who said they were friends; presently Manned their
Boat, brought too, and so came along the side of them; who gave the said Church
an account, That yesterday there was a very great Army of Indians, and French
with them upon the Island, at the going out of the Harbor, and that they were
come on purpose to take Casco Fort and Town, likewise informed him that they
had got a Captive Woman aboard (Maj. Waldens daughter of Piscataqua) that could
give him a full account of their number and intentions: He bid 'em give his
Service to their Captain, and (...) him, He would wait upon him after he had
been on shore and gave some orders and directions: being come pretty near he
ordered all the Men still to keep close, giving an account of the News he had
received, and then went ashore, where were several of the chief Men of the
Town who met him, being glad that he came so happily to their relief; told him
the News Mrs. Lee had given them, being the Woman aforesaid. He going to Capt.
Davis's to get some refreshment, having not eat a Morsel since he came by
Boston Castle; and now having inquired into the State of the Town, found them
in a poor condition for to defend themselves against such a number of Enemies:
He gave them an account of his Orders and Instructions and told them what
Forces he had brought, and that when it was dark they should all Land, and not
before, lest the Enemy should discover them. And then he went on board the
Privateer, who were Dutch Men; but as he went called aboard every Vessel and
ordered the Officers to take care that their Men might be all fitted and
provided to fight, for the People of the Town expected the Enemy to fall upon
them every Minute, but withal charging them to keep (...) discovered: and
coming on board the said Privateer, was kindly ^^ated, discoursed Mrs. Lee, who
informed him that the company the came with ^ad fourscore Canoo's: and that
there was more of them, whom she had not seen, which came from other Places,
and that they told her when they came all together, should make up 700 Men. He
asked her Whether Casteen was with them? She answered, That there was sever^
French Men with them, but she did not know whether Casteen was there or not. He
then having got what intelligence she could give him, went ashore and viewed
the Fort and Town, discoursing with the Gentlemen there according to his
Instructions; and when it began to grow dark, he ordered the Vessels to come as
near the Fort as might be, and Land the Soldiers, with as little noise as
possible; ordering them as they Landed to go into the Fort and Houses that
stood near, that so they night be ready upon occasion; having ordered
Provisions for them, went to every Company and ordering them to get every thing
ready; they that had no Powder-horns nor Shot-bags, should immediately make
them; ordering the Officers to take special care that they were ready to March
into the Woods an hour before day: and also directing the Watch to call him two
hours before day; so he hastened to bed to get some Rest. At the time prefixed
he was called, and presently ordering the Company's to make ready, and about
half an hour before day they moved; several of the Town People went with them
into a thick place of brush, about half a Mile from the Town; now ordering them
to send out their Scouts, as they used to do, and ^eing them all settled at
their work, he went into Town by Sun rise again, and desired the Inhabitants to
take care of themselves, till his men had fitted themselves with some
necessaries: for his Indians most of them wanted both bags and horns; so he
ordered them to make bags like Wallets to put Powder in one end and shot in the
other: So most of them were ready for action (viz.) the Seconet Indians, but
the Cape Indians were very bare, lying so long at Boston before they embarked,
that they had Sold every thing they could make a Penny of; some tying Shot and
Powder in the corners of their Blankets. He being in Town, just going to
Breakfast, there was an Alarm, so he ordered all the Soldiers in the Town to
Move away as fast as they could, where the firing was; and he with what Men
more were with him of his Soldiers, Moved immediately, and meeting with Capt.
Brackits Sons, who told him their Father was taken, and that they saw a great
Army of Indians in their Fathers Orchard, etc. By this time our Indians that
wanted bags and horns were fitted, but wanted more Ammunition: presently came a
Messenger to him from the Town and informed him, That they had knocked out the
heads of several Casks of Bullets and they were all too big, being Musket
Bullets, and would not fit their Guns, and that if he did not go back himself a
great part of the Army would be kept back from Service for want of suitable
Bullets: He run back and ordered every Vessel to send ashore all their Casks of
Bullets; being brought, knocked out their heads, and turned them all out upon
the green by the Fort, and set all the People in the Town that were able to
make slugs; being most of them too large for their use, which had like to have
been the overthrow of their whole Army: He finding some small Bullets and what
slugs were made, and three Snap-sacks of Powder, went immediately to the Army,
who were very hotly engaged; but coming to the River, the Tide was up; he
called to his men that were engaged, encouraging them, and told them he had
brought more Ammunition for them. An Indian called Capt. Lightfoot, laid down
his Gun, and came over the River, taking the Powder upon his head and a Kittle
of Bullets in each hand, and got safe to his Fellow Soldiers: He penceiving
great firing upon that side he was of, went to see who they were, and found
them to be two of Maj Church's Companies, one of English and the other of
Indians, being in all about Fourscore Men, that had not got over the River, but
lay firing over our Men's heads at the Enemy; he presently ordered them to Rally
and come all together; and gave the word for a Casco Man: So one Swarton a
Jersey man appearing, who he could hardly understand; he asked him, How far it
was to the head of the River? or whether there was any place they could get
over? He said, there was a Bridge about three quarters of a Mile up where they
might get over: So he calling to his Soldiers engaged on the other side, that
he would soon be with them over the Bridge, and come upon the backs of the
Enemy; which put, new courage into them; so they immediately Moved up toward
the Bridge* Marching very thin, being willing to make what show they could,
shouting as they Marched: they saw the Enemy running from the Riverside, where
they had made Stands with Wood to prevent any body from coming over the River;
and coming to the Bridge, they saw on the other side that the Enemy had laid
logs and stuck birch brush along to hide themselves from our view. He ordered
the Company to come all together, ordering them all to run after him, who would
go first, and that as soon as they got over the Bridge to scatter, that so they
might not be all shot down together, expecting the Enemy to be at their Stands;
so running up to the Stands, found none there, but were just gone, the ground
being much tumbled with them behind the said Stands: He ordered the Captain
with his Company of English to March down to our Men engaged, and that they
should keep along upon the edge of the Marsh, and himself with his Indian
Soldiers would March down through the brush: and coming to a parcel of low
ground which had been formerly burnt, the old brush being fallen down lay very
thick, and young brush being grown up made it bad traveling; but coming near
the back of the Enemy, one of his Men called unto him their Commander, and
said, That the Enemy run W^stward to get between us and the Bridge, and he
looking that way saw men running, and making a small stop, heard no firing, but
a great chopping with Hatchess; so concluding the fight was over, made the best
of their way to the Bridge again; left the Enemy should go over the Bridge into
the Town. The men being most of them out (our Ammunition lay exposed) coming to
the Bridge where he had left Six Indians for an Amboscade on the other side of
the River, that if any Enemy effec'd to come over they should fire at them,
which would give him Notice, so would come to their assistance; (but in the way
having heard no firing nor shouting, concluded the Enemy were drawn off) he
asked the Amboscade, whether they saw any Indians? They said, Yes, abundance.
He asked them, Where? They answered, That they ran over the head of the River
by the Cedar Swamp, and were running into the Neck toward the Town: There
being but one English man with him, he bid his Indian Soldiers scatter, run
very thin to preserve themselves and the better able to make a discovery of the
Enemy: and soon coming to Lieut. Clarks field on the South side of the Neck,
and seeing the Cattle feeding quietly, and perceiving no Track, concluded the
Amboscade had told them a falsehood; they hastily returned back to the said
Bridge, perceiving there was no noise of the Enemy. He hearing several great
Guns fire at the Town, concluded that they were either assaulted or that they
had discovered the Enemy: He having ordered that in case such should be, that
they should fire some of their great Guns to give him notice; he being a
Stranger to the Country, concluded the Enemy had by some other way got to the
Town: whereupon he sent his Men to the Town, and himself going to the River,
near where the fight had been; asked them how they did? and what was become of
the Enemy? who informed him that the Enemy drew off in less than an hour after
he left them, and had not fired a Gun at them since. He told them he had been
within little more than a Gun shot of the back of the Enemy, and had been upon
them had it not been for the thick brushy ground, etc. Now some of his Men
returning from the Town gave him the account, that they went while they saw the
Colors standing and Men walking about as not molested. He presently ordered
that all his Army should pursue the Enemy: But they told him that most of them
had spent their Ammunition, and that if the Enemy had engaged them a little
longer they might have come and knocked them on the head; and that some of
their Bullets were so unsizeable that some of them were forced to make slugs
while they were engaged. He then ordered them to get over all the wounded and
dead men, and to leave none behind: which was done by some Canoo's they had
got. Capt. Hall and his men being first engaged did great Service, and suffered
the greatest loss in his Men. But Capt. Southworth with his Company, and Capt.
Numposh with the Seconis Indians, and the most of the men belonging to the Town
all coming suddenly to his relief, prevented him and his whole Company from
being cut off, etc. By this time the day was far spent, and Marching into Town
about Sunset, carrying in all their wounded and dead men; being all sensible
of Gods goodness to them, in giving them the Victory, and causing the Enemy to
fly with shame, who never gave one shout at their drawing off. The poor
Inhabitants wonderfully rejoiced that the Almighty had favored them so much:
saying, That if Maj. Church with his Forces had not come at that juncture of
time, they had been all cut off; and said further That it was the first time
that ever the Eastward Indians had been put to flight, and the said Church with
his Volunteers were wonderfully preserved, having never a man killed out right,
and but one Indian mortally wounded, who died, several more being badly
wounded, but recovered.

After this engagement Maj Church with his Forces ranging all the Country:
thereabout, in pursuit of the Enemy; and visiting all the Garrisons, at Black
Point, Spurwink, and Blew Point; and went up Kenneb^ck River, but to little
effect. And now Winter drawing near, he received orders from the Government of
the Massachusetts. Bay, to settle all the Garrisons, and put in suitable
Officers according to his best discretion, and to send home all his Soldiers
the Volunteers and transports; which orders he presently attended. Being
obliged to buy him a Horse to go home by land, that so he might the better
comply with his orders. The poor People the Inhabitants of Casco and Places
Adjacent, when they saw he was going away from them, lamented sadly, and begged
earnestly that he would suffer them to come away in the Transports; saying if
he left them there, that in the Spring of the Year the Enemy would come and
destroy 'em and their Families, etc. So by their earnest request the said Maj.
Church promised them, that if the Governments that had now sent him, would send
him the next Spring, he would certainly come with his Volunteers and Indians to
their relief: And that as soon as he had been at home, and taken a little care
of his own business, he would certainly wait upon the Gentlemen of Boston, and
inform them of the Promise he had made to them; and if they did not see cause
to send 'em relief, to entreat their Honors seasonably to draw them off, that
they might not be a prey to the barbarous Enemy. Taking his leave of those poor
Inhabitants some of the chief men there waited upon him to Black Point, to Capt
Scottaways Gartison; coming there they prevailed with the said Capt. Scottaway
to go with him to Boston, which he readily complied with, provided the said
Church would put another in to Command the Garrison; which being done and
taking their leaves one of another, they set out and traveled through all the
Country home to Boston: (having employed himself to the utmost to fulfill his
Instructions last received from Boston Gentlemen, which cost him about a Months
Service more and above what he had pay from Plymouth Gentlemen) and in his
travel homeward several Gentlemen waited upon the said Maj Church who was
obliged to bare their Expenses. When he came to Boston Gentlemen, he informed
them of the miseries those poor People were in by having their Provisions taken
from them by order of the President, etc. Then went home; staid not long there
before he returned to Boston, where Capt. Scottaway waited for his coming, that
he might have tge determination the Government of Boston to carry home with
him; and it being the time of the Small Pox there (and Maj Church not having
had it) taking up his Lodging near the Courthouse, took the first opportunity
to inform those Gentlemen of the Court his business; who said they were very
busy in sending home Sir Edmund the Ship being ready to Sail. The said Maj.
Church still wai^ing upon them, and at every opportunity entreating those
Gentlemen in the behalf of the poor People of Casco, informing them the
necessity of taking care of them either by sending them relief early in the
Spring, or suffer them to draw off, otherwise they would certainly be
destroyed, etc. There answer was, They could do nothing till Sir Edmund was
gone. Waiting there three weeks upon great expenses, he concluded to draw up
some of the circumstances of Casco and Places Adjacent, and to leave it upon
the Council Board, before the Governor and Council; having got it done,
obtained liberty to go up where the Governor and Council was sitting, he
informed their Honors, that he had waited till his Patience was wore out; so
had drawn up the matter to leave upon the Board before them: which is as
follows.

To the Honored Governor and Council of the Massachusetts.
Gentlemen,
Whereas by virtue of Yours with Plymouths desires and Commands, I went
Eastward in the last Expedition against the Common Indian Enemy, where
Providence so ordered that we Attacked their greatest body of Forces, coming
then for the Destruction of Falmouth, which we know Marched ^ff Repul'st with
considerable Damage, leaving the ground, and never since seen there, or in any
Place Adjacent: the time of the Year being then too late to prosecute any
further design, and other Accidents falling contrary to my expectation,
Inpeeding the desired Success. Upon my them Removal from the Province of Maine,
the Inhabitants were very Solicitous that this Enemy might be further
Prosecuted, wiling to venture their Lives and Fortunes in said Enterprise,
wherein they might serve God, their King and Country, and enjoy Quiet and
Peacrable Habitations; Upon which I promised to signify the same to Your
Selves, and willing to ventue that little which Providence has betrusted me
with on the said account. The Season of the Year being, such if some speedy
Action be not performed in Attacking them, they will certainly be upon us in
our Out Towns (God knows where) and the Inhabitants there being not akle to
Defend themselves, without doubt many Souls may be cut off, as our last Years
Experience woefully has declared; The Inhabitants there trust to your
Protection, having undertaken Government and your Propriety; If nothing be
performed on the said account (The best way under Correction) is to Demolish
the Garrison, and draw off the Inhabitants, that they may not be left to a
Merciless Enemy; and that the Arms and Ammunition may not be there left for the
strengthening of the Enemy; who without doubt have need enough, having exhausted
their greatest Store in this Winter Season: I have performed my Promise to
them, and acquitted my self in Specisring the same to your selves: Not that I
desire to be in any Action (although willing to serve my King and Country) and
may pass under the censure of Scandalous Tongues in the last Expedition, which
I hope they with amend on the first opportunity of Service. I have to the
Mature Consideration, the loss of Trade and Fishery, the War brought to the
Doors; what a Triumph will it be to the Enemy, derision to our Neighbors,
besides dishonor to God and our Nation, and grounds of frowns from our Prince,
the frustration of those whose eyes are upon you for help, who might have
otherwise applied themselves to their King. Gentlemen, this I thought bumbly to
propose, unto you, that I might discharge my self in my trust from your Selves,
and Promise to the Inhabitants of the Province, but especially my Daty to God,
His Majesty and my Nation, Praying for Your Honors Prosperity, Subscribe,

Your Servant, Benj. Church.
A true Copy given in at Boston, this 6th of February 1689. At the Council
Board. Attest T. S.


Maj Church said moreover that in thus doing he had complied with his Promise
to those poor People of Casco, and should be quit from the guilt of their
blood: the Governor was pleased to Thank him for his care and pains taken.
Then taking his leave of them went home, and left Capt. Scottaway in a very
sorrowful condition, who returned home sometime after with only a Copy of what
was left on the Board by the said Church. Maj Church not hearing any thing till
May following and then was informed, That those poor People of Casco were cut
off by the barbarous Enemy: and that although they made their terms with Monsieur
Casteen, who was Commander of those Enemies, yet he suffered those Merciless
Salvages, to Massacre and Destroy the most of them. To conclude this first
Expedition, East; I shall just give you a hint how Maj. Church was treated
(although he was Commander in Chief of all the Forces out of Plymouth and Boston
Government) after he came home, for Plymouth Gentlemen paid him but Forty two
Pounds; telling him, He must go to Boston Gentlemen for the rest, who were his
imployers as well as they. Of whom he never had one Penny for all Travel and
Expenses in Raising Volunteers, and Services done; except Forty Shilings or
there about, for going from Boston to Rhode Island on their business, and back
to Boston again: Also for sending a Man to Providence for Capt. Edm^nds (who
raised a Company in those Parts) and went East with them.

The Second Expedition, East.
IN the Year 1690. was the Expedition to Canada, and Maj. Walley often
requested Maj Church that if he would not go himself in that Expedition, that
he would not hinder others: He answered the said Walley, That he should hinder
none but his old Soldiers, that used to go along with him, etc. And the said
Church going down to Charlestown to take his leave of some of his Relations,
and Friends, who were going in that Expedition, promised his Wife and Family
not to go into Boston, the Small Pox being very brief there. Coming to
Charlestown, several of his Friends in Boston came over to see him; and the
next day after the said Church came there, Maj. Walley came to him, and
informed him, That the Governor and Council wanted to speak with him: He
answered him, That he had promised his Wife and Family not to go into Boston;
saying, If they had any business, they could Write to him, and that he would
send them his answer. Soon after came over two other Gentlemen with a Message,
that the Governor and Council wanted to have some discourse with him. The
answer returned was, That he intended to lodge that Night at the Gray-bound, in
Roxbury, and that in the Morning would come to Pollards at the South End of
Boston; which accordingly he did: soon after he came thither received a Letter
from the Honorable Capt. Sewall, to request him to come to the Council; the
answer he returned by the bearer was, That he thought there was no need of his
hazarding himself so much as to come and speak with them; not that he was
afraid of his Life, but because he had no mind to be concerned any further, by
reason they would not hearken to him about the poor People of Casco. But
immediately came Mr. Maxfield to him, saying, That the Council bid him tell the
said Church, That if he would take his Horse and ride along the middle of the
Street there might be no danger, they were then sitting in Council: He bid him
go and tell his Masters. Not to trouble themselves, whether he came upon his
head or feet, he was coming: however thinking the return was something rude,
called him back to drink a Glass of Wine, and then he would go with him. So
coming to the Council, They were very thankful to him for his coming; and told
him that the occasion of their sending for him was, That there was a Captive
come in who gave them an account. That the Indians were come down and had taken
possession of the Stone Fort at Pejepscot, so that they wanted his advice and
thoughts about the matter; whither they would tarry and keep in that Fort or
not? and whither it was not expedient to send some Forces to do some spoil upon
them; and further to know whither he could not be prevailed with to Raise some
Volunteers and go, to do some spoil upon them? He answered them, he was
unwilling to be concerned any more; it being very difficult and chargeable to
Raise Volunteers, as he found by experience in the last Expedition. But they
using many arguments prevailed so far with him, That if the Government of
Plymouth saw cause to send him (he would go) thinking the Expedition would be
short. Took his leave of them and went home. And in a short time after there
came an Express from Governor Hinkley, to request Maj Church to come down to
Barnstable to him: he having received a Letter from the Government of Boston to
raise some Forces to go East; whereupon the said Maj. Church went the next day
to Barnstable, as ordered; finding the Governor and some of the Council of War
there, discous'd him, concluding that he should take his Indian Soldiers, and
two English Captains with what Volunteers as could be raised; and that one Capt
should go our of Plymouth and Barnstable County, and the other out of Bristol
County, with what Forces he could raise, concluding to have but few Officers to
save Charge: the said Church was at great Charge and Expense in raising of
Forces. Governor Hinkley promised that he would take care to provide Vessels
to transport the said Army with Ammuniton and Provisions, by the time prefixed
by himself for the Government of Boston had obliged themselves by their Letter,
to provide any thing that was wanting; so at the time prefirt Major Church
Marched down all his Soldiers out of Bristol County to Plymouth, as ordered;
and being come, found it not as he expected, for there was neither Provisions,
Ammunition nor Transports; so he immediately sent an Express to the Governor
who was at Barnstable, to give him an account that he with the Men were come to
Plymouth, and found nothing ready; in his return to the said Church, gave him
an account of his disappointments; and sent John Lathrop of Barnstable in a
Vessel with some Ammunition and Provision on board, to him at Plymouth; also
sent him word that there was more on board of Samuel Alling of Barnstable, who
was to go for a Transport, and that he himself would be at Plymouth the next
day: but Alling never came near him, but went to Billings-gate at Cape-cod, as
he was informed. The Governor being come, said to Maj. Church that he must
take some of the open Sloops, and make Spar-Decks to them, and lay Platforms
for the Soldiers to lie upon; which delays were very Expensive to the said
Church; his Soldiers being all Volunteers, daily expected to be treated by
him, and the Indians-always begging for Money to get drink: but he using his
utmost diligence, made what dispatch he could to be gone. Being ready to
Imbark, received his Commission and Instructions from Governor Hinkley, which
are as follows, viz.

The Council of War of their Majesty's Colony of New Plymouth in New England.
To Major Benjamin Church Commander in Chief, etc.
WHereas the Kenebeck and Eastward Indians, with the French their Confederates
have openly made War upon their Majesty's Subjects of the Provinces of Maine,
New Hampshire and of the Massachusetts Colony, having committed many Barbarous
Murders, Spoils and Rapines upon their Persons and Estates. And whereas there
are some Forces of Soldiers English and Indians now raised and detached out of
the several Regiments and Places within this Colony of New-Plymouth, to go
forth to the Assistance of our Neighbors and Friends of the aforesaid
Provinces and Colony of the Massachusetts, Subjects of one and the same Crown.
And whereas you Benjamin Church are appointed to be Major and Commander in
Chief of all the Forces English and Indians detached within this Colony,
together with such other of their Majesty's Subjects as else where shall List
themselvas, or shall be orderly put under your Command for the Service of their
Majesty's as aforesaid. These are in their Majesty's Name to Authorize and
Require You to take into your Care and Conduct all the said Forces English and
Indians, and diligently to Intend that Service, by Leading and Exercising of
your Inferior Officers and Soldiers, Commanding them to Obey you as their
Chief Commander. And to pursue, fight, take, kill or destroy the said Enemies
their Aiders and Abettors by all the ways and means you can, as you shall have
opportunity, and to accept to Mercy or grant Quarter and Favor to such or so
many of said Enemies as you shall find needful for promoting the disign
aforesaid. And you to observe and obey all such Orders and Instructions, as
from time to time you shall receive from the Commissioners of the Colonies, or
the Council of War of the said Colony of New-Plymouth, or from the Governor
and Council of the Massachusetts. In Testimony whereof u^ffixed the Public
Seal of this Colony. Dated in Plymouth the Second day of September, Anno Domi.
1690. Annoque Regni Regis et Reginae Willielmi et Mariae etc. Secundo.

Tho. Hinkley President.

Instructions for Major Benjamin Church Commander in Chief of the Plymouth
Forces, with other of the Massachusetts put under his Command.
IN pursuance of the Commission given you for their Majesty's Service in the
present Expedition against the Common Enemy, Indian and French their Aiders and
Abettors, on the request of our Brethren and Friends of the Massachusetts
Colony, Subjects of one and the same Crown of England; for our Assistance of
them therein. Reposing considence in your Wisdom, Prudence, Proness and
Faithfulness in the trust under God committed to you for the Honor of His
Name, the Interest of Christ in these Churches, and the good of the whole
People; Praying and Expecting that in your dependence on Him, you may be helped
and Assisted with all that Grace, Wisdom and Courage necessary for the carrying
of you on with Success in this difficult Service; and though much is and must be
left to your discretion, with your Council of Officers, as Providence and
Opportunity may present from time to time in Places of action. Yet the
following Instructions are commended to you to be observed and attended by you,
so far as the State and Circumstances of that affair will admit.

You are with all possible speed to take care that the Plymouth Forces both
English and Indians under your Command be fixed and ready on the first
opportunity of Wind and Weather, to go on board such Vessels, as are provided
to transport you to Piscataqua; and there take under your care and command such
Companies of the Massachusetts Colony, as shall by them be ordered and added to
you there, or else where from time to time; all which your are to improve in
such way, and from place to place, as with the advice of your Council,
consisting of the Commission Officers of the Massachusetts Colony, and Plymouth
under your conduct, shall seem meet, for the finding out, pursuing, taking or
destroying of said common Enemy, on all opportunities, according to Commission,
and such further Orders and Instructions as you have or may receive from the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, the Commissioners for the United
Colonies, or the Governor and Council of Plymouth; so far as you may be
capable, Intending what you can the preserving of the near Towns from the
Incursions and destruction of the Enemy: But chiesly to intend the finding out,
pursuing, taking and destroying the Enemy abroad, and if possible to attack
them in their head quarters and principal Randezvouz if you are in a rational
capacity of so doing; and for the better enabling you thereunto, We have
appointed the Vessels that transport you, and the Provisions and c. to attend
your motion and order until you shall see cause to dismiss them, or any one of
them, which is desired to be done the first opportunity that the Service will
admit. You are to see that your Soldiers Arms be always ^^^t, and they
provided with Ammunition, and other necessaries, that they may be always ready
to repel and attack the Enemy. You are to take special care to avoid danger in
the pursuit of the Enemy's by keeping out Scouts, and a forlorn, to prevent the
Ambushments of the Enemy on your main body in their Marches. And by all
possible means to surprise some of the Enemy, that so you may gain better
Intelligence.

You are to take effectual care that the worship of God be kept up in the Army,
that Morning and Evening Prayer be attended, and the holy Sabbath duly
Sanctified, as the Emergency of your affairs will admit.

You are to take strict care to prevent or punish Drunkenness, Cursing,
Swearing and all other Vice; least the anger of God be thereby provoked to
fight against you. You are from time to time to give Intelligence and advice to
the Governor of the Massachusetts, and to us of your proceeding and occurances
that may attend you. And in case of a failure of any Commission Officers, you
are to appoint others in their stead. And when with the advice of your Council
aforesaid, you shall after some trial see your Service not like to be
advantageous to the accomplishment of the Public end aforesaid: That then you
return home with the Forces; especially if you shall receive any orders or
directions so to do from the Massachusetts, or from us

Given under my band at Plymouth, the 2d day of September, Anno Domi 1690.

Tho. Hinckley GOV. and President.

Now having a fair Wind Maj Church soon got to Piscataqua, who was to apply
himself to Maj. Pike a worthy Gentleman, who said, He had advice of his coming
from Boston Gentlemen; also he had received directions that what Men the said
Church should want must be raised out of Hampshire; out of their several Towns
and Garrisons: Maj. Pike asked him, How many Men he should want? He said enough
to make up his Forces that he brought with him, 300 at least, and not more than
350. And so in about Nine days time he was supplied with two Companies of
Soldiers. He having been at about Twenty Shillings a day charge in expenses
while there. Now he received Maj. Pike's Instructions: which are as follows,

Portsmouth in New Hampshire, Sept. 9. 1690. To Maj. Benjamin Church Commander
in Chief of their Majesty's Forces now disigned upon the present Expedition
Eastward, and now Resident at Porrsmouth.
THe Governor and Council of the Massachusetts Colony reposing great trust and
confidence in your Loyalty and Valor from experience of your former Actions,
and of Gods presence with you in the same. In pursuant of an Order received
from them, Commanding it. These are in their Majesty's Names to Empower and
Require you as Commander in Chlef, to take into your care and conduct these
Forces now here present at their Randezvouz at Portsmouth; and they are alike
required to they you: and with them to Sail Eastward by the first opportunity
to Casco, or Places Adjacent, that may be most commodious for Landing with
safety and secresy, and to visit the Enemy French and Indians at their head
quarters at Ameras-cogen, Pejepscot, or any other Plat, according as you may
have hope or intelligence of the Resident of the Enemy; using always your
u^most endeavor for the preservation of your own Men, and the killing,
destroying and utterly rooting out of the E^^my wheresoever they may be found;
as also as much as may possibly be done for the redeeming or recovering of our
Captives in any Places.

You being then arrived, and understanding your way, to take your Journey back
again tither by Land or Water, as you shall judge most convenient for the
accomplishing of the end intended; and to give intelligence always of your
motions whenever you can with safety and convenience.

Lastly, in all to consult your Council the Commanders or Commission Officers
of your several Companies, when it may be obtained, the greater part of whom to
determine, and so the Lord of Host the God of Armies go along with you, and be
your Conduct. Given under my hand the day and year abovesaid.

Per Robert Pike.

Being ready, they took the first opportunity and made the best of their way to
Pejepscot Fort, where they found nothing. From thence they Marched to
Ameras-cogen, and when they came near the Fort Maj. Church made a halt,
ordering the Captains to draw out of their several Companies 60 of their
meanest men, to be a guard to the Doctor and Snapsacks; being not a Mile from
said Fort; and then Moving toward the Fort, they saw young Doney and his Wife,
with two English Captives: the said Doney made his escape to the Fort, his Wife
was shot down, and so the two poor Captives released out of their bondage. The
said Maj. Church and Capt. Walton made no stop, making the best of their way to
the Fort with some of the Army, in hopes of getting to the Fort before young
Doney; but the River through which they must pass being as deep as their
Armpits; however Maj. Church as soon as he was got over stripped to his Shirt
and Jacket, leaving his Breeches behind, ran directly to the Fort, having an
eye to see if young Doney, who ran on the other side of the River should get
there before him: the Wind now blowing very hard in their Faces as they ran was
some help to them; for several of our Men fired Guns, which they in the Fort
did not hear; so that we had taken all in the Fort had it not been for young
Doney, who got to the Fort just before we did, who ran into the South Gate, and
out at the North, all the Men following him except one, who all ran directly
down to the great River and Falls. The said Church and his Forces being come
pretty near, he ordered the said Walton to run directly with some Forces into
the Fort and himself with the rest ran down to the River after the Enemy, who
ran some of them into the River, and the rest under the great Falls; those who
ran into the River were killed, for he saw but one man get over, and he only
crept up the bank, and there lay in open sight; and those that ran under the
Falls they made no discovery of notwithstanding several of his men went in
under the said Falls, and was gone some considerable time; could not find them;
so leaving a Watch there, returned up to the Fort, where he found but one Man
taken and several Women and Children, amongst which was Capt. Hakins Wife and
Worumbes's Wife, the Sachem of that Fort, with their Children; the said Hakins
was the Sachem of Pennacook, who destroyed Maj Walden and his Family, some time
before, etc. The said two Women, viz. Hakins and Worumbes's Wives, requested
the said Church that he would spare them and their Children's lives, promising
upon that condition, he should have all the Captives that were taken, and in
the Indians hands: He asked them, How many? they said about fourscore: So upon
that condition he promised them their lives, etc. And in the said Fort there
was several English Captives, who were in a miserable condition; amongst whom
was Capt. Huckings's Wife of Oyster-River. Maj. Church proceeded to examine the
Man taken, who gave him an account that most of their fighting men were gone to
Winter-harbour, to provide Provisions for the Bay of Fondy Indians, who were to
come and join with them to fight the English. The Soldiers being very rude
would hardly spare the Indians life, while in examination, intending when he
had done that he should be Executed: but Capt. Huckings Wife and another Woman
down on their knee^ begged for him saying, He had been a means to save their
Lives and a great many more; and had helped several to opportunities to run
away and make their escape; and that never since he came amongst them had
fought against the English, but being related to Hakins Wife kept at the Fort
with them, he having been there two Years; but his living was to the westward
of Boston. So upon their request his life was spared, etc. Next day the said
Church, ordered that all their Corn should be destroyed, being a great
quantity, saving a little for the two old Squaws which he designed to leave at
the Fort to give an account who he was, and from whence he came: the rest being
knocked on the head, except what aforementioned, for an example, ordering
thern to be all buried. Having enquired where all their best Bever was? They
said, it was carried away to make a present to the Bay of Fondy Indians, who
were coming to their Assistance. Now being ready to draw off from thence, he
called the two old Squaws to him, and gave each of them a Kittle and some
Biskets, biding them to tell the Indians when they came home, that he was known
by the Name of Capt. Church, and lived in the Westerly part of Plymouth
Government; and that those Indians that came with him were formerly King
Philips Men, and that he had met with them in Philips War, and drew them off
from him, to sight for the English against the said Philip and his Associates,
who then promised him to sight for the English as long as they had one Enemy
left; and said, that they did not question but before Indian Corn was ripe to
have Philips head, notwithstanding he had twice as many men as was in their
Country; and that they had killed and taken one thousand three hundred and odd
of Philips Men, Women and Children, and Philip himself, with several other
Sachems, etc. and that they should tell Hakins and Worumbo, That if they had a
mind to see their Wives and Children they should come to Wells Garrison, and
that there they might hear of them, etc. Maj. Church having done, Moved with
all his Forces down to M^quoyt, where the transports were (but in the way some
of his Soldiers threatened the Indian man Prisoner, very much, so that in a
thick Swamp he gave them the slip and got away) and when they all got on board
the transport; the Wind being fair made the best of their way for Winter
Harbor and the next Morning before day, and as soon as the day appeared they
discovered some Smokes rising toward Skamans Garrison: He immediately sent
away a Scout of 60 Men, and followed presently with the whole body; the Scout
coming near a River discovered the Enemy to be on the other side of the River:
But three of the Enemy was come over the River to the same side of the River
which the Scout was of; ran hastily down to their Canoo, two of which lay at
each end of the Canoo, and the third stood up to paddle over: The Scout fired
at them, and he that paddled fell down upon the Canoo and broke it to pieces,
so that all three perished; the siring put the Enemy to the run, who left their
Canoo's and Provisions to ours; and old Doney, and one Thomas Baker an English
Man who was a Prisoner amongst them, were up at the Falls and heard the Guns
fire, expected the other Indians were come to their Assistance, so came down
the River in a Canoo, but when they perceived that there was English as well as
Indians, old Doney run the Canoo a shore, and ran over Bakers head and followed
the rest, and then Baker came to ours; and gave an account of the Bever hid at
Pejepscot plain: and coming to the place where the plunder was, the Major sent
a Scout to Pejepscot Fort, to see if they could make any discovery of the
Enemies Tracks or could discover any coming up the River; who returned and said
they saw nothing but our old Tracks at said Fort etc. Now having got some
Plunder One of the Captains said it was time to go home, and several others
were of the same mind; and the Major being much disturbed at the Motion of
theirs, expecting the Enemy would come in a very short time where they might
have a great advantage of them, etc. Notwithstanding all he could say or do, he
was obliged to call a Council, according to his Instructions, wherein he was
out-voted. The said Commander seeing he was put by of his intentions profer'd
if 60 Men would stay with him he would not imbark as yet; but all that he could
say or do could not prevail; then they Moved to the Vessels and Embarked and as
they were going in the Vessels on the back side of Mayr-point they discovered 8
or 9 Canoo's, who turned short about, and went up the River; being the same
Indians that the Major expected, and would have waited for; and the aforesaid
Captain being much disturbed at what the Major had said to him, drew off from
the Fleet, and in the Night run aground; in the Morning Anthony Brakit having
been advised and directed by the Indian that made his escape from our Forces,
came down near where the aforesaid Vessel lay a-ground, and got aboard; who has
proved a good Pilot and Captain for his Country. The next day it being very
calm and misty, so that they were all day getting down from Maquait to
Perpodack; and the Masters of the Vessels thinking it not safe putting out in
the Night, so late in the Year, Anchored there at Perpodack; the Vessels being
much crowded, the Major ordered three Companies should go on shore, and no
more, himself with Capt. Converse went with them to order their lodging, and
finding just Housing convenient for them, viz. Two Barns and one House; so
seeing them all settled and their Watches out, the Major and Capt. Converse
returned to go aboard, and coming near where the Boat was, it was pretty dark,
they discovered some Men, but did not know what or who they were; the Major
ordered th^^e that were with him all to clap down and cock their Guns, and he
called and asked them, Who they were? and they said, Indians: he asked them,
Whose Men they were? they said Capt. Southworth's: he asked them where they
intended to lodge? They said in those little Hutts that the Enemy had made when
they took that Garrison. The Major told them they must not make any fires, for
if they did the Enemy would be upon them before day. They laughed, and said.
Our Major was afraid. Having given them their directions, he with Capt.
Converse went on board the Mary Sloop; designing to Write home, and send away
in the Morning the two Sloops which had the Small Pox on board, etc. But before
day our Indians began to make fires and to Sing and Dance; so the Major called
to Capt. Southworth to go ashore and look after his Men, for the Enemy would
be upon them by'nd by. He ordered the Boat to be hall'd up to carry him
ashore, and called Capt. Converse to go with him, and just as the day began to
appear, as the Major was getting into the Boat to go ashore, the Enemy fired
upon our Men the Indians, notwithstanding that one Philip an Indian of ours,
who was out upon the Watch, heard a man cough, and the sticks crack; who gave
the rest an account, that he saw Indians; which they would not believe; but
said to him, You are afraid: his answer was, that they might see them come
creepping: They laughed and said, they were Hogs: Ay, (said he) and they will
bite you by'nd by. So presently they did fire upon our Men; but the Morning
being misty their Guns did not go off quick, so that our Men had all time to
fall down before their Guns went off, and saved themselves from that Volley,
except one man, who was killed. This sudden firing upon our Indian Soldiers
surprised them that they left their Arms, but soon recovered them again, and
got down the bank which was but low: The Major with all the Forces on board
landed as fast as they could; the Enemy firing smartly at them; however all got
safe ashore. The Enemy had a great advantage of our Forces, who were between
the Sun rising and the Enemy, so that if a man put up his head or hand they
could see it, and would fire at it: However some with the Major got up the bank
behind stumps and rocks, to have the advantage of firing at the Enemy; but when
the Sun was risen the Major slipped down the bank again where all the Forces
were ordered to observe his Motion, viz. That he would give three shouts and
then all of them should run with him up the bank: so when he had given the
third shout, ran up the bank, and Capt. Converse with him, but when the said
Converse perceived that the Forces did not follow as commanded, called to the
Major and told him the Forces did not follow; who notwithstanding the Enemy
fired smartly at, yet got safe down the bank again, and Rallying the Forces up
the bank, soon put the Enemy to flight; and following them so close, that they
took 13 Canoo's, and one Lusty Man, who had Joseph Ramsdle's Scalp by his side,
who was taken by two of our Indians, and having his deserts was himself
Scalp'd. This being a short and smart fight, some of our Men were killed, and
several wounded. Some time after an English Man who was Prisoner amongst them,
gave an account that our Forces had killed and wounded several of the Enemy,
for they killed several Prisoners according to their Custom etc. After this
action was over our Force: embarked for Piscataqua, and the Major went to
Wells, and removed the Captain there, and put in Capt. Andras, who had been
with him and knew the Discourse left with the two old Squaws at Ameras-cogen,
for Hakins and Worumbo to come there in 14 days, if they had a mind to hear of
their Wives and Children: Who did then or soon after come with a Flag of Truce
to said Wells Garrison, and had leave to come in, and more appearing came in,
to the number of Eight, (without any terms) being all Chief Sachems; and was
very glad to hear of the Women and Children, viz. Hakins and Worumbo's Wives
and Children; who all said three several times that they would never fight
against the English any more, for the French made fools of them, etc. They
saying as they did, the said Andras let them go. Maj Church being come to
Piscataqua, and two of his transports having the Small Pox on board; and
several of his Men having got great Colds by their hard Service, pretended they
were going to have the Small Pox, thinking by that means to be sent home
speedily; the Major being willing to try them, went to the Gentlemen there and
desired them to provide an House, for some of his Men expected they should have
the Small Pox; who read^ly did, and told him, That the People belonging to it
was just recovered of the Small Pox, and had been all at Meeting, etc. The
Major returning to his Officers ordered them to draw out all their men that
were going to have the Small Pox for he had provided an Hospital for them: So
they drew out 17 Men, that had as they said, all the symptoms of the Small Pox;
he ordered them all to follow him, and coming to the House, he asked them, How
they liked it? they said very well. Then he told them that the People in said
House have all had the Small Pox, and was recovered; and that if they went in
they must not come out till they all had it: Whereupon they all presently began
to grow better, and to make excuses except one Man who desired to stay out till
Night before he went in, etc. The Major going to the Gentlemen, told them, That
one thing more would work a perfect cure upon his Men, which was to let them go
home: Which did work a cure upon all, except one, and he had not the Small Pox.
So he ordered the Plunder should be divided forthwith, and sent away all the
Plymouth Forces. But the Gentlemen there desired him to stay and they would be
assisting to him in raising new Forces to the number of what was sent away; and
that they would send to Boston for Provisions: which they did, and sent Capt
Plaisted to the Governor and Council at Boston, etc. And in the mean time the
Major with those Gentlemen went into all those Parts and raised a sufficient
number of Men, both Officers and Soldiers; who all met at the bank on the same
day that Capt. Plaisted returned from Boston; whose return from Boston
Gentlemen was, That the Canada Expedition had dreen'd them so that they could
do no more: So that Maj. Church notwithstanding he had been at considerable
Expenses in raising said Forces to Serve his King and Country was obliged to
give them a Treat and dismiss them: Taking his leave of them came home to
Boston in the Mary Sloop Mr. Alden Master, and Capt. Converse with him, of a
Saturday; and waiting upon the Governor, and some of the Gentlemen in Boston,
they looked very strange upon them, which not only troubled them but put them
into some consternation what the matter should be, that after so much toil and
hard Service could not have so much as one pleasant word, nor no Money in their
Pockets; for Maj Church had but Eight Pence left, and Capt. Converse none, as
he said afterward. Maj. Church seeing two Gentlemen which he knew had Money,
asked them to lend him Forty Shillings, telling them his necessity: Yet they
resused. So being bare of Money was obliged to lodge at Mr. Aldens three
Nights; and the next Tuesday Morning Capt. Converse came to him (not knowing
each others circumstances as yet) and said he would walk with him out of Town;
so coming near Pillards at the South End, they had some Discourse; that it was
very hard that they should part with dry lips: Maj Church told Capt. Converse
that he had but Eight Peace left, and could not borrow any Money to carry him
home. And the said Converse said, that he had not a Penny left; so they were
obliged to part without going in to Pollards, etc. The said Capt. Converse
returned back into Town, and the said Church went over to Roxbury; and at the
Tavern he met with Stephen Braton of Rhode Island, a Drover; who was glad to
see him the said Church, and he as glad to see his Neighbor: whereupon Maj.
Church called for an Eight-Peny Tankard of drink and let the said ^raton know
his cireumstances, asked him whether he would lend him Forty Shillings? He
answered, Yes: Forty Pounds, if he wanted it. So he thanked him, and said, he
world have but Forty Shillings; which he freely lent him: and prosently after
Major Church was told that his Brother Caleb Church of Watertown was coming
with a spare I ^orse for him, having heard the Night before that his Brother
was come in; by which means the said Maj Church got home. And for all his
travel and expenses in raising Soldiers, and Service done, never had but 14 l
of Plymouth Gentlemen, etc not a Penny of Boston: notwithstanding he had wore
out all his Clothes, and run himself in debt, so that he was obliged to Sell
half a-share of Land in Tiverton for about 60 l. which is now worth 300 l. more
and above than what he had.

Having not been at home long before he found out the reason why Boston
Gentlemen looked so disaffected on him; as you may see by the sequel of two
Letters Maj. Church sent to the Gentlemen in the Eastward parts: which are as
follows.

Bristol, November. 27. 1690. Worthy Gentlemen,
ACcording to my promise when with you last, I waited upon the Governent at
Boston upon the Saturday, Capt. Converse being with me. The Governor informed
us that the Council was to meet on the Monday following in the afternoon, at
which time we both there waited upon them, and gave them an account of the
State of your Country, and great necessities. They informed us, that their
General Court was to Convene on the Wednesday following; at which time they
would debate and consider of the matter; my self being bound home, Capt.
Converse was ordered to wait upon them, and bring you their resolves. I then
took notice of the Council that they looked upon me with an ill aspect, not
judging me worthy to receive thanks for the Service I had done in your parts;
nor as much as ask me whether I wanted Money to bare my Expense, or a Horse to
carry me home. But I was forced for want of Money (being far from friends) to
go to Roxbury on foot; but meeting there with a Rhode Island Gentleman,
acquainted him of my wants, who tendered me en Pounds, whereby I was
accommodated for my Journey home: And being come home, I went to the Minister
of our Town, and gave him an account of the transactions of the great affairs I
had been employed in, and of the great favor God was pleased to show me, and
my Company, and the benefit I hoped would accrue to your selves; and desired
him to Return Public Thanks: but at the same interim of time a Paper was
presented unto him from a Court of Plymouth, which was holded before I came
home, to Command a day of Humiliation through the whole Government, because of
the frowns of God upon those Forces sent under my Command, and the ill success
we had, for want of good conduct. All which was caused by those false Reports
which were posted home by those ill affected Officers that were under my
Conduct; especially one which your selves very well know, who had the advantage
of being at home a Week before me, being sick of Action, and wanting the
advantage to be at the Bank, which he every day was mindful of more than
fighting the Enemy in their own Country. After I came home, being informed of a
General Court at Plymouth, and not forgetting my faithful Promise to you, and
the duty I lay under, I went thither, where waiting upon them, I gave them an
account of my Eastward transactions, and made them sensible of the falseness of
those reports that were posted to them by ill hands, and found some small
favorable acceptance with them, so far that I was credited. I presented your
Thanks to them for their seasonable sending those Forces to relieve you, with
that expense and charge they had been at; which Thanks they gratefully
received; and said a few Lines from your selves would have been well accepted.
I then gave them an account of your great necessities by being imprisoned in
your Garrisons, and the great mischief that would attend the Public concerns
of this Country by the loss of their Majesty's Interest, and so much good
Estate of yours and your Neighbors; as doubtless would be on the deserting of
your Town. I then moved for a free Contribution for your relief, which they
with great forwardness promoted; and then ordered a day of Thanksgiving through
the Government upon the 26th. day of this Instant. Upon which day a Collection
was ordered for your relief (and the Places near Adjacent) in every respective
Town in this Government; and for the good management of it that it might be
safely conveyed unto your hands, they appointed a Man in each County for the
reception and conveyance thereof. The persons nominated and accepted thereof,
are: For the County of Plymouth, Capt. Nathanael Thomas of Marshfield: For the
County of Barnstable, Capt. Joseph Lathrop of Barnstable: And for the County of
Bristol, my self. Which when gathered you will have a particular account from
each person, with orders of advice how it may be disposed of for your best
advantage, with a Copy of the Courts order. The Gentlemen the effects are to be
sent to are your selves that I now Write to, viz. John Wh^elwright Esquire Capt.
John Littlefield, and Lieut. Joseph Story I deferred writing expecting every day
to hear from you concerning the Indians coming to treat about their Prisoners
that we had taken. The discourse I made with them at Ameras-cogen, I know would
have that Effect as to bring them to a treaty, which I should have thought my
self happy to have been improved in, knowing that it would have made much for
your good. But no intelligence coming to me from any Gentlemen in your parts,
and hearing nothing but by accident, and that in the latter end of the week by
some of ours coming from Boston, informed me that the Indians were come in to
your Town to seek for Peace; and that there was to be a treaty speedily; but
the time they know not. I took my Horse, and upon the Monday set out for
Boston, expecting the treaty had been at your Town, as rationally it should,
but on Tuesday Night coming to Boston, there met with Capt. Elisha Andros, who
informed me that the Place of treaty was ^acaty-b^ck, and that Capt Alden was
gone from Boston four days before I came there, and had carried all the Indian
Prisoners with him, and that all the Forces were drawn away out of your parts,
except 12 men in your Town, and 12 in P^scataqua, which news did so amuse me,
to see that wisdom was so taken from the wise, and such imprudence in their
actions, as to be deluded by Indians; and to have a treaty so far from any
English Town, and to draw off the Forces upon what pretense soever, to me looks
very ill. My fear is that they will deliver those we have taken, which if kept
would have been greatly for your Security, it keeping them in awe, and
preventing them from doing any hostile action or mischief, I knowing that the
English being a broad are very earnest to go home, and the Indians are very
tedious in their discourses, and by that will have an advantage to have their
Captives at a very low rate to your great damage. Gentlemen, as to
Rhode Island, I have not concerned my self as to any relief for you, having
nothing in writing to show to them, yet upon discourse with some Gentlemen
there, they have signified a great forwardness to promote such a thing. I lying
under great reflections from some of yours in the Eastward parts, that I was a
very Covotous Person, and came there to enrich my self, and that I killed their
Cattle and Barrel'd them up and sent them to Boston, and Sold them for Plunder,
and made Money to put into my own Pocket; and the owners of them being poor
People begged for the Hides and Tallow, with tears in their eyes; and that I was
so cruel as to deny them; which makes me judge my self incapable to Serve you
in that matter: yet I do assure you that the People are very charitable at the
Island, and forward in such good actions, and therefore advise you to desire
some good substantial Person to take the management of it, and write to the
Government there, which I know will not be labor loft. As for what I am
accused of, you all can witness to the contrary, and I should take it very
kindly from you to do me that just right, as to vindicate my Reputation; for
the wise man says, A good Name is as precious Ointment. When I hear of the
effect of the Treaty, and have an account of this Contribution, I intend again
to Write to you, being very desirous, etc should think my self very happy, to
be favored with a few lines from your selves, or any Gentlemen in the Eastward
parts. Thus leaving you to the protection and guidance of the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, who is able to protect and supply you in your great
difficulties, and to give you deliverance in His own due time.

I Remain, Gentlemen, Your most assured Friend to Serve you to my utmost power,
Benjamin Church.
Postscript.
Esquire Wheelwright, Sir, I entreat you, after your perusal of these lines, to
communicate the same to Capt. John Littlefield, Lieut. Joseph Story; and to any
other Gentlemen, as in your judgment you see fit: With the tenders of my
respects to you, etc. and to Maj. Vaughan, and his good Lady and Family. To
Capt. Friar and good Mrs. Friar, with hearty thanks for their kindness whilst
in those parts, and good Entertainment from them. My kind Respects to Maj.
Frost, Capt. Walton, Lieut. Honeywel, and my very good friend little Lieut.
Plaisted: with due respects to all Gentlemen my friends in the Eastward parts,
as if particularly named.

Farewell. B.C.




Bristol, November. 27. 1690. To Major Pi^e. Honored Sir,
THese come to wait upon you, to bring the tenders of my hearty Service to your
Self and Lady, with due acknowledgment of thankfulness for all the kindness and
favor I received from you in the Eastward parts, when with you. Since I came
from those parts, I am informed by Capt. Andros, that your Self, and most of
all the Forces are drawn off from the Eastward parts; I admire at it,
considering that they bad so low Esteem of what was done, that they can
apprehend the Eastward parts so safe before the Enemy was brought into better
Subjection. I was in hopes when I came from thence, that those that were so
defroms to have my room, would have been very brisk in my absence to have got
themselves some Honor, which they very much gapped after, or else they would
not have spread so many false reports to defame me^ Which had I known before, I
left the Bank, I would have had satisfaction of them. Your Honor was pleased
to give me some small account before I left the Bank, of some things that were
ill resented to you, concerning that Eastward Expedition, which being rolled
home like a Snow-ball through both Colonies, was got to such a higness that it
over-shadow'd me from the Influence of all comfort, or good acceptance amongst
my friends in my Journey homeward. But through Gods goodness am come home finding
all well, and my self in good Health, hoping that those Reports will do me that
favor, to quit me from all other Public Action: That so I may the more
peaceably and quietly wait upon God, and be a comfort unto my ou'n Family in
this dark time of trouble, being as on that is bid, till His Indignation is
over past: I shall take it as a great favor to bear of your Honors wellfore.

Subscribing my self as I am, Sir, Your most assured Friend and Servant.
Benjamin Church


Major Church did receive after this, Answers to his Letters, but has loft
them, except it be a Letter from several of the Gentlemen in those parts in
June following: which is as follows.

Portsmouth June 29 1691. Major Benj. Church. Sir,
YOur former readiness to expose your self in the Service of the Country
against the Common Enemy; and particularly the late Obligations you have laid
upon us in these Eastern parts, leaves us under a deep and grateful sense of
your favor therein: And forasmuch as you were pleased when last here, to
signify your ready inclination to further Service of this kind, if occasion
should call for it: We therefore presume confidently to p^omise our selves
compliance accordingly; and have sent this Messenger on purpose to you, to let
you know that notwithstanding the late overture of Peace the Enemy have
approved themselves as perfidious as ever, and are almost daily killing and
destroying upon all cur Frontiers; The Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts have been pleased to Order the Raising of 150 Men to be forthwith
dispatched into these parts; and as we understand have Writ to your Governor
and Council of Plymouth for further Assistance, which we pray you to promote,
boping if you can obtain about 200 Men English and Indians, to visit them at
some of their Headquarters up Kenebeck River, or elsewhere, which (for want
of necessaries) was omitted last Year, it may be of great advantage to us: We
offer nothing of advice as to what Methods are most proper to be taken in this
affair, your acquaintance with our Circumstances as well as the Enemies, will
direct you therein, We leave the Conduct thereof to your own discretion: But
that the want of Provision, etc. may be no Remora to your Motion, you may
please to know Mr. Geafford One of our principal Inhabitants now residing in
Boston, has promised to take care to supply to the value of two or three
hundred Pounds, if occasion require: We pray a few lines by the bearer to give
us a prospect of what we may expect for our further Encouragement, and remain,

Sir, Your Obliged Friends and Servants, Will. Vaughan Francis Hook Richard
Martyn Charles Frost Nathanael Friar John Wincol William Fernald Robert Elliott.

A True Copy of the Original Letter; which Letter was presented to me by Capt.
Hatch, who came Express.




Maj. Church sent them his Answer: the Contents whereof was, That he had gone
often enough for nothing; and especially to be ill treated with scandals and
false Reports, when last out, which he could not forget. And signisyed to them,
That doubtless some amongst them thought they could do without him, etc. And to
make short of it, did go out, and meeting with the Enemy at Maquait, were most
shamefully beaten: as I have been informed.

The Third Expedition, East.
THis was in the Year 1692. In the time of Sir William Phip^'s Government:
Major Walley being at Boston, was requested by his Excellency to treat with
Maj. Church about going East with him. Maj. Walley coming home, did as desired;
and to encourage the said Maj Church, told him, That now was the time to have
recompense for his former great Expenses; saying also, That the Country could
not give him less than Two or three hundred Pounds. So upon his Excellency's
request Maj Church went down to Boston, and waited upon him; who said he was
glad to see him, etc. And after some discourse told the said Church, That he
was going East himself, and that he should be his Second, and in his absence
Command all the Forces: And being requested by his Excellency to raise what
Volunteers of his old Soldiers in the County of Bristol, both English and
Indians. Receiving his Commission: which is as follows.

SIR William Phips Knight, Captain General and Governor in Chi^f in and over
their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
To Benjamin Church Gent. Greeting
REposing special Trust and Confidence in your Loyalty, Courage and good
Conduct. I do by these presents Constitute and Appoint You to be Major of the
se^eral Companies of Militia, detached for their Majesty's Service against
their French and Indian Enemies. You are therefore Authorized and Required in
their Majesty's Names, to discharge the duty of a Major, by Leading Ordering
and Exercising the said several Companies in Arms, both Inferior Officers and
Soldiers, keeping them in good Order and Discipline, Commanding them to Obey
you as their Major: And diligently to intend the said Service, for the
prosecuting, pursuing, killing and destroying of the said Common Enemy. And
your self to observe and follow such Orders and Directions as you shall from
time to time Receive from my Self, according to the Rules and Discipline of
War, pursuant to the Trust reposed in you for their Majesty's Service. Given
under my Hand and Seal at Boston, the Twenty-fifth day of July 1692. In the
Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary, by
the Grace of GOD King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

WILLIAM PHIPS.
By his Excellency's Command, Isaac Addington, Secr.

Returning home to the County aforesaid, he soon raised a sufficient Number of
Volunteers both English and Indians, and Officers suitable to Command them
Marched them down to Boston. But there was one thing I would just mention;
which was, That Maj. Church being short of Money was forced to borrow Six
Pounds in Money of Lieut. Woodman in Little Compton, to distribute by a
Shilling, and a Bit at a time to the Indian Soldiers; who without such
Allurements would not have Marched to Boston. This Money Major Church put into
the hands of Mr. William Fobes, who was going out their Commissary in that
Service, who was ordered to keep a just account of what each Indian had that so
it might be subducted out of their wages at their return home. Coming to
Boston, his Excellency having got things in a readiness, they Embarked on board
their transports, his Excellency going in Person with them, being bound to
Pemequid: But in their way stopped at Casco, and buried the bones of the dead
People there, and took off the great Guns that were there; then went to
Pemequid: Coming there his Excellency asked Maj. Church to go ashore and give
his judgment about Erecting a Fort there? He answered, That his Genius did not
incline that way, for he never had any value for them, being only Nests for
Destructions: His Excellency said, He had a special Order from their Majesty's
King William and Queen Mary to Erect a Fort there, etc. Then they went ashore
and spent some time in the projection thereof. Then his Excellency told Maj.
Church that he might take all the Forces with him, except one Company to stay
with him and work about the Fort; the Major answered that if his Excellency
pleased he might keep t^^ Companies with him, and he would go with the reft to
Penobscot, and Places Adjacent. Which his Excellency did, and gave Maj. Church
his Orders: which are as follows.

By his Excellency Sir William Phips Knight, Captain General and Governor in
Chief in and over their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, etc.
Instructions for Major Benjamin Church.
WHereas you are Major and so Chief Officer of a body of Men detached out of
the Militia appointed for an Expedition against the French and Indian Enemy;
you are duly to observe the following Instructions.

Impri. You are to take care that the Worship of God be duly and constantly
maintained and kept up amongst you, and to suffer no Swearing, Cursing, or
other profanation of the Holy Name of God; and as much as in you lies to deter
and hinder all other Vice amongst your Soldiers

2ly. You are to proceed with the Soldiers under your Command to ^^^obscot,
and with what privacy and undiscoverable Methods you can, there to Land your
men, and take the best measures to surprise the Enemy.

3ly. You are by killing, destroying, and all other means possible to endeavor
the destruction of the Enemy in pursuance whereof, being satisfied of your
Courage and Conduct, I leave the same to your discretion.

4ly. You are to endeavor the taking what Captives you can either Men Women or
Children, and the same safely to keep and convey them unto, me.

5ly. Since it is not possible to judge how affairs may be circumstanced with
you there, I shall therefore not limit your return, but leave it to your
Prudence, only that you make no longer stay than you can improve for advantage
against the Enemy, or may reasonably hope for the same.

6ly. You are also to take care and be very industruous by all possible means
to find out and destroy all the Enemies Corn, and other Provisions in all
Places where you can come at the same.

7ly. You are at your return from Penobscot and those Eastern Parts, to make
all dispat^^, hence for Kenebeck River, and the Places Adjacent, and there
prosecute all advantages against the Enemy as aforesaid.

8ly. If any Soldier Officer or other shall be disobedient to you as their
Commander in Chief, or other their Superior Officer, or make or cause any
Mutiny, commit other offense or disorders, you shall call a Council of War
amongst your Officers, and having tried him or them so offending, inflict such
punishment as the merit of the offense requires, Death only excepted, which if
any shall deserve, you are to secure the person, and signify the Crime unto me
by the first opportunity.

Given under my hand this 11th day of August, 1692. WILLIAM PHIPS.

Then the Major and his Forces embarked and made the best of their way to
Penobscot; and coming to an Island in those Parts in the evening, landed his
Forces at one end of the said Island: Then the Major took part of his Forces
and moved toward Day to the other end of the said Island, where they found two
French Men, and their Families in their houses; and that one or both of them
had Indian Women to their Wives, and had Children by them. The Major presently
examining the French men, Where the Indians were? They told him, That there was
a great company of them upon an Island just by: and showing him the Island,
presently discovered several of them. Maj. Church and his Forces still keeping
undiscovered to them, asked the French men where their passing Place was? Which
they readily showed him; so presently placed an Ambascade to take any that
should come over. Then sent orders for all the rest of the Forces to come;
sending them an account what he had seen and met withal; strickly charging them
to keep themselves undiscovered by the Enemy. The Ambascade did not lie long
before an Indian Man and a Woman came over in a Canoo to the Place for landing,
where the Ambascade was laid: who haul'd up their Canoo, and came right into
the hands of our Ambascade, who so suddenly surprised them that they could not
give any notice to the others from whence they came; the Major ordering that
none of his should offer to meddle with the Canoo, lest they should be
discovered, hoping to take the most of them if his Forces came as ordered, he
expecting them to come as directed. But the first news he had of them was, That
they were all coming, though not privately as ordered; but in the Vessels fair in
sight of the Enemy, which soon put them all to flight: and our Forces not
having Boats suitable to pursue them, they got all away in their Canoo's, etc.
(which caused Maj Church to say, He would never go out again without sufficient
number of Whale-boats) which for want of, was the ruin of that action. Then
Maj. Church according to his Instructions ranged all those parts to find all
their Corn, and carried aboard their Vessels what he thought convenient, and
destroyed the rest. Also finding considerable quantities of Plunder, viz Bever
and Moose skins, etc. Having done what Service they could in those parts, he
returned back to his Excellency at Pemequid; where being come, staid not long:
they being short of Bread, his Excellency intended home for Boston, for more
Provisions; but before, going with Maj. Church and his Forces to Kenebeck
River, and coming there, gave him his further Orders; which are as follows.

By his Excellency the Governor.
To Major Benjamin Church.
YOu having already received formet Instructions, are now further to proceed
with the Soldiers under your Command for Kenebeck River, and the Places
Adjacent, and use your utmost endeavors to kill, destroy and take Captive the
French and Indian Enemy wheresoever you shall find any of them; and at your
return to Pemequid (which you are to do as soon as you can conveniently; after
your best endeavor done against the Enemy, and having destroyed their Corn and
other Provisions) you are to stay with all your Soldiers and Officers, and set
them to work on the Fort, and make what dispatch you can in that business,
staying there until my further order.

WILLIAM PHIPS.

Then his Excellency taking leave went for Boston; and soon after Maj. Church
and his Forces had a smart fight with the Enemy in Kenebeck-River, Pursued them
so hard that they left their Canoo's and ran up into the woods, still pursued
them up to their Fort at Taconock, which the Enemy perceiving set fire to their
Houses in the Fort, and ran away by the light of them, and when Maj. Church
came to the said Fort found about half their Houses standing and the rest
burnt; also found great quantities of Corn, put up into Indian Cribs, which he
and his Forces destroyed, as ordered. Having done what Service he could in
those parts returned to Pemequid, and coming there employed his Forces
according to his Instructions: being out of Bread, his Excellency not coming,
Maj. Church was obliged to borrow Bread of the Captain of the Man of War that
was then there for all the Forces under his Command, his Excellency not coming
as expected. But at length his Excellency came and brought very little Bread
more than would pay what was borrowed of the Man of War: So that in a short
time after Maj. Church with his Forces returned home to Boston, and had their
Wages for their good Service done. Only one thing by the way I will but just
mention, that is, about the Six Pounds Maj. Church borrowed as afore-mentioned,
and put into the hands of Mr. Fobes, who distributed the said Money, all but 30
s. to the Indian Soldiers as directed, which was deducted our of their Wages,
and the Country had Credit for the same; and the said Fobes kept the 30 s to
himself, which was deducted out of his Wages. Whereupon Maj Walley and the said
Fobes had some words. In short, Maj. Church was forced to pay the Six Pounds he
borrowed out of his own Pocket, besides which the said Church was obliged to
expend about Six Pounds of his own Money in Marching down the Forces both
English and Indians to Boston, having no drink allowed them upon the Road, etc.
So that in stead of Maj Church's having the allowances aforementioned by Maj.
Walley, he was out of Pocket about Twelve Pounds more and above what he had;
all which had not been, had not his Excellency been gone out of the Country.

The Fourth Expedition, East.
IN 1696. Maj Church being at Boston, and belonging to the House of
Representatives, several Gentlemen requesting him to go East again, and the
General Court having made Acts of Encouragement, etc. He told them, if they
would provide Whale Boats, and other necessaries convenient, he would: Being
also requested by the said General Court, he proceeded to raise Volunteers, and
made it his whole business Riding both East and West in our Province and
Connecticut, at great charge and expenses; and in about a Months time raised a
sufficient number out of those Parts, and Marched them down to Boston; where he
had the promise that every thing should be ready in three Weeks or a Months
time, but was obliged to stay considerable longer. Being now at Boston he
received his Commission and Instructions; which are as follows.

William Stoughton Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief in and over
His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
To Major Benjamin Church, Greeting.
WHereas there are several Companies raised, consisting of Englishmen and
Indians for His Majesty's Service, to go forth upon the Encouragement given by
the Great and General Court or Assembly of this His Majesty's Province,
convened at Boston the 27th Day of May 1696. to prosecute the French and Indian
Enemy, etc. And you having offered your self to take the command and conduct of
the said several Companies. By virtue therefore of the Power and Authority in
and by His Majesty's To, al Commission to me Granted, reposing sp^cial trust
and confidence in your Loyalty, Prudence, courage and good conduct. I do by
these Presents Constitute and Appoint you to be Major of the said several
Companies, both Englishmen and Indians, raised for His Majesty's Service upon
the Encouragement aforesaid. You are therefore carefully and diligently to
perform the duty of your place, by Leading, Ordering, and Ex^cising the said
several Companies in Arms, both Inferior Officers and Soldiers, keeping them
in good Order and Discipline, commanding them to obey you as their Major. And
your self diligently to intend His Majesty's Service for the prosecuting,
pursuing, taking, killing or destroying the said Enemy by Sea or Land; And to
observe all such Orders and Instructions as you shall from time to time receive
from my Self or Commander in chief for the time being, according to the Rules
and Discipline of War, pursuant to the trust reposed in you. Given under my
Hand and Seal at Arms at Boston, the Third Day of August, 1696. In the Eighth
Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord William the Third by the Grace of God
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Wm. STOUGHTON.
By Command of the Li^ut. Governor, etc. Isaac Addington, Secr. Province of
the Massachusetts Bay.

By the Rt. Honorable the Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief.
Instructions for Maj. Benjamin Church, Commander of the Forces raised for His
Majesty's Service against the French and Indian Enemy and Rebels.
PUrsuant to the Commission given you, you are to Embark the Forces new
furnished and equipped for His Majesty's Service on the present Expedition to
the Eastern parts of this Province, and with them and such others as shall
offer themselves to go forth on the said Service to Sail unto Piscataqua, to
join those lately dispatched thither for the same Expedition, to await your
coming. And with all care and diligence to improve the Vessels, Boats and Men
under your command in search for, prosecution and pursuit of the said Enemy, at
such places where you may be informed of their abode or resort, or where you
may probably expect to find or meet with them, and take all advantages against
them which Providence shall favor you with.

You are not to list or accept any Soldiers that are already in His Majesty's
pay and posted at any Town or Garrison within this Province, without special
Order from my self.

You are to require and give strict Orders that the duties of Religion be
attended on board the several Vessels, and in the several companies under your
command, by daily Prayers unto God and reading His Holy Word, and Observance of
the Lords Day to the utmost you can.

You are to see that your Soldiers have their due allowance of Provisions and
other necessaries, and that the Sick or Wounded be accommodated in the best
manner your circumstances will admit. And that good order and command be kept
up and maintained in the several companies, and all disorders, drunkenness,
profane cursing, swearing, disobedience to Officers, mutinies, omissions or
neglect of duty, be duly punished according to the Laws Martial. And you are to
require the Captain or chief Officer of each company with the Clerk of the
same, to keep an exact Journal of all their proceedings from time to time.

In case any of the Indian Enemy and Rebels offer to submit themselves, you are
to receive them only at discretion. But if you think fit to improve any of them
or any others which you may happen to take Prisoners, you may encourage them to
be faithful by the promise of their lives, which shall be granted upon
approbation of their fidelity.

You are carefully to look after the Indians which you have out of the Prison,
so that they may not have opportunity to escape, but otherwise in prove them to
what advantage you can, and return them back again to this place.

You are to advise as you can have occasion with Capt. John Gorham who
accompanies you in this Expedition, and is to take your command in case of your
Death. A copy of these Instructions you are to leave with him, and to give me
an account from time to time of your proceedings.

Wm. STOUGHTON.
Boston, August 12th. 1696.
In the time Maj. Church lay at Boston, the News came of Pemequid Fort being
taken, it came by a Shallop that brought son^ Prisoners to Boston, who gave
account also that there was a French Ship at Mount- Desert, who had taken a
Ship of ours; so the discourse was that they would send the Man of War, with
other Forces to take the said French Ship and retake ours. But in the mean time
Maj. Church and his Forces being ready, embarked, and on the 15th day of August
set Sail for Piscataqua, where more Men were to join them (but before they lest
Boston, Maj Church discoursed with the Captain of the Man of War, who promised
him, if he went to Mount- Desert in pursuit of the said French Ship, that he
would call for him and his Forces at Piscataqua, expecting that the French and
Indians might not be far from the said French Ship, so that he might have an
opportunity to fight them while he was engaged with the French Ship:) Soon
after the Forces arrived at Piscataqua the Major sent his Indian Soldiers to
Col. Gidney at York, to be assisting for the defense of those Places; who gave
them a good Commend for their ready and willing Services done, in Scouting, and
the like Lying at Piscataqua with the reft of our Forces near a Week, waiting
for more Forces who was to join them to make up their complement; in all which
time heard never a word of the Man of War. On the 22d of August they all
embarked from Piscataqua, and when they came against York, the Major went
ashore, sending Capt. Gorham with some Forces in the two Briganteens and a
Sloop to Winter Harbor, ordering him to send out Scouts to see if they could
make any discovery of the Enemy, and to wait there till he came to them: Maj
Church coming to York, Col. Gidney told him his opinion was, That the Enemy was
drawn off from those parts, for that the Scouts could not discover any of them,
nor their Tracks. So having done his business there, went with what Forces he
had there to Winter Harbor, where he had the same account from Capt. Gorham,
That they had not discovered any of the Enemy, nor any new Tracks: So
concluding they were gone from those Parts toward Penobscot; the Major ordered
all the Vessels to come to Sail and make the beft of their way to Monbegin,
which being not far from Penobscot, where the main body of our Enemies living
was; being in great hopes to come up with the Army of French and Indians,
before they had scattered and were gone past Penobscot or Mount- Desert, which
is the chief place of their departure from each other after such actions; and
having a fair wind made the beft of our way, and early next Morning they got
into Monbegin, and there lay all day fitting their Boats, and other neccssaries
to imbark in the Night at Mussel neck with their Boats; lying there all Day to
keep undiscovered from the Enemy; at Night the Major ordered the Vessels all to
come to Sail and carry the Forces over the Bay near Penobscot; but having
little Wind, he ordered all the Soldiers to imbark on board the Boats with
eight days Provision and sent the Vessels back to Monbegin, that they might not
be discovered by the Enemy; giving them orders when and where they should come
to him. The Forces being all ready in their Boats, rowing very hard, got
ashore at a Point near Penobscot just as the day broke, and hid their Boats,
and keeping a good look out by Sea, and sent Scouts out by Land; but could not
discover neither Canoo's nor Indians; what Tracks and fire places they saw were
judged to be 7 or 8 days before they came: As soon as Night came that they
might go undiscovered got into their Boats and went by Mussel-neck, and so
amongst Penobscot Islands, looking very sharp as they went for fires on the
shore, and for Canoo's, but found neither; getting up to Mathebestucks hills,
day coming on, landed, and hid their Boats; locking out for the Enemy, as the
day before, but to little purpose. Night coming on to their Oars again, working
very hard, turned the Night into Day; made several of their new Soldiers
grumble: but telling them they hoped to come up quickly with the Enemy put new
life into them; and by daylight they got into the Mouth of the River, where
landing, found many Randezvous and fire Places where the Indians had been; but
at the same space of time, as before mentioned. And no Canoo's passed up the
River that day. Their Pilot Joseph York informed the Major that 50 or 60 Miles
up that River at the great Falls, the Enemy had a great Randezvous, and planted
a great quantity of Corn, when he was a Prisoner with them, four Years a go,
and that he was very well acquainted there; this gave great encouragement to
have had some considerable advantage of the Enemy at that Place; so using their
utmost endeavors to get up there undiscovered: and coming there found no Enemy
nor Corn Planted, they having deserted the Place. And ranging about the Falls
on both sides of the River, leaving Men on the East side of the said River, and
the Boats just below the Falls, with a good guard to secure them, and to take
the Enemy if they came down the River in their Canoo's: The west side being the
Place where the Enemy lived and beft to travel on, they resolved to range as
privately as they could, a Mile or two above the Falls, discovered a birch
Canoo coming down with two Indians in it, the Major sent word immediately back
to those at the Falls to lie very close, and let them pass down the Falls, and
to take them alive, that he might have Intelligence where the Enemy was (which
would have been a great advantage to them:) But a foolish Soldier seeing them
passing by him, shot at them, contrary to orders given, which prevented them
going into the Ambascado that was laid for them; whereupon several more of our
Men being near, shot at them; so that one of them could not stand when he got
ashore, but crept away into the brush, the other stepped out of the Canoo with
his Paddle in his hand, and ran about ^rod, and then threw down his Paddle and
turned back and took up his Gun, and so escaped: One of our Indians swom over
the River and setch'd the Canoo, wherein was a considerable quantity of blood
on the Se^ts, that the Indians sat on; the Canoo having several holes shot in
her: They stopped the holes, and then Capt. Brackit with an Indian Soldier went
over the River, who Track'd them by the blood about half a Mile, found his Gun,
took it up, and seeing the blood no further, concluded that he stopped his blood,
and so got away. In the mean time another Canoo with three Men were coming down
the River were fired at by some of our Forces, ran ashore and left two of
their Guns in the Canoo, which were taken, and also a Letter from a Priest to
Casteen, that gave him an account of the French and Indians returning over the
Lake to Mount-Royal, and of their little Service done upon the Maquas Indians
westward, only demolishing one Fort and cutting down some Corn, etc. He
desiring to hear of the proceedings of Deborabuel, and the French Man of War;
and informed him that there were several Canoo's coming with work men from
Quabeck, to Saint John's, where since we concluded it was to build a Fort at
the Rivers Mouth, where the great Guns were taken, etc. It being just Night,
the Officers were called together to advise, and their Pilot York informed them
of a Fort up that River, and that it was built on a little Island in that
River; and that there was no getting to it but in Canoo's, or on the Ice in the
Winter time: This with the certain knowledge that we were discovered by the
Enemy that escaped out of the upper Canoo, concluded it not proper at that time
to proceed any further up, and that there was no getting any further with our
Boats; and the Enemy being Alarmed would certainly fly from them (and to do as
they did four Years ago at their Fort at Taconock, having fought them in
Kanebeck River, and pursued them about go Miles to Taconock; for they then set
their Fort on fire, and ^un away by the Light of it, ours not being able to
come up with them at that Place.) Maj Church then encouraging his Soldiers,
told them, he hoped they should meet with part of the Enemy, in Penobscot bay,
or at Mount- Desert, where the French Ships were. So notwithstanding they had
been rowing several Nights before, with much toil, besides were short of
Provisions, they cheerfully embarked on board their Boats, and went down the
River, both with and against the Tide: and next Morning came to their Vessels,
where the Major had ordered them to meet him, who could give him no
intelligence of any Enemy. Where being come they refreshed themselves; Meeting
then with another disappointment for their Pilot York not being acquainted any
further, they began to lament the loss of one Robert Cawley, who they chiefly
depended on for all the Service to be done now Eastward: he having been taken
away from them the Night before they sat Sail from Boston (and was on board Mr.
Thorps Sloop) and put on board the Man of War, unknown to Maj Church;
notwithflanding he had been at the charge and trouble of procuring him. Then
the Major was obliged to one Board, procured by Mr. William Alden, who being
acquainted in those parts, to leave his Vessel and go with him in the Boats,
which he readily complied with, and so went to Na^ket point; where being
informed was a likely place to meet with the Enemy; coming there found several
Housing and small Fields of Corn, the fires having been out several days, and
no new Tracks. But upon Penobscot Island they found several Indian Houses, Corn
andTurnips, though the Enemy still being all gone, as before mentioned. Then they
divided and sent their Boats some one way and some another, thinking that if
any straggling Indians, or Casteen himself should be there about, they might
find them, but it proved all in vain. Himself and several Boats went to Mount
Desert, to see if the French Ships were gone and whither any of the Enemy might
be there, but to no purpose: The Ships being gone and the Enemy also. They
being now got several Leagues to the Westward of their Vessels; and seeing that
the way was clear for their Vessels to pass: And all their extreme rowing and
traveling by Land and Water, Night and Day to be all in vain. The Enemy having
left those parts, as they judged about eight or ten days before. And then
returning to their Vessels, the Commander calling all his Officers together, to
consult and resolve what to do, concluding that the Enemy by some means or
other had received some Intelligence of their being come out against them; and
that they were in no necessity to come down to the Sea side as yet, Moose and
Bever now being fat. They then agreed to go so far East, and employ themselves
that the Enemy belonging to those parts might think they were gone home: having
some discourse about going over to Saint John's; but the Masters of the Vessels
said, he had as good carry them to old France, etc. which put off that design,
they concluding that the French Ships were there. Then the Major moved for
going over the Bay toward Lahane, and toward the Gut of Cancer, where was
another considerable Fort of Indians, who often came to the assistance of our
Enemy, the barbarous Indians; saying that by the time they should return again,
the Enemy belonging to these parts would be come down again, expecting that we
are gone home. But in short could not prevail with the Masters of the open
Sloops to venture a cross the Bay; who said it was very dangerous so late in
the Year, and as much as their Lives were worth, etc. Then they concluded and
resolved to go to Senactaca, wherein there was a ready compliance (but the want
of their Pilot Robert Cawley was a great damage to them, who knew all those
parts:) however Mr. John Alden Master of the Briganteen Endeavor Pilotted them
up the Bay to Senactaca; and coming to Gr^^ston- point, being not far from
Senactaca; then came too with all the Vessels; and early next Morning came to
Sail, and about Sunrise got into Town; but it being so late before we landed,
that the Enemy most of them made their escape, (and as it happened landed where
the French and Indians had some time before killed Lieut. John Pain, and
several of Capt. Smithsons Men, that was with said Pain) They seeing our
Forces coming took the opportunity, fired several Guns, and so run all into the
Woods, carried all or most part of their goods with them. One Jarman Bridgway
came running to wards our Forces with a Gun in one hand, and his Cartridg-box
in the other, calling to our Forces to stop that he might speak with them; but
Maj. Church thinking it was that they might have some advantage, ordered them
to run on; when the said Bridgway saw they would not stop, turned and run, but
the Major called unto him, and bid him stop, or he should be shot down; some of
our Forces being near to the said Bridgway, said it was the General that called
to him: he hearing that, stopped and turned about, laying down his Gun, stood,
till the Major came up to him, his desire was that the Commander would make
haste with him to his house, lest the Salvages should kill his Father and
Mother, who were upward of fourscore Years of Age, and could not go. The Major
asked the said Bridgway whither there was any Indians amongst them? and where
they lived? he shak'd his head, and said, he durst not tell, for if he did they
would take an opportunity and kill him and his: so all that could be got out of
him was, that they were run into the Woods with the rest. Then orders were
given to pursue the Enemy, and to kill what Indians they could find, and take
the French alive, and give them quarter, if they asked it. Our Forces soon took
three French Men, who upon examination said, That the Indians were all run into
the woods. The French firing several Guns at our Forces, and ours at them; but
they being better acquainted with the woods than ours, got away. The Major took
the above said Jarman Bridgway for a Pilot, and with some of his Forces went
over a River, to several of their houses, but the People were gone and carried
their goods with them: In ranging the woods found several Indian-houses their
fires being just out but no Indians. Spending that day in ranging to and fro,
found considerable of their goods, and but few People; at Night the Major writ
a Letter, and sent out two French Prisoners, wherein was signified, That if
they would come in, they should have good quarters. The next day several come
in which did belong to that part of the Town where our Forces first landed, who
had encouragements given them by our Commander, That if they would assist him
in taking those Indians which belonged to those parts, they should have their
goods returned to them again and their Estates should not be damnify'd; which
they refused. Then the Major and his Forces pursued their design and went
further ranging their Country, found several more houses, but the People fled,
and carried what they had away; but in a Crick found a prize Bark that was
brought in there by a French Privateer: in ranging the words took some
Prisoners, who upon examination gave our Commander an account that there was
some Indian: upon a Neck of Land toward M^nes; so a party of Men was sent into
those woods, and in their ranging about the said Neck found some Plunder, and a
considerable quantity of Hu^^l^buries, both green and dry, which were gathered
by the Indians, and had like to have taken two Indians, who by the help of a
birch Canoo got over the River and made their escape. Also they f^und two
Barrels of Powder, and near half a bushel of Bullets; the French denving it to
be theirs, said they were the Salvage; but sure it might be a supply for our
Enemies: Also they tock from Jarman Bridgway several Barrels of Powder, with
Bullets, Shot, Spears and Knives, and other supplies to relieve our Enemies; he
owning that he had been a Trading with those Indians along Cape Sable Shore,
with Peter Assnow, etc. in a Sloop our Forces took from him; and that there he
met with the French Ships and went along with them to St. John's, and helped
them to unload the said Ships and carried up the River Provisions, Ammunition,
and other goods to Vilboons Fort. The Major having ranged all Places as was
thought proper returned back to the place where they first Landed, and finding
several Prisoners come in, who were much troubled to see their Cattle, Sheep,
Hogs and Dogs lying dead about their houses, chopped and hacked with Hatches,
(which was done without order from the Major) however he told them, It was
nothing to what our poor English in our Frontier Towns were forced to look
upon, for Men, Women and Children were chopped and hacked so, and left half
dead, with all their Scalps taken of, and that they and their Indians served
ours so; and our Salvages would be glad to serve them so too, if he would
permit them; which caused them to be mighty submissive, and begged the Major
that he would not let the Salvages serve them so. Our Indians being some what
sensible of the discourse, desired to have some of them to Roast, and so make a
dance; and dancing in a hideous manner to terrify them, said, That they could
eat any fort of flesh, and that some of theirs would make their hearts strong:
stepping up to some of the Prisoners, said, They must have their Scalps, which
much terrifyed the poor Prisoners, who begged for their lives. The Major told
them he did not design the Salvages should hurt them; but it was to let them
see a little what the poor English felt, saying, it was not their Scalps he
wanted, but the Salvages, for that he should get nothing by them; and told
them, That their Fathers the Friars and Governors encouraged their Salvages,
and gave them Money to Scalp our English, notwithstanding they were with them;
which several of our English there present did testify to their Faces, that
their Fathers and Mothers were served so in their sight. But the Major bid them
tell their Fathers the Friars and the Governors, That if they still persisted
and let their wretched Salvages kill and destroy the poor English at that rate,
he would come with some hundreds of Salvages, and let them loose among them,
who would Kill, Scalp and carry away every French person in all those parts for
they were the root from whence all the branches came that hurt us; for the
Indians could not do us any harm, if they did not relieve and supply them. The
French being sensible of the Majors kindness to them, kissed his hand, and was
very thankful to him for his favor to them in saving their lives; owned that
their Priests was at the taking of Pemaquid Fort, and were now gone to Layben^
with some of the Indians, to meet the French Ships, but for what they would not
tell. The Commander with his Forces having done all the Service they could in
those parts, concluded to go to St. John's River to do further Service for
their King and Country, Embarked all on board their Transports, and having a
fair wind soon got to Mon^genest, which lies a little distance from the Mouth
of St. John's River. Next Morning early the Major with his Forces landed to see
what discovery they could make, Traveled a cross the woods, to the old Fort or
Falls at the Mouth of St. John's River, keeping themselves undiscovered from
the Enemy; finding that there were several Men at work, and having informed
themselves as much as they could, (the Enemy being on the other side of the
River, could not come at them) Returned back, but Night coming on and dark wet
Weather, with bad Traveling, was obliged to stop in the woods till toward day
next Morning, and then went on board; soon after the Major ordered all the
Vessels to come, to Sail, and go into the Mouth of the River; being done, it
was not long before the Major and his Ferces landed on the East side of the
River, the French ^ring briskly at them, but did them no harm; and running
siercely upon the Enemy, they soon fled into the Woods. The Major ordered a
brisk party to run a cross a Neck to cut them off from their Canoo's, which the
day before they had made a discovery of; so the Commander with the rest ran
directly toward the New Fore they were a building, not knowing but they had
sotre Ordnance mounted. The Enemy running directly to their Canoo's was m^t by
our Forces, who fired at them and killed one and wounded Corpotal Canton, who
was taken, the rest threw down what they had and ^an into the woods; the said
Prisoner Canton being brought to the Major, told Li^n, if he would let his
Surgeon dress his wound and cure him, he would he Serviceable to him as long as
he lived: so being dressed, he was Examined: who gave the Major an account of
the Twelve great Guns which were hid in the beach below high water Mark (the
Carriges, Shot and Wheelbarrows some Flower and Fork, all hid in the Woods:)
And the next Mo^^ing the Officers being all ondered to meet together, to
consult about going up the River to Vilb^ens Fort, and none amongst them being
acquainted but the Aldens, who said the Water in the River was very low, so
that they could not get up to the Fort, and the Prisoner Canton told the
Commander, That what the Aldens said was true. So not being willing to make a
Canada Expedition, concluded it was not practicable to proceed. Then ordered
some of the Forces to get the great Guns on board the open Sloops, and the rest
to rang the woods for the Enemy, who took one Prisoner, and brought in; who in
their ranging found there a Shallop haul'd into a Crick, and a day or two after
there came in a Young Soldier to our Forces, who upon examination gave an
account of two more which he left in the woods at some distance; so immediately
the Major with some of his Forces went in pursuit of them, taking the said
Prisoner with them, who conveyed them to the place where he lest them, but they
were gone. Then asked the Prisane, Whither there were any Indians in those
parts? Said, No, it was as hard for Vilb^on their Governor to get an Indian
down to the water side, as it was for him to carry one of those great Guns upon
his back to his Fort: for they having had Intelligence by a Prisoner out of
Boston Goal, that gave them an account of Maj. Church and his Forces coming out
against them. Now having with a great deal of pains and trouble got all the
Guns, Shot and other Stotes aboard, intended on our design which we came out
first for, but the Wind not serving, the Commander sent out his Scouts into the
woods to seek for the Enemy, and four of our Indians come upon three French Men
undiscovered, who concluded that if the French should discover them would fire
at them and might kill one or more of them, which to prevent fired at the
French killed one and took the other two Prisoners; and it happened that he who
was killed was Shanel^re, the Chief Man there etc. The same Day they mended
their Whale-boats, and the Shallop which they took, fitting her to Row with
Eight Oars, that she might be helpful to their Prosecuting their intended
design against the Enemy in their returning homewards. Then the Commander
ordering all the Officers to come together, Informed them of his intentions and
ordered that no Vessels should depart from the Fleet, but to attend the Motions
of their Commadore, as formerly, except they were parted by Storms or thick
Fogs, and if so it should happen that any did part, when they come to
Passamequady, should stop there a while, for there they intended to stop, and
do business with the help of their Boats against the Enemy, and if they mist
that to stop at Machias; which was the next place he intended to stop at,
having an account by the Prisoners taken, That Mr. Lateril was there a trading
with the Indians in that River: Encouraging them, said, He did not doubt but to
have a good booty there; and if they should pass those two places, be sure not
to go past Naskege-point, but to stop there, till he came and not to depart
thence in a Fortnight without his orders, having great Service to do in and
about Penobsecot, etc. Then the Major discoursed with Capt, Brackit, Capt.
Hun^well and Capt. Larking, (with their Lieutenants) Commanders of the Forces
belonging to the Eastward parts, who were to discourse their Soldiers about
their proceeding, when they came to Penobscot; and the Major himself was to
discourse his Indian-Souldiers, and their Captains; who with all the rest
readily complied. The projection being such, That when they came to Penobsent
the Commander Besign'd to take what Provisions could be spared out of all the
Sloops, and put on board the two Briganteens, and to send all the Sloops home
with some of the Officers and Men that wanted to be at home: and then with
those Forces aforementioned ( to wit) the Eastward Men, and all the Indians;
and to take what Provisions and Ammunition was needful, and to March with
himself up into the Penobscot Country, in search for the Enemy, and if possible
to take that Fort in Penobscot River. Capt. Brackit informing the Major, That
when the water was low they could waid over (which was at that time) the lowest
that had been known in a long time. And being there to rang through that Country
down to Peenequid, where he intended the two Briganteens should meet them; and
from thence taking more Provisions ( viz.) Bread, Salt and Ammunition suitable
(to send those two Vessels home also) to travel through the Country to
Nerigiwock, and from thence to Ameras cogen-^ort, and so down where the Enemy
used to Plant, not doubting but that in all this Travel to meet with many of
the Enemy before they should get to Piseataqua. All which intentions were very
acceptable to the Forces that were to undertake it, who rejoicing, said, They
had rather go home by Land than by Water, provided their Commander went with
them: (who cotry their fidelity) said, He was grown Ancient, and might fail
them; They all said they would not leave him, and when he could ^ot Travel any
further, they would carry him. Having done what Service they could at and about
the Mouth of St. John's River, Resolved on their intended design; and the next
Morning having but little Wind, came all to Sail, the Wind coming, against them
they put into Mushquash Cove, and the next day the Wind still being against
them, the Major with part of his Forces Landed, and employed themselves in
ranging the Country for the Enemy, but to no purpose: and in the Night the wind
came pretty fair, and at 12 a Clock they came to Sail, and had not been out
long before they spied three Sail of Vessels; Expecting them to be French,
fitted to defend themselves, so coming near, hail^d them: who found them to be
a Man of War, the Province Galley, and old Mr. Alden in a Sloop, with more
Forces, Col. Hathrone Commander. Maj. Church went aboard the Commadore, where
Col. Harbrone was who gave him an account of his Commission and Orders, and
read them to him. Then his Honor told Maj. Church, that there was a particular
Order on board Capt. Soutback for him: which is as follows.

Boston; September. 9th. 1696. Sir,
HIs Majesty's Ship Orford having lately surprised a French Shallop with twenty
three of the Soldiers belonging to the Fort upon John's River in Nova Scotia,
together with Villeau their Captain, Previdence seems to encourage the forming
of an Expedition to attack that Fort, and so disrest and remove the Enemy for
that Post, which is the chief Scource from whence the most of our disasters do
issue, and also to fovour with an opp^rtunity for gaining out of their bands
the Ordnance, Artillery and other Warlike Stores and Provisions lately supplied
to them from France, for erecting a new Fort near the Rivers mouth, whereby
they will be greatly strengthened, and the reducing of them rendered more
difficult. I have therefore ordered a Detachment of two new Compa^ies
consisting of about an Hundred Men to join the Forces now with you for that
Expedition, and have Commissimated Lieut. Colonel John Hathorne, one of the
Members of His Majesty's Council, who is acquainted with that River, and in
whose courage and conduct I repose special Trust, to take the chief command of
the wh^le during that Service, being well assured that your good affections and
zeal for His Majesty's Service will induce your ready compliance and assistance
therein, which I hope will take up no long time, and be of great benefit and
advantage to these His Majesty's Territories if it please God to succed the
same. Besides its very probable to be the farest opportunity that can be
offered unto your self and Men, of doing Execution upon the Indian Enemy and
Rebels, who may reasonably be expected to be drawn to the defense of that Fort.
I have also ordered His Majesty's Ship Arundel, and the Province-Gally to
attend this Service.

Colonel Hathorne will communicate unto you the contents of his Commission and
Instructions received from my self for this Expedition, which I expect and
order that your self, Officers and Soldiers now under you yield obedience
unto. He is to advise with your self and others in all weighty attempts.
Praying for a Blessing from Heaven upon the said Enterprise, and that all
engaged in the same may be under the special Protection of the Almighty.

I am your Loving Friend, Win STOUGHTON.

The Major having read his last Orders, and considering (...) Commission, found
that he was obliged to attend, All Orders, etc. was much concerned that he and
his were prevented in their intended projection, if carried back to St. John's.
Then discoursing with Col. Hathorne, gave him an account of what they had done
at St. John's, viz. That as to the demolishing the New Fort they had done it,
and got all their great Guns and Stores aboard their Vessels; and that if it
had not been that the waters were so low would have taken the Fort up the River
also before he came away. Told him also that one of the Prisoners which he had
taken at St. John's, upon examination concerning the Indians in those parts,
told him, it was as hard for Vilboon their Governor to get one of their
Indians down to the water side, as to carry one of those great Guns upon his
back: and that they had an account of him and his Forces coming to those parts
by a Prisoner out of Boston Goal. Also told his Honor, That if they went back
it would wholly disappoint them of their doing any further Service, which was
that they came for to Penobscot, and Places Adjacent; but all was to no
purpose, his Honor telling the Major that he must attend his Orders then
received. And to encourage the Officers and Soldiers, told them, They should
be wholly at the Majors Ordering and Command in the whole action: (and to be
short did go back) and the event may be seen in Col. Hathron's Journal of the
said action. Only I must observe one thing by the way, which was, That when
they drew off to come down the River again, Col. Hathorne came off and left the
Major behind to see that all the Forces were drawn off; and coming down the
River in or near the Rear, in the Night heard a person hollow, not knowing at
first but that it might be a snare to draw them into; but upon consideration
sent to see who or what he was, found him to be a Negro man belonging to
Marblehead, that had been taken, and kept a Prisoner amongst them for some
time. The Major asked him. Whither he could give any account of the Indians in
those parts? He said, Yes, they were or had been all drawn off from the Sea
Coast up into the Woods near a hundred Miles having had an account by a
Prisoner out of Boston Goal; that Maj. Church and his Forces were coming out
against them in four Brigantee^s, and four Sloops, with 24 Peraougers, meaning
Whale-boats, which put them into a fright, that notwithstanding they were so
far up in the Woods were afraid to make fires by Day left he and his Forces
should ^iscover the Smokes and in the Night left they should see the light. One
thing more I would just give a hint of, that is, How the French in the Eastward
parts were much surpised at the motion of the Whale boats; said, There was no
abiding for them in that Country: and I have been informed since, that soon
after this Expedition, they drew off from St. John's Fort and River But to
return, Then going all down the River, Embarked and went homeward; only by the
way Candid Reader, I would let you know of two things that proved very
prejudicial to Major Church and his Forces: The first was, That the Government
should miss (...) so much as to send any Prisoner away from Boston before the
Expedition was over. Secondly, That they should send Col. Hathrone to take them
from the Service and business they went to do: Who with submission, doubtless
thought they did for the best, though it proved to the contrary. So shall wind up
with just a hint of what happened at their ^^^ng home to Boston. After all
their hard Service both Night and Day, the Government took away all the great
Guns, and Warlike Stores, and gave them not a Penny for them, (except it was
some Powder, and that they gave what they pleased for it) and beside the
Assembly past a Vote that they should have but half pay. But his Honor the
Lieut. Governor being much disturbed at their so doing went in to the
Townhouse where the Representatives were sitting, and told them except they
did Reassume that Vote, which was to cut Maj. Church and his Forces off half
their pay, they should sit there till the next Spring. Whereupon it was
Reassumed: So that they had just their bare Wages. But as yet never had any
Allowance for the great G^ns and Stores; neither has Maj Church had any
Allowance for all his Travel and great Expenses in Raising the said Forces
Volunteer.

The Fifth and Last Expedition, East.
IN the Year 1703, 4. Major Church had an account of the miserable Devestatiors
made on Deerfield, a Town in the Westward parts of this Province, and the
horrible Barbaritic, and Cruelties exercised on those poor Innecent People, (by
the French and Indians) especially of their Cruelties toward that worthy
Gentlewoman Mrs. Williams, and several others, whom they Marched in that
ex^ream Season; forcing them to carry great loads, and when any of them (...)
their hard usage could not bare with it were knocked on the head, and so killed
in cool Blood. All which with some other horrible Instances done by those
Barbarous Salvages, which Maj. Church himself was an eye witness to in his
former Travels in the Ea^^ward parts, did much astonish him. To ^^e a Woman
that those Barbarous Salvages had taken and killed, C^^sed in a most brutish
manner (as can be expressed) with a Young Child ^^i^d taste with strings to her
breast; which insant had no apparent wound, which doubtless was left alive to
suck its dead Mothers Breast, and so miserably to perish and dye. Also to see
other poor Children hanging upon Fences dead of eithers Sex, in their own poor
Rags, not worth their strip^^ng them of, in scorn and derision. Another
Instance was, of a straggling Soldier, who was found at Casco, exposed in a
shameful and barbarous manner; his body being staked up, his head cut off, and
a hogs head set in the room, his body ^ip'd up, and his heart and inwards taken
out, and private Members cut off and hung with belts of their own, the inwards
at one side of his body, and his private at the other, in scorn and derision of
the English Soldiers, etc. These and such like Barbarities caused Major Church
to express himself to this purpose, That if he were Commander in Chief of these
Provinces, he would soon put an end to those barbarities done by the Barbarous
Enemy, by making it his whole business to sight and destroy those Salvages, as
they did our poor Neighbors; which doubtless might have been done if rightly
managed, and that in a short time etc. So that these with the late Inhumanities
done upon the Inhabitants of Deerfield, made such an Impression on his heart as
cannot well be expressed; so that this Blood boiled within him, making such
Impulses on his Mind, that he forgot all former treatments, which were enough
to hinder any Man especially the said Maj. Church from doing any further
Service. Notwithstanding all which, having a mind to take some Satisfaction on
the Enemy, his heart being full. Took his Horse and went from his own
Habitation near Seventy Miles, to wait upon his Excellency, and offered his
Service to the Queen, his Excellency and the Country; which his Excellency
readily accepted of, and desired Maj. Church to draw a Scheme for the ensuing
action of (...) so taking leave, went home, and drew it: which is as follows.

Tiverton, February 5. 1703, 4 May it please your Excellency,
ACcording to your request when I was lass with your Self; and in obedience
there-unto, I present you with these following lines, that concern the
preparation for next Springs Expedition, to Attack the Enemy. According to my
former Direction, for it is good to have a full stroke at them first, before
they have opportunity to Run for it; for the first of our action will be our
opportunity to destroy them, and to prevent their running away, in way-laying
every passage; and make them know we are in good earnest, and so we being in a
diligent use of means, we may hope for a blessing from the Almighty, and that
He will be pleased to put a dread in their hearts, that they may fall before us
and perish: For my advice (...), 1st. That Ten or Twelve hundred good able
Soldiers well equipped be in a readiness fit for action by the first of April
at the furthest, for then will be time to be upon action. 2ly. That five and
forty or fifty good Whale-boats be had ready, well fitted, with five good O^rs,
and 12 or 15 good Paddles to every Boat: And upon the Wail of each Boat five
pieces of strong Leather be fastened on each side to slip five small Ash bars
through, that so when ever they land the Men may step overboard, and slip in
said bars across, and take up said Boat, that she may not be hurt against the
Rocks. And that two suitable Brass-Kittles be provided to belong to each Boat,
^o dress the Men's Victuals i^, to make their Lives comfortable. 3ly. That 4 or
500 pair of good Indian Shoes be made ready, fit for the Service, for the
English and Indians, that must improve the Whale-boats, and Birch Caneo's, for
they will be very proper, and safe for that Service; and let there be a good
Store of Cow Hides, well Tanned, for a supply of such Shoes; and Hemp to make
Thread, and Wax, to mend and make more of such Shoes, when wanted, and a good
store of Awls. 4ly. That there be a 100 large Hatches or light Axes made pretty
broad, and steeled with the best Steal that can be got, and made by workmen,
that may cut very well, and bold, that the Hemlock knots may not brake nor turn
them; to widden the landing places up the Falls, for it may happen that we may
get up with some of our Whale-boats to their Falls or Headquarters. 5ly. That
there be a suitable quantity of small Bags, or Wollets provided, that every Man
that wants may have one, to put up his Bullets in, of such a size as will sit
his Gun, (and not served as at Casco.) That every Man's Bag be so Marked that he
may not change it: for if so, it will make a great confusion in action; that
every Man store of Ball be weighed to him, that so be may be account able, and
may not squander it away; and also his store of Powder, that so be may try his
Powder and Gun before action. And that every particular Company may have a
Barrel of Powder to themselves, and so marked that it by no means may be
changed; that men may know before hand, and may not be cheated out of their
Lives, by having bad Powder; Or not knowing how to use it: and this will prove
a great advantage to the action. 6ly. That C^l John Gorham if he may be
prevailed with may be concerned in the management of the Whale-boats, he having
been formerly concerned in the Eastern Parts, and experienced in that affair.
And Whale-men them will be very serviceable in this Expedition, which having a
promise made to them, that they shall be released in good season to go home a
Whaling in the Fall; your Excellency will have men enough. 7ly. That there may
be raised for this Service 300 Indians at least, and more if they may be had;
for I know certainly of my own knowledge, that they exceed most of our English
in hunting and sculking in the woods, being always used to it; and it must be
practiced if ever we intend to destroy those Indian Enemies. 8ly. That the
Soldiers already out Eastward in the Service; By men of known judgment may
take a survey of them and their Arms; and see if their Arms be good, and that
they know how to use them, in shootting right at a Mark; and that they be men
of good Reason and Sense, to know how to manage themselves in so difficult a
pi^ce of Service, as this Indian hunting i^; for bad men are but a clogg and
hindrance to as Army, being a trouble and vex^tion to good Commanders, and so
many Mouths to devour the Countries Provision, and a hindrance to all good
action. 9ly. That special care be had in taking up the whale-boats, that they
be good and sit for that Service; that so the Country be not cheated, as
formerly, in having rotten^oats; and as much care that the Owners may have good
satisfaction for them. 10ly. That the Tenders or Transports, Vessels to be
improved in this action be good Decked Vessels, not too big, because of going
up several Rivers; having 4 or 6 small Guns a-piece for defense, and the fewer
Men will defend them. And there is enough such Vessels to be had. 11ly. To
conclude all, If your Excellency will be pleased to make your Self Great and
(...) a happy People, as to the destroying of our Enemies, and easing of our
Taxes, etc. be pleased to draw forth all those Forces now in Pay in all the
Eastward Parts, both at Saco and Casco-Bay; for those two Trading-Houses never
did any good, nor never will, and are not worthy the name of Queens Forts; and
the first wilding of them, had no other Effect, but to lay us under Tribute to
that wreached Pagan Crew; and I hope will never be wanted, for that they were
first built for: But sure it is, they are very serviceable to them, for they
get many a good advantage of us to destroy our Men, and laugh at us for our
folly, that we should be at so much post and trouble to do a thing that does us
so much harm, and no manner of good: but to the contrary, when they see all our
Forces drawn forth, and in the pursuit of them, They will think that we begin
to be rouzed up and to be awake, and will not be satis^ed with what they have
pleased to leave us, but are resolved to Retake from them, that they formerly
took from us, and drive them out of their Country also. The which being done,
then to build a Fort at suitable time and in a convenient place; and it will be
very honorable to your Excellency and of great Service to Her Majesty and to
the enlargement of her Majesty's Government: (The Place meant being at Port
Royal.) 12ly. That the objection made against drawing off the Forces in the
Eastward Parts will be no damage to the Inhabitants; for former Experience
teaches us, that so soon as drawn into their Country they will presently
forsake ours to take care of their own: And that there be no failure in making
preparation of these things aforementioned, for many times the want of small
things, prevent the completing of great Actions; and that every thing be in a
readiness before the Forces be raised, to prevent Charges; and the Enemy having
Intelligence: And that the General Court be moved to make suitable Acts, for
the incouragirg both English and Indians; that so men of business may freely
offer Estates and Concerns to Serve the Public.


This hoping what I have taken the pains to Write in the sincerity of my heart
and good affection, will be well accepted;

I make bold to subscribe, as I am your Excellency's most Devoted and Humble
Servant, Benjamin Church.


Then returning to his Excellency presented the said Scheme, which his
Excellency approved of; and returned it again to Maj. Church and desired him to
see that every thing was provided, telling him that he should have an Order
from the Commissary General to proceed. Then returned home and made it his
whole business to provide Oars and Paddles and a Vessel to carry them round;
and then returned again to his Excellency, who gave him a Commission: which is
as follows.

JOSEPH DUDLEY Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over Her
M^j^sty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire in New England
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
To Benjamin Church Esq^ Greeting.
By Virtue of the Power and Authority in and by her M^jesty's Royal Comm^ssion
to me granted, I do by these presents Reposing special Trust and Confidence in
your Loyalty, Courage and good Conduct, Constinute and Appoint you to be
Colonel of all the Forces raised and to be raised for Her Majesty's Service
against the French and Indian Enemy and R^bels, that shall be improved in the
Service to the Eastward of Casco-Bay; And to be Captain of the first Company of
the said Forces. You are therefore carefully and diligently to perform the Duty
of a Colonel and Captain by Leading, Ordering and Exercising the said Regiment
and Company in Arms, both Inferior Officers and Soldiers; and to keep them in
good Order and Discipline. Hereby commanding them to Obey you as their Colonel
and Captain; And with them to do and Execute all acts of hostility against the
said Enemy and Rebels. And you are to observe and follow such Orders and
Directions as you shall receive from my Self or other your superior Officer
according to the Rules and Discipline of War pursuant to the Trust rep^sed in
you. Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms at Boston the 18th day of March. In
the Third Year of Her Majesty's Reign. Anno Dom. 1703.4.

J. DUDLEY.
By his Exellency's Command, Isaac Addington Secr.

Col. Church no sooner received his Commission, but proceeded to the raising of
Men Volunteers, by going into every Town within the three Counties which was
formerly Plymouth Government; advising with the Chief Officer of each Company,
to call his Company together, that so he might have the better opportunity to
discourse and encourage them to Serve their Queen and Country; treating them
with Drink convenient; told them he did not doubt but with God's blessing to
bring them all home again; all which, with many other arguments animated their
hearts to do Service, so that Col. Church enlisted out of some Companies near
20 Men, and others 15. He having raised a sufficient number of English
Soldiers, proceeded to the enlisting of Indians in all those parts where they
dwelt, which was a great fategue and expense; being a People that need much
treating, especially with Drink etc. Having enlisted the most of his Soldiers
in those parts, who daily lay upon him; was not less than 5 l. per day
expenses, some days, in Victuals and Drink; who doubtless thought (especially
the English) that the Country would have re-imburst it again, otherways they
would hardly accepted it of him. Col. Church's Soldiers both English and
Indians in those parts being raised, Marched them all down to Nantasket,
according to his Excellency's directions; where being came, the following
Gentlemen were Commissionated to be Commanders of each particular Company, viz.
Lieut. Col. Gorham, Captains John Brown, Constant Church, James Cole, John
Dyer, John Cook, Caleb Williamson and Edward Church, of the Forces raised by
Col. Church, each Company being silled up with English and Indians as they
agreed among themselves, and by the Colonel's directions; Capt. Lamb, and Capt.
Miricks Company, who were raised by his Excellency's direction, were ordered to
join those aforesaid under the Command of Col Church. Matters being brought
thus far on, Col. Church waited upon his Excellency at Boston to know his
pleasure, what further measures were to be taken; and did humbly move that they
might have liberty in their Instructions to make an Attack upon Port Royal:
Being very well satisfied in his opinion, that with the blessing of God, with
what Forces they had or should have; and Whale-boats so well fitted with Oars
and Paddles, as they had with them, might be sufficient to have taken it. His
Excellency (looking upon Col Church) replied, He could not admit of that, by
reason he had by the advice of Her Majesty's Council writ to Her Majesty about
the taking of Port Royal Fort, and how it should be disposed of when taken,
etc. However Col. Church proceeding to get every thing ready for the Forces
down at Nantasket, which was the place of Parade. He happening one day to be at
Capt. Belchers, where his Excellency happened to come; who was pleased to order
Col. Church to put on his Sword, and walk with him up the Common; which he
readily complied with: where being come, he saw two Mortar pieces with Shells,
and an Ingineer trying with them, to throw a Shell from them to any spot of
ground where he said it should fall: Which when Col. Church had seen done, gave
him great encouragement and hopes that it would promote their going to Port
Royal, which he had solicited for; and returning from thence after they had
seen them tried by the said Ingineer, and performing what was proposed. Coming
near to Capt. William Clarks-house over against the Horse-shoe, his Excellency
was invited by Capt. Clark to walk over and take a Glass of Wine; which he was
pleased to accept of, and took Col. Church with him; and in the time they were
taking a Glass of Wine, Col. Church once more presumed to say to his
Excellency; Sir, I hope that now we shall go to Port Royal in order to take it;
those Mortars being very suitable for such an Enterprise. His Excellency was
pleased to reply; Col. Church you must say no more of that matter, for the
Letter I told you of I writ by the advice of her Majesty's Council, now lies at
home on the board before the Lords Commissioners of her Majesty's foraign
Plantations, etc. After some days every thing being ready to Embark, Col.
Church received his Instructions: which are as follows.

By his Excellency JOSEPH DUDLEY Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in
and over Her Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, etc. in New England,
and Vice Admiral of the same.
Instructions for Colonel Benjamin Church in the present Expedition.
IN Pursuance of the Commission given you to take the Chief Command of the Land
and Sea Forces by me raised, equipped and set forth on Her Majesty's Service,
against her open declared Enemies the French, and Indian Rebels. You are to
Observe the following Instructions.

First. You are to take care, That the duties of Religion be attended on board
the several Vessels, and in the several Company's under your Command, by daily
Prayers unto God, and Reading his holy word; And that the Lords Day be observed
and duly Sanctified to the utmost of your power, as far as the circumstances
and the necessity of the Service can admit; that so you may have the presence
of God with, and obtain His Blessing on your Undertaking.

You are to take care, That your Soldiers have their due allowance of
Provisions and other necessaries; That their Arms be well fixed, and kept sit
for Service, and that they be furnished with a suitable Quantity of Powder and
Ball, and be always in readiness to pass upon Duty.

That good Order and Discipline be maintained; And all disorders, drunk^uness,
profane Swearing, Cursing, Omission or neglect of Duty, disobedience to
Officers, Mutiny, Desertion, and Sedition be duly punished according to the
Rules and Articles of War; The which you are, once a Month or oftener, to cause
to be published and made known to your Officers and Soldiers for their
Observance and Direction in their duty. Let notorious and Capital Offenders be
sent away to the next Garrisons, there to be Imprisoned until they can be
proceeded with.

Let the Sick and wounded be carefully looked after, and accommodated after the
best manner your circumstances will admit of, and be sent either to Casco Fort
or to Mr. Peperels at Kittery, which may be easiest, so soon as you can.

You are forthwith to send away the Forces and Stores by the Transports, with
the Whale boats to Piscataqua, on Kittery side, there to attend your coming;
whither you are to follow them with all Expedition.

You are to Embark on the Province Galley, Capt. Soutback Commander, And let
Lieut Col. Gorbam go on board Capt. Gallop; who are both directed to attend
your Motion on the French side; after which they are to return. Let the
Commanders of all the Store Sloops and Transports know that they Sail Anchor
and Serve at your direction.

When you Sail from Piscataqua keep at such distance off the Shore, that you be
not observed by the Enemy to Alarm them. Stop at Mo^tinicut, and there Embark
the Forces in the Whale-boats for the Main, to range that part of the Country,
in search of the Enemy, to Mount Desert; sending the Vessels to meet you there;
and after having refreshed and recruited your Soldiers, proceed to Machias,
and from thence to Passamequado; And having Effected what spoils you possibly
may upon the Enemy in those parts, Embark on your Vessels for Menis and
Signecto, touching at Grand Manan, if you see cause, and from Menis and
Signecto to Port Royal Gut; And use all possible Methods for the burning and
destroying of the Enemies Housing, and breaking the Dams of their Corn grounds
in the said several places, and make what other Spoils you can upon them, and
bring away the Prisoners. In your return call at Penobscot, and do what you can
there, and so proceed Westward.

This will probably employ you a Month or Six Weeks; when you will draw
together again, and by the latter end of June consider whithes you can march to
N^rrigwack, or other parts of their Planting to destroy their Corn and
Settlements: And keep the Expedition on foot until the middle of August next.

Notwithstanding the particularity of the afore-going Instruction, I lay you
under no restraint, because I am well assured of your Courage, Care, Caution
and Industry; But refer you to your own Resolves, by the Advice of your
Commission Officers, not under the degree of Captain's, and the Sea Commission
Captains (whom you will, as often as you can, Advise with) according to the
Intelligence you may receive, or as you may find needful upon the Spot.

You are by every opportunity, and once a Week certainly, by some means, either
by way of Casco, Piscataqua, or otherwise to acquaint me of your proceedings
and all occurrents, and what may be further necessary for the Service. And to
observe such further and other Instructions as you shall receive from my Self.

As often as you may, Advise with Capt. Smith and Capt. Rogers Commanders of
Her Majesty's Ships.

Let your Minister, Commissary and Surgeons be treated with just respects.

I Pray to God to preserve, prosper and succeed you.

Given under my hand at Boston, the Fourth Day of May, 1704. J. DUDLEY.

Pursuant to his Instructions he sent away his Transports, and Forces to
Piscataqua, but was obliged himself to wait upon his Excellency by Land to
Piscataqua in order to raise more Forces, in the way thither; and did raise a
Company under the Command of Capt. Harridon; taking care also to provide a
Pilot for them in the Bay of Funde^^ Col. Church being directed to one --
Fellows, whom he met with at Ipswich. And going from thence to Piscataqua with
his Excellency, was there met by that worthy Gentleman Maj. Winthrop Hilton,
who was very helpful to him in the whole Expedition, whose Name and Memory
ought not to be forgot. Being ready to Embark from Piscataqua; Col. Church
requested the Commanders of her Majesty's Ships, Capt. Smith and Capt. Regers
to tarry at Piscataqua a Fortnight. that so they might not be discovered by the
Enemy before he had done some spoil upon them. Then moving in their Transports,
as directed, Got safe into Montinucus undiscovered by the Enemy. Next Morning
early sitted out two Whale boats with men, Capt. John Cook in one, and Capt.
Constant Church in the other; and sent them to Green-Island upon a discovery;
and coming there they parted, one went to one part, and the other to the other
part, that so they might not miss of what could be discovered; where they met
with old Lafaure with his two Sons Thomas and Timothy, and a Canada Indian. The
Enemy seeing that they were discovered, threw down their Ducks and Eggs who had
got a considerable quantity of each, and ran to their Canoo's, getting into
them, stood directly for the Maine; looking behind them, perceived the whale
boats to gain so fast upon them, clapped side by side and aM four got into one
Canoo, which proved of little advantage to them, for the Whale boats gained so
much upon them, and got so near that Capt. Cock firing at the Srores-man which
was the Indian, and happened to graze his skull, and quite spoiled his
Paddling: upon which old Lafaure and Sons seeing their companions condition
soon begged for quarter, and had it granted: the two Captains with their success
presently returned to their Commander, taking care that their Captives should
not discourse together before they were examined; when brought to Col. Church,
he ordered them to be apart; and first proceeded to examine old Lafaure, who he
found to be very surly and cross, so that he could gain no manner of
intelligence by him; upon which the Commander was resolved to put in practice
what he had formerly done at Seg^c^^; ordering his Indians to make two large
heaps of ^y wood at some distance one from the other, and to set a large stake
in the ground close to each heap; then ordered the two Sons Thomas and Timothy
to be brought and bound to the Stakes; also ordering his Indians to paint
themselves with colors which they had brought for that use. Then he Colonel
proceeded to examine first Timothy; and told him, He had examined his Father
already; and that if he told him the truth he would save his Life, and take him
into his Service; and that he should have good pay and live well. He answered,
That he would tell him the truth; and gave him an account of every thing he
knew; which was all Minuted down: He being asked whither his Brother Thomas did
not know more than he? His answer was, Yes. For his Brother Thomas had a
Commission sent him from the Governor of Canada, to Command a Company of
Indians who were gathered together at a Place where some French Gentlemen
lately arrived from Canada, who were Officers to Command the rest that were to
go Westward to fight the English, and that there was sent to his Father and
Brother Tom, a considerable quantity of Flower, Fruit, Ammunition and Stores,
for the supply of the said Army. He being asked, Whither he could Pilot our
Forces to them? said, No: But his Brother Tom could, for he had hid it and that
he was not then with him. The Colonel asked him, What Gentlemen those were that
came from Canada? He answered Monsieur Gordan, and Mr. Sharkee. Being asked
where they were? Answered at Passam^quado; building a Fort there. Being also
asked, What number of Indians and French there were at Penobscot? He answered,
there were several Families, but they lived scattering. Asked him further, If
he would Pilot our Forces thither? Answered, He would if the Commander would
not let the Salvages Roft him. Upon which the Colonel ordered him to be loosed
from the Stake, and took him by the hand, told him, He would be as kind to him
as his own Father; at which he seemed to be very thankful. And then the Colonel
proceeded to examine his Brother Tom, and told him that he had examined his
Father and Brother, and th^^ his Brother had told him every tittle he knew; and
that he knew more than b^ Brother Timothy did; and that if he would be
Ingenious and confess all he ^iew, he should fare as well as his Brother, but
if not, the Salvages should ^^ost him. Whereupon he solemnly promised that he
would; and that he would Pilot him to every thing he knew, to the value of a
Knife and Shea^e (which without doubt he did.) Then the Colonel immediately
gave orders for the Whale-boats to be ready, and went directly over where the
^^id Goods and Stores were, and found them as informed, took them on board the
Boats, and returned to their Transports; and ordering Provisions to be put into
every Man's Snapfack for 6 or 8 days; so in the dusk of the Evening lest their
Transports, with Orders how they should act; and went directly for ^he Mainland
of Pe^obscot and Mouth of that River with their Pilots Tom and Timothy, who
carried them directly to every Place and Habitation both of French and Indians
there abouts, with the assistance of one De Young, whom they carried out of
Bostom Goal for the same purpose, who was very serviceable to them: being there
we killed and toak every one both French and Indians, not knowing that any one
did escape in all Pen^bs^^t; among those that were taken was St. Casteens
Daughter, who said that her Husband was gone to France, to her Father Monsieur
Casteen: She having her Children with her, the Commander was very kind to her
and them. All the Prisoners that were then taken, held to one Story in general,
which they had from Lafaure's Sons; that there were no more Indians
there-abouts, but enough of them at Passamequado; upon which they soon returned
to their Transports with their Prisoners and Plunder. The Commander giving
order immediately for the Soldiers in the Whale-boats to have a recruit of
Provisions for a further pursuit of the Enemy, giving orders to the Transports
to slay a few days more there, and then go to Mount Desert (and there to stay
for her Majesly's Ships, who were directed to come thither) and there to wait
his further order. Then Col. Church with his Forces immediately embarked on
board their Whale-boats, and proceeded to scout the Coast and to try if they
could discover any of the Enemy coming from Passamequado; making their stops in
the day time (at all the Points and Places where they were certain the Enemy
would Land, or come by with their Cano^^) and at Night to their Paddles. Then
coming near where the Vessels were ordered to come, having made no discovery of
the Enemy, went directly to Mount Desert, where the Transports were just come;
and taking some ^^ovisions for his Soldiers, gave direction for the Ships and
Transports in 6 days to come directly to Passamequado, where they should find
him and his For^es. Then immediately moved away in the Whale boats and made
diligent search along shore, as formerly, inspecting all Places where the Enemy
was ^^^^y to lurk: Particularly at Machias; but found neither Fires nor Tra^^^.
Coming afterward to the West Harbor at Passamequado, where they entered upon
action; an account whereof Col. Church did communicate to his Excellency, being
as follows.

May it please your Excellency.
I Received Yours of this Instant Octab. 9th. with the two enclosed
Informations, that concern my actions at Possamequado; which I will give a just
and true account of as near as possible I can (viz) on the 7th of June last
1704. In the evening we entered in at the Westward Harbor at said Passamequado;
coming up said Harbor to an Island, where landing, we came to a French house,
and took a French Woman, and Children, the Woman upon her Examination said, her
Husband was abroad a Fishing. I asked her, whither there were any Indians
thereabouts? She said, Yes. There were a great many, and several on that
Island. I asked her, whither she could Pilot me to them? Said, No. They hid in
the Woods. I asked her, when she saw them? Answered, Just now, or a little
while since, I asked her, whether she knew where they had laid their Canoo's?
Answered, No. They carried their Canoo's into the woods with them. We then
hastened away a-long shore, seizing what Prisoner^ ^e could, taking old Lo^riel
and his Family. This intelligence caused me to leave Col, Gorham, and a
considerable part of my Men (and Boats) with him at that Island, partly to
guard and secure those Prisoners, being sensible it would be a great trouble to
have them to secure and guard at our next landing, where I did really expect,
and hope to have an opportunity, to sight our Indian Enemies; for all our
French Prisoners, that we had taken at Penobscot, and a-long shore had informed
us, That when we came to the Place, where these Canada Gentlemen lived, we
should certainly meet with the Salvages to sight us, those being the only Men
that set the Indians against us, or upon us, and were newly come from Canada,
to manage the War against us (pleading in this account and information their
own Innocence) and partly in hopes that he the said Col. Gorham would have a
good opportunity in the Morning to destroy some of those our Enemies, (we were
informed by the said French Woman as above,) with the use of his Boats, as I
had given direction. Ordering also Maj. Hilton, to pass over to the next
Island, that lay East of us (with a small Party of Men and Boats) to surprise
and destroy any of the Enemy, that in their Canoo's might go here or there,
from any place, to make their flight from us, and as he had opportunity to take
any French Prisoners. We then immediately moved up the River in the dark Night
through great difficulty, by reason of the Eddys and Whirlpools, made with the
fierceness of the current. And here it may be hinted that we had information
that Lotriel had loft some of his Family passing over to the next Island,
falling into one of these Eddys were drowned; which the two Pilo^^ told to
discourage me. But I said nothing of that nature shall do it, for I was
resolved to venture up, and therefore forthwith Paddling our Boats, as
privately as we could, and with as much expedition as we could make with our
Paddles, and the help of a strong Tide, we came up to Monsieur Gourdons, a
little before day; where taking notice of the Shore, and finding it somewhat
open and clear, I ordered Capt. Mirick and Capt. Cole, (having English
Companies) to tarry with several of the Boats to be ready, that if any of the
Enemy should come down out of the brush into the Bay, (it being very broad in
that place) with their Canoo's, they might take and destroy them. Ordering the
remainder of the Army, being landed, (with my self and the other Officers) to
March up into the Woods, with a wide Front, and to keep at a confiderable
distance; for that if they should run in heaps, the Enemy would have the
greater advantage: and further directing them that if possible, they should
destroy the Enemy with their Hatches, and not fire a Gun. This order I always
gave at landing telling them the inconveniency of firing, in that it might be
first dange^^^, to themselves, they being many of them Young Soldiers, (as I
had sometimes observed, that one or two Guns being sired, many others would
sire, at they knew not what; as happened presently after) and it would alarm
the Enemy, and give them the opportunity to make their escape; and it might
alarm the whole Country, and also prevent all further action from taking effect
Orders being thus passed, we moved directly toward the Woods, Le Faver's Son
directing us to a little Hu^t or Wigwam, which we immediately surrounded with a
few Men, the rest Marching directly up into the Woods, to see what Wigwams or
Hutts they could discover; my self made a little flop Ordering the Pilot to
tell them in the Hu^t, that they were surrounded with an Army, and that if they
would come forth, and surrender themselves, they should have good quarter, but
if not, they should be all knocked on the head and die: One of them showed
himself, I asked, Who he was? He said Gourdan; and begged for quarter: I told
him he should have good quarter; adding further, That if there were any more in
the house they should come out: Then came out two men; Gourdan said, They were
his Sons, and asked quarter for them, which was also granted. Then came out
(...) Woman, and a little Boy; she sell upon her knees, begged quarts for her
self and Children, and that I would not suffer the Indians to kill them. I told
them they should have good quarter and not be hurt. After which I ordered a
small guard over them, and so moved presently up with the rest of my Company,
after them that were gone before, but looking on my right hand over a little
run, I saw some thing look black, just by me, stopped, and heard a talking,
stepped over, and saw a little Hurt or Wigwam with a crowd of People round a
bout it, which was contrary to my former directions: Asked them what they were
doing? They replied there was some of the Enemy in a house, and would not come
out. I asked what House? They said a Bark house. I hastily bid them pull it
down, and knock them on the head, never asking whether they were French or
Indians; they being all Enemies alike to me. And pissing then to them, and
seeing them in great disorder, so many of the Army in a crowd together, acting
so contrary to my Command and Direction, exposing themselves, and the whole
Army to ^tter ruin, by then so disorderly crowding thick together; had an
Enemy come upon them in that interim, and fired a Volley amongst them, they
could not have missed a shot; and wholly neglecting their d^^^y, in not
attending my orders, in searching diligently for our ^^^^^^g Enemies in their
Wigwams, or by their sires where I had great hopes, and real expectation to
meat with them. I most certainly know that I was in an exceeding great Passion,
but not with those poor miserable Enemies; for I took no notice of half (...)
dozen of the Enemy, when at the same time, I expected to be engaged (...) some
hundreds of them, of whom we had a continued account who were expected from
Port Royal side. In this heat of action, every word that I then spoke, I cannot
give an account of, and I presume it is impossible. I stopped but little here,
but went directly up into the woods, hoping to be better employed, with the
rest of the Army, I listened to hear, and looked earnestly to see what might be
the next action; but meeting with many of the Soldiers, They told me, they had
discovered nothing; we fetching a small compass round, came down again. It
being pretty dark, I took notice, I saw two men lay dead as I thought, at the
end of the house, where the door was, and immediately the Guns went off, and
they fired every man as I thought, and most toward that place where I left the
guard with Monsieur Gourdan. I had much ado to stop their firing, and told
them, I thought they were mad, and I believed they had not killed and wounded
less than 40 or 50 of our own Men. And I asked them what they shot at? They
answered at a French man that ran away: but to admiration no man was killed but
he, and one of our own men wounded in the Leg; and I turning about, a French
man spoke to me, and I gave him quarter. Daylight coming on and no discovery
made of the Enemy, I went to the place where I had left Monsieur Gourdan, to
examine him, and his Sons, who agreed in their examinations; told me two of
their men were abroad: It proved a damage; and further told me, That Monsieur
Sharkee lived several Leagues up at the head of the River, at the Falls; and
all the Indians were fishing, and tending their Corn there; and that Monsieur
Sharkee had sent down to him, to come up to him to advise about the Indian
Army, that was to go Westward; but he had returned him answer, his business was
urgent, and he could not come up: and that Sharkee, and the Indians, would
certainly be down that day, or the next at the furthest, to come to conclude of
that matter. This was a short Nights action, and all sensible Men do well know,
that actions done in the dark (being in the Night as aforesaid) under so many
difficulties, as we then labored under, as before related, was a very hard
Task for one Man, matters being circumstanc'd as in this action; which would
not admit of calling a Council; and at that time could not be confined
there-unto; at which time I was transported above fear or any sort of dread;
yet being sensible of the danger in my Armies crowding so thick together, and
of the great duty incumbent on me to preserve them from all the danger I
possibly could, for further improvement, in the Destruction of our implacable
Enemies; am ready to conclude, that I was very quick and absolute in giving
such Commands and Orders, as I then apprehended most proper and advantageous.
And had it not been for the Intelligence I had received from the French we took
at Penobscot, as before hinted, and the false report the French Woman (first
took) gave me, I had not been in such haste. I question not but those French
men that were slain, had the same good quarter of other Prisoners. But I ever
looked at it a good Providence of Almighty God, that some few of our cruel and
bloody Enemies, were made sensible of their bloody Cruelties, perpetrated on my
dear and loving friends and Country men; and that the same measure (in part)
meeted to them, as they had been guilty of in a barbarous manner at D^erfield,
and I hope justly, I hope God Almighty will accept hereof, although it may not be
eligible to our French implacable Enemies, and such others as are not our
friends. The foregoing Journal and this short annexment, I thought it my duty
to exhibit, for the satisfaction of my Friends and Countrymen, whom I very
faithfully and willingly served in the late Expedition; and I hope will find
acceptance with you. Excellency, the Honorable Council and Representatives now
Assembled, as being done from the zeal I had in the said Service of Her
Majesty, and her good Subjects here.

I Remain your most humble and obedient Servant, Benjamin Church.

This Nights Service being over immediately Col. Church leaves a sufficient
guard with Gourdan, and the other Prisoners, moved in some Whale-boats with the
rest; and as they were going spied a small thing upon the Water, at a great
distance, which proved to be a birch Canoo, with two Indians in her; the
Colonel presently ordered the lightest boat he had to make the best of her way
and cut them off from the Shore: but the Indians perceiving their design run
their Canoo a shore and fled. Col. Church fearing they would run directly to
Sharkee made all the expedition imaginable; but it being ebb and the water low,
was obliged to land and make the best of their way through the woods, hoping to
intercept the Indians, and get to Sharkee's house before them; which was two
Miles from where our Forces landed. The Colonel being Ancient and Unwildy,
desired Sergeant Edee to run with him, and coming to several Trees fallen,
which he could not creep under or readily get over, would lay his breast
against the Tree the said Edee turning him over, generally had Cat luck,
falling on his feet, by which means kept in the Front: and coming near to
Sharkee's house, discovered some French and Indians making a Wair in the River,
and presently discovered the two Indians aforementioned, who called to them at
work in the River; told them there was an Army of English and Indians just by;
who immediately left their work and ran, endeavoring to get to Sharkee's
house; who hearing the noise, took his Lady and Child, and ran into the woods.
Our Men running briskly fired and killed one of the Indians, and took the rest
Prisoners. Then going to Sharkee's house found a Woman and Child, to whom they
gave good quarter: and finding that Madam Sharkee had lest her Silk Clothes and
fine linen behind her, our Forces was desirous to have pursued and taken her:
But Col Church fothid them, saying he would have her run and suffer, that she
might be made sensible, what hard ships our poor People had suffered by them,
etc. Then proceeded to examine the Prisoners newly taken, who gave him the same
account he had before; of the Indians being up at the Falls, etc. It being just
Night prevented our Attacking of them that Night. But next Morning early they
moved up to the Falls (which was about a Mile higher:) But doubtless the Enemy
had some Intelligence by the two aforesaid Indians, before our Forces came, so
that they all got on the other side of the River and left some of their goods
by the Waterside, to decoy our Men, that so they might fire upon them; which
indeed they effected: But through the good Providence of God never a Man of ours
was killed; and but one slightly wounded. After a short dispute Col. Church
ordered that every Man might take what they pleased of the Fish which lay
bundled up, and to burn the rest, which was a great quantity. The Enemy seeing
what our Forces were about; and that their stock of Fish' was destroyed, and
the season being over for getting any more, set up a hedious Cry, and so ran
all away into the woods; who being all on the other side of the River, ours
could not follow them. Having done, our Forces Marched down to their Boats at
Sharkee's, and took their Prisoners, Bever, and other Plunder which they had
got, and put it into their Boats, and went down to Gourdams house, where they
had left Lieut. Col. Gorbam and Maj Hilton, with part of the Forces to guard
the Prisoners; (and kept a good look-out for more of the Enemy) who upon the
Colonels return, gave him an account that they had made no discovery of the
Enemy since he left them, etc. Just then Her Majefly's Ships and Transports
arriving. The Commanders of Her Majesty's Ships told Gol. Church that they had
orders to go directly for Port Royal Gut, and wait the coming of some
Store-Ships, which were expected at Port Royal from France; and Col. Church
advising with them, proposed that it was very expedient and serviceable to the
Crown, that Capt. Southack in the Province Galley should accompany them, which
they did readily acquiesce with him in. Upon which the Colonel immediately
embarked his Forces on board the Transports, and himself on board Capt. Jarvis;
ordering the Commissary of the Stores, the Minister, Surgeons and Pilots all to
embark on board the same Vessel with him; ordering all the Whale boats to be
put on board the Transports, and then all to come to Sail. The Ships standing
away for Port Royal Gut, and Col, Church with the Transports for Menis: In
their way the Colonel inquired of the Pilot -- Fellows, What depth of Water
there was in the Crick near the Town of Menis? He answered him that there was
Water enough near the Town to flote that Vessel they were in at low Water, So
when coming near, Col. Church observed a Woody Island between them and the
Town, that they run up on the backside of the said Island, with all their
Transports undiscovered to the Enemy, and came to Anchor. Then the Colonel and
all his Forces embarked in the Whale boats it being late in the day moved
directly for the Town, and in the way asked for the Pilot, whom he expected was
in one of the Boats but he had given him the slap and tarried behind. The
Colonel not knowing the difficulties as might attend their going up to the
Town; immediately sent Lie^^. Giles, who could speak French, with a Flag of
Truce up to the Town with a Summons, which was writ before they landed,
expecting their surrender; which is as follows.

Aboard Her Majesty's Ship Adventure near the Gut of Menis, June 20. 1704
An agreement made by the Field Officers commanding Her Majesty's Forces for
the present Expedition against the French Enemies, and Indians Rebels.
Agreed.

THat a Declaration or Summons be sent on Shore at Menis and Port Royal, under
a Flag of Truce. Particularly, We declare to you, the many Cruelties and
Barbarities that you and the Indians have been guilty of toward us, in laying
waste our Country here in the East at Casco, and the Places Adjacent:
Peculiarly, the Horrid action at Deerfield this last Winter, in Killing,
Massacring, Murdering and Scalping without giving any notice at all, or
opportunity to ask quarter at your Hands; and after all carrying the Remainder
into Captivity in the height of Winter (of which they killed many in the
Journey,) and exposed the rest to the hardships of Cold and Famine, worse than
death it self. Which Cruel^ies we are yet every day exposed unto, and exercised
withal.

We do also declare, That we have already made some beginnings of Killing and
Scalping some Canada Men (which we have not been wont to do or allow) and are
now come with a great number of English and Indians, all Volunteers, with
resolutions to subdue you, and make you sensible of your Cruelties to us by
treating you after the same manner.

At this time we expect our Men of War and Transport Ships to be at Port Royal.
(we having but lately parted with them.)

In the last place, We do declare to you, That inasmuch as some of you have
shown kindness to our Captives, and Expressed a love to and desire of being
under the English Government, We do therefore notwithstanding all this, give
you timely Notice, and do demand a Surrender immediately, by the laying down
your Arms, upon which we promise very good Quarter; if not, you must expect the
utmost Severity.

Benjamin Church Colonel. John Goreham Lieut. Col. Withrop Hilton Major.


To the Chief Commander of the Town of Menis, and the Inhabitants thereof, and
we expect your answer positively within an hour.
Then moving to the Crick expecting to have had Water enough for the Boats, as
the Pilot had informed them, but found not Water enough for a Canoo; so were
obliged to land, intending to have been up at the Town Before the hour was out,
that the Summons expressed: (For their return was, That if our Forces would not
hurt their Estates, that then they would Surrender, if otherwise intended, they
should fight for them, etc.) But meeting with several Cricks near 20 or 30 foot
deep, which were very Muddy and Dirty, so that the Army could not get over
them; was obliged to return to their Boats again, and wait till within Night
before the Tide served for them to go up to the Town; and then intended to go
up pretty near the Town, and not to fall on till Morning, being in hopes that
the banks of the Cricks would sheker them from the Enemy: but the Tides rising
so high exposed them all to the Enemy; who had the Trees and Woods to be-friend
them. And so came down in the Night and fired smartly at our Forces; but Col.
Church being in a Pinis that had a small Cannon placed in the head, ordered it
to be charged several times, with Bullets in small bags, and fired at the
Enemy, which made such a rattling amongst the Trees, that caused the Enemy to
draw off; and by the great Providence of Almighty God not one of our Forces was
hurt that Night; (but as I have been informed they had one Indian killed, and
some others wounded, which was some discouragement to the Enemy.) Next Morning
by break of Day, Col. Church ordered all his Forces, (and placed Maj. Hilton on
the right wing,) to run all up driving the Enemy before them, who leaving their
Town to our Forces, but had carried away the best of their Goods (which were
soon found by our Soldiers.) The bulk of the Enemy happening to lie against
our right Wing caused the hottest dispute there, who lay behind Logs and Trees,
till our Forces, and Maj. Hilton who led them, came on upon them, and forced
them to run; and notwithstanding the sharp firing of the Enemy at our Forces,
by the repeated Providence of God there was never a Man of ours killed or
wounded. Our Soldiers not having been long in Town before they found
considerable quantities of Strong Drink (both Brandy and Claret) and being very
greedy after it, especially the Indians, were very disorderly, firing at every
Pig, Turkey or Fowl they saw, of which were very plenty in the Town; which
endangered our own Men: Col. Church perceiving the disorder, and firing of his
own Men, ran to put a stop to it, had several shot come very near him; and
finding what had occasioned this disorder, commanded his Officers to knock out
the heads of every Cask of Strong Liquor they could find in the Town, to
prevent any further disturbance amongst his Army; knowing it was impossible to
have kept it from them, especially the Indians, if it was saved, etc. Then some
of the Army who were desirous to pursue the Enemy, having heard them driving
away their Cattle, Requested the Colonel to let them go; who did: and gave them
their orders. Capt. Cook, and Capt. Church to lead the two Wings, and Lieut.
Barker who led the Colonels Company in the Center: and the said Capt. Cook and
Capt. Church desired Lieut. Barker not to move too fast; so that he might have
the benefit of their assistance, if he had occasion; but the said Lieutenant
not being so careful as he should have been, or at least was too eager, was
shot down, and another Man; which were all the Men that were killed in the
whole Expedition. Toward Night Col. Church ordered some of his Forces to pull
down some of the Houses, and others to get Logs and make a Fortification for
his whole Army to lodge in that Night, that so they might be together: and just
before Night ordered some of his Men to go see if there were any Men in any of
the Houses in the Town; if not, to set them all a fire: which was done, and the
whole Town seemed to be of a fire all at once, etc. The next Morning the
Colonel gave orders to his Men to dig down their Dams, and let the Tide in to
destroy all their Corn, and every thing that was good, according to his
Instructions; and to burn the Fortification which they had built the Day
before: And when the Tide served to put all their Plunder which they had got
into the Boats. Then ordering his Soldiers to March at a good distance one
from another; which caused the Enemy to think that there was not less than a
thousand Men (as they said afterward:) and that their burning of the
Fortification, and doing as they did, caused the Enemy to think that they were
gone clear off and not to return again. But it proved to the contrary, for Col.
Church and his Forces only went aboard their Transports, and there staid till
the Tide served; in the Night embarked on board their Whale-boats, landed some
of his Men, expecting they might meet with some of the Enemy mending their
Dams; which they did, and with the Boats went up another branch of the River,
to another Town or Village; upon such a surprise took as many Prisoners as they
could desire. And it happened that Col. Church was at the French Captains House
when two Gentlemen that came Post from the Governor of Port Royal to him, who
was the Chief Commander at Menis, with in Express to send away two Companies of
Men to Defend the Kings Fort there; and to give him an account, That there was
three English Men of War come into Port Royal Gut or Harbor; and that the Men
sent for must be Posted away with all speed. Col. Church, as was said before,
being there, treated the two Gentlemen very hansomely, and told them, He would
send them back again Post to their Master upon his business; and bid them give
him his hearty thanks for sending him such good News, that part of his Fleet
was in so good a Harbor. Then reading the Summons to them that he had sent to
Menis. Further added, That their Master the Governor of Port Royal must
immediately send away a Post to the Governor of Canada at Quebeck, to prevent
his further sending any of his cruel and bloody French and Salvages, as he had
done lately upon Deerfield, where they had committed such horrible and bloody
outrages upon those poor People, that never did them any harm, as is
intolerable to think of; and that for the future, if any such Hostilities were
made upon our Frontier Towns, or any of them, He would come out with a thousand
Salvages, and Whale boats convenient, and turn his back upon them, and let his
Salvages Scalp and Roast the French; or at least treat them as their Salvages
had treated ours: Also gave them an account of part of that action at
Passa^^^ado, and how that his Soldiers had Killed and Scalp'd some Canada Men
there, and would be glad to Serve them so too, if he would permit them. Which
terrifyed them very much, etc. The two French Gentlemen that came Post made
solemn Promises that they would punctually do the Colonel's Message to their
Governor. So with the desire of the French People there that the Governor
might have this Intelligence, Col. Church dismissed them, and sent them away;
telling the same Story to several of the Prisoners, and what they must expect
if some speedy course was not taken up prevent further outrages upon the
English. The number of Prisoners then Present (which were considerable) did
unanimously entreat of Col. Church, that he would take them under the
Protection of the Crown of England; making great Promises of their fidelity to
the same, begging with great Agony of Spirit to Save their Lives, and to
protect them from his Salvages, whom they extremely dreaded: As to the matter
of the Salvages, He told them, It would be just Retaliation for him to permit
his Salvages to treat the French in the same manner, as the French with their
Salvages treated our friends in our Frontier Towns: But as to his taking them
under the Protection of the Crown of England, he utterly refused it, urging to
them their former Perfidiousness; they also urging to him, that it would be
impossible for any French to live any where in the Bay of Fundy, if they were
not taken under the English Government; for with the benefit of those
Whale-boats, (as the English called them) they could take and destroy all their
People in the Town of Menis in one Night: But he replied to them, It should
never be; alleging to them that when they were so before, when Port Royal was
taken last by the English that it proved of very ill consequence to the Crown
of England, and the Subjects thereof in our Frontiers; for that our English
Traders supplying them; enabled them (which opportunity they improved) to
supply the Indians our bloody Enemies; and therefore he could make no other
Terms of Peace with them than that; if they the French at Menis, Signect^ and
Canada, would keep at home with their bloody Salvages, and not commit any
Hostilities upon any of our Frontiers, we would return home and leave them; for
that we lived a great distance off, and had not come near them to hurt them now
had not the blood of our poor Friends and Brethren in all the Frontiers of our
Province cried for Vengeance; especially that late unheard of Barbarity
committed upon the Town of Deerfield; which wrought so generally on the hearts
of our People, that our Forces came out with that Unanimity of Spirit, both
among the English and our Salvages, that we had not, nor needed a Pressed Man
among them. The Colonel also telling them, That if ever hereafter any of our
Frontiers East or West were Molested by them, as formerly, that he would (if
God spared his Life,) and they might depend upon it, Return upon them with a
thousand of his Salvages, if he wanted them, all Volunteers, with our
Whale-boats, and would pursue them to the last Extremity. The Colonels warm
discourse with them wrought such a consternation in them, which they discovered
by their P^nick fears and trembling, their hearts sensibly heating, and rising
up a^ it were ready to choke them; confessed they were all his Prisoners, and
begged of him, for JESUS sake, to Save their Lives, and the Lives of their poor
Families; with such melting Terms as wrought relentings in the Colonels Breast
toward them; but however, he told them, That his intent was to carry as many
Prisoners home as he could, but that he had taken so many, they were more than
he had occasion for, nor desired any more; and therefore he would leave them.
The Colonel resolving the next day to complete all his action at Menis, and so
draw off. Accordingly, sent his orders to Col. Goreham and Maj Hilton, with all
the English Companies both Officers and Soldiers, except some few, which he
thought he might have occasion for to go with the Indians in the Whale-boats up
the Eastward River, where a third part of the Inhabitants Lived; that so he
might prevent any reflection made on them, in leaving any part of the Service
undone. And therefore in the evening ordered all the Whale boats to be laid
ready for the Nights Service; and accordingly when the Tide Served, he went
with his Indians up the River, where they did some spoil upon the Enemy going
up. In the Morning several of their Transports came to meet them, to their
great rejoicing, on whom they went on Board, and soon came up with the whole
Fleet, with whom they joined, bending their course directly toward Port Royal,
where they were ordered. Coming to Port Royal Gut where their Ships were, and
calling a Council according to his Instructions, drew up their result: Which is
as follows.

Present all the Field Officers and Captains of the Land Forces. Aboard the
Province Galley, 4th July 1704. In Port Royal Harbor.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, having deliberately considered the
cause in hand, whether it be proper to Land all our Forces to offend and
destroy as much as we can at Port Royal, all or any part of the Inhabitants
thereof, and their Estates, We are of Opinion, that it is not for our Interest
and Honor, and the Countries whom we Serve, to Land or expose our Selves; but
quit it wholly, and go on about our other business we have to do, for this
Reason, That we Judge our Selves Inferior to the Strength of the Enemy; and
therefore the Danger and Risque we run, is greater than the advantage we can,
or are likely to obtain, seeing the Enemy has such timely Notice, and long
opportunity to Provide themselves against us, by our Ships lying here in the
Road about Twelve Days, before we could join them from Menis, where we were
during that time, and being so very meanly provided with necessaries convenient
for such on Undertaking with so small a Number of Men, not being above Four
hundred capable and fit for Service to Land; and understanding by all the
Intelligence we can get from both English and French Prisoners, that the Fort
is exceeding Strong.

John Goreham Lieut.Col. Winthrop Hilton Major. Jos. Brown James Cole John Cook
Isaac Myrick John Harradon Constant Church John Dyer Joshua Lamb Caleb
Williamson Edward Church.

Having, Pursuant to my Instructions taken the advice of the Gentlemen above
Subscribed, and considering the weight of their Reasons, I do Concur therewith.
Benj Church.
WHereas Col. Church has desired our Opinions, as to the Landing the Forces at
Port Royal, they being but 400 Effective Men to Land, and by all the
Information both of French and English Prisoners, the Enemy having a greater
number of Men, and much better provided to Receive, than they are to Attack
them, We do believe it is for the Service of the Crown, and Preservation of Her
Majesty's Subjects to act as above mentioned.

Thomas Smith. Geo. Rogers. Cypryan Southack.




After this, they concluded what should be next done; which was, that the Ships
should stay some Days longer at Port Royal Gut, and then go over to Mount
Desert Harbor, and there stay till Col Church with his Transports came to
them. Being all ready, the Colonel with his Transports and Forces went up the
Bay to Signecto, where they needed not a Pilot, being several of them well
acquainted there: (and had nor met with so many difficulties at Menis, had it
not been that their Pilot deceived them; who knew nothing of the matter, kept
out of the way and Landed not with them, etc.) And coming to Signecto, the
Enemy were all in Arms ready to receive them, Col. Church Landing his Men; the
Commander of the Enemy waving his Sword over his head, bid a Challange to them:
The Colonel ordering his two Wings to March up a-pace, and come upon the backs
of the Enemy, himself being in the Center, and the Enemy knowing him, (having
been there before) Shot chiefly at him; (but through Gods goodness received no
harm, neither had he one Man killed, nor but two slightly wounded) and then ran
all away into the Woods, and left their Town with nothing in it; having had
timely Notice of our Forces, had carried all away out of the reach of our Army;
for Col. Church while there with part of his Forces Ranged the Woods, but to no
purpose: Then returning to the Town, did them what spoil he could; according to
his Instructions, and so drew off, and made the best of their way for
Passamequado, (and going in) in a great Fog, one of their Transports ran upon a
Rock, but was soon got off again. Then Col. Church with some of his Forces
embarked in their Whale-boats, and went amongst the Islands, with an intent to
go to Sharkee's where they had destroyed the Fish; but observing a Springgy
place in a Cove, went on Shore to get some Water to drink, it being a Sandy
beach, they espied Tracks, the Colonel presently ordered his Men to scatter,
and make a search; soon found De Boisses Wife, who had formerly been Col.
Church's Prisoner, and carried to Boston; but returned, who seemed to be very
glad to see him: She had with her two Sons that were near Men grown; the
Colonel ordering them a part, Examined the Woman first, who gave him this
account following, That she had lived there-abouts ever since the Fleet went
by, and that she had never seen but two Indians since, who came in a Cando from
Norrigiwock; who asked her, what made her to be there alone? She told them; She
had not seen a French Maninor an Indian except those two since the English
Ships went by. Then the Indians told her there was not one Indian left except
those two, who belong to the Gut of Cancer, on this side of Canada: for the
Friars coming down with the Indians to Monsieur Gordans, and finding the
Frenchmen slain, and their Hair spoiled, being Scalp'd, put them into a great
Consternation; and the Fryerstold them it was impossible for them to live there
abouts, for the English with their W^^le-(...) would serve them all so; upon
which they all went up to Norrigiwock: Also told her that when the English came
along through Penobscot, they had swept it of the Inhabitants, as if-it had been
swept with a Broom, neither French nor Indians escaping them: Further told her,
That when their Fathers the Friars, and the Indians met together at Norrigiwock
they called a Council, and the Friars told the Indians, That they must look out
for some other Country, for that it was impossible for them to live there; also
told them there was a River called Mossippos where they might live quietly and
no English come near them: It being as far beyond Canada as it was to it, etc.
and if they wodid go and live there, they would live and dye with them, but if
not they would leave them, and never come near them again. Whereupon they all
agreed to go away; which they did, and left their Ruff household stuff, and Corn
behind them, and went all, except those two for Canada. Also her Sons giving
the same Intelligence, so we had no reason to think but that it was true. Col.
Church having done what he could there, Embarked on board the Transports and
went to Mount Desert, where he expected to have met with the Ships from Port
Royal Gut; and going into the Harbor at Mount Desert, found no Ships there,
but a Runlet rid off by a line in the Harbor, which he ordered to be taken up,
and opening of it found a Letter, which gave him an account that the Ships were
gone home for Boston. Then he proceeded and went to Penobscot; where being
come, made diligent search in those Parts for the Enemy, but could not find or
make any discovery of them, or that any had been there since he left those
Parts, which caused him to believe what De Boisses Wife had told him was true.
(I will only by the way just give a hint of what we heard since of the Effects
of this Expedition, and then proceed.) [First, That the English Forces that
went next to Norrigiwock found that the Enemy was gone, and had left their Ruff
household stuff and Corn behind them; also not long after this Expedition, there
were several Gentlemen sent down from Canada to concert with our Governor
about the settling of a Cartile for the Exchange of Prisoners; and that the
Governor of Canada has never since seet down any Army upon our Frontiers (as I
know of) except some times a Scout of Indians to take some Prisoners, that he
might be informed of our State, and what we were acting etc. and always took
care that the Prisoners so taken should be Civily Treated, and safely Returned,
as I have been informed; that some of the Prisoners that were taken gave an
account; so that we have great cause to believe that the Message Col. Church
sent by the two French Gentlemen from Menis to the Governor of Port Royal took
Effect, and was a means to bring Peace in our borders, etc.] Then Col. Church
with his Forces embarked on board the Transports, and went to Cases Bay, where
they met with Capt. Galop in a Vessel from Boston, who had brought Col Church
further Orders; which was to send some of his Forces up to Norrigiwock in
pursuit of the Enemy; but he being sensible that the Enemy were gone from
thence, and that his Soldiers were much wore-out and fategu'd in the hard
Service they had already done, and wanted to get home, called a Council, and
agreed all to go home, which accordingly they did. To Conclude this Expedition,
I will just give a hint of some treatment Col. Church had before and after he
came home: for all his great Expenses, Fategues and Hardships in and about this
Expedition, (viz) He received of his Excellency Fifteen Pounds as an earnest
Penny toward Raising of Volunteers; and when he came to receive his Debenture
for his Colonels Pay, there was ^. 4 d. due to him; and as for his Captains
Pay, and Man Jack he has never received any thing as yet. Also after he came
home some ill minded Persons did their endeavor to have taken away his Life,
for that there was some of the French Enemy Killed this Expedition: but his
Excellency the Governor, the Honorable Council and House of Representatives
saw cause to Clear him, and gave him Thanks for his good Service done.

FINIS.

