Mr. John Barnard's SERMON On PSALM CIII. 1.

THE Nature and Manner OF Man's Blessing GOD; With Our OBLIGATIONS thereto.

A SERMON Preached at Salem, upon a Public Thanksgiving, the Thursday after
the Death of the Reverend, Mr. GEORGE CURWIN; Who departed this Life, November.
23 d. 1717. In the 35th Year of his Age.

By JOHN BARNARD, A.M. Colleague Pastor to the First Church of CHRIST in
Marblehead.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Crump, for Samuel Gerrish, and Sold at his Shop in
Cornhill. 1717.

To the Honorable Col. Samuel Brown, Esquire One of His Majesty's Council for the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.
SIR,
Y OUR peculiar influence in Introducing the Reverend Mr. George Curwin into
the Work of the Ministry in Salem, (happy in being the Seat of his Birth and
Labors,) seems to have been under the special Direction of Heaven; and speaks
Your near view of the Importance of that Sacred Trust, and your true Concern to
transmitt Religion, in its Greatest Purity, to the Rising Generation: as Your
Affliction for his Loss does, Your high Esteem of His Personal Merit, and Your
just sense of the awful Frown of Divine Providence, in so speedy a Removal of
Him from amongst you.

AND since Your true Value for so Great and Good a Man, has lead You to demand
this faint Sketch, which the Public Thanksgiving, my short Notice, and my own
Sorrows, would allow me to give of Him; that You might leave the Memory of His
Worth, and Your own Veneration for Him, to admiring Posterity; Duty obliges me
thus to submit it to the Direction of His Patron.

WHICH I do, with my earnest Prayers, That the Great Shepherd of the Sheep,
would afford His most tender Compassions to the Bereaved Flock, You belong to;
lead it in a right way; and bestow an Accomplished Gift of Heaven upon it, that
may indeed Succeed Him in His Virtues, and enjoy a double Portion of the same
Good Spirit which rested upon Him: make You particularly Instrumental, equal to
Your Advantages, in promoting the Peace, Holiness, and Flourishing of the
Church; enrich You, and Yours, with the Fullness of the Blessings of the Gospel
of Peace here, and with an Unperishable Inheritance in the World to Come.

Your Honor's Most Humble and Obedient Servant; John Barnard.
Marblehead, Dec. 2. 1717.
THE Nature and Manner Of Man's Blessing GOD.
PSALM CIII. 1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me, Bless His
Holy Name.
THE Great Intention of this Psalm is, to Dispose us for the noble Employments
of the Heavenly World, where the Perfected Spirits, (among whom our Deceased
Brother bears a joyful part,) are incessant and unwearied in their Eternal
Acknowledgments, their Hallelujahs and Adorations to their Almighty Sovereign,
the Immense Fountain of their Blessedness. Here therefore the Holy Psalmist
begins the Melody; and with an elevated Note raises his own Devotion, summoning
all his Powers to engage herein; and excites the Reasonable and Religious World
to join in the Harmony, that there may be one constant and endless Symphony in
the Celebration of the Praises of our God.

This is the Duty and Service which Men and Angels owe to their Exalted
Sovereign, a Sacrifice truly grateful and pleasing to Him, the best exercise of
their Powers, and the height of their Felicity.

THE Arguments which the Psalmist uses to enforce this Exhortation, as they
abound with sufficient Consolation, to revive our drooping Spirits, and render
us sedate and easy under the most weighty Afflictions, that break in upon us in
a mutable World; so are they truly strong and powerful upon the Devout
Ingenuous, to pay this reasonable Homage to their Supreme Lord, and Gracious
Benefactor.

HE argues from the Gracious Nature of God, and the stability of His Covenant
and promised Mercy; he argues from the Consideration of the Divine Beneficence,
to ourselves in particular, and to the Church of God in the World: he argues
from the Divine Sov'reignty. Empire and Dominions over all Visible and
Invisible Worlds; the active Spirits that minister round His Throne, who do His
Commandment, hearkening to the voice of His Word; and all His other Works in
all places of His Dominion, which silently speak His Praise.

AND through the whole, how grave and weighty are his Accents? and yet how brisk
and lively do his Notes run? while his Song is adorned with so many beautiful
Ideas of a GOD, as are enough to lay every Evil Spirit, and keep on the joyful
Sound, triumphant over the noisy Discords of our mournful passions.

ONE would be ready to think, that the Holy Psalmist was reduced to our present
necessity, when we consider him in the midst of a Song of Praise touching the
heavier Airs; as though, like us, he were under the sensible Conviction,
(possibly by the Loss of his Absalem,) that a Man though never so well furnished
and endowed, and never so dear to us, yet his days are as Grass; as a flower of
the Field, so he flourishes; the wind passes over it and it is gone, and the
place thereof shall know it no more. But what a sweet Harmony does he compose
to this? when he meditates, that though God thus chide, yet He will not keep His
Anger for ever; He deals not with us after our Sins, nor rewards us according
to our Iniquities; He knows our frame, and pittieth us as a Father pittieth his
Children: so does he raise himself above the Melancholy, stretch his pinions
and soar away to the Everlasting Mercies, and the Righteousness of God to
Childrens Children.

SO far should any present Afflictions he might labor of, be from interrupting
his Acknowledgments to his God, or make him forgetful of His Benefits, that
even these shall become a part of his Song, and he knows how to Bless the Lord
under them. And so I return to my Text: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that
is within me, Bless His Holy Name. Where we have,

1. A Duty Excited to; Bless the Lord, Bless His Holy Name. A high Duty, and
always incumbent on us in our various Conditions and Circumstances of Life; and
to be performed in a more set and solemn manner in times of remarkable
Prosperity or Adversity; as will easily be seen when in its proper place we
consider the nature of this Duty.

2. THE manner of our performing this Duty in directed, viz. with our Souls,
and all that is within us. So the Psalmist calls upon himself, and repeats the
(...) again and again, and so should we: and we need to Chastize ourselves for
our sloth and negligence, in not returning to the Lord answerable to the
Benefits received from Him, and our want of a suitable Deportment when under
His Afflicting Hand.

3. THE Reasons by which the Duty is enforced: It Is our Lord whom we are to
Bless; and His Name, which is Great and worthy to be Praised; is Holy, and to
be Reverenced and Adored with Sincerity and Humility of Soul. His Name; that is
God considered in Himself, and the transcendent Excellencies of His Nature. His
Name; God considered as manifesting Himself to us in His works of Mercy or of
Judgment. So are we to Sing of Mercy and of Judgment. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and all that is within me, Bless His Holy Name.

IN the further Prosecution of these Words I shall by Divine Assistance,
endeavor these Three change; viz.

I. TO show what is meant by Blessing the Name of the Lord, which will open to
us the nature of this Duty, and let us see what it is to Bless God.

II. I shall mention some Reason why we should Bless the Lord; which will show
us our Obligation to the Duty.

III. I shall set before you after what manner this Duty is to be performed by
us.

According to this method I am,

I. To show what is meant by Blessing the Name of the Lord, or when we may be
said to Bless God. The phrase to Bless God must always be understood with
certain Limitations and Restrictions; as will be seen by taking a view of the
various Acceptations of it, as it respects the several Relations of them that
Bless and those that are Blessed.

1. IT IS used from Superiors to their Inferiors; which indeed is the most
proper use of the phrase to Bless: and it means the Superiors conferring upon
the Inferior such Good things as he absolutely needs for his well being, and
which he can in no other way come at the possession of. And so it is most truly
applicable to God, who only can properly and in a strict sense be said to
Bless; who Blesses His People by conferring upon them such Temporal and
Spiritual Blessings, which none but He can bestow. Thus when God tells Moses
how Aaron in His Name should Bless and People, we find it to mean the
Bestowment of the Divine Favor upon them. Numb. VI. 24, 25, 26. The Lord Bless
thee, and keep thee, the Lord make His Face shine upon thee, and be gracious
unto thee; the Lord lift up His Countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And
hence God Himself says to Abraham, Genesis XXII. 17. In Blessing I will Bless
thee: which is Explained by declaring what great things He would do for him and
his Seed after him. And this made Jacob so earnest in his wrestling with the
Angel of the Covenant, and so resolutely cry out, I will not let thee go,
except thou Bless me, Genesis XXXII. 26.

2. SOMETIMES the phrase is used between Equals, who are said to Bless one an
other; as a Man his fellow Creature: and then it means either their mutual acts
of love and friendship, which the Laws of Justice and Charity oblige them to.
As when it is said, Matthew. V. 44. Bless them that Curse you: that is, let no ill
carriage of theirs who curse and persecute you, hinder you from doing all the
good offices of love and kindness to them which your Profession obliges you to,
and you mutually owe to one another. Or else it means our wishing well to one
another, and sincerely praying to God to Bless our FellowCreature. Hence we
read, Psalm. CXXIX. 8. The Blessing of the Lord be upon you, we Bless you in the
Name of the Lord. So Jacob called for the Children of his Son Joseph that he
might Bless them; Genesis XLVIII. 9. which he does in the form of a Solemn Prayer,
saying, God before whom my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac did walk; the God that
fed me all my life long unto this day; the Angel which redeemed me from all
Evil, Bless the Lads, verse 15, 16.

3. THE phrase to Bless is used from Inferiors to Superiors; and so I am lead
into the sense and meaning of it in my Text, viz. as Man's Blessing God.

NOW it is plain that in the two first senses we cannot be said to Bless God.
For, if thou be Righteous, what give thou Him, what receives He of thine
Hand, Job XXXV. 7.
. If He were hungry He would not tell thee; for the World is His, with the
fullness thereof Psalm L. 12.
. The Infinite God has all Everlastingly in Himself, that is Essential to His
own Glory and Happiness; and no additions can be made thereto by all that Men
or Angels are capable of.

NOR can we pretend to render to the Lord any proper mutual acts of Kindness.
We are Beholden to God for all that we have and are; in Him we live, move, and
have our being, Act. XVII. 28.
. and from Him, the Father of Lights, comes down every good and perfect Gift we
enjoy Jam. I. 17.
. But God is not, nor can He be Beholden to us for any thing. We are ever
Dependent and constantly in need of Him; But God is utterly independent upon
any thing out of Himself, and needs us not.

NOR can we so much as wish any thing to the Essential Glory and Happiness of
God, which He has not already and will never be without. Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to Perfection Job. XI.
7.
? And since our most stretched Conceptions are not able to reach the Infinite
fullness there is in God, how can we entertain a thought of any further degrees
of Perfection as necessary to complete the Glory of his Nature and the Felicity
of His State. So that in these respects God is exalted above all Blessing and
Praise Neh.IX.5.
. Yea He Iopabieth the Praises of His Israel Psalm.XXII.3.
: and His Saints Bless Him Psalm.CXLV.10.
.

THEY do so, either by Acknowledging the Perfections of the Divine Nature, and
speaking of His Greatness and the Glory of His Majesty; which is to Laud and
Praise His Name: Or, they do so by a grateful sense of the many Instances of
His Bounty, and the multiplied Benefits He communicates to them, and suitable
returns therefore; which is Thanksgiving; Or they do so, when under the
Afflicting Hand of God with Deep Humility and an entire Resignation of Soul
they maintain an awful sense of the Divine Supremacy, unbiased Rectitude and
unerring Wisdom; which is proper Adoration. In each of these senses Man may be
said to Bless God.

Thus,

1. WE Bless the Name of the Lord when we think highly of Him, and speak His
Praise. So the Psalmist, Psalm 34. 1. I will Bless the Lord at all times, His
Praise shall continually be in my mouth. And hence we find the Levites with
some of the Fathers saying to the People, Neh. IX. 5. Stand up and Bless the
Lord your God forever; and Blessed be thy Glorious Name; and then they go on to
celebrate His Praise in speaking of His Excellencies and the Glorious effects
of them. So David is said to Bless the Lord before all the Congregation, 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 10. Thine O Lord, is the Greatness, the Power, the Glory, the
Victory, and the Majesty, etc.

2. WE Bless God by our Thanksgiving; a thankful acknowledgment of His Mercies,
and suitable returns to Him therefore. Thus in this Psalm CIII. 2. Bless the
Lord O my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits. So the Psalm CXLV. which is a
Psalm of Thanksgiving, uttering the memory of the Goodness of God in the Care
and Kindness of Divine Providence unto all His Creatures, but especially them
that fear Him, begins ver.1. I will extol thee myGod, O King, and I will Bless
thy Name for ever and ever: and it concludes in the same strain; verse 21. My
mouth shall speak the Praise of the Lord, and let all flesh Bless His Holy Name
for ever and ever.

3. THUS we Bless God by a suitable Deportment under Divine Chastisements; when
from a sense of the Hand of God upon us, in all the Sorrows that befall us, we
are patient and submissive, silent and adoring, and our Corrections produce the
desired Effects in our Amendment. Thus we find even a Nebuchadnezzar, under a
sense of the Holy Hand of God which had lain heavy upon him, saying, Dan. IV.
34. I lift up mine eyes unto Heaven and my understanding returned to me, and I
Blessed the most High, and I praised and honored Him that lives for ever; and
this he does by acknowledging the Dominion and Sovereignty of God, and himself
as nothing before Him; none can stay His Hand, or say unto Him, what do
thou? His works are Truth and His ways Judgment; and those that walk in pride,
He is able to abase, ver. 35, 37. Well then may we except to find a Holy Job in
this Devout frame, when the heavy Tidings of his multiplied Losses roll in
thick upon him, till they are all completed in the fatal finishing stroke of
the untimely Death of his Children: In the Distress hereof, he arose and rent
his mantle and shaved his head, and fell down upon the Ground and Worshipped;
saying, God has given, and God has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the
Lord. Job I. 20, 21. Agreeable to the Psalmist, who under a sense of the Divine
Chidings, says, Bless the Lord, O my Soul. Thus we see what is meant by
Blessing the Name of the Lord. I pass to the Second thing proposed, viz.

II. TO mention some Reasons, why we should Bless the Name of the Lord; which
shows us our Obligation to this Duty. A High Duty it is, what God requires of
us, and well becomes us as Reasonable and Religious Creatures: what the Holy
Name of God, the Benefits we receive from Him, and His Relation to us,
challenges at our hands,

1. THE Holy Name of God, which is God Himself and His Adorable Excellencies
and Perfections demands the Tribute of Praise from us. The Name of God it is
God Himself, clothed with Light as with a Garment, and compassed with Glory as
with a Vesture. It Is Infinite Majesty and Greatness, Incomprehensible Power and
Wisdom, unrivalled Goodness Mercy and Truth and Holiness, possessing an
Universal and Everlasting Empire and Dominion. The Glorious Perfections of God
are each of them God Himself; His Nature so made known unto us; and are
therefore called His Name, because God discovers Himself to us by them, and
gives us some glimpse of His Glory; which appears so bright to the
contemplative mind, as to dazzle us with the Luster of them, and fill us with
holy Admiration and Love. All of this Name of God demands the Tribute of Praise
from us: for it is in itself truly Excellent and Glorious, a Beauty so
heightened and conspicuous, that the greatest created Excellency is but a
glimmering, mere Darkness compared with the unviewable Brightness of it. And
because the Name of God is so Excellent, it deserves our highest esteem and
constant praises, which is the least Homage we can give to a Being the
Perfections of whose Nature exceed our most enlarged conceptions, nor can
Angels approach the Seat of them without veiled Faces. So the Psalmist calls
upon all Creatures to Praise the Lord, for His Name alone is Excellent, His
Glory is above Earth and Heaven, Psalm. CXLVIII. 13.

THUS we are to Praise God for His Infinite Majesty and Greatness: For He is
High above all Gods, and none among the Sons of the Mighty may be likened unto
Him. Come let us Sing unto the Lord; let us make a joyful noise unto the rock
of our Salvation; for the Lord is a Great God, and a Great King above all Gods,
Psalm XCV. 1, 3. O Sing to the Lord a new Song, Sing unto the Lord all the
Earth, Sing unto the Lord, Bless His Name; Honor and Majesty are before Him,
Strength and Beauty are in His Sanctuary, Psalm. XCVI. 1, 2, 6. Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised, His Greatness is unsearchable, Psalm. CXLV. 3.

GOD is to be Praised for His uncontrollable and unlimitted Power and Might;
which is equal to His Will, and does whatsoever pleases Him in the Heavens,
the Earth, the Sea, and all Deep places; by which He stretched out the Heavens
like a Curtain, and laid the Beams of His Chambers upon the Waters, stretched
out the North over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing; before
whom the Pillars of Heaven tremble, and the Earth melts like wax at His
presence. Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord Glory and
Strength, give unto the Lord the Glory due unto His Name, Psalm.XXIX. 1,2. And
because God exalts Himself in His own Strength, therefore should we Sing and
Praise His Power, Psalm. XXI. 13.

THE Infinite Wisdom of God challenges our Praises. He is wife in Counsel as
well as wondrous in Working; who by wisdom made the Heavens; His Works also are
manifold, and in Wisdom has He made them all, and with equal Counsel and Design
orders all their Station and various mutations. To the only Wise God be the
Honor and Glory, 1 Timothy I. 17. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to Sing
Praises to our God; -- for His Understanding is Infinite, Psalm. CXLVII. 1, 5.

THUS God is to be Praised for His Essential Goodness and Mercy; who is Good,
and does Good even to all, and His tender Mercies are over all His Works: the
Goodness of whose Nature is the unfailing Fountain whence Men and Angels are
supplied with all those Streams that support them in Life and complete their
felicity; whose Mercy is high above the Heavens, and is the sure Basis of their
Comfort that put their Trust in Him. O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is
Good, for His Mercy endures for ever, Psalm. CVII. 1. And so, Psalm. CVIII init.
O God, my Heart is fixed, I will sing and give Praise, even with my Glory; I
will Praise thee, O God, among the People, and I will sing Praises unto thee
among the Nations; for thy Mercy is great above the Heavens.

'O the Truth and Fidelity of God is to be Praised: His unchangeable
Faithfulness to Himself, and to His Word and Promises. He is the Unchangeable
Jehovah, without variation or shadow of turning; whose Word is made fast in
Heaven, His Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds; the Word that has gone out
of His mouth remains steadfast for ever; He is of one Mind, and who can turn
Him. So the Psalmist, Psalm. C. 1, 5. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye
Lands, -- enter into His Courts with Praise, -- and Bless His Name, -- His
Truth endures to all Generations. And, Psalm. CXVII. is a short but full
Celebration hereof; O Praise the Lord, all ye Nations; Praise Him all ye
People, -- the Truth of the Lord endures for ever; Praise ye the Lord.

AND thus are we to Praise God for His unbiased Righteousness and Justice; the
Foundation of whose Throne is Righteousness and Judgment; and He is Righteous
in all His Works. Hence says the Psalmist, Psalm. XLVIII. 10. According to thy
Name, O God, so is thy Praise unto the Ends of the Earth; thy Right Hand is
full of Righteousness. And the CXLIX Psalm, seems to have been composed on
purpose to celebrate the Righteousness of God, even in the Judgments which He
executes in the World.

FINALLY the unspotted Holiness of God demands our Praises. Bless His Holy
Name; the Essential Purity of the Divine Nature, and the Holiness of His Works.
The Holiness of God is as the Brightness of all His other Perfections,
peculiarly the Glory of God; and shines Illustrious in His Word, and in all the
Works of His Hands. For this the Holy Angels Praise Him, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God Almighty, Rev. IV. 8. And so must we at the call of the Devout
Psalmist, Psalm. XCIX. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at His
Footstool, for He is Holy. And so, Psalm. XCVII. 12. Rejoice in the Lord, ye
Righteous, and give thanks at the Remembrance of His Holiness.

THUS do all the Glorious Perfections of God challenge our Praises; and when we
consider the Adorable Excellencies of the Divine Nature, harmonizing in the
Amazing wonders of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, as the Prospect is still
more amiable and pleasant, so our Praises should be the more raised; intensely
devout, and unwearied. And then,

2. THE Many and Great Benefits we receive from God lay us under Obligation to
a Dutiful Thanksgiving. Benefits from whomsoever communicated are an Obligation
upon the Receiver to Thank the Donor; and one would think, that it is the least
we can do to be sensible of the Favors we receive, and Thank the Author of
them. So it is accounted among Men. And the more and greater the Benefits
conferred upon us by our gracious Sovereign are; and the more multiplied and
extensive they are, the stronger are our Obligations to return our sincere and
hearty Thanksgiving. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all His
Benefits. To mention some of them, as they lie in a delightful variety, in this
Psalm.

(1.) THE Forgiveness of Sin; the justifying, and accepting of us to the Grace
of Adoption, and Reconciliation through the Propitiatory Sacrifice of our Blessed
Redeemer, is such a matchless Benefit as we are for ever obliged to Bless the
Holy Name of God for. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who Forgiveth thine
Iniquities, ver. 3. It Is God only that forgiveth Iniquity, and for the
Accomplishment of this Glorious work, has drawn out the Bowels of His Mercy to
us, and sent His Eternal Son to become on Offering and a Sacrifice for Sin; in
whom we have Redemption, through His Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sin,
according to the riches of His Grace. This is deservedly mentioned in the first
place, as the Fountain from whence all other Mercies flow. What an unspeakable
Gift in this to a miserable World? That the Eternal Father should make a
Sacrifice of His own Son; that through Him the chief of Sinners might have their
Iniquities forgiven, be justified before Him, and accepted as His Children. For
this are we obliged, and we can never enough Bless the Name of the Lord; This
should inspire our Breasts with Thankful Acknowledgments, and fill our Mouths
with Songs of Praise. O give Thanks unto the Lord, for His Mercy endures for
ever; so let the Redeemed of the Lord say. Psalm. CVII. 1, 2. O Lord, I will
praise thee, tho thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortest me, Isai. XII. 1. So sang the Holy Zacharias, Luke I. 68, 69.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for He has visited and Redeemed His People,
and has raised up an born of Salvation for us, in the House of His Servant
David, etc.

(2.) THE Health we enjoy is an Obligation upon us to return Thanks to God.
Bless the Lord, who Heals thy Diseases, ver. 3. Thus whether we consider God
as having actually Healed any of us of our Diseases; or as the God who only can
Heal, and who keeps us in Health. We are often, it may be the most of us,
laboring under indispositions, pains and maladies, incident to our frame and
brittle Constitution; and it may be we have sometimes been brought very Low,
even to the Edges of the Grave; but through the Goodness of God, we have had our
Pains assuaged, our Maladies cured, our Diseases Healed; and surely those of us
who have so experienced the Divine Goodness, will say, not unto us, not unto
us, but unto thy Name alone O Lord be all the Glory. He sent His Word, and
Healed them, O that Men would praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His
wonderful works to the Children of Men; and let them Sacrifice the Sacrifices
of Thanksgiving, and declare His works with rejoicing, Psalm CVII. 20, 21, 22.
The Living, the Living He shall Praise thee; as we desire to do this Day,
giving Thanks to God for that wonderful measure of Health He has favored our
Land with; and when Pestilential Distempers have set footing upon our Shoars,
God has spoken the Word, I will put none of these Diseases upon thee, for I am
the Lord that Heals thee, and they have not been able to walk abroad in
Darkness, nor wast at noon Day. I will thankfully say of the Lord He is our
refuge, and our fortress, our God, in Him will we trust; surely He has
delivered thee from the noisome pestilence, He has covered thee with His
feathers; -- only with thine Eyes have thou beheld it, -- no Evil has befallen
thee, neither (...) any Plague come nigh thy Dwelling, vid. Psalm. XCI.

(3.) THAT God Redeemeth our Life from Destruction is a further Bond upon us to
give Thanks unto Him and Bless His Name. See ver. 4. He is our Life, and the
Length of our Days, Deuteronomy. XXX. 20. And how often has He graciously interposed
to keep us in Life, and Lengthen out our Days, by giving His Angels charge over
us to keep us in all our ways, to bear us up, as in their Arms, least at any
time we should dash our feet against a Stone. Innumerable are the Snares and
Casualties that surround us, the least of which, armed with a permission from
God, would soon prey upon us. How often has the Divine Arm been put underneath
us, and saved us from the destructive Accidents which else would have broke in
upon us, unobserved by us? And many a time, may we now say, had not the Lord
been on our side we had been swallowed up by the Threatening Dangers, and the
proud Waves had gone over us, and the Deep had enclosed us: The Lord is thy
keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand, the Lord has preserved thee
from all Evil. It becomes us to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. XXXIV. ult. I will
Bless the Lord at all times, -- O magnify the Lord with me, I sought the Lord,
and He heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. He has done so
particularly in His Guard upon our Sea Coast, and the wonders He has wrought
for us there, for which we give thanks to His Name this Day. When the Sons of
Violence had invaded us, and the Cruel and Blood-thirsty lay hovering over us
with a formidable power; God has redeemed not only our Substance, but our
Lives from Destruction, by taking those Pirates into His own Hands, He blew
upon them in His Anger, and drove them with His fierce Tempest, till our Shoars
proved their Destruction. They went down into the Warers like lead, saving a
few that fell into our hands for an Example unto others. For this we take up
our Song of Praise in the Psalm. CXXIV. 6,7,8. Blessed be the Lord, who has not
given us a prey to their Teeth; our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare
of the Fowler, the Snare is broken and we are escaped: our Help is in the Name
of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. And Psalm. LXVI. 2,3,5,7,8,9. Sing forth
the honor of His Name, make His Praise Glorious; say unto God, how terrible
art thou in thy works? -- come and see the works of God; He is terrible in His
doings toward the Children of men; -- let not the Rebellions exalt themselves;
O Bless our God ye People, and make the voice of His Praise to be heard; which
holds our Soul in Life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.

(4.) GOD's crowning us with loving kindness and tender mercies calls upon us
to Bless His Holy Name, ver. 4. He encompasses His People with love and favor
as with a Shield, and through the Mercy of the Most High their Prosperity sits
like a Crown upon their Heads. His Fatherly Love and Affection takes care of
them, He gives them to see the Light of His Countenance, and to rejoice in His
Smiles. He has furnished us with those various Gifts and Qualifications which
are in some good measure suitable to our Posts and Employments. He gives and
spares many of our Delightful Friends with whom we solace ourselves, and take
counsel together. He orders our path for us, directs us in our way, and gives
us to see a Comfortable issue of our Labors and rejoice in the works of our
Hands. Blessed be the Lord my Strength, through whom the Sons of His People are
as Plants grown up in their Youth, their Daughters as Corner Stones, polished
after the similitude of a Palace: their Garners are full affording all manner
of Store; their Sheep bring forth Thousands, and ten thousands in their
Streets; their Oxen are strong to Labor; and there is no breaking in nor going
out, nor cause of complaining in their Streets, Psalm. CXLIV. 1, 12, 13, 14.

OR if we meet with adverse Circumstances, has not the tender Mercy of God been
exercised toward us? and His pity like that of a Father to His Children been
manifested to us under them? He chastises us only when it is needful, and then
in measure with His tenderest Compassion stirred by the feeling of our
Infirmities. He has punished us less than our Iniquities deserve; proportioned
our trials to our Strength; He has given forth Strength to encounter
Afflictions, supported us under our Difficulties, has found out a way for our
escape out of many of them, and we trust will make them all turn to our
Advantage. Thus does God crown us with loving kindness and tender mercy, and we
do all of us more or less experience it; that even in our worst Circumstances
we have yet so many Mercies as out weigh our Chastisements: and because of His
loving kindness, therefore our lip should praise Him, Psalm. LXIII. 3. Yea, we
should sing in the ways of the Lord, for great is the Glory of the Lord; though
the Lord be High yet He has respect unto the lowly; though I walk in the midst
of trouble thou will revive me; -- the Lord will perfect that which concerns
me, thy Mercy O Lord endures for ever, Psalm. CXXXVIII. 5. to the end.

(5.) THAT God satisfies our Mouth with Good things obliges us to
Thankfulness, ver. 5. All Eyes wait upon Him, and He gives them their Meat in
due season; He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear Him. From the
inexhaustible stores of His Goodness He communicates to us a full supply to all
our wants; and daily loads us with His Benefits. He gives us our Food and
Raiment, convenient for us, by which our frail Bodies are nourished and
refreshed, and guarded against the inclemencies of the Air and injuries of the
Weather. He deals forth unto us not sparingly and with a slack hand, barely
enough to keep Soul and Body together; but He allows us for our Convenience
Delight and Entertainment as well as for Necessity, giving us all things richly
to enjoy: though not for the satisfying our carnal greedy Appetites, and for the
pampering our unruly Lusts; yet for our comfortable support in the House of our
Pilgrimage and to carry us well to our Journeys end; and suffers us not to lack
any thing that would be Good for us Our Thank-Offerings would be due, if God
should bestow upon us no more than the crumbs that fall from His Table, but how
much more when He has spread so large a Table for us and so plentifully
furnished it, filling our Mouths with good things and our Hearts with
rejoicing. For this we are Assembled together to give thanks unto the Name of
the Lord, who has this Year so abundantly satisfied us with His Goodness; and
the more affectionate should our Acknowledgments be, the Smoke of our
BurntOffering ascend with the greater fervor, and our Peace Offerings be the
more Liberal, when we consider that the Heavens have dropped down fatness to us
in Answer, we trust, to our Ardent Prayers therefore. When the early scorching
Drought threatened utterly to lay waste our pleasant fruit, and burn up every
green thing, we cried unto the Lord our God, and our cry came up into His Holy
dwelling place, and He granted us our Request. Yea when our Pious Rulers had
but determined to call upon this People to seek the Lord in our Distress,
before we called the Lord answered us, and ever the solemn Day approached He
showered down upon us His plentiful Rain, by which the latter Herbage was
wonderfully recovered, and our Land has yielded a comfortable increase. --
Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion, unto Thee, shall the vow be performed,
O thou that bear Prayer; -- thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it, thou
greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water, thou
preparest them Corn when thou have so provided for it, -- thou blessest the
springing thereof; thou crownest the Year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop
fatness; they drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the little hills
rejoice on every side; the pastures are clothed with flocks, the valleys also
are covered over with Corn, they shout for Joy, they also Sing, Psalm. LXV. 1,
2, 9, to the end.

(6.) AND if God renews our Youth like the Eagle, this calls for our
Thanksgiving, ver. 5. This being an hard Text and difficult to be understood, I
shall only say upon it, that if any, who through the Favor of God are spared to
Old Age, under such Circumstances as calls for their Labor and Industry, yet
have their strength and vigor like that of Youth, and the Birds of prey,
continued to them answerable to their work in a time when the infirmities of
Age usually seal up the hands from Labor. Or if under the weakness of the Body
bowed down with Age, the intellectual Powers remain quick and lively as in the
vigor of Youth: Or if we suppose the Words to refer to the Resurrection state,
when our Bodies shall be raised, refined, and spiritualized: considering the
Words in either of these senses, in some or other of which Expositors generally
understand them, certainly it calls upon us to Bless the Lord, who so makes
the Man of an Hundred Years Old as a Child in Vigor, (Isai. LXV. 20.) or that
we hope to partake of the Glorious Resurrection of our Bodies, and the Blessed
Consequents of it.

(7.) THE Lord executes Righteousness and Judgment for all that are Oppressed,
ver. 6. Which I take to include in it, those Civil Liberties and Privileges,
which render a People safe and easy. When God raises them up Kings to be
nursing Fathers, and sets to Rule over them Able Men, fearing God and hating
Covetousness. When He gives the King His Judgments, and His Righteousness to
the Kings Son, and the under Officers, and they Judge the People with
Righteousness, and the Poor with Judgment; the Mountains bring forth Peace and
the little Hills by Righteousness; Justice is dispensed like Showers, and flows
down the Streets like a River, which refreshes the Earth, and makes the
Righteous to flourish.

AND surely this calls for our Thanksgivings this Day, That God has so
overruled Affairs among the Nations, and the Spirits of the People, as maugre
all the secret cabals against it, to bring to the Throne of Great Britain a
Protestant Prince of the Illustrious House of Hanover, under the Shadow of
whose Wise and Just Administrations we may set our selves down in quiet, and
joyfully eat of the fruit of our own Vine and Fig Tree, without the distressing
fears of the Usurpations of a Popish and consequently a Tyrannical Pretender;
That God has appeared in the Mount of Difficulty, as a Man of War subduing the
People under him, breaking the force of a powerful Invasion, by dispiriting
their weak Chiefs and baffling the Counsels of their Wise, and turning the Rout
back by the way by which they came, covering them with Shame and Contempt: that
He has more lately interposed His watchful Eye, to spy out the hidden works of
darkness, and bring to Light the dark design of intreaguing Statesmen, and
break to pieces the new formed Model for a Foreign Invasion; and that in the
midst of the Tumults of a strangely uneasy Faction at Home, and the envious
Contrivance of Popish Enemies Abroad, God has graciously preserved the Life of
our Sovereign King GEORGE, and His Royal Offspring, and now happily secured the
Crown upon His Head, and redeemed the Nation to that easy Tranquillity it enjoys
at this Day: And that we have those immediately over us, who seek our Welfare,
and Feed us according to the Integrity of their Hearts, and Guide us according
to the Skilfulness of their Hands; God also being with them to prosper them
therein; and our Borders flourish with peace. Let Israel rejoice in Him that
made them, and the Children of Zion be joyful in their King, Psalm. CXLIX. 2. I
will sing a new Song unto Thee, O God, upon a Psaltery, and an Instrument of
Ten Strings will I sing Praises unto thee; it is He that gives Salvation unto
Kings, who delivers David His Servant from the burtful Sword, Psalm. CXLIV. 9,
10. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things;
and blessed be His Glorious Name of ever, and let the whole Earth be filled
with His Glory. Amen and Amen, Psalm. LXXII. 18, 19.

(8.) TO add no more, He has made known His Ways unto Moses His Acts unto the
Children of Israel, ver. 7. Which I take to refer to the Revelation of the
Divine Will and Commandment; that unto them were committed the lively Oracles
of God; the Ark and Temple of the Lord was among them, and God had shown them
the Pattern of His House, the outgoing and the incoming thereof, and had
Consecrated His Priests to wait upon them at His Altar; with them had ratifyed
His Covenant, and given them the assured promise of the Messiah, the hope of
Israel and the Savior thereof.

AND has not God favored us with His Gospel, and visited these Ends of the
Earth, which once were regions of Darkness with a Great Light, and published in
our Ears the Glad Tidings of great Joy, that to us there is born a Savior? Has
He not reared up His Tabernacle among us, and multiplied His Synagogues in our
Land? Has He not prepared for us a River, by putting it into the Hearts of our
Fathers to lay the Foundations of the School of the Prophets, the Streams
whereof are many, run far and wide, and rejoice the whole City of our God? This
challenges our Thankful Acknowledgments, and for this we now lift up our hands
on high, and Bless the Name of the Lord. Great is the Lord and greatly to be
praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of His holiness: Beautiful for
Situation, the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion, in the sides of the
north, the City of the Great King: God is known in her palaces for a refuge;
Let Mount Sion rejoice, let the Daughters of Judah be glad, Psalm. XLVIII.
1,2,3, 11. I will sing of the mercy of the Lord for ever, for, Blessed are the
People that know the joyful Sound, that walk, O Lord, in the Light of thy
Countenance, Psalm. LXXXIX. 1, 15. We will go into His Tabernacle, we will
worship at His Footstool; -- for the Lord has chosen Zion, He has desired it
for His Habitation; this is my Rest for ever; here will I dwell for I have
desired it; -- I will also cloth her Priests with Salvation, and her Saints
shall shout aloud for Joy, Psalm. CXXXII. 7, 13, 14, 16. He showed His Word unto
Jacob, His Statutes and Judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with every
Nation, and as for His Judgments they have not known them: Praise ye the Lord,
Psalm. CXLVII. 19, 20.

AND if God has so smiled upon the Pious and Generous Endeavors of the
Government, as to open a door for the spreading of the Gospel in its Truth and
Purity among the Aboririginal Natives of our Eastern Country; it becomes us to
give Thanks unto the Lord, who opens the Gate of Righteousness, that the
People may go thereinto and Praise Him; this Gate of the Lord, into which the
Righteous enter: -- Blessed are they who so come in the Name of the Lord: and
Blessed be God who gives His Commandment on Earth, His Word runs swiftly;
who has given His Son for a Covenant to the People, and a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, to open the Blind Eyes, and be for Salvation to all the End of the
Earth.

To proceed,

3. THE Relation which God stands in to us, as our Creator, our Sovereign, and
our Judge, demands that we Bless His Name, by the most humble Submission and
Adoration.

FIRST, We owe this Duty to God as we are His Creatures, the Workmanship of His
Hands, which He has formed, and not we our selves. He made us for this very
end and purpose, to get to Himself a Great Name: This People have I formed for
my self to show forth my praise: says God. Isai. XLIII.21. And all the
Creatures on Earth do and shall Praise Him, in their way and manner, according
to their Nature and Capacities. It Is but just we give suitable acknowledgments
to Man for any curious piece of Workmanship he is the Author of; and how much
more ought we to Bless that God whose we are, and by whom we are fearfully and
wonderfully made, Psalm. CXXXIX. 14. God will have Glory from us whether we will
or no: Angels behold our Admirable contrivance, and Praise our Maker, as those
Morning Stars sang together when the Foundations of the World were laid. But we
are reasonable Creatures; and God expects an active Homage from us; that we
ourselves give Glory to Him. And that not only by the Celebration of His
Perfections appearing in our make, but in all the manifestations thereof in the
course of His Providence toward us. That we remember we are His Creatures, who
have our entire dependence upon Him; and accordingly pay the profoundest
Submission to Him, by a silent humble prostrate Adoration before Him, in what
form soever He sees cause to mould and fashion us. O come let us worship, and
bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our Maker: for He is our God, and we are
the People of His Pasture, the Sheep of His Hands, Psalm. XCV.6,7. Go down to
the House of the Potter; faith the Lord, -- the Vessel that He made of Clay was
marred in His Hands -- O House of Israel cannot I do with you as the Potter
says the Lord; as the Clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye in my Hands, Jer.
XVIII. init. God not only forms our Clay, but He gave Essence to it also, and
therefore our Obligation is the stronger to adore all the turns of His Hand.

SECONDLY, And this is part of that Natural Homage which we owe to God, as our
Sovereign Lord and King, whose right it is to Rule. We owe it to our Sovereign,
to Bless His Name all the ways we are capable of: to Praise Him who sits
upon the Circle of the Earth, and before whom the Inhabitants thereof are as
Grasshoppers. The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
Generations; Praise ye the Lord, Psalm. CXLVI.10. O clap your hands all ye
People; -- God is gone up with a Shout, the Lord with the sound of the Trumpet;
sing Praises to our God, sing Praises; sing Praises unto our King, sing
Praises: for God is the King of all the Earth; sing ye Praises to Him with
understanding, Psalm. XLVII. 1, 5, 6, 7. Can any thing be more decent, than
always to speak honorably of our high Sovereign? It equally becomes us to
speak of the Glory of His Majesty, and talk of His high Power; as to offer our
humble Petitions to His Majesty, for such Mercies as we want: and it is as much
a due Debt to our Sovereign, to Praise Him for the illustrious appearance of
His Perfections in the Works of Providence, as to bow before Him with our
humble Supplications.

AND we equally owe it to our Sovereign, to Bless His, Name, by paying the
profoundest Submission to His Will. For God has an Original and underived Right
to do what He pleases with us; and because the rights of His Sovereignty are
independent and necessarily in Him, therefore they are truly unalienable and
indefeasible. Hence the Divine Sovereignty and Lordship challenges it at our
Hand that we become all obedience and submission before Him; that under the
most dark and mysterious, the most weighty and grievous allotments of Divine
Rule and Government, we remember it is the Lord who has done it; who always does
all things in Righteousness and Wisdom; whose Government must be acknowledged
by us, by an entire resignment of ourselves and all our Interest to Him; saying
before Him, Here I am let the Lord do what seems Him Good, 2 Samuel XV. 26.
It Is as proper and necessary and Acknowledgment of our Dependence upon God, to
submit to His Hand, as to ask His Direction and Blessing; nature leads to them
both alike; and alike they are Commanded; and thus we Bless God, with mournful
Hearts; but humble ones; as truly as when we Sing His Praise with Joyful Lips.
And here lies the force of the Psalmist's reasoning; The Lord has prepared His
Throne in the Heavens, His Kingdom rules over all; Bless the Lord ye His
Angels, Bless the Lord ye His Hosts, Bless the Lord all His Works, Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, ver. 19, -- 22. So must we give unto the Lord this Adoration
and Submission, as the Tribute due unto His Name: this is the Testimony of our
Highest Esteem, and our Deepest Veneration for our Sovereign; what the Infinite
Distance between the most High God, and worms of the Dust requires; and a proof
of our attending our Duty around His Throne, thus to bow down and worship at
His Footstool.

FINALLY; The Consideration of our being accountable to God as our Judge
bespeaks it of us, to Bless the Name of the Lord. For here we are in a state of
Probation and Discipline; and the great design of all Gods dealings with us are
answerable hereto; that by Mercies on the one hand, and Chastisements on the
other, we might have our minds enlarged in the knowledge of God, and all the
Faculties and Powers conformed to this knowledge in a practical Service
Obedience and Submission to Him: and since we must at last be accountable to
Him, how we have behaved our selves in this state of Probation; what
Improvement we have made of His Providence toward us; what returns of
gratitude we have rendered Him for His many favors; what Impressions His
Chastisements have had upon us; what has been our Deportment under His Holy
Hand; and how far a Life of Holiness and the Temper of Obedient Subjects has
been produced hereby; it concerns us as ever we would give up our Account to
Him with Joy and not with Grief, that we thus Bless the Lord with our Souls and
all that is within us.

BUT when we consider God as thus related to us, according to the Tenor of the
New Covenant in and through Christ Jesus as the Head and Mediator thereof; that
He is not only our Judge, but our Best Friend; not only our Lord and King, but
our tenderhearted indulgent Father; Our God, peculiarly so, and as well our
Blessed and Everlasting Portion and Inheritance; what an abundant Ground is
this; as for our Thanksgiving, so for the Joy of our Faith in Tribulation, and
(...) to the Divine Hand, which always treats us under the Influence of this
Covenant Relation. Praise ye the Lord, Praise the Lord, O my Soul; while I live
will I Praise the Lord, I will sing Praises unto my God while I have any Being;
for Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God, Psalm. CXLVI. 1, 2, 5.

SO I come to the Third and Last thing proposed, viz.

III. TO set before you after what manner we are to Bless the Name of the Lord.
And here,

1. WE must Bless the Lord with our Souls, That is to say, It must be a
Sacrifice offered in Truth and Sincerity; otherwise it will prove offensive
like a corrupt thing, lame and heartless. It Is a Spiritual Service we are
called to attend upon, and therefore our Spirits must be engaged in it. Merely
to talk great things of the Majesty, Power and Glory of God, and speak of His
Goodness and Bounty to us; or to hang down our Heads like a Bulrush, and grown
under the weight of His Hand, while our Souls are not duly impressed with a
sense of God in all, and filled with Praise or Adoration; all such Calves of
our Lips will prove but an unacceptable Sacrifice, and the Noise we make be an
ungrateful found: but if our Souls give Praise, with an Elated Joy in the Lord,
and Thankfulness to Him, or groan out the broken Accents of a deep Submission
and Humiliation; this is an agreeable Harmony in the Ears of the Lord, and the
broken and contrite Spirit which He will not despise. It Is not to Bless the
Lord, if our Souls are not engaged herein; which indeed only are capable of so
high a Duty, the Body being but the Instrument, as the Mouth the Organ, it uses
to Bless God with. So sang the Psalmist, Psalm. LVII. 7, 8. My heart is fixed, O
God, my heart is fixed; I will Sing and give Praise; awake up my Glory, awake
Psaltery and Harp; I my self will awake early. When the Heart is awake, engaged
in this Duty, and fixed with a steady Hope and Trust in God, then shall we
indeed Sing and give Praise, though it be a Night of Darkness with us. Our Souls
must be inspired by the Divine Spirit; there the Fire of Love and Zeal,
Admiration and Resignation must be enkindled, and burn with servent Aspirations
to God, considered in His Essential Glories, His Communicative Goodness, and in
all His relative Properties. While Grace Enlightens and Warms the Soul; and at
the same time Humbles and Abases it, in a sense of the Divine Excellency, and
our own nothingness; then shall we be as high sounding Cymbals, tuning forth
Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto the Lord our God.

2. WE must Bless the Lord with all that is within us. All our Faculties and
Powers, all within our reach and disposal should be employed in this grateful
Service.

EVERY Faculty of our Souls is to strike up their pleasant Notes: Our
intellectual minds be ravished with the Luster and Brightness of the Divine
Incomprehensible Glories, the Majesty and Sweetness of His Nature, the
Extensiveness of His Goodness, and the uncontroulableness of His Dominion: Our
Wills cheerfully harmonize with the Divine Will, by an entire Resignation of
ourselves and our Interest thereto; highly approving it as the Blessed and only
measure of our Happiness, and the means leading to it; and readily obeying and
submitting to it with a genuine alacrity; our Affections raised and aspiring,
burning like Seraphs, with a Zeal for the Glory of God, entirely centring, and
sweetly delighting in Him; and void of all boisterous fretfulness, or fullen
murmurs, with a sedate Trust, and a gentle Hope patiently bear the Indignation
of the Lord, and quietly wait for His Salvation.

AND while we Behold the Invisible things of God, clearly manifest by the
Visible things of the Creation; while we hear of the Glory of His Kingdom, and
the Might of His terrible Acts; while we taste that the Lord is Good and
Gracious; or feel the weight of His Hand; our Souls should make use of our
Bodily Powers, as Instruments, in celebrating the Praises, and adoring the
Majesty of our God. Thus no part of Man should be dumb and silent, stupid and
unactive; but with all that is within us should we Bless the Name of the Lord.

So should we Bless God with all that is with in our reach and power, offering
to Him not only the Sacrifice of our Bodies and Spirits, as a living Service,
but Sacrificing all our interests and Enjoyments to the Lord, as one whole
Burnt Offering, and a reasonable Service; honoring the Lord with our
Substance, abounding in Works of Piety and Charity; and resigning up our most
valuable Friends and Relations, whenever He sees meet to call for them.

3. TO add no more; There must be a Spirit of Holiness, Devotion, and Religion
in all our Attempts to Bless the Name of the Lord: else we shall but Bless our
selves in our Heart, and Flatter our selves in our own Eyes, and cry Peace,
Peace, when there is none. It Is the Holy Name of God we are to Bless; and
surely then it must be performed in a Holy and Religious manner. Vain minds may
think it enough to Bless God, by rejoicing with a carnal mirth and jollity over
their Good Cheer, without a devout thought of the God that bestows it upon
them; or please themselves with their noisy Sports, as though Revelling were a
Sacrifice fit for a God; or say in a frothy vein God be thanked, and Blessed be
God, It is so and so with me. But we have not so learned the Nature of God and
His Worship, as to profane His Name, and think it a suitable way of Blessing
Him. His Name is Holy, so that the Object of Praise, Thanksgiving and Adoration
is Holy; and so should the Subjects be too, Holy Hearts; and it must be
performed in a Devout and Religious manner; otherwise there will be no
proportion between the Nature of that God we pretend to Bless, and the nature
of the Offering we present to Him. It Is from religious Principles, that we are
to Celebrate the Perfections of the Deity; from a religious sense of the Divine
Bounty and Goodness, that we return our humble and hearty Thanksgiving to Him;
and from a religious awe and reverence, that we are to Adore before Him. So the
Holy Angles Bless God, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole
Earth is full of thy Glory, Isai. VI. 3. And in like Holy manner should the
Saints on Earth Echo back, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God Almighty; -- thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have
created all things; and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. IV. 8,
11. Thus God should be seen, acknowledged, and adored in all that we have, and
in all that befalls us; and while this Duty is thus carefully attended by us,
then do we Bless the Lord with our Souls, and all that is within us, Bless His
Holy Name.

THUS I have endeavored to set before you the present Duty of this Day; and
reconcile your deep Humiliation, with the Public Joyful Thanksgiving which you
are called to attend. And if in my Attempts to lead you in the Songs of Zion,
you easily perceive my imperfect Speech, and faultring Accents; you will as
readily conceive, my Harp, with yours, as hanging upon the Willows.

SURE I am, when I meditate the Sudden Departure of my Reverend and Beloved
Brother, Mr. GEORGE CURWIN, I cannot but be sensibly affected with it, as an
awful and great frown of Providence in depriving me of those advantages I
proposed to my self, from his Friendship as a Brother, and his wise Counsel as
a Father: and I doubt not but a sense of your Loss of so valuable Blessing, as
you have enjoyed in him, sits heavy upon you in this Day of your Joyful
Solemnities.

YOU all know, that though the pleasure of Heaven spared him but few Years in his
Relation to you, yet he grew Old in your Service, wearing himself out with hard
and constant Labor among you.

HE seemed to have been peculiarly formed from his Youth, for the great and
noble Design, he afterward spent a short and Laborious Life in.

THE Spirit of Early Devotion, accompanied with a natural freedom of Thought,
and easy Elocution, a quick Invention, a solid Judgment, and a tenacious
Memory, laid the Foundations of a Good Preacher; to which his Acquired
Literature, his great Reading, hard Studies, deep Meditation, and close Walk
with God, rendered him an Able, and a Faithful Minister of the NewTestament.

AND, for the Three Years and an Half that he bore the Relation of your Pastor,
you know, and are Witnesses, how Holy, and Unblameably he has walked before
you; how servent, and zealous his Addresses have been to you; how sincerely,
and with what Agony of Soul, he has been wooing you unto an Espousal with the
Son of God.

YOU know how Faithful he has been in dispencing his Admonitions, Reproofs,
Rebukes, and Exhortations, equally to the High, and the Low, without respect to
Persons; and as faithful in his true concern and tender regards, in his
unwearied Care and Labors, for the Salvation of the Immortal Souls of the
Poorest, as well as the Richest of his Flock.

NOR are you Ignorant of his Charities, which were equal to his Patrimony, and
his enlarged Mind, which contemned Earthly things; though they have been so
prudently dispensed as to be best known unto those who sat under his Shadow,
rejoicing in his fruit; and now mourn him as their common Parent and Benefactor.

HIS great Humanity, added to those other Embellishments of Nature and of
Grace, rendered him Pleasant and agreeable to all Men; but the Delight of them
that knew him: and peculiarly so to my Venerable Aged Father, (the Reverend Mr.
NICHOLAS NOYES, Whom the awful Providence of God removed to a better World,
December. 13 th following, having just finished the 70 th Year of his Age.
) who rejoiced in this his Colleague, as in a Son Begotten in the Lord; and had
the pleasing prospect of leaving his Charge in the hands of so Skilful and
Faithful a Successor: but now mourns with you his Loss, and is ready to say, O
my Son, my Son; would God, I had dyed for thee; my Son, my Son.

And, as one would expect of such a Perfect and Upright Man, he Dyed in Peace;
unless in the Deliriums of his Distemper; in the midst of which, and I think in
one of the last Fits of it, he still manifested the intenseness of his mind
upon his Masters Work, and his great Concern for you, imagining himself to have
been in the Pulpit, and so in a manner Dyed Preaching; and is gone to keep a
better Thanksgiving than he could have done on Earth.

THERE is something in the Time of his Death, besides its being in the midst of
his Days, peculiarly Afflicting; viz. that it takes you under the Disadvantage
of your Aged Pastors very great Bodily Pains and Weaknesses, and when a Number
of you are proposing to swarm your selves into an other separate Congregation.

BRETHREN; Let this awful Rebuke of Providence upon you, in removing so bright
and shining a Light from among you, and at such a Time as this, be duly
resented by a deep Humiliation before the Lord, from a humbling sense of His
Holy Hand lying heavy upon you herein.

SERIOUSLY consider how far your own unprofitableness, while you walked in his
Light, may have provoked God to shut you up in so much Darkness, by
entinguishing so great a Luminary.

AND now join with united Hearts and Hands, however you may have your separate
Places for Public Worship, in helping forward the Great Work, which his Heart
was so much set upon, of Building up the Kingdom of God among you.

LET Your Aged Pastor, now the Works falls the heavier upon him, with the
Additional weight of his own Pains and Sorrows have the greater share in your
entire Affections, and your dutiful Veneration, and Submission to his Counsels
and Exhortations; that the few remainders of his weary Pilgrimage may be
rendered Comfortable to him, in seeing the more of his Children walkin the
Truth, and becoming a Crown of Rejoicing to him.

CALL to mind the many wholesome Instructions your Deceased Pastor, who Dead yet
speaks, has given you, and the Holy Example he has set you; and so Live,
and so Do.

PRAISE God who furnished him with such Bright Characters of His own Image;
Give thanks to God that you have enjoyed so rich a Gift from Our Ascended
Savior; and now that he is taken away from you, silently and humbly Adore the
Divine Government and Dominion; seek and rely upon His Fatherly Pity and
Compassion to furnish and bestow upon you such an other Perfect Gift from Above.

LET not your heavy Loss interrupt your sense of the many Blessing you enjoy,
and such as this Day calls for your thankful Acknowlegments, particularly in
the spared Life of your Aged Pastor; and earnestly Beg of God to Continue and
Strengthen him, that he may flourish in the House of his God.

THIS will be to Glorify God in the Fire, and to Bless the Name of the Lord,
when He takes away, as well as when He gives.

AND now, what Supports have the Aged and Honorable and Bereaved Parents from
the Consideration, that This their Son, Born from Above, after a Labourious
Endeavor to assist them, and an unfainting Struggle to help others in their
Journey to the Better World, has but just got the start of them, and reached
his Native Home before them; where within a very little while, they will meet
again, never more to be parted; and join in Consort with him in Songs of Praise
Gratitude and Adoration, without the Burden of their mournful Weeds, or so much
as a whispered Sigh to break in upon Harmony.

MAY the Virtuous Relict and tender Offspring inherit a plentiful return from
the vast Stock of Prayers, which have been laid out for them, and have a double
Portion of his Spirit resting upon them; may She find her Maker to be her
Husband, and God to be their Father; and in the midst of their Sorrows be
enabled to rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of their Salvation.

SHOULD and Angel from Heaven audibly declare the Happy State their Deceased
Son and Husband is entered into the possession of, it would not be such ground
of Comfort as the review of his past Life spent in so near a Conformity to the
Rules of the Gospel. And because God, who is the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob, is the God of the Living, and not of the Dead, they may be assured
that since Christ his Head Lives, he Lives also, and his Sleeping Dust shall
partake of a Glorious Resurrection. Awake and Sing, ye that dwell in the Dust;
thy Dead Men shall live, together with my dead Body shall they arise, Isai.
XXVI. 19. Wherefore Comfort one an other with these Words.

TO Conclude, may we all be lead to follow his Example, wherein he followed
Christ; that our whole Life may be one continued Strain of Blessing the Holy
Name of the Lord, under the various Changes which pass over us in a vale of
Tears; that so Glorifying God on Earth, we may all return from our present
Pilgrimage, and with the Ransomed of the Lord arrive safe to the Heavenly Zion,
with Songs and Everlasting Joy upon our Heads, where we shall obtain Gladness,
and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away; where no Broken String in our Harp, nor
Jarring Note in our Songs, shall spoil the Melody of our Endless and Unwearied
Praise, Thanksgiving and Adoration.

FINIS.

