A brief ENQUIRY Into the REASONS Why the People of GOD have been wont to bring
into their Penitential Confessions, the SINS of their Fathers and Ancestors, In
Times long since past.

Preached on a Day of General PRAYER and FASTING, March 22. 1716.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump, for Samuel Gerrish, on the North
Side of the Townhouse. 1716.

Our Father's SINS Confessed with our Own.
Psalm CVI. 6. We have sinned with our Fathers: We have committed Iniquity, we
have done wickedly.


THIS Psalm is a History, or rather a Penitential Confession of the Rebellions
and Provocations of the Children of Israel, from the day of their Departure out
of Egypt, through all their Travels and long Sojourning in the Wilderness. In the
Text the Psalmist in the Name of the People of his own Generation, confesses
their Interest and share in these Sins of their Fathers and Ancestors.

We have Sinned with our Fathers: The Critics render it by Sicut and aeque; as
expressing the Similitude of one unto the other, or the Aggravation of the one
from the other: We have done as our Fathers did before us, with equal
Perverseness and Rebellion. We have, added to the Stock of Hereditary Guilt, and
filled up the Measure of their Iniquity. Not only have sinned in their loins,
being the Children and Posterity of wicked Ancestors; but we have been our
selves a disobedient, Impenitent, and sometimes Idolatrous People, after the
Similitude of their Transgressions. We have sinned like them, by whose Example,
Sins and Sufferings we should have taken Warning.

THIS seems to be the Meaning of the Confession in the Text, and so they
Aggravate on their own Iniquities in deep Humiliation, by calling to
Remembrance the Sins of their Ancestors.

NOR barely is it the Sins of their Immediate Progenitors which they here
confess, but they look back unto the first Times of their being a free and
Distinct People, as you may see at large through the Psalm.

MOREOVER, I would observe the Repetition of the Confession; which is doubled
and trebled, to express the mighty Sense they had of the Greatness of their own
Guilt: We have sinned with our Fathers, we have committed Iniquity, we have
done wickedly. The same thing is repeated over and over in other words: Yet
here is no Tautologie or vain Repetition: But out of the Abundance of the heart
the Mouth pours out its Confessions: the more to express the Reality and
Certainty of the thing, and the Shame and Sorrow felt on that account: the more
to affect themselves with the thing, and to aggravate it upon themselves.

THE Doctrine I would offer is this.

THAT it becomes the Professing People of GOD in their Humiliations and
Confessions of their own Sins, and the Sins of their own Time and Generation,
to remember mention and bewail also the Sins of their FATHERS and ANCESTORS,
even in Times long since past.

THAT we should mourn for our own Personal Guilts in the first place, you will
easily Acknowledge: these should ever lie nearest to and heaviest upon our
Hearts. Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man
repented him of HIS Wickedness, saying, What have I done?

BUT we must mourn for the Sins of Others together with our own. Sin ought to
grieve us wherever we see it: Psalm. 119.158. I beheld Transgressors and was
grieved.

IN particular, We should be Affected with and afflicted for the Sins of the
Time, the People and Places wherein our Lot is cast: Ezekiel. 9.4. Go through the
midst of the City, and set a Mark on the foreheads of the men that sigh and
that cry for all the Abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

BUT it may be the Instance in the Text has been less though it of, than These
which I have named: scil. That we should bring into our Humiliations and
Confessions, as the Sins of our People that now live, so the Sins of the
Generations before us; even their Sins who are long since dead, and were so
before we were born.

I will lay before you, 1. The Demand of GOD from us to this purpose, and then
2. Consider a little the Reasons of it.

I. IT is the Will of GOD that we should remember and mourn for the Sins of
those that are gone before us, and who may have been long since dead, in our
penitential and solemn Confessions. GOD prescribes This unto Israel by the hand
of Moses, in the After-Confessions of Future Generations, and in particular in
the Captivities which their Sins would bring upon them: Levit. 26.39, 40. You
shall pine away in your Iniquities in the Land of your Enemies, and in the
Iniquity of your Fathers shall ye pine away: If then they shall confess their
Iniquity and the Iniquities of their Fathers, -- then will I remember my
Covenant. Now in Obedience to this Direction and Command of GOD, the Faithful
and Penitent in Israel did thus on every Solemn Occasion: whereof the Psalm
before us is a copious Instance. More especially, toward and after the
Babylonish Captivity (to which some refer the Psalm) this was the Burden in
the Church's Confessions. So Jeremiah, Ezra and Nehemiah made their Confession
in their Day. Jer. 3.25. We lie down in our Shame, and our Confusion covers us,
for we have sinned against the LORD our GOD, we and our FATHERS from our Youth.
Lam. 5.7. Our Fathers have sinned and are not, and we have born their
Iniquities. Ezra 9.7. Since the days of our Fathers have we been in great
Trespass unto this day. Nehem. 1.6, 7. Both I and my Fathers house have sinned:
We have dealt very corruptly before thee. More especially in the Ninth Chapter
we have a large Account of a Day of Prayer solemnized by Nehemiah and the
Remnant of Judah, the very Design of which Solemn Day is thus declared, v. 2.
The seed of Israel -- stood and confessed their Sins, and the Iniquities of
their FATHERS. They were indeed then smarting for borh together, and could not
well separate them v. 16. But they even our Fathers dealt proudly, and hardened
their Necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments, etc. v. 34. Neither have
our Kings, our Princes, our Priests, nor our Fathers kept thy Law.

THUS the Practice is Established in Scripture, by Precept and by Example. We
find the holy Men of GOD, under the Inspiration of the HOLY GHOST, and the
special Influence of his Grace, bringing the Sins of their Ancestors and of the
Generations before them, into their Confessions before GOD; as well in their
private as in their more public Humiliations.

And now,

II. I will Enquire into the Reasons of this Duty. It may seem liable to two
Objections, which I would premise two Words to Obviate. 1. As if it implied
want of Reverence to our Ancestors, 2. Irreverence toward GOD.


1. IT implies no want of Reverence to our Ancestors: Nor is it to be charged
with the Spirit of graceless Ham, who was condemned for not covering his
Fathers Nakedness. We cannot uncover the Shame of our Fathers before GOD, to
whose Eye all things are naked and open. Or if we remember them with Abasement
before GOD, as well as prostrate our selves in the Dust, it is before our
FATHER in Heaven, that His Name and Holiness may be glorified: Whose Honor
should be infinitely dearer to us than the Name of all Earthly Parents: And like
Levi we must be ready to say unto Father and Mother in His Cause, I have not
seen them; Neither may we Acknowledge our Brethren, nor know our own Children.
Deuteronomy. 33.9.

On the other hand,

2. IT is far from implying any Irreverence toward GOD, as if He punished us
for our Father's Sins. Far be it from us to take up the foolish and profane
Proverb which was sometimes used by the wicked Israelites: Ezekiel. 18.2. The
Fathers have eaten the sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edge.
No: What I am arguing for is just the Reverse of this Blasphemy. For they make
an Objection of it against the Justice of Providence, we on the contrary
confess its Righteousness herein: They make a fleer and jest of it as an
Absurdity, we in solemn manner Adore the Soverain GOD in his Dispensation, and
Abase our selves before Him In profound Humiliation: They reflect upon the
Divine Government, we justify His Administration, and own there is no Hardship
done us: for that we know that we shall never be punished for our Fathers Sins
if we do not walk in their Steps; and then too only in Temporal Calamities (not
in the Eternal State) wherein GOD will at last have punished us less when our
own Iniquities have deserved.

HAVING premised these two things for the guarding and stating the Truth before
us, I shall now offer two or three more direct Reasons, Why we should confess
the Iniquity of our FATHERS together with our Own in our Solemn Humiliations.

1. TO repair the more if it were possible the Dishonor done unto the Name of
GOD and His holy Law. For all the Reparation which we can make being only in
the Explicit Humiliations of our Souls on that Account, we do render the
greater Glory to the Name of GOD while in our Confessions we do look back to
the Sins of our Ancestors, as well as Recollect our Own. I am sure among Men it
would be Accounted a very worthy Action, if our Parents had done any Injury to
a Nei'bour, if We after their Death should do what we can, and what appears
just to us to do them right: And doubtless the Great GOD will accept such an
Act of Piety and Duty from us toward Himself.

SHOULD it be our Grief that our Fathers sinned against GOD, and should we not
say so before Him? What better Reverence can we show unto our Father in Heaven?
while we go backward like the blushing Sons of Noah, drawing a Covering over
our earthly Parents Nakedness. Which though we wont look upon, yet we know with
Concern that it lies Exposed. To whom do we publish it? to GOD! and why? but
that HE may be Glorified! Where then is the Trespass on Filial Piety by this
Act of Devotion and Worship? or did it bear harder on the Names of the
Deceased, yet what were these to the Honor of the ETERNAL GOD?

IN confessing the Sins of our Fathers we Adore the GOD of our Fathers; and in
Effect we do but give Him the Glory of that Relation: Our Fathers GOD and we
will Exalt thee: son we do as truly Exalt GOD in our Penitent Confessions, as
in our Thankful Praises. Ezra 10.10, 11. Ye have transgressed -- Now therefore
make Confession unto the LORD GOD of your Fathers. Can we remember Him as our
Fathers GOD in our Confessions, and never bring our Fathers Sins into our
Confessions? Where then is his Honor, and where is his Fear, as the Lord GOD
of our Fathers?

2. IT becomes us to Confess the Sins of our Fathers with our Own, to show our
Impartiality in the hatred of Sin: that we grieve and mourn for it because it
is Sin, Contrary to GOD and abhorred by Him, without any Respect of Persons.
For Sin is the same in it self, and the same in the Sight of GOD, whoever be
the Sinner; and therefore it is equally to be resented by us, as against GOD.
Psalm. 139. ult. Am I not grieved with them that rise up against thee? This is a
sincere and upright Detestation of Sin, as such.

SOME can freely eno' fault Sin in those that are not related to them; but O
how they cover and palliate it when it falls out in their own House? This
brings the most declared Zeal against Sin under a just Suspicion in any One;
while it turns to another for a Testimony of their Impartial Regard to the
Honor of GOD, when they are not bribed by their Relation unto any to justify
them in Sin.

3. IT is but just for a wicked Posterity to join the Sins of their Ancestors
with their own in their Confessions, because they are actually Partakers with
them in their Iniquity. Indeed this is too much the Course of this World in the
several Generations of it, Posterity learn and retain the Vices of their
Ancestors. As one Generation corrupt themselves it is a pretty sure way to make
the Next worse. A People are hardly bro't to reform the Errors of their
Predecessors, which they are Educated in, and suck in with their Mothers Milk.
So Isreal's Apostasy grew on the succeeding Generations after the Death of
Joshua, and again after the Reigns of David and Solomon. Judge. 2.10, 19. There
arose another Generation which knew not the LORD; but the next after them
returned and corrupted themselves more than their-Fathers. The Prophet supposes
it to be sometimes the happy Case of particular Persons, that the Son sees all
his Fathers Sins which he has done, and considers and does not the like.
Ezekiel. 18.14. And GOD forbid that this should not be often Exemplified; and to
GOD be the Praise whenever it is so. But the Contrary is usually the Case of a
Degenerate People. Posterity inherit their Fathers Manners, and are fixed in
evil Customs by the Practice and Example of Ancestors, and sometimes may
receive their Errors with Reverence.

NOW if the People of our Age retain the Evils of the last, and carry Impiety
to a greater Length than it was before our time, have we not made our Fathers
Sins our own with a witness? Truly, as our Savior said to the Jews in His
Time. Luke 11.48. Ye bear witness that ye allow the Deeds of your Fathers. That
is, They did by the Prophets then, as their Fathers had done long before; They
were Impenitent and Obstinate in Sin as their Fathers had been under the
Ministry of former Prophets; they were of the same persecuting Spirit that
their Fathers had been of: So their Fathers Sin was Theirs and both to be
confessed in the same Breath.

IT was the folly of the Pharisees, and their Hypocrisy that they could confess
their Fathers persecution of the Prophets and not discern their own. It may be
the Error may seem less if we confess our own faults, and not our Ancestors.
But that our Confessions may be perfect we must Omit neither. As the Martyr
Stephen made Confession for the Jewish Rulers, since they would not do it for
themselves: Act. 7.51. You stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye
do always resist the HOLY GHOST; As your Fathers did so do ye: Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which
showed before of the Coming of that JUST ONE, of whom ye have been now the
Betrayers and Murderers.

4. TO Confess the Sins of our Fathers with our own may be of special Influence
to keep us from them, or to Convince us of them, and put us the more zealously
upon the Reforming and Amending them, that the Wrath of GOD may be turned away
from us.

1. TO keep us from them: that if we are not fallen into their Sins we may not:
for what more Effectual way is there for the Prevention of Sin than a sincere
penitential Confession of it; which binds the Soul not to do it 2. Chron. 30.
And be not ye like your Fathers and like your Brethren, which trespassed
against the LORD GOD of your Fathers, -- Now be not ye stiff-necked as your
Fathers were.

2. OR surely it must the more Convince us of and humble us for our own Sins,
if we have sinned after the Similitude of the Sins of our Fathers which we
confess. It must leave us Self-judged and condemned. Our own Lips do then fall
upon us, and our own Tongue rises in Judgment. The Guilt of a People is greatly
Aggravated, and the Offense to GOD rises exceedingly, when the Sins of
Ancestors are retained. A People may not be ready to Apprehend this; but GOD
will have them Convinced of it. Jer. 16.10, 11. What is our Iniquity? or what
is our Sin that we have committed against the LORD our GOD? Then shall thou say
unto them, Because your Fathers have forsaken me, says the LORD, -- and ye
have done worse than your Fathers. If this will not convince a People what can!
Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers ye have gone away from mine
Ordinances --. Antiquity, Usage and long Custom is so far from Extenuating the
Apostasy, that it aggravates it. Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up the Measure of your
Fathers.

3. IF we are Convinced of and Humbled for the Sins of our Fathers found among
our selves, we shall reform and forsake them as well as confess 'em. So
Hezekiah gathered the Priests and Levites together, and said unto them; Our
Fathers have trespassed, and done that which was Evil in the Sight of the LORD,
-- Now it is in my heart to make a Covenant with the LORD GOD of Israel, that
his fierce wrath may turn from us. 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 10.

4. And lastly. GOD will turn away his Wrath from and mercifully pardon such a
People, as penitently confess and reform their own and their Fathers Sins.

ON the one hand it is most Certain, that a Peoples persisting impenitently in
their Fathers Sins does heap up Guilt, and treasure up Wrath, from Generation
to Generation, and at last brings down fearful Destructions on them. Isa. 65.7.
Your Iniquities and the Iniquities of your Fathers together, -- which have
blasphemed me --: therefore will I measure their former Work into their Bosom.
Very pathetical are the Expostulations to this purpose: Jer. 44.7, 9. Wherefore
commit ye this great Evil against your own Souls, to cut off from you man and
woman, child and suckling out of Judah, to leave you none to remain --? Have ye
forgotten the wickedness of your Fathers --? they are not humbled even unto
this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law. And again, Ezekiel.
20.30, 36. Are ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers? Surely -- with
fury poured out -- will I plead with you --.

BUT now the Entail of Wrath is as certainly cut off, if a people repent of and
reform the Sins of their Fathers, and do not relapse into them, nor have any
like Provocations of their own. Josiah would have saved Judah from Ruin, after
all their Apostacies and Impenitence, if his People would have done and been
like Him: He rent his Clothes when he heard the Words of the Book of the Law,
-- for great is the Wrath of the LORD that is kindled against us, said he,
because our Fathers have not hearkened to the Words of this Book: Whereupon he
sent and gathered unto him all the Elders of Judah and of Jerusalem, and went
up with them in a Solemn Assembly into the House of the LORD, and there caused
to be read in their hearing all the Words of the Book of the Covenant: And the
King there and then publicly Covenanted before the LORD, to walk after the
LORD, and to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with
all their heart and all their Soul, -- and all the People stood to the
Covenant. i.e. Declared their Consent to it and bound themselves to keep it;
which had they indeed stood to, Jerusalem's Destruction would not have come on
so soon after. See 2 King. 22. and 23. Chapters.

THESE are some of the Great Reasons why a People in confessing their own
Iniquity, should confess also the Sins of their FATHERS. I will Conclude with a
few proper Inferences from the Premises.

USE 1. Hence I infer, That in our Conduct and Actions we should always
consider that we act for POSTERITY. The Influence of our Principles and
Practices reaches to them. Therefore we should by no means limit our Tho'ts
merely to our selves and our own Times, when we are regulating our own
Behavior. If we of this Age are wicked, we hurt not only the present, but Ages
to come. Not only those who are now Alive and see our ill Example, but those
too who are not yet born may be much prejudiced by our ill Conduct. And on the
other hand, If we are Virtuous and Religious, we serve not only our own
Generation, but those that come after us, it may be to many Generations. For
this Reason and on this View let us desire so to live that Posterity may not be
the worse for us, but the better. That they may not be Miserable through our
fault and come to curse us, but that our Memory may be dear and precious,
Venerable and blessed to them. That our Childrens Children may not be Ashamed
of us, and remember us only in their Confessions and Abasements; but also some
times in their Acknowledgments to the Glory of GOD with Reverence and Esteem.
Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our Fathers trusted in Thee, they trusted and Thou did deliver
them; they cried unto thee and were delivered, they trusted in thee and were
not Confounded.

2. IF we ought to confess the Sins of our Fathers, then pious Fathers should
bewail the Sins and degeneracy of their Children, and be afflicted and abased
before GOD in the prospect and fear thereof. This is a very natural Grief to
Holy Hearts, and alas too commonly is there Occasion given for it. The fear of
this gives a very painful Concern to Them that bear us, and if they live to see
it it brings down their gray Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave. Like old Eli they
sit trembling for the Ark of GOD in the hands of their Ungodly Offspring.
Tremble they do for their Sons, to think what will become of them; but much
more for the Name and Honor of GOD that suffers by them, and which is more to
them than the Lives of their Children. So faithful Moses took a sorrowful Leave
of Israel, on the knowledge of their past Sins, and foresight of those to come:
He even confessed and bewailed 'em before those were born that did commit 'em:
Deuteronomy. 31.27, 28, 29. For I know thy Rebellion and thy stiff neck: Behold while
I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been Rebellious against the LORD; and
how much more after my Death? Gather unto me all the Elders of your Tribes, and
your Officers, that I may speak these Words in your Ears, and call Heaven and
Earth to Record against them. For I know that after my death you will utterly
corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the Way which I have commanded you;
and Evil will befall you in the latter days, becouse ye will do Evil in the
sight of the LORD, to provoke him to Anger --.

3. IF we should confess their Sins who are gone before us, then whatever has
been Amiss in our Fathers we should reform. I have no Accusation to bring
against the FATHERS of my Country, whose Memory is Blessed with us; and with
Whom we may not compare our Selves, being risen up a sinful Generation in their
place; A more mixed People, and acting more on worldly Views, Maxims and
Customs. Yet They were far from pretending to Perfection, They were ^^^en
subject to Passions and Errors. And while we Venerate their Devotion, and ought
to Imitate their Virtues, we should take care not to be misled by their Example
in any thing Amiss in them; receiving it by Tradition from them.

IF in the Beginning of the Country, in any Places they founded their Churches
on too narrow a Bottom, and in too much Independency one upon another, their
Posterity have done well to Enlarge the Foundation, and those are to be pitied
who will charge this with Apostasy. For certainly we have at last too many
Unbaptised Persons among us, and it is a Grief to have the LORD's Table so
neglected, as it is among us at this day.

IF there be any Customs in our Churches derived from our Ancestors, whereby
those Terms are Imposed in order to the Admission of Persons to the LORD's
Table, which CHRIST has not imposed in the New Testament, such Impositions
ought to be laid aside. For they are justly to be Condemned, especially in US,
because we do complain of Impositions in other Communions, and our Fathers sled
from the same.

IF there ever was a Custom among us, whereby Communion in our Churches was
made a TEST for the Enjoyment of Civil Priveledges in the State; the Natural
Rights of Men and the Legal Rights of English Men, without respect to one
Church State and Communion or another, consistent with the public Peace and
Safety of the GOVERNMENT; we have done well long since to Abolish any such
corrupt and persecuting Maxims: Which it is a Mischief to any free People and a
Scandal to any Communion of Christians to retain.

IF there were of old among our Fathers any Laws Enacted, or at any time any
Judgments given and Executions done according to those Laws, which have carried
too much the Spirit and Face of Cruelty and Persecution; we ought to be Humbled
greatly for any such Errors of our Fathers, and confess it to have been sinful
in them. And blessed be GOD for the more Catholic Spirit of Charity that now
distinguishes us.

IF there ever was among our Fathers any Grounds for that gross Accusation
which has been made by some against them; but I am ready to believe was a
Slander and Calumny unjustly cast upon their Memory, because I have heard the
same Accusation made most unjustly in some particular Cases against our Judges
now alive; If (I say) there has been open Partiality in doing Justice and
Judgment, out of respect of Persons, because of our own Communion or way of
Worship; GOD forbid that the least of this Leven or Tincture should be found
among us.

OR if any of our Fathers have even dealt too proudly in Censuring and Judging
others that differed from them in Modes of Worship; let us their Posterity the
rather be clothed with Humility, Meekness and Charity, preserving Truth and
Holiness with the laudable Zeal of our Predecessors.

Finally, IF we and our Fathers before us have been guilty of Negligence in
Gospelizing the Heathen as we might have done; or if the Fund for that Service
might have been more faithfully and wisely Applied than it sometimes had been;
(which also has been often said to our Dishonor) I am sure that Those
concerned in that Affair, as well as all of Us in our several Stations, should
be quickened to consider, what the Honor of GOD and Compassion to Souls calls
for at our Hands.

I might add, If any of our Fathers may have sometimes seemed too Strict in
Judging others for lawful Liberties; I hope it will find an easy pardon with
Them that look on the License taken by many in our own Times. Some few did so
in their day, but They Instituted them better both by Precept and Example; and
to their Praise be it spoken -- We never received the Immoral Practices of the
Present Generation from Them: They never learnt us to be profane, disobedient
to Parents, dishonest in our dealings, unclean, false, selfish, covetous and
worldly. Which leads me to say,

4. IF we should be ready to confess the sins of our Fathers, then whatsoever
was Good and Worthy in Them should be also remembered, (...), praised and
Imitated by us. Our Reverence to GOD and Man commands this of us, and it is one
Instance of our Obedience to the first Commandment with Promise, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother. If there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think of
these.

OUR Fathers had their Infirmities no doubt, but they had their Virtue and
Integrity. They were a Company of brave and honest Men. Not many Wise men after
the flesh, not any of the Mighty and Noble were among them; but neither were
they any of the base and vile of the Nation for outward Estate or Character.
They were for the Body of them Serious and Godly Christians; Men rich in Faith
and Heirs of a better World. For that better Country they left their pleasant
Native Land, and in removing into a Wilderness mostly for Religion's sake, they
declared plainly that they fought it.

THEY came over on a most worthy Design, on the Noblest Motives, and with the
best Intentions. Pare and Undefiled RELIGION was their proposed End, and their
Support in their Undertaking. Their first Care was to plant Churches rather
than Towns, and Schools and Colleges as soon as they saw Towns Increase, to
leave a learned MINISTRY and Religion in the Power of it to their Posterity.
Government and good Order was as much their Care as Liberty of Conscience; not
using Liberty for an Occasion to the flesh, but standing fast in that wherewith
CHRIST has made us free.

THEY have jest us their Testimony for the purity of GOD's Worship according to
the Institution of Scripture, without the Additions of men; and against Will
worship and Superstition Formality and Hypocrisy. They have Instituted us in
the strict Observation of the Sabbath, which has been the Honor of these
Churches, and as it decays is our real Apostasy from vital Religion. They have
commended to us strict Family Government, and the good Education of our
Children, which was our own Happiness under their wise and faithful Care. They
taught us by Word and Life what the. Grace of GOd, which brings us Salvation
teaches; to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present Evil World: to honor all Men, to love
the Brotherhood, to fear GOD, and to honor the King. They have left us the
noble Example of a Public Spirit, to love our Country, to act for Posterity,
and seek the Good of After-Generations.

SUCH a sort of Men were the Founders and Fathers of our Country: Men of whom
the World was not worthy, though they were plain men, but not wanting in Wisdom
and Learning, Prudence, Integrity and true Devotion, I should have said too
what a Stock of Prayers they laid in for us, which have bro't down many
Blessings on us already, and we hope will many more on the Generations yet to
come.

[NOR may I omit to mention, with how much Humanity and a truly Christian Zeal
they had at heart and labored for the Civilizing, the Instruction and
Conversion of the Natives. The Names of Eliot and Mahew are made Immortal with
us on this Account, and their Rest is Glorious. They did the part of Apostles
and Evangelists with a truly primitive Spirit. The Government treated the
barbarous people with many Courtesies and Obligations. Unknown Labors were
used and pains taken with them to Acquaint them with the Ways of GOD. The Bible
with vast pains and diligence was Translated into the Indian Tongue and printed
for their Use, and distributed among them. They were preached to, they were
argued with and Entreated. An Indian College was built, some of their Children
with much difficulty put to School, and one or two have been bro't up at the
College, but died there.

WHAT though the Success has not answered the pious hope Intention and Prayers of
our Fathers? their Piety is never the less Conspicuous, and their Reward is
with GOD tho the Salvages be not gathered. What though they might have taken
wiser Methods, some may think; They did what appeared to them best, and what
cost 'em more Expense and fatigue it may be, than the other proposed Methods
would have done. And what though there were Neglects too of some Parts, and even
some of our own Plantations were settled in too heathenish a manner: Never the
less if much of the Spirit and Presence of GOD had not been with our Fathers,
they had never done half the Great and Good things they did.]

THIS is but a small piece of Justice to their Memory, and to excite our
Emulation.

5. And lastly, IF we should consider the faults of our Ancestors to confess
them, then how much more ought we to bewail our own Sins, and the Sins of our
own Day.

1. OUR own Personal Transgressions and Guilts. Without these the Sins of
others gone before us would not hurt us much. The Soul that Sins shall die: The
Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father, if he considers and does not
the like. Ezekiel. 18.14.

LAY thy hand then upon thy heart, and smite there for thy own Abominations.
For these GOD will judge thee in the last Day. And this it is that He looks for
to day from thee, that thou feel the plague of thy own heart, and so spread
forth thy hands toward his house. For what have thou to do to confess the Sins
of others, who art not Affected with thy own? Thou Hypocrite, pull first the
Beam out of thine own Eye. Repent thee of thy own Wickedness, and say, What
have I done? When I speak of Sinners, am I not the Chief? But what is my own
Repentance this day before the LORD? Am I humbled for and bewailing my own
Sins? have I reformed these yet? do I keep my self from mine own Iniquity?
Psalm. 51.2, 3. Wash ME thro'ly from MINE Iniquity, and cleanse ME from My Sin;
for I acknowledge My Transgressions, and My Sin is ever before me.

2. LET us lay to heart the Sins of our Day and Time. Whether those of our
Land, or of our Nation.

1. THE Sins of our Land. We are sadly on the decay as to serious Piety and
vital Religion. We have lost our first love, life and zeal. Our FATHERS where
are they? their Spirit of Devotion! their Sobriety and Temperance! their
Godliness and Honesty! Sensuality, worldliness and Pride are grown up in the
place of these; profaness, lukewarmness and Hypocrisy; Selfishness and
Unrighteousness. Our Fathers would be ready to disown us on these Accounts, and
we ought to think how they will rise up in Judgment against us and condemn us.
Let us consider from whence we have fallen and repent.

OUR Work to day is to bewail the present degeneracy and corruption of our
People. Isa. 58.1. Show my People THEIR Transgression, and the House of Jacob
their Sins. Let us therefore bring our Peace Offerings, as repenting Judah did,
and make Confession to the LORD GOD of our Fathers* 2 Chronicles. 30.22.

2. LET us lay to heart the Sins of our Nation, the place of our FATHERS
Sepulchers. And here a dismal Scene opens of such Iniquity, as I hope is not
yet known among us; how soon soever it may threaten us if not reformed there.
For besides Formality in Religion, Sensuality, profaness, injustice,
worldliness, pride, covetousness, etc. whereof we have our share; there are yet
greater Abominations glaring there; Such as Atheism and Infidelity, and open
Contempt of all that is most Sacred, not only expressed in Dissolveness of
life, but also in public Conversation and in Writings.

THE Venerable Name of Religion and of the CHURCH is made a Sham-pretence for
the worst of Villainies: for all Uncharitableness and unnatural Oppression of
the pious and peaceable, for slanders lies and falsehoods, for Divisions hatred
and Animosities, for Bribery and Perjury, for Disloyalty and Perfidy, for
Tumults, Mutinies and Rebellions, for all Ingratitude to GOD and Treason
against the KING and our Country.

THE perilous Times are come, wherein Men are Lovers only of their own Selves,
sacrificing the Public to their own private Gains and Ambition, without natural
Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are Good; Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of GOD, having a form of Godliness, and multitudes not that
neither. From such turn away, says the Holy Apostle: And I pray GOD to purge
the Court, Nobility and Magistracy of this plague and leprosy; and not the
Court only, but also the Church and the Clergy, the Universities and
Accademies, as well as the Camp and Fleet; that the Spirit of Parties and
Factions may not increase unto more Ungodliness, and to all Barbarities.

Ah Calamitous Day! whereinto we are fallen, and into which the Sins of an
Infatuated Age has bro't us. Hear this, Ye old Men, and give ear all Ye
Inhabitants of the Land! has this been in your days? or even in the days of
your Fathers? They are a Nation void of Counsel, neither is there any
Understanding in them! as if their Rock had sold 'em, and the LORD had shut
them up. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter End! that at least when their Judge comes there may be
some Faith and Charity found in the Land.

AND doubtless there is some among Professors of every Denomination. But O how
wanting among every party of men. However I am very glad that I can do our
United Brethren in Great Britain, and this Country too the Honor and the
Justice as to say, That in this time of public Treacheries, Perjuries,
Rebellion and Treason, not a dog can wag his tongue to charge us with
Disloyalty, Undutifulness or Disrespect to Government, or want of Zeal and
Fidelity to the PROTESTANT SUCCESSION, the peaceful Reign of the KING, and the
true Interests of the Nation as to their Civil and Religious Rights.

Indeed it is an Amazing thing, and one would think Incredible, that any
Protestant or Member of the Church of England should be in the late Rebellions
against his present MAJESTY, to set up a popish Pretender whom they have so
often and justly Abjured. It is as the right Reverend the Bishops say
Excellently in their late pious and loyal Declaration, so vile and detestable a
thing as may justly make 'em Odious to GOD and man. And at the same time to
pretend a zeal for the Church of England is such an Imposition on the common
Sense of Mankind, that nothing even in Popery it self can be more Absurd: And
nothing but an Infatuation from GOD, justly inflicted for our Sins can suffer
it to pass upon the Nation.

Wherefore, in the Name of GOD, those most Reverend Persons do call upon the
Nation, in the first place to humble themselves before GOD for the Great and
crying Sins of the Nation; for that Spirit of Infidelity and Libertinism; of
Unthankfulness for the Mercies of the Gospel; of Formality and Hypocrisy, of
Strife and Envy, of Hatred and Animosity, which are so rife in it, and
generally the Forerunners of the Destruction of any People.

Blessed be GOD for this Seasonable and True Testimony of these FATHERS in the
Church. They have here said what the Body of the Dissenting Ministers have long
though it and said often Weeping, but in vain. The Atheistical and Immoral part of
the Nation are the Source of its Miseries and Dangers. GOD heal its Sins and
Breaches. GOD make the Bishops of the Church its Healers. And GOD grant that we
may see the things of our Peace before that they be hid from our Eyes.

I pray GOD that the Day may come when We may no longer hate to be reformed,
and that the KING may live to be the Glorious Instrument in the Hand of GOD of
our Reformation in every Respect. So may HE be blessed, and His Throne
Established before the LORD for Ever.

FINIS.

