ANSWER To what has been offered as Argument against the Validity and Force of
an Act of Assembly, Entitled, An Act that the Solemn Affirmation and
Declaration of the People called Quakers, etc. Passed in the Province of
New Jersey, in the 13 th Year of the Reign of Queen Anne.
WHEREAS there has been of late an Objection, without any Foundation in Law or
Reason, started against the People called Quakers, their being Employed in any
Places or Posts of Profit or Trust in this Province; which Objection, in my
Opinon, has a Tendency of no less Consequence than the rendering the Municipal
Laws thereof of no Force or Effect for the Future, and Subverting the Civil
Government; I have Judged it Necessary for the Satisfaction of the Minds of the
Scrupulous, and Stopping the Mouths of the Clamorous and Siditious, until a
more Effectual Method may be pursued, if Necessity to require, to set that
Affair in so clear a light, that the Half-sighted may See, and the half-witted
be Convinced of the Unreasonableness and Absurdity of that Objection. The rest
can see and understand without my Help.

The whole Force of their Objection Leans upon this. There is, say they, an Act
passed in Great Britain, in the First Year of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for making Perpetual an Act of the 7 th and 8 th Years of the Reign of
his late Majesty King William the Third, Entitled, An Act that The Solemn
Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers shall be accepted in
stead of an Oath in the usual Form, etc. This Act of the first of King George
Extends that Act of King Williams to the Plantations, by the last Clause in it,
in these Words, Provided always, That so much of this Act as Relates to the
Affirmations to be made by the People called Quakers, shall be Extended to that
Part of Great Britain called Scotland, forever, and to the Plantations
belonging to the Crown of Great Britain, for Five Years, and to the end of the
next Session of Parliament after the said Five Years, and no longer. And that
Act of King William has in it the following Clause, Provided, and be it
Enacted, That no Quaker or reputed Quaker shall BY VIRTUE OF THIS ACT, be
qualified or permited to give Evidence in any Criminal Causes, or Serve on any
Jury's, or bear any Office or place of Profit in the Government, any thing in
THIS ACT contained to the Contrary notwithstanding. Now, say they, The Law past
in this Province some time ago for qualifiing That People for Places of Profit
and Trust, is by that of the first of King George, above mentioned, Repealed
and of no longer Force, and Consequently Quakers can no longer enjoy Places of
Profit, etc. This is all that has come to my Ears upon this head that has the
Appearance of any Meaning in it.

And first, I shall observe in General, into what a woeful Condition must the
Plantations be Plunged, if such Laws as shall by a Legislature, I awfully
Constituted by virtue of the Letters Pattent, under the broad Seal, be Enacted
for the Good Government and Ease of the Subjects there, shall by Implication or
Construction, he deemed to be Repealed upon the Suggestion of any petty
Attorney who shall or may affirm for Excuse, that he may say what he thinks fit
for the Benefit of his Clyent.

But in the next place, That Act of Assembly is not so much as by Implication
Repealed; for the Words in that Act upon which they lay the stress of this
Argument, are these, " Provided, That no Quaker shall by Virtue of THIS Act, be
Qualified, etc. Now, I know no Quaker that pretends that he is or can by Virtue
of THAT Act be qualified, but I believe every Quaker thinks that he is or may
be qualified by Virtue of an Act of Assembly, Entitled, An Act that the Solemn
Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers, etc. passed in this
Province, and sent home for the approbation of the Sovereign above two Years
ago, and for any thing I have heard to the contrary, Approved and Ratified. It
is as plain as Words can make it, that That Act of the 7 th and 8 th of King
William has No Negative but upon it self, and Consequently cannot be alleged
in Bar to any Laws already Enacted in the Plantations, or even such as may be
Enacted; for by these Letters Patent, which give a being to this Government and
Legislature, all such Laws as shall be Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Assembly, are declared to be in Full Force from the time of Enacting. The
Governor, indeed, by his Instructions is Commanded Not to give his A^^ent to
any Bills of Unusual and Extaordinary Nature and Importance, wherein the
Prerogative Royal of the Crown, or the Property of the Subject may be
prejudiced, etc. because all Laws enacted there, are in Force from the time of
Enacting; and if he Transgresses in this point, He is accountable for it. But
the Law in Question is so far from the Suspicion of being of that Nature, that
it is exactly conformable to the Governors Instructions, and what he had in
Command from the Sovereign, in the following words, being the 60 th and 61 st
Instruction to him under the Queens hand and Seal,

AND Whereas We have been Informed that diverse of our good Subjects Inhabiting
those parts do make a Religious Scruple of Swearing, and by reason of their
Refusal to take an Oath in Courts of Justice, and other places, are or may be
liable to many Inconveniencys, Our Will and Pleasure is, that in Order to their
ease in what they conceive to be matter of Conscience, so far as may be
consistent with good Order and Government, you take care that an Act be passed
by the General Assembly of our said Province to the like Effect as that past
here in the 7 th and 8 th Year of his late Majestys Reign, Entitled An Act
that the Solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers, shall
be accepted instead of an Oath in the usual Form, and that the same be
transmitted to Us, and to our Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, as before
directed. And whereas We have been further informed, That in the first
Settlement of the Government of our said Plantation, it may so happen that the
Number of Inhabitants fitly qualified to Serve in our Council, of the General
Assembly, and in other Places of Trust or Profit there, will be but small, it
is therefore Our Will and Pleasure, that such of the said People called Quakers
as shall be sound capable of any of those Places or Employments, and
accordingly be Elected or appointed to Serve therein, may, upon their taking
and signing the Declaration of Allegiance to Us, in the Form used by the same
People in this Kingdom, together with a Solemn Declaration for the true
Discharge of their respective Trusts, be admitted by you into any of the said
Places or Employments. Which Instructions are contained also in His present
Majestys Instructions to the Governor, dated at St. James's the First Day of
July, 1715. word for word.

To Sum up the whole I do Affirm, That an Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act
that the Solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers, etc.
passed in the last Assembly of this Province, stands in Full Force and Vigor,
being passed by the Sovereigns especial Command, not having been Disallowed or
Disapproved by the Sovereign, nor Repealed or made void by any subsequent Act
of Parliament or Assembly; And that by virtue of that Act, Quakers or reputed
Quakers, when duly qualified as that Act directs, are capable of Offices of
Profit and Trust in this Province; and that the asserting or affirming the
contrary, serves only to open a Gap to Pretenders to Law, to plead against the
Validity of any or all your Municiple Laws, when either their Selfish Views or
perverse Purposes may suggest to them so very Ridiculous and Absurd a Notion,
and to weaken (as I verily believe it is intended) the Administration, and
Unhinge or Dissolve the Government in this part of the Province, where it was
first openly and avowedly Asserted.

To. Hunter.

A SPEECH Made by the Chief Justice of New Jersey in the Supreme Court at
Burlington, the first Day of May, 1716. before the Grand Jury was Sworn and
Affirmed.
IT is now the sixth time I have had the Honor to sit here in the Month of
May. I was called to the Office of Chief Justice at a time when it was vacant,
without my seeking. In the Opinion of many Persons the greater part and most
considerable for Wealth and Interest, of the first Settlers in the
Western-Division, are of the People called Quakers, or so reputed to be; and
these (amongst other things) do distinguish themselves, by refusing to take an
Oath in Form by Law prescribed to be used generally. The late Queen Anne (of
blessed Memory) having this under her Royal Consideration, by her Instructions
to his Excellency, our Governor, was graciously (...) not only to appoint some
of the People called Quakers to be of her Majesty's (...) Council for the
Province of Nova Cesaria or New Jersey, but also gave leave and encouragement
to others of them to bear Offices of Trust and Profit in the Government, which
could not otherwise be effected than by Qualifying them in their own way of
Affirmation. Pursuant hereunto an Act of Assembly was passed in the 13 th Year
of her said Majestys Reign, entitled, An Act that the solemn Affirmation and
Declaration of the People called Quakers shall be accepted instead of an Oath
in the usual Form, and for Qualifying and enabling the said People to serve as
Jurors, and to execute any Office or Place of Trust or Profit within this
Province. By which Law, these People (being Affirmed as that Law directs) are
admitted to serve on all Inquests, Grand and Petty Jurys (except on petty Jurys
in Causes Criminal) any Law Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King George, upon his Accession to the Throne,
in a public manner did declare, That the Indulgence and Toleration granted by
Law to scrupulous Consciences, was no way inconsistent with the Civil and
Religious Constitution of the Kingdom. His Majesty has likewise renewed the
Commission and confirmed his Excellency Brigadeer Hunter in the Government of
this Province with the Instructions relating to the People called Quakers. And
why should private Persons set up for and pretend to be Wiser than the Laws,
Wiser than their King and Governors, and Wiser than their Legislators? This
Act of Parliament made in favor of the People called Quakers in the first year
of his Majesty's Reign, which was so offi^iously obtruded to the Court in
November last, backed with the Rash and Precipitant Opinions of some Gentlemen
at the Bar, in my Opinion, was altogether then Mis-understood and
Mis-interpreted by them; for it was very plainly designed as a Favor and
Indulgence to all the People called Quakers, who were amongst his Majesty's
Subjects in all and every of his Dominions, and no manner of Restraint of any
Liberty and Indulgence which they then were, or might be otherwise possessed of
thereafter. At that time (as I suppose it was intended) it gave me some
Surprise, and coming from a private hand at Philadelphia, printed on a small
single Sheet, in no Statute Book of public Laws, from no Board of Trade,
Secretary of State, or other Officer or Minister directed to the Governor of
either this or the Neighboring Province, the Opinion which I then gave, was,
That as yet I could not take any Notice of it as a public Law, nor give my
Opinion upon it, being only a Presumptive Evidence of the being of such Law.
And there being a Positive notorious Act of Assembly of this Province for
Qualifying the People called Quakers to serve on Jurys of all Sorts (except in
Criminal Causes) on that Affirmation, I did Order the Secretary to qualify them
accordingly, which (contrary to his Duty) he positively Refused to do, by means
whereof, we had no Grand Jury this last Term, I did pronounce him in Contempt
of the Court, and Imposed a Fine upon him for this Contempt. And now having
better considered of the Substance and Intent of this Law or Statute, I am
fully prepared to give my Opinion thereof, with relation to the Inhabitants of
this Division who are Quakers or reputed Quakers. My first Observation is, That
this Paragraph of the Statute is only Negative of it self; for the Words are,
Provided and be it Enacted, That no Ouaker or reputed Quaker shall by virtue of
This Act be Qualified or permitted to give Evidence in any Criminal Causes or
serve on any Jurys, or bear any Office or place of Profit in the Government,
any thing in This Act contained to the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.
Then again, this Act of Parliament of Great Britain is an Enlargement of the
Quaker Privieldge to what it never was before, It makes that perpetual to them
in England, which before was Temporary, and expired or near expiring by its own
Limitation; Carrys the same into that part of Great Britain called Scotland,
where it was not before, and makes it perpetual there; and into the Plantations
generally for Five Years. This does no ways hinder, but that by virtue of the
Act of Assembly of this Province, which is a Municipal Law thereof, the Quakers
or reputed Quakers are qualified to be of Jurys, and Evidence, and bear Offices
of Trust and Profit in the Government; nor but that they may be so qualified
hereafter by any other Law hereafter to be made for that or the like purpose,
Although by virtue of That Act of Parliament they are not so qualified.

It is true, there are other inhabitants in Burlington, who profess themselves
to be of the Church of England, as by Law established; and it were to be wished
they were more numerous, and better disposed toward the Government thereof,
under the best of Princes, and a prudent and well deserving Governor, who
bears the particular Marks of his Majestys Royal Favor. Can any of these say,
that whilst they behaved themselves well, they were denied to have the Oaths
administered to them in due Form of Law, and their Privileges? The promiscuous
Return of both sorts upon the Sheriffs Pannels to serve on Grand Jurys, with
the Differences of Parties, has been an Occasion of great Obstruction to the
Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding my frequent Admonitions to the contrary.
I am not altogether ignorant of the Authors of those Disturbances, having been
present at Burlington the greatest part of the time of that Session of
Assembly, when that Law, in Favor of the Quakers, was in Framing; the
pretended Zeal for the Church, and its supposed and Imaginary Danger, with the
humor of new invented Distinctions, run to a very great Height, so that some
Persons seemed to be almost disposed to a total Contempt of Government, and
Rebellion. I shall forbear naming Persons in hopes that these ill humors are
evaporated and at an end; I do beseech you to be at the pains to read that
Grave and sage Advice given by his Grace the most Reverend Father in God Thomas
late Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Right Honorable the Lords
Bishops then in and about London, of the 3 d of November last, in their printed
Declaration, and consider whether it is not worthy of all our Regard and
Obedience. These groundless and subtle Distinctions and Jealousies, which of
late had like to bring the State and Constitution of the Government into
Danger, are now over in Great Britain, By the blessing of God upon his Majestys
Arms, and his prudent Conduct; Let them not Survive here; Let us for the future
Resovle to lay aside all bitter Envying and Stri^e one against another, on any
Store whatsoever, and heartily endeavor to preserve, maintain and improve that
Harmony, Love and Peace which our most Gracious Sovereign Lord the King has
given such Assurances of to all his Loving Subjects whatsoever. Why shall
Moderation and Christian Charity be laid aside as Useless, Antichristian and
Heterodox, and Envy, Hatred and Malice pass upon us for Zeal and Religion!

I do understand the Grand Jury of Burlington, at the last General Sessions of
the Peace, after an Unpresidented manner, have found an Indictment against Me,
for what I have done in the Execution of my Office upon the Bench, in November
last, as also Indictments against some other Persons of Figure and Distinction
in the Government; Were it an Offense only against me Personally, I thank God,
I could pass it by without the least Resentment; (I am ready to believe they
were none of their own Framing, especially that against my Self,) but as it is
an open Affront put upon me, as I represent the Kings Person, it deserves
Correction. The Law does not suppose that a Judge is Infallible, and therefore
he is not accountable in Law for a Mistake in his Opinion; and in many cases
the Judges of England are of different Opinions. And the Law provides well for
the Support of the Dignity of such Persons as do represent his Majesty in the
Office of Administration of Justice. The Judgment for Striking in
Westminster Hall, etc. siting the Courts, is, That the Offender shall be
Imprisoned during his Life, Forfeit all his Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chatte^s, and that his Right Hand be cut off at such a place; Which Judgment is
given by the Common Law. It is one of the species of High Treason to Kill and
Murder a Justice of either Bench, in their Places doing their Offices. If any
Man in Westminster Hall, or in any other place, sitting the Courts of Chancery,
Exchequer, the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, or before Justice of Assize, or
of Oyer and Terminer, shall draw a Weapon against any Judge or Justice, though
he strike not, this is a great Misprison, for the which he shall loose his
Right Hand, and Forfeit his Lands and Goods, and his Body to perpetual
Imprisonment. The Reason given for it, is, Because it tends Ad Impedimentum
Le^^s Terrae, To the Hinderance of the Law of the Land. I do not mention these
Matters to you, for that I would aggravate the Offense (which is the occasion
of this Discourse) above what it is, but to show you, That as in these Higher
Crimes against his Majesty's Justices upon the Bench, doing their Offices, an
extraordinary Punishment is to be inflicted, so in smaller Offenses committed
against them, for the doing of their Duty in their Offices, the Law will
proportionably require a sharper Reproof, than for the like Offenses against
Persons in a private Capacity. I shall not take upon my self to direct this
Punishment, but cannot think that any of those Persons, who were of that Grand
Jury, can properly serve in that Trust again, until they shall make Ransom for
that Offense, which I sincerely desire may be Moderated, being inclineable to
believe, That none of them did compose those Presentiments, and that they were
prepared to their hands.

The Charge to the Grand Jury at Burlington, the First Day of May, 1716.
I Would have introduced my Charge this time to the Grand Jury, by saying
somewhat concerning the Necessity and Usefulness of Government, and what a
great share of our Christian Duty it is, to be subject and Obedient thereunto,
and to Support it. It is a thing so well known, that few will offer to dispute
it, yet so little regarded by many, makes it necessary to be mentioned and
urged. It is a thing so Copious, more might easily be said on that head, than
my Time will now permit; I shall therefore confine my self to that nervous and
sollid Argument of the Apostle Paul, writing to the Romans, who had embraced
the Christian Religion, and lived under the Obedience and Government of Heathen
Rulers and Magistrates, chap. 13. from ver. 1. to v. 8. Let every Soul be
subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that
be are ordained of God; Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation;
For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the Evil. Will thou then not
be afraid of the Power? do that which is good and thou shall have praise of the
same; for he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain; for he is the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake; for
for this cause pay we Tribute also; for they are Gods Ministers attending
continually on this very thing. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to
whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom
Honor. St. Peter writing to the Strangers who had embraced the Christian
Faith, in his first general Epistle, was of the same Mind, his words are.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or to Governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the Punishment of evil Doers, and for the Praise of them that do well; for
so is the Will of God.

The Health and very Life of Government consists in the due Execution of the
Laws, and this is the Prerogative of the Crown, and this the King does by his
Ministers and Officers, who do represent his Person, in the due Execution of
their Offices; Without this the Law is but a dead Letter. And it is for this
end we are now met here. And for that we are Judges of Record, by the order of
the Laws, we cannot take Knowledge of Offenses without the Information of
others, and therefore, by the Kings Authority, you are called together here,
according to ancient Practice in England, and the former Usage, as Men, who by
common intendment, do know such Offenses, as we have power to deal withal,
committed within the several places of your Habitations in the County of
Burlington. Let there be no more Strife and Dis-uniting amongst you, on the
score of that mixture of Persons which the Law has allowed to serve. Those who
have taken the Affirmation are by that Law as much obliged as any sworn in the
most Solemn manner, and are under the same Penalties. And however the same may
be variously understood, it is certain they be thereby qualified to serve on
Grand Jurys; and if any Number of such, upon their Enquity, being Attested, do
agree to the Truth of what others do agree to Present, upon their Oaths, where
is the Injury or Prejudice to the Verdict of those who are Sworn? Is the
Presentment the less True, because the others do Affirm it to be True, and that
in the Presence of God, and upon the Penalty of Perjury? You who have taken an
Oath upon the holy Contents of that Book, do take upon you a Vow of great
Importance, which ought to be seriously weighed and considered; For in the Book
are contained, not only the Comfortable Promises of Almighty God, to those that
Serve and Fear him, but also the heavy Wrath and Fearful judgments denounced
against Impenitent Sinners, False Swearers, and such as d^ ^onceal the Truth,
and instead thereof Advance Falsehood and Lies. The Prophet Zachariah, chap. 5.
to v. 5. in his Vision, saw A Flying Roll, Twenty Cubits long and Ten Cubits
broad, then said God unto him, This is the Curse that goes forth over the
whole Earth; For every one that Steals shall be cut off, as on this side,
according to it, and every one that Swears shall be Cut Off, as on that side,
according to it: I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall
enter into the House of the Thief, and into the House of him that Swears
Falsely by My Name; it shall remain in the midst of the House, and shall consume
it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. And you who are Attested
or Affirmed, are under the same Curse and Penalty, if you Falsi^y your Solemn
Affirmation.

The Service which you are now to perform, is of very great Importance; first,
It concerns the Honor of God, and the Advancement of his Glory, and the
Suppressing of Satan's Kingdom. Then it concerns the Security of His Majesty's
Person, and his Government as now established, and the Preservation of the
Common Peace of all his Subjects in this County, in the quiet Enjoyment of
their Lives and Liberties, their Wives and Children, and their Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and all other Rights and Properties whatsoever;
For without Justice can be neither Order nor Peace, but Confusion and Trouble.
If you carefully observe your Oath, you shall do much Good, answer all these
good Ends, and be Praise Worthy; but if Contrary-wise (which I hope there ^s no
reason to apprehend) any of you should be Tempted to Violate your ^olemn
Engagement, you should draw down upon your selves the Vengeance and Displeasure
of God, and subject your selves to the Punishment of the Law. Wherefore, I do
Exhort you, in Gods Name, to Observe the Contents of this Oath, and Affirmation
much to the same purpose. Twelve must agree to Find any Bill, or to (...) it by
Ignoramus. I shall enumerate some Black Crimes to you, but hope there be very
Few or no such Criminals. T^^^e are Offenses by the Common Law, and Offenses by
the Statute Law, o^ which some are Capital, some not Capital; Some against God
immediately, and some immediately against Man. Capital Offenses against God
immediately, are Heresy and Witchcraft; Not Capital, Breaking the Lords Day,
Profane Swearing, and the like; Against Man immediately, are High Treason,
Petit-Treason, Fellonies by Common Law or by Statute Law. Fellonies by Common
Law are of Four Kinds, such as are committed against Life, against the Goods,
against the Habitation, and against the Protection of publik Justice. Murder is
against the Life, so is Manslaughter, Felo-de-se, Chance-Medley, and
se-de^endendo. Against the Goods of a Man, Larceny or Theft, distinguished by
Grand and Pettit Robbery, and Larceny from a House. To this we may add Piracy.
Offenses against the Dwell^^g-House, are Burglary, Arson; And against the
Protection of public Justice, ^s Breach of Prison. Diverse Fellonies against
the Statute, Rape, Carrying away Women against their Will, Cutting out their
Tongues, etc. Poligamy, and many more, which are not Capital, as Misprisons*
Conspiracys, Bribery, Perjury, Riots, Routs, Unlawful Assemblies, Monopolies
and all Breaches of the Peace; False Weights and Measures, Nusances, and all
Real Grievances and Offenses whatsoever; and such are Persons Refusing to pay
Taxes, and such as advise their Neighbors so to do; Such as shall utter and
spread Infamous and Approbious Language against the Government, their
Governors, Judges, Justices, and other Magistrates and Officers, for doing
their Duty, and that Oppose them in doing thereof; and those Officers that are
Negligent of their Duty: All these things are against the King's Peace and fall
under your Consideration. So God direct you.

FINIS.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York; Sold also by Andrew Bradford
in Philadelphia, 1716.


