A Discourse OCCASIONED By the late Distressing STORM Which began Feb. ^0th.
1716, 17 As it was Delivered March 3d. 1716./7.

By Eliphalet Adams, A.M. Pastor of the Church in New London.

Psalm. cxlviii. 8. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, Stormy Wind fulfilling His
Word.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, near the Meeting House. 1717.

A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the late Distressing STORM.
NAHUM I. 3. The LORD has His Way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the
Clouds are the Dust of His Feet.


THIS Prophesy of Nahum is Directed against Niniveh the Metropolis of the
Kingdom of Assyria; It seems they returned to their Sins again after their
remarkable repentance and reformation upon the Preaching of the Prophet Jonas,
They quickly fell from their good resolutions and were become ripe for ruin,
Either their repentance was not Sincere or else it was not General or else the
good Effects of it dyed away and were lost with that Generation; The Anger of
God was mightily kindled against them, It could not be so Easily Quenched now
as it had been before and accordingly we find very terrible threatenings
denounced against them in this Book.

They were puffed up with their Conquests, their hearts were hardened in Pride
and they seemed quite to forget and disregard the God that was above, Otherwise
Sennacharib their King had never sent that Insulting and Insolent Message by
the hand of Rabshekah, against the People of God in the Days of Hezekiah, Unto
this probably the Prophet refers in that passage, v. 11. There is one Come out
of thee, that imagines Evil against the Lord, a wicked Counselor. This
stirred the Jealousy and fury of the Lord, to revenge their Misdoings upon
their guilty heads, v. 2. God is Jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord
revengeth and is furious, the Lord will take Vengeance of his adversaries, and
he reserveth wrath for his Enemies.

It is true, the Lord is slow to anger, he bears a great while with wicked men
that go on in their Sinful ways, But woe to them that make an ill use of this
Patience and Long-suffering of his, to harden themselves in Sin, for he is also
great in Power and will not at all acquit the wicked, as we find in the
beginning of this third Verse. Let none Encourage themselves in Sin, because of
God's present forbearance and his slowness to anger, for sooner or later their
Iniquity will find them out unless they repent, and we may be sure that the day
of Vengeance will be never the less terrible when it comes for its having been
kept off so long: It is a noted Saying, That though Justice comes with Leaden
feet, yet it strikes with Iron hands, Accordingly Interpreters understand the
words of the Text as Expressing the Suddenness together with the force and
Violence of those Desolating Judgments which should come upon the wicked
Assyrians, The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm and the
Clouds are the Dust of his feet. And so the words may be parellell'd with that
passage in, Isa. 47. 11. Therefore shall Evil come upon thee, thou shall not
know from whence it rises; And mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not
be able to put it off: And desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou
shall not know. Whirlwinds come upon Men suddenly before they are aware of it
and Storms beat upon our Habitations with unrelenting fury, Either of them
bringing Certain Destruction when they come with greater Violence; How bold and
strong are the Metaphors that are here made use of! How lofty is the though it and
yet how agreeable and lively is the Description of their approaching fate! The
Lord has his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm and the Clouds are the Dust
of his feet. With what Pomp and Majesty does the Lord Come forth of his place
to Execuse Judgment on a Sinful People! Before he dealt mildly with them and
sent his Prophet to stir them up to repentance, as one that delighted not in
the Death of Sinners, But now the Day of his Patience is at an End, and he has
his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm, to bring swift and terrible Destruction
upon them, As Conquerors, that have been Enraged by the perfidiousness of their
Enemies, fly in have to the Spoil, Their Eyes do not spare, Nor do their hearts
move them to pity in the Day of Slaughter, They pursue their flying Adversary
from place to place, while mighty Clouds of Dust are raised by their Eager
troops; So the Lord has his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm and the
Clouds are the Dust of his feet; And as it is true in the Metaphorical sense,
that the Lord has his way, etc. so Doubtless it is in the Literal sense, from
whence these Metaphors are borrowed, And it is in this Sense chiefly that I
design to handle the Words at this time.

A Whirlwind is occasioned by the meeting of two Opposite winds which prevent
Each others passage and are therefore Necessarily both of them carried Sideways
in a Circular motion, Now as the winds which do thus Encounter Each other are
more or less Strong, so the Effects thereof are more or less Dreadful, We see
how it whirls about the Leaves and other lighter things which it finds in its
way when it is but moderate; But sometimes it is more Violent, breaking down
and tearing up trees, Overwhelming houses and snatching up persons and things
whatsoever it finds in its way, It makes dreadful havoc while it lasts, And
therefore the mighty force and surprising suddenness of Divine Judgments is
sometimes aptly Expressed thereby, Jer. 30. 23. Behold, the whirlwind of the
Lord goes forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind, it shall fall with pain
upon the Head of the wicked. Storms also are oftentimes very terrible and leave
dreadful Effects behind them, whether they be Storms of wind only or whether
they be attended with rain or hail or snow, Not only are they pernicious to
them that do business upon great Waters, that more faithless Element, But upon
the Land too they frequently cause abundance of Loss and Damage, The fierce and
Violent winds blow down all before them, A sweeping rain leaves little or no
food, Some dreadful hail beats down and Destroys the tender herb and Standing
Corn and has not seldom been fatal both to the life of man and beast. And our
Eyes have lately seen how Effectual some driving snow is to smother, bury and
Destroy; Whirlwinds and storms, rain, hail and snow are all of them the Effects
of Natural Causes, yet the Lord has his way in them, as is affirmed in the
Text; In the farther speaking to these Words, I shall First. Consider what we
are to Understand by it when the Lord is said to have his way in the Whirlwind
and the Storm. Secondly, I shall Endeavor to Demonstrate and Prove the truth
of this. Thirdly, I shall Consider what Improvement we ought to make of this
Truth.

1. I shall Consider, what we are to Understand by it when the Lord is said to
have his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm. For (as was noted before) this
is true and may well be Understood in the Literal as well as in the
Metaphorical sense, When therefore the Lord is said to have his way in the
Whirlwind and the Storm and that the Clouds are the Dust of his feet, these
things may be Intended therein.

1. That the Lord is the Author, Producer and Cause of all these things. The
wind and the Pain, the snow and the hail do all acknowledge God as their
Author, They are laid up in his treasures to be brought forth at such times and
in such manner as he shall see Cause, Either with more gentleness and
moderation, for the benefit of Mankind, Or else with more Violence and terror,
for their Correction;

He is the Father of the Rain and it is he that has begotten the drops of the
Dew, He makes a way for the Lightning of thunder and has laid up the Snow and
the hail in his Storehouses, which no mortal Eye has seen. Job 38. 22. Have
thou Entered into the treasures of the snow? or have thou seen the treasures of
the hail?

The Lord makes the bright Clouds and forms the thick Clouds, filling them
with his water and driving them to and fro under the whole heaven; These are
his Sponges which suck up the moisture from the Earth or Sea until they are
satiated and then he causes them to distill it again upon the Earth, He gives
Ice like morsels and by the breath of the Lord Frost is Created. Job 37. 10,
11, 12. By the breath of God frost is given and the breadth of the waters is
straightened, also by watering he wearieth the thick Cloud; he scatters his
bright cloud. And it is turned round about by his Counsels. He gathers the
winds in his fist, Prove. 20. 4. When he opens his hand they fly abroad Over
the face of the whole Earth; These are parts of his ways, the works of his
hands who is the Author of all Nature, and the Lord is to be seen and
Acknowledged in them; And although we read in, I Kings 19. 11. of a great and
strong wind that rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before the
Lord and that the Lord was not in the wind, Yet when the Lord is said not to be
in the wind, the meaning is only, that he did not manifest himself to the
Prophet, by any Distinct Voice in that Wind, as he did afterward; and we are
not to Understand by it as if the Lord were not the Author, Causer and Producer
thereof.

2. When the Lord is said to have his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm and
that the Clouds are the Dust of his feet, the meaning is that he Orders and
governs all these things, and that both as to the times and places where they
shall come and as to the height and Degree to which they shall arise. These
things do all of them seem wild furious unto us, yet are they perfectly under
the Divine Government. At his Word they rise, they rage within the bounds of
his permission only and they are hushed again at his bidding; He that sets
bounds to the proud waves of the Sea, saying, Hitherto shall ye come and no
farther, that stilleth the tumult of the People, does also restrain these
meteors within their proper Limits, They go wherever he sends them, they rise
to that height which pleases him, and they are silenced again whenever he
will; Psalm. 147. 15. He sends forth his Commandment upon Earth, has Word
runs very swiftly. It is the Lord that causes it to rain upon the
Wilderness where no man dwells, Upon one City and not upon another, that makes
it Descend in smaller or Larger Quantities; He calls for the waters of the Sea
and pours out floods upon the dry and thirsty Ground and faith to the Snow, Be
thou upon the Earth. Job 37. 6. For he faith to the Snow, Be thou on the Earth;
likewise to the small rain and to the great rain of his strength. He causes
the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes Lightnings for the
rain; be brings the wind out of his treasuries, Psalm. 135. 7.

Nor are these things Unmanagable by him when once they are risen to some
Extraordinary height, but he can still them at a words speaking whenever he
pleases,

So our Lord Jesus Christ when his disciples were sorely distressed by a
tempest in the Sea of Tiberias, awoke from his sleep, first checked his
Disciples needless fear since their Lord was with them and then stilleth the
Storm. Mat. 8. 26, 27. And be faith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? Then he arose and rebuked the Winds and the Sea and there was a
great Calm. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that
even the Winds and the Sea Obey him? Yea, Even when Storms and tempests are
raised by Satan, (as he is sometimes allowed to do it, and he did so
particularly when he afflicted Job, so that the house fell upon his Children
and Destroyed them. Job 1 19) Yet they are still under God's Ordering and
Government: And no more Damage shall be done thereby than he is pleased to
permit.

3. When the Lord is said to have his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm and
that the Clouds are the Dust of his feet, the meaning is, that he Executes his
good, wise and just Purposes thereby. Every thing is at God's Command, All
Creatures are his Servants, and he gives them Commission to Execute his Will
when and as it pleases him; Not only the blessed Angels above are his
Ministers; to Obey his Voice, ready to fly upon every Errand that he sends them
about, but the meanest insects are formidable when he gives them Commission to
Execute judgment. Winds and Storms, rain, hail or snow do perform whatever he
appoints them; as the Psalmist observes in, Psalm. 148.8. Fire and hail, Snow
and vapor, Stormy wind fulfilling his Word.

Here to be a little particular.

1. These things do Execute the Lords purposes of Mercy and bring great benefit
to his People. Thus the Winds do move and fan the Air and make it more wholesome
to breath in, When the Lord faith to the Snow, Be thou upon the Earth, It is
meant as a Covering to the Ground to keep it warm and make it more fruitful,
This Doubtless is partly intended by that Expression of the Psalmist, in, Psalm.
147. 16. He gives snow like wool. It is compared unto Wool not only on the
account of its softness and Color, but especially for its Warmth which it
brings to the Earth: Who can reckon up the benefits of the Rain? Without it
every thing would quickly be parched up and the World would soon become a
barren and desolate Place; It is this which produces that great Variety of
excellent Fruits which our Eyes behold, It makes all Nature to rejoice, It
drops upon the Pastures of the Wilderness and the little Hills are girded with
joy on every side, The Pastures are clothed with Flocks, The Valleys are
covered over with Corn, They shout for joy, they also Sing. Psalm. 147. 8, 9.
Who Covers the Heaven with Clouds, who prepares Rain for the Earth, who
makes Grass to grow upon the Mountains, he gives to the Beast his Food, and
to the young Ravens which cry. Job 37. 12, 13. -- That they may do whatsoever
he Commands them upon the face of the world in the Earth, He causes it to
come, whether for Correction, or for his Land, or for Mercy.

2. By these things the Lord sometimes Designs to Convince men of his great
Power and work in them an Aw of his Majesty. They are used sometimes more for
Terror than Execution, that men may learn to fear and tremble before the God of
Heaven and be taught what they are to expect if they prove Disobedient to his
Voice and provoke him to Anger with their Iniquities; So at the giving of the
Law at Mount Sinai, the Lord appeared in great Pomp and Majesty, to strike a
greater dread into the People and prepare them to receive his Will with greater
Reverence: Exodus 19. 16. And it came to pass on the third day in the morning,
that there were Thunders and Lightnings and a thick Cloud upon the Mount and
the Voice of the Trumpet exceeding Loud, so that all the People that was in the
Camp trembled.

So when the People of Israel had Displeased the Lord by asking them a King,
that they might be Convinced of their Sin and brought to fear the Lord their
God, he sent Thunder and Rain very terrible. 1 Samuel 12. 18, 19. So Samuel
called to the Lord and the Lord sent thunder and rain that Day and all the
People greatly feared the Lord and Samuel, And all the People said unto Samuel,
Pray for thy Servants unto the Lord thy God that we did not, for we have added
unto all our Sins this Evil to ask us a King.

3. By these things the Lord sometimes sees it fit to Correct his People for
their Sins. Their Transgressions do provoke him to Jealousy and that they may
be made sensible of their faults, he touches them in a very sensible part, by
Distressing them as to their Outward Enjoyments and Ordinary Comforts: The wind
and the rain, the snow and the hail shall be sent or withheld for their
Punishment. Sometimes they are afflicted for want of Rain and the Country is
burnt up by excessive Drought, This Calamity was often sent upon the People of
Israel, and we have frequently Experienced it Our selves; Sometimes again the
Country is even drowned with Excessive Rain and abundance of Damage is done by
mighty Floods;

The Lord sends forth the great Rain of his strength and causes it to come for
Correction, as in the before mentioned, Job. 37. 13.

Violent Storms are oftentimes fatal to men's Lives and to their Substance,
producing Shipwrecks by Sea and terrible Desolations by Land; Thus God's
Purposes are Executed and a Sinful People most justly Punished.

4. By these things also the Enemies of God and of his People are frequently
Punished and Destroyed. Of this we have many Instances both in Sacred and
Profane History; This was one of the Plagues of Egypt, There was hail and fire
mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the
Land of Egypt since it became a Nation, and the hail smote throughout all the
Land of Egypt both Man and Beast that were found in the Field and Destroyed
every Herb and every Tree;

Such was that terrible Thunder Storm when Sodom and Gomorrha and the Cities of
the Plain were destroyed by Fire from Heaven, so that the Assertion of the
Psalmist was Literally fulfilled upon them even in this world. Psalm. II. 6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone and an horrible
Tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup.

So when Joshua was fighting against the Canaanites, the Lord sent down great
Stones upon them from Heaven, insomuch that there were more who perished by the
Hailstones than by the Sword, Josh. 10. 11. And afterward in Samuels time the
Philistines that fought against Israel were Discomfited with great Thunder, 1 Samuel 7. 10. These things, viz. the Rain, the Snow and the Hail, the Wind and
the Thunder are reserved in God's Treasures for these uses. Job 38. 22, 23.
Have thou entered into the treasures of the Snow? or have thou seen the
treasures of the Hail? Which I have reserved against the time of Trouble,
against the Day of Battle and War. In these respects the Lord is fitly said to
have his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm in that these things fulfill his
Word and execute his Purposes.

II. I am to Demonstrate and Prove the Truth of this, that the Lord has his
way, in these respects, in the Whirlwind and in the Storm and the Clouds are
the Dust of his feet. Many Persons see the working of these things, what great
and mavelous Effects they do produce, but they do not perceive, nor
acknowledge the Hand that manageth them. They cannot see afar off nor look
beyond Second Causes to the First; But it becomes us to Adore and Reverence him
who has the management of all these things, since it is so Evident and
Demonstrable that the Lord has his way in them, This will appear if we
Consider --

1. That the Scriptures do every where Assert and Imply it whenever there is
occasion to make mention of these things. They are still attributed to God's
Hand, and Second Causes have not the Command of them, Now the Scriptures being
sufficiently Proved to be the Word of God, are therefore a good ground for us
to build our Faith upon. To be sure, we that have acknowledged them for our
Rule, ought to give entire Credit unto whatsoever is related and asserted
therein.

2. Even the Light of Nature may assure us of the truth of this, that the Lord
has his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm and the Clouds are the Dust of his
feet. The Light of Nature Discovers a Superior Being, who is Self-subsistent,
the First Cause and the Last End of all other things; Reason cannot be
satisfied or rest till it Centers here; We are even forced to this Conclusion
since nothing can be solved without it, Now it is Natural to think and a
Necessary Inference, that he who Made all things, must also Order, Dispose and
Govern them; Hence it comes to pass that People of all Nations, who are
furnished with Nothing but the Light of Nature, when they are Distressed by
Violent Storms, do Naturally lift up their Hands, their Eyes and their Hearts
to this Superior Being that he would graciously appear for their help, However
Lame and Defective their notion of God may be in other respects, Yet they agree
in believing that he hat the Command of Storms and Tempests, and that he is
able to deliver them when they are Distressed on such Occasions, So the
Mariners with whom the Prophet Jonas Sailed, fall to their Prayers when the
Storm was hard upon them and stir up him to his Devotions too. Jon. 1. 5, 6.
Then the Mariners were afraid, and Cried every man to his god, and cast forth
the wares that were in the Ship into the Sea, to lighten it of them; but Jonah
was gone down into the sides of the Ship and he lay and was fast asleep. So the
Ship-master came to him and said unto him, what meanest thou O sleeper? Arise,
call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.

3. It is very Evident that the Lord has his way in the Whirlwind and the
Storm and the Clouds are the Dust of his feet, in that we do not see all things
Destroyed almost, and find them in the utmost Confusion. These are wild and
furious things when once they are broken loose, what Desolations would they not
cause, what Mischiefs would they not produce, did not the Lord restrain their
Violence and say unto them, Peace, be still; Did not the Lord who fitteth upon
the Water-floods, who makes the Clouds his Chariot, and flies upon the wings
of Wind, curb their Violence and Check their force, all Nature would quickly be
in the Utmost Confusion; So when once the Fountains of the great Deep were
broken up and the Windows of Heaven were opened, when Storms and Tempests were
left to rage without Control, the World was drowned and every Living thing
dyed excepting Noah and those that were with him in the Ark, who were taken
under God's immediate Care and Protection, The like or greater Desolations
would Quickly happen again, did not the Lord bind in the great Deep as with
swaddling Bands, did he not stay his Rough wind in the day of the East wind, and
Control the Violence of Storms and Tempests.

III. And Lastly, I am to Consider what Improvement we ought to make of this
Truth, or Consideration, that the Lord has his way in the Whirlwind and the
Storm and that the Clouds are the Dust of his feet. Every Doctrine which either
Nature or Scripture teaches is singularly Useful, and this among the rest.

To be a little particular.

1. What we have heard upon this Subject may teach us that all men ought to
fear and tremble before the God of Heaven.

Since all Nature is at his Command and every thing stands ready to Execute his
Pleasure, He sends forth his Commandment upon the Earth, his Word runs
very swiftly, He sends forth Lightnings, they go and say here we are, He
calls for the Rain both the more gentle showers and the great Rain of his
Strength, He mustereth up the Stormy Winds and they fly to fulfill his Word, The
Hail, and the Snow descend at his bidding, Sometimes he lets loose more of
their rage and fury, and then terrible Destruction is made upon the Earth,
Ought we not to fear Him whom all Nature Obeys, who is clothed with Majesty and
is terrible in his Doings? Job 37. 22, 24. With God is terrible Majesty, -- Men
do therefore fear him. Especially they that go down to the Sea in Ships, that
do Business in great Waters, These see the Works of the Lord and his Wonders in
the Deep, For he Commands and raises the Stormy Wind which lifts up the
Waves thereof, They mount up to heaven, they go down again to the depths, Their
Soul is melted because of trouble, They reel to and fro and stagger like a
Drunken man and are at their wits end, Again he makes the Storm a Calm so that
the Waves thereof are still, as we find it in that Elegant Description of the
Psalmist. Psalm. 107. 23, and c. It is the Lord that sets Bounds to the raging
of the Sea, and faith to its Proud Waves, Hitherto shall ye come and no
farther, that they return not to Overflow the Earth, Surely men ought to fear
Him, who is able to Save and able also to Destroy and that in this World as
well as Eternally.

Verily, They are bold, Impious and foolhardy People who refuse to tremble
before the God of Heaven, who alone does wondrous Works; Jer. 5. 22. Fear ye
not Me, faith the Lord? Will ye not tremble at my Presence, which have placed
the Sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree that it cannot pass
it, and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail,
though they roar yet can they not pass over it. The very Earth shakes and
trembles at his Presence, the Foundations of the Hill are moved when the Lord
passes by, to teach us to rise up with Reverence and behold the Lord with an
Aw upon our Spirits, when he has his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm;
Such a profound Regard had Elihu for the Lord when he appeared with such
Circumstances of Pomp and Majesty. Job 17. 1, etc. At this also my heart
trembles and is moved out of his place, Hear attentively the noise of his
Voice and the sound that goes out of his Mouth, etc.

2. What we have heard upon this Subject may further teach us what a sad and
dangerous Condition they are in, who are still in a state of Sin and full of
Enmity against God. These Persons are always Exposed, they stand in Jeopardy
every hour, and every Evil that finds them is ready to Slay them; there is no
Creature but what is armed for their Destruction, waiting only for leave to
Dispatch them out of the World; And we may observe, that it is to set forth the
grievous Hazard and certain Ruin unto which wicked Men and the Enemies of God
are continually Exposed, that the words of our Text are Introduced, The
Ninivites had ripened themselves for Destruction by their Sins, and the Lord
had Determined their Ruin which should come Suddenly and Irresistably upon
them, He is flying to the Execution, and is therefore said to have his way in
the Whirlwind and the Storm and the Clouds are the Dust of his feet, How
effectual and terrible the Stroke upon them would be, we are farther told in,
v. 8,9,10. But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the
Place thereof, and Darkness shall pursue his Enemies, What do ye imagine
against the Lord, He will make an utter end; Affliction shall not rise up the
second time; For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are
drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. In the like
hazardous Condition are all Impenitent Sinners and Enemies of God, It is Easy
with him to Cut the thread of their Lives, They go in Constant Peril whether by
Land or Sea, and may well fear that every Storm and Tempest is Aimed at their
Devoted heads; Every Creature is ready to rise up and Avenge its Masters
Quarrel, and when ever it receives a Commission for that purpose it will
Execute it Effectually, And then, No sooner are these Persons Dispatched out of
this Life, but they drop into Everlasting Misery.

3. What we have heard on this Subject may farther teach in how safe and happy
they are, who are taken under the Divine Protection, as all Godly Persons be.
To use the Psalmists Expression, These People have hastened their Escape from
the windy Storm and Tempest, They Dwell on high, i. e. more out of the reach of
Evil, their Place of Defense is the munition of Rocks, They have made the Lord
most High their Refuge and Habitation, and therefore no Evil shall befall them,
nor any Plague come nigh their Dwellings, They dwell in the secret Place of the
most High, and shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; Either they shall
be Distinguished and singled out to Preservation when terrible Storms do Come,
as is oftentimes the Case, So the Lord remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of
the midst of the Overthrow when Sodom and Gomorrha were destroyed; So the
Israelites had Light and joy and safety in their Dwellings, when the Egyptians
were afflicted with all manner of Calamities and Plagues; Or else if they do
suffer by them, all shall be Sanctified and made to work together for their
good, So that they shall gain more in Another and a better way than they can
possibly lose; Nay if their Death should be hastened thereby (for even good Men
are not Exempted from the stroke of Temporal Calamities, and when the Scourge
slays suddenly, both the Righteous and the Wicked are sometimes involved in one
common Ruin) Yet they are only transported the sooner into Everlasting Joy, Nor
will their Happiness taste ever the worse for the Suddenness of their admission
thereinto, So Elijah was taken up by a Whirlwind into Heaven, and had,
doubtless, as true a relish of the Joys of the Kingdom as if he had gone
thither by more slow and leisurely approaches; Upon the whole, It is certain
that the Lord exercises a singular Care about them that trust in his Mercy, He
knows them and all their Circumstances, and will never suffer any thing to
befall them which shall be for their real Damage, as we find in this Chapter, v.
7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him. He knows them as the good Shepherd knows his Sheep, He
accepts and approves of them, He will own his Relation to them and never leave
them or forsake them.

4. What we have heard upon this Subject may farther teach us, that it is our
Wisdom and Interest to be more Weaned from this World and its Enjoyments, which
is the Place of Storms and Tempests and is oftentimes very Uncomfortable to
Live in. What grievous Calamities are we here oftentimes Exposed unto, How
tediously and Uncomfortably are we many times forced to lead our Lives in this
Vale of Tears, this Region of Storms and Tempests; We are frequently Distressed
with Difficulties so that we know not which way to turn, we are followed with
Various Disasters and our Lives are not seldom in Imminent Danger; Why should
we be Over-fond of abiding here below, Why should we cleave so Close to the
Empty, Uncertain, Unsatisfying Enjoyments of this World, that are attended with
as much or more Bitterness and Sorrow, than they can possibly afford us
Delight; Why should we not loose our selves by Degrees from what we Enjoy here
below, that when the Day of Parting comes it may not seem so very grievous unto
us, Why should we not frequently aspire in our thoughts and desires to that
Region of Happiness above where every thing is Calm and Serene, where the Lord
will no more have his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm for our Correction and
Terror, But in his Light we shall ever see Light, and there shall be nothing to
Interrupt our Joy and Satisfaction to all Eternity.

5. What we have heard upon this Subject may farther teach us, to See and
Acknowledge God's Hand in all those Storms and Tempests that come upon us.
Since the Lord has his way in them all whether they be Natural or
Metaphorical, we ought to regard the Operation of the Lord and wisely to
Consider his doing; There are but too many stupid and Inadvertent People that
when the Lord's Hands is lifted up they will not see, when his Judgments are
abroad in the Earth they will not regard them; Whatever Loss and Damage they do
sustain by any Public Calamity, they are affected a while with that, and set
their wits to work to Contrive how it may be repaired again as soon and as well
as possible, while God is Entirely overlooked, and they act as if they thought
some Chance only had befallen them; But it becomes us to Acknowledge God in all
our ways, to Eye his Hand in every thing that happens to Us, to our Neighbors
and to our Country; This is but a piece of due Respect which we Owe to the
Lord, whose Works are all of them Great and Magnificent and therefore must not
be heeded by us with a slighty and Incurious Eye, Even as the Actions of
Princes and great Men, whether they exercise Mercy or Judgment, are more
attended unto than the Actions of meaner People, Much more heedfully should we
Observe the goings of the Lord, all whose Works are done in Judgment, who is
Holy in all his ways and Righteous in all his doings.

Herein also we shall show our Wisdom and better Consult our interest, since
thereby we shall be more Capable of falling in with the Lord's design, So when
the Psalmist had been recounting the Various dispensations of Divine Providence
toward the Children of Men, the manifold Distresses which he sometimes brought
them into and the strange Deliverances which he afforded to them, he Concludes
thus in, Psalm. 107. 43. Whosoever is wise and will Observe these things, even they
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Particularly,

1. We ought to Acknowledge the Distinguishing Goodness of God at such times,
so far as we and ours are Spared, Protected and Provided for. It may be those
round about us are Considerable Sufferers at such times, Now we ought not only
to pity and Sympathize with them, but to return our hearty Thanks unto God who
has Distinguished us and does not yet Call us forth to the Enduring of such
grievous things; Let us be far from reflecting upon or Censuring them as
greater Sinners because they suffer such things, The Lord might have called our
Sins to remembrance too and sent upon us the fierceness of his Wrath and
Indignation, since we have deserved it as much, nay, perhaps more than some of
them; Let the Long-suffering and forbearance of our God toward us work upon
our Ingenuity and lead us to Repentance; that so there may be no need of any
hersher Methods to be used with us to bring us to our right Minds and a more
regular Behavior; Whenever we and what belongs to us have found a secure
Shelter from the Fury of the Winds and the Violence of a Tempest, we ought to
give Thanks to him who has his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm and did not
suffer it to Come near to us for hurt, So the Psalmist puts men upon Praising
the Lord for his Goodness on such Occasions and for his wonderful Works to the
Children of men, Let them Exalt him also in the Congregation of the People and
Praise him in the Assembly of the Elders, Psalm. 107. 31, 32. So when we have
found Protection and Safety in any Metaphorical Storm, we ought to Glorify God
that afforded it unto us. Isa. 25. 3,4. Therefore shall the strong People
Glorify thee, the City of the terrible Nations shall fear thee, For thou have
been a Strength to the Poor, a Strength to the Needy in his Distress, a Refuge
from the Storm, a Shadow from the Heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is
as a Storm against the wall.

2. We ought also to Acknowledge God's Righteousness and Justice so far as we
are Sufferers on such Occasions. It is no Chance or Accident that has befallen
us now (as some men fondly dream) but a Necessary Chastisement inflicted upon
us, by the Kind, Wise and Righteous Hand of God; God is now Calling to us in
his holy Providence to Consider our ways and search out for what Reasons he is
thus Contending with us; And we may be satisfied that there is always Enough
amiss in our Conduct to justify the greatest Severity which God uses in his
Dealings with us, Nay, We must even then Confess that he Punishes us less than
our Iniquities have deserved, And that it is of the Lord's Mercies that we are
not Consumed, because his Compassions do not fail us; We should therefore be
far from Murmuring against the Righteous Hand of God on such Occasions, And if
we feel our Hearts begin to rise and be hot within us, we should turn all our
Displeasure upon our Sins which have Deserved these and might have brought down
much greater Calamities upon our Heads.

3. When the Calamity is General we ought to Consider what the Lord's Intention
therein may be, to hearken to his Voice and set in with his Design. Now we
Ought as one man to Humble Our selves under God's Mighty Hand, to hear the Rod
and him that has Appointed it, according to that Direction, in Mic. 6. 9. The
Lord's Voice Cries to the City, and the man of Wisdom shall see thy Name; hear
ye the Rod and who has Appointed it.

What has been hitherto spoken, was Occasioned (as you may easily Conjecture)
by the late terrible Storm which the Lord has sent upon us and is yet so very
Distressing unto us; The Hand of the Lord was so Visible therein, It was so
very Manifest that the Lord had his way in this Storm and Came forth against us
in a way of Judgment and Displeasure that I could not Omit taking this Public
Notice thereof; And there were these following Circumstances especially, among
others which might have been mentioned, that made it more Remarkable, rendered
it still more heavy to be born, and showed the Divine Displeasure yet more
Visibly therein.

1. In that it happened so very late in the Year when it was the less to be
Expected. We were comforting our selves that we had almost gotten through the
Winter, which indeed had been very Moderate till then; We were almost ready to
say as we find it in the Song of Solomon, The Winter is past, The Rain (and the
Snow) is over and gone, The Flowers are ready to appear on the Earth, The time
of the Singing of Birds is almost come, and the Voice of the Turtle shall again
be heard in our Land, When, Lo we are cast back into all the Solitudes and
Difficulties of the Winter again.

2. In that the Snow Descended in so very great a Quantity, far beyond what is
Usual and has almost been known in the Memory of man. It is very surprising to
behold the Mounts and Hills which it has left behind and the Earth seems
almost to groan under the heavy Load, Insomuch that there is hardly any
stirring from our Places about our Necessary Business or providing our selves
with those Conveniences of Life which yet it is very Uncomfortable to want.

3. In that it was so Quickly and so Terribly Repeated. Scarce had we recovered
our first Surprise when we were Visited a Second time, and we might well
perceive the goings forth of him that is Everlasting in his sore Indignation
against us by the mighty Dust of his feet, The Lord saw it Necessary to follow
his Blow and caused the Affliction to rise up the Second time that all those
who were not sufficiently Awakened by the first Visitation might be more
Effectually startled by the Second, So the Lord promised himself that if the
Egyptians would not believe nor hearken to the Voice of the first Sign that yet
they would be Convinced by the Second; Exodus 4. 8. And it shall come to pass,
if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the Voice of the first Sign,
that they will believe the Voice of the latter Sign.

4. It was the more Awful and still a greater Token of the Divine Displeasure
in that we were driven out of the House of God thereby. There was scarce a
possibility of stirring out or so much as making an Attempt to go up to Public
Worship. The Lord, who will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, dispensed with our
Attendance upon him in the Sanctuary for that time; And, Oh that we were sure
that it was not because the Offerings which we were wont to bring before him,
were Loathsome and Displeasing in his sight; We know that the Worship which God
himself Commanded to the Jews, was once Unacceptable to him as Coming from
them, whose Hands were defiled with Sin and their Hearts Pertinaciously set
upon their Evil ways, He was weary to bear it, as the Prophet plainly tells
them in God's Name; Isa. I. 11, -- 19. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the Burnt-offerings of Rams,
and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of
Lambs, or of He-goats. When ye come to Appear before me, who has Required this
at your hand, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an
Abomination unto me: the New Moons and Sabbaths, the Calling of Assemblies I
cannot away with: it is Iniquity, even the Solemn Meeting. Your New Moons and
your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to
bear them. And when ye spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you:
yea, when ye make many Prayers, I will not hear; your Hands are full of Blood.
What should be the meaning of all this Displeasure? These were things of God's
own Institution and Appointment, but they were Corrupted by passing through such
foul Hands, The Worship was good, but the Offerers were Evil; and the Lord
could not possibly Approve and Accept of them until they had Amended their Ways
and Doings.

Whether our Public Services are become as Unacceptable to God as theirs were
or not, It seems they were of no such great Account with him as that he would
please to Permit us to Offer them the last Sabbath, And it is more than
probable that even this Day, many are hindered from going to the House of God in
Company with us by the remaining Effects of the late Storm, whose Hearts are
with us and who do account it a Considerable frown and Disadvantage to them
that they are detained from joining in the Public Prayers and Praises of the
Congregation. Doubtless, There are but too many who account it no Affliction at
all to be Kept from going up to the House of God upon the Sabbath, They have
unhappily Learned to make light of the Ordinances of the Gospel, and have
forsaken the Assembling of themselves together for God's Worship in a very
great Degree; This is such a Degenerate Practice as must needs be very
Displeasing unto God: And who can tell what force this among other Sins might
give to the Violence and Terror of the late Storm?

Oh! that it would please God Graciously to Open the Eyes of these People, as
well as of all other sorts of Sinners, that we might once see them Panting
after the Lord as the pursued Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, their Souls
Thirsting, and their Flesh Crying out for the Living God, and saying, When
shall we Come and Appear before God? God was Awfully Preaching to us the Last
Sabbath, and Disciplining of us in his Holy Providence for our not Improving
former Opportunities as we should have done. Oh! That it might Effectually
Teach us to Husband our Seasons better for the time to Come, and be more
Diligently Gathering Fruit unto Eternal Life.

5. And Lastly, It was the more Awful and yet greater token of the Divine
Displeasure, in that has brought upon us so great Distress, Loss and
Suffering. How many have been driven to great Straits thereby and pinched with
hard Necessity, And many have met with Considerable Losses (...)n their
Substance and their Cattle, How have they Perished in Droves and been swept
away in great Numbers by one Desolating Stroke! So terribly did the Storm serve
to Smother and Bury at once, and perhaps we do as yet hear but of a small part
of the Damage that has been done; The Lord Pity the poor Sufferers and such
especially, who being in Low Circumstances are the less able to bear up under
such an heavy Stroke,

And after he has graciously Sanctified the Affliction to them and more
Purified their Souls by the means of these Outward Calamities, may he please to
make up to them their present Losses by that Effectual Blessing of his which
makes Rich, and grant them Experimentally to see that he is able to give them
much more than this.

To Conclude, May this heavy Hand of God upon us serve to drive us home to our
selves and put us upon a careful Searching our what it is that is so Provoking
unto God in the midst of us: May it lay us all Prostrate at his Feet, who has
all Nature at his Command, can easily come at us for our Correction and has
yet more Judgments in store to send upon us if these Suffice not for our
Reformation; Particularly, May the late Tempest that has been upon us, tend to
allay the Storms that rage in our Breasts and make us Meek, Peaceable, Gentle
toward all men and Easy to be Entreated, such as Christianity Describes and
requires its Professors to be. May it still the Noise of Tumult and Contention
in the Country and Check the spirit of Jealousy, Suspicion and Division that
is strangely gone forth to the Disturbance of all Order and which Threatens the
Ruin of all that is dear in the midst of us; If we may but be brought Nearer to
God and to one Another, and learn at length to Live more like Christians and
Dwell together in Unity as Brethren ought to do, we shall then have reason to
bless the Means which brings about so much Good, however harsh it may be in the
Operation. Then would the Lord Arise for our Help, He would rejoice over us
with Singing, He would rest in his Love, He would turn again and have
Compassion upon us, He would Subdue all our Iniquities and Cast our Sins behind
his Back into the depths of the Sea.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, a Book, Entitled, The Absence of the Comforter
Described and Lamented, In a Discourse on Lamentations I. 16. For these things
I Weep, wine Eye, mine Eye runs down with Water; because the Comforter, that
should relieve my Soul, is far from me.

By the Reverend Mr. Nehemiah Hobart, late Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Newton.


