FAIR DEALING between Debtor and Creditor. A very brief ESSAY UPON The CAUTION
to be used, about coming in to DEBT, And getting out of it. Offered at
BOSTON-Lecture; 5. d. XI. m. 1715/16.

By Cotton Mather, D.D. and F.R.S.

Stultus est Debtor, qui gaudens Pecunias accipit, et Tempus quo reddere
debeat, non attendit.

Gregor. in Moral. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop
over against the North side of the Townhouse. 1716.

The Honest Debtor.
BOSTON-Lecture 5. d. XI. m. 1715, 16.
Romans XIII. 8. Owe no Man any thing, but to Love one another.


IT was a sad Complaint of Old, upbraiding a People, who had made an high
Profession of the true Religion; Ezekiel. V. 7. You have not done according to the
Judgments of the Nations which be round about you. It seems, other Nations, who
had not been so well-instructed as this People, yet had more Equity in their
Dealings, and were People of Better Morals, than these who had been under the
Covenant of God.

It has been complained, That though the Religion of God, be Professed with an
uncommon Show among our selves, yet among us, there are too often found such
Iniquities in the Dealings of Men, as are condemned even in the Judgments of
the Nations; and there are Better Morals to be found in Places, which yet may
have the Censure of the Patriarch upon Gerar too much belonging to them, than
sometimes occur in what makes the most flourishing Pretenses to be a Land of
Rectitude.

But, I hope, it will never be complained, That the Ministers of the Gospel,
are by any Sinful Silence accessory to the Transgressions, which Deny the
Doctrine of God our Savior, among a People, that are under peculiar
Obligations to Adorn it. It shall not be complained, That the Ministers do so
confine themselves to Preach Faith and Repentance, that the People forget Moral
Honesty, through any Default of ours. It shall be asserted, That with a due
Frequency, as well as Fervency, we inculcate upon our Neighbors, the Duties of
Moral Honesty, and remonstrate unto them, that without This, all their Faith
and Repentance is but a Counterfeit; God will reject it, and they shall not
prosper in it!

One Point of Morality, wherein we are told, that many People are defective,
is, The Caution with which Peoples Running into Debt, and Lying in it when they
have run into it, ought for ever to be regulated. People there are, too many,
who do bring Debts upon themselves, in such a manner, and in such a measure,
that a Folly nothing short of Criminal, is to be charged upon them. And when
they have brought such Debts upon themselves, their Delay to get from under
them, is what also amounts unto a Crime, for which they are to be Indicted, as
not having the Fear of God before their Eyes. There are some Circumstances of
the Day, which may render a Discourse on this Point of Morality, singularly
Seasonable. But indeed it were never out of Season. And, I would humbly hope,
that not only the Creditors, but even the Debtors too, will anon be Thankful,
for the Advice which is now Faithfully to be dispensed unto them.

To check the Errors too often committed by Contracting of Debts, and by
Continuing in them, I now read unto you a Sentence of the Sacred Oracles,
before which we ought all to tremble as before the Vibrations of a Thunderbolt.
It is the Voice of the ETERNAL, that is now conveyed unto us, by the Pen of an
Inspired Apostle. The God of Glory Thunders in it; May His Voice be so
Powerful, as to produce an universal Compliance among us, an universal
Obedience unto it.

The Spirit of God, who is a Righteous Lord, and Loves Righteousness, does
first of all direct us, to pay a Debt which People owe unto their Superiors;
That they who serve the Public, and have their Thought and their Time taken
up, in watching for the Safety of the People, may be handsomely Subsisted in
their Station. A Debt this is, which is not always duly considered, nor so
honestly paid as it ought to be! But then, the Direction goes on; That whatever
Debt People may owe to one another, in the way of their Dealing with one
another, be also duly answered. People must not be in Debt unto one another,
any further than what is anovoidable. It Is true, there is One Debt, which though
it should be ever Paying, yet it will be ever Owing. A Debt of Love to one
another. Of this, as much as you please! But for any other Debt, even for that
which is a proper Debt, Here you cannot be too Cautious. Let Christians come
Slowly into it; and let them get Quickly out of it. Let Christians Exercise
their Wisdom in coming in, and their Justice in getting out. Come into it, with
the Pace of a Tortoise, and get out of it, with the Flight of an Eagle.

The DOCTRINE, which I have a sufficient Commission to insist upon, is this.

There is a proper Caution, about coming into DEBT, and getting out of DERT,
which is a considerable Point of Christianity.

A Due Caution, to Owe no Man any thing, is what every Man should Labor in.
It Is the Duty of Christians, to have as few Creditors as ever they can, and owe
as little to their Creditors as ever they can, and give none of their Creditors
any cause to complain, That they are not fairly dealt withal.

I suppose, There is no need of any Accurate Essay, to give a Definition of the
DEBT, against which we are now to be cautioned. The Lexicons of the Lawyers are
needless to be consulted on this Occasion, which will tell us, Debtor tuus
est, qui tibi non reddit quod tuum est. A Debtor is One, who does not let
another Man have his own; One who does not render to a Neighbor, what he has a
claim unto. They will tell us, A Debt, is what a Man is under Obligation to
accommodate another Man withal. Or, Quod ab Invito Exigi potest; What a Man may
by Law and Right, be forced whether he will or no, to part withal. The meaning
of a DEBT, is too well known, yea, on both sides too feelingly understood, for
us to want any Explication of it. Every body knows, That a Man is in Debt, when
he is under Obligation to deliver up any Possessions unto another Man, upon the
Demand thereof. There are many Ways, in which a Man may come under such an
Obligation; and particularly such Ways as those wherein Onesimus came in Debt
unto his Master. But the most usual Way, and that which I have now my Eye most
upon, is, that of Agreement with the Creditor. The Debt is indeed, but as an
Embryo, in its Formation, while the Time is not yet come for the Creditor to
make his Demand. But it is more fully formed, and makes a very audible Cry,
when a Man witholds from another Man, the Possessions, which ought Now to be
delivered. This is not only Being in Debt, but also Lying in Debt: And it is to
be avoided with all the Caution imaginable. Christians, You do not answer your
Worthy Name; nor come up to that Necessary Character of True and Good and
Genuine Christians, Heb XIII. 18. Having a Good Conscience, in all things
willing to Live Honestly; -- If this Caution be a Stranger with you.

I hope, no Man will Excuse any Man's not Paying what he Owes, by the Example of
the Israelites, who Borrowed of the Egyptians, without making any Restitution.
If the Great GOD, who was now become the King of the Israelites, gave His
injured People a sort of Letters of Mart, for them to make Reprisals on the
Egyptians, it was but according to the Law of Nations. But some will maintain,
in reality, the Israelites did not Borrow any thing of the Egyptians. Our
Translation may be mended. They did not Borrow, but Beg of them. The same Word
is Translated elsewhere, To Request. The Things which the Israelites had of the
Egyptians, were not Lent, but Given to them. When its said, They Lent unto
them, it should be only taken so, They Accommodated them.

I am aware, That for People to bring themselves into Debt, is not a Thing
always Forbidden of God Our Apostle himself, who writes to the Romans, Owe no
Man any thing, yet was willing to bring himself into Debt, upon a Good Occasion
Yea, and into a Debt of Suretiship too, which is a Sort of Debt, that calls for
more Caution than any in the World. On the behalf of his Convert, he writes
unto Philemon; (Ver. 8.) If he owes thee any thing, put that on mine Account.
It was of Old required by God; Deuteronomy. XV. 8 If there be a poor Man, thou shall
surely lend him sufficient for his Need. Our Savior has Commanded us. To Lend
one unto another; Saying, From him that would Borrow of thee, turn thou not
away. And in His Word, He has Commended, the Good Man, that Shows Favor and
Lends; with an Hint indeed at the same time, That we should guide our Affairs
with Discretion. But we cannot (...) without our Neighbor coming into Debt unto
us: Which renders it plain. That some Debt is to be allowed of. Yea, without
some Debt, there could no Trade be carried on. It would strangely Cramp the
Trade of a People, if it might be no more than the Cash that is running among
them. There may be much Convenience in Buying, and sometimes there may be a
Necessity for Buying, when People cannot immediately Pay for what they Buy.
Yea, since the World so much resolves to Trade upon Credit, I will Grant, That
a Man of Capacity and Integrity, that has nothing else, may sometimes have his
Capacity and Integrity a Sufficient Fund, for him to take up thereupon, if his
Creditors will please to have it so. Our Books of Accounts, are a very Material
part of our Libraries; and an Excellent Provision they are, to carry on a
Lucriferous Business, when it is impossible to have Cash at hand, in Proportion
to the Trade that mult be prosecuted. And there, if Discount pass for Good Pay,
I pray, what Hurt is done to any Body? No Body is hurt, if the Debt wherewith
Trade is carried on, be kept under a Suitable Regulation.

But, that Suitable Regulation! This is what I am now to treat upon.

I Confess my self less competent for a Treatise on such a Subject, than
perhaps many others in the Auditory, For, I am neither a Trader, nor the Son of
a Trader. And yet I am a Master of certain MAXIMS, which will Enable me and
Embolden me, to attempt now a very brief Treatise upon it. MAXIMS which I can
maintain with Victorious Demonstrations, and have more than a Thousand
Preachers in the Auditory, to stand by me; I mean, The CONSCIENCE of every Man
that I Speak unto; MAXIMS, which if well hearkened to, there would be fewer of
those Debts, which multiply among us Uneasy Circumstances; and this Place would
be much more, A Mountain of Holiness, and a Dwelling of Righteousness, and so
the Blessed of the Lord.

The first MAXIM.
A Man that is going into Debt, should keep the Eye of Prudence Open, upon
every Step that is before him. To run in the Dark, when One is going into Debt;
This is Folly in the Exaltation of it: One going into Debt, should with a
Rational Prospect, be able to see his whole way Plain before him. People
without Foresight should never go into Debt; without Foresight, of what in the
Progress of their way they may meet withal. It was an ancient Prayer; Psalm. V.
8. Because of my Observers, make thy way strait before my Face. My Friend,
Because of thy Creditors, Be sure of a Strait way, and go not into Debt,
without a Way lying Plain before thy Face, for every step of thy Motions. The
Jews have a Tradition, that our Father Adam was the Author of that Saying, No
Man would Sin if he saw from the Beginning to the End. Most certainly very many
among the Children of Adam, would not run into Debt, as they do, if they did
but see from the Beginning to the End. Going into Debt, make a Pause, and
think, Will it not be Bitterness in the Latter End? The conduct of Prudence, is
that; Prove. XX^^, A Prudent Man foresees the Evil and hides himself. Sirs, When
you are going into Debt, thoroughly weigh the Matter. If you can foresee any
remarkable Evil, in which you are like to be Entangled by what you do; Then
Stop; then stay; then look about you. If you are So Simple, as to pass on, you
deserve to be Punished for what you do. The Thing I press for is, That before
you go into Debt, you advise with an Ingenious Man that once prevented a deal
of Mischief at Ephesus; I mean him, who did a World of Good by that Memorable
Saying, Ye ought to do nothing Rashly. When the Temptation of going into Debt
comes upon you, [And, there often appears too much cause to Justify my Term,
when I call it, of Temptation!] it will be but Prudently done of you, to think;
What will be the Consequence of what I am now a doing? Shall not I run my self
into inextricable Snares? Am not I pulling on my self insupportable Miseries?
Cares that will be too heavy for me? Cheats upon those have trusted me? The
wrath of disappoinied Creditors? Disgrace and Contempt among all my Neighbors?
If upon Mature Deliberation, you have a Clear View of Escaping all this Evil;
Then it is Well!

Prudence is the Thing that is urged upon you. Now, that you may keep within
the Limits of Prudence, Methinks, it were no improper Proposal; Consult with a
Prudent Friend, about what you do, before you do it. A Friend whose Prudence
you may rely much upon; Such a Friend is a Treasure. And on this Occasion, he
may be very Literally so, Emphatically so! If you have any Doubt, about going
into any Debt; Ask the Counsil of such a Friend, Whether it be well for you to
do it, or no? You know who said; Prove. XIII. 10. With the Well-advised is
Wisdom.

I am sure, if you Consult with one Friend, whom I shall Name unto you he will
give you a Dictate of Prudence, about one Sort of Debt, where with many
Thousands do most Unadvisedly ruin themselves, and their Families. A Solomon
is the Friend, I intend; and the Debt is that of an Inconsiderate Suretiship,
an Unreasonable Suretiship. He tells us; Prove. XVII. 18. A Man void of
Understanding strikes hands, and becomes a Surety in the presence of his
Friend. He tells us; Prove. XI. 15. He that is Surety for a Stranger shall be
sore Broken for it; and he that hates Suretiship is sure. For a Man to Vow,
That he will never be Surety for another, it is to make a Rash Vow. A Man may
thus Ensnare himself in Engagements to decline a Duty which God may call him
to. There is a Violation of the Third Commandment, as well as Breach upon
Charity, in such Engagements. But then, If you will be well-advisea, forget not
that Caveat; Prove. XXII. 26. Be not One of them that are Sureties for Debts.
Use abundance of Deliberation, when a Suretiship shall be propounded unto you;
Think over and over again; Am I Safe? Does God call me into any Sponsorial
Hazards? Do not the Circumstancies of my Family forbid my coming into them?
Shall not I by'nd by Repent most bitterly, and even tear my Hair for the
Vexation of my coming under these Encumbrances? These are Thoughts, which I
suppose, do not come into the Minds of them, who are most easily drawn into
Ruining Suretiships. The Cups that sometimes Mellow Men into this Folly, don't
afford Room for such Thoughts as these.

The Second MAXIM.
A Man that would not be Sinfully in Debt ought to have a Spirit reconciled
unto a Low and Mean Condition in the World, if this be what the Glorious GOD
shall call him to.

A grand Cause of Peoples running into Debt, is this; They cannot bear the
Humiliations of a Low and a Mean Condition in the World. Especially, They that
have sometimes Lived in more of Splendour; these oftentimes find themselves very
unable to bear a Reduced Condition. This it is, that causes them to run into
Debt. for the Supply of their Carnal Appetites. Hence it is, that Some who Live
upon other Men's Estates, go so far in their Extravagancy, as to Live Higher
than their Creditors themselves can do. Those Flags of Pride, if I may be so
bold, Are they Paid for? With what Face can you pretend unto them, while they
are not so?

But, first, it is a Position, which I hope, no Good Man will question; If a
Man cannot keep out of a Low and Mean Condition, without a plain wrong to the
Estates of other Men, he is then most Evidently called of GOD into a Low and
Mean Condition. Man, The Glorious GOD, whose thou art, and whose are all thy
ways, now Stakes thee down to a Low and Mean Condition. Thy Straits are what
the Glorious GOD has ordered for thee. It should be a Principle with a Good
Man, I may not have, what I cannot have. And in Pursuance of this Principle he
should go on; I cannot have what it will be a wrong unto other People for me to
have. The short of it is; If there be any thing that I cannot have without
forcing and keeping my Neighbor out of his Right for it, the Great GOD Orders
me to go without it.

Well; but what shall we then do, if a Condition of such Creepling
Circumstances be ordered for us?

The Answer is, Lower your Sails. For there is another Position, of which I am
sure no Good Man will make any Question. If GOD consine a Man unto a Low and
Mean Condition, the Man should Labor for a sweet Contentment with his Low and
Mean Condition. Confinement and Contentment must go together. You have not
forgotten the Exhortation that speaks unto you, Be Content with such Things
as you have. Let a Man get a Spirit suited unto his Condition. It is the First
mark of Blessedness; Mat. V. 3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit. Who are the
Poor in Spirit? They that have a Spirit willing to be Peor if God call them to
it. It is injoined upon you; Jam. I. 10. Let the rich rejoice in that he is
made low. How shall he Rejoice in being made Low? Let him cheerfully entertain
the Opportunities which his being made Low, and falling into Decay, gives him
to express his Patience, his Humility, his Resignation, and Glorify God. A Low
and a Mean Condition is perhaps, the Cross which our Savior has assigned unto
us; The Thing appointed for us. It becomes us now to be Crucified unto the
Would: A Man upon a Cross troubles not himself about the Wealth of this World.
Remember, Sirs, It will not be long that you are to languish in this Low and Mean
Condition. The Prophet said, Ezekiel. VII. 12. The Day draws near, let not the
seller mourn. Since the Day draws near, that you are to be Stripped of all,
don't lay it much to Heart, though you must Sell all you have, and Strip your
selves of every thing, rather than ly in Debt for what you have.

The Third MAXIM.
For a Man to run into Debt, when he has no Prospect, and perhaps no Purpose of
ever getting out; This is a Dishonesty by no means to be Countenanced.

There are those who push themselves into Debt, when they know, it is utterly
Improbable, they shall ever Pay what they Owe. Yea, with a Probability, there
is also an Intention in them, never to Pay. In the mean time, how are the
Creditors imposed upon! O Dishonest People, It Is one sort of Stealing, and a
very gross one too, which is to be charged upon you. It Is as bad at Picking the
Pockets of your Creditors! In this Tribe are to be ranked the Shameless
Borrowers; I say, Shameless Borrowers; The Borrowers whom the Thirty Seventh
Psalm and the Twenty first Verse, has Stigmatized. A Sort of Bold People, who
carry on a downright Beggary under the more Specious Form of Borrowing; --
People, from whom you Save no less than Four Pounds in Five, by not Lending but
Giving of One unto them, when they would have borrowed Five. What says the
Word of God? Prove. XIX. 22. A Poor man is better than a Liar. It were better to
be Poor, and Conflict with a very Straitning Poverty, than to run into Debt,
with such Lies, as they who Promise to Pay at such a Time, and Pay at such a
Time, and have no Faith in all their Promises; There is no Believing a Word
they say!

The Fourth MAXIM.
Men ought often and nicely to Examine the State of their Business, if they
would not find themselves irrecoverably Plunged into Debt, before they are
aware, but it comes in unexpectedly like a Traveller upon them; and then holds
him like an Armed Man.

It is a very Dangerous, and therefore a very Culpable Thing, for People to let
their Business go on from Year to Year, in Muddy Uncertainties. There are no
wise People, but what will be fond of often seeing Where-abouts they are in
their Business. It was directed; Prove. XXVII. 23. Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds; For Riches are not for ever.
People should use much Diligence, frequent Enquiry, exact Inspection, into the
State of their Affairs. For some Rich Men, have soon come to nothing by their
Inadvertency. Dealers of the Best Fashion among us, have used constantly Once a
Year, to Settle their Books of Accounts, and find their Account in doing so.
And for want of it, there may be some of whom we may shortly say, as Paul to
the Shipwrecked Mariners; Ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have gained
the Harm and Loss, which you are like to suffer by your Negligence.

But, if upon the Scrutiny, Men find, That they Over-trade their Stock; and if
they find, That they run behind hand; Or, in a word, if they find, that their
Expenses do exceed their Revenues; They ought Seasonably, I say, Seasonably, to
take all due Measures, and Early Enough, put a Stop to the Torrent of Debt,
which else like Waters at a Breach, is breaking in upon them.

Upon this Head, I have One Thing more to say; which I suppose all that would
lead Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, will Justify. I will not now discuss
the Question, How far, or how soon a Debtor is bound in Conscience to discover
his Difficulties unto his Creditors? Yet it may be truly affirmed; That
sometimes People fail and break, who are guilty of Great Iniquity, in that they
did it not some Years before. They ought some Years before to have seen, how
Matters were going with them, and been much more Early in doing what should
have been done, that their Creditors might not have been such heavy Sufferers.
They have brought themselves into ill Terms with Heaven, by such a
Mismanagement as is to be charged upon them.

The Fifth MAXIM.
The Man that is got into Debt, ought to get out of it, as fast as be can, and
as if it were for his Life.

Unto a Man that is fallen into the Toils of Debt, there is this Advice given;
Prove. VI. 5. Deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of the Hunter, and as a
Bird from the hand of the Fowler. What is a Debt, but a Load: An honest Man
should feel it as a Load, and groan under the Load; But not cry for, more
Weight! -- as the Miserables that are Pressing to Death use to do. He that is
in Debt, should be in Pain, to get out of it. Especially, if the Time when the
Payment becomes due, be arrived, it should be like the Pain of a Broken Bone
unto him. For indeed, it is a very true Assertion; Minus Solvit qui minus
tempore Solvit; A Man does not Pay the Sum, if he don't pay it in the Time that
is agreed for. Debtor, Be thou so Solicitous in Complying with Time for every
Payment; and be so Indefatigable in turning every Stone for the Satisfaction of
thy Creditor, that he may have no manner of reason to Reproach thee, for any
Carelessness, and Slothfulness, any Tendency to the least Appearance of Evil in
thee. And here occurs one thing to be more particularly animadverted on. When a
Poor Man has done any Work for a Rich Man, whom he has much dependence on, and
he comes for his Dues; the Rich ought not now to answer him roughly, and put
him off time after time, and make him Lose, I know not how much Time, in giving
Attendance on him. Detained Wages will anon make a Cry that will reach the
Heavens. It Is Enjoined, Prove. III. 28. Say not unto thy Neighbor, go and come
again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee.

The Sixth MAXIM.
If a Man be so far brought into Debt, as to become Insolvent, there is a
Behavior agreeable to (...) Holy Religion, both by God and Men to be expected
from him.

Let our Debtors pay some Regard unto the Admonition of God our Savior.

If it be through any Real Default of yours, that such a Debt be come upon you.
it is most certain, you ought with a deep Repentance, to abase your selves
before God, and the World. Your Acknowledgments unto your Creditors
particularly, ought to have such a sensible, and Ingenuous, and self abusing
Repentance in them, that their Hearts toward you may be mollified, by their
seeing the Brokenness of yours. It is prescribed unto one in Debt; Prove. VI. 3.
Do tois now, my son: when thou art come into the hand of thy Friend, Go humble
thy self.

But if it be the mere Hand of God that has by Impoverishing Losses brought
this Debt upon you, still there is very much Self-Abasement called for. It Is a
Rebuke of God upon you, that has thus Emptied you, and Enfeebled you; And a
very Humbling Rebuke it is. Under it, you ought to be so Humble, so Modest, so
Pensive, and so Submissive, that your Creditors as well as other Spectators,
instead of Upbraiding you and Insulting you, shall but Sympathize with you in
the Disasters that have befallen you. The Exhortation to such as are thrown
into Debt, is that; 1 Pet. V. 6. Humble your selves under the mighty Hand of
God, that he may Exalt you in due time.

In Fine, Let the Debt come which way it will, your Creditors must be fairly
dealt withal. An Insolvency must not be complicated with any Underhand
Practices, any Fraudulent Practices, any Unjust Concealments, that shall
withold more than is meet, from the Injured Creditors. There was a Poor Widow,
very much in Debt; But she was one who discovered a very Honest Mind that the
Creditors might be satisfied. God strangely enabled her to satisfy them; Yea,
but see how the Direction ran, 2 King. IV. 7. Go, and pay thy Debt, and live
thou and thy Children of the rest. The First Thing to be looked after was, Go
and pay thy Debt; And, Rely upon the Providence of God for the reft. There have
been some Debtors, who have taken such Indirect Methods upon an Insolvency,
that a perpetual Series of Disappointments has afterward been Entailed upon
them; Nothing would ever after stick upon their Bread; The Doom from the Throne
of God upon them, has been that; Jer. XXII. 30. Write you this Man, A Man that
shall not prosper in his Days.

The Seventh MAXIM.
A Wholesome Antidote against the Mischiefs of Debt, it would be for a Man to
Consider Seriously what he does, when he wrongs other Men by lying in Debt unto
them.

CONSIDERATION: O thou Preservative of Mankind. A wake thou, Arise, Affect, and
mightily go to Work, on the Occasion that is now before us.

First, A Debtor, (one that is, or would be so) will do well to Consider, how
much he may be Condemned by that Royal Law; Let a Man do as be would be done
unto. The Law that shines as a Star of the First Magnitude, in the Scriptures
of our Savior; Mat. VII. 12. All things whatsoever ye would, that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them. A Law, which God has Engraven as with a Pen
of Iron, and the Point of a Diamond, on the Hearts of the Children of Men. A
Law, than which none more Confessed, and yet none more Transgressed among the
Children of Men. Debtor, Think with thy self, Were I the Creditor, should I
like to be dealt withal as I now deal with my Creditor?

I now make a Motion that is full of Equity; And if this Our Motion may more
generally take, my Sermon will have a very Desirable and Comfortable Harvest,
though all the rest of it should be but as the Rain falling upon a Rock. It Is
this; When the Debtor puts off his Creditor from time to time, Let him think
with himself; Were I the Creditor, could I care or bear to be so deals withal?
How many Shufflings, would such a Thought as this in the Power of it, put an
end unto?

Again, A Debtor will do well to Consider, what is the Eighth Commandment; What
is implied in it; What is Required in it; And how far the Eighth Commandment
will bear him out. Certainly, To keep a Man out of his Right, when it is
possible to help him to it; I may use those Words upon it, Job XXXV. 2.
Think then this to be Right? The Eighth Commandment will never consent unto
it.

This is the rather to be spoken, because very many of the Debts in the World,
are perfect Thefts, cursed Thefts. And the Flying Roll that is to Enter into
the House of the Thief, will find the way to those that make nothing of them.

Once more; The Miscries which Debt is accompanied withal; ought not these also
to be Considered? Oh! Cotisider of it. Is it nothing, to be in such continual
Perplexities, that One must conclude a Pillow to have Some uncommon Stuffing in
it, that so Perplexed a Man should be able to Sleep upon it? Is it nothing, to
be Despised of ones Neighbor, and be annihilated with a blasted Reputation? Is
it nothing, to be exposed unto the Rage, of Provoked Creditors, and feel many
Effects of their Indignation? To be Dun'd with repeated Indignities; To be
Vexed with legal Prosecutions; At length to have that Story come in for the
iffue of all; Marth. XVIII 28 The Creditor laid hands on him; and tool him by
the Throat, saying, Pay me what thou owe. And he cast him into Prison, till
he should pay the Debt. Oh! Miserable Case! It is mentioned as the Lamentable
case of David's Followers; 1 Samuel XXII. 2. Every one that was in Distress, and
every one that was in Debt. Verily, It Is Distress enough to be in Debt; Enough
to Pall and Spoil all the Delights of a Man that has any Ingennicy What? For
him on every Turn to think, There we such and such Good Neighbors. that Suffer
no little Damage from me! How much Regret in a Reflection on it!

For indeed, There is this in it, worse than all the rest. Oftentimes a Man in
Debt, must have the Guilt of much Wrong lying upon him. This Guilt will bring a
Cloud upon the Soul, be Chains of Darkness upon it, and much interrupt
Communion with God. Yea, the Guilt will arm the Conscience with Scourges
grievously to lash the Soul that shall be under it. In Antiquity we find many
Customs, of Severe Punishments inflicted by Creditors on their Debtors when in
a course of Law, they had them delivered up unto them. A. Gellius among others
makes a mention of them. What the Roman Laws of the XII Tables allowed, for the
Creditors to tear the Debtors Limb from Limb without a Metaphor, was hard
enough. But for the Conscience of a Debtor to take him in hand, and with angry
Strokes to tell him, You have wronged such and such Neighbors; they feel
themselves the worse for you every day that comes over their heads; and what
Restitution can you make unto them! Verily, This will be worse than any of the
ancient Punishments, that Bankrupts had assigned for them. I say, Again and
again, Consider of it!

And now, having built a Watchtower upon Seven MAXIMS, as upon so many
Unshaken Pillars, from whence you have dispensed unto you those Warnings, which
may prevent the Debts, wherein too many detain the Possessions of their
Neighbors, without the Consent, and unto the Damage, of the Rightful Owners; I
think, I have Purchased the Liberty to address the Creditors a little in Favor
of their Debtors, and Entreat that as much Favor as can be, may be shown unto
them. Sir, It may be your Poor Debtors, come to you after that manner; Matthew.
XVIII 29 He fell down at his Feet, and besought him, saying, Have Patience with
me, and I will pay thee all. Now, if these Debtors give you any Indications of
an Honest Mind, I also Pray you, to have as much Patience with them as you can.
I have not a word to say, against Compelling of People to be Honest. But if you
see, they would fain be Honest, and Struggle and Wrestle for it, and have any
Merit in them, then, I say, use them with all the Goodness and Mercy of a
Brother; Let them find all Brotherly Kindness from you. You have them in Debt
unto you, for so much Money; Bring them into a further Debt, for so much Kind
Usage of them; Though on this head, Let them stand charged for nothing, but, Love
to a Benefactor.

It pleases me very much to find this prescribed in a famous Lexicon Juridicum;
That before a Debtor be Sued, Adeundus est, et civiliter interpessandus, semel
atque iterum, He should be civilly Addiessed once again, by the Creditor, and
then by some of his Friends, and be Admonished of the Damage that he will bring
upon himself, and especially the Wounds upon his Conscience, if he don't fairly
pay what he owes. [According to, Matthew. XVIII. 15, 16.] Calvin the Lawyer,
observes, That this way of Admonishing a Debtor, before the Arresting of him,
Certum crit, quod ex jure Divino et Humano omnibus modis sit Observanda. And
that there are Places, in which a Plantiff cannot have his Cause heard, if he
cannot prove that he has used the Urbanity, of these Preliminary Admonitions.

Doubtless you Observe, That the Precept, Owe no Man any thing, has a
Twin-Brother born with it; But to Love one another. Of this Debt, the Debt of
Love, which we must always Pay, and yet always Owe, to one another, I cannot
but make this Observation. This Debt well followed, would regulate the other
wonderfully! If this MAXIM, To Love our Neighbors as our selves, were closely
kept to, Things would be carried on between Creditors and their Debtors, with a
most wondrous easiness.

Did Men Love one another, they would be loath to be Debtors, be slow to Owe,
and swift to Pay; They would have a mighty Horror of Owing more than they can
make Payment of; They would resolve, I will undergo any thing, rather than
damnify my Neighbor, that lives peaceably and securely by me, and is ready to
let me have, what I ask him for,

Did Men Love one anotber, they would not seck to make others become their
Servants, which you know, Debtors are. And where they are so, they would not be
Cruel in Exactions and Extortions upon them. No; They would sometimes Remit
unto the extremely Necessitous, what they might have Exacted and Extorted from
them.

I will particularly say, Though Usury be Lawful in a Country where Lands may be
Mortgaged and forever Alienated; as they might not in the Land of Israel; yet
there are some Hard Usages in the Usury, between the Creditor and the Debtor
among our selves, which the Law of Love will never justify.

And now, the Minds of People throughout the Country, are greatly engaged in
Projections, how we shall become furnished with such a Medium of Trade, as may
prevent an undue Growth of Debt among us, I will take the Opportunity to say;
My Brethren, I be seech you, Let not this Debt be forgotten, To Love one
another. There is a Variety of Apprehensions upon the matter. This Variety,
begins to grow into too much Acrimony. But, My Brethren These Things ought not
so to be. Your Ministers are too Wife, I hope, to offer you any of their
Sentiments upon your Various Projections. And they do not count themselves Wise
enough, to pronounce any Judgment upon that Spirit of Over-trading and
Over-doing that some suppose very much to threaten us. Or Wise enough to
propose what Retrenchments may be most Expedient for us. But we will all make
you an ofter, of what our Bible has in it, relating to your Conduct. There we
find it said; Jam. IV. 11 Speak not Evil One of another, Brethren. There we
find it said; Ephesians. IV. 31. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and
Clamor, and Evil-speaking be put away from among you. Sirs, you have a Great
Esteem for One another; and they are very worthy Men, who now thwart One
another in their Apprehensions. But, Oh! Don't grow Strange to One another. If
once your Spirits be at all Exasperated, the Malady against which we would all
provide, will but come under an Exasperation. Animosities will make all good
Projections Impracticable; our Case Deplorable and Incurable. Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

But I shall go off in Debt, if I leave another Thing Unmentioned. I may not
leave off, until I have done my Best, that every Soul in the Assembly may have
a Portion to carry home. It may be some of the Hearers will count themselves
Unconcerned, [tho', I know not why they should] in what has been hitherto
insisted on. But I am sure, I have now something to say, that every Soul in the
Assembly has Infinite Cause to give Attention to. The Distinction of a, Debtor
ex contractu; and a, Debtor ex delicto, is to be thought upon; A Debt of
Contract, and a Debt of Trespass.

It Is a Thing that calls for the most awful, Consideration of Every Soul among
us; That our Sins have brought us into Debt unto the Justice of the Infinte
GOD. There is a Debt of Sufferings, which we owe to the Justice of the Infinite
GOD. The Fenalty of the Divine Law, to which our Sins have made us obnoxious,
must be Executed. The Honor of the Holy One, whom we have Denied and
Blasphemed by our Sins, must be Vindicated. For the Payment of this Debt, there
are Sufferings to be endured, which are, Oh! how Exceedingly to be trembled at!
Our Sins are called, our Debts, because they render us fearfully Indebted unto
the Justice of God. Sinner, Thou have a Debt lying upon thee, which were
ponderous enough to break the Backs of all the Angels in Heaven. Ten Thousand
Talents are but a small Denomination, for the Debt which is oppressing of thee;
the Debt, which may make thee cry out, Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me!
Ten Thousand Mountains were less than the light Dust of the Balance, compared
unto it. Thousands of Rams, Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil; a Sacrificed
Offspring; a Sacrifice of Myriads of Angels; the whole World made a Sacrisice;
all Creatures turned into a Burnt-Offering, would not make a full Payment of
the Debt.

But, Oh! What an astonishing thing has been done for us on this tremendous
Occasion! The Eternal Son of God has assumed our Nature; and therein He has
become our Surety. On a Compact with His Glorious Father agreeing unto it, He
has taken our Debt upon Him. He said, Lo, I come to answer the Debt. He has
done so, in the Expiatory Sufferings, wherein He became Obedient unto Death,
even unto the Death of the Cross: And He received an Acquittance, as having
done it, at His Rosurrection from the Dead. Oh! wonderful! Oh! wonderful! Our
Savior now invites us, to come, and plead the Payment which He has made, that
we may be Released from our Debt, and lay hold on Enternal Life. Oh! Let us now
with a lively Faith, make that Prayer to our Savior, Psalm CXIX. 122. Be Surety
for thy Servant for Good. Plead it with the Glorious GOD, Lord, my Savior has
answered the Demands of thy Law in my Room. Oh! Bring my Soul out of Prison,
that I may praise thy Name, and Oh! deal bountifully with me.

But then, what a Debt of Love to Him, who has thus paid our Debt, shall we
have lying for ever upon us! We must own that Debt for ever, and the Love of
our Savior, in thus Ransoming our Souls, it must Constrain us to love Him, and
prize Him, and seek Him, and serve Him, and be swallowed up in all possible
Endeavors to Glorify Him. O ye Ransomed of the Lord; what will you do now for
Him, who has discharged a Debt for you; wherein if He had not appeared for you,
you must have been cast into an horrible, and an infernal Prison, from whence
you could not have come out until you had Paid the uttermost Farthing: -- But
that, -- What Ages must it have called for? -- What will you do, but most
heartily declare unto him; Truly, O Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant,
since thou have loosed my Ponds; Oh! may I be entirely Thine forever more!

Let this be the Conclusion of the Matter.

FINIS.

