Two Discourses SHOWING, I. That the LORDS Ears are open to the Prayers of the
Righteous. II. The Dignity and Duty of Aged Servants of the LORD. ALSO, A
PREFACE in which the Congregational Discipline of the Churches in New England
is Vindicated, with the Authors Dying Testimony there-unto.

By I. Mather, D. D.

Prove. 23.23. Buy the Truth, and Sell it not.

Isai. 46.4. And even to your Old Age I am be, and even to hoar hairs will I
carry you.

Est quaedam precum Omnipotentia, Luther. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green,
for Daniel Henchman, and Sold at his Shop over against the Brick Meeting House.
1716.

THE PREFACE
IF the Reader does Expect any thing Curious or Rare in the Subsequent Sermons,
he will find himself disappointed. In my Youth I Endeavored to comply with
that Apostolical Rule, in doctrine to show Incorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity,
found Speech, which cannot be condemned. It would be unbecoming my Old Age to
do otherwise.

Concerning the Prevalency of Prayer, I Published a Discourse Forty Years
since, in which I mentioned many Instances of Signal Answers of Prayer, in the
time of the Indian War, began by Philip Sachem, by which we have seen that the
LORD is a Prayer-Hearing GOD, Of which having had such Experience we should be
Encouraged to take up the Psalmists holy Resolution to Call upon Him as long as
we live.

On the Subject of Old Age many have Written. Several Moralists among the
Gentiles have treated th^^^. In special Plutarch, Cicero, and Seneca of whom it
is said, That the reason of his having that Name given to him, was, his being
Born with gray hairs upon him. Some profitable Observations are to be seen in
those Authors; but not comparable with what has been Written by those Eminent
Divines Tossanus and Rivet, and of our own Nation Mr. Borroughs, Mr. Bridge,
and more lately Mr. Boyse, has done worthily. Also, that Reverend and Aged
Minister of CHRIST, Mr. Steel, (whom I knew in London) has an Eleborate
Discourse of Old Age. He mentions Dr. Sheafes Vindication of Old Age, Written
by him when he was Fourscore, and Dedicated to Dr. Chaderton, who was an
Hundred Years old. I have not been able to obtain the sight of that Book, in
which I doubt not but that there are many things very Edifying.

AGE is commonly attended with many Infirmities, O quam continuis, et quantis
plena senectus longa malis. There have been but few Men in the World, that
could say as that Philosopher did, who being asked when an Hundred and Seven
Years Old, Why he desired to Live longer, Replied, Because he had nothing to
accuse Old Age with. And few that can say as that Learned and Critical Divine,
D^usius did, Mihi Senectus metior quam ipsa Juvenius. That his Old Age was more
Comfortable to him than his Youth. For a Man to Enjoy Health, and the
continuance of his Intellectual Abilities in Old Age is a rare and wonderful
Mercy. It is impossible to be Thankful enough for so great a favor of Heaven.
An holy and fruitful Old Age, though accompanied with Infirmities is in good
Old Age. And if it is not so qualifyed, yet there is a Veneration due to Age
itself. The Ancient Romans (who indeed had, some of them, very noble
Sentiments) were of that Mind, witness their famous Poet, who says,

Magna fuit quondam capitis reverentia cani, Inque suo pretio, ruga senilis
erat. Happy is the Man that has lived many Years, and has been doing good in
the World all that time. I am troubled to think how long I have Lived, and to
how little purpose. Having obtained help from GOD, I have seen many Days, and
have been favored with great Opportunities to be doing of Service for CHRIST,
and for His Churches, in more Capacities than One, and in more Lands than One;
but I have been a Cumberer of the Ground: Were not the LORD whom I Serve, a GOD
of Infinite Patience and Goodness, I had been Cut down for my Unfruitfulness
long ago. He has seen meet to Employ me in His Service for a longer time, than
any Minister now Living in New England. Nine and Fifty Years are Lapsed, since
I began to Preach the Gospel, in my Youth in Lands afar off, in England and
Ireland for Three or Four Years, until for Nonconformity I was rendered
incapable of further Service there. Since GOD brought me to Boston, Five and
Fifty Years are within a few Weeks Expired. What Changes have I Lived to see? A
whole Generation buried, and the best that these Latter Ages have seen. And now
that I am going out of the World, it is a grief of heart to me, to see
Principles and Practices set on foot, which are Essentially differing from that
Congregational Discipline which was once owned in these Churches, and has been
the distinguishing Character and Glory of New England. Stated Councils with any
thing of a Juridical Power, are not consistent with the Congregational
Discipline. There was Pull sued many Years since, A Declaration of the Faith
and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in England, Agreed
upon and Consented to by their Elders and Messengers in their Meeting at the
Savoy, October 12. 1658. In that part of their Confession which concerns the
Institution of Churches, and the Order appointed in them by Jesus Christ: Their
words are (These. 26, 27.) In Cases of difficulties or differences, either in
point of Doctrine, or in Administrations, wherein either the Churches in
general are Concerned, or any one Church in their Peace, Union and Edification,
or any Member or Members of any Church are injured, or by any proceeding in
Censures, not agreeable to Truth and Order, it is according to the Mind of
Christ, that many Churches holding Communion together, do by their Messengers
Meet in a Synod or Council, to Consider and give their Advice on, or about the
matter in difference to be reported to all the Churches concerned. Howbeit,
these Synods so assembled are not Entrusted with any Church Power, properly so
called, or with any Jurisdiction over the Churches themselves, to Exercise any
Censures, either over any Churches or Persons, or to impose their determination
on the Churches or Officers. Besides these occasional Synods or Councils, there
are not Instituted by CHRIST any Stated Synods in a fixed Combination of
Churches, or their Officers in Lesser or Greater Assemblies, nor are there any
Synods appointed by CHRIST in a way of Subordination to one another. There were
in this Savoy Convention the Messengers of an hundred and twenty Congregational
Churches, among whom Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Owen, and Mr. Nigh were Principal. The
large and Judicious Preface to that result, was Written partly by Dr. Goodwin,
and partly by Mr. Nigh. Eighteen Pages of it are Dr. Goodwins, the rest is Mr.
Nyes. That which Concerns the Order of the Churches was Dr. Owins Composure. It
may be some Readers will be gratified with this Information, and so far as I
understand, I am the only Person now Living that had the knowledge of these
Particulars. Sed haec obiter. With the Congregational Brethren in England,
agrees our New England Platform of Church Discipline, which declares that it
belongs not to Synods, or Councils to Exercise Church Censures, nor any act of
Church Authority, or Jurisdiction. But if a Council shall take upon them to
suspend a Considerable Number of Persons, belonging to a particular Church,
where CHRIST has given them no Authority, do they not Exercise Jurisdiction? If
a Council has power to suspend which is Excommunicatio Minor, they have power
to deliver to Satan, which is Excommunicatio Major. All that a Council can do,
is to advise the particular Church to suspend their delinquent Members if their
is cause for it, but it belongs to no Council in the World to Exercise that
Authority. Moreover, to allow unto half the Ministers in a Council, a Negative
Voice, is not Congregational, nor yet Presbyterial. That Great Light in
Connecticut Colony, the for ever famous Mr. Thomas Hooker, has illuminated
those Churches with better Principles. In his Elaborate and Accurate Survey of
Church Discipline, part 4. p. 46. 47 He proves that in Councils or Synods, all
have equal power, nor do any act there as Officers but as sert by their
Churches, nor has any Minister a right to Vote in an Ecclesiastical Council,
without a Mission from his Church. In the Reformed Churches abroad, there is no
Negative on their Councils, but the Vote of the Majority is Conclusive: Which
has occasioned some Prelatick Writers to Speak reproachfully of them, because
the Majority of their Synods consisting of those they call Lay Men, they may
carry it against the other. For their Synods consist of Deacons as well as of
Lay Elders and Pastors. Nor will they admit a Pastor Except he brings One or
more with him, that is not such. As may be seen in the French Protestants
Discipline. Chap. 5. Art. 2. And in Mr. Quicks Synodicon Passim. In the time of
the Reforming Parliament, there was a Provincial Synod settled at London, whose
Constitution was such, as that their acts would have been valid although not so
much as One Minister had consented therewith. If we change our Congregational
Principles, I am abundantly persuaded that we shall not ad Meliora transire,
change for the better. The words of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Urian Oaks,
in his Election Sermon, deserve to be well thought on, He says concerning
those Godly Men, who were the first that Planted Churches in this part of the
World, That GOD did more for them, than for any People in the World, in showing
them the Pattern of His House, and the true Scriptural Way of Church Government
and Administration. GOD was certainly in a more than Ordinary way of favor
Present with His Servants, in laying our Foundations, and in Settling the way of
Church Order, according to the Will and Appointment of CHRIST. I fully believe
that the Congregational Way, is the highest step that has been taken toward
Reformation, and for the Substance of it, it is the very same way, that was
Established and Practiced in the Primitive Times, according to the Institution
of Jesus Christ. I must needs say, I should Look upon it as a sad Degeneracy,
if we should leave the Good Old Way, so far as to turn Councils and Synods into
Classes and Provincial Assemblies, andc. Thus Mr. Oaks, my Dear Friend and
Worthy Predecessor in the Presidentship of the College in Cambridge. It was a
Mercy to all the Churches in New England, when that Excellent Man was the
President, who being Dead yet Speaks.

IT must be acknowledged, that controversies about Church Government, and
Ecclesiastical Administrations, are not Fundamentals in Religion. There are
among Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Antipedobaptists, as well as among
Congregationals, Many Godly Men. Such notwithstanding their different
persuasions may hold Communion together in all the Ordinances of the Gospel.
Nevertheless, they cannot all in things wherein they differ, have Truth on
their side, nor may they part with any Truth. Sell it not. When some would be
compounding for the Truth, Luther Spoke like himself, in saying, Potius pereat
Caelum quam una mica veritatis, the Heavens shall sooner fall than we will part
with one crum of Truth. Although Brotherly Communion may and should be
maintained among those Differing Persuasions, nevertheless, if any among us
shall set themselves to introduce Episcopacy, Antipedobaptism, or
Presbyterianism, to the Disturbance of the Churches of Christ, I believe the
Man that shall withstand them will do an Acceptable Service to God. If the
Congregational Way is the Way of Truth, the departing from it in New England,
will be a greater Sin and Provocation to God, than in any other part of the
World, where the Light has not shined in such clearness as here it has done.
The thought of this, in consideration with the Expectation I have of being
called hence suddenly, has induced me to take hold of this Opportunity (least I
should not have another) of bearing (...) Testimony against Innovations, which
I plainly foresee ^^e like to break in upon these Churches like a Flood. I
trust that when I am gone, CHRIST will raise up others of greater Learning and
Judgment than any thing that I pretend unto that shall defend His Truth, and do
greater (...) for this People than. I have been able to do for them. Councils
when duly called, ought to be Revered, as an Ordinance of CHRIST, which the
very Light of Nature directs unto. It was an Error in Nazianzene, who because
he observed, that in his Time, when there began to be a Defection and
Declension from Primitive Purity, many Councils did more hurt than good, took
up a Prejudice against all Councils whatsoever. I wish that none among us may
do so. Some Years ago, I wrote a Disquisition concerning Ecclesiastical
Councils, proving that not only Pastors but Brethren Delegated by their
Churches, have equally a right to a decisive Vote in such Assemblies; also
showing the Usefulness and Necessity of Occasional Councils to the
Establishment and well being of Churches. In suppressing the Publication of it
so long, I have attended the Old Advice, In nonum prematur ad Annum. I could
not expect but that as my Vindication of the Order of the Gospel, Printed in
Boston Sixteen Years since, and then also in London, was received in
New England, but not in England, with Scoffs and Railery instead of a Solid
Answer by Innovators, that this also would be so, by the like Sort of Men. I am
not without Fears, that a selfish desire of repose, which is an Infirmity
incident to Old Age, has made me guilty of an Omission of that which was my
Duty. However it be, I have designed that Discourse as my Last and Dying Advice
to the Churches in New England.

I conclude this Preface with saying, That Mr. Norton (the Famous Teacher in
Boston) was one of the Greatest Men that ever New England saw. I have reason to
Honor his Memory, for that I had part of my Education under his Tuition. That
Eminent Servant of the Lord in the last Sermon that ever he Preached, Exhorted
these Churches (let that be my Dying Exhortation to them) to abide by the
Congregational Discipline, saying, Our Fidelity in this Cause is our Crown, let
no Man take it from us.

Boston, July 26. 1716.
The Ears of the LORD are open to the Prayers of the Righteous.
I. PETER III.12. The Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are
open unto their Prayers.


THE Apostle in this Context Exhorts Christians to demean themselves as they
ought to do, both toward good Men and toward evil Men. With good Men they
should endeavor to maintain Unity and Love, as in the 7th Verse. As for evil
Men they should not do as they do, rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but on the contrary they should bless them. The Motive by which the
Exhortation is urged, is, because to do so, is the way to obtain a blessing
from God. Verse 9. This he proves by a Testimony of Scripture taken out of the
34th Psalm, to which this with the two preceding Verses has respect.

In the words which have been read, we consider, (1.) The Subject spoken of,
viz. The Righteous. By which Believers are intended who have the Righteousness
of Christ by Faith imputed to them, which makes them Righteous in the sight of
God, who have also Sanctifying Grace inherent in them. Imputed and Inherent
Righteousness always go together. (2.) The thing affirmed concerning such. The
Eyes of the Lord are over them. The Eye of His Favor is continually watching
over them. And because they are the Objects of His special Favor, His Ears are
open to their Prayers. The meaning, is, Not only that God sees them and hears
what they Pray before Him. For He that has an alseeing Eye, and an alhearing
Ear cannot but see all Men, and hear every word that is spoken by them, but
that He hears them so as graciously to accept and answer their Prayers. That
therefore is the Doctrine before us to be insisted on, viz.

DOCT. That GOD will graciously hear and answer the Prayers of the Righteous.

For the clearing of the Doctrine, we shall only Enquire into two Particulars.
(1) How it does appear that GOD will graciously hear and answer the Prayers of
the Righteous? (2) The Reason why He does do?

Quest. 1. How does it appear that the LORD will graciously hear and answer the
Prayers of the Righteous?

Answ. 1. The Scripture does abundantly bear witness to this Truth. Therein it
is declared that the LORD is a Prayer-hearing GOD. He is made known by that
Attribute: Psalm. 65 2. O thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh
come. The Scripture does abound with precious Promises concerning this. Isai.
41.17. When the Poor and Needy seek water, I the Lord will hear them. Mat 7.7.
Ask and it shall be given you; Seek and you shall find. There are Conditional
Promises of Temporal blessings on Praying for them, viz. if it shall be most
for the Glory of God and for the best good of His Servants, that such blessings
should be granted to them. Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is.
But Spiritual blessings are more absolutely Promised to Praying Ones. Every one
that asks receives. If you know how to give good gifts to your Children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father, give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
Him, Luke 1^.10, 13. Audience of Prayer is a special Article of the Covenant of
Grace. Zech. 13 9. They shall call on my Name, and I will hear them; I will say
it is my People, and they shall say, the Lord is my God. A Praying Man has the
Lord to be his God. And when the Lord ingageth to be a God to any Man, He
promises to hear his Prayers.

2. The Experience of the Saints of God has Confirmed the Truth of this
Doctrine. It is not only true that God is a Prayer-hearing God, but He has
always been so; He never was otherwise. Isai. 49 19. I have not said to the
seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. One way or other, in whole or in part their
Prayers have been Answered. The Lords People in general have seen this
verified. And particular Saints have had Experience of it. Our Father Abraham
had so. God said to him, I have heard thee, Genesis 17.20. And Jacob had
experience of it. He therefore built an Altar to God who Answered him in the
day of his distress, Genesis 35.3. And David had the like experience. Psalm. 34 4.
I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. And
Verse 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and has saved him out of
all his troubles. Again, in another place he says, Verily God has heard me, he
has attended to the voice of my Prayer, and blessed be God, who has not turned
away my Prayer nor his Mercy from me, Psalm. 66.19, 20. Ezra says of himself,
and the Lords Servants who joined with him, We besought God, and he was
entreated of us, Ezra 8.23. All the true fearers of God, that do indeed know
what it is to Pray, have experienced this. Psalm. 145.18, 19. The Lord is nigh
to all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth; He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him, be also will hear their cry and will
save them. Thus has it ever been. To which of the Saints will thou t^^^ thee?
Ask one, Have not you found the Lord to be an Hearer of Prayer? He will say I
have found him to be so. Ask another, and he will say so. And another, and he
will say the same. The Scripture says, Every one that is godly will pray,
Psalm. 32.6. So every one that is godly will set his Seal to this Truth, that
the blessed God is an Hearer of Prayer. The Righteous know it by happy
Experience. For,

3. The Righteous are the Lords Favorites. Which is implied when it is said,
That His Ears are open to them, as the Ears of a Prince are open to one that is
his favorite. Such an one has the Kings Ear: He is apt to grant the request of
such an one, whether it be for himself or others. The Tyrians and Sidonians
were sensible of this: Wherefore when Herod was displeased with them, and they
stood in need of his favor, in order to obtaining it, they made Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain their friend, Act. 12.20. Now righteous Men, especially such
as are eminently righteous and holy, are highly in favor with God. They are
the objects of His singular love. Psalm. 146 8. The Lord loves the righteous.
They are His Jewels. No Jewels are in such esteem with Men as the righteous are
with God. A few of them are more valued by Him, than Millions of other Men.
Since they are precious in His sight, and that He Loves them, He says, He gave
men for their Life, and Egypt, and Ethiopia for an handful of His People. How
many were those Egyptians, and Ethiopians, and Assyrians whom God gave for the
Life of the People whom He Loved? When Pharaoh with his Egyptians followed the
Israelites into the red Sea, the Jewish Historian says, There was in that Army
Fifty thousand Horses, and two hundred thousand Foot: They were all drowned
that the Lords People might be Saved. We know from the Scripture, that in the
Etheopian Army, in Asa's time, there were a Million. And what an Army had the
Assyrians? When God sent an Angel to kill an hundred four-score and five
thousand of them in one Night. And all this for the Life of those whom He
Loved, Isai. 43.3, 4. As for the righteous, their Persons are acceptable to
God, and the objects of His delight, therefore their Prayers are so too: Prove.
15.8. The Prayer of the Upright is his delight. Under the New Covenant God does
not accept of first the Work and then the Person: but first the Person, and
then the offering. This we see in Cain and Abel. Cains oblation was not
accepted because he was an Unbeliever and so Unrighteous, but righteous Abel
sound acceptance with God. Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered to God a more
excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous.

Quest. 2. Whence is it that the Lords Ears are open to the Prayers of the
Righteous?

Answ. 1. It is from the gracious Nature of the blessed God. Exodus 20.27. I
will hear for I am gracious. Gracious is His Name and Nature. When God did in a
most wonderful manner make known His Name to Moses, He passed by before him,
and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God Merciful and Gracious, abundant in
Goodness, Exodus 34.6. It is an Infinitely gracious Condescension in Him to look
upon such Poor beggars as we are. He humbles himself to behold the things in
Heaven. How much more to behold such dust and ashes on the Earth! Besides, we
are not only mean considered as Creatures, but we are Sinners. Peter fell down
at Christ's feet and said, Depart from me for I am a sinful man, O Lord, Luke
5.8. God might say to the best of us, Depart out of my presence, for you are
Sinful Men, and shall not come near me. And as our Persons are Sinful, so are
our Prayers also. There is iniquity in our holy things. Isai 64.6. We are all
as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Our
Righteousnesses, in the Plural number, not some of them, but all of them: They
are but rags, nay filthy rags. If then God shall accept of us, or of any of our
Services, it is wonderful and astonishing Grace.

2. The Reason why the Ears of the Lord are open to the Prayers of the
Righteous, is, because they Pray to Him in the Name of Christ. The Lords People
Israel were taught this, when they were directed to Pray toward the Temple.
They were to spread forth their hands, that is a Praying posture, toward that
house, 1 King. 8.38. Thence it was that Daniel when in Babylon his Windows
being opened in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, kneeled upon his knees and
Prayed. He did not open his Windows toward the Kings Palace, that Men might
not think that he Prayed to him, according to that Idolatrous decree of the
Court of Persia, nor toward the East, as they that worshipped the Sun were
wont to do, but toward Jerusalem, because of the Temples having been there,
which was a Type of Christ. Prayers that comes in such a Name must needs find
acceptance. For Jesus Christ the Son of God, is so dear to the Father, that He
will deny Him nothing. He says, Thou hear me always, Joh. 11.22. On which
account Christ might well say as He did to the Disciples, John. 16.23.
Whatsoever you shall aks the Father in my Name, he will give it you. To ask in
Christ Name is to ask for His sake. When the righteous Pray, they do not
present their Supplications before God for the sake of their own
righteousnesses or deservings, but only for Christ's. Thus did the Prophet
Daniel: He said, Hear the Prayer of thy Servant, and his Supplication, for the
Lords sake. Meaning for the sake of Christ, the Messiah that was to come into
the World, Dan. 9.17. To Pray in Christ's Name is to ask by virtue of a Command
from Him. If a Man goes to another by direction from one whom he has the
greatest kindness for, and says, Such an one sent me, he bid me come to you
with this request, he comes in his Name, and will be likely to speed, Thus when
Believers come to God, and say, Christ has Commanded me to Pray for daily
Bread, and therefore I come to thee for Temporal Blessings so far as thou shall
see them convenient for me, Christ has directed me to Pray for the forgiveness
of my Sins, and for Sanctifying Grace, I therefore ask for these blessings as
being appointed by thy Son my Savior to ask for them; surely such Prayers will
not be in vain. To Pray in Christ's Name, is to Pray for the sake of the Merit
of his blood. Christ said to His Disciples, Hitherto you have asked nothing in
my Name, Joh. 16.24. because they had not asked any thing on the account of the
Merit of Christ's blood shed to purchase the Salvation of their Souls and the
Audience of their Prayers. For although it is now an Article of our Christian
Faith, that we are reconciled to God by the death of His Son, nor can any Man
be Saved that does not believe it; Nevertheless, the Disciples had but a dark
knowledge of this Mystery before the Death and Resurrection of our Savior. His
blood has Merited all the good promised in the Covenant of Grace; It is the
blood of the Everlasting Covenant. The Sins of Believers cry against them, but
the blood of Christ has a louder cry in it for Mercy. It speaks better things
than the blood of Abel. They may with Faith in that blood be humbly confident,
that their Prayers shall be heard and answered. Heb. 10.19. Having boldness by
the blood of Jesus to enter into the holiest of all. When we Pray, We enter
into the holiest of all. Only the High Priest entered into the holiest of all,
and that but once a year, but the Believer may every day by Prayer enter into
the holiest of all, with confidence of acceptance, through the Merit of the
blood of Jesus.

3. Christ in Heaven intercedes for Believers that their Prayers may be heard.
Heb. 6.25. He ever lives to make intercession for them that come to God by him.
Praying is coming to God. When the Priest was offering Incense in the Temple,
the People were Praying without in the Time of Incense, Luke 1.10. Thus when
Believers are Praying here on Earth, Christ our High Priest is in Heaven
offering the Incense of His own Merit and Mediation. John saw an Angel unto
whom was given much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all
Saints; and the smoke of the Incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God, out of the Angels hand, Rev. 8 3, 4. Christ is that
Angel; It is because of the Incense which comes out of the Angels hand, that
the Prayers of Saints are pleasing and prevalent with God. There is much
infirmity attending the Prayers of Saints on Earth, and that which make them
unsavory. How then shall the Lord be pleased with them, or smell a sweet savor
in our Oblations? It is the Incense which Christ offers to God, that takes away
the ill savor of our Sinful Prayers, and makes them to become adoriferous in
the Lords Nostrils. From thence it is, that the Prayers of the Saints are
golden vials full of odours, Rev. 5.8. If Christ in Heaven shall say, There is
such a Servant of mine Praying for such a blessing, I would have his Prayers
granted, it will certainly be done.

Before we proceed to the Application of the Doctrine, there is an Objection to
be answered. It is this.

The Lords Servants complain that He turns a deaf Ear upon them, and will not
hear their Prayers. How then is it said, that His Ears are open to the Prayers
of the Righteous? Does not holy Job say, I cry unto thee and thou do not
hear me, I stand up, viz to Pray, for, standing as well as kneeling is a
Praying posture, and thou regardest me not, Job 30.20. Do not the Lords People
make a sorrowful complaint: Psalm. 30.4. How long wilt then be angry against the
Prayer of thy People. And is it not among the Churches Lamentations, When I cry
and shout, he shuts out my Prayer; Thou have covered thy self with a cloud
that our Prayer should not pass through* Lam. 3.8, 44.

Answ. The Lord does many times hear the Prayers of His People, when they
themselves are not sensible of it.

For, 1. He does not always give the thing Prayed for immediately, when their
Prayer is graciously accepted, and in due time they shall receive what they
have begged for. Sometimes indeed God hears the Prayers of His Servants, and
answers them forthwith. They no sooner speak but speed. Nay, it may be when
they do but purpose to Pray, He is so gracious as to prevent them with His
blessings. Isai. 65.24. Before they call I will answer, and while they are yet
speaking I will hear. So it was with Daniel, While he was speaking and praying
and presenting his supplication before God, yea, whilst he was speaking in
Prayer, God sent an Angel to acquaint him that his Prayer was heard, Dan. 9.20,
21. But it is not thus always. The Lord for wise and holy ends defers the
Answer when He intends to give the thing Prayed for. It may be there is one
repulse after another to try the Faith of His Servants, as it was with the
Woman of Canaan. Sometimes to exercise their Patience, as it was with Job. Let
them wait patiently, and the Answer will come at last, and in the best time,
and will not be delayed a day beyond that. Hab. 2 3. The Vision is for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie, though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come it will not tarry. And it may be the
longer it is before it comes, the greater will be the blessing in it. Possibly
we are not for the present fit to receive the Mercy we Pray for. The Lord waits
that he may be gracious, Isai. 30.18. He waits to see when His Servants will be
duly prepared for the blessing they Pray for, and then He will graciously
answer them. There has been many a Child of God that has Prayed and Waited long
for a Mercy, and when it has come at last, they have seen, that if it had come
as soon as they Prayed for it, they would not have demeaned themselves suitably
under it, not so humbly and so thankfully as they ought to have done. Moreover,
it may be there is some Sin lies in the way, and stops the answer of Prayer for
the present. No doubt but Joshua and the Lords People with him, Prayed for
success in their Expedition against Ai, but they were disappointed; it was then
said, Israel has sinned, destroy the accursed from among you, Josh. 7.11, 12.
After that an Answer came.

2. The Lords Servants are apt to mistake and think their Prayers are not
Answered, because not in the very thing which they Pray for, whenas He gives
them something else instead thereof, which is better for them; sometimes, yea,
many times God grants to the Righteous, the very blessings they have been
pleading for. So he did to Jabez. He called upon God, saying, Oh that thou
would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and keep me from evil that it
may not grieve me; and God granted him that which he requested, 1 Chronicles. 4.10.
And thus it was with Hannah, She said, For this Child I prayed, and the Lord
has given me the Petition which I asked of him, 1 Samuel 1.27. But the Lord does
not always Answer the Prayers of the Righteous; in Specie sea in valor, in the
thing which they ask, but in something else, which is more valuable. And then
He fulfils his promise in hearing their Prayers. If a Man does promise another
a hundred Pound, but in stead of that gives him a thousand, he is as good as
his word. Thus when God sees meet not to grant to His Children that particular
blessing they Pray for, He uses to give them something else of far greater
worth. Moses prayed, that he might go into the Land of Canaan, and that he
might see the goodly Mountain which was there, Deuteronomy. 3.25. The Jewish
Expositors suppose that he intended Mount Moriah, where Abraham offered Isaac,
and where afterward the Temple was built. God would not hear him, but bid him
Speak no more to Him of that matter; but then God gave him to enter into Heaven
of which the goodly Land of Canaan was a Type, and therefore the goodliest
Mountain in all the Creation of God. Heaven is so. The Apostle Paul being
exercised with sore Temptations, prayed again, and again, that that messenger
of Satan might depart from him, but it was not so for some time. Only in Answer
to his Prayer, God told him that a sufficiency of Grace should be vouch-safed
to him to support him, and carry him well through his Temptations, which was a
greater Mercy than a present deliverance. The Righteous when in affliction pray
for deliverance, God gives them Patience and that is better. They pray for
Temporal blessings, and God answers their Prayers in Spiritual blessings, which
are a thousand Times better.

We proceed to the Application of the Truth before us. Let the first USE be for
Information.

Inf. 1. If the Ears of the Lord are open to the Prayers of the Righteous, then
certainly it is wisdom to desire and obtain an interest in the Prayers of such.
Abimeleck was directed by the Lord Himself to desire Abraham's Prayers for him.
God said to him concerning Abraham, He is a Prophet, he shall Pray for thee,
and thou shall live, Genesis 20.7. When Abimeleck and all his Family was sick, in
Answer to Abraham's Prayers they were healed. Eliphaz and his two friends were
bid to apply themselves to Job, that he might Pray for them. And if Job had not
done so it would have fared ill with them, Job 42.8, 9. And the Prayers not
only of the most Eminent Servants of God, such as Abraham and Job, who have a
singular interest in Heaven, but of others also, if they are righteous Persons
are to be valued. For the Prayer of a righteous Man avails much, Jam. 5.16.
The most eminent Servants of God may need the Prayers of those who are much
inferior to them. How often do we hear a Great Apostle, not inferior to the
chief of the Apostles, begging for the Prayers of other Christians,
notwithstanding he was himself no stranger to Prayer. To the Ephesians he says,
Pray for me, Ephesians. 6.19. And he hoped for benefit by the Prayers of the
Corinthians for him, 2 Cor. 1.11. You helping by Prayer for us. And to the
Philippians he says, I know that shall turn to my salvation through your
Prayer, Phil. 1.19. And to the Hebrews he says, Pray for us, I beseech you the
rather to do it, that I may be restored to you the sooner, Heb. 13.18, 19. They
that care not for the Prayers of righteous Men are worse than Pharaoh, who
desired Moses and Aaron to entreat the Lord for him. And worse than Simon
Magus, who when he heard what sad things were like to befall him, said to Peter
and John, Act. 8.24. Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things
which you have spoken may come upon me. It is a very great Mercy to have an
Interest in the Prayers of the righteous. There have been those in the World,
(and there are such) who owed their lives to the Prayers of others for them. It
has been related concerning our English Josiah (as he has been by some
deservedly called) King Edward VI. That when his Tutor, for whom he had a great
value, was dangerously sick, enquiring of his welfare, he was told that he was
a dying man, the Physicians had given him over; You are mistaken (said that
excellent Prince) I have this Morning on my knees begged his Life from God, and
I have obtained it, he shall not dy^ and he did strangly recover and live. When
Myconius (one of the Reforming Divines in Germany) was in all appearance a
dying Man, being far gone in a Consumption, Luther set himself to Pray
earnestly for him, that his life might be spared, and he obtained the
continuance of that useful and precious Life, so that Myconius would often say,
that under God he owed his life to Luthers Prayers for him.

Inf. 2. It is a dangerous thing for any Person or People to have the Prayers
of the Righteous, whose Prayers God will hear, to be engaged against them.
Concerning the two Witnesses it is said, If any man will hurt them, fire
proceeds out of their Mouth and devoureth their Enemies, Rev. 11.5. Prayer
will kill those Enemies, as it did those Captains and their Companies who came
to apprehend the Prophet Elijah. Fervent Prayer is doubtless one thing in that
fire which proceeds out of the Mouth of the Witnesses. It is reported of a
Queen in Scotland, that She said, She was more afraid of Mr. Knox his Prayers,
than of an Army of ten thousand Men. And it is said of a Prince in Wales that
being advised to engage in a War with another Prince, that was famous for his
Religion, he declined it, saying he was afraid of his Prayers. Armies have
fallen before the Power of Prayer. When an Army of Philistines came against the
Children of Israel, Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him
and thundered with a great thunder that day, and discomfited them, 1 Samuel 7.9,
10. Whatever the World may think of it, Prayer is more terrible than thunder.
When in Jehosaphats time three Nations combined against an handful of the Lords
People, that godly King was very sensible that he had not a might sufficient to
go against so great a Multitude of Enemies; but he set himself to seek the
Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah, to seek the Lord and ask help
of him, and poured out servent Prayer before him. Those Prayers routed all
their Enemies, so that they needed not to strike a stroke, but to stand still,
and see the Salvation of God: This has Prayer done. Once more, in Hezekiahs
time, when Sennacherib came against him with a formidable Army of Assyrians,
Hezekiah betook himself to the old tried weapon of Prayer, and desired the
Prophet Isaiah to join with him, those Prayers slew an hundred and fourscore
and five thousand Assyrians in one Night. As for the Enemies of God and His
Church in these latter days, Vials of wrath must be poured on them, until they
are utterly destroyed. It is said of those Vials, that the Angels who are the
Instruments of Providence in executing the wrathful Judgments contained
therein, Come out of the Temple, Rev. 15 6. Now the Temple is the house of
Prayer. It is the Prayers which are made in the Temple that bring down the
Seven Plagues of the Vials on the Antichristian Generation. O what Praying will
there be when that time is come!

USE. II. Let it be for Examination, whether our Prayers are such as that we
may have reason humbly to hope that they shall find acceptance with God*

Quest. How may we judge concerning that? What are the signs of a Prayer that
will be surely Answered and not return in vain?

Ans. 1. If the Spirit of God helps us to believe as well as pray; such a
Prayer does not use to miscarry, Jam. 5.15. The Prayer of Faith shall heal the
sick If it is indeed Faith and not Presumption or Delusion it will have a
blessed effect. David when greatly afflicted could say, I have believed
therefore have I spoken, Psalm. 116.10. He believed that God could and would
deliver, therefore did he speak accordingly, not to others only, but to God in
Prayer. We often hear him expressing his Faith: Psalm. 4.3. The Lord will hear
when I call unto him. And, 6.9. The Lord will receive my Prayer. When Asa
believed and relied upon God, that Prayer of Faith was more powerful than a
Million of Armed Men. A Prophet some time after when he was too diffident and
unbelieving, put him in mind of his former Faith. 2 Chronicles. 16 8. Were not the
Ethiopians a huge host, yet because thou diast rely on the Lord, he delivered
them into thy hand. The Believer by Faith takes hold on the Almighty arm of
God. And then what can he not do? What Evil can he not prevent? What Mercy can
he not obtain? Isai. 27.5. Let him take hold of my strength that he may make
peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.

2. An holy importunity in Prayer is many times a sign that the Prayer will be
Answered. When the Supplicant at the Throne of Grace will not be discouraged,
but resolves to hold on still praying and waiting, and waiting and praying, it
is to be hoped that the Mercy will come at last, and the longer it is prayed
and waited for, the greater will the Mercy be when it comes. When Elijah Prayed
for Rain, he sent his Servant to see if there were any Cloud, or sign of Rain,
he brought word that there was none; go again Seven times, says he. Thus when
there is a resolution to pray Seven times, will not the Lord incline His Ear
and hear? This Christ has confirmed by diverse Parables. One is that of a Man
that having Guests come to him, and nothing to entertain them with, goes to his
friend at Midnight, night, and prays him to lend him three Loaves; his friend
said to him trouble me not, I cannot rise and give thee, Luke 11.7. but then in
the 8. verse it is said, Though he will not rise and give him because he is his
friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he
needs. So says the Lord, Do you be importunate in Prayer, especially for
Spiritual blessings, and doubt not but God will give you what you ask for.
Another Parable to this purpose is that in the Eighteenth Chapter of Luke,
concerning the unjust Judge and the poor Widow, who cried to him for Justice.
That he had no mind to, yet said, because this Widow troubles me, I will
avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me, verse 5. Now God is a
righteous Judge, we may therefore conclude that He will avenge His own Elect
that cry to Him day and night, although He may in their apprehension bear long,
He will avenge them speedily. When the Believer will take no denial from God,
it is a sign that God will Answer his Prayers. This we see in Jacob, when he
wrestled with the Angel that appeared unto him in the form of a Man, which
Angel was the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his Memorial, Hos. 12.5. Therefore
he was Christ, Let me go says Christ, Jacob replied, I will not let thee go
except thou bless me, Genesis 32.26. Then he had power with God and prevailed.
Another instance to this purpose is that of the Woman of Canaan, who cried to
Christ for Mercy, but He answered her not a word; yet she would hold on
praying. The Disciples besought Christ that He would send her away, give her,
what she would have, that we may be no more troubled with her. Then Christ said
to her, I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel. I am sent
to Preach and Work Miracles only among the Jews, but you are none of them Thou
art a Gentile, and among the Canaanites, and do thou think I will work a
Miracle for thee? Here was a plain repulse, yet does she continue crying to
Christ for help. Then Christ seems to give her a sharper denial. Tells her that
the Gentiles were dogs. And shall I give the Childrens bread to dogs. I confess
(said she) I am a dog, but may not a dog have a crumb that falls from his
Masters Table? So that there was no repelling of her, but Mercy she would have
from Christ. And what an Answer did the Lord give to this Importunate Prayer?
The Answer was, Be it unto thee even as thou will, Mat. 15.28.

3. A Christian may judge something whether his Prayers shall be heard, by the
frame of his heart before duty, and in the duty, and after it. If before he
pours out his Soul to the Lord, God prepares him by putting his heart into a
suitable humble praying frame, that is a sign that his Prayer shall be heard:
Psalm. 10.17. Thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine Ear to hear. And if in the duty there is an holy
fervency wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, its a sign that the Prayer
will be prevalent. Jam 5.16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man
avails much. When a Man Prays like an holy Energonmen, like a man possessed
and acted by the holy Spirit which is the Spirit of Prayer, such Prayers do not
use to fall to the ground; no, they pierce the Heavens. As it is said of a
Prayer once made by the Priests and Levites, Their voice was heard, and their
Prayer came up to his holy dwelling Place, even unto heaven, 2 Chronicles. 30.27. We
read concerning Cain and Abel that Abels offering found acceptance with God,
but Cains did not, at which he was very angry. But how was this known? No doubt
but there was some visible sign of it. The Hebrew Doctors say that fire came
from Heaven and consumed Abels Oblations, but not Cains. It is very probable
that it was so. For this was an usual sign of Divine acceptance. When Solomon
made an end of Praying at the Dedication of the Temple, fire came down from
Heaven and consumed the Sacrifices. So it was at Elijahs Prayer on Mount
Carmel, 1 King. 18.38. Thus when God by His holy Spirit does fire our Spiritual
Sacrifices, it is a sign of His being pleased with them. And if after Prayer
the troubled Spirit is composed and easy having left the matter with God,
waiting quietly for a gracious answer in Gods good time. Thus the Prophet
Habbakuk, having Prayed he said, I will stand upon my watch, I will watch to
see what he will say to me, Hab. 2.1. A blessed sign this is that a gracious
Answer is coming Wherefore the Church says, I will wait for the God of my
salvation, my God will hear me. This we see in that godly praying Woman,
Hannah, in the bitterness of her Soul she prayed to the Lord and wept sore, she
poured out her Soul before the Lord, and after that her Countenance was no more
sad, 1 Samuel 1.18. This was a sign that her Prayer was heard, and her Tears put
in the Lords bottle.

USE. III. This Doctrine is an Encouragement to be Instant in Prayer. Let the
righteous Pray without ceasing, considering that the Ears of the Lord are open
to their Prayers.

Quest. For what, or for whom ought we to be Instant in Prayer?

Ans. 1. We ought to be Instant in Prayer for the Church of God. Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. We should Pray that the
implacable Enemies of Christ and his Church may fall and perish and rise no
more. Especially the great enemy Antichrist. Mystical Babylon is as sure to
fall as if it were done already. Therefore is it expressed twice and in the
present tense importing the undoubted certainty of it. Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, Rev. 18.2. And then and not till then, the Church on Earth will have a
glorious day. Glorious things are spoken of thee O City of God. Selah. The
Scripture must be fulfilled, that there shall be no more a pricking brier unto
the house of Israel, nor any grievious thorn of all of that are round about
them. And not only so, but an universal dominion over the whole Earth shall be
given to them, for which nothing can be more express and clear than that
Scripture, in Dan. 7.27. The Kingdom and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom
((...)) under the whole heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints of
the Most High. It ought to quicken our Prayers that the time draws on apace
when the Prophecies and Promises concerning the happiness of the Church in the
last days shall be fulfilled. When Daniel understood by Books that the Seventy
Years of Captivity was well nigh accomplished, he set himself to Pray about it
after an extraordinary manner. Several very Learned Men, have thought that this
Year which we are now entering upon, would prove happily fatal to the
Antichristian Interest in the World. Whoever lives a few Months longer will see
whether they are not mistaken. Several things are very encouraging; Namely, the
Death of the Most Antichristian King, than whom there never was a greater enemy
of the Church of God in the World; and it is said that he that is the present
Regent in France is more favorable to the Protestants there; And in that God
has given to our Nation a Protestant KING, who is a professed enemy of
Persecution and of Persecutors. These are hopeful signs that God will shake
once more not Earth only, but Heaven also. But if the Wheel should begin to
turn, we may not think that all will be overturned at once. Rome was not built
in a day, nor will the last Plagues of it be over in a day, though in a short
time. The downfall of Antichrist has by some been predicted to be in such a
Year, and then in such a Year. In Sixty six and in Seventy seven, and in other
Years. Yet he is standing still, which has occasioned many to deride all
Predictions of that nature as delusions. They are ready to say as Ezekiels Jews
did, the days are prolonged, and every vision fails, but truly that is a
sign, that the days are at hand, and the effect of every vision, Ezekiel. 12.23.
Lets turn all into Prayer.

And shall we not be Instant in Prayer for our own most sinful Nation, which is
under the guilt of bloody crimes, and yet has had Miraculous deliverances. When
was there a Nation (except the Jewish) that manifested a greater contempt of
the Gospel? What shall we say when near upon two Thousand Ministers of God were
silenced in one black day? Was there ever Nation that declared a greater Enmity
against being a Reformed Nation, when a Covenant for Reformation was burnt
after the most ignominious manner that possibly could be? And is there not a
cry of Innocent blood! In some of the late unhappy Reigns were not Lives, and
some of them of Eminent Men taken away by forms of Law, just as Naboths was in
the days of Ahab, and not one of those Murderers called to any account? How
many hundreds have dyed in Prisons for their Religion in the time of the
Caroline Persecution? And has there not been a National Profanation of the
blood of Christ, by means of a Sacramental Test? Pareus said to the
Heydelbergians, that he did not wonder at the War and Blood shed in Germany,
when he considered how the blood of the Son of God was profaned by admitting
wicked men to the Lords Table. And does not the Nation seem to be incorrigible
under the dispensations of God? National Judgments have come upon us. Was it
not so when one hundred thousand were swept out of one City by the Pestilence
in one Year? And when in the next Year that Capital City was set on fire and
thirteen thousand Houses burnt to the ground. And has not God tried the Nation
with Mercies and Deliverances? How great a Mercy was the Revolution
Twenty-eight Years ago, when Popery and Slavery was coming in like a flood, but
that Providence gave a check to it. And when not two Years ago, the Nation was
in the hands of treacherous Ministers who betrayed it to the French King, and
the way was paved for a Popish Pretender to come to the Throne, GOD by one
Death has made a mighty change in Three Kingdoms, and instead of a Queen has
given us a wise KING: but an ungrateful Generation has not been Thankful to GOD
for so great a favor of Heaven, to a sinful Nation. A wicked sort of men who
assume and arrogate to themselves the Name of the Church, but are enemies to
the true Church of CHRIST, have joined with Papists, and have laid waste the
Houses in which the Lords Servants used to worship Him; They have burnt the
Synagogues of God, and have risen up in Rebellion against the King whom GOD has
set over them, and who is without flattery and without reflection on any Prince
the best King living on the face of the Earth. We may by Prayer to the Almighty
be instrumental in subduing those Rebels and Enemies, to their King and
Country. So let thine Enemies perish, O Lord!

And shall we not be Instant in Prayer for New England? And for those that are
to succeed us, that they may Know and Serve the GOD of their Fathers. There is
matter of Encouragement before us from the Consideration of Gods gracious
Covenant, which says, That His Spirit shall not depart from His Servants, nor
from their Seed, nor their Seeds Seed, Isai. 59.21. And there is matter of
Encouragement if we Consider whom they are descended from. It has been the
observation of some Divines that when in the last of those eight Beatitudes (as
they are called) Persecuted ones are pronounced blessed twice over, it imports
their being blessed not only in themselves, but again in their Posterity, Mat.
5.12, 13. Many of the Children in New England are the Posterity of those who
have been Eminent Confessors and Sufferers in the Cause of Religion, and for
the Purity of it. For that it was that they followed the Lord into this Land,
when it was a Wilderness, and a Land not sown: will not God remember that
kindness to their Children after them? Also, the Experience which we have had
of the Lords hearing Prayer, should Encourage us to be Instant therein. When
Forty Years ago the whole Country was involved in a dangerous War, with great
Multitudes of Indians, we saw many very signal Answers of Prayer, which I
thought it my duty in the time of them, to take Notice of and publish to the
World. And so has it been all along. No longer since than a Year and half ago,
we were in eminent danger of a Famine, by reason of a drought of long
continuance. We set apart the Second day of the Seventh Month, to be a day of
Solemn Prayer, immediately God sent gentle showers, which continued from day to
day, so that the fruits of the Earth were wonderfully and beyond expectation
revived, and a comfortable Harvest followed. Ought we not to remember such
things, and thereby be Encouraged to Pray to that God whose Ears are open to
the Prayers of the righteous?

And shall we not be Encouraged to Pray for our Selves and Families? who knows
what Mercies we may obtain for them? It is related concerning an Eminently
Pious Man in Scotland, that he said to an intimate friend of his, whom he could
acquaint with the secrets of his Soul, This day I have obtained Mercy from God,
not only for my Self but for all Mine. And it was observed that all his
Children were remarkable for their godliness.

To Conclude, since the Lords Ears are open to the Prayers of the righteous,
Let us make sure that we be among the Righteous, whose character is, Faith and
Holiness. And let us Love and Serve that God who hears our Prayers, and resolve
(by His help) to Live a Life of Praise and Prayer as long as we shall live. I
finish with the words of the Psalmist: Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord: because
he has heard my voice, and my supplications* Because he has inclined his Ear
unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.

The Duty and Dignity of Aged Servants of the LORD.
PROVE. XVI.31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in a way of
Righteousness.


IN this verse, we have an assertion and a supposition. (1) An Assertion in the
former part of it, viz. That an hoary head is a crown of glory, h. e. a crown
that does adorn and honor the Person on whom it is. By the hoary head Old Age
is meant, that being an usual sign and symptom accompanying Old Age. The words
are a Metaphor alluding to Kings, or great Personages that have Crowns and
Diadems set on their heads, on the account whereof respect and honor is given
to them. The great Men belonging to Niniveh are called, Their Crowned, Nah.
3.17. They that have an hoary head, God has set a Crown on their heads which
calls for respect. (2) There is a supposition in the latter part of the verse,
If ('it is said) it is found in the way of righteousness. There is indeed no If
in the Hebrew Original, whence some Interpreters take the meaning of the words
to be, that they who walk in the way of righteousness, shall be honored with
living to Old Age, when the wicked shall have their days shortened, which indeed
many times happen to be so yet not always. But if we take the if in our
translation as Explanatory, they import that it is most honorable when there
is a Conjunction of Age and Righteousness together in the same Person. Not that
there is no honor due to Age if righteousness is wanting, but that then
especially it is a crown and glory; accordingly the Doctrine to be insisted on
from the words, is,

DOCT. That there is an honor due to Old Age, especially when found in a way
of Righteousness.

The Doctrine may be opened and confirmed in Two Propositions, both which are
contained in it.

PROP. 1. That Old Age is honorable. It ought to be revered and honored. The
Scripture declares it to be honorable. Isai. 9.15. The Ancient and the
honorable he is the head. If he is Ancient he is on that account honorable.
As a Man that has a Crown or Diadem set on his head is therefore regarded. The
hoary head is a crown of glory. Prove.20.29. The beauty of Old Men is the gray
head. Several things may be mentioned which will confirm and clear the Truth
before us.

1. GOD is the Author of this Crown. It is to be respected considering from
whom it comes. Indeed the Infirmities of Old Age are the effect of Sin, but Age
it self comes from none but God. Deuteronomy. 30.20. He is thy Life and the length of
thy days. God said to Solomon, If thou will keep my Commandments, I will
lengthen thy days, 1 King.3.14. If any Man is favored with long life, it is
God that has lengthened his days. As life is originally from Him, so is the
continuance of it to Old Age. Considering the many dangers which attend Men,
not only by diseases, but by innumerable accidents, it is a mavelous
Providence that upholds a frail life to Old Age. Psalm. 66.9. O bless our God,
which holds our Soul in Life. Our Souls and Life had been taken from us, if God
had not held it. The Apostle ascribes the continuance of his Life to the Power
and Providence of God. Act. 26 22. Having obtained help from God, I continue to
this day. Although life may be lengthened by the use of natural means, in special
great Temperance has a natural tendency to prolong Life, and to preserve from
diseases, nevertheless Men cannot by all the art they can use keep themselves
alive for a few days. If then any Man shall attain unto Old Age, it is because
God has redeemed his Life from destruction, and has Crowned him with loving
Kindness and tender Mercy.

2. GOD has put honor upon Age. He has so by requiring others to show respect
to it. The Word of God has said, Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a
Father, 1 Timothy 5.1. It is evident from the next verse, that the Apostle by an
Elder in that Place does not mean an Elder in respect of Office, but an Ancient
Man. If there is cause to reprove him, you must consider that he is a Father,
and therefore not to use harsh language, but to treat him with that decency
that becomes his Seniority, and in respect of Age Superiority. The Commandment
of God is very solemn and awful, in Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the
hoary head, and honor the face of the Old Man, and fear thy God, I am the
Lord. Rising up is a sign of honor. Therefore Solomon when he saw his Mother
coming to him rose up and bowed himself in token of a reverential respect
always due to a Parent, especially to an Aged Parent. The Hebrew Writers say,
that among them, if an hoary headed Man, came within four Cubits of him that
was sitting, he was to rise up and not to sit down again until the Old Man was
past him, such reverence had they for the face of the Old Man. And where do we
find a more solemn charge in all the Scripture, than this of honoring the Old
Man? God says as ever you would manifest the fear of My Name to be in your
hearts, honor the face of the Old Man. If you do it not, you do not fear Me,
you do not acknowledge Me to be the Lord, if you make no Conscience of this
Commandment. Moreover, God has put honor upon Old Age by Promising it as a
great favor and blessing. Psalm. 91.16. With long life will I satisfy him. It
is promised as a reward of Obedience to the Commandment of God. He said to His
People Israel, You shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has
Commanded you, that you may live and that you may prolong your days, Deuteronomy. 5
33. How often in the Scripture, and especially in the Proverbs of Solomon, are
such Promises inculcated thereby to Encourage Obedience. Prove. 3.1, 2. Keep my
Commandments, for length of days and long life shall they add unto thee. And
Chap. 4.10. Receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many. In
special, long life is promised as a reward for Obedience to the Fifth
Commandment Ephesians. 1.2, 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right; honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first Commandment with
promise, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the
Earth. Long life is spoken of as a greater blessing than the Riches and Honors
of the World. It is said of Wisdom, That length of days are in her right hand,
and in her left handriches and honor, Prove. 3.16. The preference is given to
long life, that is the right hand blessing. And this is promised as a blessing
that shall attend the happy times on the Earth yet to come. Isai 65.20. There
shall be no more thence an Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled
his days, for the Child shall dye on hundred years old. Yea, it is promised as
a blessing to a Town that there shall be Old Men, and Old Women in it. Zech.
8.4. There shall be Old Men and Old Women dwell in the Streets of Jerusalem,
and every man with his staff in his hand for very age. He shall need a staff to
support him, not because of Sickness, but because of his great Age. And the
removal of Aged Persons out of the World, is mentioned as a Judgment, and a sad
Omen to the Places where they had lived and saved God. The Lord threatened His
People that he would take from them the Prudent and the Ancient, Isai 3.2. And
it is spoken of as an heavy Judgment on a Family, that none of that family
should live to Old Age. So was it said to Eli, There shall not be an Old man in
thy house, 1 Samuel 2 31. Now God by promising long life as a blessing, and
threatening shortness of days as a Judgment, has put honor upon Old Age.

3. Aged Men have more Experience and many times more Knowledge and Wisdom than
others have attained unto. It is presumed that Old Men know more than Younger
ones who have not had their experience and advantages. Wherefore the Apostle
said, I have written unto you Fathers because you have known him that is from
the beginning, 1 John 2.14. Job wondered (...) the rash and weak Judgment of his
three friends, considering they were Old Men, and therefore should have been
wiser: He said, Job 12.12. With the Ancient is wisdom, and in length of days
understanding. In verse 20. He takes away the understanding of the Aged. Which
is not to be understood as if it were impossible for a Young Man to have
wisdom. Elihu a Young Man discovered more Wisdom in his discourses than three
Old Men. It was said to Solomon when he was Young, Thou art a wise Man and
know what thou ought to do, 1 King 2.9. Some by singular advantage of
Education have gained a great deal of wisdom in a little time. Nor have gray
hairs engrossed this commodity of Wisdom, Great men are not always wise, as was
said. So neither are Old Men always wise, Job 32.9. Neither do the aged
understand Judgment. Wisdom (says (...)) Does not always lean on a Staff,
(...) look through Spectacles. It does not always go on three legs, or see
through your Eyes. Nevertheless, two things (...) to be asserted. (1.) That
Aged Persons have had greater advantages than others to gain Knowledge and
Wisdom. And it is a great shame to whom, if they have not done so. Senex
Elementaris, an A, B, C, Old Man is a despicable Creature. (2.) It must be
asserted, that many times Old Men excel in Wisdom. That expression of David's:
Psalm. 119.100. I understand more than the Ancients, because I keep thy
Precepts, imports that Ancient Men use to understand more than others. This
Elibu was sensible of. Therefore he said to some Ancient Men, I am young, and
you are very old, wherefore I durst not show you mine opinion, I said days
should speak, and multitude of Years should teach wisdom, Job 32.6, 7. His
words are Elegant and Rhetorical, that which belongs to Persons is ascribed to
Time. If Men have improved a Multitude of days and years well, they must needs
be fitter to teach wisdom than they were before they had the experience of many
years. Aged Persons are fittest to give counsil. It was the saying of a wise
Man, That that City will be happy, that makes use of Young Men's Arms, and
follows the counsil of Old Men. What ruin did Rehoboam bring upon his Kingdom,
he lost Ten Tribes of Twelve by forsaking the counsil of the Old Men, and
counselling with the Young Men. That came of his heartening to the counsel of
green Heads, and declining the counsil of gray Heads: Now if Old Age has wisdom
accompanying of it, then it is Venerable. It commands reverence. People feared
Solomon when they saw that the wisdom of God was in him. It is a crown of
glory, it is an Ornament to whoever has it. Prove. 14.18. The prudent are
crowned with knowledge. Ecclesiastes says, that Wisdom makes a man's face to
shine, Eccl. 8.1. It makes a Man Venerable and Amiable. Wherefore it is also
said, Wisdom is the principal thing when thou do embrace her, she shall give
to thine head an Ornament of Grace, and a crown of glory shall she deliver to
thee, Prove. 4.9.

4. The light of Nature teaches Men to honor Age. I remember Mr Buroughs in
one of his Sermons, relates a Passage worthy of Commemoration, concerning
several Lacedemonian Ambassadors, who being in a Theater at Athens, when they
saw an Aged grave Man coming although they knew him not, only because of his
hoary head, they knew him to be Aged, they rose up and bowed to him, the whole
Theater admired and applauded those Ambassadors as Men worthy to be honored
themselves, for their showing such Veneration to an Aged Man, purely on the
account of his great Age. It has been showed that the People of God who had His
Word to direct them, have given a preference to Age. When Moses needed some to
be Coadjutors and Assistants to him in Rule and Government, God said to him,
Gather Seventy men of the Elders of Israel whom thou know to be the Elders
of the People, Numb. 11.16. Of such Elders their Sanedrim or great Council did
consist. Their Priests were Ecclesiastical Rulers, besides them, there were of
other Tribes Civil Rulers; these are called the Elders of the People. And in
the Gospel, Pastors of Churches are called Elders. Act. 14.23. They Ordained
Elders in every Church. Such were to be either in respect of their Years
Elders, or to be endowed with the Knowledge, and Wisdom of Old Men. In which
respect there may possibly be an Old Young Man. A Young Man that has the
Seriousness, Piety, and Gravity of an Old Man, is a Young Old Man. The Rabbi
said true, Sapiens appellatur Senex, etiam si diebus sit exignis. But moreover,
they that have not had the Scriptures, yet the Law written in their hearts by
Nature, has directed them to give a peculiar respect and deference to Aged Men.
In most Civilized Nations they have done so: They have thought such fittest to
be trusted with the greatest and most honorable Offices, inasmuch as Age has
given the denomination to their Public Councils. Among the Romans their Rulers
had the Name of Senators as being Senes Old Men, and their Magistrates were
called their Senate. So among the Spartans in Greece, their Public Councils
had the Name of Gerousia, which signifies a Senate. Such was their honor for
Age as that it became a proverbial saying, It is good living to be an Old Man
in Sparta, because the People in the City, did exceedingly respect and revere
Old Men. In our Nation Magistrates have had the Name of Aldermen given to them,
which word has respect to Age, importing Elder-men. By all this it appears that
they who honor not the hoary head, Sin against the light of Nature as well as
against the light of Scripture.

5. Not to honor Age is a sign of great inhumanity and barbarousness. It was
predicted that the Apostate Children of Israel should for their Sins fall into
the hands of a Nation with a fierce Countenance which would not regard the
person of the Old, Deuteronomy. 28.50. Which was fulfilled when the inhumane Chaldeans
came upon them, who were brutish Men and skilful to destroy. Their brutality
and barbarity appeared in that they had no Compassion on the Old man, nor on
him that was so old as to stoop for Age, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. This is twice
mentioned in the Prophet Jeremiahs Lamentations, Chapter 4.16. They respected
not the persons of the Priests, they favored not the Elders. And 5.12. The
faces of the Elders were not honored. So inhumane were those Heathen.

6. There is something of the Image of God in Age. The greater Seniority there
is in any, the more does he in that respect approach to the Eternal God. It is
said of Him, Neither can the number of his years be searched out, Job 36.26. In
respect of their Age there is a stamp of God upon Old Men, more than upon
others. He is called the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. And Christ in respect of
His Eternity is represented as having his head and his hair white like wool,
as white as snow, Rev. 1.14. Although all Ages put them all together are not a
Moment to Eternity, nevertheless, as to our Computation, Old Age bears the
fairest Image of Eternity. Therefore is the hoary head a Crown of glory.

PROP. II. It is especially true, that Old Age is honorable, when found in a
way of Righteousness. If the hoary head is an honor, this is the honor of
that honor. It is a Crown, righteousness is the Crown of that Crown. It has
been well said by some, that Life is not to be measured by the length of it,
but by the righteousness of it. When the Silver Crown of Old Age is adorned
with the Golden Crown of Religion, as one expresses it, that is the honor of
it. The proposition before us may be opened and confirmed in two Assertions.

1. He that is in the Way of righteousness is a righteous Man. He is one that
not only does actions which as to the matter of them are according to the rule
or law of righteousness, for so may an unrighteous man, but one that as to his
spiritual State is, a righteous, or a godly Man. One whose way and course is
righteous. Men while in this World are Viatores, they are traveling in one of
two ways. Either in the broad way which leads to destruction, which the most of
Men are going in, that is the way of Unrighteousness: Or in the narrow way which
leads to life; that is the way of Righteousness. Prove. 12.28. In the way of
righteousness is Life, and in the path way thereof is no death. This is that
which is called the good way: 1 Samuel 12.23. I will teach you the good and the
right way, which men should be very sollicitous about their getting into that
way. Jer. 6.16. Ask where is the good way and walk therein. And the way of good
men, Prove. 2.20. And the way which is called holy, Isai. 35.8. So the way John
Baptist walked and taught others by his example as well as by his doctrine to
walk in it. Matt. 21.32. John came in the way of righteousness. This way of
righteousness is the way of Gods Commandments, and of His Precepts, Psalm.
119.27. Men do not naturally choose or walk in that way. Wherefore going in the
way of righteousness implys, Conversion. For Unconverted Sinners are not in
that way. Among all the Unconverted Sinners in the World, there is not one
righteous Man to be found. Romans 3.10. It is written, there is none righteous,
no not one.

2. It is to be asserted, That being found in the way of righteousness, does
imply having been therein for some time. How should hoary heads be found in the
way of righteousness, if they were not in that way before they were adorned with
hoary heads, and then their gray hairs will be a great glory to them. The
Expression implies not only a Conversion to God, but an early Conversion. A Man
that from his Youth to his Old Age has gone on in a course of righteousness and
holiness, is honorable indeed. It is mentioned to the honor of a Disciple
whose Name was Mnason that he was an Old Disciple, Act. 21.16. He had been a
Disciple for many years. The Apostle Paul mentions it to the honor of some
kinsmen of his, they were (says he) in Christ before me, Romans 16.7. And that
which is recorded concerning Obadiah is a great honor to his Name and Memory,
that he said to the Prophet Elijah, 1 King 18.12. I fear the Lord from my
youth. That Expression intimates that he was not then in his Youth, but that
Age had overtaken him, and found him fearing God, and that for many Years he
had done so. Such an one was Samuel He therefore said, I am old and gray headed
and I have walked before you from my Childhood unto this day, 1 Samuel 12.2. He
began to fear and serve God in his Childhood, and continued to do so, until he
had an hoary head. Such Persons be they Men or Women that have for many Years
walked in the ways of righteousness, have an honor due to them. Such as
Zechary and Elizabeth, of whom it is said, Luke 1.6. They were both righteous
before God, and walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless. It is reported concerning Polycarp (once a famous Pastor of the
Church in Smyrna) that when he came to dye he said to his Persecutors, I have
served Christ fourscore and six years. It is supposed that he was Converted
about the Sixteenth Year of his Age, and that he was an hundred Years Old at
his Death and Martyrdom. Surely that was a Venerable Old Servant of the Lord.
None of us in this Congregation can say, that we have served Christ Eighty and
six Years, but I trust there are some among us that can say that they have
these fifty, nay sixty Years and more been His Servants in the way of
righteousness. Why should not such be honored? That a crown of glory does in a
singular manner belong to such Servants of the Lord as have not only lived but
continued faithfully Serving of Christ for many Years, will appear in several
particulars.

1. Grace in the Soul makes Men to be Excellent and Glorious. For Grace is a
glorious thing. It is an internal glory. Psalm 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within: viz. in respect of the Grace wherewith her Soul is adorned.
Grace is called Glory. Believers beholding Christ as represented in the glass
of the Gospel are changed from glory to glory, i.e. from one degree of Grace to
another, which is their Glory, 2 Cor 3.18. Grace is an ornament to whoever has
it. No Gold, nor Jewels, nor costly Apparel does adorn the body, so as Grace
does the Soul that is invested with it. Wherefore the Apostle speaks, as 1 Pet.
3.3, 4. Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, or of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the
hidden man of the heart, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is
in the sight of God of great price. Who are the most excellent Persons on the
Earth! It is they that are in the way of righteousness. Prove. 12.26. The
righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor. Men that excel their Neighbor
in Riches, or in Wordly greatness or grandieur, are not the more excellent in
the sight of Heaven on that account, but they that have godly Souls within them
are excellent in the Lords esteem. Psalm. 16 3. The Saints on the Earth, the
excellent in whom is all my delight. They are so because they are Saints. Their
Sanctity makes them excellent. One says well, That a Saint in rags outshines
the greatest man on earth, if he is a wicked man. And it is a Celebrated saying
of Luther, That a poor Servant doing the meanest work, if they do it from a
principle of Grace and in obedience to God, is a more glorious sight than
Caesar in all his triumphs. For Holiness makes Men like Angels. What is the
difference between the Angels of Heaven, and the Devils of Hell? It is Holiness
that makes the difference. Angels are holy, but Devils are spiritual
wickednesses. A very holy Man is an Angel Incarnate. One of our English Martyrs
blessed God for his being cast into Prison, because there (said he) I became
acquainted with that Angel of God Mr John Bradford. Nay, Holiness makes Men
like God. A Godly Man is a Godlike Man. The Image of God does especially
consist in Holiness. Ephesians 4.24. Put on the new man, which after God, i. e. after
the Image of God, is created in righteousness and true holiness. The blessed
Angels resemble God more than any other Creatures, because they are of all
Creatures the most holy ones. These Watchers over the World are called the holy
Ones, Dan. 4.17. What Men on Earth are they, that do most of all resemble the
blessed holy God? They are the holiest Men. His holiness is in a singular
manner his glory. Exodus 15.11. Thou art glorious in Holiness. Then this must
needs be the greatest Crown of glory that any Man on Earth has or can have.
Therefore holiness is venerable. It commands respect and reverence. Sometimes
ungodly men and great men too, will revere a very holy Man. It is said of Herod
that notwithstanding his being a King, He feared John Baptist knowing that he
was a just man and an holy. There was no persuading him out of the way of
righteousness, Mark 4 20. Now if being in a State of Grace, or in the way of
righteousness, calls for respect and honor, then certainly, they that have
been in that State a long time, and have walked in that way for many Years are
on that account honorable.

2. Aged Servants of the Lord have had a long acquaintance and communion with
God. They are to be honored, since God has vouchsafed to honor them with His
Presence, and that there have been Mutual Communication between them for a long
time. 1 John 1.3. Truly our Fellowship is with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ. They have had the honor of being admitted into the Presence of
the King of Glory, and that every day, and for many Years. God has bid them
come to Him with their requests, and that they should open their hearts and
speak freely to Him; and this of matters which they cannot speak to any one
else of, and this have they done many a time and often. Psalm. 142.2, 3. I
poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble, when my
spirit was overwhelmed within me. God puts honor on His Servants when He will
permit them to be thus free with Him. They have come to God in the Name of
Christ many a time, and He has through Christ come to them. He said to His
People, I will meet with them and I will commune with them from above the
Mercy-seat, Exodus 25.20. Christ is the Mercy-seat, and it is a blessed
communion which through Him, Believers have with God. And this is what Christ
has promised to such as abide in the way of righteousness. Joh. 14.23 If a man
love me he will keep my Commandments, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. It is among Men counted an honor
to have a free conversation with an Earthly King, but the Servants of God can
say, our Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. And when there has been for
many years an holy blessed conversation between the Lord and them, a blessed
Familiarity proceeds from thence. It has been related concerning an Eminent
Christian, that when he was on his death bed he could say to those about him,
If the walls of this Chamber could speak they would say that I have met with
God here many a time, and that He has been Familiar with my Soul. When Moses
had been conversing with God forty days, his face did shine. Then aged
Christians who have been Conversing with God for more than Forty years, do they
not shine? Surely there is a Crown of Glory belonging to them.

3. Aged Servants of the Lord have done a great deal of good in the World. The
Generation in which they have lived has fared the better for them, and it may
be after Generations too. David lived to a good old Age, and he has left this
Character behind him, That he served his own Generation according to the will
of God, Act. 13.35. Sometimes Young Men have been very useful and serviceable
having done a great deal of good in a little time: had they lived to Old Age
they would have done a great deal more. But more especially such Servants of
God as His Providence has set in a Public Station, if they walk in the way of
righteousness, many will fare the better for them. Rulers in the Civil State,
if they set themselves to promote righteousness, they are blessings to the Land
in which they live. One such Man in Jerusalem would have saved the whole City
from ruin, Jer. 5.1. But if they continue many Years to do thus, how much Evil
will they prevent, and how much good will they obtain, in the place where
Providence has cast their lot. Such a King as David that continued serving the
Public Forty years together, until Old Age, and in his Old Age to the last a
whole Nation fared the better for him. So for such a Governor as Nehemiah who
never took a bribe all the time of his Government, which was twelve years, nay,
considering the People were poor, he would rather deny himself of the Salary
which was due to him as Governor, than the poor People should be burdened,
Neh. 5.14, 15. He was one that the whole Province had cause to bless, and to
bless God for him. And a Minister in the house of God, if he has been so a long
time, and has been faithful, must needs have been an instrument of much good.
It may be many Sinners have been Converted, and thousands Edified by his holy
labors. It is said concerning that faithful and eminent Minister of God Old
Jehojadah, that he had done good in Israel both toward God, and toward His
House, 2 Chronicles. 24 16. But others also, although but in a private Capacity, if
they have walked in the way of righteousness, and continued to do so for many
years, they have done much good. They have been blessings to their Families,
and blessings to their Neighbors. They have done good by their Example, by
which they have shined as lights in the world, they have been like Stars which
are common blessings. They have done good by their Prayers. So have they been a
means to keep off destroying Judgments from the places where they have lived.
The Jews have a saying, Sinc stationibus non staret Mundus, If it were not for
Prayer the World would not stand. And whose Prayers? The Prayers of such as
walk in the way of righteousness. The righteous is an everlasting foundation.
It is eminently true concerning such as have been a long time in that way. Men
will regard the Requests of an Old Friend, or of an Old faithful Servant. So
will God regard the Prayers of His Old Friends that have been serving him
faithfully for these many years. Surely they will obtain no little good for
those they Pray very much for. Now a great respect is due to such as have been
useful and serviceable. The more serviceable the more honorable. For Men in
being beneficial to many resemble the blessed God. How Extensive is His
goodness who is good to all, and His tender Mercies over all His works. The
more universally beneficial we are, the more do we approve our selves the
Children of our Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 5.45. And Men that do a great
deal of good in the World are in that respect like Christ. How many did He do
good unto both as to Body and Soul? Act. 10.38. He went about doing good and
healing all that were oppressed of the Devil. The whole World has fared the
better for Him, since He is the Light of the World. God has made the Sun to be
a Mercy to the World. Christ the Sun of Righteousness has been an infinitely
greater Mercy. Mankind has fared the better for His Mediation. That tree had
been cut down, if the Son of God had not said, spare it. But especially the
Elect of God in all Ages and Places of the World have been blessed by Him On
which account it was said to Abraham, in thy Seed, by which Christ is intended
all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed, Genesis 22.18. Now Aged Christians
having had longer opportunities of doing good in the World than others have
had, if they have done accordingly, they do in that respect the more resemble
God and Christ, and then their Old Age becomes a Crown of glory to them. Hence,

4. Aged Christians being found in the way of righteousness have brought more
glory to the Name of God, than they could have done, if they had not been
favored with Time and Age to glorify Him in. Christians are in the Scripture
compared to Trees. The fruit which grows upon such Trees, if they are
Christians indeed, is righteousness. Isai 61 3. Trees of righteousness of the
planting of the Lord that he might be glorified. The more of that fruit any
Christian bears, the more is God glorified in them and by them. Wherefore
Christ said to the disciples, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that
you bear much fruit. And the Apostle shows that if Christians be filled with
the fruits of righteousness that will be to the glory of God, Phil. 1.11. Now a
Tree that has been bringing forth fruit many years one after another until it
is grown Old brings forth much fruit. An Aged Saint is such a Tree. If
Christians live to Old Age, it will be a great shame for them, if they have not
brought forth much fruit in all that time, but if they have done so, God has
been glorified by them. Nay, such Christians do not only glorify God
themselves, but they cause others to glorify Him. They that see their good
works will glorify their Father which is in Heaven, Matthew 5.16. They that are
about them may well say, if the Servants of God are thus good and thus holy,
than how good is their Father who has made them to be such! And what respects
is due to such Persons who have for so many years been glorifying God.

5. Aged Servants of the Lord are near their Crown. Their Salvation is nearer
than when they first believed, Romans 13.11. It was a comfortable word which was
spoken to Jerusalem, Isai. 40.2. Speak you comfortably to Jerusalem, cry unto
her that her warfare is accomplished. Thus may it be said to Aged Saints, be of
good comfort, your warfare is well nigh accomplished: you are not far from the
Kingdom of God. A Man that is like to have a rich Inheritance speedily fall to
him, is respected. This will be the Portion of the Aged Saint. An Inheritance
incomparably better than any in this World will soon be his. One that is like
to have a Kingdom in a little time, is on that account highly respected. An
Aged Christian is a sincere Christian, will speedily be in the Possession of a
Kingdom infinitely better than any in this World. An Aged Saint, like old Peter
knows he must Shortly put off his Earthly Tabernacle, and so shortly be in
Heaven. It is reported of a singularly Pious Lady in England, (the Lady
Falkland) that when She went to her rest at Night, She would ly down with those
words, Now I am one day nearer Heaven than ever I was before. Old corn is not
kept long out of the barn. No more will it be long before the Old Servant of
God will be gathered into the heavenly barn. It was said to Job, Thou shall
come to thy grave in a full Age, like as a shock of corn comes in; it comes
into the barn, in its season, when it is fully ripe, Joh 5 26. They that are so
near their crown in Heaven ought to have the more respect from Men whilst yet
on Earth.

6. If Men continue long in the way of righteousness, their Crown of Glory in
Heaven will be the weightier for that. The longer thy Crown is in preparing
(says an excellent Writer) the more full of Diamonds and Pearls will it be
when it comes. There are righteous Men who if they had dyed Fifty Years ago,
they had gone to Heaven, but they would not then have had so great a Crown
there, as now they shall. All those years of Service will be an augmentation of
their Glory. The more Glory Men by being active Instruments in His Service,
shall bring to the Name of God here on Earth, the greater shall their own glory
be in Heaven. Will not degrees of glory there be according to degrees of grace
and serviceableness in this World? Does not the Scripture say, He that sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows plentifully shall reap
plentifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. And if Men are diligent in improving and exercising
the Grace which they have received, will they not have more? The righteous
shall hold on his way and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger, Job 17.9. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. The Christian that has been
many years improving the Grace bestowed on him, must needs have attained to a
great measure. In is said in the Parable of Talents, To every one that has
shall be given, and he shall have abundance, Matt*. 25.29. It is to be presumed
concerning Aged Christians, that they have been laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come. Store of good works,
store of works of Piety; none but God knows how many thousands and ten
thousands of Prayers, and store of works of Charity. And then how great will
their Crown of Glory be in the life to come? For all their works will be
rewarded in a future State and World. Their works, that is the reward of their
works, do follow them; Whither will they follow them? They will follow them to
Heaven, Rev. 14.13. Not the least good work but what shall be rewarded. He that
shall give a cup of cold water only, to a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple,
verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose his reward, Mat. 10.42. What a
blessed reward then shall that Man have, that has done great Services for
Christ, and it may be has endured Persecutions for his Fidelity to the Truth
and Interest of Jesus Christ. O the glorious Crown that is reserved for him!
How great will it be? Psalm. 31.19. How great is thy goodness which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee! Where is it laid up? It is laid up in Heaven.
That Servant of the Lord, who for many years, from his Youth until Old Age has
been faithfully Serving God in Jesus Christ, how great is that Crown which is
laid up for him in Heaven?

SERMON. II.
WE proceed to APPLY the Doctrine which has been thus Opened and Confirmed. Let
it be Applied, (1.) By way of Instruction, in several Particulars.

Inst. 1. They that walk in the way of Righteousness, many times live to Old
Age, and it is a Mercy when they do so. We cannot say that all righteous Men
shall be Crowned with this Mercy, for some of them dye before they have hoary
heads. Promises made concerning Temporal blessings are to be understood not
absolutely, but with limitations. If God shall see, that it will be most for
His glory, that some who are in the way of righteousness, should die whilst
they are Young, they shall not live to Old Age. It may be God will have them
Crowned with Martyrdom, which is a far more glorious Crown than that of an
hoary head. It is said of many who lived in the Primitive Ages of Christianity,
that they loved not their lives to the death, Rev. 12.11. According to the
ordinary course of Nature they might have lived many years longer, but they
laid down their lives for Christ, and by that they brought more glory to Christ
in one day, than they could have done by many years active Obedience. Sometimes
God in singular love and compassion to righteous Ones takes them out of this
evil World whilst they are yet Young in Years. It may be sad Calamities and
Desola^^ons are coming on the Places where they live, and the Lord would not
have them grieved with beholding such sad Spectacles. Isai. 57.1. The righteous
is taken away from the evil to come. We have an Instance for this in Josiah,
who was one of the most Pious Princes in the World, and yet he dyed before he
was full Forty Years Old. To him it was said, Thou shall be gathered to thy
Grave in peace, neither shall thine Eyes see all the evil that I will bring on
this Place, and upon the inhabitants of the same, 2 Chronicles. 34 28. Or it may be,
there is a righteous Man that doleful misery is coming on his Family and
nearest Relations, which if he should live to gray hairs, he must be a
sorrowful Spectator of: Therefore he must die before that. Thus concerning
Jeroboams godly Young Son. The Prophet having predicted the lamentable ruin
that was to come on his Fathers family, said. He only of Jeroboam shall come to
the Grave, because in him there is found some good thing, toward the Lord God
of Israel, 1 King. 14.13. But although it is sometimes otherwise, nevertheless
very often they that are in the way of righteousness, have their lives
lengthned out to Old Age. Wherefore it is said, The fear of the Lord prolongeth
days, Prove. 10.27. God blessed the holy Patriarchs with long life. It is said
of Abraham that when he died, he was an Old Man and full of years, Genesis 25.8.
Some have observed that Abraham is the first Person who is in the Scriptures
called an Old Man, notwithstanding there were many older Men than he that dyed
before him. His Old Age was a reward of his singular Obedience to God. His Son
Isaac also lived to be an Old Man: Genesis 27.2. He said, behold now, I am old, I
know not the day of my death; and yet he lived Forty Years after he spoke those
words, that is, after he began to be an Old Man. And Jacob lived to be an Old
Man. Before Joseph made himself known to his Brethren, he enquired with a real
concern about his Aged Fathers welfare: Genesis 43.27. He asked them, is your
Father well? The Old Man of whom you spoke, is he yet alive. Samuel lived to
Old Age. And then the People unworthily slighted him after all the many Years
Service he had done for them. They said to him, behold thou art Old, make us a
King to Judge us, 1 Samuel 8.5. The Prophet Elisha was an Aged Servant of the
Lord. For King Joash bewailed his death with the same words that he bewailed
the departure of Elijah Fifty Years before that. Several of the Apostles
notwithstanding their indefatigable Labors, and that the Devil and his
instruments sought to take their lives from them, yet lived to Old Age. So did
Peter: He was an Old Man when he suffered Martyrdom, as Christ did many years
before signify to him. Joh. 21.18. When thou art old, thou shall stretch forth
thy hands, h.e. thou shall be Crucified and thy hands nailed to the Cross. The
Apostle Paul was an Aged Servant of the Lord before he dyed, Philem. 9. Paul
the aged. But especially the Apostle John, who was the only one of all the
Apostles that dyed a Natural Death, all the rest were Persecuted to death;
Writers inform us that he lived to be an hundred Years old. It is reported
concerning Simeon who was the Son of Cleophas, and therefore the Lords kinsman,
that he was an hundred and twenty Years old when he was Crucified. Some Eminent
Servants of God in these latter Ages have lived to a great Old Age. Robert
Constantine who was Beza's great friend lived till he was an hundred and three
Years old; his Senses of Body and Mind being perfect and his Memory strong. Now
it is a Mercy when they that are in the way of righteousness live to Old Age.
When it is said, The hoary head is a Crown of glory, that implies that there is
the Mercy and Favor of God in it. The Lord promised Abraham that he should be
Buried in a good Old Age, Genesis 15.15. If righteous Men live to Old Age, it is a
Mercy to the World, especially if they are in a Public Station: for many fare
the better for them. They do a great deal of good in the World. If their
Intellectual Abilities hold they do a great deal of good by their Wisdom and
Counsil which the Authority of their Age makes to be the more regarded. So was
aged Jehojada a blessing to the whole Land in his Old Age, since by his Wisdom
he kept the People from a great Apostasy all his days, which as soon as ever
that Old Minister of God was laid in his Grave they were subject unto, 2 Chronicles.
24.17, 18. So by their holy Example, and by their Prayers to God they are
blessings to the Places where they live; for thereby they keep off Judgments,
as Moses and Samuel, and the Prophet Amos did more than once; and obtain
Mercies, as Elijah did, when there was a sore drought, ^he Prayed earnestly and
the Heavens gave rain, Jam. 5.18. And if a Man that is in the way of
righteousness shall live to Old Age, it will be a Mercy to himself as well as
others. For that (as before was intimated) it is to be hoped that in many years
he will gain a large stock of Grace, so as to become strong in the Grace which
is in Christ Jesus. Old Abraham was strong in the Faith. So was Old Jacob: He
had a strong Faith not only for himself, but for his Posterity; for his
Children and Childrens Children that God would bless them after he was gone out
of the World. He that is in the way of righteousness, if he continues growing
in Grace all his days, the longer ^he lives, and the more good he does, the
greater will his happiness be in the Eternal World, as also before was
intimated.

Inst. 2. If Old Age when found in the way of righteousness is honorable, then
they that despise Aged Servants of the Lord, are guilty of a great Sin. Has God
set a Crown of glory on their heads, and shall Men despise them for it? If Men
are Aged there is a reverence due to their Age, supposing that to be all their
honor, but much more if they are adorned with godliness. Not to show an Aged
Man the respect which his Age calls for, is a great Sin. An heathen had so much
of Natural Religion in him as to say, That if a Young Man did not rise up to
show respect to an Old Man, it was a crime Morte piandum, which deserved to be
punished with nothing less than death. But then to treat Aged Persons with
disrespectful and disdainful Language only because of their Age, is a very
criminal offense in the sight of God: yet how common is it to call this or the
other Person, Old such an One, in a way of contempt on the account of their
Age? Do they not offend God, who is styled, the Ancient of days? Thus did the
Children of Bethel to Elisha, 2 King. 2.23. They Mocked him, and said, Go up,
thou bald head, go up, thou bald head. After this manner did they treat that
Aged Prophet, Thou Old bald head, it is pretended that thy Instructor Elijah is
gone up to Heaven, Lets see thee go up after him: Go up if thou can. Bears
came out of the woods and tare above Forty of those Children. The Judgment was
extraordinary, and that was a sign that the Sin was more than ordinary. To
deride Aged Persons because of those Natural Infirmities which Age has brought
upon them, is a great Sin. It may be they are become weak and childish, as the
Proverb says, Once a Man and twice a Child. They that laugh at them on that
account, perhaps if they should live to their Age will be as childish as they.
And would they be willing then to be made a laughing stock, by those that are
Younger than they? Or, if there are Moral Infirmities which their Old Age is
attended with, they ought to be covered with a Mantle of Charity. It may be
they are pettish and hard to be pleased. To expose Fathers for such Infirmities
is to be like Cham, who discovered his Fathers Nakedness. But it is in a most
peculiar manner true concerning Children with respect to their Aged Parents,
Any way to despise them in their Old Age, is a wicked thing. To disregard the
Advice of an Old and a Godly Father, is great Impiety. Children are apt to do
so, and especially to despise an Aged Mother. Wherefore the word of God, gives
a special caution to Children to beware of that Sin. Prove. 23.22. Hearken to
thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is old. When
Infirmities of Age are added to that of her Sex, it does often occasion
contempt, but it ought not to be so. For still she is thy Mother who endured
much sorrow in bringing thee into the World, and in thy Education when thou
wast a Child, and therefore it will be vile ingratitude to despise her. And
there is another Scripture in which the Mother is mentioned before the Father,
when Children are Commanded to reverence them both: Luke 19.3. You shall fear
every one his Mother and his Father. Children cannot do better for themselves
than to honor and cherish their Aged Parents. They should study to require
them for all the care and cost and sorrow which for their sakes they have
endured. And in that they will show something of Piety. 1 Timothy 5.4. Let them
show piety at home, and to requite their Parents. The Stork uses to be called
Avis Pia, a Pious bird, because when the old ones are decayed and not able to
provide for themselves, their young ones provide for them, and feed them. The
Stork will rise up in Judgment against those unnatural Children that have no
regard for their Aged Parents. We have the greatest Example that ever was in
the World, to instruct Children that they should take care for the welfare of
their Aged Parents. For our Savior Christ when He was dying on the Cross,
seeing His poor Widow Mother standing by, He said to His beloved Disciple,
Behold thy Mother, and from that hour that disciple took her to his own home,
Joh. 19 27. Those Children that will suffer their Aged Parents to want, if they
are able to supply them, do not deserve the Name of Christians: They are worse
than some Infidels have been. The most famous of all the Greek Poets, speaks of
one whose life was short. Why! says he, He gave not food and nourishment to
his Parents. On the other hand, there have been some dutiful Children, who when
their Aged Parents have been decayed, they have maintained them honorably, and
by that means have brought a signal blessing from God upon themselves and upon
their Posterity.

Inst. 3. Aged Servants of the Lord may have Comfort against the Temptations
and Afflictions which their Old age (...) attended with. The World uses to
slight them. Men will not worship the setting Sun. Suppose a Lamp to have
shined never brightly, when it is going out, it is Lamp despised, Job 12.5.
That Is often the case of Aged Servants of the Lord. And sometimes they think
themselves more despised than they are; that is a natural Infirmity of Age: but
suppose they are so, if God does not despise them, it is no matter though the
World does. God despises no Servant of His for his being Old, but respects him
the more for his having been many Years in the way of righteousness. One of the
greatest discouragements of Old Age, is, that then a Christian cannot do that
Service for God and Man which in his Younger Years he was capable of. Yet
sometimes God is so gracious to His Aged Servants, as to continue their
Abilities for Service, which is a signal and more than ordinary favor. There
are some whose Old Age is like Abraham's, a good Old Age, Genesis 25 8. If a Man is
capable of doing good in his Old Age, God has blessed him with a good Old Age.
Some Aged Servants of the Lord have done singular Service for the Church of God
just as they have been going out of the World. Some of their last words and
works were of great use after they were dead and gone. Thus concerning the last
words of David the Man of God, 2 Samuel 23.1. The Apostle Paul, wrote his Second
Epistle to Timothy in his Old Age, a little before his death, which has been of
singular use to the Church of God. The like is to be said concerning the Second
Epistle of Peter. But suppose Age has debilitated him, and rendered him
unserviceable, if when he had youth and vigor he laid himself out for God, he
may comfort himself with this thought, the Lord remembers it. Jer. 2 2 I
remember the kindness of thy youth. Moreover, Aged Servants of the Lord may
comfort themselves with this consideration, God will never forsake them. They
may live to be a burden to themselves and others: their nearest Relatives may
grow weary of them; but then the everlasting Arm will not be weary in
supporting them. It was David's Prayer, Cast me not off in old Age, forsake me
not when my strength fails, Psalm. 71.9. Sometimes God is pleased to comfort
His Aged Servants, who have walked with Him, and been Eminent workers of
righteousness with sensible manifestations of His favor. It is related
concerning an Eminent Minister in Scotland, who in his younger Years had been
diligent at his Study, and laborious in Preaching, when he was through Age and
Weakness confined to his Chamber, One asking him about the State of his Soul,
the return he made, was, When I was Young I was diligent, and I lived by Faith
in the Son of God, now I am Old, He condescends to feed me with lumps of Sense.
The remembrance of many years past spent in Serving God, and endeavoring to
promote the Salvation of Souls will be a comfort on a deathbed.

Inst. 4. Aged Persons who are Strangers to the way of righteousness are very
Miserable. The hoary head which Providence has favored them with, for want of
righteousness to adorn it, will prove an aggravation of their Sin and Misery.
Would you know who is the most Miserable Creature on the face of the Earth? It
is an ungodly Old Man. Isai. 65.20. The sinner of an hundred years old shall be
cursed. O how cursed! yet there are such Miserable Creatures in the World.
There are Old Atheists. Ezekiel. 8.12. Have thou seen what the Ancients of the
house of Israel do in the dark. They say, the Lord sees us not. Such Atheists
are they. And there are Old Liars, Old Drunkards, Old Lascivious Wretches: Such
(...) are Old in Adulteries, Ezekiel. 23.43. Whoever escape destruction from God,
such Sinners shall not. There was a destroying Angel sent to Jerusalem with a
slaughter weapon in his hand, and a positive order to destroy utterly: but who
did he slay in the first place? Ezekiel. 9.6. He began at the Ancient men. They
because of their long continuance in Sin best deserved the destruction. For the
longer Men live in their Unregenerate Estate, the more Sin they will have to
answer for at the Day of Judgment. All the Sins of their Youth, and of their
Middle Age, and of their Old Age, will lie down in the Grave with them, and go
to Hell with them, and rise up in Judgment against them at the dreadful day. Of
an Old Sinner it is said, His bones are full of the sins of his youth, which
shall lie down with him in the dust, Job 20.11. Woe to the Old Impenitent
Sinner, for he has only done evil before the Lord from his youth, Jer. 32.30.
His gray hairs would have been a crown to him, if he had Served God, but the
crown is fallen from his head, woe unto him that he has sinned. How much Sin is
a wicked man guilty of in one Year? But then if he shall live Sixty or Seventy
Years, and all that time continue Sinning against God, what a Prodigious heap
of guilt, will he have contracted on his woeful Soul! God has given an Old
Sinner a large space to Repent in, and that will aggravate his Impenitency and
Condemnation, as it did Jezabels, of whom the Lord says, I gave her space to
repent, and she repented not, I will cast her into great tribulation, Rev.
2.21, 22. Not only tribulation, but great tribulation, not only damnation, but
great damnation will be the portion of such Sinners except they repent. And it
may amaze them to think how near they are to that damnation, having already one
foot in the Grave and so in Hell. An Old Man cannot but know that death will be
upon him quickly. It may be so on a Young Man, but to be sure on an Old Man.
And when death comes and finds him in his Sins, what will come along with it!
What will immediately follow it? That you see in, Rev. 6.8. where you read of a
pale horse, and his name that sat on him was death, and hell followed with him.
What an Old Sinner! O be awakened, for you have reason to expect death and hell
every Day, every Moment of thy life? How do thou know but that an Apoplexy or
a Palsy, or some other sudden accident may put an end to thy space of
repentance! And there is one thing more to be thought on. It is a truth, and an
awful one, That if Men have lived under the light of the Gospel all their days
until gray hairs are upon them, and yet remain in their Natural Unconverted
estate, it is not usual for such obdurate Sinners ever to be Converted. They
have slighted so many offers of Grace; they have continued so long in their
rebellion, grieving the holy Spirit of God, Sin and Satan has got such a fast
hold on their Souls, that nothing less than a Miracle can cast him out. And yet
I would not have you despair neither. For with God nothing shall be unpossible.
Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Nicodemus said, Can a man when he is
old be born again? As improbable as this may seem, with God it is possible. The
Arm of God is able to bow and bend an old oak, which no arm of a Man can do. He
that was able of the Stones which were taken out of Jordan, (for I suppose John
Baptist spoke of them, Mat. 3.9.) to raise up Children to Abraham, can of Old
Sons of Belial, make Children of God. Can Old dry bones live? Can Old Sinners
be converted? If the Almighty Spirit of God will enter into them they shall. He
that raised Lazarus after he had been dead Four days, can as easily cause a Man
that has been dead in trespasses and sins fourscore Years to live. If Christ
shall say, Thou Old Sinner come out of thy Grave, he that was dead shall come
forth and live. There have been some wonderful instances of it, in our days. I
have formerly put you in mind of an Old Man who although living under the light
of the Gospel was not savingly Converted before a great Old Age had overtaken
him, and then he would often say, If I had dyed before I was Seventy and six
years Old I had not gone to Heaven. I was a poor Unregenerate Creature until
then. But what must such Old Sinners do to be saved? The Answer is that Old Men
must be saved in the same way that Young Men are, namely in the way of
Repentance toward God, and of Faith in Jesus Christ. Let the Oldest Sinner
turn from all his Sins, and believe on Jesus Christ, and all his Sins shall be
forgiven: He shall not then perish but shall have everlasting life.

USE. II. Let it be for Exhortation. (1) To Young Persons. (2) To Aged Servants
of the Lord.

1. To Young Persons. Make sure that you get into, and that you keep in the way
of Righteousness I know (and I bless God) that there are some Young Men
belonging to this Congregation who are in that way: Oh that there were more
such! Oh that all Young Men were in that way. It is a way which few there be
that find it. Nevertheless, it is the good way; You cannot turn into it, too
soon, but if you keep long out of it, a thousand to one you will never find it.

Consider 1. That if you would live long on the Earth, in this way you are most
likely to find length of days. Psalm. 34 12. What man is there that desires
life, and loves many days? Where is there a Young Person that does not? The
14 v. tells them what they must do, Depart from evil, and do good; forsake the
ways of Sin, and walk in the way of Righteousness. He that is in the way of
righteousness, will abstain from those things by which life is shortened. An
intemperate course of life shortens days. Excess in drinking or in eating does
so. Righteousness will make Men careful to beware of such excesses. Fleshly
Lusts war against the Body, as well as the Soul, and destroys both. They whose
life has been among the Unclean frequently dye in Youth. As for the Young
Debauch, a dart strikes through his liver, as a bird when hastes to the snare,
and knows not that it is for his life. He is smitten with a Consumption of his
Liver, and that in a little time puts an end to his life, Prove. 7.13. Had he
been in the way of righteousness, he had lived longer. Oh then, Let Young
Persons make it appear that they are in the way of righteousness, by their
Obedience, as in a special manner to the Fifth which is the Commandment to
which a promise of long life is annexed, so to all the Commandments of God. And
being in that way hold on in it, as they that are really therein will do. Job
17.9. (...) ^^^hteous shall hold on in his way. There have been many Young
Persons that have had hopeful beginnings they have associated themselves with
such as fear God, and have begun to seek the Lord, but their goodness has been
like the Morning cloud, and as the early dew it is gone away. What will such
seeming vanishing righteousness stand them in stead? No life is promised to
them, but the contrary. Ezekiel. 18.24. When the righteous turn away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned. Oh be not like Urziah, who for some
time did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, he sought the Lord, and
as long as he did so, God made him to prosper, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. but after a while
his heart was lifted up to his destruction. He provoked God to make him a
remarkable example of His holy indignation. For in the very act of Sinning he
was smitten with a Leprosy, and lived and dyed a Leper. Be not like Joash, who
seemed to be a Pious Young Man, was a zealous encourager of the Worship of God,
but he fell in with wicked companions after the death of his Uncle Jehojada
under whom he had a Religious Education, he became a flagrant Apostate, he left
the house of God, and served Idols, and was a prodigy of ingraditude, Murdering
the Godly Son of the Man to whom he had been beholden both for his Life and
Crown: And his end was woeful.

Consider 2. That if you abide in the way of righteousness from Youth to Old
Age, great will be your reward in the Life and World which is to come. Those
hoary heads, which God has set a crown of glory upon, shall then have another
kind of crown and glory given to them. The longer you have continued faithfully
Serving God, the more Diamonds will your crown of glory shine with in the
Eternal World. All the numberless Prayers which you have poured out before God,
for your selves or others, all your other deeds of Piety, all your works of
Charity, will be remembered. The Lord whom you Serve will not forget one of
them. If when you were Children, you did from a principle of the fear of God in
your hearts, behave your selves dutifully toward your Parents, God will reward
you for that Obedience which was your duty. If you have been Servants, and then
were diligent and faithful to your Masters, not with eye Service as Men
pleasers, but as Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, He
will reward you for the Service you did for your Masters. Whatever good thing
any man does the same shall he receive of the Lord whether he be bond or free,
Ephesians. 6.8. In the space of many years, you must expect to meet with manifold
Afflictions and Temptations. If you bear the Cross as becomes the Servants of
Christ, He will reward you for all your Patient sufferings. Thus shall it go
well with the righteous. Therefore let Young Persons make sure of their being
such: And the sooner you do it, the happier are you both for Time and for
Eternity. Oh! that Young Men would do now as probably they will wish they had
done when they shall see Death and Eternity ready to take hold on them. They
will then wish that they had lived a Life of serious Godliness: that they had
spent more Time in Communion with God. I have often thought of the dying words
of a great Man, when he was going out of the World, he expressed himself after
this manner, I (said he) have been Privy Counselor to four Princes, have been
present at State-transactions for thirty Years together, and I have learned
this after so many Years experience; that Seriousness is the greatest Wisdom,
Temperance the best Physic, and a good Conscience the best Estate; yea, I
would change the whole Life I have lived in the Palace, for one hours Communion
with God in the Chapel.

Exhor. 2. Let Aged Servants of the Lord suffer the word of Exhortation; To
approve themselves as becomes their Age. It is not unbecoming for me to Exhort
such who am my self Aged, and so far as I can learn, the Oldest Man in all this
Large Congregation. Wherefore as the Apostle speaks to those that were on
another account Elders: 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders which are among you I Exhort,
who am also an Elder. So the Ancient Men in the Assembly, I Exhort, who am also
my self Ancient. Why may not I, who have been (although the most Unworthy in the
whole World that ever could say so) a Public Preacher of the Gospel Nine and
Fifty Years, (for this Month and this Week Nine and Fifty Years are past since
I began to speak in the Name of the Lord,) why should not I esteem it my duty
to speak a few words to my Aged Friends? There are a considerable number of
Aged Persons (though short of my Age) here before the Lord. For there are many
who have attained to Threescore, and such are every where accounted Old Men. It
has a long time been a Proverbial saying, Sexagenarius de ponte, a Man that is
Sixty is to be dismissed from those Employments which are proper for Youth and
Strength. Let me then confirm the Exhortation, with some Directions, and none
but what I would my self (Christ helping me) be willing to join with you in the
practice of.

1. Aged Servants of the Lord should be humbled for the many Sins of their Life
past. A Man that has lived long in this sinful World, how many Sins has he been
guilty of? Innumerable evils, more than the hairs on his head. How many Sins of
Commission in Words, Thoughts, and Deeds. And much Sin also in respect of
Omissions. Alas! how little good have we done in the World! Our famous Dr.
Usher had been a great blessing in his day, not only by the Sermons he
Preached, which were instrumental in the Conversion of many, and among others
of several Young Scholars when he resided for some time in Oxford, but also by
the Books he wrote, by which many thousands have been Edified, yet when he drew
near to his End, his Prayer was, The Lord forgive my Sins of Omission.
Moreover, The vanities of Childhood and Youth, should be matter of Humiliation
in Old Age. They were so to David, whose Prayer was, Remember not the Sins of
my Youth, nor my transgressions, Psalm. 25.7. Nor has our Elder Age been without
Sin. It was an humble Expression of one of the Ancients, Diu vixi^. diu
paccavi. I have lived a long time, and I have been a Sinner a long time. It is
not enough for us once to have confessed our past transgressions, but the
remembrance of them, should cause us to go softly in the bitterness of our
Souls all the days of our life. We should go Mourning for them to our Graves.
It is reported of Old Austin that he dyed reading the Penitential Psalms.

2. Let Aged Servants of the Lord be watchful against what ever will be a
blemish to that Old Age which God has crowned them with. Nothing will really
blemish our Age, but only Sin, and that will do it. It is not the natural
decays and infirmities of Age, but Moral and Sinful Infirmities that will prove
a blemish and dishonor, which we ought to watch against. And the rather
because some Eminent Servants of God have miscarried very scandalously after
they have been Old. So, did Solomon, notwithstanding he was beloved of God, and
therefore had the Name of Jedidiah, which signifies beloved of the Lord, given
to him, yet it is said that when he was old his Wives turned away his heart, 1
King. 11.4. So Asa in the time of his Old Age, when a sore disease was upon
him, sought to the Physicians, but he sought not to the Lord, 2 Chronicles 16.22. He
Persecuted an holy Prophet, and oppressed some of the People at the same time:
by these things he greatly blemished his Old Age, which has caused some to
question whether he was a sincere godly Man. Aged Persons should be far from
those Sins which are directly contrary to the Virtues which ought to be the
Characters of Persons who are stricken in Years. Aged Men and Women may do well
to read the Second, and Third, and Fourth Verses of the Second Chapter of the
Epistle to Titus, and there they will see what Qualifications and Virtues
become their Age; I shall not mention them all, but Gravity is one of them. The
whole deportment of such as are in Years should be attended with a becoming
Gravity. Levity in Words, and much more in Actions is unsuitable and a shame to
them, considering their Age, and stains their glory. For Old Men to be gay and
youthful in their Apparel, or if Aged Women dress themselves like young Girls,
it exposes them to reproach and contempt. Again, The Apostle says of Aged
Persons that they should be Temperate. For such to be overcome with Wine or any
other Strong Drink is very lamentable. There have been some Old Men, and Old
Professors of Religion also, who supposing their Age required it, have indulged
themselves in drinking of Drams to a sinful Excess, whereby their hoary heads,
have been dishonored, and a blemish has been left on their Names. Again, It
becomes Aged Christians to be Sound in the Faith, and to be steadfast therein,
and this not only as to fundamentals in the doctrine of Godliness, but in
Truths relating to Worship and Discipline, and that order of the Gospel which
is of Divine Institution. Our Fathers came into this Land when it was a
Wilderness, that so they might Worship God according to Scripture Pattern
without any humane Inventions therein; but there have been some of late who in
their Old Age have Apostatised to another Way of Worship differing from that
which their Fathers walked in, so have they corrupted themselves, and blemished
their Old Age, when just going out of the World. All Men, but especially Old
Men ought rather to dye than to forsake the way of righteousness. There was a
famous Jew whose Name was Eleazar, some of his Enemies had a reverence for him
on the account of his great Age. They would have persuaded him to transgress
the Law of God only in a Ceremonial Precept, promising him his life if he would
do so: but he with a noble courage chose a cruel Death rather than to Sin
against his Conscience in a Ceremony. The Jewish Historian says of him, He
considered his Ancient Years, and the honor of his gray head. I (said he) am
above fourscore and shall I get a stain to my Old Age. I will rather ^e and
show my self as my Age requires, (...) ^^nt to the torment, and was tortured to
Death. I believe this Eleazar was one of those Hebrew Martyrs the Apostle
speaks of, who were tortured not accepting deliverance, Heb. 11.35.

3. Aged Servants of the Lord should be very careful to redeem the Time. For it
is certain that they have but a very little time to be in this World. Death and
Old Age are not far asunder. Hence Old Barzillai said, How long have I to live?
2 Samuel 19.34. There are Young Persons who if they did really believe they
should dye very shortly, they would be careful to redeem their time. They that
are Aged cannot but know that they must dye shortly. Time is a precious
Commodity, and they have but a very little of it left, and shall they Squander
away any of that little. Let us rather endeavor to live much and do a great
deal of Good in a little time. It is true, they that are Aged cannot do as in
their Youthful days they could, nor does God Expect it from them, considering
the infirmities that attend their Age. In Old Age a Grasshopper is a burden, as
Solomon speaks. That which was a Recreation in Youth, will be an insupportable
burden in Old Age. Yet may they do a great deal of Good. They may do so by
being shining Examples of Piety: and by their wise and godly Counsels to
Younger ones, and by Communicating their holy Experiences to others. They have
had great Experiences of the Lords carrying them through many Temptations, and
of wonderful answers of Prayer, by declaring to them that fear God, what he has
done for their Souls, many may be Edified. They may also before they go out of
the World be instrumental of a great deal of Good by being much in Prayer to
God. In that respect not only Aged Men, but Aged Women may be great blessings
to the World, as Anna was, of whom it is said, That she was a widow of about
fourscore and four years, which departed not from the Temple but served God
with fasting and prayers night and day, Luke 2, 37. That Aged Woman was a
blessing to the whole Town. Oh! Let us Pray that our last days may be our best
days. There was an Eminency in David's Last Words, 2 Samuel 23.1. And it is
mentioned to the lasting honor of the Pastor in the Church in Thyatira, That
his last works were beyond the first, Rev. 2 19. So shall we live desired, and
dye lamented.

4. Aged Servants of the Lord should be always ready and very willing to dye.
Always ready: For many times Aged Persons are taken away by a sudden Death. It
may be by the Palsy, or Apoplexy; or it may be they will dye in their Sleep.
Some Eminent Servants of God, have gone well to bed at Night, and have been in
Heaven before the Morning. O blessed Night! An Aged Man in a special manner
should live by that rule, Never to do any thing that he would be afraid to do
if he knew he should dye the next day. And make haste to do every thing, he
would have to be done before his death. He should always keep a Will or
Testament by him, as they that think they are dying use to do. And let them be
very willing to dye and leave this World. It is strange if they be (...). Men
that are at Sea desire to get into a safe Harbor as soon as may be. And shall
not Christians who are tossed in a tempestuous World long to be in their
blessed Haven. Travelers long to be at Home. While in this World we are
Travelers and Pilgrims. Not Earth but Heaven is our Home, and shall we not
think the time long until we are there! A Soldier longs for a Victory, and is
not easy until he has obtained it. And shall not Christians, especially such as
have been long engaged in a difficult and dangerous Warfare, desire the day
when they shall have a perfect Victory over all their Spiritual Enemies! Some
Moralists among the Gentiles have thought that Aged Persons should be willing
to leave the World. It is reported of the Emperor Adrian, that he said, He
wondered that a Man who was above threescore would send for a Physician: He
thought that a Man of that Age must needs have had so much Experience of the
undesirableness of this Evil World as to be weary of it, and willing to be gone
out of it. But Christians have higher and more noble reasons to induce them to
bid Death welcome, e. g. That so they may be perfectly and for ever delivered
from Indwelling Sin, which is like the Leprosy in the house of the Israelite,
which must be pulled down or it could not be cleansed. So must the house of his
body be dissolved that he may become pure from Sin: Romans 6.7. He that is dead
is free from sin. When the blessed day of his death comes, the Believer on
Christ will never Sin more in Word, Thought, or Deed. Who would not be willing
to dye on that condition? Then do Believers go to be with Christ, who said to
Peter, Whither I go thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me
afterward, Joh. 13.36. He did so, and is with Christ at this day. Well may
those Christians be willing to leave the World, who when they are gone hence
shall be with Christ. The thought of this made the Apostle Paul not only
willing but desirous to be gone out of this World. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire
to depart and to be with Christ. They that are with Him behold His Glory, which
is the Heaven of Heaven it self. Wherefore He has said, Father I will that they
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory,
Joh. 17.24. When the Immortal Souls of Believers are separated from their
Bodies, they go to God. The Spirits of just men made perfect, are with God the
Judge of all, Heb. 12.23. There they have such divine Communications as are
ineffable, and to us in this Mortal State unconceivable. God said of Moses,
With him will I speak mouth to mouth and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold, Numb. 12.3. Much more does God do so with the Saints in Heaven. If
dying Stephen could say, I see the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, most certainly glorified Souls do so. They see God and are
therefore blessed. Their happiness consists in that Beatificai Vision, which
they shall enjoy in the fullness and perfection of it after the Resurrection.
Moreover, Aged Servants of the Lord may well be very willing to dye,
considering that decrepit Old Age renders them incapable of that which is the
chief reason why life in this World is desirable, viz. That so we may do
Service for Christ and for His People. In this respect there is a difference
between Young Men and Old Men. Young Men although they also should be willing to
die if that be the will of God concerning them. Nevertheless, with submission to
the Divine Will, Let them Pray for the continuance of their life, that so they
may do Service for the Name of the Lord. Thus the Psalmist, I said, O my God
take me not away in the midst of my days, Psalm. 102.24. Thus also Hezekiah,
when he was dangerously sick, he Prayed unto the Lord, who sent the Prophet
Isaiah to say to him, I have heard thy Prayer, I will add to thy days fifteen
years, Isai. 38.5. And David in his younger years, Prayed. O spare me, that I
may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more at all, Psalm 39.13. He
did not Pray so, when he was arrived to Seventy Years. No: It is said that then
he was full of days. He was satiated, having had enough of the World, and was
willing to go out of it. It is a very undesirable thing for a Man to outlive
his work. Although if God will have it to be so, His holy will must be humbly
and patiently submitted unto. When a Man's work is done he may well desire a
dismission. When through decay of Age, he can do little or no Service for
Christ and for His Church, then to be called out of this, and removed to the
better Country, that is an heavenly, is a very desirable Mercy. Why then are
some Aged Servants of the Lord, fond of living here still! There is not an Old
Man that hears me this day, but let him do two things, which I will mention,
and he will be very willing to leave this World as soon as the Lord shall
please. One is, Let him think much of Heaven. Let Heaven come into your Minds
every day, and often in a day. The more you Meditate on the heavenly World, the
more you will long to be there. When Monica (the Pious Praying Mother of the
famous Austin) heard Ambrose Preach a Sermon concerning the glory of Heaven,
the Meditation of it was rapturous to her. Is there (said she) such glory in
Heaven! why then do I stay here any longer! And the other thing to be done, is,
Get a well grounded Assurance that your Names are written in Heaven. Let us do
so, and I am certain of it that we shall not be afraid to say with good Old
Simeon, Lord, NOW let thou thy Servant depart in peace.

5. Let Aged Servants of the Lord be content to live longer if God will have it
so. There are but few that need this Exhortation. Too many are like that great
Man among the Romans, who said he would be content to live in any Misery,
provided he might be assured that he should never dye; so terribly was he
afraid of Death. So loathe are the most of Men to leave the Earth, that it would
be very superfluous to persuade them to be willing to stay here. There was
(says one) a Parliament, concerning which it was Enacted that they should not
be Dissolved until they themselves pleased. If God should say so to Men, Heaven
(says he) would be very Empty, and there would be more Men here below than the
Earth could contain. Nevertheless, there are some that are too impatient of
their continuance here. Was not the Prophet Elijah so, when he was feign to fly
his Country, and hide in a Wilderness: 1 King. 19.4 He requested for himself
that he might die, and said it is enough. I am like to do no more Service for
God, on which account I have lived long enough, and therefore Now O Lord take
away my life. And Jonah in too much pet and passion Prayed, Now O Lord take I
beseech thee my life from me, for it is better for me to dye than to live, Jon.
4 3. Nay, and the Meek Moses discovered humane frailty when he said to God,
Kill me I pray thee out of hand, if I have found savor in thy sight, and let
me not see my wretchedness, Numb. 11, (...) How much good did Moses do in the
World after that, which if God had granted that request would not have been
done. The truth is, that if a Man is subject to some very exercising
Affliction, and Meditates much on Heaven, and is assured of his Interest there,
he is apt to be too earnest and impatient to be gone. But we must leave as the
way and manner, so the time of our departure out of this World, with the wise
and faithful Providence of God, waiting all the days of our appointed time
until our change shall come. It becomes a Christian both to endeavor that his
last days may be his best days, and to desire to dye, yet to be content to
live, especially if he is not so decayed, but that he is capable of doing some
Service for Christ among His People. Thus it was with the holy Apostle: Phil.
1.21, 23, 24. For me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. I am in a great
strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is
far better, nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

6. Let Aged Servants of the Lord be much in Prayer. An Old Man should be a Man
of Prayer, often on his knees before the Lord. Why not every day and why not
often in a day? Blessed Mr. Chauncey the Learned President of Harvard College,
seldom saw a day in which he was not with God at least Six Times. Surely such a
Praying Man will be a blessing to the World as long as he lives in it, and will
obtain good for his own Soul and for his Family, and Posterity by laying up a
stock of Prayers for them. And in Prayer, Let us who are Aged, plead the
Promises that are made to Old Age. There is a promise that they shall be
fruitful. Psalm. 92.14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they
shall be (...) and flourishing. Let us plead that promise. There Is a promise
that they shall have the gracious presence of God with them in their Old Age.
Isai. 46.4. Even to old age, and to hear hairs I will carry you. That promise
may encourage Aged Servants of the Lord, to Pray as, David did when Old Age had
overtaken him: Psalm. 71.17, 18. Thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto
have I declared thy wondrous works. Now also when I am old and gray headed, O
God forsake me not. It is reported concerning that very Learned and Holy Man
Dr. Rivet, that he used in his Old Age to repeat those words every day. They
are words very suitable for Old Christians to remember. Let us live and dye
Praying. And how will all our Prayers end? They will end in Praises, not only
whilst we are living on the Earth, but in Heaven to all ETERNITY. The sweet
Singer of Israel, he said, Psalm. 146.2. While I live I will Praise the Lord:
But is that all? You will soon be dead, but you have an Immorral Soul which
shall never dye, the Being of it will abide throughout the days of ETERNITY.
So long shall I continue Praising Him. I will sing Praises unto my God while I
(...) any being. AMEN!

BOSTON, June 17 th. 1716.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the PREFACE. Page ii. line 24. r. Drusius. line 25. r. melior.

Page 23. line 5. for, therefore. r. there see.

Page 66. line 12. for, ture, r. true.

Page 96. line 15. for, over r. ever.


