SOME CONSIDERATIONS Upon the several sorts of BANKS Proposed as a Medium of
Trade: AND Some Improvements that might be made in this Province, hinted at.

Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump, at the Desire of some of the Inhabitants of
BOSTON. 1716.

IN a Country of much Trade and Business, and where the Silver (which is the
best Medium) is drawn off, the Trade will thereby be greatly disadvantaged. To
supply the Deficiency thereof in thi^ Country, the Public Bills of Credit have
been for some Years a useful Expedient; but they being become scarce, and daily
decreasing, various have been the Projections of setting up a Bank to the value
of 200000 l. more or less, as the only Medium of Trade.

Before the Consideration of the several Projections, it may be of use to
consider, that before the War, 26 or 27 Years since, there was a competent Cash
to answer the Trade of the Country; and to enquire what it was that drew it in,
and how it comes to pass it is now drawn out; that so the first may be
encouraged, and the other avoided.

And though the Wrecks and the Privateers did bring in considerable Quantities,
yet many are of the Opinion those were but a small Proportion to the running
Cash of the Country; but that the Fishery was then the N. E. Silver Mine, and
if Peace continue, may prove the principal Means to draw in Silver again; and
so much the more, if it has all needful Encouragement given by the General
Court. For though it is true the needless Expense in many respects, as in Silks,
fine Cloth, both Linen and Woollen, as also the Drinking so much Wine and Rum,
etc. has been a great means of carrying off the Silver, yet this is a Toppick
easier to speak to, than to redress; and is a Matter worthy of the Legislators
care. And if the General Court should lend upon good Security, and without
Interest, (only paying for the making) great Sums of Bills for inabling
Particular Men to carry on any useful and beneficial Works, and should give to
others sufficient to Encourage them to set up useful and profitable Inventions
or Trades, it would be not only some addition to the Running Cash, but also
would prevent much of our Importation. And Encouragement to our Fishery would
much increase our ^tion, whereby in time, the Difficulties we now labor under,
would be abated. For till our Exportation exceeds our Importation, if Silver
should happen to be brought into the ^^untry, it could not abide here, but of
necessity must be again Exported to pay the Debt contracted. But as a needful
Expedient, and while other Methods can be taken, (the Country Bills failing,
and shortning every Day more and more) several have been the Projections of
Banks to supply the Defect.

The first proposed, is a Private Bank; wherein a number of Men, of good Real
Estates, entering their Names, and Subscribing for any Sum proportionable to
the Security they can give in Lands, etc. take out perhaps half the Sum
Subscribed for, paying Interest for what they take out; the rest of the Bills
to be let out to such as will hire the same upon good Security; a part of the
whole Interest to be to Public Uses, the rest to the Bankers; He that
Subscribes most to have most Voices, so that one Man may have 5 Votes in all
Matters, with many other Articles.

This Bank seems projected more for the Advantage of the Bankers, than for the
Public Good: For (not to mention many other Objections) till we can be assured
that not only the present Bankers, but also their Posterity, will always seek
the Public above their own Private Advantage; What Assurance can there be,
that those Gentlemen of 5 Votes a-piece, will not by joining together, easily
sway the Votes to their own Advantage; as by drawing out of great Sums to
Monopolise not only Goods, but Provisions; with many other ways ruinous to the
Public?

The second Projection is; That the Country Emit Bills and let them out upon
Interest, and upon good Security, which will bring in a large Revenue toward
the support of the Charges of the Government.

This has likewise met with Objections; and till the Throne can be secured from
a Prince of Arbitrary Principles in all times to come, such a Bank will be
dangerous: For how easy will it be for such a Prince to divert such a large
Revenue to his Use and Pleasure? If any think otherwise, they may consider the
last 5 Reigns, and see if they can assure us, that any more than one of them
would not have taken hold of such an Opportunity: For though (thanks be to
Heaven) we have a King upon the Throne, that Studies nothing more than the
welfare of his People, yet all Men are Mortal, and as Changes have been in our
Kindom of England, so no doubt may be again; and if a Prince of such Principles
should ever Ascend the Throne, all the Laws of secure so large a Revenue, would
prove but as Spiders Webs.

These two Banks which are levelled to raise a large Income yearly, which must
also have many Officers, and a large Pension for their Service, are
reciprocally opposed by both; neither of the two Parties, but can see danger in
the others obtaining their ends.

A third Proposal has been, That the Country should make a competent Sum of
Public Bills, and lend them to the several Towns in proportion to their Rates,
at 5 per Cent for 20 Years, in which time the whole being paid in, the
Principal to be to such Town, who may either let it out upon Interest, or
purchase Lands with it for the use of the Town.

This third Proposal being without the Charge of great Officers and Salaries,
and without the risque of bad Bills, or Cheats, yet answering the end proposed
of supplying a Medium of Trade, and having none of the former Objections lying
against it, may reasonably be accounted the most eligible, and every way
preferable, rather than any of the two former, or than that of framing a new
Specie of Bills founded upon the Mortgaged Lands; and all the Country's
undivided Lands, which so long as any of those Bills were out, would bar the
Country from settling one Town more; and (without the Country's Sanction) would
involve the People in new Perplexities how to pay their Specialties for
Province Bills.

And it being supposed, that many that are rather for no Bank, yet join in some
with one side, some with the other, in order to obstruct emiting of any; as
best suiting their particular Interest: In which case a Fourth has been
proposed, ( viz.) A Private Bank, of a competent Number of Men in Business
agreeing together, make Bills, and give Security each to other to answer them;
to let their Books lie open for any Man in the Province to Subscribe his Sum;
and giving in Security sufficient, to take out what Bills he Subscribes for,
without paying any Interest, only at taking out, to pay for the making, etc.
and to be obliged in some Penalty to meet once a Year, and pay off the
necessary Charge, etc. till a competent Cash be taken out, and then the Books
to be shut up, and no more Bills Emitted, save only to change the defective,
etc. Such a Bank might be very Useful as a Medium of Trade, and would soon
obtain in this Province, to be as good as the Bills of the other Colonies.

It Is certain, Banks of what kind soever, cannot be (in our declining
Circumstances) a complete Remedy, but only may render us more Comfortable in
our consuming Condition; as a Cordial to a Man in in a deadly Disease, may be
some Support till other Means can be used; for which Reason it is preferable to
all Banks, that the Government Emit large Sums for promoting what may be
Beneficial and of a general Good; ( ut sup.) which will not only be a Supply of
present Cash, but will also lay certain and stable Foundations of increasing
the Produce of the Country; which is the Interest and Wisdom of all Nations.

Such as lending large Sums upon good Security, without Interest for some Term
of Years, (only paying for the making) for building a Bridge over Charles
River, cutting a Channel at Sandwich for safe and more speedy Passage of
Vessels, if those Works upon Mature Consideration shall be found Practicable.
And here being both Iron Oar, and a plenty of Wood to work it, and this Country
having great occasion for all sorts of Iron Work; it may be advisable to
advance considerably in Bills, either by the way of Loan or Gift, to such as
will undertake to set up a Finery, and cause it to Work to Effect; which would
work the Iron better, and in greater Quantities; and by the help of which, Pots
and Kettles might be made here for the use of the Country. To encourage which,
the Duty laid in England upon Hollow Ware, would have no small Influence. True
it is, here was a Finery in the beginning of Times at Lynn, which did not
prosper, here not being then a competent Number of People to manage them, nor
yet to take off the Wares when made, though at half the Price now sold at. It
ought not to be any Discouragement in the Undertaking, now both the quantity of
Hands to work at it, as also to expend the Goods when made, are double; the
Price they then were at, being also doubled.

And here being great occasion for Nails, and other small Works, which at
present cannot be made at the price for want of a Slitting Mill, to slit the
Iron into suitable Rods; (for it is found that it is as much Labor to fit the
Rods, as to make the Nails when the Rod is prepared) If the Country should give
or lend a competent Sum to any that shall procure Workmen to bring such a Mill
to work to Effect here, it would enable the Smiths to make a sufficient Supply
of Nails for this Country. And if the Soldiers at the Castle had Nailers to
instruct them, many of them might be employed in it, which would be a benefit
to such Soldiers in their Health. This one Article of Iron-works, which might
be set upon for a few Hundreds, would soon save the Country some Thousands in a
Year.

Glass-works might also be improved here, the Materials being all at hand,
which in its several parts, as Window-Glass, Beer-Glasses and Bottles, would
amount to a very great Sum; and a small Encouragement from the Country, would
be sufficient to set it up here. The like may be said of Paper making, working
upon Horn for Combs, Ink-Horns, etc. which with Encouragement, would save the
Country very Considerable.

The improving the sowing of Hemp and Flax, is also a Matter worthy of great
Regard; and is much obstructed by the inability of many to break up Land
suitable. In which case, it would be a good Encouragement to lend them without
Interest, such a Sum as may enable them yearly to break up and Fence in 10 or
20 Acres for that Use. This would be of very great Service to the Country.

And though the Crown will always have a jealous Eye upon any Increase of the
Woollen Manufactury here; yet it will rather Encourage the working upon Linen
or upon Cotton, (as in Ireland) which with suitable Encouragement, is capable
of a vast Improvement here, by making Sheeting, Shirting, and Callicoes.

This Country being often liable upon a failure of Crops, to be bro't to
Extremity for want of Grain; and when a time of Plenty comes, there are but few
Buyers, whereby it is often run down below a reasonable Price: To prevent both
which Extremes, the erecting of Storehouses or Graineries, would be of
singular Use: And if the Country advance some Thousands for building of
Graineries, for safe laying up of Grain, many in a time of Plenty, would lay up
their Grain in them; and taking a Receipt for it may with it pay their Debts.
(As is practiced in Germany) It is easy to conceive, that this would be a very
great Benefit to Trade, and that which Holland, though they have comparatively
but little Grain growing, yet hereby are enabled in times of Scarsity, to
supply not only themselves, but also the Neighboring Nations.

Though this Country be large, and much good Land in it, which for want of
People, cannot be improved in many Generations; yet a shame it is to say, This
Colony cannot provide themselves necessary Food.

The Town of (...) much increased of late Years, by (...) but the Country has
not (...): But in stead of that, many are gone (...) following them, so that
it is supposed, (...) last 12 Years enough have gone out of this Colony, to
Plant 12 good Towns in Connecticut only; besides what have gone to other
Places. The reason of the not improving the Country more, and also many going
out, when here is want of double the Number we have, is a Matter worthy to be
well considered.

In the first Settling this Country, Land was easy to be attained, and at a low
price, which was an Inducement to multitudes to come over Servants: But now the
Land being so generally taken up, few come over that can live elsewhere; so
that Servants now brought, generally prove Run-aways, Thieves, or some way
Disorderly: To avoid having of such, multitudes have rather chosen to get
Slaves, though at excessive Price; which Practice, tho so directly against the
Peopling the Country, is encouraged in stead of being remedied, even by the
Laws of the Country. For he that is able to purchase a Slave, comes off in the
Rates cheaper than his poorer Neighbor that has an Apprentice: though indeed in
that hard and unequal Tax of Polemoney, the Masters are made equal. But he that
has an Apprentice, must pay more for him, than his richer Neighbor is set at
for his Slave; and the poor Man's Apprentice must Watch and Train, and not only
so, but in a time of War, must be Pressed from him: All which his richer
Neighbor is cleared from, besides his paying less in the Rates; to the
encouraging of Slavery, and discouraging of the Poor; and consequently to the
putting a full stop to the Growth of the Country: Slaves being a weakening
rather than Addition to the Strength of a Country. Boston alone is supposed to
have 3 or 400 Slaves; which were there so many Servants in their stead, enough
would come out of their time yearly, to people a good Town.

These are some of the Hindrances of the Increase of the Country; for Remedy
whereof, it is humbly Proposed, That the Country make such Provision, that
Servants when out of their time, shall be entitled to 50 or 60 Acres of Land,
and a Township appointed for them; and if others shall join with them in
settling such Town, they to pay to the Country a moderate Price for Land, etc.
such Township not to exceed 4 or 5 Miles Square; for the extravegant Bounds of
Townships, is that which has occasioned great Quarrels among themselves, and
also given a great deal of Trouble to the General Court about placing new
Meeting Houses, and the Bounds of Precincts. And such Township (if it may be)
to have a Brook or River in it, proper for a Grist-Mill and a Saw-Mill, the
Meeting House to be set in the middle of the Township, and the Houses as near
as may be to it. And as soon as such Township is filled up with Inhabitants,
then to appoint another. And this would be the greatest Inducement to the
coming over of Servants, and the greatest Means of Increasing and Strengthening
the Country.

To effect which, if those Gentlemen that have Ingrost vast Tracts of Land,
without any design ever to settle them by themselves, Servants or Slaves,
should Voluntarily thro^ up into the Country's Hands, one half of what may have
so Ingrost, in order to furnish Conveniences for such Settlements, they might
be gainers by it in the other half.

Or if the Country should put a Rate upon such Tracts of Land as lie convenient
to settle Townships upon, in order to make them willing to throw them up to the
Country; such yearly Rate would be more Justifiable, and more Equal, than to
Rate a poor Man 10 s. that has much ado to live; those Estates being valued
worth hundreds of Pounds by the Owners thereof, who keep them only in hopes
that as other Places hereafter shall be settled, they may Advance upon the
Price, yet Pay no Rates for them: And in the mean time their poor Neighbors
must pay perhaps a greater Rate than would be put upon him in the most
Arbitrary Kingdom in Europe.

Either of these two ways, with what Lands remain yet in the Country's Dispose,
would soon furnish Land sufficient to supply Servants as they shall become
Free, and supply others that they need not withdraw, etc. But if neither of
these two Methods should be approved of, If the Country should Enact, That as
often as there should be occasion, a convenient Township be looked out and
Surveyed, and made sure to them, and such others as shall join with them, they
after some Years to pay a quit Rent, in some Proportion to the former Value of
the Land, to the Owners thereof when they shall have made out their Claims;
This would be so far from being a Damage, that it would be a Benefit to such
Owners of Lands, by having an Income of that which if the former Methods
continue, can hardly ever be settled.

Some that are good Farmers, who observing that the Lands are so generally
Ingrost, fear they shall not procure sufficient to settle their Children upon,
have straightened themselves, and perhaps run in debt to buy Land, to the
disabling them to improve the Lands they before had. For inabling such to
improve their Lands, if the Country should lend 100 l. without Interest, upon
Condition that in ten Years time they break up and keep subdued 50 Acres of
Land; this would be a great Encouragement to them, and would much Increase the
Produce of the Country.

And as to Slaves, as was before Demonstrated, they are a great hinderance to
the Peopling and Improving the Country: And the Proverb tells us, That the
Receiver is as bad as the Thief; and that if there were no Receivers, there
would be no Thieves: If those are true Proverbs, then are not we of this
Country guilty of that Violence, Treachery and Bloodshed, that is daily made
use of to obtain them; we rendering our selves Partakers with them in that
Wickedness? (For it is not to be supposed, that these do voluntarily abandon
themselves to be carried into a Foreign Country, and there to be sold for
Slaves) If therefore the Country in stead of many Laws they have made obout
Negroes, should Enact, That twenty Years hence there should be no Slave in the
Country, it would hurt no Man, but would greatly Encourage Servants to come,
and necessitate their being brought over, to the great Increase and
Strengthening the Country.

And now if any shall object to what is said, in order to better the Proposals,
for advancing the general Good of the Country; or shall add mo^^ ^^ch better
Reasons to Enforce what may be said, they would therein do good Service to
their Country.

But if they Object with design to hinder the Improvements hinted at, from
private and secret Views of their own, however they may esteem of themselves,
are far from being true Friends to the Country. All wise civilized Nations make
it a principal Part of their Care to Encourage the Produce of their several
Countries, that so they may stand in need of the less from abroad,

And it being agreed upon on all hands, that a Medium is wanting, and the
General Court having pitched upon the Sum of 100000 l. to be Made and Emitted;
The Question is, Whether it be best for the General Good, to invest all or Part
of said Sum in the several Towns in Proportion; and with the remainder, or with
other Money lent, (for 100000 l. will be found too small a Sum) free of
Interest, to Particular Men, to be for the Advance of Husbandry, and bringing
in of Arts and Trades that may be of vast Benefit to the Country ( ut sup.)?

Or whether it be best to let it out to Interest to our Necessitous Neighbors,
and thereby raise a large Revenue?

For Answer, Can it be thought, that a little Use-Money should be a greater
Benefit to the Country, than any or all the various Methods hinted at, or that
might be thought of? One Branch of which, ( viz.) that of breaking up of Land,
and Improvements thereon, or that other Branch of Ironwork. would Yearly save
the Country much more than all the Use-Money could amount to, (were it to come
clear of all Charges.)

Or can it be conceived, that a Committee, though well chosen, can Inspect the
Title and Value of Lands in all the remote Parts of the Province, better than
the several Towns can act for themselves? Or will the Sallaries of such
Committees be so small, as to be less than if the several Towns have the
Management for their own Advantage? Or can it consist with the Wisdom of a
Religious People, even to force those to be Usurers, whose Judgment and
Conscience is utterly against it; and for failure of paying Debt and Interest,
to swallow up the Estates of their poor Neighbors? Is not this what is
abhorred by Jews, Turks and Papists; ( viz.) To eat up their poor Neighbors by
Usury?

Have the Laws of any Christian Nation ever approved of it, or any more that
barely tolerated it? And have not many of the Celebrated Divines in England
declared it utterly Unlawful? And must this Country run Retrograde to all?

To Conclude; Take the Words of the Law-Book, Title ( Usury) which was Enacted
when there was in the General Court, many Wise Religious Men, and such as were
of the First Comers; where after they have expressed, that none shall be adjudged
more than Eight Pounds in the Hundred for Forbearance for a Year, adds, P. 153.
these Words; Neither shall this be a Color or Countenance to allow any Usury
among us, contrary to the Law of God.

FINIS.

