A Short Discourse SHOWING THAT OUR Salvation IS OF Mere GRACE.

Psalm. 101.1 I will sing of Mercy and of Judgment.

Romans 9.16 It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
who shows Mercy.

Printed in the Year, 1716.

To the READER.
THE Seasonableness and Coincidence of Discourses of the Grace of God, with the
present workings of Providence, and the great designs of Grace toward us Men,
that the Sovereign Lord of all purposes to put in Execution in these latter
Days, together with their tendency to animate and excite unto a Co-opperating
with Him therein are not uneasily discerned; And would Men, especially the
Princes and Great Men of the World, suffer themselves to be persuaded to work
with Him therein, and put their hands unto an advancement thereof, as in other
ways, so by putting Men into Public Posts and Stations; and particularly the
Work of the Ministry, and Encouraging and Supporting them therein, that are
qualified and spirited hereunto, as they would manifest their truly Noble and
Heroic temper, and in the best manner that may be, consult their own Interest
and Honor; so it would be an happy Omen, and attended with God's dwelling
amongst Men, the Earths yielding her Increase, and all manner of Outward
Prosperity. Wherefore it is much to be desired, and heartily implored, that Men
would give over their petty contrivances and doings, to (chiefly and in the
first place) set forward their own humors and satisfactions, as if they were
so many Deities, and apply themselves principally unto this Design. The Author
of the following Short Tract, supposed that perhaps others, that are more
adorned with both Natural and Acquired Endowments may thereby be jogged in
their Essays this way. And if there are some hints therein, at a various
hypothesis concerning the Spirits carrying on the work of His Grace in Men,
from what some Great and Venerable Personages have fallen in with, yet it is in
it self such as is so far from clouding the Glory that He aims at in these His
doings, as that by His working in the way herein pointed at, His Wisdom, Power
and Mercy are more displayed, than they would be in Operating in the other. And
he supposes, that all that may be opposed against it, may be easily Answered.
But yet it is only suggested hypothetically and submitted; it being one of the
Artifices of Folly and Satan to confound laudable Designs, by throwing Men into
vain janglings about means and less Essential matters leading to the End. May
the God of all Grace by His Dispensations and Love and Kindness to us transform
us into His Likeness and make us to be Holy. Which is the Prayer of your
Unworthy Servant.

Our SALVATION IS OF Mere GRACE.
EPHESIANS. II. 5 By Grace are ye Saved.


THE Apostle in this and the preceding Chapter lays before us the Original and
Fountain, and the Meritorious cause of our Salvation, the way wherein we are
brought thereunto, and God's end in saving of us; that the spring and first
rise thereof lies in the free Election of the Father, that we are saved through
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, that the way wherein we are brought to
Salvation is by the Lord's Converting us, and that his End in saving us is the
Praise and Honor of His Glorious Grace.

These Words lie in that part of his Discourse that gives an account of the way
wherein we are brought to participate in the blessedness purchased for us by
Christ the Lord. And for the more full understanding this clause, these things
may be observed.

1. That by Grace here, we are to understand the free favor of God. This word
is used in Sacred Writ principally in two Notions. Very generally it signifies
as much as free and undeserved favor. I shall mention only two Places, wherein
it is used in this sense, namely, Genesis 6.8. But Noah found Grace in the eyes of
the Lord, that is, he found favor in the Lords Eyes, and He freely set His
love upon Him. The other is, Tit. 2.7. That being justified by his Grace; that
is, of His Free and Sovereign Mercy we are Justified, as the preceding Context
undeniably shows. But then sometimes we are to understand by it, the fruits of
the Mercy and Sovereign Grace of God. In this acceptance the word is used,
Heb. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom, which cannot be moved, let us
have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, that is to say, let us have
the holy Inclinations and Dispositions enabling and disposing to serve God
acceptably. See also, 2 Cor. 8 6. Insomuch that we desired Titus that as he had
begun, so he would also finish in you the same Grace also; that is, we desired
Titus that as he had begun to further you in your charitable Contributions, so
he would promote, excite, direct and perfect you therein; and the reason why
these and such things as these are called by this name, and have this
Denomination put upon them, is because they are the fruits of the Grace and
unmerited Mercy of God. It is the former notion that the Word is here used, and
when the Apostle says, By Grace are ye saved, his meaning is, that our
Salvation is the fruit of God's Rich Mercy and Sovereign Love, as you may see
if you read the Context, and particularly the Fourth, and the preceding part of
this Verse. But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in trespasses and sins has quickened us
together with Christ, ( by Grace are ye saved.) His saying here by Grace are ye
saved is an inculcation and repetition of what he had said in the preceding
Words, of their quickening, its being an effect and fruit of the rich Mercy and
great Love of God to us.

But 2ly. We may take Notice what is meant by the Salvation here spoken of. By
Grace are ye saved The Apostle has an especial respect herein, unto that part
of our Salvation, lying in our recovery and enlargement from under the tyranny
and dominion of Sin whereof he had been treating in the words immediately
preceding, and which he had declared to come from the love of God: But he has
also an eye therein unto the whole of that Deliverance and Blessedness that we
have, and obtain by Christ in this mortal estate, and after this Life. And this
Word Salvation is very commonly used in this signification. As for Instance,
Tit 2.11. Heb 2.3, 10. And the reason why he thus repeats what he said just
before, and had so plainly in general taught in the foregoing Discourse, and
pointed at, was because he was deeply affected with this matter, would impress
upon us an abiding sense of it, that our Salvation in every part of it, is of
Grace, and that the Lord might have the whole honor of our Salvation, and be
Glorious in the eyes of Men and Angels, for ever, upon the account hereof.

The Argument or Conclusion that we propose from the Words thus opened is this,
That our Salvation is of Mere Grace.

It is of no small Importance and Concernment upon many accounts, that we
believe this Doctrine, and grow and increase in our assurances of the truth
thereof. Wherefore sundry things will be proposed and laid down that may
subserve unto that end.

The first Consideration that may be offered in Evidence of the Truth hereof
is, That all we do until we are actually brought into an estate of Grace or
entirely saved, is Sin. Not but that many, that are not in an estate of
Salvation, behave themselves orderly and well, and live virtuous lives.
Multitudes of the perishing Persons that live in places of Gospel Light are
very cleanly in their deportment, as they abstain from scandalous Immoralities,
so they are considerably and in more then a few instances obedient unto the
Precepts of the Law, and that in part from principles of Conscience. Yea as to
many duties of Morality they exceed, and go beyond some that are made Partakers
of the Holy Ghost. And the same will hold with respect unto many of the
Heathen. History informs us, that amongst the ancient Romans, and Grecians,
there were many wise, temperate, just, and public spirited Persons, that would
expose their Persons and Estate and Honor for the good of their Country. It
was said of Sulpitius the Roman, That one might sooner stop the Sun in his
course, then Sulpitius in his course of Justice. And Aristides, Cato, and a
great many others are commemorated in ancient History as being virtuous, and
living well according to the light that they had. And many of the Turks at this
day are just, honest and sober Persons, and this partly from fear of a Deity,
and to obtain His favor. And Morality is a fine Ornament and Praise worthy,
but these Concessions notwithstanding, it is certain that only those that are
in an estate of Grace do any actions that are good, and all that other Men do,
every action that they put forth is Sinful or a Sin. And when we thus say, we
would not be understood in any other but a plain and fair meaning, and not as
speaking under the covert of Scholastic Distinctions, and various senses

And these things may be proposed in Evidence thereof.

1. That the last end in unconverted Men's eye and that which is principally
upon their hearts in their virtuous deportment, is themselves. It is well
enough if we seek our selves, I know of nothing that can reasonably be objected
against it, if we have some regard to our selves in every thing that we do.
Self love is born with us and ought always to move, (but in its own sphere) but
such is the transcendent Excellency, the Wisdom, Power, Truth, Mercy and
Goodness, and other Perfections in the Divine Majesty, and such our dependence
upon Him, and obligation unto Him, that His Honor and Glory ought to be
nearest unto our hearts, and should be principally aimed at and designed by us
in all that we do, as Men; and when any other chief End is set up and advanced,
the God of Glory is so far Dethroned, and His Royalty invaded. and our doings
are a vile insurrection against Him. Yea, let His essential Glory be considered
abstractedly from the dependence that we have upon Him, and the infinite
Obligation that He has laid us under by Redeeming us, and this Honor of our
thus seeking His Glory either vertually or intentionally in all that we do, is
His indefeazable right and prerogative; and so far and so much as we seek our
selves ultimately, we ungod Him, (as far as we are capable thereof) and make
War upon him. Now that we say is this, That the Last End of such as are not in
an Estate of Grace, is self: Not but that they may have, and many of them have
a regard to Gods Honor, and imagine that the Lords interests are uppermost in
their design, Joh 16.2. But such imaginations are the fruit of self flattery;
and there never was an Unbeliever in the World, that designed God's Honor
principally, or as his Last End in any Service that he did for Him, or act of
Obedience that he put forth.

And this may be made out two ways.

(1.) They may be Convinced hereof, by an impartial Examining their own hearts,
and Consulting their own Experiences. Such of them as carry on a Form of
Godliness, and do much in Religion, will, if they enter upon this Scrutiny and
Search, find, that they have really and truly an Eye unto the Lords Interests
and Honor: So had those Jews of whom the Apostle bears record: Rom 10.2. That,
They had a zeal of God. And so might those, in the Prophet Isaiah, Chap 66. v
5. that said, when they Excommunicated their Godly Brethren, Let the Lord be
glorified: but it is one thing to seek Gods Honor to serve an End, a Self-End,
to quiet a Man's Conscience, to obtain Outward Blessings, Gods Favor, or that a
Man may obtain Eternal Life, and another thing to seek God's Honor from a
Sincere Love to Him, because He has Saved him from Eternal Death; and the
adorable Excellency of his Nature displayed and discovered in the Scriptures
and in His Works: it is the former only, and not the latter, that Unbelievers
attain unto; and this they will find, if they impartially Examine and Search,
what the Motives are that they act upon, and what they design in their being
Religious and Obedient. And here-unto correspond the Experiences of those that
believe, they know, at least, such of them as are wise, that while they were in
their Unbelief, this was the highest they did or could attain unto.

(2.) That which gives power and ability here-unto, is a sound belief of the
declarations and reports in the Gospel concerning the Wisdom, Power, Justice,
and especially the Mercy, Grace and Faithfulness of God displayed in the
Mystery of our Salvation. By our woeful Apostasy we have lost the knowledge of
Him; and because of the Judgments, that the World is and has in all Ages been
full of, and our desperate guiltiness in His sight, and that inaptitude that is
upon us, and the like, to be concerned with Divine Things; we either decline
concernment with Him, and give up our selves to the making our selves as happy
as we can, in the enjoyment of the Creature, as the Psalmist hints: Psalm. 4.6.
There be many that say, Who will show us any good. i. e Seeking it in this and
the other, and a great variety of Creatures. And we read to the same effect,
Rom 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Or, if this does not happen unto us, but we are raised up
into, and act in a somewhat higher Orb, and more Manly Sphere, and transact
with our Maker about His and our own affairs, through any Conceptions,
Apprehensions, Illuminations or Ideas concerning Him, that we may by any means
attain unto, that fall short of that knowledge of Him that we are speaking of,
we are not broken off thereby from our natural channel and path of seeking our
selves ultimately, but go on therein, until the Lord brings us in such ways,
as it pleases Him, more or less gradually, to believe the Gospel. And this is
that, and that only that gives power, to a loving of Him above the Creature,
and to be holy. This may be seen by, Act. 26.18. To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God Our
eyes must be opened, to behold the Glory of God in the Gospel, before we can
live holily. See also, 1 John 4.19. We love Him because He first loved us And
porportionably to our belief and understanding of such things as these, will be
our Holiness.

2. That all our Works are Dead Works and Sinful, until we are brought into an
estate of Salvation, is plentifully taught in the Scripture. The Texts that are
alleged by Divines as speaking to this effect, are almost innumerable. Two or
Three only shall be quoted and they are those, Prove. 21.4. An high look, and a
proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is Sin Romans 8.7. Because the carnal
mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be Gal. 3.22. But the
Scripture has concluded all under Sin

And the same might be made out by many other Arguments.

And this is a thing that Men are generally (I suppose) convinced of in one way
or another, before they believe unto Salvation. And because of our pertinacious
and obstinate adhering unto and depending on our own righteousness, which we
are not easily brought off from, without a Conviction hereof; it is needful
that the Ministers of the Gospel endeavor to convince their Hearers, that all
Unbelievers are verily the Servants of Sin, after the Example of sundry of the
Divinely inspired Teachers upon Sacred Record. And it is worth our serious
consideration, whether neglects hereof and unskilfulness herein, be not one
great cause and reason that Christianity flourishes no more in the World.

The second thing that we offer to Establish in believing, that our Salvation
is of Mere Grace is, That all our Outward Blessings are freely bestowed upon
us* Are we Fed and Clothed? It is of the Lord's Mercy we are so. Are we
preserved out of the hands of Satan, and are Wicked Men kept back from being
thus and so injurious unto us? We must ascribe it unto the Grace of God. Are we
recovered from Sickness? It is because the Lord is Gracious. Are our Lives
preserved when our Acquaintance, Friends and Kindred are cut off by the Sword,
Diseases or fatal Accidents? It is because the Lord is Gracious to whom He will
be Gracious. All the outward and common Mercies that are dealt out unto us, of
what kind, denomination or sort soever they are, flow down unto us, from the
inexhaustible Fountain of the Grace and Mercy of God. And this is true not only
with respect to Mankind, in general, but also of such of the Children of God as
are most Loyal, Dutiful and Obedient unto Him. His giving Joseph favor, in the
eyes of the Keeper of the Prison, is ascribed to His Mercy, Gen 29.21. And His
recovering Epaphroditus from his dangerous Sickness is attributed unto the same
cause; Phil. 2.27. And indeed he was Sick nigh unto Death, but God had mercy on
him And the Truth is, the more holy any Man is the more thankful is he for, and
the more does he admire the Grace of God, in bestowing common, and more
ordinary Blessings upon him.

3. Christ's working out the Means of our Salvation, is an act of Grace He has
born the penalty that was due for our Sins. This is spoken of under a great
variety of Phrases, and Expressions in the Scripture. It is called a bearing of
our Sins in His Body on the Tree. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bear our Sins
in his Body on the Tree. And it is called therein a dying for our Sins. 1 Cor.
15.2. How that Christ dyed for our Sins. And this is employed when He is said,
to have Offered himself a Sacrifice to God for us, Ephesians. 5.2. And we are taught
the same Truth, when He is called, The Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins
of the World. And this was foreshewn by the Multiplied Sacrifices under the
Law. And as He has undergone the Penalty that was due and belonged to us for
our Sins; so also He has Obeyed the Law, and wrought out Righteousness for us,
Math 3.19. Rom 5.19. Both these things were necessary that so we might be
Saved. It was not only suitable and condecent, that if Man rebelled and cast
unparalled dishonor upon the Sovereign Lord of all things, that he should be
cast out of his Favor, and not be admitted into it again, and inherit life,
unless his Honor were repaired by the offender, or his Surety underwent a
punishment, that would bring as much honor to Him, as the offenses committed
should detract from His honor, or disparage Him: but the Sovereign and
inviolable Constitution of Heaven ordained and established, that Man should not
be Saved unless His honor were in this way repaired; this is established in
that Law mentioned, Genesis 2.17. For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye. And as Man could not be Saved, unless his Sins were satisfied
for, so neither could he obtain Life without a perfect, spotless, and
unblemished Righteousness. Wherefore Christ Jesus has done both, the one and
the other of these things for us; He has obeyed the Law for us, and sustained
and undergone that punishment, which our Sins deserved. And His accomplishing
these things for us, His obeying and suffering, were acts of wonderful, and
astonishing Grace. The Fathers choosing Him to this Service, was an act of self
moving Mercy and Love. And Christ's taking upon Him to do, and His Performing
them for us, were fruits of rich Mercy, and His being full of Love to us, Ephesians.
3.18, 19.

4. His Converting us is the fruit of free Grace. There are that suppose, that
the Lord when He Converts us, and turns us unto himself, Creates in our Souls
new qualities, habits, powers, inclinations and dispositions; taking the word
Creation in its more proper and restrained signification, and as denoting,
Making something out of nothing; and in that sense which it is used, in Genesis
1.1 And God Created the Heaven and the Earth: Meaning that He made them
originally out of Nothing; and that which they support this their opinion by,
is principally that consideration, That this work of the Spirit is frequently,
and very often, called in the Scriptures a Creating, Quickening and making
Alive; and a like manner of Speaking is used concerning it therein; as in Ephesians
2.1, 10. Chap 4.24. and elsewhere. But there are others, who have other
thoughts concerning this matter; they readily grant, that it is not effected
and brought about by the helps that remained and were left unto Man in the
ruined estate that the Fall brought us into, and by the assistances and aids
that were proper to that estate; but God, say they, upon our Apostasy in His
Sovereign Grace, set up and Erected a New Dispensation, and Published the
Gospel unto the World, in such ways and manners, as in His Wisdom it seemed
good unto Him; until that after the Revolution of more than Four Thousand
Years, the World is blessed with that perfect rule of Faith and Manners,
contained in the Holy Scriptures, with other helps and advantages directed
unto, promised and appointed therein; and that it is in the way of His alwise
managing this Dispensation, and the concernments thereof, and giving forth
Assistances becoming the same, that Men are brought over from a trusting in,
living upon, and unto, and seeking rest and contentment in the Creature, unto
the living the life of God. And they look upon it proper speaking to call
Conversion a supernatural work, and fruit of supercreating Grace, but that God
does in propriety of speaking, Create any thing in Men when He Converts them,
they do not discern, but suppose rather, that this Change is accomplished by a
wise and powerful conducting and managing and adapting Providence to the
estate of the Elect, and giving their powers and faculties an assistance proper
unto the particular, and general Dispensations, that they are under. And they
say, there is nothing in the Experiences of those that believe, but what
exactly agrees with this Scheme of things; and to refer events unto miraculous
operations, when it can be shown they may come to pass, in a more ordinary,
though special way of working, is vain. And they understand those and such like
Places of Scripture, as were just now mentioned, as speaking Metaphorically and
Figuratively, and what, say they, is more usual then for them to speak
popularly, and after this manner of Works of Providence, that are no way
miraculous, but common and ordinary. See, Psalm 104.30. Isai 54.16. Ezekiel 28.13,
15. 1 Timothy 6.13 Psalm 71.20. Psalm 119 20. Much less need it seem strange, if this
special work of God's Spirit be thus expressed. And they say, setting this
matter in a due light, would abate the prejudice that many, both secret and
open Enemies of the Protestant Religion, have drank in against it to the damage
of the Interests thereof, and the hazard of their Immortal Souls; as if it is
Doctrines did not correspond with the Scripture, and Experience. But be these
things as they are, that our Conversion is of Grace, is plain. See, Tit. 2.4.
But after that the kindness of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he has
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost
Act. 18.27. Who when he was come, helped them much, which had believed through
Grace And the Church Prays for it as being unworthy of it, and a Gift of Grace,
Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19. And the longer Christians live, and the more they grow in
Sanctification and Holiness, the more are they affected with and thankful for,
and the larger views have they of the Grace of God, displayed in this benefit,
as is observed by all, that are well conversant in such matters, and especially
the Epistles of the Apostle Paul.

5. Our Perseverance in Faith and Holiness, is also from the Mere Grace and
Mercy of God. This will appear from these two things laid together,

(1.) It cannot be imputed unto our strength, power, and ability or any
creature helps. We watch against Temptation indeed, and the means that we make
use of, namely Prayer, Self-Examination, Meditation, Hearing the Word Preached,
Baptism, the Lord's Supper, Fasts and Thanksgivings, and the like, have a direct
and natural tendency to further and help us in well doing; but means, helps and
our power to use them are of God, and if infinite Power and Wisdom be not in us
and them, supporting and managing of both, our Faith and Well-doing will
quickly be at an end. Let never so wise Statesmen sit at Helm in a Kingdom or
Province, unless the Divine Presence be in and with them, conducting and ruling
them, and the Governments over which they preside, all things will run to
ruin, and the ends of Government will not be obtained. And so if the most
Skilful Physicians and proper Medicines are in a place, if they and the People,
Air and Seasons, etc be not under a Gracious and Powerful and All-wise
Disposing, Diseases will break out, that will carry away both them and the
People amongst whom they are, as a Flood. And thus it is in the case under
consideration, whatever our strength may be, and however proper, and suitable
the means are that we enjoy for the Promotion of our Perseverance, our Religion
will vanish and come to nothing, if the Lords Gracious Presence and Powerful
and All-wise Conduct be denied. Upon the whole then, the Gracious and
Indwelling Presence of the Spirit of God, is the Principal Efficient cause of
our Perseverance. This is attributed unto Him, Col. 1.8. Who also declared unto
us your love in the Spirit It was the Spirit of God that perpetuated their Love
and other Graces. 2 These. 2.13. Because God has from the beginning, chosen us
unto Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit. Their initial and
progressive Sanctification was by the SPIRIT, as the Author and Efficient cause
thereof. Which things are not so to be understood as if by the light and tastes
given unto Men in Conversion, they are not, after a sort, indissolubly fastened
unto Divine Objects, nor as if the Efficiency and Operation of the Holy Ghost,
to promote our Perseverance, were ordinarily miraculous and beyond the Sphere
of His acting to produce other effects and events in their several kinds, that
are wrought by Him.

(2.) It must be added, that the Lords causing us to Persevere is a Gratuitous
and Gracious Part in Him. 1 These. 5.23. And I pray, your whole Spirit, Soul and
Body be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ And it
has been the way of the Godly in all Ages to go unto the Lord, as unworthy
Suppliants for help in this respect. How often does David in the Psalms implore
His Mercy in this regard. I shall quote only one Text, wherein he Prays for
this Mercy, as most unworthy of it. And that is, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O
God, and know my heart, and try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be
any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. And let it be
considered, how that notwithstanding the Glory of His Perfections, the right
that He has unto their Service upon the account of the Relation that they have
unto Him, as Creatures, His taking them into an estate of Grace, the endearing
Obligations He lays them under in the course of His Providence, their Love to
Him is so very small and imperceptible, their Humility and Evangelical
Submission so defective, and in general their Conversation and Deportment
toward God and Man really so Carnal, however laudable it may be in appearance,
that were it not for their more sensible actings of Faith, they would call
their Sincerity Godward into Question; and what is the desert of the least
Sin, and it must be acknowledged, that it is from astonishing Grace and
infinite Depths of Mercy and Kindness that He does not utterly abandon them and
suffer them to go down into endless Misery.

Lastly, The Scriptures of both the New and Old Testament, so ascribe and refer
the whole and every part of our Salvation, and all the concernments thereof, as
our Election, Vocation, Justification, Peace of Conscience, and Glorification,
unto the Love, Rich Grace and Undeserved Kindness of God, and especially the
New, and remarkably the Epistles of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who
manifests himself even astonished thereat, and was mightily carried out to
display the glory thereof; as that if there were not a wonderful dislike of
this Doctrine in the hearts of Corrupt Man, and Men were not besotted with
empty fading Vanities; and Hell did not use all it is Artifice and Skill to
conceal it, it would never have been so detracted from, and clouded by Men of
Corrupt Minds, in various degrees and manners, and so little believed in the
World; as it has been in all Ages, and particularly, that wherein we live. I
shall only cite Three Text, wherein the whole thereof, and Two wherein some
particular parts of it (which the Cunning craftiness of Men, has endeavored
by various Sophisms and other Wicked devices to persuade and make us believe,
that they come, at least, in part from other causes,) are ascribed, and the
glory of bestowing them is given over unto the Grace of God, in full and very
expressive terms; And they are these, Psalm 116. throughout; where the Psalmist
speaks both of Temporal, but Principally of Eternal Salvation, and he refers
all to the Grace and Mercy of God. See also, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy, he has saved us
by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By
Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God, not of works, least any man should boast And our Justification is in a
most indisputable and declarative manner of speaking, ascribed to God's Mercy.
Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption, that is
in Jesus Christ And the Holy Ghost speaks to the same purpose, of our
Conversion, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ, before the world began Wherefore these things being so.

1. The Gospel way of Salvation is contrary to the now Natural Inclination and
choice of Man Not but that, should the darkness, that is upon his Mind, and
Natural to him in that estate that Sin, and the Curse of God have cast him down
into, be removed; and should things be set before the eye of his Mind and he
helped to view them as they are, he would, the Lord giving him such an
assistance as is proper to such an illumination fall in therewith. He ever
more does so. So far forth as the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ is
revealed to us by the Gospel, and we believe it in such degrees do we fall in
therewith. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding, as in a glass the
Glory of the Lord are changed into the same image, from Glory to Glory. 9. d As
our prospect into the Glory of the Lord by the glass of the Gospel advances;
so our taking of him and accepting him in Christ, as our Savior and Portion;
and our Sanctification is furthered. But our Natural condition is an estate of
darkness, and until we are brought out of it, we Sacrifice and burn Incense
unto and serve that greatest Idol in the World, Self; even all People, Nations
and Languages, and hate and abhor all that tends to confound its interests,
spoil it of its honor and bring it to nothing; which the Doctrine of Salvation
by free Grace does, as effectually, as can be imagined Wherefore it is not to
be wondered at, if the Patrons thereof are misrepresented, and persecuted, the
Preaching of it disliked, and the affairs thereof discountenanced; and that
even by those that wear the honorable Name of Christians, and particularly
amongst Protestants, in very sensible degrees.

2. It will be bootless and we shall come off with frustration, and
disappointment, if we go about to seek Salvation, partly by our own
righteousness None of Mankind that are concerned in their Spirits about
Salvation, are so destitute of right apprehensions and convictions of the
irregularity of their Lives, the desert of Sin, and the Holiness of God as that
they dare venture the Eternal well-being of their Souls upon that single plea
of their own goodness, or obeying and suffering in Gods cause; but they all
have some dependence upon the Grace and Mercy of God: but they generally seek
it partly by their own righteousness. This way go the Mahometans, the Papists,
and all other Heretical Sects of Christians; and this is the path that vast
numbers of the Orthodox go on in; however they profess to seek it merely by
Grace; they seek it partly by works, in an higher or lower degree: though Alas!
for them, they are so unhappy as not to discern it and thus they go out of the
World, and never observe that Error until it be too late to mend it. And this
comes to pass, as from many other causes and reasons, so especially from a want
of a due Examining into, and searching the temper and frame of their own
Spirits, and their not being well taught the Doctrine of the Grace of God, with
what belongs there unto; and were they well instructed in these things, this
unhappiness would be in part prevented.

3 From these things we may learn, Whether to go and repair, for the Personal,
Private and Public Mercies and Salvations; whether Spiritual or Outward, that
we, our Country, the Church of God, or the World want. We must repair unto the
free Mercy of God, for them. Few or none well instructed Protestants, plead in
words, their own righteousness in their Prayers, but it is common for them to
plead both their own Positive, but especially their Negative righteousness in
the Secret recesses of their hearts. See, the Parable of the Pharisee and
Publican, Luk 18. And believers themselves may have too much of such a Spirit.
Matthew. 19.28. Then answered Peter, and said, Behold we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, What shall we have therefore? But when such workings of heart
cannot be charged upon us, yet through the prevailings of sottishness and
unbelief, we fail of trusting and hoping in, and repairing unto Gods Mercy as
we ought. The way to obtain what we desire, is under a view of the excellency
and greatness of His Loving Kindness, by Faith and Prayer to address our selves
to Him for them.

And let it be suggested as Motive thereunto, That one of the great designs,
that the Lord our God has upon His heart is to Glorify Himself in His Goodness
and Kindness toward Sinful Man. As He magnifieth and rendereth illustrious His
Wisdom and Power, in the Works of Creation and Providence, and He does and will
Glorify His Justice and Holiness in the Judgments, that He inflicts upon the
World for their Sins and the ruin that befalls the Wicked, and the Apostate
part of fallen Angels, especially in the other World; so it is upon His Heart
to render Glorious, and get large Revenues of Honor and Praise unto His Mercy,
and Kindness, by being Good, Gracious and Kind unto us vile and abominable Men;
according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.7. That in the Ages to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his Grace in his kindness toward us by Christ
Jesus And there are certain seasons and times, wherein this His Projection and
Design, puts forth it self and blossometh, in an especial manner. As there are
Periods wherein He remarkably chastises the World or great Parts thereof, for
their Wickedness, such as that when the Babylonish Forces conquered and
subdued, and brought under their Yoke, and miserably Slaughtered the Jews, the
Egyptians, the Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, and the other Nations in those
parts of the World; And that when the Goths, Huns and Vandals and other
Northern Nations made irruptions into the Roman Empire, and occasioned its
overthrow and ruin; so also there are certain Seasons, wherein the Lord by
Peace, Health, Plenty, and other common Blessings, as also by Spiritual
Blessings, allures Men unto a good Opinion and Serving of Him, and there is an
hopeful appearance, that we are entering under such a Dispensation, and He may
be about to try what good effect kindness will have upon that part of the World
wherein we are especially concerned. Wherefore, if we now repair unto His Mercy
for Blessings for our selves and others, its not unlikely we shall come in a
good Day; and that we shall have occasion to say, in the issue, in an
acceptable time he has heard, and in the day of Salvation, he has helped us.
Only we must always remember that when we draw nigh unto Him, and make our
Supplications and Addresses to Him, for the Communication of the Effects of His
Grace, we must do it in an humble manner, and after the Example of the
Publican, Luke 18. Namely, Hanging down our heads and smiting upon our breasts,
and saying, God be merciful unto us Sinners; and to encourage our selves
hereunto by thoughts of His Mercy.

Lastly, Is it so that all our good things and our Eternal Salvation come down
from the Free Grace of God? We have the greatest reason to Love, to be very
Thankful unto, to walk holily before, and to be to the Praise of the Lord His
Superlative Excellency and Native Glory, and our dependence on Him exact and
demand these things at our hands, and had He refused to cast the least Eye of
Pity toward us, the neglect of loving Him above all things, even with all our
Heart and Soul and serving Him with utmost Cheerfulness, Readiness, Humility
and Thankfulness, had been monstrous Wickedness and unaccountable Injustice, as
well as madness and folly: But by His freely saving us out of the depths of
Misery that we had plunged our selves down into, and by bestowing upon us the
common good things of this Life, we are under doubled Obligations to be to Him
and for Him. To do then as has been counseled is that which all should fall in
with.

If it be said, this Advice is verily good and what is proposed is highly
reasonable, but how shall we attain to follow it, and be obedient to the
Exhortation? In Answer to this Enquiry, only these things may be offered.

1. If we would hearken thereunto, We must get and keep and live under a
permanent, and an abiding, powerful and close Conviction of our ineffable
Sinfulness and the desert of Sin. Our Sinfulness not only before, but also
after Conversion is so great, as that those Words of Solomon, Eccl. 1.8.
concerning the Labor, that is under the Sun, scil. Who can utter it, may with
an Emphasis be applied thereunto, and is more remarkably true of this then
that. Our Transgressions are for Number like the Sand upon the Sea shore, Psalm.
40.12. To say nothing of the heinous nature of them, and the inhauncing and
aggravating Circumstances that do attend them. And the desert of the least Sin,
is Death, as we may be sensible, if we consider who it is that is thereby
dishonored; and especially this is taught by the Death and Sufferings Christ
underwent to make Expiation for Iniquity. Due apprehensions of these things
would be conducive unto our hearkening unto this Advice, and without them a
compliance therewith cannot be expected, however uneasy some may be under them,
and whatsoever some may fancy to the contrary.

2. We must believe, and grow and increase in our knowledge and belief of the
Doctrine of the Grace of God. It is fit and very well that a great many other
Arguments, Motives and Considerations be used to persuade Men, thus to glorify
God and comply with their Duty; but let the most accomplished Orators use the
best of their skill; let them summon all their faculties and powers, and use
the most flowing Metaphors and charming and ensnaring figures and forms of
Speech, and argue from Interest, Honor and Justice, in the most affecting
taking and obliging manner, that the wit of Men and Angels can invent, they
will not be able to make so much as one Convert; all that their Oratory and
Skill will be able to compass, is to make Men specious and well dressed
Hypocrites. But let a Man well believe the Love of God to us, and the adorable
and astonishing actings thereof for us, past and to come, and this will unhinge
him from his natural bottom, and melt down his frozen and stupid heart into a
loving of Him above himself, and humble thankfulness unto Him, and make him cry
out with David, Truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant: and the greater our
acquaintance is to these things, the more do we love Him and are enlarged in
the way of His Commandments, and therefore it was that the Apostles, in their
day, so Preached up, and dilated and insisted upon the Love, Grace and Kindness
of God in their Writings and Discourses, and Sermons unto the People. If then
we would get and grow in our love to God, and walk acceptably before Him* and
abound therein, we must believe the Love of God, and increase in our belief
thereof. And as other Expedients are to be used that we may be thus happy, so
the Lord Himself is to be in humility and with self judging applied unto and
importuned for help in this respect, for Faith it self, and the increases
thereof are His Gifts, as well as other Blessings. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. For by
Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of God. Not of works, least any man should boast, for we are his Workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus, unto good works 2 These. 1.3. We are bound to thank God
always for you Brethren, as it is meet, because your Faith grows exceedingly

FINIS.

