Bridgwater's Monitor. Two SERMONS, Preached unto a NEW-ASSEMBLY, of CHRISTIANS
at Bridgwater. On, 14 d. VI. m. 1717. A Day of PRAYER kept by them, at their
Entering into the NEW-EDIFICE, Erected for the Worship of GOD among them. The
First, By JAMES KEITH, Pastor of the Church in Bridgwater. The Second, By
SAMUEL DANFORTH, Pastor of the Church in Taunton. With a Preface of Dr.
Increase Mather, and Dr. Cotton Mather.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Crump, for Samuel Phillips, and Sold at his Shop in
King Street 1717.

A PREFACE.
THE New-English BRIDGWATER has been a Town favored of GOD; yea, some Favors
of Heaven unto it, have indeed been distinguishing.

It was planted a Noble Vine. -- And may no more of the Text from whence this
Phrase is borrowed, ever be applied unto it! The First Planters of it, were a
set of People, who made RELIGION their main Interest; and it became their
Glory. There was a Time* when it stood in a Land of unwalled Vill^ages, with
fierce Armies of Bloody Indians destroying round about them; And the
Dispensations of GOD our SAVIOR toward it at this time, were so wonderful,
that the short Report thereof given in, The Church History of New England, is
not unworthy to be here transcribed and repeated.

Remarkable was the Fate of Bridgwater, a most Praying, and a most Pious Town,
seated in the very midst of the Dangers of the War; that although they were often
assaulted by formidable Numbers of the Enemies, yet in all their sharp
Assaults, they never lost one of their Inhabitants, Young or Old. They were
solicited strongly to desert their Dwellings: but they resolved, that they
would keep their Stations. And now on May 8. 1676. the Indians began to Fire
the Town; but the Inhabitants with notable Courage, issued forth from their
Garrisons, to fight the Enemy; and GOD from Heaven at the same time fought for
them, with a Storm of Lightning, Thunder, and Rain, whereby a considerable part
of their Houses were preserved. Thou, Church of Bridgwater,

O niminus dilecta Deo, cui militat ether. One that was no Christian, so sang
the Favors of Heaven to the Emperor Theodosius; and so might the Pagan Foe
now sing of thy Salvations!

Ever since that memorable Day, the Town has been proceeding, with the Smile of
GOD upon them, and upon the Intentions of His Gospel among them, until they are
now become Two Bands. They are Lovingly and Peaceably swarmed into a New
Assembly, and began to meet in their New Edifice on a Day of Prayer (as it is
the manner of New England,) when the Two SERMONS were Preached, which the
affected Hearers have here Published. GOD grant, that from the Tokens of His
Gracious Presence with them, the Place may claim the Name of, Mahanaim* And may
there be still found among them such a Number of Lively, Watchful, Fruitful
Christians, Exemplarily Living to GOD, and by the Faith of the Son of GOD; May
a value for the Ordinances of our SAVIOR, be so preserved in Vigor with them,
and the Success thereof appear in all Real and Vital Godliness quickened among
the Young as well as the Old among them; And may their Brotherly-Love continue
at such a rate, that it may be plainly seen, GOD is yet among them. Woe to them,
if I depart from them, says the Lord.

It has been a singular Felicity unto this Good People, that from the very
Infancy of their Plantation, they have satt under the Ministry of a Gracious,
Faithful, Humble Servant of GOD, who continues with them to this Day. He has
been a Precious Gift of our Ascended LORD unto them; and they have hitherto
Rejoiced in his Light; and We Rejoice with them, that after Fifty Four Years,
his Light yet shines with such Brightness among them.

We can make no Doubt, but that, as they have grown into such Good
Circumstances under his painful and patient conduct, they will study in all the
Methods if Goodness, to render his Old Age comfortable to him, and so multiply
all the Offices and Expressions of a Grateful People toward him, with an
Affection and Reverence, like what the Church of Smyrna paid unto their Aged
Polycarp, that he may anon Die, Blessing of them, and Blessing of GOD for them.
They will certainly find their Account in doing so!

The Savoury SERMON, which is here Extor^^^ for the Public from him, as well
as that of his Reverend Neighbor, who has also for many Years been a Rich
Blessing to the Churches in his Neighhood; we recommend unto the Blessing of
GOD that so the Ends of Piety, which the Good People have proposed in thus
Exhibiting a lasting Memorial of what GOD has done for them, and a constant
Remembrancer of their Duty, may be answered.

Increase Mather. Cotton Mather.


A Case of Prayer, handled on a Day of Prayer. By JAMES KEITH. BRIDGWATER,
August 14. 1717.
EZEKIEL XXXVI.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of,
by the House of Israel, to do it for them.


I Shall not insist upon the Division of this Chapter, into the several parts
of it; Only we may consider for an Introduction to the Text, that from the four
and twentieth verse to the close of the Chapter, we have a Number of exceeding
great and precious Promises made to Israel; Promises both of Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings. In the first place, there are Promises made to them of a
new Heart and a right Spirit, promises of Pardoning Mercy, and promises of
Converting and Sanctifying Grace; and thereunto we have an addition of Promises
respecting Temporal Blessings, the blessings of Increase, the Increase of Men,
the blessings of Peace, of quietness and safety in their Dwellings; the
Blessings of plentiful Provision in the increase of the Field, and the fruit of
the Trees. After a long Enumeration of Divine Blessings, the Lord shows them in
our Text, what is to be done on their part in order to the obtaining of the
great Blessings he does promise to bestow upon them.

We may consider the Text, as it contains a solemn Declaration; and therein we
have,

First: The Author of it, and that is the Lord. That which we have in the Text
was published and declared in a ministerial way, by the Prophet Ezekiel by
divine Inspiration and divine Authority; so the Text expresses, Thus says the
Lord God; It was from the Great and Glorious Jehovah, the Self-Existing, the
Infinite and Eternal Being, the Fountain of all being and blessedness.

Secondly, We have the Object, unto whom this Declaration is directed, and that
is The House of Israel, the Family, the Posterity of Israel; who were separated
from the rest of the Nations, and taken into special Covenant Relation unto
God. As this is firstly and more immediately directed to the Church of Israel,
so it is of concernment unto all the Israel of God, unto all the Churches and
People of God through all Generations.

Thirdly. We have the way and means to be attended in order to the Enjoyment of
the good which God has promised to bestow; and therein we have

First, The Duty enjoined. I will yet be enquired of by the House of Israel:
That Enquiry must be made by Prayer and Supplication to God, not in a slight
superficial way, but with great earnestness and so with perseverance in Prayer;
Prayer notwithstanding delays as to the Accomplishment of Promises: I will yet
be enquired of by the House of Israel; It must be a careful and diligent
Enquiry as Critics observe from the Hebrew Word Daresh. Such must the Enquiry
be, of those that would prevail with God.

Secondly, We have the Good to be sought for from the Lord; For this I will be
enquired of that I may do it for them, i. e. that I may perform my Word to
them, that the Promises of Mercy and Blessing I have made to them may have
their Accomplishment. That which is to be sought for is here expressed in the
Singular Number. We find in Scripture phrase, the Singular Number put for the
Plural, as emphatical and more comprehensive; and so [ This] may be taken as
comprehending not only that particular promise immediately preceding the Text,
but all the foregoing Promises; But whether we take the Word [This] in a large
or strict sense, the Text will afford this plain genuine Doctrine,

DOCTRINE.
That as the Lord has made Promises of great Blessings to his People, so he
will be enquired of by them; he will be sought to in the way of Prayer and
Supplication in order to the performance of that which he has promised, that
he may do it for them.



This is that which God expects from his People, this is that he has obliged
them to, as to all the Good which he has promised to bestow upon them; This is
the great Means which God has instituted, which must be attended with the
greatest serioussness and diligence, This is that the Lord insists upon in all
Cases; He will be enquired of, He will have Prayer and Supplication to be made
to him in order to the Dispensation of all Covenant Blessings.

We may find the Doctrine confirmed by abundant Testimony of the Holy
Scripture. Among many Scriptures which might be cited I would refer
particularly and peculiarly unto that* Jer. 29.11, 12, 13, 14. For I know the
thoughts which I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not
of evil, to give you an expected End; Then shall ye call upon me and ye shall
go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek me and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart! and I will be found of you
says the Lord.

For the opening of the Doctrine we are to consider,

1. That God has a People in the World, unto whom he has made Promises of
great Blessings. All the People in the World, the whole Posterity of Adam
successively from Generation to Generation, considered in their natural
Apostatic State, have forfeited the Blessing, (...) separated from God,
separated from his (...) and from Communion with God, and as Sinners, as
Transgressors of the Law of God, are all justly exposed to the curse of the
Law, Gal. 3.10. Notwithstanding God has in infinite Mercy singled out a
certain Number of the lost Race of Adam to inherit the Blessing. After that Man
had broken the First Covenant of Works, it pleased God to make a New Covenant
with a Select Number of the Children of Men, a Covenant of Grace and Mercy,
which is established in the hand of Jesus Christ, our Glorious Mediator, by
whom all the Good of the Covenant is purchased and conveyed; According to that
Covenant God does prepare and form a People for himself in the World, to be to
the praise of his Glory. Isai. 43.21. This People have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my Praise. Such a People the Lord had under the Old
Testament dispensation; It was the great privilege of Israel that they were set
apart to be a peculiar People unto God, Exodus 19.5. Such a People the Lord has
raised up and multiplied and will yet multiply more and more, both among Jews
and Gentiles, under the New Testament dispensation, whom he will preserve
through all Generations unto the Worlds End. The Grace and Mercy of the
New Covenant is displayed in the visible Dispensation of it in visible Church
Relation to God, in the outward Privileges of the Covenant, the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, etc. But more especially in the saving Dispensation of it
unto his Elect and Chosen, unto all true Believers, to his called, his
justified and sanctified Ones. Such a Number the Lord has among Men who are
for a peculiar People to him. We have their Characters in the Word of Truth,
whereby they are distinguishing from all others in the World, as in, Psalm. 15.
They are such as walk uprightly, and work righteousness and speak the truth in
their hearts. Again in, Psalm. 24.3, 4. Mat. 5. at the beginning; and frequently
elsewhere. It is to such that all the Promises of Covenant Blessings are made
and confirmed in Christ Jesus; However they be despised by the Men of the
World, yet they are the Blessed of the Lord; On them the Lord will bestow the
Blessings both of the upper and nether Springs, the Blessings of Time and of
Eternity.

2. That such as live in the neglect of Prayer and Supplication to God, have no
right to the Promises of God, they can lay no claim to any Covenant Blessings.
Such a number there is in the World, that have no regard to Prayer, and they
are by far the greatest Number among Men. It is so universally with the Race of
Adam by nature. Psalm. 14.2, 3. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God,
they are all gone aside. So, Romans 3, 11. There is none that seek after God:
This is the black Character of all that are Ungodly, They call not upon the
Lord, Psalm. 14.4. Such is their State, that they do not seek the Lord, they
will not seek after God, Psalm. 10.4. In that respect they have no Right to any
Covenant Blessing. Indeed such may be favored according to the Sovereign Will
of God in the way of his Common Providence with many temporal Mercies, with the
blessings of Peace and Plenty, yea of all outward Prosperity; they may be
favored with the outward visible privileges of the Covenant* but they can have
nothing from God in a way of special Favor and Covenant Mercy; instead of a
Blessing they are exposed to the Curse, the Curse of the Lord. Such is the case
of all Prayerless Nations, and Prayerless Families, of every Prayerless
Society, or every individual Person in the World, that does not seek after God.
Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10.25.

3. As it is a moral Duty incumbent upon all Men to seek the Lord by Prayer; so
it is eminently the Duty of the People of God to Pray, to present their
Supplications to the Lord. I say, it is the Duty of all, of all Ranks, Orders
and Degrees of Men to Pray. As the Divine Existence, the Eternal Being of God
is manifest by the Light of Nature: So the Light and the Law of Nature does
oblige all to Pray to God. It is an Homage due to God as the Glorious Creator
and Preserver of Men, as the Great Benefactor on whom all have their
Dependence. It is a part of that natural Worship due to God which is required
in the First Commandment, Exodus 20.3. There are indeed no Promises from God,
that he will hear the Prayers of the Ungodly; they have no Faith and therefore
he can take no pleasure in their Prayers. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is
impossible to please him. Nevertheless such is the Goodness and Mercy of God,
that his Ear is open to the cries of such in the Times of Trouble, Psalm.
107.19. They cry unto the Lord in their Trouble, he saves them out of their
Distresses. Many such Instances there are in the way of his Providence.

But we are further to consider, That it is eminently the Duty of the People of
God to Pray; It is commended unto them, not only as a part of natural Worship,
but as a special part of instituted Worship; and they are under peculiar
Obligations thereunto above all others in the World. This the Lord expects from
the House of Israel; so the Text. As to all the Good that God has promised to
his People, He will be enquired of, he will be sought unto, that he may do it
for them.

For the further Explication of this Head, there are diverse things to be
considered.

1. That God has given a Directory for Prayer. We have in the Holy Scriptures
a complete Directory with respect to all the parts of Religious Worship and
particularly of Prayer.

I cannot give you a better Definition of Prayer than that you have in the
Assemblies Catechism wherein you have been instructed, as it is drawn from the
Word of God.

All Prayer must be directed to God, as the One only Object of all Religious
Worship, Mat. 4.10. It is the Glory of the Lord to be the Hearer of Prayer, and
his Glory he will not give to another, Psalm. 65.1.2.

As Prayer must be made to the One True and Living God, so in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in His Name alone, as he is the One only Mediator between
God and Man. 1 Timothy 2.5. in whose Name alone we are commanded and encouraged to
ask. Joh. 14.13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will do. Heb. 4.14,
15, 16. Having such a Great High Priest, who is passed into the Heavens, even
Jesus the Son of God, Let us come to the Throne of Grace with boldness. In that
respect Prayer must be carried on, not in our own Strength, but by the help of
the Spirit of God. Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities.

Again, The Petitions we present to God must be for things agreeable to his
Will, 1 John 5.14.

Again, Our Prayers to God must be with penitential Confessions of our Sins,
Psalm. 32.5. Psalm 51.3, 4. with a Soul humbling sense of our Unworthiness of the
least of all the Mercies we ask of God, Genesis 32.10. and so with due
Acknowledgment of the Goodness of God, of all his benefits. Phil. 4.6. In every
thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, Let your requests be made
known to God.

2. All that belong to God, have the Spirit of Prayer given unto them to rest
upon them, by whose powerful and gracious influences they are enabled to Pray.
In that respect the preventing Mercy of God is displayed toward his Elect and
Chosen Ones who seek him not, who have not called upon his Name. Isai. 65.1. I
am sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not.
When God is about to accomplish his Eternal Purpose in the Conversion of his
Elect, he pours upon them the Spirit of Prayer, Zech. 12.10. In that respect we
have a great Instance of the Grace of God in Paul upon his Conversion. Act.
9.11. Behold he prays. Prayer is the Voice of the New Creature, of new born
Babes, of all that are born of God by Regeneration; it is their peculiar
property to be disposed unto Prayer, and it is a sure evidence of their
Relation to God as his Children, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father. This is the
Duty and peculiar Privilege of the Saints of the Lord. Psalm. 32.6. For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a Time when thou may be
found. There are common Gifts of the Spirit, great Gifts of Prayer bestowed
upon many, who have no saving Relation to God; But all true Converts have the
Spirit of God resting upon them as a Spirit of Grace and of Supplication, though
(...) in the same measure and degree. Hence it is, that none who are born of
God can live without Prayer. There are indeed Times of Temptation and Restraint
that pass upon the Saints of the Lord, Times wherein they are so troubled that
they cannot speak, Psalm. 77.4. But whatever the withdrawings of the Spirit may
be for a season from any of the Children of God, He will return to them, he
will open their Hearts and open their Lips, so that they shall have Freedom and
Liberty to pour out their Hearts before Him.

3. It is the Duty of the People of God to wait on the Lord, both in the way of
Ordinary and Extraordinary Prayer: and so it must be considered,

1. That there is an Ordinary Course of Prayer to be attended by all that would
approve themselves to God. Prayer must be the constant Exercise of the Saints
and People of God; and so Prayer is to be considered both as mental and vocal.
Mental Prayer consists in the inward desires and breathings of the Soul after
God. Psalm. 25.1 Unto thee, O Lord do I lift up my Soul. With mental Prayer,
vocal Prayer, Prayer with the Voice, must be joined by those on whom God has
bestowed the Organs of Speech. Psalm. 5.3. My Voice shall thou hear in the
Morning, O Lord. The Voice is to be improved in Prayer in such a way and manner
and to such a degree, as may be most subservient to the Honor and Glory of
God, our personal Relief, the Comfort and Edification of others.

As to Ordinary Prayer, it is further to be considered, that there are diverse
ways of Prayer to be attended. There is the Duty of Secret Prayer, of Praying
singly and apart, of personal and particular Application to God, which ought to
be and will be the daily Exercise of all that belong to God. Mat. 6.6. When
thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and pray to thy Father which is in secret.
The Children of God have many secret Cases of Prayer, many secret wants and
necessities both Temporal and Spiritual, to present to him, such as the World
does not know and such as are not meet for the World to know. The Life of
Religion depends much upon that way of Converse with God by Secret Prayer.
Again, There is the Duty of Family Prayer to be attended by Heads of Families
with those that appertain to them: There are many Obligations upon the Servants
of God to attend that Duty, to present to God a Morning and Evening Sacrifice
of Prayer; and there are such Examples of Devotion left on Sacred Record, which
may convince all that will consult the Oracles of God, that Family Prayer is an
essential part of practical Godliness; as that of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Also see
Josh. 24.25. Job. 1.5. All Heads of Families that would approve themselves to
God, must walk within their Houses with a perfect Heart, according to that
great Example, Psalm. 101.2. There can be no Evidence of Sincerity with such as
live in the habitual Neglect of Family Prayer; however such may think
themselves something, they are nothing, their Religion is vain.

Again, With respect to Ordinary Prayer, there must be Public Prayers made to
God in Church Assembles. Acts* 2.42. Prayer is a special part of that Public
Worship which is to be performed to God on the Sabbath; All other Ordinances
must be attended with Prayer, as the Ministerial Dispensation of the Word, the
Administration of the Holy Sacraments, the Seals of the Covenant; all must be
accompanied with Prayers and Supplications unto God.

2 It is to be considered, that there are Extraordinary Prayers to be made to
God by his People; as they are liable to Extraordinary Dispensations of
Providence, so they are to seek God by Extraordinary Prayer as the great means
of their relief in all Cases of distress. So God is to be sought by Secret
Prayer, by a particular and personal Application to him; for this we have many
Examples presented to us, as that of Jacob, Genesis 32.24, 25. Hos. 12.4. He wept
and made Supplication; of David, Psalm. 35.13. I humbled my Soul with Fasting
and my Prayer returned into mine own bosom; of Daniel, Dan. 6.10. Above all we
have the Example of our Lord Christ, Luke 6.12. Luke 22.44. Being in an agony,
he prayed the more earnestly.

And as Extraordinary Prayer is to be made in Secret singly and apart; so also
by Families, 1 Cor. 7.5. There are many Family Cases which call for such Prayer.

Withal, there are Extraordinary Prayers to be made to God by his People in
their Public Assemblies. Times and Cases of Extraordinary dispensation call
for such Prayer. For this we have plain Commands and great Examples, which
stand for our instruction and imitation, as 2 Chronicles. 20. Joel 2.15, 16. Act.
12.5. Such Prayer is necessary for the preventing and removing of special
Plagues and Judgments, and in order to the obtaining special Mercies, positive,
Extraordinary Blessings, both Temporal and Spiritual. As there are times of
extraordinary distress that pass upon the People of God, wherein they are to
Pray in an extraordinary way; so there are extraordinary Communications of the
Spirit of Prayer in such times of distress, Zech. 12.10. Thus God does dispense
to his People, as he is gracious and merciful, abundant in goodness and truth;
when God does so dispense, it is an evident Token for Good; when his People
follow him with a strong current of Prayer, it is an hopeful Sign of some great
work to be done, some great Salvation from the Lord near to be revealed. The
greatest Mercies are obtained in that way of Prayer; so we may find from, Jer.
31.18, 19, 20. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, turn thou me and I shall
be turned; Upon that earnest cry of Ephraim we have that return from the Lord,
I will surely have mercy upon him. So Jer. 50.45. In those days and in that
time, says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children
of Judah together, going and weeping, they shall go and seek the Lord their
God, They shall ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward. The Answer
to those Prayers we have in that which follows, ver. 18, 19, 20. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, Behold I will punish the King of Babylon and
his Land, as I have punished the King of Assyria and I will bring Israel again
to his habitation -- In that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah and they shall not
be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

4. That God has laid himself under Engagements to his People who Enquire
after him and Pray unto him, that he will hear their Prayers. As the Lord has
laid many Commands upon his People to make their Supplications to him, so he
has annexed unto those Commands many gracious Promises that he will hear their
desires. Psalm. 10.17. Psalm. 145.19. Such is the Condescension of God that he
has thus engaged and obliged himself to his People that call upon him, to all
that call upon him in truth. As he will be enquired of by the House of Israel,
so he has given abundant Testimony that their Labor in the way of Prayer
shall not be lost Labor. Isai. 45.19. I said not to the seed of Jacob seek ye
me in vain.

5ly, and lastly. That God will certainly bestow all that Good which he has
promised to those that seek him in sincerity. That which he has promised to
bestow, he is able to bestow, and as he is faithful, he will not fail to
bestow. Romans 4.21. Heb. 10.23. There have been great instances of the
Faithfulness of God in the Answers of Prayer. 1 Kin. 8.56. There has not
failed one word of all his good promise. There is a Concurrence of all the
Glorious Divine Perfections unto the Accomplishment of the Promises he has
made to his People. This is that we ought to remember in all the Prayers we
present to God, that he is able to do and will do according to that which he
has promised. Such is the Greatness and Glory of the Lord, that he is able to
do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. This is
the peculiar privilege of the sincere seekers of God, that he will fulfill all
their Petitions: He will withold no good from them, Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 85.12.
Whatsoever they ask of God according to his Will they shall receive, he will do
it for them, they shall have it in the best Time, in the most proper season.
There is no meritorious Virtue nor any causal Influence in the best Prayers
that can be made by the most Eminent Servants of God, to procure the Blessings
which he has promised; but as Prayer is a Condition of the New Covenant, as
the Prayers of the Saints are the Breathings of the Spirit of God, and as they
are presented to God by our Glorious High Priest Jesus Christ, the righteous,
our Advocate with the Father, so they prevail with God; In that respect all the
Answers that are given to the Prayers of the People of God, are from the Free
Grace of God in Christ Jesus.

The Doctrine would afford diverse profitable USES, were there Time to insist:
But the Improvement I intend, is only by way of Exhortation, and so with
particular Application to this Precinct, unto this New Society, for whose sake
and at whose desire, the present Service and Solemnity in the Worship of God is
attended. As you are concerned to set up a New Society for the Worship of God,
according to the Order of the Gospel, you have set apart this Day of Fasting
and Prayer, in order (...) obtaining Divine Direction and a special divine
Blessing upon your Undertaking. This is that you have proposed for the Ground
of your present Application to God in this solemn way; See then that this Day
be observed to the Lord, that it be such a Fast as the Lord has chosen, not a
Day of Provocation but a Day of Atonement and Reconciliation to God, wherein
you may have power to prevail with God for that you are enquiring after. It is
a great thing you have to ask of God in your present Address to him. Let all
your Hearts therefore be lifted up to God by the most fervent Prayers and
Supplications to him that he may do it for you. I would urge this Exhortation
upon by two or three Motives.

Consider, 1. That the Eyes of the Lord are upon you. You are not only exposed
to the Observation of Men in that which you have undertaken, but more
especially to the Observance of the Great God, the Judge of all, whose Eyes are
as a Flame of Fire, Rev. 1.14. who pondereth the Paths and weighs the Spirits
of all the Children of Men. This is a Truth of great Importance for you all to
meditate upon. Our Lord Christ will have all the Churches to know that He it is
who searches the Reins* and the Heart, Rev. 2.23. He who (...) Jerusalem with
Candles, Zeph. 1.12. (...) ^ake a strict and thorough search into every House,
into every Heart among you; He will search out your Ends in the Charge and
Expense you have been at to Build this House, wherein you are now Assembled,
whether your design be for God or for your selves? Whether that you have
undertaken be for any carnal worldly Interest of Honor and Esteem among Men;
for high Seats and high Places, or whether it be indeed for the Advancement of
Religion, that the Lord may be exalted among you?

Consider, 2. There are Difficulties before you, and such wherein you will need
Help, special Help from God, Counsels, Supports and Assistances from the Lord,
that you may be able to uphold and carry on that which you have begun: This is
that you ought all to be sensible of. You know how it was with the Jews upon
their return from Babylon, in rebuilding the Wall and Temple of Jerusalem, the
great opposition that Work met with: you must not think it strange, if you be
tried in like manner; you must reckon upon Trouble in Temple Work and arm your
selves against it, and therefore you must have your recourse to God by Prayer,
both Ordinary and Extra-Ordinary Prayer; you must follow that Example you have,
Ezra 8.21. Then I proclaimed a Fast there at the River Ahava, that we might
afflict our selves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us and for
our little ones and for our substance. There may be Difficulties before you,
with a Number among you, in outward respects, to carry on and to uphold; you
may expect Obstructions to be given by Satan and his Instruments; there may be
strong Temptations unto Rents and Divisions among your selves; and there are
great Mountains of Sin to be removed, to be pardoned and subdued. In all such
difficulties that may be before you, you must go to God who is able to break
the Gates of brass, and the Bars of iron, unto him who can make the crooked
places straight and every mountain a plain, according to that in, Isai. 40.4.
Zech. 4.6, 7. Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts; who art thou, O great Mountain before Zerubbabel? Thou shall become a
plain and he shall bring forth the head stone with shouting, crying Grace,
Grace unto it.

3. According as you Enquire of God, so it will fare with you. I would
therefore commend unto your serious consideration and improvement that
Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while you are with him: if ye
seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
If your Hearts be not right with God in your present Addresses to him, if you
will forsake the Lord in setting up the Interests of the World above the great
Interest of Religion he will forsake you; and if you be forsaken of God, then
your Condition will be most miserable. Hos. 9.12. Woe to them when I depart from
them. Whatever you may enjoy of outward Prosperity or of outward Ordinances,
all will be penal and judicial; you can have nothing of a special Blessing with
them. On the other hand, if your Hearts be set aright for God, if you be
sincerely devoted to his Service to follow him and to cleave to him in all
those ways which he has instituted and prescribed; He will be your God and
acknowledge you to be His People, according to that great Promise, Jer. 32.39.
He will set up his Tabernacle among you, he will bless you with all the
Blessings of his Sanctuary; and to all those Spiritual Blessings he has
promised to bestow, he will add the outward Blessings of Peace and Safety in
your Dwellings, of Health in your Habitations, He will bless all the Work and
Labor of your Hands. Whatever Afflictions you may meet with in the way of your
Obedience to God, all shall be Sanctified to you, the Lord will be for a sure
and strong support to you in all times of Trouble, he will never leave you nor
forsake you, he will perfect all that does concern you, even because his Mercy
endures for ever.

For your Direction in this great Concern.

1. You must consult the Law and the Testimony in all that you have to ask of
God. Thither you are directed, Isai. 8.20. Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded. This is that which must be attended in
all that does refer to your establishment in the Order of the Gospel; you must
Enquire of the Lord from his Word how it may be done so as may be unto his
Honor and Glory, to the progress of the work of Conversion, unto your
Edification and Consolation and so to the Salvation of your Souls. Though your
Establishment in Church State under the full Administration of Gospel
Ordinances, be not directly the present Subject of your Enquiry; this is that
which ought to be and must be enquired after in due time; and therefore it may
not be unseasonable at this time to warn you of the Danger of following the
Counsels of your own hearts: if there be a resolve for your own Counsels the
Lord will reject your Prayers. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard Iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me. What can be expected but that he will answer you
according to your Idols? Ezekiel. 14.3, 4^ These men have set up their idols in
their heart and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face,
should I be enquired after all by them? I the Lord will answer him that ^^^eth
according to the multitude of his Idols. If you would be Blessed with a Sound
Sanctified Ministry, if you expect a Pastor from God according to his own
Heart, Jer. 3.14. If you would obtain that great Gift of our Glorified Savior
Jesus Christ, as the fruit of his Ascension and Mediation, you must consult
those Rules, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. where you have the qualifications of the Gospel
Ministry.

2. Let your Prayers and Supplications be attended with deep Humiliation for
Sin; for all your past Transgressions, and all those Sins which still remain
among you unrepented of, whether open or secret Sins, First Table Sins or
Second Table Sins: This the Lord always insists upon with his People; in order
to the obtaining those great Mercies he has promised to bestow upon them. Lev.
26.40, 41, 42. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. There must be Conviction of Sin, ingenuous
Confession of Sin, Contrition of heart for Sin; deep penitent Reflections upon
contempt of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, profanation of the Sabbath, neglect
of Family Order and Family Worship, Contentions, Intemperance, Lasciviousness,
Fraud, Deceit, Unrighteousness and all other Evils you may find upon
Self-Examination; whatever there has been of precipitancy or preposterousness,
of rashness or suddenness in any of your Motions and Managements with respect
to your Public Concerns, must be recollected and repented of, if you expect a
Blessing from the Lord.

3. Let your Enquiries and Askings of the Lord be for Spiritual Blessings, as
the main and principal things. Such is the Goodness of God, that he is tender
of his People in all that does refer to their Temporal Welfare: he is so as he
stands engaged in those indearing Relations of a Master, of a Father, of an
Husband: in this respect he has promised to bestow upon them Blessings in
their Houses, in their Fields, the Blessings of Health and Peace, of
Protection, Provision of all outward Supplies, whatsoever may be needful for
them: These things God allows you to ask of him in Subordination and
Subservency to the highest and greatest things, Mat. 6.11. Give us this day our
daily Bread. But above all that does concern your temporal state, you are to
ask for the saving Blessings of the New Covenant, for Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly things in Christ, the Pardon of Sin, the Favor of God. Hos. 4.2, 3.
Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously. Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift up the
light of thy Countenance upon us. Converting and Sanctifying Grace for
yourselves and your Offspring. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me and I shall be turned.
Psalm. 90.16, 17. Let thy work appear unto thy Servants, and thy glory unto
their Children. Let the Beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish
thou the work of our Hands. These are things of the greatest Value, which ought
to have the highest esteem in your Hearts and are to be sought after with the
greatest earnestness.

4. Your Enquiries of God and Supplications unto God must be with Union, with a
due accord and agreement among your selves. As you must come to an Agreement
with God, so also one with another. Amos 3.3. Can two walk together, except
they be agreed? Union with one another in the Lord is necessary in all the
parts of Religious Worship and particularly in Prayer. This is the condition
Christ has laid before you in order to the acceptance of your Prayers with
God. Mat. 18.19. I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on Earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father,
which is in Heaven. There are solemn Commands laid upon all Christians to seek
peace and to pursue it, to walk in love one toward another; to labor for the
most perfect Union that is attainable both in Judgment and Affection: Such
Commands are iterated and reiterated, they are earnestly inculcated, 1 Cor.
1.10. Phil. 2.1, 2. and frequently elsewhere. We find it among the great
Peomises God has made to his People, that he will give them one heart to fear
him and to serve him, Ezekiel. 11.19. It will be your Strength, your Crown and
Glory, to be of one Heart, to live in Peace and Love one toward onother. I
beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God that you lay aside all Grudges one
against another, that you study to be quiet. Let nothing be done through strife
or vain glory, Gal. 5.26. Phil 2.4, 5. Let there be no strivings among you for
Places of Honor and Dignity in Church or State, in Civil or Military respects.
Let not this House which you have Erected for the Name of the Lord, be a
Meribah, a place of strife; not a Beth-Aven but a Bethel and so a House of
Prayer, and a House of Peace, that the God of Peace and Love may be with you,
that here the Lord may Command the Blessing, even Life for ever more, Psalm.
133.5. You must ask in Faith, by a firm reliance upon God, relatively
considered, in and through our Glorious Mediator, Jesus Christ. This is
indispensably necessary. It is the great thing the Lord requires in all your
Prayers. Jam. 1.6. Let him ask in Faith: and eminently in the Prayers you
present to him at this day. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so
shall ye be established. You have that for your Encouragement, Mat. 21.22. All
things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing ye shall receive. There
must be a dependence of Faith upon the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the
Goodness and Mercy, the Truth and Faithfulness of God, upon all his Glorious
Attributes, upon the Merits of Christ by whom all Covenant Blessings are
purchased, upon his Mediation, by the virtue whereof all the Good of the
Promise is actually dispensed and applied. As to all you may be called to do or
to suffer in that which you have undertaken, your Dependence must be upon the
Lord. There must be Faith for the Pardon of Sin and Faith for the Subduing all
your Iniquities, Faith to strengthen you against all Temptations, to direct and
to uphold you in all the duty incumbent in your respective Places and
Capacities. You who are yet Strangers to the work of Faith must plead hard with
God that you may be enabled to believe. Mar. 9.24. that you may obtain the
great Gift of Faith, Ephesians. 2.3. You that have obtained the precious Faith of
God's Elect, must stir up your Souls to a lively exercise of Faith. I hope
there is a Number among you who through Grace have believed. Let such be
excited to improve your Interest in God with the greatest Vigor, that you may
encounter all the Difficulties which are before you unto perfect Victory, that
the Lord may own the Work which you have begun, that it may be carried on with
Power, that His Hands may finish it.

6. Let your Supplications to God, be followed with Reformation: This it that
the Lord calls for and expects from you. Jer. 7.3. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways and your doings and I will cause you
to dwell in this place. Consider therefore the need, the great need there is of
Reformation. See that there be a Reformation with respect to the Public
Worship of God, Public Ordinances, a more tender regard to the Sanctifying of
the Sabbath, a greater Zeal for the House of God, that as you are now favored
with greater Conveniences than before to attend upon Public Worship, so your
Zeal may flourish in waiting upon the Lord. As to Family Reformation, Let there
not be one Prayerless Family found among you. You that are Heads of Families,
Parents and Masters, see to it, that Family Prayer, Reading the Scriptures,
Catechizing, Conference about the things of God be upheld in your Houses. Let
Parents remember that solemn Charge which is laid upon them, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. The
words that I command thee this day shall be in thy heart and thou shall teach
them diligently to thy Children. Let the Young Generation of this Society be
persuaded to lay a sure Foundation of sound Conversion in the Morning of their
day, Eccl. 12.1. For that end be subject to Family Rule and Government, avoid
all unseasonable Night Walks as they are the Works of Darkness; hearken to the
faithful Counsels and Pious Instructions of Parents, give your selves to
Prayer, labor so to walk that you may be counted to the Lord for a Generation.
Further as to Reformation respecting Immoralities against the Second Table,
besides other Evils which might be mentioned, I would refer particularly to
that of Intemperance, the excessive and prodigious expense upon Strong Drink,
above all that of RUM, I say the scandalous and horrible abuse of RUM, which
threatens Ruin unto this Land and to this Place, a Ruin to all our dearest
Interests both Civil and Religious. If there be any such Houses among you, as I
fear there are, that Vend that Strong Drink contrary to the Law of God and the
Wholesome Law of the Province, let such of you who are vested with Civil Power,
and stand obliged under the Oath of God see that such grievous Profanations be
suppressed, least that Iniquity, The Abuse of Rum, be our Ruin.

7. Finally. You must wait on the Lord with quiet Expectation for the
performance of all the Great things he has promised to do for his People. Thus
we are to wait for a more full Accomplishment of this Promise in our Text, as
it refers to Israel, to the Conversion of the Jews; and so far as the Promise
of God in this Chapter, together with many other Promises in the Holy Prophets
refer to the Enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ among the Gentiles, we must
wait for the performance of them. Though there have been many and great
Disappointments as to Times and Seasons, with respect to the Destruction of
Antichrist, the Conversion of Israel, the Gathering of the Gentile Nations; all
these things shall be done in the appointed Time, the Testimony of the Lord is
sure, the Vision will speak at the end and not lie; Times of Accomplishment are
in the Lord's Hand, and as he is a God of Judgment, blessed are all they that
wait for him, Isai. 30.18.

As to that which refers to this New Society, who are designed for the Worship
and Service of God, you must continue instant in Prayer to God, he will yet be
enquired of, that you may be established in the Order of the Gospel, that you
may be built up to be an Habitation of God through the Spirit: you must avoid
haste and hurries; He that believes shall not make haste, Isai. 28.16. Wait on
the Lord and keep his way, that it may be well with you. Be persuaded to suffer
this Word of Exhortation which is given you from the Lord by your Aged Pastor,
who has served you in the Gospel now full Fifty Four Years, and I hope by the
Grace of God in some measure of Sincerity, though attended with much Weakness,
great Infirmities and manifold Temptations. Let these Counsels of the Lord be
acceptable to you, labor to have them engraven upon the Tables of your hearts;
and see that all your deportments and improvements be such, that the Lord may
take pleasure in your Prosperity according to the Riches of his Grace in Christ
Jesus, that true Religion, pure and undefiled Religion in the power, beauty and
glory of it may live with you and with your Children after you unto all
Posterity. In order thereunto I shall conclude with that solemn Prayer of the
Apostle on your behalf, Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of Peace that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the
Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

THE END.
The Building up of Sion carried on by Prayer.
By SAMUEL DANFORTH.
PSALM CII.16, 17. When the Lord shall build up Sion, He will appear in His
Glory. He will regard the Prayer of the destitute and not despise their Prayer.


THis Psalm describes (as is supposed) the disposition and behavior of the
Godly among the Jews in Babylon, when their Seventy Years Captivity was near
its Expiration.

1. Their Condition in that Captived state was extremely distressed and
calamitous, and is in this Psalm spread before God in Prayer; therefore is the
Psalm Entitled, A Prayer of the Afflicted when overwhelmed (with sorrow) he
pours out (...) Complaint before the Lord. Their days in that Captivity were
consumed like smoke, ver. 3. in which is nothing solid, neither strength,
beauty nor delight. Their Bones were burnt as an Hearth; The continual Grief on
their Spirits dried up their Bones, Prove. 17.22. So that it is said of the
Church in Babylon, Shall these dry Bones live? Ezekiel. 37.2, 3, 4. They were like
withered grass pulled up by the Roots, which therefore must needs dye, ver. 4.
The Church was then like a Pelican of the Wilderness, ver. 6. forsaken of all
Friends, and loving solitude and solitariness, like a Sparrow alone on an house
top, ver. 7. When her Condition called most for pity, her Enemies added more
Affliction to her by their Reproaches, ver. 8. The Church to her own
apprehension was in a decaying, wasting, declining state, like the shade of the
Sun that is going down, which varies every moment 'till it end in total
darkness, ver. 11. In this Prison of Babylon the Church lay groaning, like a
Son of Death, like a Person Sentenced to Death, of whose Life was no hope as to
an eye of sense or reason.

Thus was the Jewish Church weakened when they were in the height of their
Strength and Splendour, in the midst of their Prosperity, ver. 21, 24. Cast down
and depressed from the height of Dignity, ver. 10. deprived of their Country,
of Church Privileges and Ordinances, and sent among barbarous Enemies; to learn
the worth of such Blessings by the want of them: and were cast down with such
violence as to break them in pieces as the breaking of a Potters Vessel, Isai.
30.14. The Church was then like a Widow and Orphans, destitute of any Head,
Parent or Guide to take care of them, ver. 17. Their case was desperate as to
Second Causes, being destitute of any help from Man.

2. Their disposition and behavior in that afflicted state.

1. They were sensible of God's Hand inflicting and of their own Sins procuring
these Troubles, ver. 10. It is because of thy indignation and Wrath. Hypocrites
bear Afflictions with impatience, murmuring against God as if he were unjust or
cruel. Godly Men are sensible that God does not willingly grieve nor afflict
the Children of Men, that God acts not rashly but for just causes and holy
ends; that their Sins kindle God's Anger against them, and bring Punishments
upon them. This grief for their Sins works in them, Repentance unto Salvation.
Thou have cast me down, ver. 10. thou have weakened my strength and shortened my
days, ver. 23. They take notice of an Hand of God in all Calamities; that there
is no Evil in the City, but God has done it.

2. The Support of their Pious Souls under this distress was from and by the
lively Exer^^^^ of Faith in Prayer; that God would in his due time Restore them
from that state of Captivity, to the enjoyment of State-Privileges and
Church-Privileges in their own Land. They stir up themselves to believe that
God would hear their Prayers, though he had delayed to give Returns to their
Prayers hitherto, ver. 11. yet he would no longer hide his Face or turn away
his Ear from them; He would no longer neglect them but speedily make it appear
that he heard them. They fix the eye of their Faith on God's Eternity and
Immutability, ver. 12. not merely considered essentially but relatively, as it
is revealed in the Word of Promise that he will take care of his Church in the
midst of greatest Calamities, which Promise cannot fail, as the Nature of God
is immutable. There is no Generation past or to come but therein God remembers
to be faithful to his Promise of taking care of his Church. No changes or
injuries of Time can stop the course of God's Faithfulness to his own People.
God will arise, ver. 13. He will make it appear that he is not asleep, that he
is not a mere Spectator of things done on Earth: but is the Keeper of Israel
who neither slumbers nor sleeps; he is always intent upon the taking care of
the safety and welfare of his Church, to restore Peace to them and to take
Vengeance on their Enemies. God will have mercy upon Zion; that is, the Church,
which is called the Daughter of Sion; by pardoning the Sins of his People upon
their Repentance, accepting them into Favor with God, bringing them back to
their own Land, and restoring their Civil Polity, and especially the Worship of
God and the Privileges of his House, unto them; and that in the appointed Time,
the Messiah should come in the Flesh, who should restore all things. For the
set time to favor Sion is come, ver. 13. the time prefixed by the Prophet
Jeremiah, chap. 29.10. Their Seventy Years of Captivity was now almost expired.
Also God's People took pleasure in the stones and favored the dust of Sion,
ver. 14. They had excited in them an inflamed love to their Country, their
Religion and the instituted Worship of God; their want of them had taught them
highly to prize and value them as their precious things, more precious then
Dust of Gold, or the richest Pearls: and they believed that out of the Stones
and Dust of Sion, though now confused, should spring forth, by Divine Power, a
New Temple, and that there should be a Glorious Resurrection and Restoration
of Religion; for they believed that God himself would appear gloriously, and
make it evident that it is his own Work peculiarly, to build up Sion, ver. 17.
to gather the Jews from their dispersions and to set up their civil Polity,
with the Temple and Divine Worship: which Work of God should be famous, like
the making of dry and dead Bones to live, or like the raising of dead Bodies
out of their Graves. When this work is accomplished, it will be apparent that
God has done it and not Man; that God himself has looked down from the height
of his Sanctuary in Heaven and beheld the Earth; that he has set at Liberty
the Prisoners appointed to Death, ver. 20. that they may proclaim God's Name in
Sion and his Praise in Jerusalem, in their own Land. This Work of God shall be
a new Creation Work, the making of a new Heavens and a new Earth, ver. 25.
creating and forming a people to Praise the Lord, ver. 18. That Text in Isai.
43.21. This People have I formed for my self, (...) show forth my praise,
points at this very time of the Restoration of the Church after the Babylonian
Captivity.

And this should be a Work done for the good of succeeding and future
Generations, for their Children should be established in the Enjoyment of these
Church Privileges, before God or most certainly, ver. 28.

Again, This should be such a Glorious Work of God as should be famous among
the very Heathen Nations round about them, and the Kings of the Earth shall
hear of it to the impressing some fear and dread of God upon them, ver. 15. Yea
the Gentiles, that were Strangers to Israel and Enemies to them, by the Beauty
and Comeliness of the Lord put upon Israel, should be moved to join with them
in Praising God, ver. 22. and the Calling of the Gentiles into the Church is
supposed to be predicted in this Psalm.

During the Seventy Years Captivity of the Jews there was little of Religion,
little of the Remembrance of God's Name and Worship left in the World; but
Pious Souls did comfort themselves, that the time drew near when not only the
Temple should be restored, but the Church should be enlarged by the calling of
the Gentiles. This Prophecy was especially fulfilled in the times of the
Messiah; to him shall the Gathering of the Nations be, Genesis 49.10.

DOCTRINE.
The Building up of Sion, or the Revival and Progress of Religion, is a work
accomplished by God himself, in answer to the Prayers of his People, when they
are deeply humbled for their Sins, and sensible that they are destitute of all
Help for the promoting of this work, except the help of God alone.



To Explain the Words of the Text and Doctrine,

1. Consider, That Sion was a Mountain in Jerusalem on the Top whereof was a
Tower, and was called the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.7, 9. Psalm. 2.6. And some
extend the Name so far as to take in Mount Moriah; on which Mountain the Temple
was built. The Church of the Jews was called Sion, because that was the Place
where they assembled. Afterward this Title of Sion was given to the Church
both of Jews and Gentiles, because they agree in one and the same Faith and
Religion, Heb. 12.22.

In several respects the Church might be resembled unto Sion; namely, As Sion
was a Fort of the Jebusites, who were Strangers to God and the true Religion,
so the Church consists of such who are Strangers to God before their
Conversion; such as were Spiritually halt and blind by nature. Mich. 4.6, 7. in
allusion to 2 Samuel 5.6, 7. And as those Jebusites were subdued by David, and
their Fort turned to a Religious use: so Sinners are subdued by Christ (the
Antitype of David,) and built up into an Holy Temple to the Lord, Col. 2.7. 2
Cor. 6.16. Again, as David made Mount Sion the Place of his Royal Residence: so
the Church and every true Member of it is the Sion that God dwells in by his
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19. and by Faith wrought in the heart, Ephesians. 3.17. Sion was
called the City of God, the Mountain of His Holiness, Psalm. 48.1, 2, 8. and
50.2. because his Oracles and Ordinances, which are the signs and tokens of his
Presence, were upheld therein: and was therefore styled the Place which God had
chosen and desired to dwell in; so the Church is the Society which God loves
above all the World, and he gives Christ to none but the Church; in this Sion
(his Church) he lays the chief corner stone Elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2.6. and
therein are preserved the Divine Oracles and Ordinances of Worship. Also the
height of Sion may be conceived to point at the elevation of the affection of
the Saints to things above. Col. 3.1. and their Conversation in Heaven while
they are upon Earth, Phil. 3.21. And the strength and firmness of Sion may put
us in mind of the stability and unmoveableness of the Church, Psalm. 126.1. Mat.
16.18. But what is said may suffice to show the agreeableness and suitableness
of the Title of Sion, to be given unto the Church. It Is plain that in Scripture
the Church under the Gospel is called Mount Sion, Heb. 12.22. and Jerusalem,
Gal. 4.26. whereof the Mount Sion in the Earthly Jerusalem was a Type, Psalm.
14.7. and 15.20 and there the Gospel was first proclaimed without that terror
with which the Law was delivered on Mount Sinai, Isai. 2.3.

2. Consider, The Church of God is either Invisible or Visible,

(1.) The Invisible Church of the Elect. True Believers are God's House, built
by Christ, Heb. 3.3. 2 Cor. 6.16. The Temple of the Living God. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye
are God's Building. The Building up of the Elect to be a Temple for God is the
peculiar secret work of God's Spirit, even from the first hewing and polishing
of them to be Stones fit and meet for the Building, unto the perfecting of the
whole Work of Grace in them.

(2.) The Visible Church. This is visible Zion. The building up of visible Zion
is by the Enlargement of the visible Church, by addition of Nations and
Plantations thereunto, which were before ungospellized, and by the Propagation
of the visible profession of Religion unto the Posterity of succeeding
Generations of the Church. The Planting of the Gospel where it was not Planted
before; and the upholding and preserving of Religion where it was before
Planted; the enlargement and growth of Churches and the Increase of them in
Number may be called a Building up of Sion. Building up is opposite to pulling
down; It notes the prosperous and flourishing state of the Church which is
opposite to the decaying state thereof.

These Considerations being premised, let us Explain the parts of the Doctrine.

PROP. I. The Building up of Sion is God's peculiar Work, in the carrying on of
which work the Glory of God does eminently appear, and is displayed.

1. The Invisible work of Grace in the Souls of the Elect is the peculiar Work
of God by his Holy Spirit; in the beginning and progress of this work of Grace,
the Lord does appear in his Glory unto each of their Souls. The calling and
gathering of them out of the World (which lies in wickedness) unto himself by
an holy and effectual calling unto their real and thorough Conversion, is a
glorious Creation-work of God: so is also the preserving of Grace alive in them
and maintaining it in exercise and causing it to grow in strength and to higher
degrees of Perfection, notwithstanding all the force and fraud used by Satan
and the carnal World to weaken and extinguish Grace in them, were it possible.
The Beauty and Glory of the Grace, Wisdom, Power, and of the other Attributes
of God shining forth in the beginning, upholding, increasing and perfecting the
work of Grace in the Souls of his Elect shall at the last day be admired in all
those that believe, 2 These. 1.10. Indeed God condescends to make use of the
Preaching of the Word, and of the outward means of Grace, in carrying on this
Work; but until Men do hear the voice of God speaking to their hearts as well
as the voice of Men speaking to their ears they will not be Converted; until
they feel the power of God's Spirit, which goes beyond any humane power in the
efficacy of it, their hard Hearts will not be broken for and from Sin, nor
their blind Minds be savingly enlightened in the knowledge of Christ so as to
believe in him for Salvation, nor will their love to Sin be turned to an hatred
thereof, nor will they accept of Christ and submit to him in all his Offices
and Ordinances and upon his own Terms on which he is offered in the Gospl.

And after Men are Converted the same Divine creating power does appear in its
Glory to preserve Grace alive in their Souls. We need the fresh Anointings of
the Spirit to give new supplies of strength and nourishment unto Faith and
every other Grace in us: we need to have our Souls watered every moment from
above to preserve Grace in a thriving and flourishing state in our Souls: we
need the help of God to recover us from decays in Grace, to quicken and revive
Grace in us, to strengthen us with might in the inner man by the Glorious Power
of his Holy Spirit, to enable us to get a victory over Sin dwelling in us, and
over Satan and the World without us, which are the Enemies that fight against
our Souls, and to enable us to conflict with and conquer that last Enemy Death,
that we may enter into Heaven, triumphing over our Spiritual Enemies, after the
end of our present Militant estate on Earth.

This internal Building up of Zion in the hearts of the Elect, is that peculiar
work of God which he chiefly aims at and intends to see accomplished in this
World; and therefore is the World itself preserved in its being 'till all the
Elect of God are born into an Existence in the World and Newborn unto Christ
by their Regeneration: All other the works of Divine Providence are put in
subserviency unto this great work of the calling home of the Elect unto Christ,
even as many as were foreordained unto Eternal Life.

2. The Building up of Sion Visibly, or the upholding and enlarging the Visible
Church is the peculiar work of God, in effecting whereof he does appear in his
Glory. For, God is wont to carry on his invisible work in the Hearts of his
Elect, by the outward means of Grace, by the Word Preached and by Ordinances
administered; therefore for the Elects sake God will uphold and preserve a
Visible Sion or Church state upon Earth, until all his Elect are gathered in
unto Christ.

And God has promised that Christ shall see his Seed, that is, shall have a
Visible Seed upon Earth in all Generations, Isai. 53.9. Also it is for the
declarative or manifestative Glory of God in the World, that a Visible Church
should be preserved therein. The forming or planting of Churches, the new
forming or giving forth new Editions of the Church, the Reformations of it in
the several ages of the World; the defending of it against its Enemies, are
such displays of the Wisdom, Power, Faithfulness and Grace of God, yea of all
his Attributes, that it may be justly said, that the Lord does appear in his
Glory here on Earth, when this good work is going forward.

God the Father has therefore in his Eternal Counsels resolved that Christ
shall have a Visible Kingdom upon Earth, and the contrary works of the Devil
shall be destroyed; by means whereof the Lord Jesus Christ shall be glorified
upon Earth. Psalm. 22.22, 27, 30, 31.

Take some Instances of the Glorious Appearances of God in building up his
Visible Church and Kingdom upon Earth.

(1.) There was a Visible Church erected or formed in Adam's Family, after his
Fall: The foundation on which it was built, was the promised Seed, the Messiah
that Seed of the Woman who was to break the Serpents head, who was to come into
the World to destroy the works of the Devil. In that Church, the Worship of God
by Sacrifices, was upheld, and there was Church Discipline exercised therein,
as when Cain was rejected from the enjoyment of the presence of God in his
House and Ordinances. In Adam's Family was formed the first Visible Gospel
Church that ever was in the World.

(2.) The Lord did appear in His Glory to build up his Church Visible in the
days of Noah: with him was the Covenant of Grace renewed; by him who was a
Preacher of Righteousness was Christ preached; and by the Ark a Type of Christ,
Men were taught that in Christ only Mankind could be saved from the deluge of
Eternal Wrath: also Laws of Worship were given to Noah; and the apostatized
World of Men, were swept out of the World by that universal Flood, that they
might no longer obstruct the thriving and flourishing of the true Religion upon
Earth, seeing they were become incorrigible in their Sins. Thus we see that God
was content to part with a whole World of sinful Men, rather than Religion
should not be upheld in the World; rather than Sinners by their numerousness
and multitude should obstruct the work of Reformation and the Progress of
Religion upon Earth.

(3.) Another remarkable Period, wherein the Lord did appear in his Glory for
the Building of Sion, was at the time of the Dispersion of Mankind by the
confusion of their Languages at Babel. For hereby vast number of Hypocrites
were separated from the true Church and purged out from fellowship with the
Church; while Religion (and probably the Original Language also) was preserved
in the House of Shem, the Father of Heber, Genesis 10.21. who would not (as is
conceived) join with the rest in building the Tower of Babel.

And this Confusion of Languages proved a Bar to hinder the rest of the World
from holding Communion with the true Church, nor was this Bar or Partition Wall
removed 'till Christ made Peace by the Blood of the Cross and obtained the Gift
of Tongues in order to the publishing of the Gospel among all Nations, Acts 2.

(4.) Another remarkable Period, wherein God appeared in his Glory for the
Building up of Sion, was when God renewed his Covenant with Abraham. For, though
during those Ten Generations from the Confusion of Languages at Babel until the
time of Abraham, the Church enjoyed a Ministry by excellent Teachers, for Noah
lived Three Hundred and Forty Years after the Flood, and served in the Church
as a great Prophet, as also Shem was preserved in life 'till Abraham's time, and
Melchizedeck, who was a Priest to offer Sacrifices and to explain the meaning
of them, as well as a King to do Justice. Yet Religion was before the (...) of
Abraham almost extinct in the World, being miserably decayed and corrupted: The
Lord therefore thought it high time to appear in his Glory for the preservation
and restoration of it: by calling Abraham to separate himself even from his
Fathers House and his Native Land, and by revealing himself unto Abraham and
Covenanting with him to be a God to him and to his Seed; and made him the
Father in respect of this Covenant renewed with him, not only of his own
natural Seed but of his adopted Seed in all Nations, namely, of all that should
have the like Faith in the Messiah which was wrought in Abraham, Genesis 12.1. and
he became Heir of the World or of the Church in the World, Romans 4.11, 12, 13.
and thus in Abraham's Family God preserved a Seed to serve him, distinguished
from the rest of the Apostate World.

(5.) Another Period of time wherein there was a very Glorious Appearance of
God for the Building up of the Church, was in the time of Moses. For Israel in
Egypt were become very ignorant, and being kept like Slaves and Drudges under
their Taskmasters, labored under woeful disadvantages for the upholding of
Religion and the Worship of God. The Lord, rather than Religion should be
wholly lost upon Earth, was pleased by remarkable works of Providence to revive
it out of the ashes. He raised up Moses, revealed himself to him from Heaven,
taught Israel the Ten Commandments from Mount Sinai, appointed Ordinances of
Worship and the Rules of a Church State as well as of a well ordered Civil
Polity: which Laws and Ordinances Ceremonial and Judicial were of force for the
space of Fifteen Hundred Years, namely 'till the coming of Christ.

Yet in this interval between Moses and Christ, the Church fell under woeful
Degeneracies and Apostasy into Vice and Idolatry; so that God was provoked to
send them into Babylon for Seventy Years. But at the end of that term it
pleased God to proceed to a New Forming of his Church that he might have a
People set apart for himself to show forth his Praise visibly on Earth, Isai.
43.21. and the Temple was rebuilt and the Ordinances of Divine Worship again
set up: This our Text seems to refer unto.

But at length the Jews fell to idolizing the very Law of Moses, expecting
Justification by the literal observance of it; which was a great dishonor to
Christ the true Mediator, that the Shadow should be preferred before the
Substance; yet thus they did, for under an Opinion of being steady Disciples of
Moses, they refused to become Disciples of Christ himself.

Hence at this time and age of the World, there was as much need of making all
things new, or of new forming the Church as there was at the time of Noah's
Flood, when the whole World had corrupted their ways; and as there was in any
other of the aforementioned Periods.

(6.) Hereupon, Christ himself, the true Messiah, appeared in the World, as the
greatest of Prophets and the chief Builder to carry on this work of Building up
the Church and to render the state of it still more glorious. He so ordered,
that the Temple and its Worship, which the Jews idolized, should be destroyed,
that the Law of Ceremonies should be abrogated; and as being Lord of his House
did appoint the Laws of it, and instituted the Ordinances of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper and Orders needful to be observed in the Church in these days of
the Gospel. He pulled down the Wall of Partition betwixt the Jews and the
Gentiles, enlarged the Curtains of the Tabernacle of David (Isai. 54.2. Amos
9.11.) takes the Gentiles within the Covenant and within the pale of the
Church, engrafting them into that Vine from which the Jews for their
impenitency and for their rejecting of Christ, were cut off. He bestowed
miraculous Gifts on the Apostles to furnish them for the carrying on of this
work, the propagation of Religion in the World, and there were remarkable
effusions of the Spirit in the days of the Apostles, by which God did appear in
his Glory for the building up of Sion.

These are some instances of the glorious Appearances of God in the World for
the carrying on his work, which deserve to be enlarged upon by a better Hand.
But these Hints may be of present use unto us. Also much might be added
concerning the wonderful appearance of God in carrying on the work of
Reformation from Popery in latter Ages; how the Grace, Faithfulness, Power and
Wisdom of God have been displayed in many signal Steps thereof.

2. Let us proceed to consider, that the Lord does also glorify his Name in
building up his Church, in the more ordinary Course and Methods of his
Providence, for the preserving of Religion where it is set up and propogating
of it to succeeding Generations. Take some instances of God's Wisdom and Grace
appearing therein.

(1.) God has taken care and made provision that the Children of Christian
Parents should be esteemed to belong to his Church and Visible Kingdom; and
has commanded their Parents to bring them up for God and does set the Mark of
Baptism upon them to distinguish them from the unbelieving World, and they are
brought under Obligations Sealed at their Baptism, to be the Covenant People of
God. If God had not made this Provision, there would have been great Chasms and
Vacancies in the dispensation of the Visible Covenant; for then the Children of
Believers would not have been Children of the Church, nor under the care of the
Church any more than Pagans and Infidels, and being left to themselves to choose
their Religion, would be exposed to sore Temptations to Apostasy, which would
tend to dissolve the Church soon after it is planted.

(2.) Christ as Head of the Church, does in every Age bestow Ministerial Gifts
upon some to qualify them to teach and lead his Church upon Earth, namely
Wisdom, Knowledge, and Utterance, to know how to speak a Word in Season for the
instruction and edification of the Church, Isai. 50.4. These Gifts are to
qualify some to be Priests and Levites to the Lord in Gospel times, Isai.
66.21. Called Prophecyings, 1 These. 5.20. 1 Cor. 14.22.

These Ministerial Gifts are ordinarily conveyed to and conferred on Persons
since the Apostles days, by a Ministerial Education in the Schools of the
Prophets. As there is the Seed of the Church in Visible Professors Educated
from their Infancy under the Christian care of their Parents and under the
watch of the Church; so there is the Seed of the Prophets preserved in the Sons
of the Prophets whom Christ raises up for his peculiar Service, and the Spirit
of Prophecy (or of Ministerial Gifts) and Christ's Word shall not depart out of
their Mouths for ever, Isai. 59.20. But Christ will take care that there shall
be a Succession of Persons thus educated and qualifyed for Public Service in
his Churches in all succeeding Ages, 'till the end of the World. This was the
way God took for the continuance of the Spirit of Prophets in the Old
Testament; for though there was a more immediate effusion of the Spirit on the
Seventy Elders, Numb 11.25. yet it was afterward continued in the School of
the Prophets wherein some ancient experienced Prophet was a Spiritual Father
and the Scholars were called his Sons: Samuel, Elijah, Elisha were Fathers in
that School, 1 Samuel 19.20. 2 Kin. 2.5, 7, 15. Amos 7.14. Yea, after this manner
Christ himself laid the Foundation of the New Testament Church, he took twelve
Men into his School and was Tutor and Master unto them himself. Joh. 13.13. Ye
call me Master and ye say well, for so I am. Agreeably did the Apostles
practice; they associated to themselves some Assistants in the Ministry who
were under the Apostles Instructions as their Sons; as Timothy, Titus, Sothens,
Gaius* M^^cus, Aristarchus, etc. 2 Timothy 2.1. and Paul (...) Timothy in, 2 Timothy
2.2. to commit the things which he had heard of him unto faithful Men, who
should be able to teach others also. The conferring of Ministeral Gifts and
Grace is a Token of Christ's special Love to his Churches and of his Presence
with them; One of the Witnesses to evidence that Christ is come in the Flesh
is, The Spirit on Earth, 1 John 5.8. namely, the Gifts of the Spirit for the
building up of the Church. This Spirit of Prophecy, or Gifts of the Spirit to
the Ministry of the Churches, is the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19.10. namely,
that Jesus Christ is Head of the Church and still lives in Heaven and takes
care of it. 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7. Happy are they who hear what this Spirit says to
the Churches. By this Spirit is Life preserved in the Church in evil times.
When this Salt has not lost its savor then it goes well with the Churches.

PROP. II. The Building up of Sion, though it be God's peculiar work yet he
carries it on in the World, as a Return and Answer to the Prayers of his
People, who are deeply humbled for their Sins and sensible that they can do
nothing of themselves for the promoting this Work, to effect, without God's
Help, Blessing and Presence with them.

1. As to the internal Temple-work carried on in the hearts of God's Elect, it
cannot be preserved or promoted by outward Means alone, without the powerful
influences and operations of God by his Spirit. Paul may plant, Apollo may
water, but God only gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.

2. As to the Extraordinary Revivals of Religion and New Formations or
Recoveries of the Church after great Apostacies, in several Ages of the Church:
they have been accomplished by remarkable Dispensations of Providence and more
than ordinary effusions of the Spirit whereby it is evident God has effected
them and not Men; though God has been pleased to make use of Men in that work.
And the Lord has done this work in Answer to the Prayers of his People when
they were deeply humbled before him and destitute of help in themselves; like
Israel when the Sea was before them and the Egyptians behind them, and
Mountains on each side of them, having no way left for their Relief but to look
upwards toward Heaven, by Faith and Penitential Prayers. Though the carnal World
despise the Church, as a feeble Folk, as weakness itself, yet the Strong God
appears to be on their side, to take their part, and they are Strong in the
Lord and in the Power of his Might. God indites the Prayers of his People for
them by his Spirit, so that they Pray for such things as are agreeable to God's
Will and tend to his Glory; He fills their hearts with holy desires after the
Revival of Religion and Enlargement of the Church; and having accepted their
Persons for Christ's sake, does also accept of their Prayers and works
wonderfully in answer to their Prayers, even beyond what they could ask or
think; and they will not cease Praying, 'till they have obtained of God the
Destruction of Antichrist and of the Kingdom of Satan. God's People will give
him no rest day or night 'till he have Mercy upon Sion and build up the Walls
of his Jerusalem, and until the Enemies of the Church are trodden down under
her feet.

3. As to the more ordinary way of the Continuance and Propagation of Religion
from one Generation to another successively, all the steps taken therein prove
not successful unless a Blessing attends them in answer to the Prayers of God's
People. Particularly,

(1.) We are to plead earnestly with God in Prayer, that he would pour out his
Spirit on the Seed and his blessing on the Offspring of the Church. Isai. 44.3.
and polish them to be fit Stones to lay in the building of Sion, the Church;
that so Religion may be continued and established among the Children and Seed
of God's Servants, Psalm. 102.28. that the Education of the Lambs of the Flocks
of Christ under Parental and Ministerial Instructions may be attended with
God's Blessing, for their Conversion; and that they may not be left to forsake
the God of their Fathers, as they grow up; nor to neglect to set up Family
Worship in their Houses, nor to forsake the Public Assemblies of God's People,
Heb. 10.25.

(2.) We are by Prayer to obtain from Heaven this great Blessing of God, that
the Churches may be supplied successively with Officers qualifyed with those
Gifts of the Spirit as well as with Grace, whereby they may be capable to
become Pastors after God's own heart, to feed and lead the Flocks of Christ
with Knowledge and Understanding; that God would be pleased plentifully to
bestow Ministerial Abilities on such as he improves in his Churches. Even Paul
himself writes in, 1 These. 5.25. Brethren, pray for us. and 2 These. 3.1.

(3.) We ought in a way of earnest Prayer to endeavor the Planting of the
Gospel in the dark Corners of our Land: and that God would appear in his Glory
for the succeeding our Endeavors for that end. It Is God's work to make a
People willing to embrace the Gospel; to open their Eyes to see that where
Vision fails a People are like to perish, and to open their hearts to bid
welcome to such as bring to them the glad Tidings of Salvation. When the Gospel
in the Ministry and Ordinances thereof is offered to a People, its a better and
greater Offer, than if we could proffer them all the Riches of the Indies; yet
such an offer will be slighted unless the Lord enlighten a People to see the
worth and value of it. Let us not be discouraged, but persevere in Prayer for
this great Blessing to be bestowed by God on those whose Souls are precious and
immortal as well as ours; and whose Salvation we should desire and endeavor as
well as the Salvation of our own Souls.

Quest. Why will God have this Work, the Building up of Sion carried on in
Answer to the Prayers of a penitent and humble People?

Answ. 1. Because those who are brought into a penitent humble prayerful frame,
are in some measure prepared to give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name
for the progress of this work of Religion. They see their own sinfulness and
vileness, that they are unworthy of such a favor from God; they see their own
inability and insufficiency to do any thing that shall subserve to the building
up of Sion; therefore when any thing of that nature and tendency is effected,
they will say, Not to us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name be the Glory. The
less of Man is seen, the more of God appears in this Work. We shall not duly
acknowledge the glorious Efficiency of God in carrying on this Work, 'till we
see our own Nothingness. We are indeed to acknowledge the Instruments whom God
makes use of (as they did, Luk 5.7. He has loved our Nation and built us a
Synagogue) but in such a way as not to derogate from the Glory of God, but to
bless God for enabling such to be instrumental in promoving his Work. 1 Chronicles.
19.14.

2. The more humble, penitent and prayerful we are, before such favors are
bestowed upon us, the more ground there is to hope that our spiritual and
saving good will be furthered by them. An impeninent and unhumbled heart is not
fit to improve a Mercy to his own spiritual good and advantage.

3. When God moves the Wheels of Providence by his Spirit in the Wheels (Ezekiel.
1.12.) He is wont at such a time to move the Wheels of Grace in the hearts of
his People, filling them with longing desires after the accomplishment of that
Work which God has in hand, for his Glory. The building up of Sion externally
is attended with the building up of Grace in the hearts of true Believers: for
at such a time there will be a fresh and renewed exercise of Love to God, Fear
of God, Faith and Trust in God: yea every Grace of God's Spirit will take its
turn to be in Exercise at such a time.

4. That Mercy has a double sweetness in it, unto a Soul truly Pious, which
comes from Heaven in answer to penitential and fervent Prayer: when a Soul can
say, This is that very Mercy which I wrestled with God for; and he has heard
my Prayer and Supplication. How sweet is that Mercy!

5. Because, We continually need the directing, supporting and comforting
Presence of God with us and his cooperating Providence, both as to the
beginning and as to the progress of any Work of God which we engage in.

(1.) We need God to direct us by his Word and Spirit in every step we take in
his Service: that we may do his work after the right Order, so as may please
him: for God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. and he
made a breach upon Uzzah when he acted indiscreetly and inconsiderately in
God's Work and not after the due Order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Its matter of Joy to
Good Men to behold the Order of the Saints in their proceedings in any good
Work. Col. 2.5. and that there may not be the noise of Hammers, etc. in the
building of their Temple, 1 Kin. 6.7. that all clamor and disturbances may be
avoided, and that peace and calmness may attend us in our Undertakings; we had
need to pray earnestly to God to restrain and mortify our pride passions, envy,
self-seeking, and all other corrupt Inclinations that will be springing up in
us when we are about God's Work.

(2.) We need the assisting and comforting presence of God with us, when we set
about any good Work; should therefore pray to him to strengthen us with might
in the inner Man, Ephesians. 3.16. and that we may not faint and be weary in well
doing* Gal. 6.9. that God would encourage our hearts and strengthen our hands
in his work; and that his Work may not be marred and spoiled and prove abortive
by passing through our defiled hands.

(3.) We have need to pray for the cooperating Providence and efficiency of
God with our endeavors to build up Sion: that he would cause a Coincidence of
all things to the accomplishing his Work; that he would prevent, or give us
Wisdom and Grace to overcome, the multitude of Obstructions which Satan from
time to time endeavors to lay in the way, to stop the progress of God's Work:
and that it may appear that God himself does work with us, for us and by us. --
And that God would be pleased to supply our wants and afford us such means and
such a measure of outward Wealth as he sees is needful for the carrying on his
Work and supporting of his Worship.

6. Because we are always beholden or obliged to the Free Grace of God to
accept of our Persons and to accept of those mean Services which we do for his
Name and Glory. Such Acceptance we cannot expect unless we be Prayerful and
Penitent: and how sad a thing will it be, if all we do should be rejected of
God, and our Persons rejected also, for want of true Faith and Repentance in
us, Isai. 1.11, -- 15. Let us then offer up our selves and our poor Services
unto God in and by Christ, that they may prove an acceptable offering, of a
sweet smelling savor unto God.

7. God builds up Sion in answer to Prayer conjoined with Humiliation and
Repentance, because he will put that honor and respect upon the duty of Prayer
with Fasting and Humiliation of Soul for our Sins; which is a Duty of his
Appointment and Institution. Therefore God will so order things in his
Providence, that Christians shall find by Experience, that all Good Works which
they engage in do succeed the better when carried on by Prayer; and that the
neglect of that duty and the neglect of exercising those Graces required unto
the acceptable performance of that Duty is one cause why Religion thrives and
flourishes no more, and makes no greater progress in the World. When a Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication is poured out upon a People, then God's Work
prospers and goes forward; When Moses hands were lifted up, then Israel
prevailed. When our hands hang down (i. e. when we omit and neglect Prayer)
then the work of Christ in our hands goes on heavily and slowly.

USE.
Hence we infer, that we are this Day in the way of our duty, while we set
apart this Day to humble our Souls before God and to Supplicate at the Throne
of Grace for Mercy, in reference to the present state of the Work of God in
this Place.

This New Building wherein we are now met for the exercise of Sacred Worship,
may serve to put us in mind of the Building up of Sion, spoken of in our Text,
which is the peculiar work which God is concerned for in the this World. And
the design of Erecting this House, being for the more convenient Assembling of
God's People who inhabit in this part of your Town, with an aim at the
preservation and propagation of Religion to your Posterity; It is therefore
very needful that Prayer and Humiliation should be attended, in your progress
in this work.

But having been too large and tedious already, I shall close the Discourse
with a few Directions.

1. Let us search our Hearts, our Houses and our Conversations that we may find
out the Sins which we should this day mourn for and confess and beg Pardon of;
which if they are impenitently persisted in will obstruct God's presence with
us and his blessing upon us. Nothing can hurt us but Sin; Sin provokes the Lord
to withdraw himself from particular Persons, who indulge themselves therein.
Family Sins unreformed provoke the Lord to hide himself from such Families; and
the prevailing Sins of the Place and People where we live, bring down the
Judgments of Heaven upon the Public Society and procure the Frowns and Rebukes
of God upon us: and bring a blast on Men's endeavors, though the work be
materially Good which they set about. Let each of us labor to find out his own
iniquity; and lament it before the Lord. Is there any Sin, which we have not
yet repented of and reformed? Let us do it now, for in this work we are
engaging in, the God with whom we have to do is an Holy God, of purer Eyes than
to behold iniquity with any approbation thereof.

Let us lament the pride of our hearts, the vanity and carnality of our minds,
our conformity to the sinful courses of the carnal World, the coldness and
lukewarmness of our Affections toward God and Religion, our backwardness and
indisposedness to that which is Good, our want of Zeal against Vice, and that
we have mourned and grieved so little for the Sins prevailing in the Time and
Place where we have lived, and that we have neglected to use our utmost
influence and interest for the reforming of them. Let us mourn for our
Barrenness under the means of Grace, and that so many of us are not yet laid as
polished Stones in God's Building, namely The Church. That we have lived in
Omission of Family Prayer and of the Holy Ordinances of Divine Institution:
that we have been too negligent in giving good Counsel, Exhortations and
Reproofs unto others, especially to our own Children and Inferiors. And
whatever other Sin our Consciences cannot but charge us with, upon serious
Self-Examination; Let us mourn for it before the Lord this day.

2. Let us betake our selves by Faith unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lamb of
God who takes away the Sins of the World. Wash in the Fountain of the Blood of
Christ which is opened unto us in the Gospel. Put forth the renewed lively
actings of Faith in prayer, to lay hold on a Crucified Savior for the
obtaining the Remission of all our Sins, that we may be cleansed from the Guilt
and Filth of them; that through Christ our Peace may be renewed with God, all
matter of Controversy between God and us removed; and that we may obtain
well-grounded hopes, that God will not hide himself from us or withdraw his
gracious presence from us. We are clothed with filthy Garments (as Joshua was
after the return from Babylon) and Satan is ready to resist us; objecting that
such contemptible Persons as we are, are utterly unfit to be improved in God's
Service. Let us look up to God by Faith that these our filthy Garments may be
taken from us, and that the Robe of Christ's Righteousness may be put upon us.
Zech. 3.3, 4. and that we may be cleansed from the guilt and filth and power of
our Sins, and may be prepared by the Sanctifying virtue of the Holy Spirit unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21.

3. Let us fix and exercise our Faith, upon the gracious Promises and
Declarations of God's Will in his Word, referring to the Building up of Sion,
the preservation and propogation of Religion. Labor firmly to believe that God
will be faithful to his Promises; He will endure for ever and his Remembrance
to all Generations, ver. 12. He will yet arise and have mercy upon Sion. He is
the same God still, ver. 27. He has the same care of his Church which he ever
had. He is ready to hear us when we cry to him and call upon him for the
revival of Religion, and in order thereunto for the pouring forth of his Spirit
on his People, and on their Offspring, and for all things needful for the
advancement of his Kingdom. He has stored up Mercy in his Covenant for the
Generations to come and for the People that are yet to be created, ver. 18. for
the Children of his Servants and for their Seed, ver. 28.

It is not in vain to Supplicate to the Lord for these Favors; that the rising
Generation and those who succeed them may be privileged with a standing and
being planted within the pale of the Visible Church and under the initiatory
Seal of Baptism; that their Parents may be moved from the Love they bear to
their Children, to bring them near unto God and to offer and dedicate them unto
the Lord in their Baptism; that they may enjoy the privilege of Parental
Christian Nurture in the knowledge and fear of God, and an Education under an
Orthodox and Learned and Pious Ministry from their Youth until their riper
Years, whereby they may be formed to be a Generation whom the Lord shall take
pleasure in; of whom the Lord shall say, This People have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my Praise.

Let us this day lift up our Hearts unto God to fit us for and be with us in
those Transactions that are preparatory to the Forming a Particular Church in
this part of your Town; that there may be the renewed exercise of Faith and
Repentance in such as shall be leading in that work of Erecting a Visible Three
of Christ on Earth, and in all who shall become constituent parts of such a
Christian Society, that they may become an Holy Temple to the Lord; and that
they may be accepted of God in such a Work.

Let us Pray that the Multiplication of Churches in this Town (as well as in
others) may not prove occasions of Distance, Differences or Animosities among
Christian Friends, Neighbors or Brethren; but that all the Churches of our
Lord Jesus Christ in the Land, may walk together in Love, as so many particular
Companies in One Great Army under One and the same Head and Lord, that on
account of their Communion and amicable* Walking together they may be terrible
as an Army with Banners.

Let us Pray that your Aged, Faithful and Reverend Pastor, whose Labors and
Conduct hitherto has been very successful for the upholding and furtherance of
Christ's Kingdom in this Town, and whose Life and Abilities God has in mercy
continued; so that by his Pious Counsel and Fervent Prayers you have been
refreshed and directed and blessed in this Day of your first Assembling in your
new Building; may still have occasion to rejoice in beholding not only the Form
but the Power of Godliness upheld in all parts of this Town, and that the
finishing parts of his Time may be filled up with delight and comfort, which he
may take in the sweet savor of the Graces of God's Spirit maintained in a
flourishing state in the Hearts and Lives of God's People over whom he has for
many Years been an Overseer.

Let us Pray, That the Person on whom your Eyes are placed, to fix in this
Candlestick (if it please God to give you leave to bring your designs to an
Accomplishment) may be made a singular Blessing in his Station and Generation,
for the upholding and propogating of Religion, Peace and Order.

Let us close with that Petition, Let thy work, O Lord, appear to thy Servants
and thy Glory to our Offspring. Let the Beauty of the Lord our God be upon us,
and the work of our hands establish thou it, Psalm. 90.17.

4. Let not our Prayers be limited to our selves; but on such Occasions, when
Sion is building up in any particular place, our Thoughts, Desires and
Petitions should be enlarged and extended to other parts of the World. That
there may be a further Accomplishment of that prediction, in ver. 15. The
Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord and all Kings of the Earth thy Glory.
And in ver. 22. The People shall be gathered together and the kingdoms to serve
the Lord. Antichrist shall be destroyed, the Jews Converted and the fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in unto Christ: and that Prophecy shall yet have a
further Accomplishment, Mal. 1.10. From the rising of the Sun even to the going
down of the same, my Name shall be Great among the Gentiles and in every place
incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name shall
be Great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.

