Believers invited to Come TO CHRIST As the Author of their Resurrection AND
LIFE. In a SERMON at the Lecture In Boston, N.E. November. 10. 1715.

By Joseph Sewall, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

John, v. 25, 28, 29. Verily, verily I say unto you, The hour comes, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of GOD: and they that hear
shall live. Marvel not at this: for the hour comes, in the which all that are
in the graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth -- BOSTON: Printed by
B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop on the North-side of the Townhouse.
1716.

CHRIST IS THE Resurrection and the LIFE.
JOHN XI. 25. JESUS said unto her, I am the Resurrection, and the Life; he that
believes in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.


THE Penman of this Gospel was John the Son of Zebedee, one of the Twelve
Apostles: he was a Person so highly favored by CHRIST, that he is in Scripture
called, The Disciple whom JESUS Loved. We are told that he lived the longest of
all the Twelve Apostles. It is observed that he insists more on the proof of
CHRIST's Divinity, then any of the Evengelists, and some tell us that he wrote
this Gospel in opposition to the Heresies of Ebion and (...) who denied CHRIST'S
Divinity. Very fitly is the Eagle made his Emblem: So high did he soar in his
Discourses upon the Divinity of our Savior, so steadily did He behold the Sun
of Righteousness in His Brightness and Glory. He relates several remarkable
Passages which the other Evangelists had omitted, one of which, and that a very
signal one, we have in this Chapter; wherein we have the History of that
Illustrious Miracle (...) our Savior wrought in raising Lazarus from (...). A
History this is, which considered in all (...)'s Circumstances, will appear to
be very Wonderful and Instructive; very Entertaining, and full of Consolation.
In the History we may Observe. (1.) Lazarus was Sick. He was one whom JESUS
Loved, and yet was Sick. Good Men that are dear to CHRIST, his Friends and
Favorites, have been in all Ages Afflicted with the Infirmities and
Sicknesses, which Humane Nature is subject to in this Frail Mortal State. So
that Love or Hatred cannot be known by such Afflictive Dispensations of
Providence. (2.) His Sisters Mary and Martha send to their LORD to acquaint Him
with their Brothers illness. Observe here their Care and Concern for their Sick
Brother. They send to the great Physician both of Soul and Body, in his behalf.
Let us be very ready to do all the good and kind Offices we can for our Sick
Friends and Relations. We should be ready to send for the Physician: And above
all, we should send up our fervent Petitions to CHRIST upon the account of our
Sick Friends, and Pray to Him, without whom all Physicians are of no value, to
send forth His Word and heal them. What is a Brother, or a Sister, if not born
for such a day of Adversity? (3.) We have an account of the Journey CHRIST made
to visit the Relations of His diseased Friend Lazarus; and of the notice He
gave to His Disciples of his Death, which He at first called a Sleep. The Death
of GOD's People is like Sleep after painful Labor. When they lay down their
Heads in the Grave, they rest as in Beds, till the Resurrection, and will then
awake wonderfully refreshed. (4.) We may take Notice of Martha's going to, and
meeting with JESUS; and of the Discourse they had together. Martha Expostulates
with our Savior concerning His Delay, in something a complaiming manner, and
yet professes her Faith in CHRIST's Power, and her belief of the Resurrection.
Our Savior in answer to her Confession of Faith respecting the Resurrection;
does declare that He is the Resurrection and the Life. (5.) We may take Notice
of the tender Sympathy CHRIST had with his Mourning and Distressed Friends.
It Is said, JESUS Wept. CHRIST did truly partake of Humane Nature, and was made
like unto us, Sin excepted. In the Afflictions of His People He was Afflicted.
Their Sorrows and Sufferings made a painful Impression on His Spirit. Here we
see that He was touched with a feeling of the Infirmities and Sorrows of those
Mourners. Let us take care that the same mind may be in us, which was also in
CHRIST JESUS. And in particular, when we go to the Houses of Mourning, Let us
do it with a becoming Solemnity; let us Mourn with them that Mourn, and labor
to have a suitable Compassion for our Friends. (6.) We may take Notice of the
Wonderful Miracle our Savior wrought in raising Lazarus from the Dead. By this
Miracle upon a Body that had been Dead Four days, our Savior gave an
undeniable Testimony to the Truth which is laid down in our Text, now to be
considered. JESUS says unto her, I am the Resurrection, and the Life.

I shall not alter the Words; but propound them as they lie in the Text.

DOCTRINE.
OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST is the Resurrection, and the Life. THESE Expressions,
The Resurrection and the Life, Are, in some respects, of the same importance,
and do intend one and the same thing. However we may give each of them a
distinct Consideration.

1. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST is the RESURRECTION. Now when it is said that CHRIST
is the Resurrection, we may understand this to be the principal meaning of the
Expression; viz. That the LORD JESUS CHRIST is the Author and Efficient cause
of the Resurrection. The Bodies of Men will be raised out of their Graves by
the Almighty Power of CHRIST. Man consists of Two Parts, a Soul, which is a
Spiritual, Indivisible, Immortal Substance: And a Body, which was at first
formed out of the Dust, and must return to Dust again. When Adam had Sinned,
GOD said unto him, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return.
We all Sinned in him, and so must all taste of Death. Our Duss will in a little
time return to the Earth as it was; and the Spirit to GOD, who gave it. These
near and dear Companions, the Soul and Body must be separated: but they shall
not always continue in this state of Separation. No, The Son of GOD will at the
Last Day raise our Bodies out of their Graves, Commanding them to come forth,
as when He said, Lazarus come forth. And the Voice of CHRIST when He shall say,
Arise ye Dead, will be an Almighty Voice, such a Word of Power as spoke the
World into Being at First. He will command the Earth and Sea to give up their
Dead. He will gather the scattered Dust of the Dead Bodies of Men, and Fashion
them anew by His Power. He Will Command the dry bones to live. He will cause
Breath to enter into them, and they shall live, and stand up an exceeding great
Army: To allude to that, Ezekiel. 37.5, 10. CHRIST will in a literal sense open
their Graves, and bring them out of their Graves, and they shall live. This the
Scripture assures us, Joh. 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this: For the hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they
that have done evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation. This Great and
Wonderful Work of Raising the Dead, belongs to CHRIST's Kingly Office. He is
the LORD both of the Dead and Living. He has the Keys of Death. And at the
Last Day He will open the Graves, and Command the Dead, both the Bodies of the
Saints, and of the Wicked, to arise. CHRIST will raise the Bodies of the Wicked
by an act of Sovereign Power and Dominion. But it is of the Resurrection of the
Just which we shall speak Principally. Now it will still more Clearly appear
that the LORD JESUS CHRIST is the Author, and Efficient of the Resurrection,
with respect to His People, if we Consider.

1. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST has Purchased a Glorious and Happy Resurrection for
His People. The Bodies of Men are by Sin exposed to Ignominy and Disgrace. The
Apostasy did not only destroy the Divine Beauty of the Soul which consisted
chiefly in its Conformity to GOD in Righteousness and true Holiness; but also
it defaced the Beauty of the Body, and in a great measure marred it is Glory. The
Bodies of Men are become vile and ignoble, Comparatively. Phil. 3.21. -- Our
vile Body -- We may in this respect take up a Lamentation and say, The Crown is
fallen from our heads; woe unto us that we have sinned. The whole Head is Sick;
and the whole Heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there
is no soundness. No Man enjoys perfect Health. And how often are the Bodies of
Men the Seat and Subject of loathsome Diseases; of Wounds and Bruises, and
putrefying Sores; of great Weakness, and pining Sickness. And in a little time
these Earthly Tabernacles must Moulder down, and be Dissolved. In a little time
the Beauty and Glory that remains upon our Bodies will be laid in the Dust, and
Darkness and the Shadow of Death will stain it. But the Son of GOD has
Purchased a Glorious Resurrection for His People. The LORD JESUS CHRIST
appeared upon Earth in the likeness of Sinful Flesh. And though He was in the
form of GOD, and thought it not robbery to be equal with GOD; yet He took upon
Him the form of a servant, became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the
Cross. Though He was the LORD of Life and Glory, yet He Voluntarily submitted to
a shameful sorrowful Death. Now all this was, that the Saints might be Redeemed
from the power of the Grave: That the bands of Death might be loosed, and that
they might be brought out of the Prison of the Grave. Zech. 9.11. By the Blood
of thy Covenant I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit. By Dying,
CHRIST destroyed the power of Death. CHRIST Redeemed His People by Price; by
His Active and Passive Obedience He Purchased this Glorious Resurrection for
them, with all the Excellent Endowments and Perfective Qualities of their
Resurrection-Bodies. And in this respect CHRIST may be called the Meritorious
cause of the Resurrection of the Saints.

2. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST Rose from the Dead, and so became the Exemplar and
Pattern of the Resurrection, and the First Fruits of them that slept. The Son
of GOD Rose again from the Dead by His own Power, Joh. 10.18. I have power to
lay it down [ my Life]. and I have power to take it again. As He offered up
Himself to GOD through the Eternal Spirit, i. e. His Eternal Godhead, His
Divine Nature; so He arose again by the Almighty Power of the same Divine
Nature. CHRIST raised up the Temple of His Body by that Power which He has in
common with the Father and the Holy Spirit. Joh. 2.19. And then in the
Resurrection of His Body, the Son of GOD has given us the Pattern and Exemplar
according to which the Resurrection-Bodies of His People shall be Molded and
Fashioned. For their vile Bodies shall be Changed and Fashioned like to
CHRIST's Glorious Body.

AGAIN, CHRIST by His Resurrection is become the First Fruits of them that
slept. 1 Cor. 15.20. But now is CHRIST risen from the dead, and become the
first fruits of them that slept. As the First Fruits being offered to GOD,
under the Law, sanctified the whole, and were also an Earnest of the full
Harvest: so in CHRIST's Resurrection, the People of GOD have an Earnest,
Pledge, and Assurance of their own Resurrection to Glory and Immortality.
Accordingly the Apostle argues in, 1 Cor. 15.12. Now if CHRIST be Preached that
He rose from the Dead, how say some among you, that there is no Resurrection of
the Dead? The Apostle speaks of it as a very absurd unreasonable thing to deny
the Resurrection of Believers, whenas there were such undeniable Proofs and
Testimonies of CHRIST's being raised from the Dead. When our Savior arose
again, He brought forth Judgment unto Victory, and gave His People an evident
Demonstration that He had conquered Death in their behalf. For He rose from the
Dead as a Public Person, the Head and Representative of all true Believers.
They are the Members of CHRIST; and CHRIST Mystical is not perfected till all
the Saints are risen. So that in CHRIST's Resurrection Believers have an
Assurance of their own Resurrection. When the Son of GOD, the Strong the Mighty
Redeemer awoke out of Sleep, He took away the Gates of the Grave, and carried
away the Bars of the Pit. And the Scripture informs us, that the Graves were
then opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept, arose. And came out of the
Graves after his Resurrection, Mat. 27.52, 53. This Miraculous Work was a
Specimen of the General Resurrection; and a plain proof and Indication of the
Infinite Virtue of CHRIST's Death and Resurrection.

3. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST will at the Last Day, raise the Dead Bodies of the
Saints by His Almighty Power, as He is their Head and Redeemer. This will not
be merely an Act of His Common Sovereign Power, as He is Head over all things:
But also an Act of Grace and especial Favor, as He is their LORD Redeemer, and
their Head. Vital powerful influences will flow from CHRIST as the Head of His
body, the Church, unto His Members to quicken and raise their Dead Bodies, and
to make them Incorruptible, Immortal, Glorious. This the Scripture does
abundantly declare; 1 Cor. 15.22, 45. For as in Adam all die, even so in CHRIST
shall all be made alive. -- The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. Phil.
3.20, 21. For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, the LORD JESUS CHRIST: who shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself. CHRIST will adorn the Bodies of
the Saints with the like Excellent and Glorious Qualities, with which His own
Body is Beautified and Dignified: Not the same in Degree, but as to Kind:
CHRIST's Body will mightily Excel in Glory. Another Signal Testimony to the
Resurrection we have in the Old Testament. Job. 19.23. to 27. inclusively. Oh
that my words were now written! Oh that they were Printed in a Book! That they
were graven with an iron Pen and Lead, in the Rock for ever! For I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter Day upon the Earth. And
though after my skin, worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see GOD:
whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another;
though my Reins (...) consumed within me. Observe here, with what an August
Speech he ushers in the Confession of his Faith, concerning the Resurrection.
He would have this great, important Truth Written in a Book, or Engraven upon
some Monument that should be durable like the Pillars of Heaven, that so it
might be consecrated to Eternity, and handed down to the latest Posterity, in
Characters which Time should not be able to Efface. When Death, that great
Devourer, whose Mouth is an open Sepulcher, has done it is worst, destroyed not
only the outward Parts, the Skin and Flesh; but also preyed upon the more
inward, vital Parts, the Reins; and brought Rottenness into the Bones, and
consumed the Marrow: Yet after all, the Son of GOD, that numbers the Hairs of
our Heads, and knows all the Atoms that fly in the Air; that sees into the
dark Recesses of the Grave, and has them open and naked to His All-seeing Eye:
He will preserve the scattered Dust of His People and out of this very Dust, He
will frame and fashion their Bodies, with curious and wonderful Art; with
Infinite and Divine Skill. But it is not my present Purpose, to Essay a
Description of the Resurrection-Body in it is Beauty and Glory, Strength and
Agility, Immortality and Incorruptibility; you may Read the 1 Cor. 15. Chap. at
your Leisure. Only we may take Notice, that the Resurrection-Bodies of the
Saints will not be mere Ethereal Vehicles, or of such a fine Substance as
shall escape the Sight, and become Invisible; No, No; They will be proper
Organical Bodies. Job says, that though worms destroy this Body, yet in My
Flesh shall I see GOD, -- And Mine Eyes shall behold, and not another. Unless
we acknowledge this, we in effect destroy One Essential, Constituent Part of Man.

II. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST is LIFE. Now this Expression as we hinted before,
may be looked upon as of the same Import and Signification with the former, and
as Exegetical of it. However, having considered the former Expression in a
strict and proper Sense, as it respects the Resurrection of the Body; we may
speak something, very briefly, unto this, without interfering with what has
been already said.

1. CHRIST as GOD, is Life Essentially. He is the Living GOD. All Degrees of
Life are contained in Him by way of Eminency. He possesses a Fullness of Life
and Being, Unchangibly and Everlastingly; without any possibility of Decay, or
the least approach toward a Dissolution. He is the Everliving JEHOVAH, the
Eternal I AM. His Life is in and of Himself. There are no Seeds or Principles
of Corruption in His Nature; and nothing from without, that can in any Measure
disturb, much less destroy His Being. The Angels shall never Die; But then GOD
gave them their Being at first, and they depend entirely upon Him for the
Continuance of it: Did not He uphold them by putting His Everlasting Arms
underneath them, they would instantly sink and retire into their first State of
Notbeing. But CHRIST is altogether, and absolutely Independent upon any thing
without Himself; both for Life and the Continuance of it.

2. CHRIST is Life Causally and Virtually. CHRIST as GOD, is the Universal
Principle and Spring of Life. He is the Fountain, from whence all Kinds of Life
flow, and are derived. In Him we live, and move, and have our being. He made
all Things, and upholdeth them all in Being. He is the first Cause of the
Vegetative, Animal, and Rational Life. John 1, 3, 4. All things were made by
Him, and without Him was not any thing made that was made. In Him was Life, and
the Life was the Light of Men. The Son of GOD gave Life to every Living
Creature; He formed the Spirit of Man within him which is the Candle of the
Lord.

3. THE LORD JESUS CHRIST is He is GOD Man Mediator, the Savior and Redeemer
of His People, is their Life. And this seems to be principally intended in our
Text. CHRIST is the Prince of Life. Joh. 14.6. JESUS says unto him, I am the
way, and the truth and the life: no Man comes to the Father but by Me. Sin
has cut us off from GOD, as He is the Fountain of Spiritual Life. And it is in
CHRIST alone that this Fountain is opened to such Sinners as we are. CHRIST
Died that His People might Live; and He ever lives to Communicate Life to them.
He who is the true and faithful Witness testifies of Himself, Rev. 1.18. I am
He that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and
have the Keys of Hell and of Death. CHRIST is a Priest, Who is made not after
the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless Life, Heb.
7.16. And He is able to Save them to the uttermost that come to GOD by Him,
because He ever lives to make Intercession for them.

(1.) CHRIST creates the New Nature, and forms the Spiritual Life in His
People. He makes those who were Dead in Trespasses and Sins, Alive to GOD, by
forming the Divine Image in their Souls. He gives this Light of Life to His
People, that sat in the Region and Shadow of Death. Every true Believer has a
Spiritual Resurrection through CHRIST. Joh. 5.25. Verily, Verily, I say unto you,
The hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of GOD: And they that hear shall live.

(2.) THROUGH CHRIST Believers who were Condemned to Die, receive the
Justification of Life. Romans 5.18. -- The free Gist came upon all Men unto
Justification of Life.

(3) IT is through CHRIST that the Spiritual Life of GOD's People is maintained
and increased, till it be perfected in Glory, Gal. 2.20. I am Crucified with
CHRIST: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but CHRIST lives in me: And the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of GOD, who loved
me, and gave Himself for me. Believers receive those vital Influences from
CHRIST whereby the New Man is kept alive, fed and nonrish'd, till it be grown
to the Stature of a perfect Man in CHRIST.

(4.) THE LORD JESUS CHRIST gives His People Everlasting Life. At the Great
Day, Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. Then CHRIST, who is the Life of
His People, shall appear. Then will their Life be perfected for ever; and they
shall enter upon the Heavenly Life, which shall never never have an end. John
10.28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish --

APPLICATION.
USE I. LEARN what grent Reason we have to Bless GOD, in that we have the
Gospel, wherein CHRIST is Revealed and Offered to us. The Apostle says, that
GOD Saved us, and Called us with an Holy Calling not according to our Works,
but according to His own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in CHRIST JESUS,
before the World began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST, who has Abolished Death, and hatl. brought Life and
Immortality to light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. It Is a great and
unspeakable Favor to enjoy the Means of obtaining an Interest in CHRIST; O let
us take care to Prise and Improve them: And be Earnest with GOD to Enlighten
our Minds, that we may come to know GOD and CHRIST, whom to know is Life
Eternal. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of Me. It Is a wonderful Mercy that such
Sinful, Mortal, Dying Creatures as we are, should have the Discoveries of an
Happy, and Glorious Resurrection made to us through CHRIST. The Lord grant that
it may not be said of us, that we refuse to come to Him that we might have Life.

USE II. IS CHRIST the Resurrection and the Life; Learn hence, That it is our
great Interest as well as Duty, to employ all the Powers and Faculties of Soul
and Body, in His Service. If we would hope to obtain an happy Resurrection, we
must now Glorify GOD with our Souls and Bodies, which are His. It Is our
Interest to lay out our selves to the utmost in the Work and Service of CHRIST.
We should very gladly spend and be spent for CHRIST; Yea, be ready to Sacrifice
our very Lives for His sake, if His Glory calls for it for He will give all His
Faithful Servants a much better Life than this we now enjoy. Be this faithful
unto Death, and I will give thee a (...) of Life, Rev. 2.10. Let us take care
to make our Bodies Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness. Let us improve
these Earthen Vessels Diligently and Faithfully in Gods Service; and then
CHRIST will One Day Refine them, and make them Vessels of Honor and Glory.

USE III. THIS Consideration should make the Children of GOD Patient,
Submissive, and Cheerful, under all the Pains, Weakness, and Sickness, they
suffer in this Frail, Mortal State. The Children of GOD are subject to the same
Infirmities and Bodily Pains as others are. They may many times say, that they
have no Soundness in their Flesh. Many times they may complain with the
Psalmist, That they are weak, and their Bones are vexed, Psalm. 6.2. O Believer,
have thou frequent Returns of Pain and Illness? Well, see that you quietly and
patiently Resign up your self to the Sovereign Will of GOD. Do not Faint, or
Fret, when thou art thus Rebuked of the LORD. Thy Redeemer is by these
Afflictive Dispensations of Providence, preparing thee for an Happy
Resurrection. And when they Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, thou
shall never more complain of Sickness; but thy Health and Strength shall be
perfected for ever. Rev. 21.4. And GOD shall wipe away all Tears from their
Eyes; and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow nor Crying, neither
shall there be any more Pain, for the former things are passed away.

USE IV. THIS should support the People of GOD undo the near Approaches of
their own Death. There is a close and very intimate Union between the Soul and
Body, so that a Dissolution is dreadful to Nature. But the Children of God
should labor to overcome this Reluctance by Faith in CHRIST, and a firm Belief
of the Resurrection. And Certainly, seeing their Redeemer is the Resurrection
and the Life, they have no need to fear any Evil with Amazement; though they
should walk though the valley of the shadow of Death. Do any of the Children of
GOD find their Earthly Tabernacles so out of Repair, that they cannot stand
long? Are the Infirmities of Age come upon you; Do the Keepers of the House
tremble; Do the strong Men how themselves, and the Grinders cease because they
are few; And are those that look out of the Windows darkened? Be not afraid,
encourage your selves in the LORD JESUS CHRIST: Go out to meet the King of
Terrors, leaning on your Beloved; Give all Diligence to make your Interest in
CHRIST clear and evident to your Souls; Take your JESUS in the Arms of your
Faith, and then with Simeon, Bless GOD, and say, Now let thou Thy servant
depart in Peace, according to Thy Word. For mine Eyes have seen Thy Salvation,
Luke 2.29, 30.

USE V. THIS should Comfort such as are Bereaved of Pious Relatives. 1 These.
4.13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if
we Believe that JESUS died, and rose again; even so them also which sleep in
JESUS, will GOD bring with Him. The Children of GOD when they Die, Sleep in
JESUS; and in the Morning of the Resurrection, they shall Awake to Everlasting
Life. Wherefore comfort one another with these Words.

TO Conclude, O let us all Bless GOD for JESUS CHRIST; and see that we Receive
Him who is the Resurrection and the Life. Let us Pray to GOD to help us to
Believe, and Realize this great, mysterious Truth. O that it were written on
our Hearts with the Finger of GOD! Let us Pray to GOD that we may be begotten
again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST from the Dead, to
an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1. -- 3, 4. In a Dying Hour, such an Hope well
Bottomed is worth Ten Thousand Worlds. Let not the Amusements of this vain
World, who is Fashion passes away, hinder us from laying hold of this Hope
which is now set before us through CHRIST. We are Mortal, Dying Creatures; our
Life is a Vapor, and we know not what a Day may bring forth. Let us then to
Day, while it is called to Day, make haste to CHRIST. Let us now take care to
walk in Newness of Life; and then when we come to Die, we shall have Hope in
our Death. And at the Great Day CHRIST will Call, and we shall Answer Him; He
will Raise our Bodies out of the Dust, to Glory and Honor. This Corruptible,
shall put on Incorruption, this Mortal shall put on Immortality; Death shall be
swallowed up in Victory, and we shall sing that Triumphant Song, 1 Cor. 15.55,
57. O Deat, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory! Thanks be to
GOD, which gives us the Victory, through on LORD JESUS CHRIST.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
NOW in the Press and will speedily be Published. The Communicant's Companion;
Or, Instructions and Helps for the Right Receiving of the Lord's Supper.

By Matthew Henry, Minister of the Gospel.

THE History of the Holy JESUS. Containing, A Brief account of the Birth and
Life, the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Blessed Savior: And of the
Prophesies, Predictions, and Prodigies relating to Him; Recorded both in Holy
Writ, and other Gentile Authors. To which is added, The Lives and Deaths of the
Holy Evangelists and Apostles. Collected from the Holy Scriptures; the Writings
of the Ancient Fathers, and other Authors of Undoubted Verity.

By William Smith, A. M. The Eleventh Edition.

Both Reprinted, and to be Sold by Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop on the North
side of the Townhouse in King Street, Boston.


