Judgment Begun at the House of GOD And the Righteous scarcely SAVED.

Blessed Peter's Prophecy of a dreadful Time of Visitation, Considered; with
his Alarm to the Godly; Advertizing them of their Danger, and Inciting their
Precaution, and necessary Armament: And his Praemonition concerning the Ensuing
Catastrophie of the Carnal and Ungodly.

Truths not Unsuitable for the Present Generations to Think on, Considering
what Times are now in View.

By John Danforth, A. M. Pastor of the Church at Dorchester.

Boston, Printed by J. Allen, for N. Boon at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill. 1716.

Judgment Begun at the House of GOD.
1 PETER IV. 17, 18, 19. For the Time is come that Judgment must begin at the
House of GOD; and if it first Begin at us, what shall the End be of them that.
Obey not the Gospel of GOD! And if the Righteous be scarcely Saved, Where shall
the Ungodly and Sinner appear? Wherefore let them that suffer according to the
Will of GOD, Commit the keeping of their Souls to HIM, in Well-Doing, as unto a
Faithful Creator.


THE Great Immanuel, GOD the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is GOD and Man,
is, by Delegation from GOD the Father, the Supreme Magistrate, the Lord of
Providence, and Absolute Paramount, Sovereign of the Church and World, Visible
and Invisible. In His Government, His Perfections of Sovereignty and Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, Grace and Holiness, Mercy and Faithfulness, Justice and
Equity, are gloriously Resplendent. To strict Justice appertain His Commanding,
Rewarding and Punishing, as a Judge Vindictive: To Grace and Mercy belong His
Commanding, Rewarding, Punishing, Forbearing, and Pardoning as a Father; His
Dispensations Refer either to the whole World, or to Particular Nations,
Provinces, and Societies, and Families, or to Individual Persons. And forasmuch
as the Infliction of Punishment upon Multitudes of Sinners of all sorts, at one
and the same time or season; has a Tendency to strike the greater Terror, and
to prevent the more Transgression, and to demonstrate the Lord's most impartial
hatred of Sin; therefore, after seasons of Long-suffering, and general Clemency
and Beneficence, the LORD has His Remarkable Times of Judgment, or of Judicial
Dispensation, wherein whole Nations, and all sorts of Persons in them, suffer
Tribulation and Calamity; some for their Saving Amendment, and others for their
Utter Destruction. 'Twas such a Time with the Jewish Nation, and with many
Gentiles also, in the Days of the Emperor Vespasian, when their Iniquity was
full; whereof our Blessed SAVIOR, and His Apostles premonished Them; And in
our Text, the Apostle Peter, gives 'em most solemn Advertisement,

1. Of the near Approach of that Time of Judgment: [ For the Time is Come:]

2. Of the Objects of its Influence, which are of two sorts [called, some of
them, The House of GOD, or His Household, and the Righteous, and Us, that is
Peter and his Fellow Christians; and Others of them, The Ungodly and Sinners,
and such as Obey not the Gospel of GOD: The Paenal Dispensations of those Days,
should Affect both sorts.

3. Of the Order of Dispensation; wherein the Priority is Assigned to the
Godly; [ Judgment must begin at the House of God.]

4. Of the Measure and Degrees of the Dispensation of Judgment, and of its
Issues and Events to the Godly, and to the Wicked; and he leaves it to their
own Sanctified Reason, and enlightened Understandings to judge, how vastly
different they would be: [ If Judgment first begin at Us, What shall the End be
of them that Obey not the Gospel of GOD? As if He should have said, your Reason
will tell you it will be superlatively miserable and dreadful; The Wicked shall
be in a much worse Condition than the Godly, when the Great Judge takes them in
Hand: If He is so impartially severe to His Children, in His Correcting of 'em
as their Father; How terrible and ruinous unto 'em will the incurably Wicked
find it to be, to be made to drink off the Dregs of the Lethal Cup of His
fierce Wrath and Hatred, as their Almighty and Everlasting Vindictive Judge and
Enemy: [And Where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear?] What will become of
them? They shall be cut off from the Earth, and they shall have no Salvation,
and Mansion in Heaven, (as the Learned Piscator shows, and the course of the
Apostles Argument strongly imports it;] and therefore in Hell will they lift up
their Eyes, being in Torments, as Dives, Luke 16. They will appear there.

5 Of its being the Occasion at least, of extraordinary Temptations, and of
extremity of Difficulty and Hazard to some of the Godly: So that they shall
find it next to impossible, to avoid Everlasting Destruction; and that they
must strain every Nerve to steer clear of Hell; and that they will have a very
narrow Escape to Heaven; and will be beholden to very Superior Acts both of
Grace and Omnipotency for that too. [ Thus the Righteous are scarcely saved;]
or (as the Original Word [ Molis] may be also rendered) with huge Difficulty;
Implying, that tho, the Elect's, passing through the strait Gate, and their
running in the narrow Way, and their daily Warfare with their Internal,
External, and Infernal Enemies, and their Fitting for Heaven, and Getting to
Heaven, are always, even in Times of most Gracious Dispensation, attended with
no small Danger and Difficulty; yet that in those Times of Gracious
Dispensation, its much EASIER in diverse regards, to Prosecute an Escape from
the Infernal Pit, and to Pursue the Race to Heaven, than in Times of Judicial
Execution. However, though the Righteous, (that is, the Upright) be scarcely
Saved; They shall be surely Saved notwithstanding; and so shall not the wicked
Reprobates be.

6. Of the Duty and Relief of the Godly, when in extreme difficulty and hazard
in such Judicial and Calamitous Days, viz.

1. To Eye and Consider the Will and Providence of GOD, that brings them into
Sufferings, and to yield and submit thereto. [To Consider themselves as
suffering by the Will of GOD.]

2. To maintain a constant Practice, and a Good Conscience of Well-Doing; in a
Way of Obedience to the Gospel of GOD.

3. Also their Souls being Created, (not Generated like their Bodies,) and the
LORD having Promised to Receive them, and make them blessed, when they depart
from their Bodies; And He being a most Faithful GOD to perform all that He has
Promised; 'Twould be their Duty and Relief to Commit their Souls unto GOD, when
their Bodies are to suffer Death, to repose and secure their Departing Spirits
into the sweet and unfailing Arms of their Reconciled Creator's Love and
Faithfulness. [ Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their Souls unto HIM in Well-doing, as unto a Faithful
Creator.]

The First Doctrine from this Text that I propose to speak to at this time as
God shall help, is this, viz.

1. That at the Coming of Times of Destroying Judgment upon very wicked
Nations, Judgment is wont first to Begin in a Corrective Way, at the House of
GOD; and then sometimes, there are such Hours of violent Temptation, and
intolerable Oppression and Distress permitted to pass over the best Christians
in those Nations, as wherein their Souls are endangered, and their Faith and
Holiness put into extreme Hazard, so as very narrowly to Escape an utter
Overthrow; and the Difficulty of keeping in the Way to Heaven is made
wonderfully great and extraordinary.

Prop. 1. Judgment usually First Begins in a Corrective Way at the House of
GOD. As good Figs are first plucked, and welted, and pressed down hard into a
Cask, and then the refuse and corrupt Figs are given over to be trampled,
devoured, and utterly destroyed. So the Best in Judah were first carried
Captive into Caldea for their Good, and then the incorrigibly Wicked were
delivered to the Sword, Famine and Pestilence, to be consumed: Jer. 24.1, --
10. The Cup of Fury is first given to Jerusalem, and then to Egypt, and other
wicked Nations: Jer. 25.15, -- 25. and 49.12. GOD's Sanctuary has the first
handsel of Judgment: Ezekiel. 9.6. The Lord says to the Land of Israel, I will
cut off from thee, the Righteous and the Wicked, Ezekiel. 21, 3, 4. And first the
Righteous are to be cut off, and sent to Heaven, before the most Ruinous Evil
is Inflicted on the Wicked: Isai. 57.1. Our LORD Praedicted that the Days of
Vengeance and Wrath should come upon the Jewish Nation, to their dreadful and
horrendous Overthrow; But that first His Disciples must be hated of all men,
and Persecuted. Luke 21.10, 11, 12, 22, 23, 24.

Quest. Why is it meet that Judgment should begin Correctively at the House of
GOD, and that Regenerate Righteous Men should not be exempted from it?

Answ. Though it is not for finite and clouded Understandings, (such as ours are,)
to presume over-curiously to search into Heavens Mysteries of Government, and
Reasons of State; and who can by searching find 'em out unto Perfection? Yet
enough being Revealed, not only to silence Objectors, but to satisfy and ravish
the most inquisitive Minds. We shall with Reverence and Humility suggest a few
Particulars, by way of Answer to that Enquiry, as to what we scantly apprehend
of that Mystery, which in its full latitude, is to us Incomprehensible. We
acknowledge, that Mercy is GOD's Attribute and Delight, and that the Godly are
His Favorites; and that He does His Work, his strange Work, and brings to pass
His Act, His Strange Act, when He Crushes them with the Wheel of Judgment; Isai
(...). But as to the Sufferers of Judg^^^^

1. They must blame themselves for Provoking it, and that they need such
dreadful Severity: They first commit sin before they smart for it; and were they
not woefully prone to it, Providence would not plant the Thorn-Hedge, nor draw
the Flaming Sword to prevent 'em: Vile Rust first defiles 'em, before GOD's
sharp File comes to take it off: The Gold sullies, before it is scoured: The
poisonous swelling of the dangerous Tumor, necessitates its painful and bloody
Launcing: Bitter Potions must be given to prevent a dangerous Relapse: The
Persons of the Godly are freed by JESUS CHRIST, from the Hostile Hatred of GOD;
Their guilty Obligation unto Everlasting Punishment and Vengeance, and to all
that Evil Temporal and Spiritual that absolutely assures it, is Cancelled by
their Great Pardon in their Justification upon their First Union with CHRIST,
by the Spirit and Faith; But by their subsequent sinful Excursions, they
multiply their guilty Exposedness to suffer Corrective Punishments that may be
inflicted on 'em to their smart; not to make any satisfaction at all to the
Absolutely Vindictive Justice of GOD for their Sins, for that is already fully
done by the Blood of their Redeemer; but to show forth His Holiness, and that
His Impartial Hatred of Sin, wherever He sees it, may shine forth, and that,
to the Everlasting Glory of His Grace, Wisdom, and Power, He may wonderfully
work, unto the utter quashing, and subduing of their remaining Corruptions, and
may prevent their breaking forth, even by the Oppressions and Distresses, that
naturally tend to inflame, irritate, and strengthen 'em. Are there two Divine
Courts, one of Eternally Vindictive Justice, another of Fatherly Discipline,
and merciful Government? It Is to the latter of 'em that the Saints must Cry for
new Pardons for their daily Transgressions, and which before those Pardons are
granted, inflicts the Punishments, when Judgment begins at the House of GOD. As
after they are obtained, Fatherly Sovereignty yet proves their Patience and
other Graces, with Trials of the first magnitude, sometimes not Paenal, but of
Free Grace, to be Recompensed with far more exceeding and eternal weights of
Glory.

2. Yea even proper Corrective Punishments though not Joyous but Grievous, yet
serve to prepare 'em for the more Joy. Often where the Lord intends the most
Comfort, He ushers it in with the more Sorrow, to prevent surfeiting, and to
secure their greater Humility and Thankfulness. The Sorrows of the true Church,
are but Travailing Pains to bring forth Triumphs. Joh. 16.20, 21. Black Roots
bear beautiful Flowers; The prodigious Fish that swallowed Jonah, brought him
to the Shore: Dark Colors prepare for an Overlaying of Gold: Jacob was first
Lamed unto Halting, and then Blessed by the ANGEL of the Covenant. The Cross in
the Covenant makes way for the Crown. The Pleasures that attend and follow our
Enduring of Affliction with the People of GOD, are far more Eligible, than the
Pleasures of Sin. The Physician's love to the Patient, gives the Griping
Medicines that produce a long and joyful Health. Whom the LORD loves, He
Chasteneth for their profit, that they may be partakers of His Holiness,
without which no man shall see the LORD, Heb. 12.6, 9, 10, 14. Precious Spice
is thoroughly pounded, to yield forth its most refreshing Fragrancy and Virtue.
Painters Grind with vile Pebblestones their richest Colors for their most
glorious Pictures. Which leads to a Third Consideration.

3. Wicked men the viler they are, are the fitter Instruments, being sharpened
with Spite and Rage, to cut deep gashes in the Godly. The Assyrian, who was the
Rod of GOD's Anger, must not be cast into the Fire of destroying Judgment, till
the LORD had performed his whole work of Corrective Judgment on Zion, first of
all by his cruel Hand. Isa. 10.5.12. Therefore Judgment first begins at the
House of GOD; and the Wicked that often Execute it, are reserved to suffer
last, and ripen themselves for suffering by their doing it; their Outrages
against the Godly, filling up the measure of their Iniquity, that so Judgment
may come upon 'em to the uttermost; the Righteousness whereof appears most
unexceptionable in that being Warned and Advertised of the Impartial Justice of
GOD, and His terrible Hatred of Sin, by His Severity on His People, they yet
Sin with the more desperateness; so that to wait any longer for their hopeless
Recovery were vain. Thus are the Wicked left without Excuse in Sinning, and cut
off from all Hope of Escaping; and when they are Destroyed, this clears up the
Glory of GOD's Justice, that has put an End to His Patience; They hereby
appearing to have been Incorrigible. And if the Exuberances of green Trees must
feel the sharp pruning Knife, What shall be done to the dry? The Lord does not
spare His own dear Children when they sin, much less will He spare His Enemies.
Cannot all the Graces and Good Works of Saints exempt them from sharp Strokes,
How then can the Wicked escape? Prove. 11.31. Well, it is meet that the Wicked do
their Work before they receive their Wages, and that they fulfill GOD's Designs,
though besides their own Intention. Isai. 10.7. And that they have the Warning,
though they will not take it, and that their mouths be stopped, but not their
Execution* therefore Judgment first begins at the House of GOD, though it ends
in their Ruin only.

Prop. 2. Such Hours of violent Temptation and Distress sometimes come upon the
Godly, in Judicial Times, as fence up their Way to Heaven, with terrible
Difficulties and Dangers; so that they are scarcely saved. Verily, the way of
Christianity, which is the only way that leads to Eternal Life, even in the
times that are not Judicial, is strait and difficult, and lined with dangers.
Mat. 7.13, 14. Luke 13.24. and few there be that find it; and they who find it,
find it very hard to keep it. It lies in a Mystery. 1 Timothy 3.16. The Right Eye
must be Plucked out, and Hand and Foot Cut off, if ever men enter into Life.
Mat. 18.8, 9. It Is an hard thing to be Saved; Yea, with man it is impossible,
and only possible with God. Mat. 19.23. -- 26. Ye cannot serve the Lord, says
Joshua. Josh. 24.19. It is not of him that Wills or Runs. To. 9.16. The
Way to Life is not unfitly compared to the Way of the Children of Israel from
Egypt to Canaan, which was through the Sea, and through a vast and howling
Wilderness, a Land of fiery flying Serpents, Rocks, Sands, Pits, Drought, and
of the shadow of Death, a Land that no man passed through, and where no man
dwelt; a most tedious, difficult and dangerous Way. The Journey to Heaven is
likened to a Race; the Saint in Running it, will find himself put to it, to
strive hard, and to stretch and strain every Limb and Nerve, to win the Prize.
Heb. 12.1. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. Yea, it is a Warfare, and continual Battle, in which
there is difficulty, hardship and danger enough. Ephesians. 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Cor.
9.26, 27

BUT when will the way of Life cease to be Difficult and Dangerous? I answer,
When 'twill be easy for an huge Camel to be spun into so fine a thread, as to
pass through the Eye of a Needle, (a thing as hard and painful, as dangerous!)
Mat. 19.24. When there shall be no more flesh or corruption in a Saint, to make
its violent and virulent Oppositions and Oppressions; Romans 8.7. When Worldly
Lusts, Objects, Delights, and Enchantments have left off to war against the
Soul; Mat. 13. 1 Pet. 2.11. And when the bloody Dragons of Hell, and their
instruments, shall never more Oppose this Way, nor obstruct and depress those
that walk in it, with their utmost fraud and force, and spite and rage; then
will this Way to Life Eternal, be free of difficulty and hazard. But Oh! how
hard till then! Yet it leads to the best Ease and Rest, Spiritual and Eternal;
yet it is to the New Creature, a Way of Pleasantness, and all its Paths are
Peace. ( Mat. 11.29. Prove. 3.17.) May we but keep therein, though with the
greatest Difficulty! But the Famous Mr. Shepard, in his Sincere Convert, has
sufficiently proved, that the Few that are Saved, are Saved with great
Difficulty: And certainly they pass through great Danger too, else why should
they be Commanded to Work out their Salvation with fear and trembling? Phil.
2.12.

Quest. BUT, What are the Saints in such extreme danger of, in Judicial Times,
and Hours of violent Temptation and Distress, they being in a State of Grace,
and safe for Eternal Life? which is inseparable from Regeneration and
Justification.

Answ. HAVING Provoked GOD by their former Sins in Times of Prosperity. By
their Neglects of HIM, and of His Great Salvation; by their waxing lukewarm in
Religion, and Practical Godliness, and losing much of the POWER of it; by their
Symbolizing with the Men of the World, and suffering themselves to be
Overcharged intemperately with Meats, Drinks, and Cares of this Life; by their
Mutual Contentions, and want of Brotherly Kindness; by their Security, Laxness,
Licentiousness, and Prostituting of GOD's Holy Table to the Profane, etc. They
in Judicial Times, when the LORD lays Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness
to the Plummet, and is raised up in His Holy Habitation unto Wrath, because of
the Provokings of His Sons and of His Daughters, and is Resolved to Plead out
His Controversy with them.

1. THEY WILL be in danger of very Great and Awful Withdrawments of the Gracious
Presence and Influences of GOD: The LORD perhaps will never more in this World,
be so Intimate with their Souls, as formerly He vouchsafed to be; They Will be
forced to Cry out, as sometimes David did, LORD! Take not Thy Holy Spirit from
us! and to Complain, O LORD, when we Cry out, Thou hear not, but shuttest
out our Prayers: and that when they seek Him in His House and Ordinances, they
find Him not: and when they wait on Him, that there are no Answers from GOD, no
Influences from GOD; and that the LORD has, though not totally and utterly, yet
in a great degree Forsaken them.

2. They Will be in danger of Great and Dismal Impairments of their Gifts and
Graces: They Will find that their Light increases not, but decays; and that they
grow Children in Understanding, wavering in the Truth, and tossed to and fro
with various winds of Doctrine, and are filled with Doubts and Darkness, and
some of 'em near drowned, sometimes in the Flood of Error and Heresy: They Will
find also their Faith in GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, lamentably failing of
its former Activity; and a doleful decay of their first Love and Zeal, and
Heavenly-mindedness, and Patience, and Charity, and Purity growing upon them;
so that they will sometimes sigh, and say, O we cannot Repent, we cannot Believe,
we cannot Pray, we cannot Love GOD; Alas! What shall we do?

3. They Will be in danger of being very much, for a time, given over to the
Power of Satan; and to have Spiritual Plagues inflicted upon them; and then
will they grow Useless, as broken Vessels, as to all good Purposes; and do
become for the time, the wretched tools and instruments of the Devil; and will
find also, that because by their Evil Deeds, they have made the Enemies of the
LORD to Blaspheme, therefore the Sword shall not depart from their House, and
that perhaps they themselves may fall in the Common Calamity, and that Their
GOD is a Consuming Fire, so as that though He Will forgive 'em, and give 'em
Repentance, yet He Will take Vengeance on their Inventions: So fearful is it to
fall into the hands of the Living GOD. Ah Lord God! Who knows the Power of
thine Anger? and all the Terrors of the LORD, and of His Fatherly Wrath, which
sometimes is like the Wrath or an Enemy, Who can bear them? This is GOD's
Strange Act; and it is dreadful work indeed: And He does it, that so His
Children may be greatly Afraid of GOD, (as David, when Vzza was smitten,) and
may Tremble at Sinning, with an holy Horror and Abhorrence of it. But let us
Consider these things more particularly.

1. They Are in danger of being smitten by the Divine Judgment, with a Spiritual
Lethargy and Stupidity; ununder which their Hearts will be Hardened from GOD's
Fear, and they will Err from His Ways; and they will grow Cold, Dry, Insipid, as to
Spiritual Things; Negligent of Religion; Unsavory, Atheistical, Proud, Vain,
Earthly-minded; Having their Consciences feared as with a red hot Iron; and
though ready to be Pressed to Death with intolerable Loads of Guilt, they will not
feel it, but make it their daily work to lay on more Weight; But they will have
no Sacrifices of Broken and Contrite Spirits for GOD's Altar. Thus it is with
many Thousands in the Day of GOD's Anger (who as Job speaks) have yet the Root
of the Matter in them, and the Seed of GOD, although sadly buried under the
Clods: And many Wise Virgins (as in the Parable) are so overwhelmed with their
Sick Sleep, as to Lie for Dead, for a Season, and but Few Waking Noah's and
Daniels left in a Nation.

2. They are in danger of being Judicially Given over to make Affinity with
False Worshippers, to Marry the Daughters of a Strange GOD, which will prove
snares to their Souls, and they will grow easy in the seeing and hearing of, and
in tampering (against their Light and Conviction) with Superstition, and
Idolatry, and Abominable Worship, which GOD's Soul hates; and when GOD's
Zealous Ministers do lift up their Voice, like a Trumpet, they will be very
Angry, and fall out with 'em (as once King Asa was wroth with the Seer,) and
then the most of their faithful Prophets being taken to Heaven, or Banished
from 'em by Persecution, they will be fitted with a Set of Men, in their stead,
of a Vile Spirit; Like People, like Priests; Blind Leaders of the Blind;
Teachers that will cause them to Err, and Daub with Untempered Mortar, and
Prophesy Peace to the Wicked, to prevent their turning from their Evil Ways.

3. THEY will moreover in such a Dreadful Day of Visitation, be (many of 'em)
Judicially Left to fall into Gross Scandals; such as Drunkenness, Vain
Company-keeping, Fornication, Unrighteous-Dealing, Profane Swearing and
Cursing, Bitter Contention, Scoffing, Disobedience to Superiors, Headiness,
Mutiny, and Murder, to the Disgrace of their Holy Profession, the Opening of
the Mouths of Adversaries, and the putting of a Sword into their hands, to
Destroy themselves and their Brethren with, and to the High Provocation of
Heaven, and deep wounding of their own Souls, and the making of sad work for a
long and bitter Repentance.

4. They Will be in Danger, that then the LORD will send on them Vexation and
Rebuke and Astonishment, making their Heavens to be Brass, and their Earth
Iron, and the Rain of their Land, Powder and Dust; Delivering their Fruits and
Increase to Devourers, Blasting 'em in all their Labors and Interests, and
Delivering them into the hands of their Oppressors, and causing Them that Hate
'em to Rule over Them, who will subtly and cruelly Oppress 'em, and
barbarously Exact upon 'em, Crush 'em, Impoverish 'em, and Pluck from 'em their
Estates and Livelihoods, and their Children out of their Bosoms, to be made
Sacrifices to Moloch, and Vassals of Idolatry; Hurry their Ministers, if not
out of the World, yet out of the Land; Forbid their Holy Worship, under
severest Penalties; Demolish the Synagogues of GOD among 'em; Put a Yoke of
Iron upon their Necks, and make 'em to know the Difference between the Service
of the LORD, and the Service of Shishak.

5. They Will be in Danger of Remaining Incorrigible under all these Things, and
of still Pining away in their Iniquities, and Waxing Worse rather than Better.
Until, that through the fierce Wrath of the LORD of Hosts, their Land be Darkened,
and such a Time Come on them as may be Called, The Hour and Power of Darkness;
and so violent the Persecution be, that they will be glad to Escape (with their
Lives) into Foreign Lands, whose Languages they understand not, and to get
their Bread by hard Labor, and the Benignity of Strangers: But vast Multitudes
of 'em may be Debarred the Privilege of such an Escape; and be Dragoon'd with
utmost and most barbarous Cruelty, to the danger of an horrendous Abjuration,
(against their Consciences,) of the Holy and Saving Truths, Ways, and Religion
of the Glorious LORD JESUS CHRIST; and far less Temptation and Torment having
vanquished Holy Peter, and Cranmer, before them, it is the less wonder if they
(being forsaken of GOD, and under a Judicial Dispensation) Sink under the
Danger, and fall into that Enormous Transgression. And what of this Kind has
fallen out among some of the most Renowned Witnesses of CHRIST, in the
Illustrious Nation of France, is enough to strike us all with Dread, and to
awaken us to Walk Humbly and Watchfully, and Prayerfully before GOD, as long as
we Live; May it be Sanctified to us.

6. They Will be in Danger not only of Deserting their Brethren that have, by the
Grace of GOD, remained steadfast in the Truth, but also of Turning against 'em;
Sins very heinous in the sight of GOD, and very perilous to the Souls of Men;
which yet some Godly Persons in the stress of Temptation have fallen into.

Yea, They Will be in danger of being so scandalized and offended at CHRIST
Himself, because He Delivers them not, when They Cry unto Him, as to be Ready
to Blaspheme HIM in their Hearts, and think Him, either Unable to Help 'em, or
Unkind, Unjust, Unfaithful, and False to His Promises (while He is True to His
Threatenings;) and thereupon to fling away from Him, in a Rage, and to Conceive
Malice in their Hearts against Him; And such near Approaches will they make to
the Unpardonable Sin, and will be under such violent Temptations thereunto, as
that nothing less than Infinite Almighty Power and Mercy will be Able to keep
them from Committing it, to their Eternal Ruin. For as some of the Reprobates
are almost Persuaded to be Christians, and are near to the Kingdom of GOD; so
some of the Elect are almost in all Transgression, almost in the Unpardonable
Sin against the HOLY SPIRIT, and near to the Internal Burning Lake.

7. WHEN at the Last, the Infinite Mercy of GOD shall Revive His Work in them,
Awakening and Recovering 'em; They having Gone so Far from GOD, will find it
excessively Hard, and an huge Work to Return again: and that the Work of
Conviction, Humiliation, Compunction, Contrition, must be acted over again, (as
Dr. Ames shows, as also the English Divines at the Synod of Dart;) and they
must be (as it were) Converted again; and Oh how intolerably will their
Consciences Rage and Sting! How will GOD also smite 'em with the Terrors of His
Wrath; and the Arrows of the Almighty that are shot within 'em, Drink up their
Spirits! How will their Bones wax old through their Roaring all the Day! for a
wounded Spirit who can bear? And Oh what Danger are They in, that GOD should
Deliver 'em to Satan to Buffet and Terrify 'em, that they may Learn not to
Blaspheme! And though GOD shall help 'em to Recant their Abjurations, and Renew
their Professions; Yet what an Almanac will they feel in their Bones? What
Heart-Aches, and Darting Pains may they carry with 'em to their Graves? What
Fears and Anguishes? Oh! how long at the very Brink of Despair, and in the very
Suburbs of Hell! and perhaps Saved at last, by the Faith of Dependence, without
the Faith of Assurance; Trembling to take the Sleep of Death, lest they should
Awake in Hell Torments: This is their Danger; and Thus they are scarcely Saved.

AND thus deals the Prudent Master with His Immorigerous and Truantly Scholar;
He Slashes him till the blood runs about his Heels; and then says to him, How
do you like this? This is for your Disobedience to your Master, and your
neglect of your Book: See what an Evil and Bitter Thing it is for you to
provoke Me. Thus Earthly Judges count it fit to do unto Capital Malefactors,
whom they are resolved not to Destroy; but have Interceeded for them, and
Procured 'em the Royal Pardon; Long must they Ly in the Dungeon, under the
Sentence of Death, and at last be dragged in Chains to the Place of Execution,
fastened to the Gallows, and called upon to make their Confessions, and to say
their last Prayers, and the Cloth be Pulled over their Eyes, they having no
Assurance of a Pardon, till after all this, it is to their Surprise, Produced
and Read under the Gallows: Thus they are made to feel and know the Terrors of
the Law, while (unknown to themselves) they were really safe from the fatal
Stroke, by the Grace of the Royal Prerogative. Yea, this Judicial Dispensation
of Heaven to some True Believers that have Joined in Rebellion against the
LORD, is like as if a Prince, the Heir Apparent of the Crown, should be in Arms
with a Company of Rebels against his Father; and thereupon his Father should
send his Army against him, and they having Vanquished and Taken him, he should
put him into Chains, Torture his Dearest Companions, and Fellow Conspirators
before his Eyes; strip him of his Ornaments, Banish him his Presence, Lock him
up Prisoner in the Tower, set strong Guards upon him, and keep him in suspense
of his Life, and of his Succession to the Crown, for many years; that so he may
Learn the Wisdom, no more to presume because of his Title of Succession to the
Crown, his Relation to the King, and his Hopes of his Fathers Love and Pardon;
to indulge his Folly in Committing such Faults as in their own Nature are
Capitally Heinous, but may Return to his Allegiance to his Father; and at last
obtain the Inheritance of the Kingdom, notwithstanding all his wicked
Forfeitures thereof.

USE I. Is the LORD so SEVERE in His Corrective Judgment, and do the Sins of
His Saints then procure 'em such Terrible Dangers and Distresses? Let us then
Labor after a Due and Abiding Sense of the Majesty and Glory of that Glorious
GOD and Sovereign, With whom we have to do; and an holy Abasement in the sense
of our infinite Distance from Him, and Vileness before Him; together with a
Religious awful Fear on our Souls in holy Duties, and in our whole Course, from
the Consideration of the Great Danger there is of Sinful Miscarriages, and of
His Severity against 'em. O may we so know the Terrors of the LORD, even of our
Covenant-GOD, our FATHER, our REDEEMER, our COMFORTER, as may effectually move
and excite our Souls unto Constant, Spiritual, Filial Care and Diligence, not
to Provoke so Great, so Holy, so Jealous a GOD; And since of our selves,
without Special Divine Aid and Assistance, notwithstanding Grace Inherent, we
cannot Keep to Walk in the Strait Path, or Preserve our selves from Great
Transgressions; Let us daily Cry to Heaven for those Gracious Influences,
whereby impressed, We may serve GOD acceptably, with Reverence and Godly Fear;
seeing that our GOD is a CONSVMING FIRE, Hebr. 12.28, 29. Oh! How many Elect
Believers in a Great Nation of late years, have been Saved, yet as through Fire,
and have had their Works Burnt, and themselves so Scalded and Burnt to the very
Bone, as to make 'em Roar out, as if they had been in Hell, till the Divine
Compassions vouchsafed at last, to Pluck em, as Brands near Consumed, out of
the Burnings, and apply Healing Ointments to them. Let us then Learn to Fear
the Great and Dreadful Name of the Lord our God, and not Presume, because of
our Interest in Him, to indulge our selves in any Negligences, Sloth, Security,
Worldliness, Pride, Strife, Unrighteousness, or Licenciousness: Nor let us be
Drunken or Unchaste, or Vain Company-keepers, or lewd Talkers, as others; but
let us Watch and be Sober; The blessed Lord JESUS will not Save us in our Sins,
but from our Sins. To turn the Grace of GOD into Wantonness, will greatly abuse
and affront the Mercy, and provoke the Displeasure and Wrath of the Redeemer,
who has his Eyes as a Flame of Fire, and his Feet as fine Brass, and has a Rod
of Iron to Punish with, as well as Golden Robes, and Crowns of Glory to Reward
with; and as He has Pity and Patience, so He has Severity also: Who shall not
Fear Thee, O Lord, Thou King of Saints? Thou only art Holy, and Thy Judgments
are made manifest, Rev. 15, 3, 4. Then being moved with Fear, Let us Remove our
Trust, Hopes and Love from our Idols, and Flee to the Saving Ark, and keep
close in it by Faith, as Noah. Heb. 11. Being moved with Fear, let us Strive to
Enter in at the strait Gate, and to Walk in the narrow Way, and to Run the Race
that is set before us, and Carefully to avoid the Paths of the Destroyers. Let
us Labor to be so happy, as to Fear always; To pass the Time of our sojourning
here in fear, and to keep working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling;
the Lord Working in us both to will and to do of His own good Pleasure. Let us
be Giving of all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure: Faith in the
LORD, and Fear of GOD, are blessed Companions and Guardians one to another; if
we lose them, we lose all our Religion; In the Divine Precept and Promise GOD
has joined them together, and let no man put them asunder.

USE II. SINCE Times of Judgment are so Dismal to the Godly, Let us Humbly and
Earnestly Wait on GOD to be Preserved from them, in the Use of Appointed Means.
The Times Come not wherein Judgment begins at the House of God to Punish the
Saints, till the LORD is moved to Jealousy, by the Provokings of His Sons and
of His Daughters, and until the Sins of the Times have Generally Prevailed, and
the Godly are Defiled: Moreover some Churches of Saints having kept the Word of
Christ's Patience, shall be kept by Him from the Hour of Temptation, which
shall Come upon all the World besides: Rev. 3.10. And taking heed to
themselves, that at no time their hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life; and Watching and Praying always, they may
be favored and dignified so far, as to Escape the Terrible Things of the Evil
Days that shall Come, etc. Luke 21.34. -- 36. Furthermore, where, in the Divine
Decree and Promise, the Means and End are inseparable, and GOD enables us duly
to Use the Appointed Means, we may most certainly Conclude, that He has
infallibly Decreed the End. Dread we then all Gradual Departures from the LORD,
all Fallings away, and Apostasy, all Provoking Evils: Be we the LORD's
Witnesses in the World; Keep up both the Form and the Power of Godliness; Do
Justly, and Love Mercy, and Walk Humbly with our GOD; Daily Lay the Sacrifices
of Broken Hearts upon His Altar; Live, Holding to our Glorious Head, the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and Deriving Favor, Righteousness, Virtue and Strength, and
Acceptance from Him; Enter we into His Chambers, and Hide we our selves with
Him, until the Indignation be Over-past: Cry mightily to GOD (with greatest
sense of our Unworthiness of it) for His Sovereign Distinguishing Mercy; That
we may be His Favourite-Noahs, and safe in the Ark, from the Overwhelming
Deluge. The LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy House into the Ark; For
thee have I seen Righteous before Me in this Generation: Genesis 7.1. As He said
also to King Josiah, Because thine Heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy
self before the LORD, etc. Thine Eyes shall not see all the Evil which I will
bring upon this Place, 2 Kings 22.19, 20.

USE III. LET us be very Thankful to GOD, that we have not yet felt the
Scorching Heat, and Terrible Dangers of the Fiery Times of Judgment, as
Thousands of others have done, even in our Days; some of whom have found Refuge
among us. The same Years that have been Times of Judgment to some, have been
Times of Grace, Mercy, and Long-suffering to us. Though the LORD has not Left us
altogether Unpunished, yet our Ministers are not Banished, nor our Children (
excepting a few in Captivity) forced from us, and brought up in Soul-Destroying
Popery; Nor our Holy Assemblies broken up, nor Dragoons let in upon us, to
Torture us a thousand ways, and Compel us to Blaspheme and Abjure our Holy
Religion, thereby to Oppress us with Guilt, to set our Consciences on the Rack,
and overwhelm us with the Divine Terrors. Are we better than others, and less
Sinful and Vile? Do we Escape the Woeful Day, because of our Godliness and
Righteousness, that is greater than theirs? No verily. Why are they made our
Examples and Warnings, and not we theirs? It Is from the LORD's Sovereign Grace
and Good Pleasure; which therefore we should Adore and Celebrate with all
Thankfulness; and often should think with our selves, what grateful Returns of
Fruitfulness we should make and render to the LORD, for all His Benefits,
dispensed unto Us. Psalm. 116.12.

USE IV. LET us Pray fervently to GOD for those who now do, or shortly must
feel the Tempest of the Times of Judgment. God has said, Because I will do
thus unto thee, Prepare to meet thy GOD, O Israel! Amos 4.12. Let us Pray then,
that they and we may be prepared: and our Blessed Savior has said, Except the
Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved; But for the Elect's
sake whom He has Chosen, He has shortened the Days; Mark. 13.19, 20. Wherefore
with submission to, and in Prosecution of that Decree, Let us make our humble
Addresses, that the LORD will not suffer the Rod of the Wicked to lie very long
on the Lot of the Righteous, to compel them to put forth their Hands to
Iniquity. Psalm. 125.3. Nor will Himself be sorely Angry with 'em from
Generation to Generation. Psalm. 85.4, 15. But that He Will vouchsafe to Deliver
and Recover 'em speedily. Psalm. 31.2. The Recovery of such as fall (and many
Fall fearfully in Judicial Times, Dan. 11.35.) is to be obtained by earnest
Prayer. Jam. 5.15. And the Vengeance that is to be Poured out on the Great
Antichrist; and on others, before or at the Time of the Calling of the Jews,
and of lost Israel, will make Judicial Times in these latter Days. Rev. 18.4.
Dan. 12.1. Times, wherein, if the Just would Live, they must Live by Faith, in
Prayer. Hab. 3. Wherein the Unbelieving and Prayerless will come to a Miserable
End; but they that Call on the Name of the LORD, shall be Saved.

So much for the First Doctrine.
The Second Doctrine is this, Viz.
2. When Times of Destroying Judgment are Come upon very Wicked Nations, and
the Best Christians then in the House of GOD among 'em, do meet with very
terrible Corrective Dispensations: The Impenitently wicked Reprobates in those
Nations, living in Disobedience to the Gospel, will act very irrationally, if
they promise themselves an Escape from Destruction; they having no just
pretenses, whereon they may Ground their Hope thereof.

What else remains for them, but a fearful Expectation of Fiery Indignation to
devour 'em. Heb. 10.27. If such cannot Escape as neglect the Great Salvation,
Heb. 2.3. How can such hope to Escape as Reject it, with Defiance of the
Glorious Savior? That Sentence from the Mouth of the Great Judge is
Unalterable, Luke 13.3.5. Except ye Repent, ye shall Perish. The Wicked shall
be Turned into Hell, and the Nations that forget GOD. Psalm. 9.17. On the
Wicked, GOD will Rain Fire, Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest. They that
finally will not be Saved from their Sins, shall be Damned. In the Day of sore
Visitation, the LORD will hurl 'em from off the Earth by His Tempest, and in
Hell shall they open their Eyes, being in Torments. Job 27.21. Luke 16.23. What
Evangelical Preachers were the Holy Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah? And what
fearful Perdition was the Portion of Disobedient Reprobates in their Days? Jer.
42.22. And how many Thousands of the Gospel-Despising Jews afterward were
dispatched into an horrendous Eternity, in a Time of Judgment, in the Reign of
the Emperor Vespasian? When GOD lays Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness
to the Plummet, and His own People Escape not fore Punishment; all the most
flourishing Pretenses of the Wicked to Hope of Escape, are Vain.

Their Usual Pretenses are,

1. The Infinite Mercy of GOD. But GOD may be (and is) of an Infinitely
Merciful Nature, and yet not be Merciful to Wicked Transgressors: Psalm. 59.5.
He that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, will
show them no favor; Isai. 27.11. Almighty GOD is as Infinite in Justice, as in
Mercy: and Incorrigible Sinners are fit Objects for His Justice to be Glorified
upon, and no longer for His Mercy and Patience to be abused by 'em: To what
Purpose is it to waste any more Time upon them, who are already as Stubble
fully dry, fit fuel for Unquenchable Fire? They obstinately persevere in their
Rejection of CHRIST, and of the Mercy of GOD in HIM, freely offered to 'em, so
that they can lay no Claim to the Divine Mercy, on CHRIST's account; and it is
impossible they should have it otherwise: Now if those who are in CHRIST JESUS,
and lay Claim to the Mercy of GOD by Faith, and have a good Title to it, yet
Escape not sore Temporal Punishments for their Sins, much less can Christless
Sinners expect to Escape. Surely GOD will Reject their Plea for Mercy, who
obstinately and incorrigibly Reject CHRIST and Mercy. Prove. 1.24.31.

2. Another of their usual Pretenses is, that they will Repent of their Sins,
and Believe in CHRIST JESUS afterward: But,

1. That of their own Free Will they will ever Savingly Repent and Believe, it
is utterly to be despaired of; the Malignity of their Wills appearing to be
Insuperable and Incurable by all Means: After so many years Withering and
Hardening, it is impossible that of Themselves they should Recover to Life and
Fruitfulness.

2. From the Lord they have no hope: For when the Time of Destroying Judgment
is Come, it is too late for such as have out-stood their whole Day of Grace, to
expect His Salvation. GOD is weary of Waiting, and HIS SPIRIT will no longer
strive with them. Genesis 6.3. Their Iniquity is full? The Set Time for Offers of
Mercy is Ended: The LORD being Angry, is risen up, and has shut the Door, they
being without: Luke 13.25. Mercy has had its long Days, and now Justice and
Fury must have Theirs; The Days that are now Come upon 'em, are not Days of
Patience, but Days of Vengeance; they have no Promise, no Ground to flatter
themselves with Expectation that GOD will give 'em the Faith and Repentance
which they hate, and are continually doing all they can to harden themselves
against. They therefore will act very Irrationally, if they Promise themselves
an Escape from Destruction.

USE. Have the Wicked no Just Pretenses to Hope for Escape from Destruction,
and horrendous Ruin, when the Day of God's Patience is Ended? And shall it be
easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Judgment, than for the Rejecters of the
Gospel, and for Rebels against the Light? And will it be e're long too late to
seek for Peace with God? I say too late, when the Day of Grace is Ended! Let
them then be Convinced, that it is most Reasonable, and account it their wisdom,
duty, and interest, that they take the Present Time, to seek Recovery from
their Wicked and Damnable Estate; Not Delaying a Day longer; Not daring to put
off this most Important Work, till afterward. GOD calls for it to Day, Psalm.
95.7. Heb. 4.7. And against GOD's Will, to Defer it, is highly Criminal: Sin
Grows and Multiplies by Continuance, which augments the fierce Wrath of the
Almighty; Psalm. 95.10, 11. By Continuance also the Mind is more Blinded, and
the Heart more Hardened, and set the further off from Repentance; Ephesians. 4.18.
Heb. 4.7. Sin Roots the Deeper, and is the harder to be Rooted out: Jer. 13.23.
A Purpose of Deferring of Repentance, and a Sincere Purpose to Repent, Consist
not together. 1 Pet. 4.3. Sinners, They are uncertain of the Continuance of
their Lives, Jam. 4.13, 14. and of having a further Day for to Repent in; and
as uncertain that God will bestow His Saving Influences on 'em, afterward, (if
they Reject His Present Calls,) without which they cannot Repent. The Man is a
Fool or Mad, who when His House is on fire, delays but one Hour, His Endeavors
to Quench it; Or when He dangerously falls a bleeding, neglects to Stanch the
Blood; Or when Timber is falling on His Head, will not in an Instant, spring
away; or when Cannons are Levelled, and firing at a Particular Place where He
stands, will not forthwith make an Escape from it. In a State of Wickedness and
Impenitence the Danger is far Greater, and to Linger (as Lot in Sodom) and to
delay to Get out of that Estate, and Danger, is a greater Folly and Madness.
Menace and Peril of Everlasting Vengeance and Torments Weigh very Heavy, when
put into the Scales of Thought and Consultation; and they are far from Wise,
that make light of them. Consider then, that Men's State since the Fall of Adam,
and of Mankind in Him, is either a State of Sin, or a State of Grace: Consider
also, that in a State of Sin, which is a Christless, Graceless Estate, He that
Lives and Dies in it, will be cast into Hell Fire: For the Person that is not
before he Dies, Saved by the LORD JESUS, from his Sins, shall be Damned for
ever: Do Sins of Heart, Lip' and Life Reign over a Man all his Days, all his
Pretenses to hope of Escape are Vain; for he has not the Spirit of Christ; and
if a Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; and if he be none of
Christ's, then Christ has not satisfied Infinite Justice for his Sins, and then
the Divine Justice will Seiz him, and Punish him in the Burning Lake to all
Eternity: For the Criminalness and Heinousness of Sin, is not to be Measured by
the Time in which, so much as by the Object against whom it is Committed* Psalm.
51.4. Is the Object, the Infinite God? then is Sin Infinitely Heinous! and if
Punishment must lie on the Sinner, till adequate Satisfaction is taken of the
finite Creature, for his Infinite Guilt, then it must Continue on him for ever.
Let Sinners then be Awakened to Consider this; Let them Hear it and Know it for
their Good: before it is too late for 'em possibly to Obtain an Escape: If the
Pain of an aching Tooth for one day, is sometimes intolerable; Think then, how
intolerable will be the Pains and Torments of Soul and Body in Hell, Millions
of Millions of Days, Years, Ages, for Ever! No Tongue indeed can sufficiently
Express all the most dreadful Tortures of the Damned: And yet (believe it
Sirs!) If unto the End of your Days, you remain grossly Ignorant of those
Fundamental Truths that pertain to Spiritual Life, you will be Damned. Ephesians.
4.18. Woe to them that Reject Knowledge; and Woe to them that are without
Vision: Without Knowledge the Heart is not Good, and without Vision the People
Perish: And are you stupidly, willingly ignorant of Fundamentals Truths of
Religion in a Land of Light? O how deep and dreadful will your Damnation be!
Again, Are you Fundamentally Erroneous as long as you Live? Know of a
Certainty, that you shall be Damned! Acts 15.24. Gal. 5.19, -- 21. 2 Pet. 2.1.
and 3.16: Again, If you do not acknowledge your selves to be destitute of all
Righteousness in and of your selves; if you do not plainly go out of your
selves, denying your own Righteousness; If you do not see your selves utterly
Undone, should you not Present your selves before GOD, with a Perfect and
Infinitely Valuable Sacrifice and Righteousness? and if you do not Apprehend
that the LORD JESUS CHRIST, His Sacrifice and Righteousness are infinitely
sufficient in this Case, (which will be Imputed to you, and become Available
for you, upon your being United to CHRIST, by the Spirit and Faith;) And if you
don't Esteem CHRIST JESUS, and prefer an Interest in Him, above all the World,
its Riches, Honors, Pleasures; If upon the Gracious Invitation, Call, and
Command of GOD in the Gospel, you do not heartily Come to CHRIST JESUS, Give up
your selves to Him, entirely subject your Souls and Lives to HIM, as your
Prophet, Priest and King; If you do not Trust in Him, and Rest on Him, for
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, as the only and
All-sufficient Mediator and Redeemer: And if you Obtain not the Grace of Faith,
thus to believe on the SON OF GOD, while you are in this World, You will
certainly be Damned. John 3.18.

Again, If before you leave this World, it be not your inward Disposition,
Frame and Course, seriously to Oppose and Resist, and to Endeavor to Suppress
and Mortify your sinful Thoughts, Inclinations and Lusts, but you do give up
your selves unto 'em, then you are not Regenerated, you are not United to
Christ, but you shall be Damned: Romans 6.12, 13, 16. And if upon Deliberation,
it be your fixed frame and disposition to Choose and Prefer Profit, Honor and
Pleasure, before Piety and Honesty; If you have commonly more Pleasure in, than
Grief for, and Loathing of your sinful Words, Thoughts, and Deeds, and continue
heartily to Love, and to Solace your selves in the Company and Fellowship of
the Ungodly, then it is Evident, you are not in a State of Grace, and infallibly
(so Dying,) You shall be Damned. Phil. 3.19. Prove. 2.14. Psalm. 50.18. 2 Cor.
6.14, etc. If you desire not the Knowledge of GOD's Ways, Job 21.14. If you
hate to be Reformed, Psalm. 59.17. and if you slight the Threatenings and
Judgments of GOD, Deuteronomy. 29.19. the fixed Disposition of your Wills being
contrary to the Holy Will of GOD, Romans 8.7. You so Dying, shall be Damned.

Again, If you Bridle not your Tongues, your Religion is vain, Jam. 1.16. By
your Words in the Great Judgment, you shall be Condemned, and Doomed to
Hellfire, upon their Evidence and Guilt, Mat. 12.37. If it is your Unrepented,
Unreformed Practice to the End, to speak Words Atheistical or Blasphemous,
Profane, or Sacriligious, Cursing, or Vain-Swearing, Lying, or Perjurious,
Defamatory, or Injurious, Reviling, or Irreverend; Bloody or Quarrelsome, Proud
or Envious, Unchaste and Wanton, Heretical and Diabolical, or any other way
Vicious, You will be Damned; Jude ver. 14, 15. Psalm. 50.19, 20. And in Hell,
you shall not have a Drop of Water to cool your Tongues: Vain Words, and Base
Language, in a Course, show a vile heart, even the Heart of an Ishmaelite: As
light as you make of your ill Words, they will be like a Millstone to sink you
down into Irrecoverable Destruction: Again, as to your Actions and Omissions,
if until you lie down in your Graves, you do, in your Course, Neglect, Secret
daily Prayer, You shall be Damned, Mat. 6.6. and if you profanely and wickedly
Neglect Family Prayer, Col. 4.1, 2, 3. Jer. 10.25. And if you so Neglect
Public Prayers, and the Word and Ordinances of GOD, publicly Dispensed, You
shall be Damned; Heb. 10.25. Romans 10.14. Or if you wilfully and wickedly Live
in the Omission of other Commanded Duties toward GOD, or toward Men, You
shall be Damned; Mat. 25.26, 42. and 5.19. Joh. 5.29. Luke 13.3, 5.

If you impenitently while you live, do carry it wickedly toward your Parents,
Children, or other Relatives, or toward your Rulers, or Teachers, or
Neighbors, or Strangers, or Enemies, You shall be Damned; whether you carry
your selves Proudly, or Enviously, or Cruelly, or Unjustly, or Unchastly, or
Intemperately, or Implacably, or Treacherously, or Partially, or Corruptingly,
or otherwise Scandalously, contrary to the Commands of GOD; or if you live in
Secret Wickedness, when the Ax of Vengeance cuts you down; you shall be cast
into Everlasting Burnings, Rev. 21.8. But the Fearful and the Unbelieving, and
the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and all Liars, shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. The Unrighteous shall not Inherit the Kingdom of
God, nor Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor
Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, etc. Mat. 3.10. The Ax is Laid to the Root of
the Trees: Therefore every Tree which brings not forth Good Fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the Fire. Where shall the Ungodly and Sinners Appear? When
the Besome of Destruction has swept 'em out of this World, they shall appear in
Chains, and be Dispatched from the Divine Presence, into Everlasting Torments.
All that are not Saved from their Sins, shall be Damned: The Holy LORD JESUS
Saves His People from their Sins, (as we said before) But He Saves none in
their Sins. Carnality, Security, Profaneness, Pride, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Strife, and Gross Worldliness, and a Rebellious Spirit, and a Spirit of
Scoffing and Derision at the Godly, and Godliness, Do so Dreadfully and
Eternally Endanger many that Come in among us, and many more who are Born in
the Land, that I am Constrained, in Compassion unto Souls; Knowing the Terrors
of the Lord, to Use great Plainness of Speech, and to make severe Inculcations
of Eternal Damnation, and to Warn Men to Flee from the Wrath to Come: I Beseech
you to Bear with Me: I must Warn the Wicked, and Woe unto Me, as well as to
them, if I Do it not; I have the Word of the LORD, and must speak it
faithfully; and it is no season for Silence or Flattery, when near Judgment and
Eternity; and Oh that these Words may sink down into your Ears and Hearts! that
you may Tremble to think of Continuing one Day longer in a Carnal, Ungodly,
Christless State, wherein if you die, all your most flourishing pretenses unto
Hope of Escape of Utter Destruction are Vain.

But the Third Doctrine is, That
Doct. III. The Grand Remedies which Christians should use against the Pannick
Fear and Dread of Bodily Miseries, and Death, that GOD may suffer them to be
Exposed unto, and Afflicted with, are a steadfast Perseverance in the Way of
Well-doing, together with a strong Faith in the Faithfulness of GOD, the
Creator of their Souls; unto whom They being well Committed, and put in Safety,
Afflictions and Bodily Death may be born, with the Greater Courage.

The Constituent Parts of Man, are Soul and Body; And our Text and Doctrine
refer unto Both: And though the Soul is Created (as our Divines prove by Reason,
and by Scriptures, such as our Text, and Isai. 42.5. and 57.16. Ezekiel. 37.5.
Zech. 12.1. Heb. 12.9. Numb. 16.22. and 27.16. Eccles. 3.21. and 12.7.) yet
being United with a Body of Humane Seed, it comes under Obligation to, and
Danger of Punishment; as the Husband is by Law, Exposed to Demands and
Distraints for his Wifes Debts. GOD, as the GOD of Nature, Creates Souls. But
as the GOD of Justice, He in Creating them, Creates them, without Impressing
His Image on them. Adam blew out that Candle, and left his Posterity (descended
from him by Ordinary Generation) in Darkness. Romans 5.14.19. And though the whole
Person, consisting of Soul and Body United, is the Subject of Guilt and
Punishment, if Christless, and (if United to CHRIST) of Justification and
Salvation; yet Principally is the Soul so; which is the Nobler and Guiltier
Part; (without which the Body is but a dead, senseless Lump; Jam. 2.26. 1 Pet.
1.9.) yet Bodily Death is Terrible; and our LORD JESUS CHRIST came to deliver
them who through fear of Death, were all their lifetime subject to Bondage; Heb.
2.14, 15. But the Death of the Body in this World, is not to be feared, in
Comparison of the Destruction of the Soul, together with the Raised Body in the
Eternal World; Mat. 10.28. Therefore CHRIST says, Fear not Them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the Soul; But rather Fear HIM, who is able to
Destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. If then Men's Souls are in safety, the
Afflictions and Death of their Bodies may be born with the greater Courage; The
Body feels no Pain, while the Soul is in Paradise: And as there are no Miseries
to the Godly, after Death; So none in this Life, but what the LORD Permits, and
Mitigates so far, and so wonderfully supports under them, that they may be able
to Bear them; 1 Cor. 10.13. And He makes them also to work together for their
Good. Romans 8.28. Now such Regenerate Persons as do with a Good Confidence of
Faith, Commit their Souls to the Faithful GOD* and Entrust them in the safe
Arms of His Goodness, and Love, They take the Right Course to obtain
Deliverance from the most Oppressive and Distressing Fears of Bodily Miseries
and Death: A Strong and Lively Faith in GOD through CHRIST, does wonderfully
overcome Worldly Fear; (1 Job. 5.4.) and Prevent pusillanimous Fainting; 2 Cor.
4.14, 18. We believe, says the Apostle, and for that Cause we faint not, while
we look at the things which are Eternal; for our light Affliction which is but
for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory;
2 Timothy 1.12. I suffer, (says he) Nevertheless I am not ashamed, For I know
whom I have Believed, and I am persuaded that HE is able to Keep that which I
have Committed unto Him, against that Day: Thus David's and Simeon's exalted
Faith gave 'em Peace from the Fear of Death: Psalm. 23.1, 3, 4, 5. The LORD is
my Shepherd; He Restores my Soul; Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I Will fear no Evil, etc. So Luke 2.28, 29. Lord! Now let Thou Thy
Servant Depart in Peace, etc. They that can with a full assurance of Faith,
trust GOD, with their Souls, and Eternity, may with a great deal of quietness,
satisfaction and rest, Trust GOD with their Bodies, and the Importances of
Time, and Acquiesce in the Love, Care and Sufficiency of the Divine Providence;
for He that Deserves the Greater Trust, does surely Deserve the Less. By Faith
also the Saints Obtain the most Strengthening and Comforting Presence and
Influences of the ETERNAL SPIRIT, to Enable 'em to Vanquish their inordinate
and excessive Fears of Death. Now that the Saint who has the Faith of
Dependence, may also have the Faith of Assurance, together with all Courage and
Joyfulness in Sufferings; he must Pray to GOD for a Steadfast Perseverance in
the Way and Course of Well-doing, according to the Gospel, and strongly
Endeavor it. The Apostle Paul, a Great Believer, and a Great Sufferer, proved
this Experiment with great success: Herein exercising himself to have always a
Conscience, void of Offense, toward GOD, and toward man: Acts 15.16. And he
found that his Uprightness gave him Boldness; and that Retaining himself in the
Way of Well-Doing, he Received no great Impressions of Perturbations from the
Apprehension of Approaching Tribulations; and that he could Die upon the Cross,
with Assurance and Courage; see Acts 20.24. 2 Timothy 4.8. So then to Fortify the
Faith and Courage of the Believer on the SON OF GOD, (the Lord, our
Righteousness and Strength,) Well-Doing is a Good Means, and what it wants of
Merit, it makes up in Evidence: Whereas Ill-Doing has Merit and Evidence enough
to knock down the stoutest Courage. Jam. 2.17 18. 'Twas well for King Hezekiah,
that (when he had received the Sentence of Death,) He was able to say, LORD, I
have Walked before Thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart; Isa. 38.3. and his
Safety for Eternity prevented not his being a longer Tenant of Time; he was
fit, and might dare to Die, though 'twas not fit, that at that Time he should
Die. He that said, Be of good Courage, GOD shall strengthen your Heart, all ye
that Hope in the LORD; He himself was of Good Courage in the Way of Believing
and Well-Doing, when he said, Into Thy Hand I Commit my Spirit; Thou have
Redeemed me, O LORD GOD of Truth. Ps. 31.1, 5, 6, 24. So also was that Heroic
Martyr, who Expiring, said, LORD JESUS, Receive my Spirit Acts. 7.59.

USE 1. Of Reprehension to such Christians as Securely Neglect to be Provided
of these two great Remedies against a Cowardly and Distracting Fear of Bodily
Miseries and Death, and Live without Strength of Faith, and Constancy of
Well-Doing. How many are there, who if a Rich and Honest Neighbor should
Promise to give 'em, but a Shilling, for every Day that they abstained from
Taverns, and Vain Company, and as much for every Morning and Night that they
Prayed to GOD with their Families, and Read the Word of God unto 'em, and as
much for every Time they Partook of the LORD's Supper, and as much for every
day that they abstained from bad Language, they would readily give Credit to
such a Promise of a Mortal Man, and to gain the Reward Promised, would be very
Mindful of those things, and they would break through all Excuses, Pretenses,
Difficulties and Opposing Temptations, and would not fail most Exactly and
Punctually to Perform 'em: But though Almighty GOD does every day give them their
Lives and Senses and Reason, (worth more than many hundred Shillings,) and
Promises them the future Needful Good Things of this Life, and an Infinite
Reward in the Other World, They dare not Trust Him, as they will trust a
Neighbor; and they account all to be an Uncertainty, though it be the greatest
Certainty of all; and are not so powerfully moved to Care, Diligence,
Heedfulness, and Exactness by GOD's Proffers and Promises as by Man's: for let
the Infinite GOD promise never so much, and give his Oath for it also, they will
suspect the matter, and doubt that they shall never have it, and you will find 'em
careless of attending the Worship of GOD in Public, and in their Families, and
Lavish of their Tongues, and Intemperate in their Cups, and sordidly Penurious
to Works of Piety and Charity; as if GOD's Promises were not worth a Rush. O ye
of little Faith, and of little Holiness! If you don't mend your Hand in
Believing and Well-Doing, I Will not be your Voucher that you shall not Faint nor
be Terrifyed, when Afflictions and Death shall Arrest you; Or that you shall
have an Open Entrance into the Kingdom, and Boldness in your Appearance before
the Majesty of GOD: I Am sure you take the Course to the contrary.

USE 2. Of Exhortation to a Steadfast Perseverance in the Way of Well-Doing, and
a strong Faith in the Faithfulness of GOD, and to a Committing of our Souls
unto His Love, and into the Blessed Arms of His All-sufficient Goodness. Our
Souls will Fly out of the Arms of our Bodies e're long; Provide we then, that
with the Wings of Assurance, they may fly up, upon Jacob's Ladder, into the
LORD's Everlasting Arms. Death is not simply and absolutely to be Contemned;
forasmuch as it is a grievous Punishment for the First Sin, and GOD's Rectoral
and Fatherly Anger is manifested therein, when it seizes upon the Children of
His Love: Yet a Pannick Dread of Death is a Great Enemy to the Holiness and
Comfort of the Saints; it sometimes hurries them on, unto the Denial of their
SAVIOVR, and into other Great Transgressions; and at other Times, Clips the
Wings of their Liberty and Cheerfulness, in the Service and Communion of GOD:
It Is our Interest therefore to have Deliverance from it, by the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; and His Spirit, and Grace, and Blood are sufficient in this Case: Heb.
2.15. 2 Cor. 12.9. Ephesians. 3.16, 20. His Spirit strengthening our Faith, it will
vanquish our inordinate Fear, and Purify our Lives; and our Well-doing, through
His Grace and Blood, being Well-pleasing to GOD, as well as Evidential and
Quieting to our own Consciences, will not a little Help to Advance our Hope
unto Courage and Joy, (when we are about to receive the Stroke of Death,) in
our Committing of our dear, departing Souls, unto our Supreme and Reconciled
Father, and most Faithful Confederate in Heaven.

Let us then Clear up our Union to CHRIST, and Interest in the Promises, and
Give all Diligence to make our Calling, and thereby our Election sure, and
Labor to be Strong in Faith, Giving Glory to GOD, as Abraham, and to be
Watchfully in the Fear of GOD, and in a Way of Well-doing, Perfecting of that
Holiness, without which no man shall see the LORD: So shall we Cry, and the
LORD will Answer, and the Comforter that should delight our Souls, will not be
far from us, when Trouble is near us; Light also shall arise to us in Darkness;
and we shall have Remedy not only against Evil, but also against the Fear of
Evil.

THE END.
The Necessity and Advantages OF Holy Watchfulness.
REV. XVI. 15. Behold! I Come as a Thief: Blessed is He that WATCHES, and
keeps his Garments; Lest He Walk Naked, and Men see his Shame.


WE have no Reason to Complain, that we have no new Miracles now wrought, to
Confirm unto our Faith, the Divinity of the Holy Scriptures, and Evangelical
Religion, since we have the Infallible History of the Miracles that have been
Divinely Wrought for that End in former Ages; And since we also daily View the
Divine Power and Efficacy of the said Scriptures and Religion, in the Shining
Instances of Persons Supernaturally Changed thereby; GOD's Omnipotency working
therewith, to free them from the Tyranny of Darkness and Corruption, and to
Advance 'em to glorious Heights of Holiness, Virtue, and Joy in a Life of
Communion with GOD, through the LORD JESUS CHRIST; And since Many of these
Sanctified Persons, By the Spirit of GOD dwelling in them, and Influencing of
them, have Courageously suffered Death by torture, in Testimony to GOD's Holy
Truths and Religion; (The Seal of Martyrs not being much less powerful, than
the Seal of Miracles:) And since it has been manifestly the Constant Work of
Providence, to be fulfilling of the Prophesies contained in the said Holy
Scriptures; and Particularly that Prophecy Concerning the Great Antichrist,
one of the Greatest Plagues that ever was Permitted and Inflicted upon
Grace-Abusing Nations.

That Prophesy was uttered by Daniel, above a Thousand Years before its
fulfillment; and by the Apostle John, in the Revelations, above Three Hundred
Years. And our Context gives a Terrible Scheme of GOD's Dealing with that
Enemy. It could never have Entered into Men's Thoughts, that such a Prodigy
should ever have Appeared in the World, had it not been Foretold, by Him that
Fore-knew; And being Foretold, if it had not Appeared, 'twould have derogated
from the Verity of Prophecy, and have Shockt our Faith; Whereas its
Appearance, (though most Formidable,) both Seals the Truth of Holy Scripture, and
the Faith of the Redeemed.

The World has seen Daniels fourth Monarchy, in all its Shapes and Alterations,
until it is brot' very near to its Consummation, wro't by the finger of
Providence, and exactly answering it is Types in Vision. It has seen Romes Mitre
turned into a Triple Crown, Domineering over many Kingdoms within the Roman
Empire, under the several Names of CHRIST and Christianity, Usurping Power to
dispose of Crowns and Nations, to Stamp Divinity upon Humane Inventions and
Lies, to Legitimate Idolatry, Mass-Worship, Invocation, and Adoration of Ghosts
and Angels, Exorcisms, Massacres, Murders of Princes, Uncleanness, Lying,
Perjuries (in some Cases,) and making 'em Meritorious of Heaven, against the
Will and Law of the Holy GOD, who Condemns them to Hell. Thus has the Roman
Empire been Reestablish'd by a Mystery of Iniquity.

Old Rome made Her Whole Empire to be One Great City, by Naturalizing and
Endenizing all of Quality in its Remotest Provinces, and Extending its
Privileges and Franchises to Men and Towns of many Nations; and thus Paul a
Jew was a Roman Born, a Freeman of the City of Rome: Thus Papal Rome makes one
great Babylonian Mystical City, of the Nations of the World: All in all Nations
who are Papists are Members of Her Church, and Citizens of Her Imperial City;
and no Papist, though of the Remotest Nation is a Foreigner to the Roman Church
and See; But All are admitted to be Capable of Holy Orders, and Offices; Their
Council consists of Men taken out of all Her Provinces; and none of 'em by
their Law shut out from Liberty to Qualify Himself to be Elected to Wear the
Triple Crown.

This Roman Catholic Church (as it Calls it self) is a Mystical Babylon for
Idolatry, Sorcery, and Universal Domination; and a Sodom for Wickedness, and
Egypt for Cruelty and Oppression. Rev. 11.8.

This Monstrous Sham-Church Establishes the Kingdom of Sin by its Simoniacal
Vain Pardons, and Lying Miracles: and (in Times and Places of Smokey Ignorance)
frights Men into its Bosom, (which it Pretends to be the only Place of
Salvation in the World,) by its terrible Anathemas; where, when they are come,
they become the fixed Marks and Butts, against whom are directly Levelled the
Chain-shot and Fire-Arrows of the Curse of Heaven.

It Is impossible but that the Glorious SON of GOD (whose Sacred Name and
Commission have been hellishly Abused, and blesphemously Pretended and
Professed as a Cover and Warranty for the Greatest Wickedness, and whose True
Spiritual Kingdom is most of all maligned, contradicted, undermined, and
impressed, by this Hellish Upstart, Usurping, Idolatrous, Murderous Kingdom of
Antichrist) should Pour out His Most Dreadful Plagues upon it; and this He does
Leisurely and Gradually at first, like the running of Sand in an Hour Glass,
and like the Pouring out of VIALS which have great Bellies, and narrow Mouths;
and afterward more suddenly, swiftly, and Abundantly, as out of a Wide-mouthed
Cup or Flaggon.

Of the VIALS, and of the CUP, you Read in THIS CHAPTER, where our TEXT is
Placed, as it were in a Parenthesis.

Among Modern Authors, Mr. Junieu and Mr. Petto are of the Opinion, that the
Vials are Poured out before the Witnesses Resurrection, and that the Seventh
Hour Glass is at its last Sand then.

In the Vision, the Vials are Poured out and Emptied on the Earth, and the Sea,
and on the Rivers, and Fountains, and on the Sun, and on the Beast's Throne,
and on Euphrates, and finally into the Air: and the Consequents thereof, are a
Noisome Sore; Bloody Waters, and the Death of such as Swim in them; Blood in
Fountains to drink of Fiery Scorchings, and Blaspheming, and Impenitency;
Darkness, Pains, Hardness; A making way for the Kings of the East; Impious
Leagues and War; Voices, Lightnings, Thunders, a great Earthquake; Division of
the Great City into Three Parts, and the falling of the City of the Nations.

Among the Various Modern Conjectures, this is One, viz. That the Seventh Vial
has been for some time, a Pouring out. Yet many are Dubious whether past
History will afford unto diligent Enquirers, a Practical Interpretation of the
Prophecy, in a Sevenfold Vengeance upon, and Mortification of the Earthly
Antichristian Babylyon, or Roman Catholic Church, already inflicted, adequate
to the Vision of the Vials: and it Deserves to be Inquired and Considered

1. Whether the General and Judicial Abdication of Full Communicants of that
Church (that Teaches Good Works to be Meritorious of Justification and Eternal
Life) unto Dismal and Affrighting Carnality and Wickedness, so as that they
should visibly become a Leprous and Vlcerous Church, full of Noisome and
Astonishing Corruption of Manners; and whether Their Walking about with
Vlcerated Consciences, whose Guilt and Stings and Sores all their Dead Saints
[Mediators] and Invocated-Angels, and all their Masses, Penances, Pilgrimages,
and Popes Pardons could not Remove; Plague-Sores and Ulcers, that keep running
to this Day; and whether their Civil State Vlcerated and Wasted by the
Incursions and Conquests of the Saracen Army, be the Noisome Sores that are the
Effects of the First Vial, Upon what they Call Holy Church?

2. Whether the Gradual Swelling of their pretendedly Infallible Oracles of
Life, unto a voluminous Ocean-Sea of really wrong and false Rules, and
Fundamental Errors, Intolerable Impositions, Irrational and Corrupt Doctrines
and Ordinances, and Damnable Blasphemies and Idolatries, retained by 'em to
this Day, in and by which, None could Obtain Spiritual Life and Everlasting
Happiness? And whether the Drawing of Shoals, Ship Loads, and Mighty Armies of
Crossed-Souldiers from all Parts of the Roman Catholic Ocean or Dominions
(with Promises of Plenary Pardons of all Sins, and of the Heavenly
Inheritance,) Unto Seven fatal Expeditions for the Conquest of the Holy Land;
(In the first whereof perished more than Two Millions of Roman Catholic
Soldiers, and in the Last Sixty Thousand, and vast Multitudes in the other;
(were not some Effects of the Second Vial, in the Emblem of a bloody Ocean, to
punish the Nations for their Subjection and Devotion to the Papal See?

3. Whether their being Confined to drink continually of the Deadly and most
Poisonous Sermons and Homilies of Monks and Friars, as of Rivers or Fountains,
and to Depend on 'em for Counsel in all their Soul-Cases, Being totally
debarred from Reading of the Holy Scriptures; and whether their being, by the
Instigation of their Popes and Cardinals, Hurried into Rebellions, against
their lawful Emperors and Princes, whereby they brought themselves to bloody
Ends, were not some Effects of the Third Vial, and a Just Judgment upon the
Empire, that so often and so long had been Glutting Her self with the Blood of
the Saints, under Pagan and Arian, and other Emperors, and under the
Influences of Antichrist?

4. Whether the Scorchings of Emperors and Realms, under the Rays of the Sun
of the Papal World, by the Popes Excommuications and Curses, and by his
Absolving of their Subjects from their Oaths of Obedience and Allegiance to
'em, and stirring up of their Neighboring Princes to Invade and Destroy 'em in
a Wicked Manner; (The Popes Power being Exuberant, and his Spirit Diabolical;)
and whether one Pope's Condemning the Infallible Edicts of a Former Pope; and
the Emperors Deposing of Popes, and setting up of General Councils above 'em;
and whether their Pope's Infallible Holiness being notoriously known to be
Blasphemers, Murderers, Poisoners, Adulterers, Sodomites, or Incestuous, or
Conjurers for many years; and Rome that Lady-City and Sear of Empire, that
formerly drew to its self the World's Riches and Glory, Her being Deserted of
Her Popes and Grandeur for Seventy Years; and whether that Monstrous Kingdom of
Antichrist, it is having More Heads upon it than One, for Forty Years; One Pope
at Avignion, and another at Rome; and Both of them Excommunicated and Accursed,
(one by another; with all their Adherents; so that almost all Europe lay under
the Papal Anathema; (So Rendering the Popes Curses, that all the World trembled
at before, Weak and Ridiculous, and Putting the Papal Dignity, and Deification,
and all His Throne, Kingdom and Territories under Darkness;) and whether
thereupon their Judicial Obstinacy and most Criminal Unreformedness and
Blasphemies (continuing to this Day) Popish Princes and Nations complaining of
the Popes, but not forsaking their Idolatry; Were not some of the Effects of
the fourth and fifth Vials Poured out upon the Papal Sun, and upon the Throne
of the Beast?

5. Whether (as Artopaeus and Mr. Jurieu think) the Irruptions, Depredations,
and Conquests of the Turks upon the Roman Empire, with their Impious Doctrines,
and Religion, and Barbarities, they being Kings of Natolin (or the East,)
having once Euphrates for their Bounds, be One Thing intended in the Sixth
Vials, (as in the Sixth Trumpet; Rev. 9.13 -- 17.)? And whether a most Judicial
Abdication of the Roman Popes and their Conclave, unto a Diabolical Spirit of
Hatred against Gospel Truth and Holiness, and of most Implacable and Bloody
Revenge, and WAR against the Professors thereof, be not Another Thing intended?
A Disposition to Murder the Saint's, most certainly is a Plague of GOD upon
Men's Hearts, an Effect and Stroke of the Fierce Wrath of Heaven, and Renders
Men very Vise in the Eyes of all that have any Sparks of Humanity in 'em: and
that the Romanists are not Free from this Plague, We are informed from
Histories; The Excommunicating, Condemning and Burning of Godly Persons who
Dissented from Popery, was Notorious in the Twelfth Century,; and has Continued
ever since: The Pope Stirred up Secular Princes against 'em, 1140. Eighty were
burnt at Strasburg; Their Cruelty against 'em was notorious at Oxford; Anno
1160. A bloody Inquisition was Established against 'em, Anno 1176; which for
540 years has been Martyring and Murdering of 'em. Anno 1198, They were by
Thousands delivered to Executioners to be hanged and burnt; So that all
Moderate Persons in Christendom were moved to Compassion. The Roman Beast that
Continues forty two months, is given over to make WAR with the Saints: and
(when appearing in the Two horned Shape) has Power to Cause 'em to be killed.
Rev. 13.5, 7.15. And it is Prophesied that the Ten Kings, who give their Power
to the Beast, shall make WAR with the LAMB, who is KING of Kings, and Whose
Army are Chosen and Faithful. Rev. 17.14. This, a Good Anotator Conceives to
Fall under the Sixth Vial: In or about the Year 1194. The Godly were forced to
Defend themselves, by Arms, against the Force of the King of Arragon, whom
Antichrist had instigated against 'em. In the Year 1400, they were Assaulted
from Time to Time in Pragela, and that Country. In the Year 1460. at Frasinere
They were dreadfully Destroyed. In the Year 1488, The Kings Lieutenant of
Dauphine, with His Troops, at the demand of Pope Innocent, very Guiltily
Slaughtered many of the Godly Innocent Waldenses. An Army was raised to root
'em out in the Year 1560; but effected it not, by Reason of the Death of King
Francis; Yet again, For the same End at another Time, was another Army Raised
of Eighteen Thousand Men; and at another Time, the Prince of Savoy sent His
Forces against 'em, who came upon 'em suddenly, Wasting all before 'em. Again,
upon the Solicitations of Pope Paul the Third, An Army under the Lord of
Trinity, marched against 'em, Exercising great Cruelty. But still they
Multiply; wherefore Armed Troops, under the Violent Alexandrino, were sent by
the Impious Pope Pius the 4th, to Extirpate them; who made dreadful Destruction
of 'em in Calabria; and the Viceroy of Naples also, and His Soldiers,
Slaughtered all the Men, Women and Children of the Godly that they could light
upon. As for the Godly on the Borders of Germany, An Army of Soldiers wearing
the Cross, Went and Slew 'em all. Moreover, Two Hundred of 'em were taken in
One of the Castles of Toulouse, and Martyred, Anno 1242. (Besides Many in
Millain; and Many in Dalmatia, and Bofina before:) And in the Year 1262. Pope
Urban made a Decree, wherein He says, -- We Enjoin you upon the Remission of
your Sins, that you do your Utmost for their Extirpation, and I will implore
the Aid of all Christian Kings and Princes; that Heaven and Earth may be moved
against 'em.

They were Harrassed in the County of Albi, Anno 1281. at Provence. Once at
Beziers the Papists slew 60000. An Hundred Thousand Crossed Soldiers from the
Nations came against 'em, Anno 1218. The Godly were all Slain in Spain, and
Parts adjacent about the Year 1235. In the Beginning of the Fifteenth Century,
the Pope Excommunicated the Godly in Bohemia, Exciting the Emperor, Kings,
Princes, and others to take up Arms against 'em, Entreating them, By the Wounds
of CHRIST, and Their own Salvation, Unanimously, to Fall upon 'em, and utterly
to Extirpate that Cursed Generation; Promising Pardon of all Sins to the most
Wicked Person that should kill any One of 'em: Whereupon Great WARS were raised
against 'em, and all Manner of Cruelty Exercised, and no less than Fourteen
Thousand and Forty of the Godly at Cuttenburg were cast into one Great and Deep
Pit of the Old Metal-Mines. And Seventeen Thousand into another, and Ten
Hundred and Thirty and Eight into another. And they had the Victory over the
Protestant Army, in the Year 1620, and took their Great City, and Used Cruel
and Crafty Artifices to destroy 'em Moreover, Pope Martin stirred up the
Emperor and Princes again, against the Godly: The Army Entered into the
Prachatice and Slew Sixteen Hundred Men, Women and Children, sparing none but
such as Fled or Hid. Again, the Pope gave CHARLES the Fifth, Two hundred
thousand Crowns in Money, and Obliged Himself, to maintain Him an Army of
Twelve Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; and Empowered Him to Sell of Abbey
Lands, to the Value of Five hundred thousand Crowns; and Allowed Him, moreover
One half of the Revenues of the Clergy, Engaging Him to Employ all These for
the Extirpation of the Protestants; And Anno 1547, The Protestant Forces (which
were raised for, and which stood upon their Defense,) were Vanquished, and a
great Persecution ensued; Many being Cruelly Beheaded, Hanged, Drowned, and
Burned. Many were destroyed at Magdeburg about the Year 1551. The bloody Duke
of Alva boasted that He had been diligent to Root out Heresy, for besides those
Protestants which He had Slain in the Wars, He had in Six Years time put into
the Executioners hands above Eighteen Tousand Persons.

In the Year Sixteen Hundred and thirty, the Protestants of Germany suffered
horrid Cruelties; Especially in Magdenburg, Hiedelburg, Griphenburg,
Frankendale, and Hoxter, as also in Saxony and Pomerania. being Prosecuted with
Fire and Sword. In France (besides the Multitudes which the Papists destroyed
in the WARS, which they Waged with the Protestants, commonly called the
Civil-Wars,) they Massacred and Slaughtered in time of Peace, above Sixty
Thousand Protestants, in a few Days; the Massacre beginning at Paris on
Bartholomew-Day, Anno 1572. And the Hellish Barbarities which the Armies of
Dragoons Executed upon Hundreds of Thousands of Protestants about thirty Years
since, viz. Anno 1658; what Historian can Relate them without Trembling? Nor
may the Bloody Massacre in Ireland be forgotten, Anno 1641; wherein are said to
be slain 300000. And the Cruelties in other Nations, though too many to be now
mentioned.

Yet the Legate Bertrand, in His Letter to the Pope, Complains of the Bad
Success of the Wars against the Godly Professors of the Reformed Religion in
the Thirteenth Century, and thus Expresses Himself; This War has Cost us very
Dear; for within less than Fifteen Years, there have died above Three Hundred
Thousand Crossed Soldiers; but all will be Lost, except these Heretics be
utterly Destroyed.

It may then be Queried, Whether 'twas then the Beginning of the Great Day of
GOD ALMIGHTY, that Critical Day of Vengeance, intended in the Context? Pope
Innocent the 3d, Offered Pardon of all their Sins, to such as wearing the Sign
of the Cross would come and fight against the Godly Albigenses, and Destroy
'em; the Popish Bishops, Monks, and Friars (like Vile Spirits) Preached these
Proffers and Pardons in the Nations; The Pope wrote also to all Christian
Princes, to stir 'em up to Get this Pardon, by Joining in this, which He
Called, the Holy War; and many Noble men, with Armies of Crossed Soldiers,
came from year to year; the Pope promising Paradise to 'em all: Earl Montfort
was made their General; The Grand Place of their Rendezvous, and Head Quarters,
was in that Reformed Country of the Good Albigenses, which the Pope had
Anathematized and Cursed, and where GOD poured out His Curse upon the Popish
Armies to their Destruction: and whither they were hurried and Congregated for
fear else of their Sustaining the Popes Curse themselves. Now, forasmuch is
Armageddon in the Syriack Hebrew signifies Cutting off by a Curse, It may be
Inquired, whether Protestant Countries may be Called Armageddon, and whether
this Holy War be pointed it by the Battle at Armageddons, in our Context, as
well as not Excluding the other Wars against the Protestants, which have been
for a long time Waged since? But Pareus tells us of some that write Armageddon
with such Hebrew Letters as signify the Mountain of the Gospel. Whether the
Great Day or GOD Almighty can be thought to be ^^^^^ng a Day? Or, Whether the
(...) Plagues Poured out on the Antichristian Party under former Vials, to
Cleave to 'em, and continue to Work, is Poison, in their Bowels, even while the
other Vials are Pouring out upon 'em? Whether Visions, and Prophesies that
Divide Times, and Events by Periods, do Divide 'em in such a Manner, that one
Period should begin where another Ends or rather on the contrary (to Use Mr
Jarieus, and Mr. Beverley's Words,) Whether they are not always Jointed and
Inlaid one within another? (As the Roman Monarchy, Although it was of above 400
Years standing, and had Conquered Her Neighbors, when Alexander founded the
Grecian Monarchy, and lasted all the Time of the Grecian Monarchy, and kept Her
Grandeur entire, is in Prophecy yet Reckoned the 4th Monarchy, being Placed
after the Grecian; Its Grandeur greatly increasing, a long time after the fall
of the Grecian:) and whether some Storms were not a Gathering under some former
Vials, the Clouds dispensing small Showers, though they Came not down with an
Overwhelming Violence, 'till the latter Vials were poured out? Also whether
some of the Plagues poured out on Antichrist did not Effect two things at once,
viz. Both to make Him a Greater Plague to the World, by the excessive
advancement of His Power and Wickedness, than He had been before; and also (by
making the Nations Weary of such an Intolerable Burden, and by opening their
Eyes to behold His Villainies and Impostures,) to Prepare and Dispose 'em to
Cast Him off?

The God of Heaven has sufficient Reasons of State for Permitting, and so
Ordering and Overruling of things, that the full Meaning of some Prophesies
shall not be fully understood, by the Generality of Men in the World, and in
His Church, until after their Accomplishment, yea until a long time after.

It Is Lawful and a Duty with Humility, Reverence, and Modesty to Compare GOD's
Works with His Word.

The Diversity of Conjecture about the Meaning of some of the abstruse
Hieroglyphics of Heaven, (Relating to the Destinies of Nations,) in the
Writings of our Worthies, shows 'em still to be Men, and that as yet they know
but in Part.

The Reformation that was made in Luther's and Calvin's Time, when many
Provinces and Kingdoms fell off from Mystical Babylon, (which Mr. Mede supposed
to fall under the Second Vial,) Mr. Jurieu ascribes to the Seventh, and it is
His Persuasion that now is the 7th Seal, 6th Trumpet, and 7th Vial; and that
when the Professors of the Western Empire Came to be THREE Parties, viz.
Papists, Lutherans, and Calvinists, there was an Accomplishment of the Vision
or Prophesy in our Context) of the Great Cities being Divided into Three Parts;
and that the Last CUP of Fierce Wrath, and the Mighty HAIL STONES, and the
falling away of the rest of the Nations from Antichrist, are now a Preparing
for that Execrable Monster, the Roman Catholic Church and Papacy; and that the
Vintage and the Third Woe are at hand.

But which soever it be of the Vials, (The Glasses of TIME and JUDGMENT,) that
is now a Running out, the WATCHWORD Given in the Prophecy of the Sixth Vial,
is not Unseasonable for Us at this Time to Consider and Improve.

And in the TEXT we may Consider, The Day, the Danger, the Duty, and the
Benefit.

1. The DAY Praedicted; a Day of Surprising, Amazing and Jealous Visitation. "
Behold! I come as a Thief.

2. The DANGER. " Lest He Walk "Naked, and tney See His Shame.

3. The DUTY. " To Watch and "Keep His Garments.

4. The BENEFIT of Doing the Duty, viz. Blessedness. " Blessed is He.

" Behold! I Come as a Thief:] The LORD Comes in the Chariot of Terrible
Providence to Try His People, as well as to Ruin His Enemies: and He comes as
a Thief, suddenly, surprizingly, Terribly, Irresistibly, In the Dark Night, and
at an Hour, when Men think not, and expect Him not. 1 These. 5.2. Luke 12.39.
Rev. 3.3. I will Come on Thee, as a Thief; and Thou shall not Know, what Hour I
will Come upon Thee. The LORD has Times of Sore Temptations and Sharp Trials
for His Own Dear People, and has a Watchful and Jealous Eye over 'em in Such
Times.

" Blessed is He, etc.] He shall Escape the Curse that falls upon Antichrist,
and the Vnhappinesses that befall Vnwatchful Christians; The Pope's Causeless
Curse against Him shall not be Ratified in Heaven: He shall Enjoy the
Complacential Presence of God, and His Guiding, Sanctifying, Upholding, and
Comforting Influences; He shall be Blessed with Peace of Conscience, and with
abundance of Grace and Usefulness, and Exemplary Fruitfulness. Life and Death,
and all things shall work together for His Good.

" He that Watches,] He is the Blessed Person; Not the Sluggard, that says,
Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little folding of the Hands to Sleep,
and that is Lazy and Drowzy, and Sottish, and Fearless, and Blind, and
Foolhardy, or that is Careless, and has an Indifferency of Spirit, and is
Regardless of GOD, thoughtless of Danger, and Heedless of His Ways; Such a Man
is not the most Happy Man, but is in a Miserable Frame, and Case, and Danger:
But the Man that is singularly Blessed (with Divine Liberty, Integrity, Purity,
Activity, Utility, Favor, Peace, Safety, and Joy) is the Watchful Christian,
the man that (like Solomon's Wise man) has His Eyes in His Head; and keeps them
open too, and Endeavors as much as He can, (in a Spiritual Sense) to Imitate
the Keeper of Israel, who never Slumbers, nor Sleeps. His Soul being
subordinately Committed to His own Watching and Keeping, He Endeavors to
discharge the Part of a Faithful Steward, Watchman, Observer and Overseer. He
is Wise and Wary, Prudent and Circumspect, Suspicious of the Serpent in the
Way, and of the Adder in the Path; Diffident and Jealous of His Heart, with a
Godly Jealousy; it having much Darkness, and Corruption yet remaining in it;
and Afraid of touching too hard the Pitch of Outward Objects, lest He be
Defiled.

He makes it His Care and Business, like a Good Sentinel, to Look to His
Charge, to Listen to all inward and outward Motions, to Descry Dangers at a
Distance, to Spy and Examine Comers and Goers, to Discover and Suppress, and
Extinguish Unhallowed Flames, at their first breaking out, to keep off Subtle
and Importunate Intruders, and to Call up his Affections timously unto Duty.
Barrenness and Inactivity of THOUGHT (which be the Bane of many Christians) are
far from Him. He makes Conscience of it, every day, to keep THINKING of the
Greatness. Holiness, Jealousy, and Nearness of GOD, and of His most awful
Severity against Loose and Careless Professors, as well as of His Tender Mercy
to such as are Serious, Circumspect and Diligent; and THINKING, Oh! I have a
Great and a Chief End, viz. to Glorify and Please GOD, and to Live in His Peace
and Favor, and Communion, through the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and to Promote His
Saving Kingdom daily; And saying, O my Soul, then Suffer not thy self in this,
or other Case, or Business, to be chiefly Swayed and Governed by any Inferior
Ends. Is He in Company, What is His THOUGHT? Lo! Here Is an Opportunity Thinks
He; How shall I Improve it? What would GOD have me to do now? LORD! Teach and
Help me! LORD! Let not the Guilt of the Unprofitable and Barren Fig Tree come
upon me: Now, my Soul! Be for some Good Word, some Good Work. Again, Here Is
Company, but with all, here is Indwelling Sin in Thee and Them, ready like Fire,
to break out, and an Evil Angel is near, to tempt; Oh! Let not Eye, Ear, Taste
or Touch deceive Thee; Let not the Pretense of Lawful Liberty deceive Thee;
It Is no Easy thing to avoid Transgression; Look to Thy Self; Thou art near the
Brink; Take Heed; Tread Soft and Warily; Danger is Near. Is Good Started?
follow the Chase; Is Peace? Pursue it, Promote it, Recover it. Guard Thee
against taking of Evil Contagion from Others, and let not a Misbeseeming Word
fly out of thy Mouth, to Infect Others. Be not, O my Soul! like the Simple, who
Pass on (forgetfully, thoughtlesly, carelessly, at all adventures, with a stupid
Presumption,) and are Punished. The Angels of Heaven are called Watchers, and
Holy Ones; and Watchful Believers, in Spirit, in Practice and in Blessedness,
are not Unlike to the Blessed Angels of GOD.

" Blessed is He that Watches, and Keeps His Garments.] GARMENTS are
Purchased, Made, and Provided for Him, and Bestowed upon Him; They are HIS
Garments; and HE has the Wearing of 'em, and the Benefit of 'em, and under GOD,
the Keeping of 'em also: and it is to be Observed, that the Text speaks of
Garments in the Plural Number, as if there were more than One of 'em, and they
are Called Finc Linen, Pure and Bright, or Radiant, even the Righteousness of
Saints, in Rev. 19.8. Now the Saints have a double Righteousness; a Justifying,
and a Sanctifying Righteousness. (1.) A Righteousness that is wrought out for
them by CHRIST, and Imputed to 'em by GOD the FATHER, for their Justification;
and this is most Clean, Pure, Perfect, Spotless, Rendering the Soul (which GOD
sees Clothed with it,) very Glorious in His Eyes: ^ct (2) A Righteousness that
is Wrought in 'em, and is Inherent in them, and is also Exerted, and Practiced
by 'em, in their Sanctification.

Now the Righteousness of the Saint's Words, Carriage, and Works is Visible,
and Bright, and Shining before Men, when as a Believer's being Clothed with
CHRIST's Righteousness is not Visible, but Hidden from Men's Eyes; Especially
when GOD's David's happen to be defiled and smutted with Scandals, through Which,
the Justifying Righteousness that is upon them, shines not forth, until such
Time, as They are Recovered from those Scandals, by a very Visible Repentance
and Reformation. Mat. 5.16. Luke 1.6. 2 Job. 3.7. Thus there is a Righteousness
expressed in the Conversations of Believers, that is Bright and Shining, (but
not Perfectly Pure, and since We cannot Justify it according to the Law, It Is
impossible that it should Justify us, and be our Merit and Plea for Eternal
Life;) and there is another (...) the Obedience of the Second Adam, by which
many are Made Righteous,) most Pure, and Untainted, (and more than Adequate to
the Demands of the Law from finite Creatures;) and also is Infinite in Value;
(the Person Offering it being Infinite;) in which therefore Believers have
Merit and Plea enough.

Mankind by the Fall, are Made Naked, and Shameful, and Vulnerable, and
Disintitled to the Divine Favor and Fruition, and Disenabled to the Divine
Communion, and Service, and to their Active Glorifying of GOD, and Manifesting
of His Virtues, and Perfections; Judicially Divested of the Divine Life and
Image; and are become Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Hell* and are under the
Power of Spiritual Death, and are Exposed to all Manner of Evils and Miseries:
But Believers, their Nakedness of Title Cease, as soon as They are Clothed
with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, and their Nakedness of Strength* (Their
total Disability) Ceases, when the New Principle of Spiritual Life is Created
and Infused; Proportionable unto the Increase, Strength and Activity whereof is
the Decrease, Weakening and Suppressing of the Old Bad Principle, the Remains
and Actings of which were the Saint's Remaining Nakedness, Rendering them Liable
unto Blemishes, Defilement, and Shame, and unto Divine-Fatherly Displeasure,
and Punishments; In Reference hereto, some of the Saints, Their Particular
Nakedness may in some degree, be Covered from (to shamefully) Appearing before
GOD and Men; their Growth in Particular Graces, being Manifested by their Words
and Actions: Thus their Increased Knowledge, so far as it Reaches, Covers the
Nakedness of their Ignorance; and their Increased Faith Covers the Nakedness of
their Unbelief, so their Noble Humility Covers the Nakedness of their Shameful
Pride, and their Heavenly Zeal Covers, or removes out of Sight, the Nakedness
of their base Earthly Lukewarmness; so their Prudence, Justice, Temperance,
Fortitude, Faithfulness, Chastity, Purity, Patience, Charity, Liberality, and
other Graces, and Virtues increased, and resplendent, Cover the Nakedness which
accrued from their Want of 'em. But as to the Vindictive Eyes and Views of GOD;
It is only CHRIST's Righteousness that can Cover all the Saints Nakedness
therefrom.

Now the Dragons of Hell, and Draconick Powers on Earth, and the Beast or
Roman Catholic Church, and the False Prophet, (the Sinful Head of that Earthly
Church, and blasphemous Pretender to Infallibility,) have Used all Wicked Arts
and Force to Pluck away the Saints Garments; Surrogating instead of the
Justifying Righteousness of CHRIST, and the true Holiness of Saints* that which
they call Good Works, viz. Idolatrous Worship, Prayers to Angels, and Saints
Departed, Penances, Pilgrimages, Crossings, Oblations to Temples and
Monasteries, Pope's Pardons, and the like fig leaves, which are utterly
insufficient for any to make Garments of, to Cover their Souls Nakedness, and
yet Declared by them to be Able to Save Men from Hell, and to be Meritorious of
Heaven, and -- Imposed on Men, under Penalty of Destruction, by Fire, and
Sword, and by the Great Anathema.

WITH their Sophistries, and Signs, and Lying Wonders, and Diabolical Miracles,
they would deceive (if it were Possible,) the Elect themselves; but GOD's
Decree and Promise have made it Impossible that they should totally, finally
deceive Them, and utterly Cheat and Strip 'em of their Saving Garments.

YET the Elect themselves must Watch, and Hold their Garments fast about 'em,
and rather Lose their Lives than let 'em go.

BLESSED is He that keeps the Righteousness of CHRIST girt about Him by Faith,
and His Evidences of His Interest therein, and His Enjoyment of the Fruits
thereof in Holiness, and the Godly and Virtuous Life.

" Left otherwise He Walk Naked, and They See His Shame.] Christless Carnal
Sinners have no Garment to Cover their Shameful and Loathsome Guiltiness and
Filthiness; and not being Justified by Faith in JESUS CHRIST, (as the LORD
Their Righteousness, they have no Peace with GOD, but he Naked and Open to His
Wrath and Everlasting Vengeance: and therefore Professors of the true Religion
must see to it, that they Get a Saving Interest in CHRIST, by Faith and
Regeneration. Moreover, Regenerate Saints must be Careful to Keep their
Garments upon Them: Have they Put on CHRIST (as their Righteousness,) they must
not Put Him off; and if they keep not this Garment Close to 'em, they will lose
much of the Warmth of it, and much of the Defense of it, and their own
Consciences will be Wounded and Ashamed. If they draw the Tattered and Vile
Garment of their own Imperfect Polluted Righteousness, and of their Errors,
Vices and Evil Works, over the Garment of CHRIST's Righteousness, (so that they
shall not be able to see whether they have CHRIST's Righteousness upon 'em or
no,) they will find Themselves Naked of Comfort, and far off from the Joys of the
HOLY GHOST, and Unprepared to offer their Lives for the Truth, (in the Time of
Trial) as good Martyrs of CHRIST; And if being Criminally Unwatchful, they
should be Left to Deny the Lord, Abjure the Truth, and Apostatize from GOD's
Holy Ways for a Time, how Shameful would this be; O! How will it turn to their
Disparagement and Reproach among their Enemies; and what Shameful Punishments
will they Procure thereby to themselves; and How will they Take Shame to
themselves, when GOD shall give 'em Repentance, and Recovery. If they don't
Watch, and keep Close to CHRIST, and keep on their Garment of Holiness, (though
they have made a Glorious Profession, and Done Great Service for Many Years;)
They will be in danger of Dishonouring of CHRIST more in One Hour, than they
have Glorified Him before, in Many Years: and by present Wickedness will they
make all their former Righteousnesses to be Forgotten, or at least Reputed by
Men to be the Shameful Brats, altogether and only of most Loathsome Hypocrisy;
Nor will the LORD's Remembrance of their Former Righteousnesses, prevent His
proceeding to manifest His Fatherly Anger against them, by Terrible Severities
upon them; so Naked will they find themselves to be, and so will Men see their
Shame.

From the Text thus Opened, The DOCTRINE is this; Viz.

That One Means, and Sign, and Part of a Christian's Blessedness, is His
Christian and Spiritual Watchfulness; which is very necessary unto His Keeping
of His Spiritual Garments; the Loss whereof would Shamefully and Dreadfully
Expose Him, Especially, whenever there shall Come a Day of Terrible Visitation
from the LORD.

Through Vnwatchfulness Our First Parents Lost their Garments of Innocence, and
the Divine Image, and became Naked, and so Lost their Blessedness also, and
became Miserable; and We in Them, became Guilty and Miserable also. And Man had
no Hopes, and no News of any possibility of His Recovery of Blessedness, 'till
from the Mouth of GOD He had the Heavenly Tidings of That, and of the Seed of
the Woman, (the LORD JESUS, the Worker of our Justifying Righteousness,) both
together.

As in the Day of Antichrist's Exaltation, ALL men should not be left to Shut
themselves out utterly from having a Part in that Glorious Promised Seed and
His Righteousness, (for SOME had their Names Written in His book (...): and
such others only Worship^^^^ Antichrist, (utterly Revolting from CHRIST,) whose
Names were not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, Slain from the
Foundation of the World; Rev. 13.8.) So ALL should not be utterly Miserable,
either in that Day of the Reign of the Man of Sin, or in the Days of
Antichrist's Execution: For our Text Contains and Exhibits a Prophesy, that
some shall be Happy and Blessed; and describes and declares, Who shall be so.
In the Worst of Times, the LORD* Has His 7000 in Apostate Israel, and His 144
thousand in Armageddon, which some translate the Mount of the Gospel, and which
also is the Place of Antichrist's Curse. In the Times of the Curse, These are
Subjects of the Blessing: In the Midst of the Great Carnage made by Popery,
These are Spiritually Alive, and Awake, and Sleep not (the Sleep of Death) as
do others; for they Watch; and none but Living Persons are Capable of Watching:
and These are not Naked, but have Garments upon them, and they make it their
Business to keep 'em.

We see their Duty, (...) Commendation: And that which they Discharged so Well,
is Charged as a Duty, upon Us, and others also. Search the Scriptures, and you
will find it so: Read Luke 21.34, -- 36. Take heed to your selves, Lest at any
Time, your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and Cares of
this Life; and so That Day come upon you unawares; For as a Snare shall it Come
on all Them that dwell on the face of the whole Earth; Watch ye therefore, etc.
Mark 13.35, -- 37. Watch ye therefore; (for ye know not when the Master of the
House Comes, at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the
Morning;) lest Coming suddenly, He find you sleeping: And what I say unto you,
I say unto ALL; Watch. 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye; Stand fast in the Faith; Quit
you like men; Be strong. 1 These. 5 5, 7. -- We are not of the Night, nor of
Darkness; therefore let us not Sleep, as do Others; But let us Watch and be
Sober. 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. These things happened to them for Ensamples; and were
written for our Admonition, -- Wherefore let Him who Thinks He Stands, TAKE
HEED Left He Fall. 2 John v. 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those
things which we have Wrought (or Gained) 2 Pet. 3.17. Beware lest ye also,
being led away, with the Error of the Wicked, Fall from your own Stedfastness.
Heb. 3.12, 13. Take Heed, Brethren! lest there be in any of you an Evil Heart
of Unbelief, in Departing from the Living GOD, etc. lest any of you be Hardened,
through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Rev. 3.2, -- 4. Be Watchful, and Strengthen the
things which remain, that are ready to Die; -- Remember -- Hold Fast -- Repent;
If Thou shall not Watch, I will Come on Thee, as a Thief; -- Thou have a few
Names, -- which have not defiled their Garments --. Thus from the Holy Oracles,
the Duty of Watchfulness is as Evident, as Indispensable.

'Twill Appear also to be a Means, a Sign, and a Part of a Christian's
Blessedness, to such as Consider, How it is singularly Appropriate to the
Saints, and how it Prevents the Crimes, Guilt, and Mischiefs, which it is
Contraries ( viz. Fearlessness, Heedlessness, Carelessness, Presumption,
Stupidity, Sloth, Drowsiness, Security, Thoughtlessness, Forgetfulness, and the
like) do Expose Men unto, and Overwhelm 'em with; And also How it is it Self a
Special Part of Obedience to the Divine Command (which is the Way of Life, and
in the keeping whereof there is Great Reward;) and Conduces to the keeping of a
Good Conscience, and to the Gaining of sweet Peace of Conscience, which belongs
to Blessedness; and is also a Defense and Preservator to every Grace, and Keeps
our Graces in Exercise, and is also essentially necessary, and powerfully
Inservient to the maintaining of the Life and Power of Godliness, and necessary
for our Living unto GOD daily in the World in an Even, Constant, and Zealous
Course of Devotion and Universal Obedience; (O blessed Watchfulness!) and
Quickens us to a speedy Recovery by Repentance, when fallen into Sin; and to a
Right Demeanor under, and Improvement of Prosperity and Adversity; and to a
Wise and Profitable Redemption of Time, and Opportunities; and moreover Greatly
furthers the Saints in their Warfare against their Enemies, Sin, Satan and the
World* and arms 'em against Surprises; and speeds 'em in Running their
Christian Race, and is very helpful for their Freedom and Frequency of
Communion with GOD, in Heavenly Meditation, Faith, Love, Prayer, Thanksgiving,
etc. and Gives 'em a good Life toward their Discovery and Assurance of the
Good Estate, and Promotes their abundant Usefulness, by their Shining Examples,
and Unwearied Activity, for the Good of Men, and for the Advancement of the
Saving Kingdom of GOD, and our LORD JESUS CHRIST in this World. Oh! How many
Ingredients of a Saints present Spiritual Blessedness are here! (all of them
Conducing to His Eternal Blessedness; (and yet (Under CHRIST, and His SPIRITS
Care and Influences,) The Christian's Powerful Watchfulness, is (within
Himself) the Mother that helps to Produce, and Continually to Keep 'em alive,
the Eye that Looks to 'em, the Hand that Quickens 'em and Stirs 'em up, the
Inward faithful Steward that Oversees 'em, guards 'em, and Cultivates 'em.

When GOD is graciously pleased to Give a man a Wakeful, Awful, Vigilant and
Sagacious Mind, and to keep it up in its Watchful Activity, What Past-Crimes
can escape Unobserved and Unrepented? How will His Inward Aim and Thoughts be
Called to Account, and kept under due Regulation! How will Earthly and Infernal
Snares be Espied and Avoided, and the Saint be freed from Scandalous Enmities,
Reduced from Wanderings, and Advanced on the Wing for Heaven! Blessed then is
the Man whom the LORD when He Comes, shall find thus Watching.

BUT, on the Contrary, the Men (though Regenerate) are not So Blessed, who Sleep
when they should Watch, and so (though not totally and universally, yet) so far
Lose their Spiritual Garments, and the Use of 'em, as to be Shamefully and
Dreadfully Exposed, and Naked, by their Want of 'em: Forasmuch as they will be
most unhappily EXPOSED; (I.) To the Corrupt Principle that remains yet within
'em, which will have a mighty Advantage from their Unwatchfulness, to betray
'em into the Hands of Blind Leaders, and Shameful Errors, and to make a Woeful
Slaughter upon their Morals, and to act dismal Tragedies upon their Consciences
and Conversations. Luke 24.34, -- 36. Jam. 1.14. Ephesians. 4.18 Jer. 17.9. Prove.
4.23. (II.) To their Adversary the Devil, to His [ Mill Nocendi Artes] Wily
Suggestions, Crafty Insinuations, Cruel Accusations, Molestations, Executions.
(1 Pet. 5.8, 9.) Therefore Men should Watch, because of their Adversary the
Devil. Mat. 26.41. (III.) To the World, to be shamefully entangled in it is
Snares, Bewitched with its Enchanting Objects, Defiled by it is Examples, and
Inflamed unto Rebellion against GOD by it is Incendiaries, and into Idolatry by
the Legends of the false Miracles of Popish Idolaters. Thus the Vnwatchful,
(though Righteous, is yet naked of their Garments and Strength) will be found
Falling before the Wicked, (who will both Insult and Scorn 'em, and be hurt and
hardened thereby, Prove 25.26. 2 Samuel 12.14. Jer. 50.7.) and so Shame will be
brought upon all their Glory. (IV.) To the Church; To Her Just and Terrible
Censures will they be Exposed, for their most Sinful Vnwatchfulness, and Loss
of their Spiritual Garment of Holiness. 2 These. 3.6. 1 Timothy 1.29. 1 Cor. 5.4,
15. (V.) To their own Consciences. For though their Sleepy Consciences do not
watch and observe their Hearts and Ways, so as to Call them up to Duty, and
Call 'em off from Sin, and Put by the Arrows of Temptation that Endanger 'em,
and the Enemies that would rob 'em of their Garments; and to Call in seasonable
Help for 'em from Heaven, as their Monitors and Guardians; yet they do Watch
and Observe them so far as to Discern their Negligences and Iniquities, and to
become (when they are thoroughly Awakened) Witnesses against 'em, and will
Accuse, and Condemn 'em, Shame, and Sting 'em intolerably for 'em. Genesis 42.21.
Jonah 1.12. (VI.) To their GOD and SAVIOVR: To His Jealous and Heart-Searching
Eye, and Punishing Hand. He Will Chastize 'em on Earth (and Perhaps with
Scorpions,) for their Neglect of their Watch, and for their not keeping their
Garmens, and for their Discovering their Shame, though He may Preserve 'em from
Hell. GOD Commanded Israel to Watch, and Beware, and Take Heed, and not forget,
Deuteronomy. 49.23. and 6.12. and 8.11, 14, 19. and threatened them for their former
Forgetfulness, (that Exposed them to Idolatry) See Exodus 32.34. -- Mine Angel
shall Go before Thee; Yet in the Day when I Visit, I will Visit their Sin upon
'em. So Rev. 2.5, 16. and 3.2, 3.

THE USE is of EXHORTATION unto Evangelical Watchfulness; which is a Choice
Duty Pressed upon us by our Best Friend, and on the Strong Motive of
Blessedness, and under the Pain and Penalty of Woeful Loss and Shame.

THE Blessing is Sure, because Pronounced by CHRIST's own Mouth, and the
Penalty Certain, for HE has Declared it.

Not any Time is allowed to Security, or to that which Breeds it, ( viz. the
Opiate of Sensuality and Worldliness; ( Luke 21.34. Take Heed lest at any Time,
etc. Happy is the Man that fears always; Prove. 28.14. and so Watches; and who
keeps in the fear of the LORD all the day long; Prove. 23.17.

YET let no man Idolize His own Endeavors, or Trust in His own Watchfulness;
Except the LORD Keep the City, the Watchman Wakes in vain; Psalm. 127.1. So
Except the LORD vouchsafe to Watch, and keep Thee, thy Vigilant-Soul Watches
over Thee in Vain. CHRIST is not Engaged in Honor to Keep such a Man as
designs (Setting CHRIST aside) to be His own Supreme Keeper.

KNOW that if you Watch well, it is CHRIST that Works in you to Will and to Do
so; and if you have Benefit by your Watching, it is all from the Bounty and
Blessing of CHRIST.

Yet Watch You must, though in CHRIST's Arms, and not upon your own Legs. Nor
may you Expect that CHRIST JESUS will Graciously Watch over you, if you don't
Watch over your selves.

I. First then, WATCH over your HEARTS, and Watch against their Nakedness; I
say, Watch and Keep your Heart with all Diligence. Prove. 4.23. Keep it, that it
suffer no Impairment in its Gracious Qualities, By Departing from the Living
God, and Hearkening to the Deceitfulness of Sin. Heb. 3.12.

The Work of Watching and Keeping the Heart from Sin, and with GOD, is a Busier
Work than any other in the World; and it is the Greatest Business We have to Do
in the World; and it is the Least Attended and Done of any Business in the
World, by the most of Men, Yea even by the most of Christians; (We may speak it
with Grief and Shame;) and this is a Main Cause, why there is so little
Difference between Many Christians, and the Men of the World.

There are Remainders of Corruptions in the most Sanctified Heart on Earth,
which must be narrowly Watched and Kept under.

The Heart is Slippery, Treacherous, Deceitful above all things, and Desperate
Wickedness is in it, while the Sinning Principle is in it; against which the
New Creature, (the Heavenly Principle,) must Watch.

Our Thoughts and Affections must be kept under Constant View and Observation
by Us: Let us then most Conscienciously Inspect 'em; and let us Call 'em up, If
they be Dull and Backward, unto Good; and Call 'em in, and Reclaim 'em, If they
be Wandering unto Evil. Let us Watch and Examine what are our Aims, Ends and
Designs; as also What our Thoughts are most upon; and What Frames our Hearts
are in daily, both when we are Worshipping of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, and when we
are about Secular Business; When we are in Company, and when we are alone; When
we are in Affliction, and under Temptation, and Meet with Affronts, and
Injuries, and When We are in more Comfortable Circumstances: and let us Cry to
GOD for 'em; and make Haste to Apply Suitable Remedies to 'em, if We discover
any Disorders in them.

CHRISTIANS! We should Watch unto the Mortification of Inordinate Self-Esteem,
and Self-Love, and Self-Dependance, and Trust and Delight in Carnal and Worldly
Objects, (both Persons and Things;) and we should Watch against Sloth,
Weariness of Duty, Impatience, Faintings, and Discouragements of Spirit under
the Cross; and we should Watch unto an Inward Rest in the LORD, a Living Trust
in CHRIST JESUS, and in the Sufficiency of His Sacrifice and Righteousness for
us, and in the Promise of Peace we shall have with GOD through JESUS CHRIST our
LORD; and we should beware of Drawing Back from the LORD; Heb. 10.38. And we
should Watch to Furnish, Provide, and Employ our Thoughts, Wills, Affections
and Consciences and Memories well; and to Make and Keep 'em Ready for the LORD,
Rev. 19.7, 20. ( Looking for, and Hastening to the Day of God;) that they may be
in such Plight as CHRIST Looks for, in a Day of Visitation, and as we may then
Rejoice, that He should find our Souls in it.

O! How can We possibly Live the Heavenly Life, without thus Watching and
Well-Ordering of Our Thoughts, Aims and Affections, and Keeping Our Minds in
Frame? Since in our Loving of GOD above all with All our Hearts, and in our
Constant most Awful Fear of Him, and in our Dependence on Our Glorious Head,
and Savior, and Communion with GOD through Him, the Life and Power of Godliness
do Consist, which can never be Upheld without a daily Watching to Keep our
Hearts with GOD.

II. Watch over Your WORDS, and Watch against their Nakedness. David could say,
Lord! There is not a Word in My Tongue, but Thou know it altogether, Psalm.
134.4. If there be any evil in the World, something of it may be found in Words
spoken by the Tongue; and How often do they break all the Commandments! The
Tongue is an University of Evil; Jam. 3.6. That, and the Pen are Chief
Secretaries of State to all Estates of Sin and Sinners. The Tongue is an
Instrument abused in all Cases. The Devil could not make His Matters do, 'till
He abused the Tongue of the Serpent. What Pleads the Vilest Cases, and is a
Pimp to all Wickedness, but the Tongue? It is the Dexterous Instrument of a
Vicious Heart for all manner of Evil. It is Atheistical, Blasphemous, Profane,
Idolatrous, Sabbath-Breaking, Abusive to Superiors and Others, Cursing,
Provoking, Spiteful, Venomous, Scornful, Reproachful, Murderous, Adulterous,
Unclean, Slanderous, False, Cheating, Avaricious, Discontented, Unbelieving,
Impenitent, and Perverse, and it is a Lasting Evil; when a Wretch in Old Age is
able to do little Else, Yet He can Handle His Tongue, and Hinder abundance of
Good, and Insinuate and Propagate a World of Vanity and Villainy by it: and No
Laws and Humane Punishments can Tame it. Bad Words also are, in some Respect,
Worse than Bad Thoughts; for if you compare Bringing forth with Conceiving,
you will say, that to Bring forth is a further degree of Perfection, than at first
to Conceive; (so says Mr. Hooker) Now the Evil which the Heart first Conceives
is Brought sorth by the Tongue; and what in the Heart was secret, in the Tongue
is Open and Manifest, and what the Mind contrived, is in part, Executed by the
Tongue; and While the Evil was kept secret and close in the Heart, the Heart
and Person were only the Worse for it; But foming out at the Tongue, Many are
guiltily Infected and Defiled both in Heart and Manners thereby; for Evil Words
Corrupt Good Manners; 1 Cor. 15.33. Much fair Speech is forcing unto foul
Crimes. Prove. 7.21. Words (and Writings which are the Characters of Words) are
Unhappy Incendiaries many times, and like unto a few Coals or Sparks of Fire,
that are so Catching and Spreading, as to be sufficient to Set whole Towns,
Cities, Provinces, and Nations into a Flame; Witness Sheba's and Sacheverell's,
and Multitudes of Others; Not to speak of the Words and Bulls (or Writings) of
Antichrist: And it is most Certain, (How Light soever Men make of Words,) that
Evil Words will Damn Men, if not Repented of: He that says to His Brother, (in
rash Anger (" Thou Fool! is in Danger of Hellfire. Why, LORD! They are but
Words! Ay, but they are Guilty of Atrocious Evil. In the Day of Judgment,
CHRIST will Convict the Ungodly of, and Condemn 'em for their Hard Speeches;
See Jude, ver. 14, and 15. And Of every Idle Word that men shall speak, they
shall give an Account in the Day of Judgment, etc. Mat. 12.36. With the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation; Romans 19.10. But if We Confess not CHRIST
before Men, He Will not Confess us before the Father; Mat. 10.32. If We Deny Him,
He will Deny Us; 2 Timothy 2.12. It Is Certain then, that Words are of Great
Consequence; And if a Man's Words be Carnal, Earthly, Vain, Proud, Lewd,
Profane, False, Bitter, Wicked, and Unreformed, His Profession will not bring Him
to Heaven, His Prayers, Thanksgivings, Hearings, and other Services then are
Insincere, Unsound, and Vain. Jam. 1.16. If a man seem to be Religious, and
Bridleth not His Tongue, that man's RELIGION is VAIN. Now if the Tongue be not
Set on Fire of Heaven, It will be Set on Fire of Hell; If Grace don't fill and
act the Tongue, Sin and Satan will; and the Tongue will Put off and Lose the
Garment of Holiness, and Walk Shamefully Naked, If it be not well Watched and
Restrained. Let us then suffer our selves to be Persuaded to follow the Example
of the Holy Psalmist, in Psalm. 39.1. And let us Watch and Take Heed to our
Speech, that we Sin not with our Tongues; Let us Keep our Mouth (as it were)
with Bit and Bridle; and let us Pray, ( Psalm. 141.3. Set a Watch (O LORD)
before my Mouth. Let us Watch, that no Corrupt Flames from within Break out
scandalously at our Tongues. Let no Words Contrary to Piety, Truth,
Seriousness, Modesty, Sobriety, Humility, Equity, Charity, Patience, Chastity,
and Goodness Come out of our Mouths; and Let us Watch unto Good Discourse that
is for the Use of Edifying, and Contrive, and Study for it; and when Idle
Words, and Vain Talk would Crowd out such Good Discourse, Let us Endeavor to
Crowd in a Remembrance of the Day of Judgment. And You who Love to Chat
Unprofitably with your Companions, (as you Love your Life) and take pleasure in
Wasting your Precious Hours in Mere Vanity, If not what is Worse, Look to it,
for Evil is before you; GOD will not put it up so; but in the Day when He Visits,
He Will severely Reckon with you for it, in this World; and it will cost you
Shame, and a Bitter Repentance; and (Besides other Punishments Here,) you may
suffer much Loss; and moreover you may Miss of such Great Degrees of Glory in
the other World, as otherwise you might have Obtained; and though you should be
Saved, yet you will be Saved as by Fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. Ps. 50.21, 22. Rev. 20.12,
13. Mat. 12.37.

III. Watch over your WORKS and LIVES. Inspect and Consider your Ways; Haggai.
1.5, 7. Search and Try your Ways; Lam. 3.40. Remember your Ways, with
Repentance of the Evil of 'em; Ezekiel. 20.43. Cleanse your Ways by taking Heed to
'em, according to GOD's Word; Psalm. 119 9. Think on your Ways, and Turn your
feet into GOD's Testimonies; Psalm. 119.59. Take Heed to your Ways, that you Sin
not, through Carelessness and Unwatchfulness. Psa. 39.1. The Prudent Looks well
to His Goings. Watch and See that you have your Conversations without
Coveteousness, and Oppressive Practices. Heb. 13.5. See that they be Honest; 1
Pet. 2.12. Sober, Just, Godly, Tit. 2.12. Peaceable, Romans 12.18. Chaste, 1 Pet.
3.2 Temperate, Holy, Innocent, and Blameless, and not Scandalous, not Vicious;
2 Pet. 3.11. Psalm. 26.26. Watch and take Opportunities to be abundant in Good
Works; 1 Cor. 15.58. and be not Weary in Well-Doing; Gal. 6.9. Watch Diligently
that your Conversation be such as Becomes the Gospel; Phil. 1.12. That you
Live no Longer in Sin, Working the Works of Darkness; Romans 1.1. But that you
Live to the LORD; To. 14.8. and Walk in ALL the Commandments, and in ALL the
Ordinances of the LORD; Luke 1.6. If you Neglect but One Ordinance, But One
Sacrament, or only Secret Prayer, or any other Institution, You
interpretatively and practically Deny CHRIST's Universal Sovereignty, as Lord
and Lawgiver, and are dreadfully Guilty: Jam. 2.10. Let such Christians as
Carelessly and Contentedly from year to year, Neglect the LORD's Supper,
Consider This. The LORD's Royal Edict is, Jer. 7 23. Walk ye in ALL the Ways
that I have Commanded you. Again, Watch to Redeem the Time, and to do Good to
all Men, even to your Personal Enemies, (as you have opportunity,) especially
to the Household of Faith: and Watch to do Good to Posterity; and to Advance the
Kingdom of CHRIST; Gal. 6 10. The LORD Calls for your Watchfulness and
Circumspection for the Doing of these Things: Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See that yon Walk
Circumspectly, -- Redeeming the Time.

Rulers, Subjects, Teachers, Hearers, Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children,
Masters, Servants, Tutors, Physicians, Tradesmen, Laborers, and Others,
[Friends, Neighbors,] have a multitude of Relative Duties to Employ their
Goodness, incumbent upon them; (and if they be not Good, as to their Relative
Capacities, they are not Good Christians; Ephesians. 5.5.) But if they are not
Extraordinarily Watchful and Circumspect, Those Duties will be left, undone, or
ill done; and Men's Religious Profession will he Scandalized thereby; Yea, the
NAME of GOD will suffer also; the Thought whereof must Needs Pierce the Heart
of a Child of GOD, and make Him to Look well to His Ways.

Christians! Waken up, I beseech You; For You must not Sleep as do Others; 1
These. 5.6. You must Watch even in all Things; -- and Watch at all Times, in
Prosperity and Adversity; and Watch in all Places, when in Company, and when
Alone; and in all Cases, and on all Occasions, and against All Sins and
Temptations, and unto all Duties which the LORD Calls yon unto, 'till the LORD
shall COME unto you; Psalm. 101.2. and you must be Watchful and Careful to
Acknowledge the LORD in all your Ways; Prove. 3.6. and to attend on Him without
Distraction. 1 Cor. 7.36.

O Christians! It Is a Great Fault, and very Woeful, that We Neglect our Watch;
and Because of this, We Enter into Temptation, and are Foiled miserably
thereby. Mat. 26.41.

Oh! How Few do make their Own Wakeful,) Awful, and Self-Watching Consciences,
Their Constant Companions, as They ought to do! and the most, being Careless of
Themselves, do not duly and charitably Watch over One Another; and cannot bear
to be Faithfully Watched over by any Others.

How Few Discern and Suppress the Tares, when they first Spring up in their
Hearts!

How few take Pains with their Hearts to deliver 'em from their Carnal Frames!

How Few do duly Watch against Unbelief, and Coolings of Faith and Desires
toward JESUS CHRIST! ( Heb. 3.12.)

How Few Spy the First Motions of Pride, Idolatrous Self-Dependance; and the
first Motions of Idolatrous Love of Creatures and Outward Comforts, and
Pleasures; and the First Motions of Undue Jealousies, Harsh Resentments of
Injuries, Wrath and Revengefulness; to Crush 'em in the Egg, before they break
forth, and become Cockatrices.

How Few So Watch as to keep up their Minds and Hearts in the Contemplations of
the Glories of GOD, and in Communion with Him!

Alas! He that Watches Best, Sleeps sometimes, and Let Us fall His Watch. Even
the Five Wise Virgins were so Foolish, that they Slumbred and Slept, and let
their Lamps go out of Trim. Mat. 25.5. Right Emblems of the Churches, and
Christians of our Days. None Watches so Warily, as to be wholly Free from
offenses: Yet some are More Watchful than Others; and the more Watchful any
are, the Fewer and Smaller are their Faults, and Hurts; and such as happen, are
the sooner Recovered and Healed. We have no Allowance of GOD to Sin, at any
time, and we are Commanded to be in GOD's fear Continually all the day; We must
therefore Continually Watch.

Object. 1. But this is too Strict!

Answ. I know that the Generality of Christians Count it so, and Many do
vigorously Argue against it, and have a Secret Hatred to it; as they have also
to some Other Points of Strict Godliness; and they would fain Persuade
themselves that GOD don't Require, what They are too Lazy and Sluggish to
Perform: But as we have already Proved the Duty, from Infallible Texts of
Scripture, so Their Objecting against it, and Unwillingnesses to it, Prove that
there is too much of Carnality (yet Unmortify'd) in their Hearts. And that They
have not Delight enough in Heavenly Things. Nor a due Hatred of Sinful
Thoughts, Words, and Actions. Nor a Sufficient Awe of GOD upon their Spirits:
But when once they shall come to know the Terrors of the LORD, and to Fear Him
exceedingly, and to have a dreadful Abhorrence of all Sin, and a Great Delight
in GOD's Commandments, and in Communion with the LORD, and shall have had good
Experience of the Practice of Watchfulness, and of the Gains and Sweets of it,
all Objections will vanish away, and They Will Repent of their former
Carelessness, and would not Live so Unwatchfully, and Ungirtly again, for all
the World.

Object. 2. We Cannot Watch; and it is enough to Tire out any Man Living.

Answ. I know You Cannot, in Your own Strength; and this Work is not Tiresome
only, but Killing to Corrupt Nature; But you that are True Believers have a New
Nature, (a Divine Principle, Created in You,) and also a Title to the Daily,
invigorating and strengthening Influences of Heaven to Friend with; You must
then Watch unto Prayer, ( Col. 4.2.) Making daily Petitions for fresh and
abundant Dispensations of these Divine Influences from CHRIST and HIS HOLY
SPIRIT; and in HIS Name, Confiding therein, You must Try and Use Your Utmost
Endeavor to Watch over your Hearts, Words and Ways, in Obedience to His Holy
Commands. This Matter is not to be Despaired of; It belongs to you, and GOD
will be with you; Be Strong, and Do it.

As for Those that Complain, It Is too much for 'em to be so Strict and Holy as
they see some Saints to be, and that to be ever taking heed to themselves and
watching of their Hearts and Ways is Unattainable; thereupon Contenting
themselves to live at a loose End; They Speak and Act as Becomes not
Christians, to whom the Evangelical Command is Possible, and who can (in a
degree) do all Things through CHRIST strengthening them. Phil. 4.13.

You perhaps have long been Accostomed not to Watch; But One Custom may be
Removed and Taken away (tho it be a Second Nature) By the Bringing in of
Another Custom; and Acts often Multiplied, make a Custom. Suidas Relates
concerning the Watchful Marcellus, that by long Use and Custom, He had brought
Himself to that Pass, as to live without Sleep, or at least, with so Little, as
could hardly be Observed by any Others. Would Christians but a while Inure
themselves to the Practice and Exercise of Watchfulness, they would find it
Easy and Pleasant, and that they could not bear to Live without it. As Colon
the Famous Diver, (mentioned by Pontanus) who by the Long Practice of Swimming,
could not bear to Live out of the Water; and the Siculan-Diver, if He was long
upon the Land, He was so Griped, as to be forced to go into the Water again,
and that Other Person, whom the Fishermen used (in an huge Vessel of Water) to
Carry about for a Show. So Julius Viator, who (as Sennartus Relates) to Save
His Life in a Dropsy, by little and little, used Himself to abstain from
Drinking, and Held His New Custom even unto Old Age, Living to be an Old Man
without Drink. Use makes Perfectness in any Art, Calling or Mystery; and
Contributes greatly to the Dexterity, Facility and Delight of Action. Present
Difficulty then should not affright us from Engaging in what is Good and
Necessary, but Next to Supernatural Helps, (which we ought to Look and Seek to
Heaven for, and Depend upon,) we should betake our selves to the Power of Use
and Custom, (to Use Polybius's Phrase,) By which ( says He) all that is Good
and Laudable is Possible to Man. Then Try the Experiment (as to this Duty of
Spiritual Watchfulness) as other Saints have done before you; and This Way of
Wisdom, which now seems Intoterable and most Grievous, You Will find it a Way of
Pleasantness, as well as a Path of Peace; Prove. 3.17. This Yoke shall be Easy
to You, and this Burden Light. Mat. 11.29.

It Is then, greatly to be Lamented, that Men Who are Professors of the Gospel,
should make so little Use of this so Gracious, so Sweet, and so Necessary an
Help in the Godly Life, that is so much and often, and upon so many Clear Texts
of Holy Scripture, preached and recommended to them, and Urged upon them. We
are dreadfully and Judicially Hardened, If neither Commands, Promises, nor
Threatenings can Move us, Nor Executions neither, nor the Concerns and Interests
of the Divine Glory, Not yet the Sense of our own Danger and Necessity.

It has been the Practice of the Best Saints to Watch over their Hearts, Words
and Ways. Job 3.26. Psalm. 39.^. and 123.2. And if they have fallen into
Iniquity, it has been when they have given Way to Security: And the Best have
offended, when they have not been Watchful. Holy Eve in the State of Innocence,
needed to Watch diligently; much more We then who are far from Innocence, and
have Corrupt Lusts and Affections within Us. She ( Vnwatchful as She was,
Satan's Word Stupfying of Her) took the deadly Infection, and was the first (of
all Mankind,) in the Transgression; and Her Holy Husband (being Vnwatchful)
took from Her the Contagion, and transmitted it (together with an Intailment of
Pollution and Destruction) to Vast Millions of His Posterity. David was a Wise
Man, a Man after GOD's own Heart, and One whom We may suppose to have Meditated
in the Law of God as much as any One Living, and had as Awful a Fear of the
Deity in his Sanctified Soul as Any, yet once and again, is Wise as He was,
when it happened that He had that Piece of His Armor ( viz. Strict
Watchfulness) a little loose, and not well girt about Him, the Devil caught
Him with His Bait and Hook, and Fired Him into those Gross Sins, for which He
and His Royal Family, and Realm, Smarted, a long time after. Godly Peter also
was led into Temptation, and into Gross Abjuration of His Knowledge of the LORD
JESUS, for Want of Faithfulness.

Though their seeing the Salvations of GOD, in Calamitous Times of Visitation,
depend upon it, Yet Christians neither do nor can Order their Conversations
aright, for Want of Watchfulness, and so they Pass on and are Punished. How
Hot, Hasty, Furious, Proud, Revengeful, and Foul-mouthed are some! Not fit to
be lived with; How Worldly, Selfish, Crafty, Overreaching, Fraudulent,
Injurious are Others! So that it is Unsafe to have Dealings with 'em; What an
Easy Prey to the Tempter are Many! How dull, weary, and wanting in Duty are
many! How Unprofitable! How Unreformed! How often Relapsing, and Returning to
Folly! How BOLD are they when Occasions of Sinning are Presented! How
Perfidious in Breaking their Vows to GOD! and all through Want of Watchfulness.
How Little do the Means of Grace Profit 'em! How long e're a Lust is Subdued!
How backward Do They Grow in Grace! How Barren of Good Works! and all for Want
of Watchfulness! How woefully does a Creature Comfort Inchant 'em! How does a
small Cross Distract 'em! and How does Death's Alarm Terrify 'em! and How do
the Consolations of GOD seem small to 'em, for WANT of Watchfulness! A Fatal
Want indeed, and enough to Undo a Man, and Spoil His Trade for Heaven! On the
other Hand, the Blessing is on the Head of Watchful Christians.

Watchful Christians, are Humble, and Brokenhearted for Sin, and Prayerful,
and Holy, and Heavenly-Minded, and Joyful, and Exemplary, and very Fruitful
Christians. Watchfulness is a Means to Prevent their Falls, to Suppress their
Lusts, to Promote their Peace, and Put the Adversary to Flight, to make their
Tongues a Tree of Life, and to Render their Actions defensible against their
Accusers. Watchfulness is a Nurse to the New Creature, Paves the Way to the
Best Evidences, and Richest Experiences, and furthers their Holy Boldness at
the Throne of Grace, and their Attainment of the Refreshing Shines of the Light
of GOD's Countenance. All Other Gifts are Beautifyed by this of Watchfulness;
and GOD is Honored; Christianity is most advantageously Recommended to the
Observing World; Religion is Made a Delight; the Saints are put into a Glorious
Transfiguration; Believers live at an High Rate; and the Blessed GOD delights
in their Persons and Services; And what High Degrees of Glory shall Crown the
Heads of the most Watchful Christians, We shall Know to our Joy ( if We be
Such) When We Come to Heaven.

Now the Good LORD Bless these Words to Us, and Quicken us to Watch, and to
Keep our Garments, that We may be Blessed at His COMING. Amen.

Tibi DOMINE! et a Te.
FINIS.

