Desires that Joshua's Resolution MAY BE REVIVED: OR, EXCITATIONS TO THE
Constant and Diligent Exercise OF Family-Religion: Being the Substance of
Sundry SERMONS

By JOSEPH SEWALL, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Genesis xviii. 19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his
Household after him -- that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him. Deuteronomy. xi. 19. and 21. And ye shall teach them your Children --
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. That your days may be
Multiplied, and the days of your Children -- as the days of Heaven upon the
Earth. BOSTON in N. E Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish at his Shop on
the North side of the Townhouse. 1716.

Dulciores sunt Lachrymae Orantium, quam Gaudia Theatrorum.

Augustine. The EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Decay of Family Piety is an awful Symptom of the Dying State of Religion
among a People: And if ever GOD shows Mercy to a Degenerate Land, He will pour
out His Spirit upon Families, and thereby give a Glorious Resurrection to
Religion in them.

THAT there is a Scandalous Negligence in this Day of Apostasy, in all the
vital Parts of that Service, which GOD requires of Heads of Families with their
Houses, is too notorious to be Denied, and too reproachful to Christianity, not
to be Lamented, with the most sorrowful Resentments of Soul, by all, that have
the Glory of CHRIST, and the Prosperity of Souls at Heart.

THIS flows not from Men's Ignorance of their Duty; but from their resolved
obstinacy, and wilful Inconsideration, which hinders them from a just sense
of their many Obligations hereto.

THERE are indeed some, who call themselves Christians, who pretend they see no
Warrant or Obligation to Family Prayer, which is a Principal part of that
Service, we owe to GOD with our Houses: They therefore Demand an Express
Precept for Divine Worship in their Families: And with this they hope to
justify their Criminal Neglect of this Duty. But assuredly whatever trifling
Pleas any may make to silence the Clamours of Conscience; yet few or none in
their cool and serious Thoughts, can think them sufficient to acquit them from
Guilt at the Bar of Conscience, much less at the Tribunal of CHRIST.

HOWEVER, since there are such, as seem to doubt of their Obligations to this
Essential Part of Family-Religion; I shall Offer a few Hints, which may Awaken
and Assist their Powers of Thought and Reflection to a sight of the Equity and
Reasonableness, the Expediency and Necessity of Family Worship.

HERE it may be Observed that the Obligation to this Duty, is Originally
Founded in the Law and Light of Nature; and not on Positive Institution: And by
Consequence, the less need to require an Express Direction for it in
Revelation. Yet we are not without plain Intimations of it in Scripture
Examples and Precepts.

AGREEABLE hereto we find Solemn Acts of Worship attended in Adam's Family; In
Abraham's House: for wherever we find him Pitching his Tent, there we see him
Erecting an Altar of Worship: And there appear Evident Indications that this
was Job's, Joshua's, and David's Practice. And most probably, this was intended
in Cornelius's Character; Act. 10.2. He feared GOD, i. e. Worshipped Him with
all his House. In many Places of the New Testament we have this Duty pointed
at. We are Commanded to Pray with all Prayer, Ephesians. 6 18. Which certainly
includes Family Prayer. And when the Apostle Paul had laid down the Duties of
the several Members of a Family, he then Exhorts them as One to continue in
Prayer, Col. 4.2. And to Pray together. verse 3. as that Place might be more
justly rendered. This sort of Prayer the Apostle Peter seems to have his Eye
upon, in that Admonition, 1 Pet. 3.7. But we need not insist on these; since
this is an Act of Natural Worship, and not purely Instituted; and as such
approves it self to the ^^^son and Conscience of Men.

HENCE, all Nations, who were so just as to acknowledge a GOD and a Providence,
have conspired in the Practice hereof. The Heathen under the Conduct of the
Light of Nature Erected their Family-Altars, and Offered Daily Sacrifices in
their Houses.

AND if the Foundation of Divine Worship in General be considered, it will
strongly Enforce the Practice of Family-Devotion. The Fundamental Reasons of
Divine Worship flow from the Nature of GOD, and that state of absolute
Dependence, and necessary Subjection that Man stands in to such a Glorious
Being. The Relation that reasonable Creatures stand in to the Blessed GOD, a
Being of Infinite Excellency and Perfection, as He is their Creator, Preserver
and Benefactor, their Owner, Lord and Lawgiver; does Infer an immutable
Obligation to pay this Divine Homage and Worship. Now will not our Obligations,
for the same Reasons, be as strong to pay GOD the Tribute of Family Worship?
Sure we are, That GOD is the Founder, Father, Benefactor, and Owner of
Families: By His Care and Providence our Houses are Built, our Families
Subsist, Grow and Flourish. What then more just and reasonable than to Worship
Him as the GOD of our Families, and the Fountain of all their Blessings? And by
Solemn Joynt-Prayer in our Houses religiously to acknowledge His Propriety in,
and Dominion over us and our Houses; and our Dependence on and Subjection to
Him. This certainly is one way to give GOD the Honor due to His Name. Family
Prayer is on this account GOD's Right; and to withold it will be found Gross
Injustice, and Black Ingratitude.

IT is acknowledged by all, that the more Public the Honor we pay to GOD, the
greater it is: Now Family Worship is more Honorable to GOD on this account,
than Solitary: And since we are bound to Worship GOD in the best manner we can,
we must conclude our Family-Sacrifices must not be withheld.

AGAIN, The Necessity and Reasonableness of Family Prayer will be Evident if we
Consider, That this Religious Practice has a necessary and direct Tendency to
promote all other Holy, and Religious Intentions in a Family. Hereby Heads of
Families themselves are awed to a greater Circumspection and Care in their walk
before their Houses: And it has a blessed Tendency to beget and cherish an
awful Sense of GOD in the Hearts of the whole Family; and to Awaken them to a
just concern for their Souls: This tends to give Life and Force to all the
Solemn Counsels, Instructions and Admonitions given by Parents and Masters in
the Name of GOD to those under their Charge. And in these respects
Family Worship must be accounted what is Good, and what the Lord requires of us.

IN a Word, I cannot see what just claim a Family, as such a Society, has to the
Character of a Christian or Religious Family, if Family Prayer and Worship be
wholly neglected.

IF after all, any will indulge themselves in the neglect of this Duty; and
please themselves that they are not under Obligation hereto: I would take
Liberty to Leave Two or Three Enquiries with them to be resolved.

DO you really believe GOD is as well pleased with, and as much honored by
your Omission of Family Prayer, as He would be by a Religious Performance of it?

DO you apprehend that you have done all in your power for the Good of the
Souls of your Family; while you neglect to Pray with them?

DARE you advise your Children, when they come to settle in Houses of their
own, to follow your Example, and live in the Neglect of Prayer in their
Families?

IN a Word, Are you willing that Death should overtake you, while you live in
the Omission of this part of Worship? Can you say, upon mature Deliberation,
that you expect as much Peace and Comfort in a Dying Hour, from a Reflection on
the Neglect, as on the Conscientious Discharge hereof? Let Conscience Answer:
and be Obsequious to it is Voice. And then I doubt not this Neglected Duty would
be Revived; and Family-Sacrifices daily offered to GOD, i. e. Morning and
Evening: Thus was the daily Sacrifice under the Law offered Morning and
Evening. And if daily Personal Wants and Mercies do Challenge daily
Supplications and Thanksgivings from particular Persons: by a Parity of Reason,
The Wants and Mercies of a Family, which are daily and continual, do require
daily Addresses from them in Consort. And nothing can be more Comely and
Beautiful, nor more agreeable to the Ends of such a Duty, than for all the
Members of a Family to Unite with one Mouth and Heart to show forth the Loving
Kindness of the LORD in the Morning: however that he, we Evening.

AND nothing can be more Worthy the Thought and Care of CHRIST's Ministers, who
are called to Watch for Souls, and must give an Account of them, than with
great Frequency, and all possible Importunity, to Inculcate this great Duty
upon their Charge.

NOW this Principal part of Family-Religion, together with all other Acts and
Instances thereof, is recommended to us in the following Solid, and Judicious
Discourses: which are every way adapted to Revive the Power of Godliness in our
Houses.

I design not an Encomium on the Reverend Author, or his Performances: His
Modesty will not allow me to do him Justice. However I cannot but say, that as
the Subject of these Sermons are most Important and Weighty, so it is Treated
with Perspicuity, Gravity, and due Solemnity, with that justness of Thought and
Language; and the whole quickened with that holy Warmth and Spirit of Piety,
that cannot fail of an high Relish with every Serious and Judicious Reader.

AND, as I do heartily bless GOD, who directed the Thoughts of His Servant to
this Subject, and assisted him in his Meditations hereon; so cannot but join
with him in Recommending the Serious Perusal of them to all Heads of Families;
but more especially to those under our Joint Pastoral Care: And do hope, by the
Presence and Blessing of CHRIST with these Labors of my Reverend Brother, more
of the Beauty of Holiness may be seen, and more of the Gracious Presence of GOD
enjoyed in our Houses.

LET us therefore in Fidelity to the Trust GOD has committed to us; and which
ere-long we must give an Account of before the Bar of CHRIST; and in Compassion
to the Souls of our Children and Servants, which we have undertaken the Charge
of, Let us, I say, Entertain and Practice the Counsels of Wisdom here given us:
Let us use our utmost Endeavors that we and our Houses may Serve the LORD with
a perfect Heart and a willing Mind. In this way we may hope to be found of our
Judge in Peace, and have our part in the Glories and Satisfactions of the
Resurrection-World. For which holy Purposes the following Sermons are with
Fervency Recommended to the Influences of the Spirit of Grace.

E. PEMBERTON.
Boston, April 23. 1716.
DESIRES That Joshua's Resolution May be Revived.
JOSHUA XXIV. 15. And if it seem Evil unto you to Serve the LORD, choose you
this day whom you will Serve; whether the gods which your Fathers Served, that
were on the other side of the Flood, or the god of the Amorites, in whose Land
ye ^well: But as for Me and My House, we will Serve the LORD.


THIS Book contains in History of the Seventeen Years of the Rule of Joshua.
Dr. Lighfoot Vol. 1 P. 39.


It Is uncertain who was the Penman of this Part of Sacred Writ: Some Conjecture
that Joshua Wrote it himself: however that be, we know it was Written of him,
and is a very notable and entertaining History of the wonderful Providence of
GOD toward His People, and their Enemies, under his Administration. It
acquaints us how GOD brought the Children of Israel into the Land of Canaan
with an high hand, and an outstretched arm, dividing the Waters of Jordan,
delivering into their hands the Kings of the Canaanites, their Lands, and
Cities.

JOSHUA was an eminent Type of CHRIST both in Name and Office. His Name
bespeaks, him to be a Savior, and is the same with Jesus only Joshua retains
the Hebrew; Jesus the Greek termination. Agreeably He is called Jesus by the
Seventy; and also in the New Testament. And indeed JESUS is the True JOSHUA,
the Savior of GOD's Israel; He is the Captain of our Salvation, and was given
to be a Leader and Commander to the People, to Lead them to those glorious
Mansions prepared for them in the Heavenly Canaan. Moses did not lead Israel
into Canaan; for the Law made nothing Perfect; but Joshua did, and therein he
was a Type of Christ, who has His Name Jesus, because He Saves His People from
their Sins; Subdues their Enemies for them, and conducts them to their
Everlasting Rest.

BUT to return, In this Chapter wherein is our Text, we have an account of some
of the Excellent Things which Joshua did just before his Death. Great were the
Pains which he took to Establish GOD's Ancient People in His true Faith and
Worship.

FOR this End, (1) Joshua assembled all the Tribes at Sichem. (2) He put them
in mind of the wonderful Favors which GOD had shown to their Fathers, and
themselves. (3) He improved the Narrative which he had given of GOD's Wonderful
and Miraculous Appearances for them, in a Word of Exhortation, and a solemn
Charge, to Fear and Serve the LORD. (4) He called upon them to determine, and
choose whom they would Serve; and makes a solemn Protestation for himself, and
Family, that they would Serve the LORD. (5) He renewed the Covenant of the LORD
with the People, Wrote these Words in the Book of the Law, and set up a great
Stone as a Memorial of this Covenant-Transaction, and as a Witness of their
Engagements to be the LORD's.

THE Words of our Text contain the Call which Josua gives the People of Israel,
to choose and determine whom they would Serve, and the resolute Protestation
which He makes for Himself, and Household, that they would Serve the LORD.

BEFORE I Name the DOCTRINE intended Principally to be insisted on, I shall
mention several Doctrinal Observations from these Words, and as they stand
related to the Context.

Obser. I. THEY that would Serve the LORD; must Renounce Obedience to Satan,
the World, and their Lusts; and must Resolve to be for GOD, and for no other.

Obser. II. IF we would Engage in the Service of GOD; We must do it
Deliberately, and of Choice.

Obser. III. THEY that would Fear, and Serve the LORD; they must do it in
Sincerity, and in Truth.

Obser. IV. ALTHOUGH the Genernlity of a Professing People should forsake the
LORD, and Serve other gods: Yet we should resolutely Adhere to Him, and
continue Steadfast in His Service.

Obser. I. THEY that would Serve the LORD; they must Renounce Obedience to
Satan, the World, and their Lusts: and must Resolve to be for GOD, and for no
other.

OUR Savior has Assured us, that No man can Serve Two Masters: for either he
will hate the One, and love the Other; or else he will hold to the One, and
despise the Other, Ye cannot Serve GOD and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. We cannot Serve
GOD and our Lusts; GOD, and this Sinful World: for they are Contrary, as Light
and Darkness. The Truth of this doctrinal Proposition will appear, as Written
with a Sunbeam, if we consider,

WE Wave but ONE Supreme LORD, the Eternal GOD. Indeed, it is inconsistent with
the Nature of the Thing, and implys the greatest Contradiction, that there
should be Two Supreme Infinite Beings essentially distinct. GOD is One: Deuteronomy.
6.4. Hear, O Israel, The LORD our God is One LORD. He who is Omniscient tells
us, that He knows not any besides Himself, Isai. 44.8. There are Three Persons
in the Godhead, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: But then these Three
are Essentially One; One in the same Undivided Essence, and all the Essential
Glories of it. Accordingly, the blessed GOD can brook no Rival; He must be
Loved with all the Heart; and nothing else must be loved at all, but in
subordination to Him. He must be Obeyed without Limitation, and Served with all
our Powers. And therefore if we would Serve the LORD; we must deny Obedience to
Satan, the World, and our Lusts; and by the Grace of God, bring every proud
Thought and Imagination, into Subjection to His Will. If GOD Rule in our
hearts, and be enthroned there; the government of Satan, and Lust, and the
World, must be pulled down.

THE Laws whereby the blessed GOD Governs His People, are directly contrary to
the law of Sin, and the corrupt rules and maxims of a Sinful World. For the Law
of GOD is holy; and the Commandment holy, and just, and good, Romans 7.12. And
therefore while the Mind is under the government, and influence of Sin, and
Satan, who rules in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience; it is Enmity
against GOD, is not subject to His Law, nor indeed can be. For it is impossible
to live in Obedience to the Law of GOD, and the law of Sin, at the same time:
for their Commands are Contrary; so that if we Obey One, in that very article
we disobey the Other. Certainly then, if we would Serve the LORD; we must
forsake Sin, and the World, and say with them: Isai. 2^.13. O LORD our God,
other lords besides Thee have had dominion over us: bus by Thee Only will we
make mention of thy Name. We must Acknowledge GOD alone for out Supreme Lord;
and make His Law the Rule of our Lives: we must not live in Sin, nor be
conformed to this evil World; but be transformed (...) out Minds. Our Lusts
must be Mortified by the Grace of GOD; or His Kingdom, which is Righteousness
as well as Peace, and Joy, cannot be set up, and flourish in our Souls. If we
would join our selves to the LORD, we must be separated from our Lusts.

USE, I. LEARN what great Folly they are chargable with, who imagine that they
can Serve GOD, and their Lusts too. This is a most absurd thing; and they that
flatter themselves, as if they could Serve Two such Masters, are egregiously
mistaken; and may well be called Unreasonable men. It Is a most vain and
monstrous attempt to go about to Reconcile the Service of the holy GOD, which
is glorious Liberty and Freedom; with the Bondage of impure Lusts, and vile
Affections. What can be more absurd than to suppose that Men may live in the
gratification of their Lusts; and at the same time, Walk Worthy of the LORD,
unto all Well-pleasing! You may a^ well Unite Truth, and Fallhood; Heaven, and
Hell, and make them One; as Serve GOD acceptably, and yet continue your Service
and Slavery to Sin, and the World. If any man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him, 1 John, 2.15. And yet it is to be feared, there are not a
few who are guilty of this Folly. They cannot bear to be divorced from their
beloved Lusts; but hold fast their Iniquities, and refuse to let them go. There
are not a few that set up an idol of Jealously in their hearts; prefer the
Pleasures, or Profits, or Honors of this World before the blessed GOD; and yet
presume that they are the Servants of the LORD, and upon good Terms with Him:
now this is most Unreasonable and Contradictory. Such may cry Lord, Lord; but
they will be rejected, and punished as Rebels against GOD, His Crown and
Dignity.

USE, II. LET us be Exhorted to Renounce Obedience to our Lusts; and to give up
our selves to the LORD, to be for Him, and Him Only. He is our Rightful Lord
and Sovereign. As for other lords that have had dominion over us; they are but
Usurpers. O let us then forsake them, and return unto the Lord our GOD; let us
no longer bow down to Idols which cannot Save us; let us no longer contince in
the Drudgery of Sin and Satan. But let us now go to GOD, fall down at His Feet,
and Cry to Him to pull down the strong Holds of Satan; and to set up His
Kingdom in our hearts. Let us be earnest with Him to deliver us from the Cruel
Tyranny of our Lusts, which seek the Ruin of our Immortal Souls; and that He
would Vindicate us into the Liberty of the Sons of GOD, and make us the LORD's
Freemen. If we Serve the LORD and have our Fruit unto Holiness, our End will be
Life Everlasting.

Obser. II. IF we would Engage in the Service of GOD; we must do it
Deliberately, and of Choice.

WE must give our selves to the LORD, and choose Him for our LORD and Master.
Choose (...) this day whom ye will Serve. Now this does not suppose that it was
a matter of Indifferency whether they would Serve the Living GOD, or their
Idols. The meaning is not, that they were (...) Liberty, and might lawfully
either choose, or ^se the Service of GOD. Nor does it suppose (...) it is a
matter about which we might hesitate; (...) we might delay, and put off, under
a pre^ of taking Time to consider of it. No! (...). As soon as ever CHRIST
called James and John, They preseutly left the Ship and their Father, and
followed Him, Mat. 4.21, 22. But it may intend that we must make Religion our
Serious, intelligent and Deliberate Choice; that we must Freely Resign up our
selves to the LORD, and yield a full Cousent to the Terms of the Covenant. This
must be our own Voluntary act and deed. GOD accepts of none in His Service, but
Volunteers. Indeed He exercises a Sovereign Dominion over His Enemies, and
makes them Serve His Designs, whether they will, or no. But He Accepts of the
Service of none, but such as are His Willing People. If we would have GOD for
Our GOD, and be acknowledged by Him, as His People; We must, by His Grace, Open
the door of our Wills unto Him, that this King of Glory may Come in; We must
yield our selves unto GOD, as those that are alive from the dead, Romans 6.13. We
must by a deliberate, and free Consent make Over our selves unto the LORD, and
bind our selves unto Him in an Everlasting Covenant never to be broken; To be
for Him, and for no other; To Love, Obey, and Serve Him for ever. It Is true,
GOD's Right, and Title to us; and our Obligation to Obey and Serve Him; do not
depend upon any act of our Wills. For His Government over us is Natural, and
Necessary; and we are indispensibly obliged to Obey His Commands, by the Law of
our Creation. He Will be our Rightful LORD, whether we will, or no. However, if
we would Serve the LORD in an Active Way, so as to be Owned and rewarded as
good and faithful Servants, through infinite rich Grace in CHRIST: We must from
our own Judgment, make Choice of the LORD JEHOVAH for Our GOD, with a strong
Inclination, and steady bent of our Will toward Him. And this implies an
Assent to the Terms of the Covenant; and an holy Resolution and unfeigned
Willingness to perform those Duties which GOD requires of us. We must Choose
the LORD for our Sovereign, and yield up our selves to Him, to be Governed by
His Laws. We must Choose Him also for our Portion and Inheritance; and say,
Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? We must Choose the LORD for our Master, and
freely bow our Necks to the Yoke of CHRIST. GOD will have none that are
forcibly dragged into His Service. The LORD JESUS CHRIST as Head of the Church
Governs a Willing People. Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be Willing in the day
of thy Power.

USE, I. LEARN that such as are driven to some external Performances of Duty,
merely by the lashes of their Consciences, and a slavish Fear of Wrath; are not
true Servants of GOD. I don't say, but that there is an holy Fear, which is of
excellent use to quicken GOD's People in His Service. And legal Te^ours are
made use of by GOD, to drive Men to CHRIST, to prepare the way for their
Reception of Him. However, when Men are forcibly Driven to serve GOD, merely
from a slavish Dread of Wrath, and not Drawn by a new and saving Inclination,
by an inward Bent of Will: then Services are not genuine.

USE, II. LET us be earnest with GOD, powerfully to incline our W^ to make
Choice of H^, and to Serve Him. The Act is formally ours; we must choose the
LORD for our GOD, and censen^ to become His Servants: But the Strength and
Power whereby we are enabled to do this is only from GOD. For it is He who
w^eth in us, both to (...) and to do, Phil. 2.13. Our Minds are naturally
Darkened; our practical Judgment misguided, having a wrong Biass upon it; our
Will is Depraved and Corrupted by Sin; so that there is an utter Impotency to
will that which is Spiritually Good in a right manner; unless GOD do by His
Spirit change our Hearts, and of Unwilling make us Willing. Let us then cry to
GOD that for CHRIST's sake, He would savingly Enlighten our Understandings,
Reform and Rectify our Judgments, and Conquer the Obstinacy and Perverseness of
our Wills, and enable us to yield our selves to Him; O that we had, each of us,
Grace to give up our selves to the LORD, and fully to consent to become His
Servants, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant! GOD does now graciously
Invite us to come unto Him, and offers to become Ours upon Gospel Terms. Let us
then present our selves unto GOD, and yield up our selves unto Him. O that we
could say that we are heartily Willing to be the LORD's; O that this might be
the Day of GOD's Power to our Souls for this end! Then it would be a joyful,
and an happy Day indeed. But if we do now reject GOD and CHRIST, and refuse to
make Choice of the LORD for our GOD: we cannot tell whether we shall ever have
such another Offer. GOD does this Day set before us Life, and Death; Blessing,
and Cursing: Let us then choose Life, that we may live. I conclude with those
Words, Deuteronomy. 30.19, 20. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: That thou may love the
LORD thy GOD, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou may cleave
unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy days.

Obser. III. THEY the would fear and serve GOD acceptably, they must do it in
Sincerity and Truth.

V. 14. Now therefore, fear the Lord, and serve him in Sincerity, and in Truth
-- We must serve GOD with a true and a perfect Heart, and see that we be
Upright before Him. (1.) They that would Serve the LORD, must yield True and
Unfeigned Obedience to Him. Psalm. 51.6. Behold, thou desire Truth in the
inward parts. GOD expects that we be Really and Truly that which we profess to
be. We must not be faise and deceitful in our Pretenses to Religion. We must
see to it, that the Inward temper and frame of our Spirit don't contradict and
give the lie to our Outward deportment and behavior. For Hypocrisy is an
abomination to the LORD. (2.) We must Serve GOD with our Whole heart, in
Integrity. If we would Serve the LORD, we must give up our Selves to Him Wholly
and without Reserve, and Obey His Commands impartially. Unless we give up our
Selves entirely to the LORD, to Serve Him with all our Powers; Unless we have
respect unto all His Commandments; We are not Sincere. And GOD will not own us
for His faithful Servants. John, 4.24. GOD is a Spirit, and they that Worship
Him, must worship in Spirit and in truth.

FOR GOD is Omniscient, and knows whether we be True and Sincere, yea or no. We
can only look upon the Outward Man, and by it must make a Judgment of the
Heart. But GOD Sees the Heart, the Inward Man. Jer. 17.9, 1^ The heart is
deceitful above all things, and de^ (...) wicked, who (...) I the Lord search
the (...) I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings. We may Compliment Men, and pretend to be
much in their Interests, when indeed we are not; we may make such fair
pretenses to Love and Esteem, as to deceive them. But the All seeing GOD cannot
be thus imposed upon. So that if we would Serve Him to any good Purpose, we
must be Hearty and in Earnest, and not think to deceive GOD with a show of
Piety, and an External Form of Godliness. No, no, GOD will not be thus mocked.
Ephesians. 6.5, 6. -- in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ: Not with eye
service as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of GOD
from the heart.

GOD is the True GOD; and all the precious Promises which He makes unto His
People, are in Truth and Sincerity. Jer. 10.10. The LORD is the True GOD. Idols
are lying vanities. The Creature many times promises more than it can perform,
and so deceives our Expectation: But the Strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Samuel 15.29. All the Offers of Grace which He makes us, are True. Heb. 10.23. He
is Faithful that promised. His Word is Truth, and sooner may Heaven and Earth
pass away, than one jot or tittle of it fail. His Promises are Yea and Amen in
CHRIST, who is the Truth. GOD will be so far from deceiving the Expectations of
His People, that He will do for them exceeding abundantly above all that they
ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Now, if we serve such a True and Faithful Master;
certainly, it becomes us to be true and sincere in His Service. It is a base
and vile thing to go about to deceive an honest Man, who is true and punctual
to his Word: How much more vile and abominable is it to deal treacherously with
that GOD, who is the Essential and Eternal Truth? GOD is a Lover of Truth; and
He hates Deceit and Falsehood: we should therefore serve the LORD in
Righteousness and true Holiness.

GOD gives Himself to his People Wholly, i. e. for all those intents and
purposes which are necessary to make them Completely happy. And therefore they
should serve the LORD in Sincerity, and with a perfect heart. God gives Himself
to his People as their Shield, and exceeding great Reward. All His Attributes
are engaged in promoting their Welfare. His Wisdom is employed to counsel,
guide and lead them; His Power, to protect and defend them; His Grace and
Mercy, to pity, pardon and save them. Certainly then, they are under the
strongest Obligations to serve GOD Sincerely and in Integrity, with their whole
heart, and all their Powers.

USE. LET us Pray to GOD to make us True and Sincere, to give us Truth in the
inward parts. We should be earnest with GOD to search us, and try us, and see
whether there be any wicked way in us, and to lead us in the way everlasting,
Psalm. 139.23, 24. Let us look to it that we be Israelites indeed, in whom there
is no Guile; no prevailing iniquity, no governing Fraud and deceit. Let us Pray
to GOD to Renew us in the spirit of our Mind, and to help us to put on the New
Man. Let us take care that we be True, true to GOD, true to our Neighbor, true
to our Profession.

Obser. IV. THE Children of GOD must Resolve to Adhere to Him, and to Continue
steadfast in His Service; although the generality of a Professing People should
forsake Him.

THUS Joshua, If it seem evil to you to Serve the LORD, choose ye -- But as for
Me and My House, we will Serve the LORD. We must not run with a Multitude to do
evil; but must endeavor to stem the Tide, and swim against the Stream. The
Apostle stood firm in the Cause of GOD, when no man stood with him, but all
forsook him, 2 Timothy 4.16. It will be no sufficient Plea to say that the Cause
of CHRIST was deserted by Many. No, there is more need for us to be Resolute,
and Active, and Vigorous in His Service. When Iniquity abounds, and the love of
many waxes Cold; We must strive that our Zeal for GOD, and the fervor of our
Spirit, be thereby invigorated and increased as by an holy Antiperistasis. The
Consideration of this should inflame us with ardent desires to do much for GOD,
and to abound in every good Work. This should the rather make us Resolve, that
though Multitudes forsake CHRIST, yet will not we; and this not with carnal
Confidence; but with humble Trust and Dependence on GOD. We must remember that
there is no Authority in the Voice of the Many or the Mighty to legitimat Vice.
Though hand join in hand the Sinner shall not go Unpunished. We must stick close
to GOD and our Duty, though the whole World should rise up against us, and
Persecute us for it. In a time of general Apostasy, GOD looks to see who will
espouse His Cause and stand up for it.

THIS is the way to testify our Fidelity to GOD, and to obtain distinguishing
Marks of His favor. A Friend is tried in a Day of Adversity; and so is a Man's
Fidelity to GOD, in an hour of such Temptation. In this way we shall give a
Seasonable Testimony for GOD, and set to our Seal to confirm the Truth of
Religion. This also is the way to obtain the peculiar Marks of GOD's Favor:
Ezekiel. 9.4, 5. The Lord said unto him, go through the midst of the City, through
the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the Foreheads of the men that
sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.
And to the others he said in mine hearing, go ye after him through the City,
and smite, -- They that distinguish themselves by their Fidelity in GOD's
Service in times of abounding iniquity, will have encouraging grounds of hope
that GOD will remember them in Mercy when He brings Evil upon a degenerate
People, and take them into the secret Chambers of His Protection until the
Indignation be over-past. Moreover, a few thus Spirited may be Instrumental to
Reform a backsliding People, and to Save them from Ruin. Such will stand in
the Gap, and may by the Grace of GOD, be employed to make up the breach, and to
keep off impending Judgment from a People. Had there been Ten Righteous Persons
found in Sodom, GOD would have spared the Place for their sake.

The Doctrine principally to be insisted on, is this,

DOCT. IT is our indispensible Duty to Resolve, in the strength of GOD's Grace,
That we will Serve the LORD; And the Heads of Families should not only Serve
GOD themselves, but also take care that their Houses join with them in Serving
the LORD.

PROP. I. IT is our indispensible Duty to Resolve, in the strength of GOD's
Grace, that we will Serve the LORD.

PROP. II. THE Heads of Families should Serve the LORD themselves, and take can
that their Houses join with them in Serving the LORD.

PROP. I. IT is our indispensible Duty to Resolve, in the strength of GOD's
Grace, that we will Serve the LORD.

THIS is fairly employed in our Text. For here we have Joshua's Resolution
respecting himself, But as for me -- It nearly concerns every One of us to say,
I will Serve the LORD. We have not all of us the Charge of a Family committed
to us; but we are all of us obliged to take up this holy Resolution for our
Selves, that we will Serve the LORD. And unless we give up our Selves to the
LORD, there will be little Probability that we shall labor to engage Others in
His Service. Here then in the first Place, we may Consider this great Duty as
incumbent upon each, and every One of us Personality.

First, WE are to Enquire, What Is implied in Serving the LORD?

Secondly, WHAT Obligations we^ly under to the Performance of this Duty? The
First of these is very Large and Comprehensive, and includes all that Duty and
Obedience which we owe to GOD. To Serve GOD implies that we Own and Acknowledge
Him for our Supreme LORD and Master, that we yield Obedience to Him in all
things. We must subject our Understanding, Will, and Affections, and all our
Powers unto GOD; to be Guided and Governed by Him. If we would be the Servants
of GOD, we must no longer walk in the way of our own Heart, and sight of our
own Eyes; but must conform to the Will of GOD revealed in His Holy Word, making
the Law of GOD the Rule of our Lives and Actions. Romans 6.16. His Servants you
are to whom you Obey. In this manner we must Honor and Reverence GOD. Mal.
1.6. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master, by Obedience.
Serving the LORD intends, that we look to Him for Direction in our Work. Act.
9.6. LORD, what will thou have me to do! And then, it intends, that we do all
with an Eye to GOD's Glory. Servants are Obliged to seek their Masters Profit
in what they do. And if we would approve our selves the Faithful Servants of
GOD, we must not seek our own Glory, but the Glory of GOD. Romans 14.7, 8. For
none of us lives to himself, and no Man dreth to himself -- We must Study how
we may spend our Time, and lay out our selves so as shall be most for GOD's
Honor, and for the Advancement of the Interest of His Kingdom. We must take
cure to Engage with all our Heart and Strength in the more immediate Service of
GOD; and see that we keep our Secular Affairs in a due Subordination. It might
have been said, that our Obedience to GOD must be Free and Unconstrained,
Sincere and Universal, Constant and Uniform. But I have prevented my self in
what has been already spoken under the foregoing Observations, and therefore
shall proceed,

TO Consider the Obligations we^ly under to Serve the Lord, and to show what
great Reason we have to Resolve so to do.

(1.) GOD has made us, and not we our selves; and has laid us under the
Strongest Obligations to Serve Him, in that He has made us capable of a
Reasonable, and a Religious Service.

THE Great GOD is the Author of our Being; He formed Man at first out of the
Dust of the Earth, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life. Rev.
4.11. Thou art worthy, O LORD, to receive Glory and Honor and Power: for Thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. Now,
as our Creator, GOD is our Lord Proprietor, and justly Challenges an Absolute
Right and Title to our Persons, and all our Services. Romans 11.36. Of Him, and
through Him, and to Him are all things. And certainly, seeing we are of the
LORD as the Primary Efficient of our Being; we are under the strongest Bonds to
Serve Him. There Is no need of our Signing Indentures, in order to GOD's
Claiming a Right to us, and our Services: for the Law of our Creation binds us
in indissoluble Bonds to be the LORD's Servants. Psalm. 95.6, 7. O come, let us
worship and how down; let us kneel before the LORD our MAKER. For He is Our
GOD, and we are the People of His Pasture, and the Sheep of His Hand. GOD's
Hand has formed and fashioned us; given us Life and Being: and therefore we
must devote our selves unto Him. It is He that has made us, and that has made
us Creatures capable of Knowing, Obeying, and Submitting to His Will. As for
the Inferior Creatures, they are carried to their respective Ends by certain
Instincts and Impressions made on their Natures, without their understanding
the Principles they act from, and without designing the Ends those Instincts
lead to. But GOD teaches us more than the beasts of the Earth, and makes us
wiser than the fowls of Heaven, Job 35.11. Men are Causes by Counsel, Free,
Rational Agents, capable of understanding the Rule and Law according to which
they are to act; of knowing that GOD who has given them their Being, and of
proposing to themselves an End in what they do. It is their Privilege and
Honor that they are endued with such noble and exalted Powers as to be capable
of an Intelligent and Rational Service, of ^ising GOD in an Active way, and of
being employed in His more immediate Service. And this does loudly Proclaim our
Indispensible Duty to Serve the LORD with all our Powers, to do His Will and
fulfill His Pleasure with Alacrity and Delight. If we transgress the Rule and
Law GOD has given us to act by, to us it is Sin; we are guilty of Rebelling
against our Sovereign LORD. Here then we see that we are obliged to Serve the
LORD, inasmuch as. He is our Creator, and so our Owner, Act. 27.23. -- Whose I
am, and whom I serve. And also in that GOD has made us thus capable of
engaging in His more immediate Service.

(2.) GOD does continually Sustain us, and Uphold us in Life; and therefore we
are obliged to Serve Him. Thou have granted me life and (...), and thy
Visitation has Preserved my Spirit, Job. 10.12. His Sustentation is, ^as it
were, a continued Creation. We have our Lives Renewed to us every Moment. O
then what Obligations are we under to Live to Him, and to Serve Him constantly,
who is the GOD of o^ ^ife, and the Length of our Days! Should we not Serve
(...) GOD to whom we are beholden for every Breath we draw? Most certainly we
should. It is impiously ungrateful, as well as very dangerous, to contemn the
Authority, and disobey the Commands of that GOD in whose Hand our Breath is,
and whose are all our ways, Dan. 5. (...). O let us not spend the Life, which
GOD continues to us, in the Service of Satan and Lust, His avowed Enemies! Let
us not Live to our selves, but to GOD, seeing He is the LORD of our Life, the
Sustainer and Disposer of it! It is Just and Reasonable, that while His
Everlasting Arms are underneath, to support us, and keep us from dropping into
Nothing; that us Hands, and all the Powers of our Souls and Bodies, should be
vigorously employed in His Service. We live upon GOD's Bounty, and are
maintained at His Cost and Charge; O then let us Serve Him.

(3.) GOD gives us all the Talents which we have, capable of Improvement; and
that for this End that they may be employed in His Service. Our Health and
Strength; our Liberty, Estate, and all our Capacities, are the free Gift of
GOD, and bestowed upon us for this End, that we may be capable of Serving GOD,
and our Generation according to His Will. We are but Stewards of our Estates
and all the Accommodations and Advantages which we enjoy. Now it is Required in
Stewards, that every one be found Faithful; and take care to improve the Things
they are entrusted with, in the Service of their LORD, upon His Account, and
for the Advancement of His Interest. Here then we see what strong Bonds we are
under to ^ve the LORD with all the Talents which are committed to us. We have
all of us some Talents delivered us by our LORD capable of being improved in
His Service. Indeed there is a great Variety in GOD's Dealing with Men upon
this Account. He is Debtor to no Man; and accordingly He manifests His
Sovereignty in this matter. by giving to one Five Talents; to another, Two, and
to another, One, as it pleases Him. But all are given to Men to profit withal,
by being improved in the Service of their LORD and Master. Agreeably, we read
in the Parable of the Talents, As a Man traveling into a far Country, who
called his own Servants, and delivered unto them his goods: and unto one he
gave Five Talents, to another Two, -- to every man according to his several
ability, -- Then he that had received the Five Talents, went and Traded with
them, -- Mat. 25.14. -- It is therefore Sacrilegious Injustice to convert these
to contrary uses, and t^ serve our Lusts with the^.

(4) GOD is our Savior. And therefore we are obliged to Serve Him. GOD is the
Savior of All Men, especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. GOD affords
unto all, Temporal Preservations and Salvations, delivers them from many
Troubles, and saves them from many Deaths. He offers Life, and Eternal
Salvation to all that Live under the Gospel. And He is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to His Chosen People GOD saves His People from Sin and Death, and
redeems their Souls out of all Adversity. The LORD JESUS CHRIST though He was in
the Form of GOD, and though it not Robbery to be equal with GOD; yet H^ took
upon Him the form of a Servant and became Obedient to Death, even the Death of
the Cross, that so He might redeem His People from the Curse, and Purchase
Grace, and Glory, and every Good Thing for them. O what Potent Obligations are
they then under to Serve the LORD, who though the Heir and Lord of all, yet
became a Servant, that He might Save them? He has Bought them with His own
Precious Blood, delivered them from the Slavery of Sin and Satan. O let these
Ransomed of the LORD being delivered out of the hands of their Enemies, Serve
their Glorious Redeemer and Savior. For this End GOD raised up a Horn of
Salvation in the House of His Servant David, that we being delivered from the
hands of our Enemies, might Serve Him without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before Him, all the days of our Life, Luke 2.69, -- 74, 75. And
has bought us when we had forfeited our Lives into the Hands of revenging
Justice. And therefore we are His, and under the strongest Obligations to Live
to Him, and Serve Him with all our Powers. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with
a price: therefore glorify GOD in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are
GOD's.

(5.) BECAUSE it is Pleasant, and Honorable to Serve the LORD. The Slavery of
Sin is most base and ignominious; but it is our Honor and Glory to Serve the
LORD. It gives to the Head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of Glory. It is
accounted a great Honor to stand before Princes, and to be taken into their
Service: How much greater Honor is it to Serve that GOD, who is KING of Kings,
and LORD of Lords? The Angels are GOD's Ministering Spirits, and look upon it as
their highest Honor to bow before His Throne, and fulfill His Pleasure. CHRIST
assures us, Joh. 12.26 -- If any man serve Me, him will my Father honor.
Again, The service of Sin is a cruel Bondage; the yoke of Satan is an Iron
yoke. He makes His Vassals to serve with Rigor. But the Yoke of CHRIST is
Easy, and His Commands are not Grievous. A peaceful Serenity of Mind is to be
enjoyed in the Service of GOD. The ways of Wisdom are ways of Pleasantness, and
all her paths are Peace, Prove. 3.17.

(6.) THE Service of GOD is always attended with a Glorious Recompense of
Reward. They that Serve the LORD Faithfully, shall receive a Crown of Life and
Glory, which fades not away; when they rest from their Labors, they shall
enter into their Masters Joy, and be for ever with the LORD, in whose Presence
is fullness of Joy, at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for Evermore. Joh. 12.26.
If any man serve Me, let him follow Me; and where I am, there shall also my
Servant be. Moreover it is a great Encouragement to us to Serve the LORD, in
that He is both able and willing to afford us all needful Assistance. He Is
always present with us to direct and strengthen as, and help us to hold out to
the End; so that our labor is not in vain in the LORD.

USE, I. HENCE we I carn, that the Service of GOD is a most Reasonable Service.
Thus it is called, Romans 12.1. -- Which is your Reasonable Service. It is thus,
not only because it must be performed Intelligently, in the Exercise of our
Rational Powers: But also because there is the highest Reason for our Engaging
in this Service. To Present our selves to GOD, to Consecrate and Dedicate all
our Powers to Him; is the most Reasonable Thing in the World. It is the highest
Prudence, a good Understanding have they that Serve the LORD. Such act like Men
that understand themselves, the Relation they stand in to GOD, and their own
truest Interest. This is most just and ^quitable. To alienate our selves from
GOD our Rightful LORD and Owner; is most unequal, unreasonable, and monstrous.
They that do thus, break the Rules of right Reason, and Violate the most Sacred
Bonds: They are more vile than the Beasts that perish; more Brutish than the Ox
and Ass. Remember this, and show your selves Men, Isai. 46.8.

USE, II. LET what has been said prevail with us to Resolve that we will Serve
the LORD. Let One and All of us say, As for us we will Serve the LORD. And O
that this Holy and Happy Resolution were fixed and confirmed in each one of us!
O that we might now be persuaded, to give up our selves to the LORD through
CHRIST by the SPIRIT! We cannot Serve a better Master, a more Gracious and
Bountiful LORD. Why then are we so backward to Bind our selves? Why so
unwilling to give GOD His own? What! Are we unwilling? Have we the Face to say,
that we will not be the LORD's? That we will not Serve the LORD our Maker, the
LORD who is able to Destroy both Body and Soul in Hell, the LORD who alone can
make us Happy? Be astonished O ye Heavens, and be horribly afraid at such
Impiety, such Stupidity! GOD does now invite you to List in His Service, and
beseeches you to Present your selves unto Him. Do not then reject so
Reasonable a Request, which is backed with the Divine Authority; but now,
without delay, join your selves to the LORD. We had need be speedy in this
Work; for we cannot tell how soon our Day of Grace may be at an end. Let us then
go to GOD this very Day, and be Earnest with Him to take Possession of us by
His Spirit: Let us cry to Him to Sanctify us, that we may become Vessels of
honor meet for our Masters use. Fall down before GOD, and Pray to Him, that
for CHRIST's sake He would receive you into His Family and Service, and keep
you Faithful to Him even to the Death. If we do thus devote our selves to GOD,
and Resolve to be for Him and for no other; then will He advance us to the
Dignity and Privilege of Children, and we shall become Heirs; Heirs of GOD, and
Joynt-Heirs with CHRIST. I Conclude with those Words, Mal. 3.16, 17. Then they
that feared the LORD, spoke often one to another, and the LORD bearkened, and
heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before Him for them that feared
the LORD, and that thought upon His Name. And they shall be Mine, says the
LORD of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him.

PROP. II. THE Heads of Families should Serve the LORD themselves, and take
care that their Houses join with them in Serving the LORD.

UNDER this Proposition we may Consider First, What is to be done by the Heads
of Families that their Houses may join with them in Serving the LORD. Secondly,
Show the Obligations They are under thus to take care that their Houses join
with them in Serving the LORD.

First. WHAT is to be done by the Heads of Families that ^ir Houses may join
with them in Serving the LORD?

WHAT are the Duties incumbent on such as have the Charge of Families? How
should they use their Endeavors, that Religion and the Power of Godliness may
be kept alive, maintained and increased in their Houses? For Answer,

THE Heads of Families should take care to Instruct their Houses, and to Teach
them the good Knowtege of the LORD, His Mind and Will. They should look to it
that their Children and Servants be taught to know the LORD, and what it is He
requires of them, that so they may Serve Him. Without Knowledge the Heart cannot
be good. Men are naturally alienated from the Life of Godliness, by reason of
the ignorance and blindness of their Hearts. If Masters of Families would Serve
the LORD themselves, and have their Houses join with them in this Excellent
Service, they must diligently use the means of getting Knowledge themselves, and
see to it that such as are committed to their Charge, be instructed in the
Principles and Mysteries of Religion. They should do what they can to teach
them GOD's Statutes, and His Judgments, and take care that all needful and
proper helps be procured for this End. Adult Persons cannot be the Disciples of
CHRIST, and Serve GOD acceptably, unless they understand their Duty, and what
the Service of the LORD is. For it is, as we have already heard, a Reasonable
Service. More particularly,

(1) THE Heads of Families should take care that their Children and Servants be
taught to Read. The Sight is one of the Senses of Learning and Discipline. We
obtain a great part of our Knowledge, and Acquaintance with things, by the help
of our Eyes. And therefore if they have not opportunity and leisure themselves
to teach them to Read, they should send them to School to be taught. It Is a
shame for Heads of Families to begrutch the Cost and Expense which they may be
at in this Matter. We should take Pains with our Children and Servants, even
the Meanest of them, and should be willing to Reward the Endeavors of others
for their Instruction. And when they have Learned to Read, we should be ready
to furnish them with Bibles, and Catechisms, and other good Books, according to
their several Capacities, that they may see with their own Eyes the Great and
Important Truths of Religion, and by Reading acquaint themselves with them.

(2.) THEY should take care to Catechize their Children and Servants. This is a
Great and Excellent Means of Instruction, especially for Younger Persons, and
it would be both Honorable and Profitable for Persons of Riper Years to be
Exercised and Improved in it. Certainly then Masters of Families must take care
that their Children and Servants Learn some good Catechism; they should see
that they commit it to Memory, and also endeavor to make them understand it,
that they may know the Meaning of what they Learn, and not Answer merely by
Rote, and like Parrots; but with Knowledge and Understanding. Now for this End
we should studiously endeavor to suit and accommodate our selves to their
Capacities. There must be Milk for Babes, who are unskilful in the Word of
Righteousness; and Meat for those that are of Riper Years, and who by reason of
use have their Senses more exercised to discern both good and evil. If we would
feed Children with Knowledge and Understanding, there must be Line upon Line,
and Precept upon Precept, here a little, and there a little. We should
endeavor that the tender Minds of our Young Ones may be seasoned with the
Knowledge of GOD, and Religion; with matter for Good and Pious Thoughts; that by
the Blessing of GOD the Imaginations of the thoughts of their Hearts may not be
Evil. The Minds of Children are in a great measure Tabula rasa, as clean white
Paper. And we should use our Endeavors that the Laws of GOD may be written on
their Hearts, and that the Truths of the Gospel may be impressed on their Minds
in their Early Years. Childhood and Youth are vanity. Their Corrupt Nature
makes them very prone to receive hurtful Impressions from the Evil Examples
which they see set before them, and the Wicked Profane Speeches they hear. O
be you careful to do what you can to infuse good Principles, the Saving and
Purifying Truths of the Pure and Holy Law of GOD, as an Antidote against this
Infection! Instruct them in the Great Duties of Remembering their Creator in the
Days of their Youth, of Hallowing His Dreadful Name, of keeping the Sabbath
Holy, of Honoring and Obeying their Parents, of Speaking the Truth, etc. We
are obliged to do this, that if they are Tempted to the Vices which are
contrary to these Duties, they may be able to say, they have been better
Taught. GOD's Ancient People were expressly Commanded to teach their Children
His Commandments: Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day
shall be in thine heart. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Now
certainly the Mistresses of Families might be very Serviceable in this matter.
You are very conversant with your Children, O endeavor to be frequently
instilling into them some Divine Truth; to teach them their Duty, and to press
upon them the performance of it! I might have said that as Parents should be
careful to Instruct and Catechize their Children and Servants; so they should
also take Care that they attend the more Public Opportunities of being
Catechized.

(3.) THEY should back and enforce their Instructions with solemn Warnings and
Exhortations. We should labor to make a close application of the Truths we
teach them, unto their Consciences; that by the Grace of GOD, they may sink
deep into their Hearts, and govern their Lives. As we should acquaint them with
the Obligations they lie under to be the LORD's; so we should call upon them,
earnestly to choose the LORD JEHOVAH for their GOD. As we should Explain to
them the Terms of the Covenant of Grace; so we should Exhort them to give up
themselves unto the LORD in that Covenant. As we must inform them of their
Original Sin and Corruption; That they are by Nature Dead in trespasses and
sins, and Children of Wrath; So we must Warn them to fly the Wrath to come, and
to make haste to lay hold of that Hope which is set before them. As we must
Endeavor to Instruct them in the Knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, His
Person, and Offices: So we should call upon them to receive CHRIST as offered
to them in the Gospel. Thus we should Instruct, Exhort, and Warn those under
our Care. And here let us remember, and seriously Consider, That those Servants
who are in the lowest degree of Servitude, must not be neglected; They have
Immortal Souls to Save or Lose, as well as others; They have the same Spiritual
Wants and Diseases, which others naturally labor of. And they are capable of
being made Kings and Priests unto GOD, as well as others; and of becoming the
adopted Children of GOD by Faith in CHRIST. Of a truth GOD is no Respecter of
Persons; but in every Nation he that fears Him, and works righteousness is
accepted with Him, Act. 10.34, 35. And thus we have Considered the first
Particular, That the Heads of Families must take care to Teach their Houses the
Knowledge of GOD, His Mind and Will. It Is true, it is not in our power to give
them Grace, GOD alone is able to shine into their hearts with the light of the
glorious Gospel in the face of JESUS CHRIST, so as to turn them from darkness
unto light; and from the power of Satan unto GOD. However, we are obliged to
wait upon GOD in the use of these Means, if we would Serve GOD with our Houses.

THE Heads of Families must take care that the Worship of GOD be kept up, and
maintained in them. This they must do, if they would Serve the LORD in
conjunction with their Houses. In this way they must use their Endeavors that
their Houses may be Bethels, Houses of GOD, Houses devoted to His more
immediate Service; That they be Temples Consecrated to the Worship of GOD.
Every Family is a distinct Society, and as such, they ought to Worship GOD
together, and the Heads of Families should lead herein.

(1.) IT is their Duty to Pray with their Families. They should offer up the
Sacrifice of Prayer to GOD in their Families Morning and Evening. Their Prayer
should be Set before the LORD as Incense, and the lifting up of their hands as
the Evening Sacrifice, agreeable to that, Psalm. 141.2. Our Houses must be
Houses of Prayer, or we cannot Serve GOD acceptably in them. This is one thing
employed in Joshua's Resolution, that he would Worship GOD in his Family by
Prayer, and that they should offer up their united Requests and Petitions at
the Throne of Grace. The Scripture speaks of David's blessing his Household, 2 Samuel 6.20. It is said, v. 18. He blessed the People in the Name of the Lord of
Hosts. And, v. 20. Then David returned to bless his Household. Men bless others,
by Praying for GOD's Blessing upon them. And thus, it is probable, David
blessed his Family, by Praying with, and for them. In the Morning and Infancy
of the Church, Families were Churches; such was Adam's, such Noah's. There are
Family-Wants; and therefore Masters of Families should together with their
Houses, make known their Requests to GOD, for the Supply of them: There are
Family Duties to be performed; and therefore they should join together with
their Houses in Praying to GOD for Strength and Grace to do them Acceptably, to
Discharge them to His Glory, and their own Comfort. They receive many
Family-Mercies, and therefore it becomes them to join together in Blessing and
Praising that GOD who is the Author of all our Mercies, the Father of Lights,
from whom comes down every good and perfect giving. Furthermore, there are
many Family-Sins, which should be Confessed and Bewailed; certainly then, it is
the Duty of the Heads of Families to make known their Requests unto GOD, by
Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving. They must attend upon this Duty
Daily, engage in it with great Seriousness. They must look to it, that those
who are under their Care and Inspection, give due Attendance at the Times for
Prayer; and choose the most Convenient Seasons for the Discharge of this Duty.
They should study so to order their Secular Affairs, that they may not
interfere with, or crowd out this necessary Duty, but that they may have due
and suitable Time for the Discharge of it. Fervent Prayer is an Excellent Mean
to keep true Piety Alive and Flourishing; and it is a considerable and
essential Part of that Homage which we owe to the Blessed GOD. And therefore,
if this Duty be neglected, we do not Serve the LORD with our Houses as we are
bound to do.

(2.) THEY should Read the Scriptures with their Families. As we must Speak to
GOD and humbly call upon Him by Prayer, so we should attentively Hear what GOD
the LORD has to say unto us. It Is therefore very Proper to join with Prayer
the Reading a Portion of the Word of GOD in the Family. This is a Part of
Divine Worship, and it ought to be a Part of our Daily Worship in our Houses.
We read, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of GOD, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness. We have in these Oracles of GOD the Rules laid down according to
which we must Walk, if we would have our Ways please the LORD, and Serve Him
Acceptably. Here we are Taught what our Duty is, and to whom we must go for
Strength to Perform it. I might here say, that if some Practical Exposition
were made use of, it would be of good Advantage.

TO these Particulars it might be added, That the Singing of Psalms is a
Pleasant and Profitable Exercise, which should be attended, where there is
Ability to Perform it.

I shall here take occasion to say that the Heads of Families should Worship
GOD in Secret; and they must call upon all under their Care to do so too, and
allow them convenient time for Secret Duties. Each Member of the Family come to
years of Discretion, must Worship GOD apart, as well as in conjunction with the
Family. Our Savior commands, Mat. 6.6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into
thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret, -- It should be their care that such as are well-disposed in their
Families, may not have just reason to complain that they are not allowed time
to Pray, and Read the Word of GOD in Secret. Our Servants are not so ours, but
they are the LORD's still, and GOD expects that part of their time be daily
devoted to His more immediate Service; so that if we refuse to grant convenient
time for such Duties, we rob GOD of His due.

HEADS of Families should take care that their Families do Sanctify the
Lord's Day, and keep it Holy. If they would have their Families Serve the LORD,
they must do so. In the Fourth Commandment it is expressly said, Exodus 20.10.
Thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates. Masters of Families should see to it, that their Children and
Servants Rest from their Worldly business, and Employment, on the Lord's Day,
and spend that Time in the Public and Private Exercises of GOD's Worship;
except so much as is to be taken up in the works of Necessity, and Mercy. They
should see to it that their Houses be set in Order, and that their Secular and
Worldly Business be Seasonably laid aside; that so they and their Houses may
keep the Sabbath as a Day of Holy Rest unto the LORD. Thus they must Remember
the Sabbath Day, to keep it Holy. Very Solemn are the Precepts and Exhortations
recorded, Jer. 17.20, 21, 22. Hear ye the word of the LORD, -- Thus says the
LORD, Take heed to your selves, and bear no burden on the Sabbath Day, nor
bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. Neither carry forth a burden out of your
houses on the Sabbath Day, neither do ye any work; but hallow ye the
Sabbath Day. They must see that they do not Command or Allow their Servants to
Work on the Lord's Day. And it is their Duty also to use their Authority to
Restrain them from Play and vanity; yea, from such Recreations as may be Lawful
on other days. The governors of Families should take care that they with their
Houses attend upon the Public Worship of GOD on the Lord's Day. As they should
take care that they attend the Duties of Private Worship in the Family: so they
should provide that none under their Roof do needlessly absent themselves from
the House of GOD, and forfake the Assembling of themselves together to Worship
GOD with the Congregation of His People. If Heads of Families allow their
Children or Servants to tarry at home, when they ought to go to the Public
Assembly; they do not do what in them lies to make their Households Serve the
LORD. It is Scandalous for Children or Servants to be suffered to absent
themselves from the Public Worship of GOD, when Necessity does not require it.
And if such as have the Charge of Families would take up Joshua's Resolution,
they must exert their Authority to oblige them to wait upon GOD in His House,
and see that their behavior there be decent and reverent; and not profane and
ludicrous.

USE. THOSE of us that are Masters of Families have cause to be Humbled for our
Defects and Shortcomings in this great Duty; that we have been no more careful
to engage our Households in Serving the LORD. Who of us can say that we have not
been wanting in this Matter? In many things all of us have offended, and fallen
short of our Duty. We have not been so careful to walk in our Houses with a
perfect Heart as we ought to have been; to dwell with our Families as Men of
Knowledge. Our Lips have not preserved Knowledge, and communicated it so much as
they ought to have done. We have not been so fervent and frequent in our
Exhortations and Warnings as we ought to have been. And must we not confess
that we have been remiss in maintaining Family Worship, in the Life and Power
of it. Alas, have we not been Formal and Indifferent in Praying in our
Families, and Reading the Word of GOD to them? Have we not been negligent in
our Observation of the Lord's Day? Have not the Cares, and Pleasures and
Business of this World, in a great measure, shu^ out Family-Religion?
Certainly, the best of us have reason to be humbled before the LORD upon this
Account, and to say as, Psalm. 130.3. If thou LORD should mark iniquities; O
LORD, who shall stand? Let us then lie down in the Dust, and abase our selves
before the LORD for our Family-Sins. Let us Cry to Him to Sprinkle our Houses
with the Blood of the True Pascal Lamb, which takes away the Sin of the World.

AND let us now be Exhorted to be active and diligent in Reforming what has
been amiss; and to be more zealous in promoting the Exercise of Family-Religion
for the future. Let us now Renew and Strengthen this holy Resolution, As for
us, and our houses, We will Serve the LORD. Let us resolve with David in that
Psalm, which as one observes, may be called the Housholder's Psalm, 101.2. I
will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; O when will thou come unto me? I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart. Let us endeavor to grow and
abound more and more in Family-Religion. Let us now be more studious to get
acquainted with GOD, His Mind and Will. And also be ready to take pains to
instruct and teach our Families, our Children, and Servants. O let it be our
Care that they may be Fed, not only with Bread, but also with Spiritual
Knowledge and Understanding. It is Written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of GOD. O let us not neglect
the Souls, the Precious, the Immortal Souls of our Children, and Servants, and
other Relatives; while we are careful to provide for their Bodies! O let us not
be so Solicitous to lay up Estates for our Children, and to provide pleasant
Accommodations for our Families; as to obtain the Everlasting Mercies of the
New Covenant, which in all things is well ordered and sure. Let us take care to
offer up fervent Prayers for, and with our Families. Let our houses be more
than ever Houses of Prayer. Then we may hope, that GOD who is the high and
lofty One, that dwells in the high and holy Place; That GOD, whose especial
Presence is the Glory and Blessedness of Heaven it self: I say that GOD will
come down and dwell with us, and fill our houses with the Glory of His
Spiritual Presence. O when will GOD thus come unto us! Then we might hope that
GOD would create upon the dwelling Places in our Zion a Cloud and Smoke by day;
and the Shining of a flaming Fire by Night; and that we and our houses should
be the Saved and Blessed of the LORD.

THE Heads of Families should take care to use that power and authority which
GOD has given them, to encourage true Piety; and to Suppress Vice in their
Houses. Its Observed that Masters of Families, in the Infancy of the World,
before Families Combined and Associated into larger Societies, were both
Priests and Kings in their Houses. Such its supposed was Noah, such Abraham.
Now though the Authority of Heads of Families is not in our Day in all respects
Equal to what it was supposed to have been then; and Masters of Fa^^lies must
beware of wresting the Sword of Ju^^^ce out of the Hand of the Magistrate, who
bears it by Divine Appointment, and see that they do not Usurp more Authority
than is allowed them. Yet I say, It Is most certain that GOD does invest them
with power and authority over their Families by an immutable, and unchangable
Law: The Fifth Commandment expressly says, Thou shall honor thy Father and
thy Mother. Children are Commanded to Obey their Parents; Servants, their
Masters: Ephesians. 6.1, and 5. Children Obey your Parents in the Lord; for this is
right. 5. v. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto
Christ. The light and law of Nature taught the Heathen, that every Man should
hear Rule in his own House. Now seeing GOD has clothed Heads of Families with
Power, they ought to improve their Power for the countenancing, and encouraging
Religion and the Fear of GOD in their Houses. For as they derive their
Authority from GOD; so they should employ it to His Honor and Glory. They
should in their Families, be a Terror to evil doers, and a Praise to them that
do well. Thus they ought to back and enforce their Instructions and
Exhortations, by their Authority; and see that they maintain Family-Discipline
in their Houses. GOD gives that Honorable Character and Encomium of Abraham:
Genesis 18.19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do Justice and
Judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which He has spoken of
him.

THEY should not only Teach and Instruct; but also Command their Household to
Serve the LORD, as being Persons in Authority. Masters of Families should
Charge those under their Care, their Children and Servants to keep the
Commandments. To hallow GOD's Name, and to abstain from profane Cursing; To
beware of calling wicked Names, and of speaking obscene and filthy Words. To
abstain from Play, and Idleness on the Lords Day. To Keep good Orders in the
Family, by duly attending on Family Worship. They should also Command them to
avoid Vicious and Profane Company, and to keep themselves from such Places
where there is danger of their being corrupted in their Manners. We should as
there is need of it, Command them to beware of every thing that has a Tendency
to Debauch them. Masters of Families should use their endeavors, that Evil
Customs may not get Footing, and prevail among us. If instead of this, they
Allow and Indulge their Children and Servants, or any under their Authority, in
any thing wherein they serve the Devil and their L^^^s; if instead of
Prohibiting them, they give them Leave to be cut at Unseasonable Hours, and
that in Places of great Temptation, where they are in Danger of having their
Lusts irritated and inflamed; if they do thus, they are egregiously defective
in their Duty; for it is our Duty as much as may be to prevent Sin. And
therefore Masters of Families when they see their Children or Servants Tempted
to Sin, and in Danger of running into any Excess; They should lay their
Commands upon them to keep themselves from the accursed thing, which GOD's Soul
hates, and their Souls should abhor. When they see them in Danger, they should
Authoritatively declare to them, that such and such things as are contrary to
the Mind and Will of GOD, are also displeasing to them; and that if they do
them, it must be upon their Peril.

AGAIN, Heads of Families should use their Authority to Reprove their Children
and Servants for their Sins and Follies, and to Correct them, if need be. As
they ought to Command them to abstain from Sin; so also to Reprove and Correct
them for their Sins, as need requires. They have power to affix a Penalty as a
Sanction to their Commands, and to put it in Execution, in case of
Disobedience. In this way they ought to bear their Testimony against the
iniquities of their Children and Servants, as the matter may require. Eli is
articled against in the Word of GOD, and threatened for his negligence herein, 1 Samuel 3.13. For I have told him, that I will judge his House for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows: because his sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not. Heads of Families don't do what in them lies to restrain
and suppress Vice in their Houses, if they are not careful to Chastise and
Punish their Children and Servants when found guilty. Its their Duty in this
way to improve their Power for that GOD who has given it them; and so to put
away iniquity far from their Tabernacles. They must have no Fellowship with any
unfruitful work of Darkness, which they see any in their Families chargeable
with: but should Discountenance it, Reprove it, Frown upon it; that so if they
have any that will not be subject to the Laws of GOD for Conscience sake, and a
holy Fear of His Wrath; that yet they may by the Blessing of GOD, be restrained
from the Open Violation of His Laws, for fear of present Punishment: Prove.
13.24. He that spares his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him,
chastneth him betimes. It Is true, Heads of Families should beware of abusing
their power; they should take heed to themselves that they be not hasty, and
passionate; and that they be not unseasonable, and immoderately Severe in their
Reproofs and Corrections. They must not, by undue, Severities, Provoke, their
Children to Wrath. They must forbear threatening their Servants after a Cruel
Manner; and see that they be not Unmerciful in punishing them. They should
Study so to manage themselves in this Matter, as to give con^cing Evidence that
it is the Glory of GOD, and the benefit of the offender that they aim at in
their Reproofs and Corrections, and not the gratifying any exorbitant Passion.

AGAIN, They should use their Authority to compe^ such to leave their Houses,
as are irreclaimably wicked, and refuse to subject themselves to
Family-Government. Such as are Openly Vicious and Disorderly, that are Sons of
Belial, who shake off the Yoke from off their Necks; that obstinately refuse to
hear the Counsels and Warnings which are given them; and go on in their
iniquity, in spite of Correction: They ought not to be suffered to dwell in our
Houses, lest others be infected and poisoned with their evil Examples. David
comes to that Resolution, in Isal. 101. which seems to treat chiefly of his
Management of himself in his Family: Verse 4. A froward heart shall depart from
me: I will not know a wicked person, Verse 7. He that works deceit, shall not
dwell within my house: he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. It
becomes Heads of Families to use their Endeavors to get and employ such
Servants as shall be ready and willing to join with them in Serving the LORD.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful that they may dwell with me: He that
walks in a perfect way, he shall Serve me. And if their Servants, or others
that sojourn with them, are open enemies to GOD and Religion, they should Purge
their Houses of them. It is their Duty in this way to show their Hatred of
Vice, when other means prove ineffectual.

AND then, as it is the Duty of Heads of Families to use their Power to
discountenance Vice; so also to encourage Virtue and true Piety in their
Families. They must be a Praise and Encouragement to them that do well; as well
as a Terror to evil doers. Such as are Heads of Families should improve their
Influence and Authority to countenance their Children and Servants, and all
under their Roof in that which is Pious and Honest, and of good Report. GOD's
Countenance beholds the Upright with delight and complacency; And they must be
imitators of GOD herein; they should give such as fear the LORD, some peculiar
marks and testimonies of their Favor: and show them, that they are well
pleased to see them take care to Serve GOD, and to walk worthy of the LORD. As
they should endeavor to help such forward in the Service of GOD, by their
Instructions; so also to use their Authority to protect and strengthen them in
the Service of our common LORD; and not suffer any to harm them, to reproach or
scoff at them, because they are followers of that which is good. Thus if Heads
of Families would Serve the LORD with their Houses, they must use the Authority
GOD has given them, to encourage true Piety; and to suppress Vice; That so by
the blessing of GOD, their Houses may be the Habitations of Righteousness; and
that wickedness may not dwell with them.

HEADS of Families must take care that the Business which their Families are
employed in, be Lawful; and should use their endeavors, that Holiness to the
LORD, be written on their Household Affairs. If we would maintain the Fear and
Service of GOD in our Houses; We must be careful that the Affairs and Worldly
Business which our Families, Children and Servants are employed in, be lawful
and useful: Such, as in the diligent Attendance upon it, they may Serve their
Generation according to the Will of GOD, and be blessings to the Communities
and Societies they belong to.

ITS the Duty of Heads of Families to look to it that all under their care be
employed in some Business; and that they be not suffered to spend their time in
Idleness and Vanity. We must not let them be all the Day Idle: For Idleness is
in it self a great Sin, and is the cause of many other iniquities. When Persons
are Idle, Satan will find work for them to do. Certainly then, If we would
Serve the LORD with our Houses, we must see that ours be employed in some
Business, according to their several Capacities.

AND then we should see that their Business be Honest and Lawful. We must
beware that we do not seek a Maintenance for our Selves, and Families by unjust
Practices. And we must not by our Influence, draw our Servants to join with us
in any Unlawful way of dealing. If we do, our Houses will deserve rather to be
called the Tabernacles of Robbers, than the Dwellings of Righteousness.

AND the Heads of Families must endeavor that their Secular Affairs be
attended in a right Manner. As they should every Day Pray for a blessing on
their lawful Business; so they should take care that it be Attended in such a
Manner that they may reasonably look for a blessing upon it. Th^se Callings
which are in themselves lawful, may be greatly abused to the dishonor of GOD,
and the differvice of Religion. Masters of Families should therefore Watch
against the Temptations which they, or their Servants may be exposed to in
their Particular Callings. They should take care to be just and honest in their
dealing themselves: And as much as may be, look to it that their Servants be so
too. In a word, they must Study to keep their Employments under such a
Regulation, as that they may be Subservient to the Glory and Honor of GOD.
Thus they should endeavor that Holiness be written on their Household Affairs,
if they would Serve the LORD with their Houses.

MASTERS of Families should use their endeavors that their Children and
Servants who are come to Years of Discretion, may be brought to give up
themselves to the LORD in his Covenant, and Publicly to profess their
Subjection to Him. Masters ought to yield up themselves to the LORD, confess
His Name, and openly profess their Subjection to Him. And they must endeavor
to prepare those that are under their care for this Duty also. They should
employ their care and diligence, that their Servants may become the Disciples
of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; and that they may come regularly, to partake in the
Privileges of the New Covenant. Masters of Families should be earnest with GOD
for His Spirit and Grace to be poured out upon themselves; and wait upon Him in
the diligent use of means, that they may obtain that Character which is given
of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. And they were both Righteous before GOD,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD blameless. They
should likewise take care that their Children be seasonably offered to GOD in
Baptism, the initiating Seal of the Covenant. And then, as they grow up to
Years of Discretion, they should instruct them in the Nature, and Design of
this Ordinance; and press upon them the Obligations which their being made
partakers of this Privilege lays them under to be the LORD's. Thus they should
bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD. But we have already
heard something concerning Family Instruction. They should call upon them to
Renew their Covenant with GOD in a Solemn Manner, and by their own Public
consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, join themselves to the LORD, and
to His Church and People; that so Dedicating themselves to the LORD, they may
be admitted Members in full Communion, as we commonly speak. And thus if they
have any in their, Families under their care, that are Adult Persons, and have
not enjoyed the Privilege of Baptism in their Infancy; they should give
diligence in the use of all proper Means, to prepare them for this Ordinance,
looking to GOD for His Blessing on their Endeavors. In this manner they should
Endeavor that they and their Houses may be the LORD's, truly Devoted and
Dedicated to His Service, and visibly in Covenant with Him; that they may
openly acknowledge the LORD JEHOVAH, FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, for their GOD.

HEADS of Families must take care to set a good Example; and to walk in their
Houses in the diligent and conscientious Attendance upon the Duties, which the
LORD their GOD requires of them; whether Personal, or Relative. As they must
Instruct their Families, and Charge them to keep the Commandments of the LORD;
so they should go before them, and Lead in the way of Rightecusness and
Holiness; That they may be able to call upon their Children and Servants to
follow them, as they follow CHRIST. Masters should be Watchful over themselves,
and take care to Walk in their Houses with a perfect heart, as David resolves
he would do, Psalm. 101.2. Among the Methods of Instruction, the way of Teaching
by good Example, is justly esteemed very Excellent. And no doubt, has been
often found very successful. Indeed verbal Instructions and Admonitions without
this, will not be likely to avail. For how can we expect that GOD's Blessing
should accomnany our Endeavors to Teach our Children and Servants to Know and
Serve the LORD: if we our selves neglect to Serve Him, and yield Obedience to
His Commands? How can we hope that our Calls, and Exhortations, and Warnings,
should have any prevailing force upon the minds of our Relatives, if they see
that we disregard GOD's Commands our selves, and in our Practice declare that
we reject them? Actions speak louder than Words. And therefore if we allow our
selves in Wicked Courses; our Evil Exa^es will be likely to do more to Corrupt
our ^milies, than our Instructions and Exhortations will do to Reform them.
Suppose Heads of Families should Instruct their Children and Servants, and call
upon them to Fear and Serve the LORD, and tell them the Obligations which they
are under so to do. Suppose they should call upon them to Secure an Interest in
CHRIST, and acquaint them with the absolute Necessity they stand in of the
Favor of GOD, and a Title to the Blessings of the New Covenant; yet if they
were not at all concerned themselves for an Interest in CHRIST and the
Blessings of the Covenant; their Children and Servants would be ready to
despise such Calls as coming from them. Suppose they should Pray, and Read the
Scriptures in their Families; yet if their Lives give the Lie to their
Requests, and Acknowledgments, manifested in their Prayers; if their Practice
be a contradiction to the Rules of the Gospel, and opposite to them; this would
be a great damp and discouragement to Family Religion; while they deny the
Power of it, at the same time when they make some Essays to keep up the Form.
Suppose they should Command their Children and Servants to keep good Hours, and
to abstain from such Places and Company, as have a Tendency to Infect and
Defile them; yet if they themselves stay out late at Taverns, or other Places
of Temptation; this would breed great Disorder and Confusion in their Families,
and be a dreadful Hinderance to the Business of Family Religion. Suppose they
should Command their Children and Servants not to Swear and Curse; not to
Profane the Lord's Day; not to Steal, and the like: yet if they allow
themselves in these Abominations; what can be expected, but that their Houses
should be the Dwelling-Places of Iniquity, and that even the External Form of
Religion should in a little time be wholly laid aside Certainly then, Masters
of Families must take care to set a Good and ^ious Example; if they would Serve
the LORD in and with their Families. They must be careful that the Rules and
Laws of the Word of GOD be Copied out in their Conversation; and that their
Instructions be exemplified in their Life and Practice.

TO Conclude, Let us Pray to GOD to pour out His Spirit from on High, to revive
Family-Religion which seems to be under visible Decays and Languishments. Let
us be Earnest with GOD to pour out His Spirit on our Seed, and His Blessing on
our Offspring. Let us Sanctify our Houses by searching for the Old Leaven, and
casting it out. If we Serve the LORD in our Families with Integrity and
Uprightness of Heart; if we Worship Him with Reverence and godly Fear; then GOD
will choose our Houses for His Habitation, and Say; This is My Rest, here will
I Dwell, for I have desired it.

Secondly, THE Second thing under this Proposition is, to Show the Obligations
which Masters of Families are under to take care that their Houses join with
them in Serving the LORD.

NOW it will appear that Heads of Families are under very strong Obligations to
use their best Endeavors that Religion may grow and flourish in their
Families, in that their Houses may be Devoted to the Fear and Service of GOD,
If we Consider,

THE Charge of Families is in a pec^s manner committed to the Hends of them, by
GOD. The Great GOD does in a peculiar manner betrust Masters with the Care and
Management of their Houses. He cloatheth them with their Authority; gives them
the distinguishing advantages which they enjoy, to promote Religion; and
accordingly He does most justly Command them to look to it that their Houses
Serve the LORD. Its the Will of GOD, That Masters of Families should diligently
Instruct those that are under their Care, in the Good Knowledge of the LORD.
That they should teach them to fear the LORD, and command them to keep His
Statutes and His Judgments. And that they should be careful to maintain the
Worship of GOD in their Houses. Indeed its the duty of all and every one in
their several Places, and according to their several Capacities, to seek the
advancement of true Piety in the Houses where they dwell. But then its
peculiarly incumbent on Heads of Families. GOD has set them over their
Families for this end. GOD has made them Overseers to inspect their Houses,
and they must watch over them as they that must give account. GOD has put you
into this Relation, and it is with a Charge to improve it to His Glory, and
Honor, and the Advancement of the Interests of His Kingdom. When GOD causes
your Houses to grow, and graclously gives you Children, the Voice of His
Providence to you is, Take these Children, and Educate them for Me; Teach them
the Reverence and Obedience they owe to Me their Heavenly Father; That they may
be Dutiful Children. When you have Servants, The Voice of GOD's Providence to
you is, Take these Servants, and endeavor to teach them the Service which the
LORD their GOD requires of them, the Mystery of their General, as well as of
their Particular Calling. Show them the Bonds and Obligations which they are
under to Serve the LORD; and endeavor that they may be delivered from the
Slavery of Satan, the Bondage of their Lusts; and become the LORD's Freemen,
the Faithful and Obedient Servants of our Common LORD and Master. This is the
Voice of GOD's Providence, as well as of His Word. The Relation they stand in
to their Families, as it commands respect and Obedience from those under their
Government: so it also lays them under peculiar Obligations to Honor GOD, by
taking care that their Houses Serve Him. They are in a peculiar manner yours,
and therefore you are under the greater Obligations to take care that they
become the LORD's.

IF Masters take no care that their Houses may Serve the LORD; then the
Iniquity of their Houses will be laid to their Charge; and they Themselves with
their Families will be exposed to the Wrath and Curse of a Jealous GOD. We are
guilty before GOD, and become Partakers with others in their Sins, when we do
not according to the Relation we sustain, and the Power and Influence we have,
seek to keep them from Iniquity, and do not bear a due Testimony against their
Sins. If our Children or Servants make themselves vile, and we restrain them
not; if we suffer them to go on in their evil ways, without Warning, Reproof
and needful Correction; we become guilty before GOD; the gui^ and defilement of
their, abominations will cleave unto us. And we shall have reason to fear that
Wrath will come down upon us, and our Houses. As it did upon Eli's House, 1.
Sam. 3.11 to 14. And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in
Israel, at which both the Ears of every one that hears it shall tingle. In
that day, I will perform against Eli, all things which I have spoken concerning
his House: when I begin I will also make an end. For I have told him, that I
will judge his House for ever, for the iniquity which he knows: because his
Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And therefore I have
Sworn unto the House of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's House shall not be
purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for ever. If Masters do not take care to
keep up the Worship of GOD in their Houses; to command their Children and
Servants to keep GOD's Statutes; they may expect that the Curse of GOD will
enter into their Houses, and sooner or later, consume them and their Families.
We read of a Flying Roll, Zech. 5.1. And then its said, This is the Curse that
goes forth over the face of the whole Earth, ver. 3, 4. I will bring it forth,
says the LORD of Hosts, and it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and
into the House of him that Swears falsely by my Name: and it shall remain in
the midst of his House, and shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the
Stones thereof. Now we rob GOD of His due all the while we take no care to
Serve the LORD our selves, and to use our endeavors that our Houses may join
with us in Serving the LORD. If we neglect to maintain the Worship of GOD in
our Houses, we rob Him of the Offerings of Prayer and Praise, which are His
due. We rob Him of His Glory while we indulge abominable Iniquities in our
Houses. Now this is the way to have the Curse of GOD spoken of in this Text,
lie upon us, and upon ours. Such as live like Heathen in their Houses, have
reason to fear that Curse should fall upon them, Psalm. 79.6. Pour out thy wrath
upon the Heathen that have not know thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not
called upon thy Name. Sometimes the Houses of the wicked are safe from fear,
neither is the rod of GOD upon them, Job 21.9. They are carnally secure, and
prosper upon Temporal Accounts. But then this is one of the most dreadful
Judgments, to be suffered to go on in Sin without the Checks and Restraints of
GOD's Providence. Spiritual Plagues are the worst of Plagues. Certainly then
the Masters of Families are obliged to use their endeavors that their Houses
may Serve the LORD, as they would hope to preserve them from the blasting Curse
of a Jealous GOD. And then if Masters are negligent in their Duty, and do not
bear Testimony against Sin in their Families; they will pull down an heavy load
of Guilt on themselves, and day themselves open to the Righteous Displeasure
and Fiery Indignation of GOD. If our Children or Servants perish through our
Criminal negligence; if we take no care for their Instruction in Righteousness;
their Blood will be required at our Hands. And if we die without Repentance
they will rise up in Judgment against us, in the Great and Terrible Day of the
LORD, when we and they must stand before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST to give an
account of the things done in the body, and to receive our final Sentence. And
O how terrible will it be to have our Children accuse us then, and say, You
were cruel to our Immortal Souls, and never had any true regard to our
Spiritual Welfare: You were more careful to teach us the vain Fashions, and
evil Customs of the World; Than to instruct us in the Principles of Religion,
and to use your endeavors that we might be brought to the Saving knowledge of
GOD in CHRIST: You were more Solicitous to have us adorned with those
accomplishments which might recommend us to the esteem of the World; Than to
have us adorned with the Graces of the Spirit, and with the Beauties and
Glories of the inward Man; you allowed us to Serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures;
but never called upon us Seriously, to Serve the LORD our Maker. You were more
concerned to get Estates for us, and that we should make a figure in the World;
Than to obtain the Blessings of the New Covenant for us. O how shall we be able
to lift up our heads at the Great Day, If our Children should accuse us after
this manner! Alas! We shall not be able to stand in the Judgment, but shall
call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on us, and hide us from the wrath of
GOD and the Lamb. Certainly then, it necessarily concerns Heads of Families to
give diligence that their Children and Servants, and all under their Care may
be brought to Acknowledge GOD as their GOD, and to Serve Him. We must endeavor
by the Grace of GOD, to do our duty in this Matter, as we would hope to give up
our account with joy, and not with grief.

THIS is the way to obtain the gracious Presence of GOD with us in our Houses,
and to have His Blessing upon us. If we take Care to Serve GOD in our Houses,
then He will come down and be in the midst of us, to bless us. If we in this
way open the doors of our Houses, and give the blessed GOD admittance? He will
come in, and make His Abode with us. Lift up your heads O ye Gates, and be ye
lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. CHRIST does
as it were knock at our doors, and say, Open to Me! And shall we not bid Him
welcome? Should not Heads of Families make all needful Preparation for His
Entertainment, by Purging their Houses from Sin, and by maintaining the Worship
of GOD in them. The Presence of the Glorious GOD will be an abundant Recompense
for all the care and pains we can take to receive and entertain Him. We read,
Rev. 22.12. And behold, I come quckly; and my Reward is with me. -- This is
true with respect to CHRIST's approaches to His People in this Life, when He
manifests His Gracious Presence with them, and passes before them in acts of
especial Kindness and Favor. When He comes into our Hearts, or into our Houses
to dwell with us: He will not come empty-handed; No, But He will bring
Spiritual and Heavenly Blessings with Him; The Blessings of the Upper and the
Nether Springs. If we and our Houses Serve the LORD, then will GOD Bless us,
Delight in us, and Rejoice over us to do us good. Prove. 3.33. The Curse of the
LORD is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the habitation of the just.
Now its the Blessing of GOD that Builds the House, that Establishes it, that
Enricheth it. O how pleasantly, how joyfully might we live, had we more of the
Presence of GOD with us, and more of the Divine Blessing upon us? They will
have light in their Dwellings, who have the Father of Lights, dwelling with
them. They shall see the want of no good thing, of nothing which Infinite.
Wisdom shall see needful and proper for them, who receive GOD into their Hearts
and Houses; That GOD, from whom comes down every good and perfect giving. O
how comfortable, how desirable is it, to have that GOD keep House with us, who
is the GOD of Peace, the GOD of Order, the GOD of Love? This would sweeten the
Troubles we meet with in the Flesh; lessen and lighten the Burdens and
Difficulties of our wearisome Pilgrimage. GOD will protect and defend such
Houses; and the secret of His Presence shall be as a Pavilion to them. Psalm.
91.10. There shall no Evil befall thee, neither shall any Plague come nigh thy
Dwelling. Nothing but what GOD will Overruled for good; they shall have Health
in their Habitations, if GOD sees it best. However He will visit such as Serve
Him, when in Sickness, and make their Beds for them in the time of their
Languishing. He will Crown them with His Favor, and Command a Blessing on
their Outward Enjoyments. 2 Samuel 6.11, 12. And the Ark of the Lord continued in
the House of Obed^edom the Gittite, three Mouths: and the Lord blessed
Obed^edom, and all his household. And it was told King David, saying, The Lord
has blessed the house of Obed^edom, and all that pertains unto him, because
of the Ark of God. So David went and brought up the Ark of God from the House
of Obed^edom, into the City of David with gladness. He will Bless such Houses;
and those whom GOD Blesses, shall be Blessed indeed. O how much does it
concern Heads of Families then to devote themselves and Families to the Service
of the Blessed GOD! How much is it their Interest to promote true Religion in
their Houses!

IT will appear, that Heads of Families are under strong Obligations to Serve
the Lord with their Houses, if we consider the many Mercies which they and
their Houses daily receive from GOD. GOD daily loads us with His Benefits. We
are Indebted to Him for many Personal, and for many Family-Mercies; And shall
we not Praise Him with our Families? Shall we not endeavor, that our Houses
may be Devoted to the Honor of that GOD, who is our Benefactor? Are we and our
Families Preserved in the Night-Watches by that GOD who is the Watchman of
Israel, that never slumbreth nor sleeps? Have we taken Re^t in Sleep, and not
been Distressed with the Terrors of the Night? Certainly then, when we see the
Faces of each other in Peace, it becomes us to join together in Praising the
Name of the Lord for the Mercies of the Night. Does GOD preserve our going out,
and coming in, in the Day Time, when Man goes forth to his Labor? Does He
make our Business to Prosper? Undoubtedly then, we are obliged to offer up the
Evening Sacrifice of Praise, and to Bless the Lord (...) the Mercies and
Preservations of the Day. Does GOD Spread a Table for us Daily? Certainly then,
it is our Duty, as to ask His Blessing upon the Food He gives us; so also to
return Thanks to Him, and Praise His Name when we have Eaten and are full. And
though it be not required that we should be very long in Craving a Blessing, or
Returning Thanks; yet certainly it becomes us to do it with Reverence and with
hearts devoutly affected with the Mercies of GOD; and not with a trifling Air,
as if we were Praying to, or Blessing (...) Idol. Furthermore, Does GOD from
time to time preserve our Houses from Fire, and other Desolating Judgments;
does our Great Landlord who is is the Earth and the Fullness thereof, give us
pleasant comfortable Dwellings, and not turn us out of Doors; Certainly this is
a strong Obligation to engage us to Serve Him in, and with our Houses. Does GOD
fill our Houses with good things, give us many Conveniences and Desirable
Accommodations; And shall we forget and despise this GOD? O base Ingratitude!
Does GOD give us Health and Peace, in our Habitations; are our Houses in a good
measure, safe from fear: O then we should Serve the LORD with joy, alacrity and
delight. The Mercies of GOD bestowed on our Families, are an ^^dearing, and a
very strong Obligation upon us, to maintain the Worship of GOD, and to Serve
the LORD in our Houses with diligence and constancy.

THIS is the best way you can take to keep up and maintain your Authority in
your Families. Thus to Honor GOD by Serving Him in your Families, is the best
way to secure to your selves Respect and Obedience. If your Children and
Servants see that you improve your Power for GOD; this will probably beget in
them reverence and esteem. If Masters of Families are careful to Command their
Household to fear the LORD, and keep His Commandments; This will give Force and
Authority to those Commands which more immediately respect themselves: For the
Law of GOD does require Children to obey their Parents; Servants, their
Masters. The Word of GOD strongly enforces Relative Duties as a Vital and
Essential Part of pure Religion. And therefore the more we promote true
Religion in our Houses; the more this flourishes and grows: By so much the
more will Heads of Families he likely to Maintain their Authority, and to
receive those acknowledgements, that Duty and Obedience in their Houses, which
is owing to them. Their Piety will give them an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of
Glory. There Is a Majesty in true Piety which commands Respect. But if Masters
and Mistresses are Vicious and Profane themselves, and take no care to promote
the Service of GOD in their Families; they may expect to be lightly esteemed.
If they do thus dishonor GOD, He may be provoked to pour Contempt upon them,
and to lay their honor in the dust. 1 Samuel 2.30 -- Them that honor Me, I will
honor; and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed. How often has the
Authority and Government of Heads of Families been forfeited and lost by not
being improved for the Glory and Honor of GOD? And that Threatening has been
fulfilled. Isai. 24.2. And it shall be -- as with the Servant, so with his
Master; as with the Maid, so with her Mistress.

TO promote Religion and the Service of GOD in our Families, will be most
Comfortable and Advantageous for Us and Ours. Heads of Families cannot take a
better course to promote the truest welfare of their Houses, than by taking
Care to Serve the LORD in them. This will be both pleasant and profitable: For
the more there is of Religion in the Family, the more comfort we shall be
likely to have in our several Relations. The Word of GOD teaches us how to
discharge the Duties of our several Relations; and that is necessary in order to
our Enjoying true Comfort in them.

THE more there is of true Religion in a Family, The more there will be of true
Comfort and delight in the Conjugal Relation. If Husbands and Wives walk in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Law blameless, there will be a Mutual
love and endearment between them; and the Commands of GOD respecting their
Mutual Duties will not be grievous; but easy, pleasant, and delightful, as far
as the Grace of GOD governs them. The more they dwell as heirs together of the
Grace of Life; the more true Satisfaction will they enjoy: This will sweeten to
them the Troubles they meet with, and make their burdens lighter, while each
one does his part, and bears his part, forbearing one another in love, in
Obedience to GOD's Commandments.

AGAIN, The more careful Heads of Families are to Serve the LORD with their
Houses, The more Comfort they will be likely to have in their Children. If we
teach our Children the good knowledge of the LORD, and use our utmost
endeavors that they may be made Wise to Salvation; then we may hope to have
joy in them in this Life, and that which is to come. A wise Son makes a glad
Father, Prove. 15.20. The Love of Parents to their Children is a very Constant,
and a very strong Passion. How greatly then must they rejoice (if they
understand their own interest, and the interest of their Children) To see their
Children walking in the Truth. What a Satisfaction must it be to them to behold
the Image of GOD shining in their Children! And how great Blessings and
Comforts will such Children be to their Parents! The more they fear GOD, and
keep His Commandments; the more dutiful, the more helpful will they be; the
more will they be the Staff and Solace of their Age. On the other hand, A
foolish Son (and wickedness is the worst Folly) is a grief to his Father, and
bitterness to her that bare him, Prove. 17 25. The more your Children love GOD,
the more they obey His Commands; the more will they love one another, the
closer will their Union be, which is their strength and glory. How pleasant is
it both for Parents and Children, when they dwell together in Unity: Psalm.
133.1, 2. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity. It Is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his
garments. Like a sweet perfume, it will afford delight, and cheer the Spirits.
Great Estates and. Possessions will not make your Children happy; No, No, If
they have not the saving knowledge of GOD in CHRIST; If they do not choose GOD
for their Portion: their Worldly enjoyments will be fuel for their Lusts; They
will prove Snares and Temptations to them, estrange them from GOD, and so set
them at a greater distance from true Blessedness; and plunge them into the
deeper abyss of Misery.

AGAIN, The more Careful they are in this kind, the more likely will Masters of
Families be to enjoy Comfort in their Servants. If our Servants become the
Faithful Servants of GOD; they will then be Faithful and Diligent in Serving
us. If Servants Fear the LORD, they will be Obedient to their Masters; Not with
Eye-service as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of
GOD from the Heart. Were Masters more careful to Teach their Servants to know
the LORD, as well as to understand their Particular Trade; they would probably,
not have so much reason to complain of Unfaithful disobedient Servants, as now
they have. The Apostle Paul writing to Philemon concerning his Servant
Onesimus, whom he had begotten in his bonds, says, Philemon 10, 11. verses. I
beseech thee for my Son Onesimus whom I have begotten in my bonds: which in
time past was to thee unprofitable; but now profitable to thee, and to me.

AND as Religion will be comfortable and beneficial to the Heads of Families,
and their Houses, In that it obliges every One to the Duty of their respective
Relations, and so tends to keep Peace in the Family, and to make the Members of
it mutual Blessings each to other while they live together: So also it would
afford strong consolation to Masters when the Relation between them and their
Families, or any parts of them, shall be dissolved. We are Children of Change,
and many are the Changes which pass over us in this passing World. And in a
little time Death will break the Bands whereby we are united, and Dissolve the
Relations between Husbands and their Wives; Parents and their Children; Masters
and their Servants. Now in hours of such Changes, it will be very Comfortable,
if we can look back, and say, While we Lived together we took care to Serve the
LORD together. This will be Comfortable to us, when our Children or Servants do
remove from us, and become the Heads of distinct Families: This will be
Comfortable to us, when our Children or Servants shall be taken from us by
Death. It is no new and uncommon thing for Parents that live to Old Age, to
survive their Children. And they have the Sorrow many times of Burying Children
that are grown up. Now it will afford them Light and Comfort in such a dark
Hour, if they can say that they Devoted such Children unto GOD; That they
Prayed for them, and Prayed with them; that they Educated them for GOD. This
will be a Comfort to them when GOD calls for His Children which were given, or
rather lent unto them. This will also be Comfortable to us when our own time to
Die shall Approach; when the Hour shall draw nigh, in which we must be carried
out of our Houses, to the silent Grave. O how Comfortable will it be, if, when
the Voice of GOD's Providence says to us, as 2 King. 20.1. Set thine house in
order, for thou shall die, and not live. I say, If then we can Appeal to GOD as
Hezekiah, v. 3. I beseech thee, O LORD, remember now how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight. This will strengthen our Hearts when we come to bid an Eternal
Farewell to our Houses; and the Places which now know us, shall know us no more.
If we Serve GOD with our Houses in Sincerity, then we may in a Dying Hour Bless
them in the Name of the LORD, with a well grounded hope that the Eternal
JEHOVAH will continue to Dwell in our Families, and delight to Bless them, when
we are gathered to our Fathers. Then we may commit our near Relations unto GOD
with an humble Confidence that He who is the EVERLASTING FATHER, will be the
Father of our Fatherless Children; the Husband of our Widows. Then we may leave
our Children with GOD, hoping in Him that He will take them up, and take a
Fatherly Care of them, when we are Dead and gone. If we can say, While we were
with them in the World, we used our endeavors to keep them in the Fear and
Service of GOD: we may then Pray in Faith that GOD would preserve them from the
Evils, when we are not. In a Word, Thus to Serve GOD with our Houses, will be
very Comfortable to us at the Great Day, when our Judge shall Demand of us,
What have you done with, What have you done for your Children and Servants
which I gave you? O what Divine Pleasure and Satisfaction will it be, if we so
Serve GOD here with our Houses, that we may come to Rejoice together in the Day
of CHRIST's Appearing. What a joyous Crown of Glory will our Children be to us,
if we shall be able in that Day to say, Lo here we are, and the Children Thou
have given us! But whatever the Event be; yet if we by the Grace of GOD, do our
Duty in Sincerity, we shall give up our Account with Joy.

TO Conclude, Let us consider the many Obligations we are under, to Serve the
LORD with our Houses; how much it is both our Interest and Duty so to do. And
then, resolve by the Help of GOD, That as for us and our Houses, we will Serve
the Lord. Let us consider Seriously, that the Care and Charge of Families, is
in a peculiar manner committed to the Heads of them. O let us not then dare to
Betray this Trust! Woe to us if we do. Let us awfully consider, that if we take
no Care to Serve the LORD with our Houses, the Iniquity of our Houses will be
laid to our Charge (as we have heard) and we, together with them, shall be
exposed to the Wrath and Curse of GOD. O that this Consideration might awaken
us to Serve the Lord with Reverence and Godly Fear, in our Houses. O that we
might be effectually persuaded by the Terrors of the LORD, to Serve GOD our
selves, and to call upon our Children and Servants to join with us in this
Excellent Service; to Warn and to Reprove them for their Sins, and use our
Endeavors to Reclaim them, that so their Blood may not be required at our
Hands, in the Great Day of Account. Let us Remember, that this is the way to
engage the Presence of GOD with us, and to obtain His Blessing. And let Love to
our selves, and our Children, quicken us in this way to seek after the Presence
and Blessing of GOD, without which our outward Enjoyments will be turned into
Curses. Have we any regular Self-Love? Have we any true Affection to our
Families? Have we any Bowels of Compassion Yearning toward our Children, which
are our selves multiplied? O then, let us show and manifest our Love, by using
our utmost Endeavors to secure the Presence and Blessing of God, with our
selves; with our Wives, who are our selves; with our Children; with our
Servants. This will be the best and most evident Testimony of our hearty Love
to them.

AGAIN, Let us consider how Comfortable and Profitable it will be for us, and
our Houses to Serve the LORD. And let us now seek after Comfort in our several
Relations in this way. It may be we have been Extravagant in our Expectations,
too ready to promise our selves great Pleasure and Satisfaction other ways, and
upon other Accounts; but have been Disappointed (as Men generally are, when
their Expectations from the Creature are Carnal and Sensual) and have found
little else but Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit. Let us then Reflect on our
Folly, and Repent of it. And now let us seek for Comfort, by Serving GOD our
selves, and by taking care to Engage our Relations to join with us in Serving
the LORD. In this we shall find solid Pleasure, durable Satisfaction. If we
join together Heartily in Serving the LORD; we shall then have real Joy in our
Relations, such Joy as Death it self shall not be able to Bereave us of. And
now, O that we were Wise, and understood this; that we could consider where our
true Interest lies, and the Interest of our Families; that it might be well
with us and ours for Ever.

HEADS of Families ^^e under Obligations to take Care, that they and their
Houses Serve the LORD; Because this is the way to advance the Interest of
Religion, in the Places where they dwell; and to make the Church of GOD in the
Land, grow and flourish. Civil Societies consist of particular Families
combined and associated. And therefore if Masters would Reform their own
Houses, this would be a good step toward a general Reformation. Now every Man
is under strong Obligations to seek the Prosperity and Welfare of the Community
which he belongs to. GOD Commanded His People of Old to Seek the Peace of the
City whither He had caused them to be carried away Captives, and to Pray unto
the LORD for it, Jer. 29.7. Certainly then it becomes us to seek the Peace of
Jerusalem, of our Israel. No Man is born for himself alone, but also for his
Country. And it should be every Ones ambition to be a Blessing to the Public;
and in nothing can we more truly promote the Public W^^l than by Endeavoring
that tru^ Piety may flourish; That the Kingdom of CHRIST which is
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, may be set up and established. True Religion is
the Glory, the Safety, the Happiness of a People. Now though we are not all of
us in Places of Public Trust* Yet we may do excellent Service, and forward
this good Work, by using the influence and authority we have in our Houses, for
the honor of GOD, and the advancement of Religion. (...) Did Heads of Families
take care to give their Children and Servants In^^^ustion, and to keep them
under^ good government^, this would (...), increase and strengthen the In^e^^^
of Religion in the Land. This would be an excellent Medium to Propagate the
true Religion, and hand it down ^o Posterity. Certainly then Heads of Families
are strongly obliged to teach their Children and Servants GOD's Statutes and
His Judgments, and to Call upon them earnestly to Serve the LORD. This is the
way to have our Children made the Blessings and Ornaments of the Places where
they dwell; and have them stand up for GOD, and maintain His Worship when we
are dead and laid in our Graves. Whereas if Family-Instruction be neglected, if
Family-Discipline be not kept up, and that with a peculiar regard to the
advancement of true Piety, and for the discountenancing of Vice: We shall have
dreadful reason to fear that there will arise a Generation not knowing the
LORD, and refusing to Obey His Commandments. Undoubtedly then, Heads of
Families are under Indispensible Obligations to Instruct their Children, and
Command them to Serve the LORD. For in this way they will do excellent Service
to the Public, and lend a helping hand toward the building of GOD's Temple
among us. If we would hope to have our Churches grow and increase with the
Increasings of GOD; we must keep up Family Religion, that so our Houses may be
Nurseries of true Piety, wherein our Young Ones may grow up, thrive and
flourish; and as they grow in Stature, increase in true Wisdom and Knowledge;
that they may when grown up to Maturity; be as Trees of Righteousness Planted
in the Courts of our GOD, that bring forth their fruit in due Season. And
indeed, Heads of Families are in a peculiar manner obliged to this Duty from
the Privileges which they and their Children are admitted to in the Churches of
CHRIST. Our Children are generally Baptized. Now when Parents do enter into
Covenant with GOD, and when they offer their Children to GOD in Baptism, they
bring themselves under engagements to bring up their Children in the Nurture
and Admonition of the LORD; to Educate them for that GOD whose Name is called
upon them, and to whom they are devoted when they receive this initiating Seal
of the Covenant. When therefore we neglect this Duty, we are guilty of lying to
the LORD, and are Perjured in His Covenant. O that we were awakened to consider
the Vows of the LORD which are upon us, more Seriously, more Solemnly! It is to
be feared, It is much to be feared, that many who seek this Privilege for their
Children, looking upon it as an honorary Badge, which it is disgraceful to
want: I say that many forget the peculiar bonds and obligations they are under
to Serve the LORD themselves, and to take care that their Children be
consecrated to His Service. And then, unless Heads of Families take care that
such as are under their Government be Instructed; the Public Dispensations of
the Word and Ordinances will be likely to be lost upon them. If they are not
taught the Principles and first Rudiments of the Christian Religion, nor
acquainted with the Important Truths and Mysteries of it, it cannot be expected
that the Word Preached should profit them. For want of this, says One, When we
speak never so plainly of the things pertaining to the kingdom of GOD, to the
most we do but speak Parables. Unless our Children and ^ervants be Catechized
at Home, the plainest Truths almost delivered from the Pulpit, will be dark
sayings to them. Now it cannot be supposed that these Truths, how weighty
soever, should sink deep into their Hearts, if they have not a place in their
Understandings. We see then that the Growth and Prosperity of the Churches of
CHRIST do very strongly oblige Heads of Families to teach such as are under
their Care, to Fear and Serve the LORD. And if Heads of Families would
seriously set about this good Work of Family-Reformation, this would have an
happy Tendency, by the Blessing of GOD, to b^ing on a General Reformation, and
to promote true Godliness in the Power of it.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. ARE the Duties we have heard mentioned, incumbent on Masters of
Families; Learn that the Care of a Family is a Weighty Charge and Betrustment.
When GOD in His Providence puts a Person into this Relation. He betrusts him
with a very considerable Talent; and in the voice of His Providence He gives
him a solemn Charge to occupy with it and improve it to His Glory. Masters of
Families are GOD's Servants, and they must not seek themselves, chiefly and
ultimately; their own Honor, their own Pleasure or Profit. They must not think
that all they have to do, is to command respect and obedience to themselves,
and to receive the Profits of the Labor of their Household; No, nor yet that
they discharge all their Duty, if they are careful to teach their Servants
skill in their Particular Calling, and to make them Masters of their Trade, and
to provide sufficient proper Food, and Clothing, and all suitable outward
accommodations for them. These things must not be lest undone; 1 Timothy 5.8. But
if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. But then there are greater
and weightier Matters incumbent on Masters of Families: They must take care, as
we have heard, that their Household be fed with Divine Knowledge and
Understanding, and that they and their Houses Serve the LORD. Certainly then,
the Care of a Family is a weighty Betrustment which Masters are concerned to
discharge with Diligence and Fidelity in the Fear of GOD. It would be well if
Heads of Families, and particularly if Young Beginners would seriously Consider
of this, and Act accordingly.

USE. II. ARE Heads of Families under so many Obligations to take care that
they and their Houses do Serve the LORD; This reproves such as wholly neglect
this Duty, or are remiss in the Discharge of it; and calls upon them to Repent
and Reform. If therefore there be any such in the Congregation, I beseech you
to suffer me to show you your Transgression and your Sin, and to Entreat and
Command you in the Name of GOD, to Serve the LORD with your Houses. The Heathen
themselves had their L^^es or ^ena^es, their Household gods, whom they
Worshipped, and to whom they offered Sacrifices in their Houses. O Let it not
be said, that such as live in the Gospel Day are more brutish then the
Heathen^, who had only the dim Star light of Nature to Guide them. Do not
Imprison this Evident Truth, this Plain Command, in Unrighteousness; but let it
have its ^ue Force and Authority with you. Listen to the Dictates of your
Consciences, and don'^ sti^^^ your Convictions. Such are highly Criminal, and
very Blame worthy who neglect to Serve the LORD with their Houses. Let not any
therefore raise Objections, or frame Excuses, to Blind or Bribe their
Consciences. Do not say that you are under such low Circumstances, and so
hurried in your Worldly Business, that you cannot spare time for Religious
Duties; To Pray in your Families, and the like. This is a poor Excuse: What,
are you so Cumbred about many things, as to neglect the One thing needful. Will
this turn to your Account in the Day of the LORD? Is this to Consult the true
Interest of your Houses? No, no, you and yours stand in m^^^ need of the Favor
and Gracious Presence of GOD, than of your Fo^d and Raiment. And then, it may
be your Poverty is a just Judgment of GOD upon you, for your Robbing Him of the
Offerings of Prayer and Praise; and for refusing to Serve Him in your Families.
Cry to GOD then for His Grace; Set up the Worship of GOD in your Families; and
you will find that Time spent in His Service, is Redeemed Time. For this is the
way, as you have heard, to obtain His Blessing on your Outward Affairs. Do not
say, your Family Business is so great, that you have not time for Family
Duties. This Plea will not Profit you in the Day of Wrath. For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Mat. 16.26.

DO not say, you have not Ability to engage in the Duties of Family Worship;
particularly, to Pray with your Families: And so cast off Family Religion. But
rather Cry importunately to GOD to teach you to Pray, and to help your
Infirmities. Study the Holy Scriptures, and your own Hearts; Meditate on your
manifold Sins ^ Consider your Wants, and the many Mercies you daily receive at
the Hands of GOD. This will afford you Matter for Confessions, Petitions, and
Thanksgivings. And know it, GOD does not look at the Elegancy and Neatness of
your Expressions in Prayer; but at the Frame and Temper of your Hearts. Do not
therefore live in the neglect of this Duty, because you cannot Discharge it so
well as might be desired. Engage in it in Obedience to GOD; look to Him for
Strength, and He will assist you. Be now persuaded to give up your selves to
the LORD, and then take Care to maintain the Worship of GOD in your Families;
and to use your Endeavors that your Houses may Serve the LORD. O do not put
off this great and important Duty any longer. Let the Time past of your Lives
su^^^e, that you have lived without GOD in your Houses. And now to Day, while
it is called to Day, Resolve in the Strength of GOD's Grace, that you will set
up Family Religion. Now Sanctify your Houses, and Consecrate them to the
Service of GOD.

AND then, let such as have been Scandalously Remiss and Negligent in Serving
the LORD with their Houses, receive the Reproof of our Text and Doctrine in
Meekness of Wisdom. And for the future, engage in this Duty with Zeal,
Constancy and Diligence. Be Zealous and Repent of your past Sloth and
Negligence; and revive the Things which are ready to Die in your Families. And
be not any longer Slothful in this Business; but fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord. Be Constant in your Family Worship. Do not Satisfy your selves with
Praying to GOD with your Houses Once or Twice in the Week; but let your Morning
and Evening Sacrifice be Daily Offered unto GOD. See that you allow sufficient
and convenient Time for Family Duties; and take Care to engage in them with a
becoming Solemnity.

USE. III. ARE Masters of Families obliged to Serve the LORD with their Houses?
Learn hence, That it is the Duty of those under their C^^e, readily to join
with them in Serving the LORD, and to lend an helping Hand to promote this good
Work. Mistresses of Families, Children and Servants, should in their several
Places and Capacities, encourage and forward the Service of GOD in the Family.
They should take Care to strengthen the Hands of the Head of the Family, in the
Performance of the Duties of Divine Worship, by giving a Ready and Reverent
Attendance. If you needlessly absent your selves, or if your Carriage be Vain
and Contemptuous, you highly Provoke GOD.

CHILDREN should give a Dut^ful, and Heedful Attention to the Pious
Instructions and Counsels of their Parents: They should cheerfully Submit to
their Authority, when they Command them to Pray to GOD, Read His Word; and to
shun Evil Company, and Keep Seasonable Hours. They should with pleasure imitate
the good Examples their Pious Parents set them; and follow them as they follow
CHRIST.

SERVANTS should be Obedient to their Masters; particularly, when they require
them to Fear and Serve the LORD. They should thankfully Obey, And endeavor to
be workers together with their Masters, in their General Calling. It is their
Duty, not only to promote the Temporal Interests of their Master and his
Household: but also to endeavor in their Places, that true Religion may grow
and thrive in the Family. They should Pray for their Masters, and join with
them in Serving the LORD.

USE. IV. WHAT has been said affords Matter of great Encouragement, and strong
Consolation to such as Serve the LORD themselves, and take care that their
Houses join with them in Serving the LORD. You take the right way to make your
Selves and your Families truly happy. See then that you go on in this way of
Duty with alacrity and delight. Hail! You are highly favored, the LORD is with
you, and you and your Houses are blessed. Possibly some of you may want many of
the Outward Accommodations which you see your Wealthy Neighbors favored and
furnished with: Well, notwithstanding this, you have reason to sing with Holy
David, Psalm. 16.5, 6. The LORD is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my
cup; thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places;
yea I have a goodly heritage. The High and Lofty One dwells in your Houses, and
gives you His Spiritual Presence, which is a greater Honor, and more true
Pleasure than if you dwelt in the Palaces of Princes. You have the Bread and
the Water of Life. And your Outward Enjoyments are Covenant-Blessings, and the
fruit of your Heavenly Father's peculiar Love. Now the smallest drop, the least
crumb that is given to GOD's People in Covenant-Love and Faithfulness; is
better than the greatest affluence and fullness with the Wrath and Curse of GOD.
The little that (...) Righteous man has is better than the abundance of many
wicked. Take Care therefore to rejoice in the Provision which GOD makes for
your Families. Let not the Troubles you meet with in the flesh deject and
dispirit you. Whatever your Personal and Domestic Troubles may be; Yet you
have abundant reason to rejoice in the LORD, and Glory in the GOD of your
Salvation. For that GOD whom you Serve, will Sanctify these Afflictions to you,
and in His due time, deliver you out of them. Are you Exercised with Sickness
in your Families; Are your Houses put into Mourning? Well, you have Solid
Matter of Comfort, in as much as your GOD Lives for ever, that GOD, who is
Favor is better than Life; That GOD who is able to give you Beauty for ashes,
the Oil of Joy for Mourning; the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness:
That GOD, who is All in all. The Presence of GOD, and the Covenant Relation you
stand in to Him, should be your Support under all the Calamities which fall
upon your Houses. Thus David comforts himself, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house
be not so with GOD; yet He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered
in all things and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all my desire,
although he make it not to grow. Let the Righteous then, that Serve the LORD in
their Houses, see that they Serve Him with Gladness and Cheerfulness; And in
this Manner recommend Family-Religion to Others, as Pleasant, Peaceful, and
Joyful.

USE. V. FROM what has been said, We may Learn the Wretched and Miserable
Condition of those Houses which cast off the Fear of GOD, and restrain Prayer.
Contraries have contrary consequences. From the Comfort and Happiness of
Religious Families, We may Infer the Misery of the Tabernacles of Iniquity, the
deplorable State of those Houses wherein Satan is Served. The Houses of such as
Serve the LORD, are happy in the gracious Presence of GOD. But there is are
Miserable; for GOD is far from them; and they that are far from Him ^^all
perish. They are without GOD, and therefore destitute of all Good, Yea Satan
has his Seat in their Houses; This Evil One who goes about like a Roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, As a Strong Man armed, he keeps their Houses.
The Blessing of GOD is on the Habitation of the just; but His Curse is upon the
wicked: Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone,
and an horrible Tempest: this shall be the portion of their Cup. Indeed
sometimes the Houses of such Sinners are safe from fear, and the rod of GOD is
not upon them. They send forth their little Ones like a flock, and their
Children Dance; they take the Timbrel and Harp and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ, Job 21.9. to 12. But then How often is the Candle of the wicked put out;
and how often comes their destruction upon them, GOD distributeth Sorrow^ in
his Anger. Their Outward enjoyments will be turned into Curses. Their Table
shall become a Snare before them, that which should have been for their
welfare, shall become a Trap. O that such as forget GOD, and refuse to Serve
Him in their Houses, would consider this, and Repent and Reform before GOD pour
out His Fury upon them, and make them utterly desolate!

USE. VI. WHAT has been said aff^^ds us a loud call and Incitation to Serve
the LORD with our Houses. Let us then receive the word of Exhortation which our
Text and Doctrine give us, and comply with it. Let us first give up our Selves
to the LORD; and then take care to Consecrate our Houses to His Service. What
has been said under the Second Head concerning the Obligations which Heads of
Families are under to Serve the LORD with their Houses, may be improved as
Motives to enforce this Duty. Give me leave to add One or Two Hints, by way of
Counsel and Direction.

HAVE an Eye to this in your first Settlement, and begin to Serve the LORD with
your House, as soon as the Providence of GOD makes you the Head of a Family.
Let it be your Care and Endeavor to seek such to dwell with you, as will
heartily join with you in Serving the LORD; and will countenance True Religion
in your Family. And when you are Settled in a Family, Let your first and chief
Care be to Sanctify your House, and Consecrate it to be a Temple for the
Blessed GOD to dwell in; to be an House of Prayer, wherein He shall be
Worshipped. Don't plead, that you are Afraid or Ashamed to be Priest to your
Family in this regard, and to lead in the Worship of GOD: But break through the
Discouragements which lie in your way, with Christian Courage and Resolution.
Delays in this Matter are very Dangerous. The longer we neglect to Serve the
LORD in our Houses, the more will our Temptations to live without GOD in our
Houses, grow and prevail upon us.

LET us Watch against every Thing that would hinder us from Serving the LORD
with our Houses. Guard against Contentions and Divisions; and see that you
Prudently follow the Things which make for Peace. It cannot be expected, that a
Family should be united in Serving the LORD, while the House is Divided against
it self. Take care then to improve your Influence and Authority to keep Peace
in your Houses; and beware of doing any Thing to Sow the Seeds of Discord and
Contention.

AGAIN, Shun Wicked and Profane Company. If you choose the Open Enemies of GOD
and Religion, for your Companions; If Persons of Profane Lives, and Dissolute
Manners frequent your Houses with Freedom: This will put a Damp upon
Family-Religion; and you and your Houses will be in eminent Danger of learning
their ways. If therefore you would Serve the LORD with your Houses, you must
say with him, Psalm. 6.8. Depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity. On the
other Hand, You must seek the Fellowship and Acquaintance of such as Serve the
LORD with their Houses, and will be ready to Encourage, Strengthen and Confirm
you in this Excellent Service. It would be very Beautiful, very Profitable, if
such Houses as are Households of Faith, would cultivate an Intimate
Acquaintance, and Endearing Friendship each with other. And that, among other
Things, for this very End, that they might strengthen each other in
Family-Piety, by their Amicable Union, and by their Communion in Offices of
Kindness and Love.

ENDEAVOR so to Order your Secular Affairs, that they may not interfere with,
or crowd out the Worship and Service of GOD. Every Thing is Beautiful in it is
Season; and that Business which is done Seasonably, is most likely to be well
done. There is a Time when it is our Duty to be Worshipping GOD in Secret: There
is a Time when it is our Duty to be Worshipping GOD in our Families: There is
also a Time when it is our Duty to be Diligently Employed in our Particular
Callings. Now we must study so to Order our Affairs with Wisdom and Discretion,
that Religious Duties may have their proper Time allowed them, and be attended
upon in the most convenient Season.

STUDY to make the Exercises of Religion as Easy, Pleasant and Profitable as
you can. Endeavor to draw your Children and Servants to join with you in
Serving the LORD, by the Cords of a Man, and the Bands of Love. Countenance and
Cherish what you see of Good in them; and let them see that you are Pleased,
when they endeavor to Please and Serve the LORD. Let not your Instructions be
Tedious, through the Length of them; but rather often Repeated and Inculcated.
Let not your Discipline be excessively rigorous. Let your Family-Prayers be
rather Fervent and Frequent, than very Long. Thus Endeavor to make your
Religious Exercises as Easy, Pleasant and Profitable as you can. It is true,
GOD alone can give Persons a Spiritual Relish for Divine Things; However, we
must employ our Care and Diligence, not to Prejudice them against the Ways of
Godliness. We must Labor, and be very Diligent in the Business of Religion:
But should Prudently endeavor, not to make it unnecessarily Burdensome to our
selves or others.

POUR out your Souls to GOD in Secret Prayer, for a Blessing on your Endeavors
to Maintain and Promote the Fear and Service of GOD in your Houses. GOD alone
can Crown your Endeavors with the desired Success, and make them Effectual to
set up, and Establish His Kingdom in your Houses. You cannot teach your Children
or Servants to Know GOD Savingly; you cannot Write the Laws of GOD on their
Hearts. Unless GOD pour out His Spirit upon them, they will continue in the
Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity; for all what you are able to do.
Abraham, who is Celebrated in Scripture for his Care, to Command his Household
to keep GOD's Statutes, had a Mocking Ishmael in his Family. Isaac, a Profane
Esau; David, the Man after GOD's own Heart, a Wicked Absalom. See then that you
not only Pray with your Families; but also that you Pray to GOD in Secret for
them; That GOD would make every One a Living Temple for Him to dwell in; that
He would pour His Spirit on your Seed, and His Blessing on your Offspring. You
cannot teach Men the Saving Knowledge of the Mysteries of Godliness, as you may
teach them your Particular Calling. The Blessing of GOD's Common Providence is
sufficient for the latter; but the Influence of His Especial Grace is necessary
to Effect the former. Take Care then to Wrestle with GOD in Secret Prayer as
Jacob did, when he and his Household were greatly Distressed, for Fear of his
Brother Esau. Then you may hope to Prevail with GOD to Command a Blessing on
your Diligent Endeavors to Serve the LORD with your Houses.

THUS we have in an imperfect manner, Considered some of the Duties which
Masters of Families must Carefully attend unto, if they would Serve the LORD
with their Houses: As also some of the Obligations which they are under to
Discharge these Duties; And have made some brief Application. What Remains now,
but that we Cry to GOD for His Holy Spirit, to make a Saving and Powerful
Application of these Truths to our Souls; to put these Laws and Commands in our
Inward Parts, and to Write them in our Hearts: That we may be the Epistle of
Christ, written not with Ink, but by the Spirit of the Living GOD. And that
this Word of GOD may be in our Hearts, as Seed sown in good Ground, bringing
forth Fruit to Life Eternal. Let us now each of us be prevailed with to give up
our selves to the LORD, to Obey and Serve Him for Ever. And the LORD grant,
that Heads of Families may be persuaded Seriously to Consider how much they are
Obliged to Maintain and Promote the Service of GOD in their Houses! O that all
were brought to Subscribe to Joshua's Resolution and Engagement, and to say,
one and another of us, As for me and my House, we will serve the LORD. If we be
only the Hearers of the Word, it will be a (...) of Death unto Death, and
Aggravate our Condemnation in the Day of Judgment. For our Savior has told
us, Luke 12.47. And that Servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
But if we be not only the Hearers, but also the Doers of the Word; we shall be
blessed in our Deed. For if we walk before GOD with a perfect Heart, and Serve
Him Faithfully in our Houses: Then GOD will dwell with us here; and we shall
dwell with Him for ever. And when we shall leave our Houses on Earth, we shall
have a Building of GOD an House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

THE END.

