A DISQUISITION Concerning Ecclesiastical Councils

Proving, that not only Pastors, But Brethren delegated by the Chuches, have
equally a Right to a decisive Vote in such Assemblies. To which is added,
Proposals concerning Consociation of Churches. Agreed upon by a Synod, which
Convened at Boston, in New England.

With a Preface, containining a further Vindication of the Congregational
Discipline.

By Increase Mather. D. D.

Prove. 11. 14. In the Multitude of Counselors there is safety. Acts 15. 23.
They wrote Letters by them, after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and
Brethren. Jus ferendi in Concilijs ad Laicos potest Extendi, et plus aliquando,
quam ad Multos clericorum. Gersom. Citante Parker Ecclesiast. Lib. 3. Cap. 28.
p. 387. Judicium [in Concilijs] et quoad facultatem, et quoad Authoritatem,
Convenire potest doctis qui non sunt Episcopi, Ames Bellarm. Encry. Tom. 2 Cap.
2. p. 18. Boston, Printed for N. Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill.
1716.

THE Preface.
THAT Controversies about Forms of Ecclesiastical Discipline, concern not the
Essentials of Religion, but that G^^d Men may be of various Sentiments about
them; Salva Fide, et Carit^t^, is readily acknowledged. Nevertheless, there
ought to be a singular Regard unto Truths of this Nature, by us in New England,
above what may be affirmed of Men in any other Part of the World, since our
Fathers were Persecuted out of their Native Land, and fain to fly into the
Wilderness, for their Testimony thereunto: great were the Difficulties and
T^mptation^, and Straits, which they for some time conflicted with, and all
upon no other Account, but that so they might enjoy a pure Discipline and
Church state, exactly conformable to the Mind of Christ, revealed in the Holy
Scriptures. On which Account, for their Posterity to depart from what their
Fathers have with so much Clearnes^ of Scripture Light, taught and practiced,
and confirmed with so great Sufferings; must needs be a greater Sin and
Provocation to the Eyes of his Glory, than may be said of any other People on
the Face of the Earth.

Concerning Forms of Church Government, besides those of the Congregational
Way, there have been especially two Pretenders to a Divine Right, viz. ^^ose
that plead for the Episcopal, and those that are for the Presbyterian
Discipline. In the famous Treaty at ^xbridge between eminent Divines of both
Persuasions, after they had been for some time arguing the Matter, the M^rquiss
of Hertford spoke to this Effect; Sir ^. Whitlock's Memorials. p. 123.
My Lords, (said he) here is much said concerning Church Government in general;
the Reverend Divines on the Kings Part affirm, that Episcopacy is Jure Divino;
the Reverend Ministers on the other Part do affirm, that Presbytery is Jure
Divino; for my part, I think that neither of them, nor any other Form is Jure
Divino, and therefore desire we may hear no more about that Controversy. I
could easily say as that Noble Lord did, as to the two contending Parties,
without concurring in his general Negative. I have been told, that the
admirably Learned Dr. Prideux, (once Regius Professor in Oxford, and a great
Ornament to that University) being asked what Form of Church Government he
thought was of Divine Institution, replied, that he supposed that no particular
Form was Jure Divino; but if any were so, it was that which Congregational Men
made a Profession of. The Protestant Churches in H^lvetia, have no
Ecclesiastical Discipline; but if any Members of Tigurine Lit^rgy. ^. 133.
their Churches fall into Scandals, they turn them over to the Civil Magistrate
to discipline them. But so much has been written by the Learned Mr. Robert
Parker, De Politeia Ecclesiastica. L. 1. Cap. 10 15. ^t Lib. 2. C. 42. 44.
to prove that there is a Form of Church Government of Divine Institution, as I
think cannot be answered, and the famous Mr. George Gill^spy Aaron's R^d
blossoming.
has abundantly confuted Erastianisme.

It has been injurious to those of the Congregational Persuasion, that the Name
of Bro^nists has been undeservedly imposed upon them, from whom they differ
essentially. The Brownists make the Community to be Rulers; whereas those of
the Congregational Discipline, although they believe that Privilege, and in
that respect Power belongs to the Fraternity, yet that Rule and Government is
peculiar to the Presbytery; and that there cannot be a Valid Church Act without
the Consent of the Brotherhood, nor without the Concurrence of the Eldership,
^n an Organick Church. Brownists disown all Churches besides their own,
renouncing all the Parish Churches in England, and the Reformed Churches in
other Nations also, as no true Churches of Christ. It deserves a Remark, that
Robert Brown, the Father of those called Pagit. Haeresiography. p. 67.
Brownists, after he had maintained, that there was no Church in England, did
himself become a Conformist, and Parson of a Parish in Northamptonsshire,
called A Church. Congregationalists are of another Spirit and Principle. They
are the genuine Posterity of the good Old Puritan Nonconformists. There was
long since an admirable little Book, (little in bulk, but great in worth)
Printed with that Title, Puritanismus Anglicanus, which Dr. Ames has honored
with a Preface, whence he has been supposed to be the Composer of it. But a
Learned Hornbeck Epist* ad Durium. p. 27.
Professor in the University of Leyden, has informed us, that not Dr. Ames, but
Mr. Bradshaw, an Eminent Nonconformist Minister, (whose Life has been written
by Learned Mr. Gataker, and published by Mr. Clark) was the Author of that
Judicious Script. It is perfect Congregationalism. The Principles of those, who
are for the Congregational Discipline, are such as these. 1. That a Particular
Church, as to the Matter of it, ought to consist of such as are in the Judgment
of rational Charity, Saints, and faithful Brethren in Christ. Of such were the
Churches planted by the Apostles. 2. That the Form of a Church, or that which
does essentiate and disti^guish it from all other Societies, is a Covenant or
Agreement to walk together in the Observation of all the Ordinances of the Lord
Jesus Christ; which Covenant, though only implicit, gives Being to a Church;
nevertheless, that an explicit Covenant is most eligible. 3. That a Particular
Church, has Power given to them from the Lord Christ, to Choose their own
Officers, viz. Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons. 4. The Essence of
a Minister's Call to the Pastoral Office, is in a mutual Election. They are for
the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery in Ordination. Nevertheless, they
look not on that as essential, but as adiaphorus. In which they agree with some
Eminent Divines of the Presbyterian Judgment, particularly with Mr. Gillespy,
English Popish Ceremonies. p. 285.
nay with the general Kirk Assembly in Scotland, as whoever shall consult Mr.
Calderwood, History of Church of Scotland, p. 26, 383, 418, 425:
will find it often asserted. 5. That a Particular Church being furnished with
Elders, at least with a Teaching Elder, has full Power to exercise Discipline
within it self, without depending on any other Superior Jurisdiction. The
famous Mr. Paul Baine Diocesens Trial.
affirms, particular Churches are equal and independent on one another. He is
(so far as I understand) the first Writer by whom that Term has been used. It
is very unreasonable, that for this, Congregational Men should be Nick* named
Independents. A late Author, who is not of that Way, but a Conformist, Enquiry
concerning the Discipline of the Primitive C^urc^es, supposed to be written by
Mr. King, Chap. 8. p. 39.
says, That in the PrimitiveTimes every Particular Church was Independent, h.
e. that it had a sufficient Right and Power in it self to punish all its
Delinquents, without the Concurrence of other Churches. There is then no Reason
why such as are for the Congregational Discipline, should be reproachfully
called Independents. Our New England Platform of Church Discipline dislikes
that Name. Mr. Hooker Survey, part 2. Chap. 3.
thinks it was from the Subtilty of Satan, to fix that Name upon those that
professed the Truth; that so the Truth it self might be made nauseous and
distastful* Mr. John Beverley Uni^ Refo^mantium.
complains of it. Those famous Apologists, Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson,
Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Bridge, (who have been esteemed Pillars amongst those of
that Way,) publicly and solemnly declared, That it was a Maxim to be ab^orred,
that a single Society of Men, pretending to be endowed with a Power from
Christ, to judge them of the same Body, should arrogate to themselves an
Exemption from giving an Account, or being Censurable of any other, either
Christian Magistrate, or Neighbor Churches. So for (say they) was our Judgment
from that Independent Liberty, which has been imputed to us. 6. As all
Protestant Writers of Note ( Grotius only excepted) approve of the Necessity
and Usefulness of Ecclesiastical Councils, so do those of the Congregational
Discipline. It has ever been their declared Judgment, that when there is Want
of either Light or Peace in a Particular Church, it is their Duty to ask for
Council, with which Neighbor Churches ought to assist by sending their Elders,
and other Messengers, to advise and help them in their Difficulties. And that
in Momentous Matters of common Concernment, Particular Churches should proceed
with the Concurrence of Neighbor Churches. So in the Ordination of a Pastor,
much more in the deposing of one. Thus it has ever been in the Churches of
New England. And so it was in the more Primitive Times of Christianity, when the
People had Chosen a Pastor, they desired Neighbor Pastors to Concur in his
Ordination. When Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 11.
Alexander was Chosen a Bishop or Pastor at Jerusalem, it was with the
Concurrence of the Neighbors. Cyprian Epist. 52.
says, that when Co^nelius was Ordained, it was the Approbation of Sixteen
Pastors. So when any Church had sufficient Cause to depose a Pastor, they would
not do it without the Advice of a Council. When Paulus Samosetanus Eusebius. Lib.
7. Cap. 30.
was deposed for his Haeretical Opinions, it was with the Concurrence of a
Council, which met at Antioch, about that Affair. When Privatus the Bishop of
Lambese Cyprian* Epist. 55.
was deposed, it was with the Advice of many other Pastors.

But if those of the Congregational Discipline are so well affected to
Councils, what then is the Difference between a Presbyterian and Congregational
Man? Truly, a moderate Presbyterian and a ^olid Congregational Man differ so
little, as that it is Pity they should differ at all. My Dearest Brother Samuel
Mather (whose Successor I am here in Boston, he having been the first that
preached the Gospel to that Church unto which I have been related for more than
fifty years, and ^^ter his Removal from New England, became the Pastor of a
Congregational Church in Dublin, where also he was succeeeded by another
Brother, the well known Nathaniel Mather) wrote an ^^enicum, in which he makes
it evident, that the Difference among the Brethren of those two Persuasions, is
inconsiderable. A principal is, that Presbyte^ia^^ suppose that Synods have a
Juridical Power, that they have Authority to Censure Erring Churches, and if
obstinate, to deliver them to Satan. But those of the Congregational
Persuasion, think, that such Authority belongs only to a Particular Church, and
that Synods cannot proceed any further than to a Sentence of Non communion.
Surely, notwithstanding this Difference, they may be United Brethren. And
blessed be God, that in London they are so. I can reflect on it with Joy, that
when Providence ordered my Sojourning among them four years, I was not wanting
to do my Part toward that Union Mr. Rutherford declared, that if those of the
Congregational Way, would come up to Mr. Cotton, in his Keys of the Kingdom, he
would meet them half way: The truth is, there is a greater agreement in many
things between the Presbyterians in Scotland, and the Congregational Men in
New England, than with them and some others that go under the Name of
Presbyterians. Particularly, in that they do not make the Essence of a
Ministers Call to be in that Rite of Imposition of Hands, but in the Election
of the People, and in that their Ruling Elders are Chosen for term of Life.
Also in Scotland they greatly approve of Reading the Scriptures in Public
Congregations, but not of a silent Reading, without any Exposition. They
generally say with their famous Didoclavi^s, (alias Calderwood) Non probo
lectionem ^ine interpretatione; and with Austin, who says, (...) Legitur si
silebitur, ^uare (...) non exponitur. Nor do their Ministers use to Conclude
their Prayers with the Lord's Prayer, as many other Presbyterians, as well as
Episcopalians commonly do. But for Ministers to pretend to a Negative Voice in
Synods, or for Councils to take upon them to determine what Elders or
Messengers a Church shall submit unto, without the Choice of the Church
concerned; or for Ministers to pretend to be Members of a Counci^ without any
Mission from their Churches, nay, although the Church declares that they will not
send them; is Prelatical, and essentially differing not only from
Congregational, but from Presbyterian Principles. And now that I am going out
of the World, I could not die in Peace, if I did not discharge my Conscience in
bearing Witness against such Innovations, and Invasions on the Rights, and
Liberties belonging to Particular Congregations of Christ.

Notwithstanding, the Churches of New England were Planted a Noble Vine, wholly
a right Seed, if now there is a visible Degeneracy or Declension as to the
Power of Godliness, and so as to Discipline, it is not to be wondered at.
Primitive Purity has rarely continued for more than one Generation. The famous
Historian Eusebins. L. 3 C. 32.
(who has by some been called the Father of Ecclesiastical Historians) has
recorded a Saying of Hegesippus, that while the Apostles were living, the
Church remained a Virgin; but when they were removed by Death, 'twas soon
corrupted. How clear is it in the Scripture, that in the Apostle's Days, there
were more Pastors or Bishops than one in a Particular Congregational Church.
Acts 14. 23. So in the Church at Ephesus. Acts 20. 17, 28. And in the Church at
Philippi. Chapter 1. 1. And in the Church at Thessalonica. 1 These. 5. 12. And in
the Church at Coloss. there was Epaphras, Archippus, and Philemon. Clemens
Romanus (the same that is mentioned, Phil. 4. 3. when there had been a
scandalous Schism in the Church at Corinth, one or two chief Brethren having
drawn a great Party with them, so as that they rashly and unjustly deposed
their Officers; he wrote a very grave Epistle to that Church, in which he
speaks of more Elders or Bishops (for with him an Elder and a Bishop are the
same) that were among them. This Epistle of Clement to the Church at Corinth,
is supposed to be written forty years after the Apostle Paul's Epistle to
them. But in the next Age to the Apostles, no more than one Pastor or Bishop
might be in one Church. This we see in the Epistles of Ignatius, in the Age
next following the Apostles. And in the Age after that, Cyprian Ubi supra.
says, Unus in Ecclesia Sacerdos. Tertullian said as much before him. When
Austin See Austin' s Life written by Mr. King. p. 485, 492.
was grown old, and under Infirmities of Age, his Church desired that Eradius
might be his Assistant in the Episcopal Office, but Austin would not consent to
his Ordination, although his Church did earnestly desire it. He objected, that
for two Bishops to be at once in the same Church, was contrary to a Decree of
the Nicene Council. Valerius the Bishop of Hippo desired, that Austin might be
a joint Bishop with him. There was great Difficulty in obtaining his Ordination
under the same Pretense, that there might not be above one Bishop, or Pastor in
the same Church. Thus not are men, ^ea, and Councils, to make Decrees that
Christ never made. And many other Corruptions immedi^tely after the Apostolical
Times, c^ept into the Church. Particularly, the Observ^nce of Easter, with what
but C^^tentions whether it should be ex^^^ly fourteen Days after the (...),
(after the Jewish Mode) or ^n the Lord's Day after. Whereas (...)
Ecclesiastical Historian Socrates (...) owns the Truth, that there (...) no
Precept for the Observation of that time is holy, either on the one of those
days, or on the other. Which is 4lso confirmed by Ir^n^^s. Likewise Exorci^ing*
Signing with the C^oss in Baptism, Unctio^ after Baptism, and the giving Milk
and Honey, were early Superstitions, corrupting (...) Puri^y of Divine
Institutions.

(...) troubled that I should differ (...) many of the present Mini^^^r, in
New England, or rather that they differ from me. For I fully concur with our
Platform of Church Discipline, believing that it is (as in the Title Page is
expressed) gathered out of the Word of God. I wish all the Ministers in New
England could say the same. I likewise concur with the two Synods Convened at
Boston, both that in 1662, and that in 1679. That Vindication of the Order of
the Gospel, which I wrote Sixteen Years since, had the Approbation of the two
most Ancient Ministers then Living among us, viz. the Reverend Mr. Higginson,
and Mr. Hubbard, who when they were just leaving the World, were pleased to
give a greater Character of that Book, than any thing of mine deserved, and to
commend it to the Perusal and Acceptance of the Churches. The Ministers of the
First Generation, who were the First Planters of Churches in this Part of the
World, are all of them gathered to their Fathers. So are many of the Second
Generation. I am now the Eldest in this Province. It may in respect of my Age
(being in my Seventy Eighth Year) become me to give a Word of Advice to Younger
Ministers, especially considering, that I have been in a peculiar Respect, a
Father to many of them, viz. in that they were under my Inspection at the
College, when for many years, I presided over that Society.

Children, that which I would say to you, is, that considering your Fathers
came into this Wilderness, purely on the Account of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and that in Matters relating to Church Order and Government, they might
practice all, and nothing more, than what there is Scripture-War^ant for; and
that so they might assert the Authority of the Second Commandment, and fully
observe it; therefore do you Labor to be well Studied in that Subject. And let
me advise you to obtain (if possibly you can) the Books written by Mr. Keys of
the Kingdom, and Holiness of Church Members.
Cotton, Mr. Survey of Church Discipline.
Hooker, Mr. Res^ons. ad Apoll.
Norton, on those Controversies, also what has been published by Dr. Goodwin,
Dr Owen, and by that Man of incomparable Reading and Learning, the Venerable De
Politeia Ecclesiastica.
Robert Parker.

In the subsequent Disquisition, the Reader will not find any thing of Satyr,
or indecent Reflection on the Brethren, whose Notions are not the same with
mine. I have endeavored to confirm what I assert with Scripture, and with
Arguments, and the Authority of Eminent Divines, both Ancient and Modern. Aged
Pareus, when he had finished his Catechism, said, (as old Simeon did) Lord, now
let thou thy Servant depart in Peace. Methinks, I can heartily say so too.
Having done this Service for the Churches in New England, I am apt to think,
that I have now finished my Testimony, and that my Work in this World is done.

In those Regions of Light and Love, which are Above, there is more Knowledge
gained in one Day, than can be attained unto in an whole Age by Reading, and
hard Study, whilst on Earth. There do I long to be. The Lord hasten my being
among the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. Amen! Even so, Come Lord Jesus,
Come quickly.

Increase Mather.
Boston, October 30. 1716.
A DISQUISITION Concerning Ecclesiastical Councils.
AN Ecclesiastical Council, or Synod, is a Convention of duly qualified
Persons, called to Consult, and judge about Affairs, in which Churches, one or
more are concerned. There have been great Disputes on that Question, Who has
Power to Convoke a Synod? Whether it belongs to Magistrates, or to Pastors. I
shall not insist upon that Enquiry, only say, that if we keep to Scripture,
Churches have this Power Belonging to them. There have likewise been some who
have decried all Ecclesiastical Councils as useless, nay, pernicious; and as
having always done hurt to the Interest of Religion. Nazianzen's in Epist. ad
Procopium.
Expressions Concerning this, are famously known. Bellarmine Charges Luther
with being of that Opinion, but he wrongs him. If Luther was against all
Councils, why does Bellarmine complain of his being President of a Council,
Convened at Wittenberg, in the Year 1536. in which there were (as he says)
Three Hundred Pastors. I know not of one Protestant Writer of any Fame, that
dislikes all Synods, Grotius only Excepted: It cannot be denied, but that the
greatest part of Ecclesiastical Convocations, have done more against the Truth
then for it, as any man that Consults Alsted's Chronology of Councils, will
easily perceive. But this has proceeded not from the nature of Councils, but
from the faultiness of the Persons, of whom they were Co^stituted. The greatest
part of Magistrates, and of Miniisters, and of Professed Christians have been
Erroneous and Vicious. This ought not to prejudice Men against Magistracy, and
Ministry, and Christianity. The same is to be affirmed of Synods, of which also
there have been more than a few that have been blessed for the Suppression of
Errors, and Establishment of the Churches in the Truth. Several Particular and
Provincial Synods have given a faithful Testimony against Errors, both in
Judgment and Practice. Writers inform us, that Eachard. Eccles. History, p. 343.
The first Ecclesiastical Council, after that held at Jerusalem, was in the
year 180. in which the Heresy of Montan^s, and his Followers was Condemned.
There was a Synod in Arabia. A. D. 240. In which Origin was the President. This
Synod Condemned Soul-sleepers. That in Arabia, A. D. 260. did good S^^vice for
the Churches, in Refuti^^ and Condemning the Haere^ies of Paul of Samosata, and
the Paulinites, as they were Called. And the four Oecuminical Councils (although
as Calvin, and many others have observed( we cannot say that any one of them
was altogether free from Error in some lesser points, were blessed for the
Suppressing of the Haere^ies, which did infest the Church in those Ages. The
Nicene Synod, in which there were 318 Bishops, or Pastors, besides a numerous
Company of Elders, and others whom the Emperor himself, the great Constantine
honored with his Presence, Condemned the Heresy of Arius. This has been
Esteemed the most Celebrious Synod that ever was in the World. 2. The first
General Council at Constantinople, in which there were an hundred and fifty
Pastors, Condemned the Heresy of Macedonius. 3. In the great Ephesine Synod,
there were two hundred Pastors, in which the Heresy of Nestorius, who
maintained that Christ is two Persons, was Condemned. This Synod Convened, A.
D. 431. In this very City of Ephesus, there was another Synod, though not a
general one) held but nineteen years after the first; in which an Heretica^
Error on the other Extreme was Established, and several Members of the Synod
Compelled by Tortures to Subscribe the Decrees of the Majority. In so short a
time have Synods in the same place, greatly varied from one another. 4. In the
General Synod at Chalcedon, A. D. 451. there was 630 Pastors, besides
Presbyters and Laymen, as they are called: This Synod was of great use in
Confuting and Condemning the Heresy of Entyches, who held that there was but
one Nature belonging to our Savior Christ; it appears by these mentioned, that
notwithstanding Councils are not infallible, nevertheless, they have been very
helpful to discover the Truth, and settle the Churches in the profession of it.
They are necessary, though not absolutely to the Being, yet to the Well-being of
Churches. I have said nothing of the Synods which have been among the Reformed,
in these latter Ages, in France and Holland, and in other Countries, by some of
which the Interest of the true Religion has been a great gainer. It has been
Objected by some, Where have we an Institution for Synods? We answer, that the
Light of Nature directs unto it: Plus vident Oculi, quam Oculus. Many Eyes see
more than one. The Scripture says, Where no Counsel is the People fall, but in
the multitude of Counselors there is safety. Prove. 11. 14. And therefore they
that are wise, will in their difficulties ask for Counsel. 2 Samuel 20. 18. They
were w^nt to speak in old time, saying, they shall surely ask Counsel at Abel;
and so they ended the Matter. Moreover, we have Scripture Example for a Synod.
The Church in Antioch, and that at Jerusalem, under the Conduct of the
Apostles, Convened in order to Consulting on a Question, which was of common
Concernment to them. Dr. Owen Of Gospel Churches. p. 252.
therefore rightly observes, That Synods are Consecrated to the use of the
Church in all Ages, by the Example of the Apostles, in their guidance of the
first Churches of Je^s and Gentiles, which had the force of a Divine
Institution, as being by them under the Conduct of the Holy Spirit.

These things being premised, I proceed to what I have principally designed in
this Disquisition. There are two Problems relating to Ecclesiastical Council^,
which I* have been desired to Exdress my Thoughts and Judgment concerning them.
One of the Questions is,

Whether no Acts of Councils are to be received as Concluding and Decisive, for
which there is not the Concurrence of the Major part of the Pastors therein
Concerned?

The Affirmative I can in no wise Concur with. I may suppose, that I have as
much reason to know what has been the practice of these Churches, as most Men
now alive; having been (however unworthy) in the Teaching Office among them for
more than two and fifty years; (which so far as I understand, no other Minister
now in New England has) and assisting in many Councils of the Churches, in
which I never knew but that the Concurrence of the Major part of the Delegates
was Decisive: Nor was it ever declared, that one half of the Pastors in Synods
should have a Negative on the whole Council; nor Asserted, That ^^^tors have a
greater Authority than (...) Elders, which is implied in the Question under
Consideration. Shall we (...)* that if there should be a Council. (...)
^^^sisting of ten Pastors* and ten (...) (...), (...) ^^enty Brethren, that if
(...) of (...) perhaps Uns^udied, ^^experienced Young Men did not (...),
not^ithstanding the other five (...), Men of the greatest Learning (...), and
all the ten Ruling (...), and the twenty Brethren fully (...), yet that the Act
of the (...) shall be no Act at all, because (...) five Young Pastors did not
Approve of it; But this also is implied in the Question. My further Reason for
Non-concurrence therewith are these.

1. In the Synod at Jerusalem (the first and only Council of Churches mentioned
in the Scripture) The Pasto^^ there did not Assume to themselves a Negative
over the other Messengers; therefore neither ought it to be so now. It is
clear, that not only (...), but Brethren acted in that Council; and that
Brethren, and not Pastors only should be sent to Synods, it acknowledged by us
all. It has been disputed between Protestants and Papists, whether the
Brethren, or Pastors only have a definitive Suffrage in Synods. Papists are for
Pastors only, and so are our Prelatical Writers; one of them lately gives it
for the definition of a Synod, That it is an Assembly of the Hierarchical Order
in Consult for the Conduct of the Churches. But our most Eminent Protestant
Divines maintain, that Ruling Elders and Brethren have equally a definitive
Voice with the other; and this they prove, because it was so in the Synod at
Jerusalem, they argue strongly; Why was the Cause brought to the Brethren, and
not to the Pastors only if they had not power to judge and to determine
concerning the Question before them? The Decrees of that Synod were sent to the
Churches in the name of the Brethren, as well as of the Apostles and Elders.
Acts 15. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church to send
Chosen Men; and ver. 23. They wrote Letters by them after this manner; The
Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, send greeting; and ver. 25. It seemed good
to us, viz. Brethren as well as Elders; and ver. 28. It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, to lay no greater burden then these necessary things. The
Council at Basil would not admit of the Pope's Superiority over the whole
Council, as if the Council could not make a Valid Act, if the Pretended Pastor
over all the Churches did not Concur; and they reasoned thus, (as I find our
Protestant Divines have done) that word Edoxe, which is translated, it pleased,
or it seemed good to us (which word is used three times by the Synod at
Jerusalem) being spoken not of Pastors only, but of others also; it does
evidently import, that those others, viz. the Brethren in the Assembly had a
Power of Judgment and Determination in the Question under debate. They in whose
Names the Synodal Decrees were sent to the Churches, had undoubtedly a
suffrage, and the right of a definitive Sentence in them. But this was done in
the name of the Brethren, as well as of the Pastors. Now then, if the major
Part of all those who have in common the power of a definitive Sentence
Concur, the Act of the Council is Valid, and ought to be decisive. It has been
objected, that in Acts 1^* 4. it is said, that the Synodal Decrees were ordained
by the Apostles and Elders, without any mention of the Brethren, therefore it
may seem that the Brethren had not a Vote therein. To this both Dr. Whitaker,
and our Learned Parker De Polit. Eccles. Cap. 22. p. 396.
Reply, that by a Synechdoche (very usual in the Scripture) the Apostles and
Elders, being a chief part of the Assembly, are put for the whole, the Brethren
being included, and are expressly mentioned in the former Chapter. It is past
doubt that the Question was brought to the Multitude, Acts 15. 12, 13. (Gr.
Plethas unde Plebs) and they had their part in disputing and discussing the
Question then to be decided. Dr. Owen Ubi supra p. 263.
speaks the truth, when he says, that it is not necessary that Pastors only
should be delegated by the Churches, but may have others joined with them; and
had so, until Prelatick Usurpation overturned their Liberties; therefore there
were others besides Paul and Barnabas sent from Antioch to Jerusalem, and the
Brethren of the Church (says the Doctor) whatever is impudently pretended to
the contrary, Concurred in the Decree and Determination there made. I suppose
there are no Ministers in New England, excepting a Conformist or two, but what
is in this, of Dr. Owen's Judgment; yet there are some in the World will be
ready to say, Dr. Owen was indeed a Man of great Learning, but he was an
Independent, and wrote like himself; But Dr. Whitaker Lived before the Name of
Presbyterian and Independent was heard of; yet he speaks in an higher strain
than the other Doctor has done. This Doctor De Consilijs Quest. 3. C^p. 3. p.
97*
speaking of the Synod at Jerusalem, has these words, In hoc concilio quivis
Laicus et Presbyter definitivum suffragium habuit, non minus quam Petrus* In
this Council (says he) Every Laick and Presbyter had a definitive Suffrage no
less than Peter. This was Dr. Whitaker's Judgment; a Man of whom it was said,
that he was the Oracle of the University, and the Miracle of the World.

2. When Pastors of Churches Convene in Synods, it is not their Pastoral
Office, but the Churches delegation, which gives them a right to be there. It
was once disputed, whether the Bishops have not a Negative on the House of
Lords, so that there can be no Valid Act of Parliament without their
Concurrence. Mr. Bashaw, (a Learned Lawyer) proved they had not; because they
did not Sit there by virtue of their Office, but of the Baronies which belonged
to them. If then Pastors do not Sit in Council as Officers, but as Messengers
deputed by their Churches, they may not Claim a Negative. They would have no
right to be in this or that Synod, if their Churches did not send them. True it
is, when a Council is Called for, the Churches ought to send their Pastors, for
they should be, and often are, most able to Judge in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
The words in our Platform are these: Because none are, or should be more fit to
know the State of the Churches, nor to advise of ways for the good thereof,
than Elders; therefore it is fit in the Choice of Messengers for such
Assemblies, they have special respect to such. Nevertheless, they do not Sit
there as Pastors, Officers, Rulers. Dr. Owen speaks Judiciously, and like
himself in saving, That no Persons by virtue of any Office merely, have right
to be Members of Ecclesiastical Synods as such; neither is there either Example
or Reason to give color to any such pretense: Officers of the Church ought to
be Present in them* but merely as such, it belongs not to them. They who say,
this is pure Independent Doctrine, discover their own ignorance; for Bu^linger,
Hyperius, Dane^^, Voetius, Vedeli^s, and Zeperus, who were no Independents,
have said as much as this amounts unto, which I have in another Discourse taken
notice of. And hence it does not follow, that if Elders have a Negative Voice
in their Particular Churches, which our Platform of Discipline gives them;
Chap. 10 Sect. 11. that they have so in Councils, because in their Particular
Churches they are Rulers, to whom Obedience is due. Heb. 13. 17. But in Synods
they have no power of Rule. A Pastor when Sitting in Council, acts as a Church
Messenger, and not as a Church Officer; the Church does not give more power to
one of their Messengers, than to another, a Presbyter, a Deacon, a Brother
Sitting in the Synod is a Public Person and Representative of the Church, as
well as the Pastor. When a City sends to the Convention of the Nation a
Senator, and another who is not Vested with any Civil Authority, to be their
Representatives, their Power in the Great Council of the Nation is Equal; though
when they are in their own City, one has a greater Rule and Authority than the
other. Qui (says our famous Parker, p. 391 and Dr. Whitaker) Ab Ecclesijs
parit^r delegantur, Par^s esse debent. Why should there not be a Parity in the
Power, when there is a Parity in the Delegation? there is great Reason for it,
Considering that some Brethren who are sent to Councils, are as able, and it
may be, far more able to give Light concerning the Question to be discussed,
than any Pastor there. In the famous Nicene Synod, the Great (...) was not then
a Pastor, (Bishops have appropriated that name to themselves.) But a Deacon in
the Church of Alexandria. But what Pastor (of which there were more than 300 in
that Council) did so much ^ervice for the Truth, in opposition to the Arian
Heresy, as Athanasius did? who notwithstanding his being but a Deacon, was a
great part of that Assembly. In the Synod at Dort, almost an Hundred years
since, some of the Seniors (as they call their Ruling Elders) did as Voetius
(who was a Member of that Synod) testifies more Service for the Truth against
the Arminian Remonstrants, than some of their Pastors did. We have seen in
several of our own Churches, Brethren of far greater Learning and Abilities,
than their Pastors. And since the power of (...) only Consultative, what good
reason can there be given, why such should not have an Equal Vote with any
other? (...) ^ut maj^ra in Laici^ (...), ^ur non ad^iberentur in (...)
Eccle^iastic^? says Bullinger; (...) cap. 2. p. 137.
If Laics have Equal, or it may be, greater Gifts than Bishops, why should not
their Votes in Synods be of Equal Authority with others? It is past doubt, (as
we shall further show) that in the Ancient Councils there were Brethren as well
as Pastors, and that the Decision of the Que^^^on was brought before them also,
which implies an Equality of Power in their Suffrages. It has been objected,
that this Principle will make way for Ignorant Mechanics to Carry it in Synods
against their Learned Pastors. The Jesuit Saunders raveth at the Centuriators,
because they affirmed, (and most truly) that in the Primitive Churches, others
besides Clergymen were Members in Synods: He says, that none but Madmen will
believe that Mechanics should Sit in Council with Bishops, about
Ecclesiastical Affairs. But why not? As for the name of Mechanics, although it
is Contemptible with us, it is not so in all Nations. It was not so among the
Jews. The most Learned Rabbi's have not thought themselves dishonored by
Learning Du veil* in Acts 9. 43.
a Trade. In their Writings we read of Rabbi Jose, a Skinner; Rabbi John a
Shoemaker; Rabbi Jude a Baker, Rabbi Meir a Scrivener. And we know that the
Apostle Paul, notwithstanding his being a great Scholar, had learned to be a
Tent-maker; and Aquila, a man mighty in the Scriptures, was of the same Craft.
Acts 18. 3. It was frequent among the Ministers of Bohemia, to be well skilled
in some Mechanical Operations. It is not then enough to Unqualify a Man for a
Synod, that he is a Mechanic; Nor are any Ministers among us (although
Prelatists are) of that Opinion: Nor have I written this, as if I thought Every
Brother in a Church, were fit to be Chosen a Member of a Council. Churches
ought to be careful in that matter. If they send Ignorant and Unqualified
Persons to be their Delegates, the fault is in the Church that does so, and not
in the Principle, that has been maintained. The Judicious Author of a little
Book, with the Title of, Puritanismus Anglicanus, affirms, that it is not
disparagement to a Church, if some who Exercise Mechanic Arts, are Chosen
Ruling Elders therein, provided they are Men of Understanding, and of Exemplary
Piety. Then why may not such be Delegates of Churches. I shall further add,
that there are Mechanics, who although they do not Excel in that which is called
Humane Learning, they are well Verst and Learned in the Scriptures, spending
much time in Consulting those Oracles of God, and being Men of great Piety, and
Excellent Natural Accomplishments, they may be very Useful in Synods
Ecclesiastical Historians, give a Remarkable Account of what happened in the
Nicene Synod. A Pious Old Man, who was no ClergyMan, nor Exercised in
Philosophical Notions, by his plain discourse did more toward the Conviction
of an Heretical Philosopher, than all the Learned Bishops in the Council could
do.

3. Popery came in at this door, of Pastors assuming more to themselves than
belongs to them, and the Fraternities readiness to part with what was theirs.
The Famous Author of the History of the Council of Trent, notwithstanding his
being a Papist, has Asserted as much as this comes to. Pastors did not at first
pretend unto a sole Authority, nor yet unto a Negative in Synods, from the
Beginning it was not so; nor yet in the days of Cyprian Lib. 3. Cap. 10. has
these words, Pres^nte pi^^is maxima part.
(who flourished A. D. 250.) Presbyters, Deacons, and other People were in his
Synod; and yet forty years before him Origin Ex^d. Homill. 11.
complained of Episcopal Encroachments then beginning. In a Synod which
Con^^ned at Rome, by which Novatus was Condemned, there were many Presbyters
and Deacons. That Elders and Brethren, as well as Pastors, had in those days
their Interest in Eccles^^stical Councils, is so manifest, that a late
Episcopalian cannot deny it; for in the year 270. there was a Synod Convened at
Antioch, to Compose the Troubles there raised by their Bishop Paul; In this
Synod were seventy two Bishops or Pastors. After they had Condemned the
Heretic Paul, for his Immorality, as well as Heterodoxy, they gave an account
of their proceedings in a Synodical Letter, directed to the then Bishop of
Rome, and to others See Mr. Echards Ecclesiastical History. p. 432.
which Letter was written not only in the Name of the Bishops, but also of the
Presbyters, Deacons and Laity, says Mr. Echard. And in some of the General
Councils, there were not only Pastors, but Elders and Laymen too (as they call
them) who had their Suffrage in them. So it was in the Nicene Synod: Vitus and
Vincentius, who were not Pastors but Elders of the Church then in Rome, signed
the Acts of that Council; and in that of Chalcedon there were many Laics. I
know Papists and Prelates deny this, but the Testimony of Socrates and
Euse^ius, and others, have sufficiently proved it. Notwithstanding the Mystery
of Iniquity began to work betimes; It was a considerable time before Bishops
did Monopolize all Synodal Power. The Usurpation came in gradually, until at
last none but Bishops, who called themselves Pastors, were thought worthy to be
Members Constituent of Ecclesiastical Councils, and of these there were
sometimes more than a good many. Bellarmin^ tells of a Council, (which he will
have to be his tenth Concilium Laterons^.
General one) in which there were no less than a thousand Bishops. I mention
not these things to reflect on any, only Considering that Good and Faithful
Pastors in the more Primitive Times, did unawares give a step toward Popery; we
should be watchful against any thing that may have the least Aspect that way.
The Pastors in the Council at Nice Nicenum Concilijum sedem Meretricis qua
super septem montes sedet praeparavit. v. Parker pol. Lib. p. 2^9.
giving the precedence to the Bishop of Rome, was a fatal thing. Before that
was done, the Church of Rome (^aith AEneas Sylvius) had but little Respect.

4. The Affirmative does not agree with the Doctrine of the most Reformed
Churches at this day, Whether Presbyterian or Congregational; If it had been
thus Expressed, no Act of the Council shall be decisive without the major part
of the Elders, it had been (though not justifyable) yet less Exceptionable. But
as it is now Expressed, it makes Ruling Elders, as well as Brethren in Councils
to signify very Little. When the Scripture informs us that the Synodal Decrees
of the Council at Jerusalem were Consented to by the Elders; our incomparable
Parker observes, that Ruling, as well as Teaching Elders were Comprehended
under that Expression. A Ruling Elder has not that Doctrinal Authority, which a
Pastor has; nevertheless his Ruling Authority is Equal with the Pastors; and
when as Delegates they Sit in Synods, may have an Equal Power. Hence Sutliff,
(a Prelatick Protestant) complains that the Synods of the Reformed Churches
send two Ruling Elders for one Pastor, and so ( says he) the major part Carries
it against their Pastors. Under the Reforming Parliament in England, there was
a Presbyterian Provincial Synod, settled at London See the History of the Four
Last Reigns. p. 159.
Consisting of twelve Ministers, and twenty four Lay Elders, (as they were
called) Acts to be Valid which pass by the Major part. Sir B. Whitlock, in his
Memorials, p. 23. informs us, that in the year 1638. It was Determined in
Scotland, that every Parish should send a Layman, whom they called a Ruling
Elder, to their National Synod, which should have Equal Power with the
Minister. The Reverend Mr. Walter Stuart, in his Collections concerning the
Discipline and Government of the Church in Scotland, informs us, that their
General Assembly Consists of Pastors and Ruling Elders; and that in the
beginning of the Reformation, the Number of Pastors were but the fourth part of
the Assembly. Their Ruling Elders are not Ordained with Imposition of Hands. He
says, that the Assembly is Null where no Ruling Elders are Commissionated. He
takes notice, that by the directions of the English Parliament, August 19.
1545* it is provided, that there be in all Assemblies a Ruling Elder, and one
Minister. In the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches in F^ance,
it is declared, that in their Provincial Synods, the Pastor shall bring one or
two Elders with him; and that if he Comes alone, he shall not be regarded; that
the President in the Synod shall gather the Votes of every Particular, and
declare the Major part; and that Elders deputed by the Churches, shall have
their Votes as the Pastors. v. Chap. 8. p. 26, 27. So that in a Presbyterian
Synod, an Act may be valid, although the major part of the Pastors do not Concur;
nay, though not one Pastor does Concur in the Passing of it. Was not the National
Kirk Assembly in Scotland lately Overruled by the Ruling Elders therein. As
for Congregationalists they Concur with Mr. Parker, Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Voet, and
Dr. Owen; that the Power which the Pastors have in Synods, is not merely from
their Office, but from the Mission they receive from their Churches; and
consequently that there is a parity in the Power: And with this agrees our
Platform of Church Discipline, which makes the next Efficient Cause of Synods
to be the Missive Power of the Churches, and speaks of the Churches sending
their Elders and other Messengers; which supposes that Elders in Synods are
Considered as Messengers, and not as Officers; and that Synods may not Exercise
any Church Authority, which, if they Sat there under the notion of being Vested
with Office-Power might be done. And that this was formerly the Judgment of
Ministers in New England, we may Conclude from M. Hooker's Survey of
Church Discipline, which had the Approbation of the Pastors then at New Haven,
Guilford, Milford, Stratford, Fairfield, and many others. Now Mr. Hooker Survey
Part 4, p. 47, 48, 52.
asserts, That in Synods all have Equal Power, because equally Sent and Chosen;
and that none act there as Officers, i. e. though they ^e Office^s in their own
Congregations, they are not so here, but as Called. Here is no Act of an
Officer, because the formal reason of his being a Member of the Synod, is the
Choosing and Sending. And therefore they that are no Officers if so Chosen, have
a right to Vote; and therefore they that are Officers, if not Sent, have no
right of Voting. Those Acts which proceed in Common from Men without, as well
as in Office, those cannot be Acts of Men in Office, when as all Acts of the
Synod are performed by all the Members of the Synod, by Brethren, as well as
Elders. Thus speaks our Renowned Hooker. Nor do his Sentiments differ from
Polan^s Polan. Syn^a^. (...) Can. 14.
who maintains, that all who are delegated from the Churches, has a Decisive
Vote, and that Masters of Schools, and others, who are not Pastors, may be
Elected. The Tripa^t History testifies, that there were Laics in the Ni^ene
Council.

It has been Objected, that Mr. Cotton maintains, In his Book o^ the (...) p.
2^.
that in the Synod of Jerusalem, the (...) of the Decrees lay chiefly, if not
only, in the Apostles and Elders. Some I hear have laid great weight upon this.
I shall a little Consider it. 1. Why should we be, Additti in verba ul^^u^
Jurarc Magistri? Why should we Call any Man Master? Mat 23. 12. The Schol-men
will now and then say of their admired Master, Peter Lombard, Hi^ (...)
tenetu^* Here we must Crave Leave to Dissent from our Master. So if Mr. Cotton
has happened to drop a Notion, which does not well Suit with Congregational
Principles, which we take to be according to the Scripture, we are not bound to
write after him. If the Opinion of Men were to decide the Question, there is as
much reason to submit to Dr. Ames as to any Man; who says, that others besides
Pastors may have Authority in Ecclesiastical Councils, which is contrary to
saying Pastors only have Authority. 2. Let his words be taken in a right sense,
and I shall say as my Venerable Father Cotton does. But there is an Ambiguity
in the word Authority. Sometimes it is taken for a Power of Rule and
Jurisdiction. A Negative Voice implies no less. No Conventions are said to have
Authority in a strict sense, or a Power to impose their Acts on others, but
such as have a Juridical Power. This cannot be Mr. Cotton's Meaning. For all
Congregationalists (of whom he was not the least) deny that Synods have any
such Power. This we see in the Order of the Congregational Churches These 26.
Published in 16^8. Our New England Platform declares, that a Synod cannot
Exercise any Act of Authority. The Presidential Synod, Acts 15. (they say) did
not. The Scripture (^aith my Learned Tutor, Mr. Norton) Respons. ad Apollo^.
Cap. 10. p. 110 111.
does neither Expressly, nor by just Consequence mention Synodal Authority.
When the Power of Synods is called Authority, the Expression is improper, their
Power is only Decisive, not Authoritative, i. e. Juridical. This he insists on,
and proves by Arguments not easy to be answered. Which is also done by Dr.
Goodwin Of Church Government.
and by my Father. In his Answer to Mr. Rutherford
In the Private Colloquies among the Churches in France, they allow Elders and
Deacons to propose their Opinions; but (say they) the Decision of the Doctrine,
is principally reserved to the Pastors, and to Doctors in Divinity. It is
rational, that it should be so, others being not ordinarily capable to Judge in
abstruse Controversy. There is a doctrinal Authority belonging to Pastors. 1 Timothy 5. 17. I suppose Mr. Cotton intended no more than this, that if the
Brethren in the Council at Jerusalem had Concurred in their Advice, if all the
Elders and Apostles had not Coucurred with them, their Decrees would have had
little or no Authority. And who will say otherwise? Mr. Norton in his
Catechism, has this Question, What is the Power of a Council? Answ. To declare
the Truth, not to Exercise Authority* Nevertheless, in his Answer to Apoll^ny,
p, 118. He proves that the Sentence of a Council is to be Decisive.

3. The words in the Question very much differ from Mr. Cotton's Assertition.
For he mentions Elders, when as the Question speaks of Pastors only, which has
a Prelatick Aspect. He allows as much Authority to Ruling Elders in Synods, as
to Pastors, which the Question as Expressed does not do, but is Exclusive as to
their having a Negative on the Acts of the Council.

4. Mr. Cotton speaks of Ap^stolical Authority. The Power of the Apostles was
greater than ordinary Pastors may pretend unto.

I have now done with the First Problem. There is another Question, which I am
also desired to Express my Thoughts concerning it, viz. Whether if an agrieved
Person is not satisfied with the Decision of ^ former Council, there shall be
another Con^ened, which shall Consist of such Pastors (...) shall be directed
to by the Ministers of an Association* near to that whereto those of the former
Council belonged, which the agrieved should accordingly apply themselves to,
and in this way expect a final Issue? Here also I must Enter my vehement
Dissent: For,

1 Churches or Persons, whose Case calls for a Council, ought no^ to have their
Liberties Infringed, but they may, and ought to address themselves to such as
from whom they may Expect the Clearest Light in the ^ifficulties before them.
Why did the Church in A^tioch go to the Church at Jerusalem for Co^ncil, but
because they had reason to think that there was the greatest Light. There were
^ndoubtedly many other Churche^ nearer to them than that at Jerusalem; for the
Synod did not meet there before the Year of Christ 49, which was sixteen or
seventeen years after our Lord's Ascension. Within that time Christianity had
wonderfully Increased. The Disciples were called Christians six years before
that. Paul was Converted fourteen years before that, and had (as well as other
Apostles) settled many Churches in Syria, which were not so remote from Antioch
as Jerusalem was; why then would they (...) far as Jerusalem? but because they
knew the most able Counselors in Church Affairs resided there, some of the
Apostles especially, and those particularly who seemed to be Pillars, viz.
Peter, James, and J^hn. It is supposed that no other Apostles, besides these
were present in the Synod at Jerusalem.

2. Although ordinarily it is most proper, yet nevertheless, it is not always
necessary no^ proper for those who need Counsel, to address themselves to such
as are nearest to them. Antioch was about 260 miles distant from Jerusalem; and
yet for the reason beforementioned, with other Considerations, they passed by
many Churches which were nearer to them, and went to Jerusalem. It is possible,
that the nearest Churches may be prejudiced, or pre-ingaged, and therefore not
so proper to be Concerned in a Council, as some others more remote. Our Synod
in 62 recommends a special reference to Churches, which are by Providence in a
convenient Vicinity, but ('it is said) with Liberty reserved to make use of
others as the nature of the Case, or the advantage of opportunity may lead
thereunto.

3. It belongs not to Ministers Authoritatively to direct or to impose upon any
agrieved Persons, to whom or to what Churches they shall address themselves for
Counsel. Especially it is improper for such Ministers as have already been
Concerned to nominate a future Council, who will be like to nominate such as
they apprehend will Confirm what they themselves have done.

4. We have lately seen a miserably divided Church at Hull, very happily
restored to Peace, by the blessing of God the Endeavors of a Council from
Neighbor Churches; which would not have been obtained, if the Method proposed
in this Question had been followed.

Thus have I impartially declared my Judgment on the Controverted Questions.
Whether the Arguments which satisfy me, will satisfy others, I must Leave
with the Divine Providence: Some I believe will on Second Thoughts Change their
Sentiments. I come now to that which was the main thing Inducing me to this
Disquisition. I would not by what I have written be misunderstood, as if I were
disaffected to the Consociation of Churches, in order to the preservation of
the Faith and Order of the Gospel professed by them. I know no man that has
appeared in this Cause more than I have done. For as to the Consociation of
Churches, agreeing among themselves, that no new Churches shall be owne^ by
them, or Pastor Ordained or Deposed, or the like matters of Common Concernment
done without the approbation of Neighboring Pastors and Churches: I have more
than once declared publicly my Judgment concerning it, as that which is not
only lawful, but absolutely necessary for the Establishment of these Churches.
The Light of natural reason, as well as Scripture, teaches Churches in Common
with other Societies, to Associate and Combine for their Common Safety. This
was practiced among the Churches, in the Primitive Times of Christianity; and
it is so in most of the Reformed Churches in Europe at this day. Some who are
not Christians, have seen a necessity of Consociating, to uphold the false
Religion professed by them. To say nothing of many Modern Instances, A late
Learned Vitringa de Synag.
Writer informs us, that some Ages since, there happened a great Contention
among the Jewish Synagogues then in France, carried on by three Rabbis of Note
among them, who were on that account Cast out of their Synagogues, but others
admitting them; what had been done proved insignificant, until they came to a
Consociation, the Issue whereof was, that the Beginners of the Schism were made
incapable of giving them any further Trouble. Now if the Children of this World
shall be so wise in their Generation, as to Concur and Consent for the
Upholding Superstition; Why should not the Churches of Christ (having the
Countenance of his Word in their doing of it) with one Consent maintain the
Faith and Order of the Gospel? Mr. Cotton would sometimes bewail the deficiency
of the Churches in New England in this particular; and he did with great
solemnity Recommend the Consideration of it to Mr. Mitchel (the famous Pastor
of the Church in Cambridge) when he gave him the Right Hand of Fellowship at
his Ordination. And not long before he went to be among the Spirits of Just Men
made Perfect, He drew up, Propositions concerning the Consociation and
Communion of Churches, t^ndred to the Elders and Brethren of the Churches, for
their Consideration and acceptance according to God. Which Propositions falling
into my Hands, I Published them to the World above forty years ago. The want
of a Church Government has been objected to us, when as we have one gath^red
out of the Word of God, by those Eminent Servants of his, who planted Churches
in New England. What else is our Platform of Church Discipline? Our only want
is an agreement to practice what has been our Profession; which neglect will in
time endanger the Overturning our Church Government, and our Churches too, and
it may be introduce another Church Government, not gathered out of the Word of
God. In the Synod which met at Boston, in the year 1662. although there was not
an Universal Concurrence in the Answer to the First Question, Concerning the
Subjects of Baptism. In answer to the second question about the Consociation of
Churches, there was a mavelous Unanimity; not one Elder, nor so much as two
Brethren in all that Reverend Assembly dissenting, which I am the better able
to testify, in that I was of that Synod; which very few Men now Living were.
Not one other that I know of. Such an Unanimity, ^eems to be of God, and the
Consideration of it should be of weight with the Churches. The Pastors in this
Province, did at a General Convention of them at Boston, May 30* 1700. Pass the
following Vote, To prevent the great mischief to the Evangelical Interests,
that may arise from the unadvised proceedings of People to gather Churches in
the Neighborhood, it is provided, that the Result of the Synod, in 1662.
relating to the Conso^iation of Churches may be Republished, with an Address to
the Churches, Intimating our desires (and so far as we are Concerned our
purposes) to see that Advice carefully attended, and the irregular Proceedings
of any People hereafter contrary to that Advice* not Encouraged. This was the
Vote which passed at the mentioned Convention. When also he that writes these
Lines, was desired to Address the Churches accordingly. What has hitherto
retarded, I need not mention. I am now taking my Leave of the World, and of
these Churches; having been in a Public Capacity, Serving Christ and them
(after a poor weak manner) for more than five above a Jubilee of Years. I have
been often thinking with my self, what I should Leave with the Lord's People in
this Land as my Last Legacy. I have Considered, that the Churches have now
greater Cause than formerly to be Concerned by Ecclesiastical and Scriptural
Methods to preserve the Faith and Order of the Gospel, which has been delivered
to them. A due attendance to what is from the Scripture declared in the Synod
mentioned, with respect to the Communion and Consociation of Churches, will, by
the Blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ, be a good means to prevent Degeneracy,
and to Establish them in that holy Faith and Order of the Gospel, which has
been professed and practiced among them; and by which the Religious People in
New England, have been distinguished from other People. I have therefore Caused
those Synodal Conclusions, to be Republished herewith, and recommend the
consideration of them, and an agreement to practice according to what is there
determined, with a steadfast adherence to the Pla^form of Discipline, as my
Dying Farewell to the Churches in New England. So will New England remain
New England.

The Synods Propositions concerning the Con^ociation of Churches, are here
annexed.

Quest. W Hither according to the Word of God, there ought to be a Consociation
of Churches, and what should be the manner of it?

Answer. The Answer may be briefly given in the Propositions following.

1. Every Church or Particular Congregation of Visible Saints in Gospel Order,
being furnished with a Presbytery, at least with a Teaching Elder, and walking
together in Truth and Peace, has received from the Lord Jesus, full Power and
Authority Ecclesiastical within it self, regularly to Administer all the
Ordinances of Christ; and is not under any other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
whatsoever.

For to such a Church Christ has given the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
that what they bind o^ loose on (...), shall be bound or loosed in Heaven, Mat.
16. 19. and 18. 17, 18. Elders are Ordained in every Church. Acts 14. 23. Tit.
1. 5. and are therein Authorized Officially to Administer in the Word, Prayer,
Sacraments and Censures, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 6. 4. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 5. 4. 12.
Ac^s 20. 29. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and 3, 5. The reproving of the Church of ^orinth,
and of the Asian Churches severally, imports they had Power, each of them
within themselves, to reform the Abuses that were amongst them. 1 Cor. 5. Rev*
2. 14, 20. Hence it follows, Consociation of Churches is not to hinder the
Exercise of this Power, but by Counsel from the Word of God, to direct and
strengthen the same on all Occasions.

2. The Churches of Christ do stand in a Sisterly Relation to each other Cant.
8. 8. Being united in the same Faith and Order, Ephesians. 4. 5. Col. 2. 5. To walk
by the same Rule, Phil. 3. 16. In the Exercise of the same Ordinan^^s for the
same End, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 16. 1. Under one and the same Political
Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians.1.22,23* and 4,5. Rev. 2.1. which Union Infers
a Communion suitable thereunto.

3. The Communion of Churches is the faithful improvoment of the Gifts of
Christ bestowed upon them, for his Service and Glory, and their mutual Good and
Edification, according to Capacity and Opportunity, 1 Pet* 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor.
12. 4. 7. and 10. 24: 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. Cant. 8. 9. Romans 1. 15. Gal. 6. 10.

4. Acts of Communion of Churches are such as these.

1. Hearty Care and Prayer one for another. 2* Cor. 11. 28. Cant. 8. 8. Romans 1.
9. Col. 1. 9. Ephesians. 6. 18.

2. To afford Relief by Communication of their Gifts in Temporal or Spiritual
Necessities, Romans 15. 26, 27. Acts 11. 22,29. 2 Cor. 8. 1, 4, 14.

3. To maintain Unity and Peace, by giving account one to another of their
Public Actions, when it is orderly desired. Acts 11. 2,3,4, -- 1.8 Josh. 22.
13, 21, 30. 1 Cor. 10. 32. and to strengthen one another in their regular
Administrations, as in special by a Concurrent Testimony against Persons justly
Censured. Acts 15. 41. and 16,4,5. 2 Timothy 4.15*3* These. 3.14.

4. To seek and accept help from, and give help unto each other.

1. In Case of Divisions and Contentions, where the peace of any Church is
disturbed. Acts 15. 2.

2. In matters of more than ordinary Importance, [ Prove. 24.6. and 15.22] as
Ordination, Translation, and Deposition of Elders, and such like, 2 Timothy 5.22

3. In doubtful and difficul Questions and Controversies, Doctrinal or
Practical, that may arise, Ac^s 15. 2, 6.

4. For the rectifying of Male-administrations, and healing of Errors and
Scandals, that are unhealed amongst themselves, 3 John v. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 2. 6,
-- 11. 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. and 13 2. Churches now
have need of help in like Cases, as well as Churches then. Christ's Care is
still for whole Churches, as well as for Particular Persons; and Apostles being
now Ceased, there remains the duty of Brotherly Love, and mutual Care and
Helpfulness incumbent on Churches, especially Elders for that End.

5 In Love and Faithfulness, to take notice of the troubles, difficulties,
Errors and Scandals of another Church, and to administer help, (when the Case
manifestly calls for it) though they should so neglect their own good and duty,
as not to seek it. Exodus 23. 4, 5. Prove. 24. 11, 12.

6. To Admonish one another, when there is need and cause for it; and and after
due means with patience used, to withdraw from a Church or Peccant Party
therein, obstinately persisting in Error or Scandal; as in the Platform and
Discipline (Chap. 15. Sect. 2. Partic. 3. is more at large declared. Gal. 2.
11, 14. 2 These. 3. 3. 6. Romans 16. 17.

5. Con^ociation of Churches is their Mutual and Solemn Agreement to Exercise
Communion in such Acts as aforesaid among themselves, with special reference to
those Churches, which by Providence are planted in a Convenient Vicinity, though
with liberty reserved without Offense, to make use of others, as the nature of
the Case, or the advantage of Opportunity may lead thereunto.

6. Communion of Churches in this Country having so good opportunity for it, it
is meet to be Commended to them, as their duty thus to Consociate. For,

1. Communion of Churches being commanded, and Consociation being but an
Agreement to practice it, this must needs be a duty also. Psalm. 119. 106. Neh.
10. 28, 29.

2. Paul an Apostle sought with much labor the Conference, Concurrence and
Right Hand of Fellowship of other Apostles: and Ordinary Churches and Elders
have not less need each of other, to prevent their running in vain, Gal. 2. 2,
6, 9.

3. Those General Scripture Rules touching the need and use of Counsel, and
help in weighty Cases, concern all Societies and Polities, Ecclesiastical as
well as Civil. Prove. 11. 14. and 15. 22* and 20. 18. and 24* 6. Eccl.4. 9, 10,
12.

4. The Pattern in Acts. 15, holds forth a Warrant for Councils, which may be
greater or less as the matter shall require.

5 Concurrence and Communion of Churches in Gospel Times, is not obscurely*
held forth in Isa. 29. 23, 24, 25* Zeph. 3. 9. 1 Cor. 11* 16 and 14. 32, 36

6 There has constantly been in these Churches a profession of Communion, in
giving the Right Hand of Fellowship at the Gathering of Churches, and
Ordination of Elders, which imports a Con^ociation, and obliges to the
practice thereof; without which we should want also an Expedient and sufficient
Cure for Emergent Church Difficulties and Diff^rences, with the want whereof
our way is charged, but unjustly, if this part of the Doctrine were duly
practiced

7, The manner of the Churches Agreement herein, or Entering into this
Consecration, may be by each Churches' open Consenting to the things here
declared, in answer to the second Question, as also to whatis said thereabout
in Chap. 15. and 16. Of the Platform of Discipline, with reference to other
Churches in this Colony and Country, as in Prop. 5th (...) before Expressed.

8. The manner of Exercising and practicing that Communion, which this Consent
or Agreement specially tends unto, may be, by making use occasionally of
Elders or able Brethren of other Churches, or by the more solemn Meetings of
both Elders and Messengers in less or greater Councils, as the Matter shall
require.

THE END
ERRATA.
IN the Preface p.10. line 6. read with the p. 3. l. 20 f. Arabia, r. Antioch.
p. 13. ^* 8. f. Bashaw, r. Bagshaw. p. 18 l. 8. f. of r. in p. 10 r.
Occupations. p. 24. l. 23. r. 1645.

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, a Book, Entitled,
An Alarm to Unconverted Sinners. In a Serious Treatise: Showing, 1. What
Conversion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. 2. What Conversion
is, and wherein it con^i^teth. 3. The Necessity of Conversion. 4. The Marks of
the Unconverted* 5. The Mi^eries of the Unconvert^^* 6. Directions for
Conversion. 7. Motives to Conversion. Whereunto are annexed diverse Practical
Cases of Conscience Judiciously Resolved. By Joseph Alleine, late Minister of
the Gospel at Taunton in Somersetshire.

Printed for, and Sold by Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the BIBLE in Cornhill.


