A SERMON Preached at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND On Thursday the 23d. of August.
1716. Being the Day of Public Thanksgiving, For the Suppression of the late
Vile and Traitorous Rebellion in GREAT BRITAIN.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN, M.A. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump; Sold by Samuel Gerrish on the North
side of the Town House. 1716.

A Thanksgiving Sermon For the Suppression of the late Vile and Traitorous
Rebellion in GREAT BRITAIN.
1 King. X. 9. Plessed be the LORD thy God which delighted in Thee, to set Thee
on be Throne of Israel, Because the LORD loved Israel for Ever, Therefore made
He Thee King, to do Judgment and Justice.


IN this Chapter we have the last Public Appearance of Solomon in all his
Glory; His Wisdom yet remaining with him. He is visited here and admired by the
Renowned Queen of Sheba. She had heard the fame of his Great Wisdom, as well as
of his Magnificence and Great Buildings; but more the fame of his Religion, and
concerning the Name of the LORD whose House he had built; and she came to be
Instructed by him, both in matters of Government and the Worship of the true
God. She came with a Great Equipage and very Princely Retinue. "She came to
trade for Wisdom, to purchase it at any Rate, with very much Gold and precious
Stones, which yet were not to be weighed with Wisdom. She appeared even a Rival
to Solomon in Riches and Magnificence, Generosity and Largeness of heart. She
came with Great Expectations, raised by the Reports she had heard in her own
Land, but owns the one half had not been told her. When she had seen all his
Wisdom, and the House that he had built, and the meat of his Table, and the
sitting of his Servants, and the Attendance of his Ministers, and their
Apparel, and his Cup-bearers, and his Ascent by which he went up into the House
of the LORD, (and I suppose with what Gravity and Seriousness, true Majesty,
Humility and Devotion this Great Prince was will not to worship) there remained no
more any Spirit in Her. She blessed his very Servants, and was ready to envy
them, and wish her self in their place. Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy
Servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. "Finally,
She blesses GOD the Giver of Solomon's Wisdom, Wealth and Grandeur, and the
Author of his Advancement; Blessed be the Lord thy GOD which delighted in thee,
to set Thee on the Throne of Israel; because the LORD loved Israel for ever,
therefore made He Thee King, to do Judgment and Justice.

THUS she turns all her Amiration and Delight into an Act of Religious
Thanksgiving to GOD. Something is said of Solomon, but more of God, by whom he
reigned. He was made King, and set on the throne of Israel, to do Judgment and
Justice. But it was GOD that made him King, and who advanced him to the Throne,
partly in kindness to Him, because that he delighted in him; but more in
kindness to his People, because the Lord loved Israel for Ever.

MIND the Decency and Devotion of this wise and Princely Speech: which though it
was the most honorable to Solomon that could be, yet was void of Flattery.
Flattery --, No, Solomon's State and Wisdom were too Great to allow it, and Her
Noble Heart and Majesty, as well as Discretion, too High to give it. Her Words
are Grave and Solemn, and did in excellent manner admonish Solomon, that he
received his Crown from God; that he was to reign for Him; to be Just, ruling
in his fear; that it was from the Undeserved Love and Good Will of God toward
him that he was Accomplished for and Exalted to the Throne from among his
Brethren; that what God had done for him was done in favor to Israel, and from
his love unto them; and finally that He was bound and so were others to bless
and praise the LORD his God, and give him all the Glory of his Advancement to
and Establishment on his Throne: Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in
thee, etc.

The Words teach us this Doctrinal Truth.

THAT when God raises up a wise and good KING to do Judgment and Justice, it is
a signal Expression of his delight in Him and of his love unto his People, for
which they are highly Obliged to laud and praise him. Or, That when God
delights in a PRINCE to set him on the Throne over his People, because he loves
them, they are highly obliged to render Him their thankful praises.

I will take the Text into the following Propositions.

1. That it is the GOD of Heaven that makes Men Kings, and sets them on their
Thrones. 2. That with a more peculiar Care and Providence does the Lord their
God fill the Throne of his Israel. 3. That he raises up wise and good Kings to
do Judgment and Justice. 4. That when he does so it is from his delight in Them
and love to his People. 5. That it is such an Expression of his favor to a
People as calls for their thankful Praises, and obliges them to laud and
magnify the Name of God.
I. THAT it is the GOD of Heaven that makes Men Kings and sets them upon their
Thrones. So the Text says that it was the LORD GOD that set Solomon on the
Throne, and made him King. The Dominion and Providence of God is the Supreme,
Absolute and Universal Government. The Heavens are his Throne and the Earth is
his Footstool. He is Lord of all. He rules in the Armies of Heaven above, and
over the Inhabitants of Earth below, and does his Will. His is the Kingdom the
Power and the Glory. He is the Blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings and
LORD of Lords. His is the Greatness, and the power and the Glory and the
Victory and the Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven and on the Earth is his:
Both riches and honor come of him, and he reigns over all, and in his hand is
Power and Might, and in his hand it is to make Great and to give Strength unto
all. He the most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will. Wisdom and Might are His: He changes the Times and
Seasons; He removes Kings and sets up Kings; He gives wisdom unto the
Wise, and Knowledge to them that know Understanding. Thus the Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is the Governor among the Nations: The Shields of the Earth
belong to him, and he is greatly Exalted.

THE Dominions and Thrones, the Principalities and Powers in Heaven are his
Subjects and Vassals; and so are Soverain Princes here on Earth. The Lord is
high above all Nations, and his Glory above the Heavens. Who is like unto the
Lord our God, who dwells on High! who humbles himself to behold the things
that are in Heaven and on the Earth! He raises up the Poor out of the dust,
and lifts the Needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes,
even with the Princes of his People. He gives to Men their Princely Spirits,
and another heart, and calls them forth to Reign; Again he cuts off the Spirit
of Princes and is terrible to the Kings of the Earth.

BY Him Kings reign and Princes decree Justice, by Him Princes rule and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth. Sometimes by a singular Providence he brings
Them to their Thrones without their seeking and calls them to reign by a clear
and certain loud Voice of his Providence and of a People, without their
Aspiring or forming Designs for their own Advancement; a wonderful Providence
makes the motion to them, and opens their Way before them: As David was
surprised by the Divine Election and Anointing, and then by Providence called
to Court and on the stage of Action; And to the Conduct of Providence he
resigned himself and waited on it to choose his Way and lead him in it, and in
Its own time to crown him. Such a KING was Solomon, of God's choosing and
Anointing: He was not the Eldest Son, nor the first Branch of the Royal Stock;
but the Person whom God pitched upon and Endowed to fill the Throne.

AND such a KING we bless God for this day, whom He Himself has chosen and
called to the Throne, and established thereon, by a Wonderful and Overruling
Government of his own Soverain, Wise and Gracious Providence. It has been the
Lord's doing and wonderful in our Eyes. The Hearts of Kings and Nobles are in
the hand of God, and so the Hearts of a Wise and free People and the Lord
turned them in the Reign before the last, in a legal manner to fix the
Succession to the Crown on the Serene House of HANNOVER, being the next
Protestant Heirs. The Subsequent Parliaments in the following Reign did from
time to time and many ways Confirm that wise and Happy Settlement of the Crown;
which rendered it the most Legal and Rightful that could be. And when at last
some Adonijah was exalting himself, and saying I will be King, under the secret
Aid and Abetting of such as Joab and Abiathar the Priest; then better Nobles
and Princes of the Nation, both Temporal and Spiritual, such as Zadock and
Benaiah and Nathan the Prophet remembered the Royal. Oath and the Engagement of
Providence, and said to one another -- "Did we not swear by the Lord, and give
the Public Faith unto our People and unto the Serene House of Hannover, that
they should now Reign and sit upon the Throne over us? As the Lord lives that
redeemeth our Soul out of all distress, as we swear unto them by the LORD our
God, even so will we certainly do this day: So they blew the Trumpet and all
the People said, God save King George; shouting and rejoicing with so great a
Joy as made the Earth to rend again. The Pretender to the Crown and his
wretched Adherents were beyond measure surprised and amazed at the wondrous
Turn. Scarce could they believe their own Eyes and Ears. And those that wished
and waited for the Event, but had long despaired of ever seeing it, were now
like them that dream; then was their mouth filled with laughter and their
tongue with singing; then said they one to another, The LORD has done Great
Things for us whereof we are glad: O Lord turn again our Captivity as the
Streams of the South, i.e. As when God sends Streams of Water in a hot and
parching Season to refresh and revive a Land.

II. WITH a peculiar Care God fills the Throne of his Israel. The Lord's
Portion is his People; as Jacob was his Inheritance. Happy is the People that
is in such a Case, yea happy is that People whose GOD is the LORD. It pleases
the LORD to make some Places and People more his own Peculiar than others. As
the Children of Israel were so of old, so are the Places which God now favors
with the Administrations of the Kingdom of his Grace in the Purity and Power of
them. The People shall dwell alone, and not be numbered among the Nations. They
are a favored and distinguished Race whom God has taken near to himself, and
marked out for his Own, and given to them his Adoption, his Covenant, his Law
and Promises. So when at first the Most High divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, when he Separated the Sons of Adam, he set the Bounds of the
People according to the number of the Children of Israel: He found him, he led
him about, he Instructed him, and kept him as the Apple of his Eye; So the LORD
alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him. God gave them not a
King like the Nations round about them, for the LORD himself was their King,
and their Government a Theocracy. But when they in process of time would have a
King like the Nations round about them, God chose them their Kings. And how
many most Excellent Princes did God raise up to them to be their Governors in
Supreme? Moses and Joshua, and the Judges; David and Solomon, etc. It is true
too that Israel had their Evil Princes, more especially in their last and
degenerate Times; for as they grew worse and worse, they had at last the worst
of Kings, who were given them in Wrath, and bro't on their last Destructions
and Captivities.

AND thus it is with the Professing People of God unto this day: although it
seems to sare with one Nation as with another, all things happening alike to all,
to the Good and to the bad, as well to Places as Persons. There are Tyrants and
Usurpers and Pretenders and Traitors in one Country and in another; and we
cannot know good or evil by all that is before us. Nevertheless there is really
a more special Providence concerning is self for and exercised toward the
Professing and Covenant People of God, and that more or less peculiar too as
they are more or less reformed, and as there is more or less of Vital Religion,
Spiritual Worship, and true Obedience among a people. So the Lord loves a
people as he makes them his Own; and as they know and fear him they are dear to
him and his special Care; All his Saints are in his hand, and they sit down at
his feet and receive of his Words. He covers them and he bears them on Eagles
wings, and makes them to ride on the high places of the Earth.

AND in some Measure of Great distinction, such has been the Grace and Favor
of God to Great Britain among the Nations of Europe. How early did the
Governing Providence of God bring the Christian Relilion into those happy
Islands and Kingdoms. The glad Tidings of Salvation reached them and
Christianity was received there, whilst the Greatest part of the Continent
continued Pagan and in gross darkness. And after the Apostasy of the Church the
REFORMATION was early received in Britain, through the peculiar Grace of our God
to that favored Land. There the reformed Religion so fixed it self that the
Gates of hell have not been yet able to prevail against it. I wish they may not
at last by Debauchery and Lust, after that the many Efforts of Popery have been
defeated.

THIS has been the signal Appearance of God for us from Age to Age. Neither the
bloody Martyrdoms in the reign of Queen Mary, nor the Spanish Armada in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, nor the Powder Treason in the reign of King James the
First; nor the more secret Reign of Popery and Vice in the Reign of a Prince
more Obliged by Providence in his Restoration than all his Predecessors, nor
the more Open and barefaced Power of Popery in the Reign of James the Second,
nor the covered Treacheries and Perfidy in favor of the Return of Popery in
the last Scene of the late Reign; have been able to restore the Tyranny of Rome
over the Liberties and Consciences of the Happy People of Britain. The same
Providence that blasted the former Attempts for its Return have blasted these
latter; and they are alike the work of God and not of Man. And now lately on
the Death of Queen Ann when a Popish Prince was just ready to have stepped into
the Throne, by some Secret and Mystery of Providence unsearchable to us He was
in one Moment wholly frustrated, and our Protestant and Rightful PRINCE
ascended the Throne peaceably and without Opposition, though the Enmity of a
powerful Party to the thing, and the Designs formed against it have since
openly appeared. We may well look on our Miraculous Deliverance and sing the
124. Psalm. If it had not been the LORD that was on our side, now may Israel
say: If it had not been the LORD that was on our side, when men rose up against
us: Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against
us. Then the Waters had overwhelmed us, the Stream had gone over our Soul. Then
the proud Waters had gone over our Soul. Blessed be the LORD who has not given
us a prey to their teeth. Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the
Fowlers; the Snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of
the LORD, who made Heaven and Earth.

SO has a peculiar Care of Providence from time to time guarded the Liberties
and filled the Throne of Britain. The Accession of King WILLIAM to the Throne,
and now the Accession of King GEORGE will be two Illustrious Instances of it in
all Future Times.

III. WHEN God raises up Wise and Good Kings it is to do Judgment and Justice.
For this God raised up Solomon; He made the King, says the Text, not to live in
ease and pomp and splendour, not to have his will and do what he pleased, but to
govern with Right and Equity. And this is the End of Government, and the true
Honor and Benefit of it; the Felicity both of Prince and People. So the Rock
of Israel said to David, and they are among his Dying Words to his Successor: 2 Samuel 23.1, 2, 3, 4. Now these be the last Words of David: David the Son of
Jesse said, and the Man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the God of
Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel, said, The Spirit of the LORD spoke by
me, and his word was in my tongue. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel
spoke to me, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God:
And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun rises, even a
morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after Rain. This is the most Noble and Elegant Character of a Good
Prince that ever was given. Like the Sun and like the Rain he is a Blessing to
his Dominions.

KINGS are set in the Throne of Judgment for this End, to scatter away all Evil
with their Eyes. It is an Abomination to Kings to commit Wickedness, for the
Throne is Established by Righteousness. Their Government should resemble the
Kingdom of God among men, who is the Most Just; and Righteousness and Judgment
are the Habitation of his Throns David in his Prayer for Solomon shows us how
we are to pray for Princes, that the Righteousness of their Administration may
answer to the Righteous Scepter of Christ, and the Benefits of their Reign be
even like those of the Messiah to the World: Psalm. 72. 1, -- 6. Give the King
thy Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness unto the King's Son. -- He shall
come down like rain upon the mowen grass, as showers that water the earth.

SUCH a KING we trust God has now given us, and God forbid but that his Wisdom
and Justice, his Moderation and Clemency, his Princely Goodness, and the Mercy
that upholds his Throne, his steady Conduct and true Magnanimity should endear
his Name and strengthen his Title in our Hearts. As it was once said by a
Nei'bouring. Prince concerning Henry the 7th. That he had three of the best
Titles to his Kingdom of any Prince living; for that he was the Wisest and the
Valiantest and the Richest Prince in Christendom. Truly so while the King
appears to be Wise and Just and Good in his Administration of the Government,
in vain will his Enemies allege any flaw in his Title; He must needs reign in
the hearts of all that are Wise and Good, and the Spirit that came upon Amasai
will rest upon them --. Thine are we David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse:
Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God helps
thee. 1 Chronicles. 2.18.

O what a GIFT of God, not only to us, but to Europe and to the Reformed
Churches, must a Wise and Just King upon the Throne of Britain be. He is a
Stranger to the World that knows it not, and he no Friend to Religion nor to
the Good of Christendom that is not sensibly affected with it. From an Evil
Prince I hope we should be able to suffer much without a traitorous Though It, but
for a Good One methinks we should even dare to die. And I am persuaded that
Providence has now given us such a King. Let us be affected with the Great and
undeserved Mercy.

To which End I proceed,

IV. THAT when God raises up Wise and Good Kings to do Judgment and Justice it
is a high Expression of his Delight in Them, and of his Love unto his People.
So says the Text God delighted in Solomon to set him upon the Throne of Israel,
and because the Lord loved Israel for ever therefore he made him King to do
Judgment and Justice.

AT Solomon's Birth, who in his Name was a Type of the Great Prince of Peace,
God sent by the Hand of Nathan the Prophet, and called his Name Jedidiah,
Beloved of the Lord. 2 Samuel 12.25. In this His Preferment begun, and God
intimated his pleasure in him to set him on the Throne after David.

BUT was it for Solomon's sake only, or David's either, that God delighted in
Him to make him this Wise and Good and Great Prince? No, no! As David said on
this very Occasion, (that is, on the Promise and Prospect of it,) Who am I and
what is my house --! O Lord according to thine own Heart have thou done all
this Greatness! -- for thou did make thy People Israel thine own people and
becamest their God. In truth there can be no higher Compliment made to a Prince
than these two in the Text; Because the Lord thy God delighted in thee, and
because he loved his People for Ever. Huram the King of Tire knew this, and
Congratulates in these very Words: 2 Chronicles. 2.11. Because the Lord has loved
his people, he has made thee King over them.

1. IT is in Kindness to the Prince himself, and God's delight in the Person
whom he makes a Good and Wise and Righteous Prince. For wherein can Providence
show a Man more favor on this side Heaven (at least in a Humane Judgment of
things) than first to qualify and furnish Him for the highest Dignities and
Powers in the World, and then to advance him to them? It is no ways desirable
to be a Prince in Name or by Birth without a Princely Spirit: The folly is but
the more exposed in the high Dignity. Rule carries worldly Greatness, Riches
and Honor along with it; but the true Glory lies in the Internal
Accomplishments of the Mind, Intellectual and Moral. A Prince without Knowledge
becomes an Image and a Stock; or it may be a Scorpion, a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear to the poor people: Or though the Prince have the Knowledge of an
Angel yet if without Goodness and Virtue he only becomes a Devil to his
wretched Subjects. Wherefore I conclude, that as it is no favor to us that we
be, unless we be wise and good; so neither is it any favor of Providence to
any one that he is a Prince, a Governor, a Magistrate, if he be a foolish and
a wicked one. I am sure God can have no delight in such a one, and I Am sure he
ought to have no delight in himself nor in his Station, nor can his People have
any delight in him. His Advancement is a Judgment upon himself and a Curse to
his People. But now where there is Personal Worth and a Prinoly Spirit,
Solomon's Wisdom and Largeness of Heart, and then a Throne given to shine on
and Power to do good with, how has God delighted to honor the Person? To make
Him a Public Extensive Blessing, a Father and a God to his People, like the
light of the Morning for pleasure after a dark night, and like the clear
shining after rain for Benificence. There is as much difference between a wise
Prince and one that is destitute within, as there is between the Princes Stamp
on Paper and on Gold. The one has an Intrinsic Value and is worth what it
passes at, but the other in a time of necessity may pass for as much when it is
in itself worth nothing. Then again, what a noble Pleasure is it to a Princely
Mind, to be in Gods stead to the World in respect of unknown Benefits done to
it, and to know that he reigns not only over such a Kingdom and Provinces, but
in the Reverence, Honor, Esteem and Love of the hearts of all that are Wise
and Good in his Dominions? While foolish and wicked Princes are contemned and
despised, loathed and hated in the hearts of them whom they tyrannise over and
oppress. This Prayer therefore let us make for our King, That his Wisdom
Justice and Mercy may ever be such as shall show that he is the Delight of his
GOD and of his People. Which brings to my Mind the glorious Style given to
Titus the Roman Emperor by Historians, that he was Delicium Humani Generis: The
Delight of Mankind.

2. IT is in kindness and love to his People when God sees a wise and righteous
Prince upon the Throne over them to do Judgment and Justice. Because the LORD
loved Israel for Ever. And indeed what one Instance is there in any outward and
temporal thing, wherein there can be an Equal Expression of an universal Regard
to the Happiness and Weal of any People, as in this of a wise and righteous
Prince on the Throne over them? What a direct and strong Influence has this
upon the Felicity and Flourishing of a Nation? yea unto the Comfort of many
Nations may the Influence extend.

GOVERNMENT is ordained for the good of Mankind. The People are not made for
the Prince, to make Him Great; so much as the Prince for his People, to do them
Good and make them Happy: That under his wise and just Administration his
Dominions may enjoy Tranquillity and Peace, their due Rights and Liberties, both
as Men and Christians; That Virtue and Religion, Learning and Arts, Trade and
Commerce may flourish together; and the Kingdom grow Wise and Rich, Potent and
Renowned; the Subjects leading quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and
Honesty; every one sitting under his own Vine and under his Fig Tree, and
having none to make them afraid. Isa. 32.1, 2. Behold, a King shall reign in
Righteousness, and Princes shall rule in Judgment. And a Man shall be as an
hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the Tempest: as rivers of Waters
in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Moses and Samuel
and David, and Hezekiah were such Blessings to Israel, and wherein did
Providence ever favor a people more than in raising up such Men unto the chief
Command? But a wicked Prince is an equal Curse and Plague to his Dominions and
to the World. Psalm. 109.6. Set thou a Wicked Man over him and let Satan stand
at his Right Rand. It Is much at one, the devil let loose upon a people, or a
cruel oppressing Tyrant set over them.

WHAT a Token of the Divine Favor, Love and Pity to a sinful People should we
then account it, that God has given us this Day a Protestant Prince endued with
Wisdom and Justice, to sit upon the Throne of Great Britain? We are not yet
forsaken of God, though the Land be full of Sin against the Holy One! Because the
Lord had Compassion on his People, and pity for his holy Name called on us,
therefore has he not given us yet up to Reproach and Servitude, that they which
hate our Religion and Liberties should reign over us. Wherefore,

V. And lastly, We are highly obliged to render unto the LORD our God our
Thankful Praises this Day, and to say, -- Blessed be the LORD our God which has
delighted in our King to set Him on the Throne over us; Because the LORD loves
his People for ever, therefore we trust that He has made him King, to do
Judgment and Justice.

IT is a Noble and Illustrious Law of our Holy Religion, that Supplications
Prayers, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men, more especially for Kings
and for all that are in Authority, (or in Eminent place, as the Margin reads
it) that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
In Obedience to this Precept of CHRIST our Savior, which is so Agreeable to
the Natural Dictates of Justice and Gratitude, we are Convened this Day to
offer the Sacrifice of Praise to the GOD of Heaven, giving Thanks to his Name
for one of his Singular and Great Gifts to the Children of Men; that he has
been pleased of his Infinite Mercies to set a PRINCE of such excellent Wisdom
and Justice, Moderation and Mercy over us. This has been constantly and always
done, every Sabbath and every Lecture in our Solemn Assemblies, since his
MAJESTY's happy Accession; and blessed be God neither Ministers nor People need
any Call to do the thing, for we dwell in a Loyal Land where none are
Indisposed to it. Would to God that all the Kings Subjects were Sensible as we
are of the Mercy of God, affected with it and disposed like us; and would to
God that our Resentment of it were as devout toward God, as I believe it is
sincerely Loyal toward the King.

BUT O the Ingratitude to Heaven, the Profaness and Contempt of Providence, in
the Vile and Traitorous Rebellions lately carried on in Great Britain! How have
a base and stupid Faction, mindless of Gods Wonders and Mercies to the Nation,
been murmuring first and mutinying, and then rising in Arms against God and his
Anointed! quarrelling with their Happiness, weary of their Religion, Liberties
and Laws, courting Popery and Slavery, rejecting not the King so much as God
that He should reign over them, and this by the blackest Treacheries,
Perjuries, Hypocrisies and Mockery of God. Shall I say, the Queen of the South
shall rise up in the Judgment against this Generation and shall condemn them?
that would be too mild a Censure and Condemnation of their Villainy.

WHEN I consider the Treasons that have been acting against the King since his
Accession to the Throne, and the horrid Spirit of the Men that appear against
his Title, it brings to my mind the words of David which he spoke before the
Lord concerning the Enemies of his House and Family; These Sons of Belial (said
he) are Thorns not to be taken with hands; but the Man that shall touch them
must be fenced with Iron, and the staff of a Spear.

O what a doleful Prospect does it afford unto us, if God do not heal their
Spirit and change their Heart! should God return their Wickedness upon their
own heads, even all that their own Heart is privy to; though the King might be
blessed and his Throne thereby be Established before God for ever; yet how are
the Convulsions and Confusions to be deprecated, which may be feared from that
infamous and cursed Spirit of Perfidy and Violence that has already appeared!

O might it never be named more, to the Infinite Reproach of our Name and our
Profession! Can Protestants so profanely forget their Religion, and Englishmen
so basely betray their Liberties?

BUT blessed be God that the whole Body of our United Brethren, so denominated
in Great Britain, have through the Grace of God stood firm to a Man unto the
Protestant Succession, and been true in this day of trial to God, their King
and their Country. The Lord show kindness and truth unto them.

LET us continue steadfast to our Religion and Allegiance, and wait upon God for
his further Mercies to our King and our Nation and the Protestant Interest. My
Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change. Let the Apostle Peter's Precept and Exhortation to us sink deep into
our hearts: 1 Pet. 2, 13 -- 17. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the King as Supreme: or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing
you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: As free, and not using
your liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor
all Men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.

FINIS

