SERMONS Preached at the Lecture in Boston, from Luke XI. 21, 22. SHOWING I.
That the Soul of Man is a noble Palace which the Great GOD built for Himself.
II. That it is now become as a Garrison or strong Hold, which Satan keeps
against GOD. III. That there is a wretched Peace and cursed Quiet, which the
carnal heart lies in under Satan's Tyranny. IV. That the Victorious SAVIOR
rescues whom He pleases, and will rescue all His Chosen, from Satan's Power and
Tyranny.


To which is added, A Discourse from Psalm CXXII. I.

I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the House of the LORD. By
BENJAMIN COLMAN, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for S. Gerrish and D. Henchman, Sold at their
Shops. 1717.

SERMON, 1. That the Soul of Man is a Noble Palace which the Great GOD built
for Himself.
LUKE XI. 21, 22. When a strong man armed keeps his. Palace, his Goods are in
Peace: But when a stronger than he shall come upon him and overcome him, He
takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.


IN the Content our blessed Savior is answering the blasphemous Imputation of
the Pharisees, who charged Him with casting out Devils by virtue of a Compact
and Confederacy with Beelzebub, the prince of Devils. Our LORD argues the
Absurdity and perve^^^ Malice of that Objection; and he (...) copious and
cogent in the Argument. A w^^^ and good Man, whether Elias or even Moses, would
have been ready to think such a spiteful Contradiction, not worthy of any
Confutation, except the vengeance of Eternal fire to fall from Heaven on the
Blasphemers: but the Meek and Merciful Lamb of God endured this Contradiction
of Sinners against Himself, and tried to convince them by Reasonings that were
plain and irresistible; at least for their sakes that stood by he did it, that
this Venom of Hell might not enter into them.

He argues with them that surely Satan would not cast out Satan, and that a
Kingdom divided against it self can never stand; that it must needs be by the
singer of God that He cast out Devils, and that therefore the Kingdom of God
was sensibly now come unto them: that it was Evident that He had a power over
the Devil, and was Stronger than he and came to destroy his works; and
therefore that He ought to be acknowledged by them to come from God, and as
such to be submitted unto.

This He illustrates in the Words of my Text by comparing the Possession that
Satan had of the Bodies and Souls of many Miserables, unto a strong Man armed
keeping his Palace in peace and quiet; till there comes upon him One stronger
than he and overcomes him, and spoils his house after he had disarmed him. When
a strong man armed keeps his Palace, etc.

In which Words we have,

1. A Representation of the Devils quiet possession of Miserable Persons: The
strong man armed keeps his Palace and his goods are in peace. Now it appears
by the Context.

1. That Satan is this strong man armed. He is a Spirit of Mighty Strength and
Power, and he is armed against God and us to do what mischief and hurt he can.
On Earth there is not his like, and he is a King over all the Children of
Pride. He is only under the restraints and check of Almighty God, and and of
His Ho^^ Angels which remain in the perfection of the^^ Strength; and if it
were not for this Blessed and Superior Power Satan would make a wretched World
know his strength daily. We read of this wicked Power in Arms, and who he
fights with: Rev. 12.7. And there ^as war in Heaven; the Dragon and his Angels
warring against Michael and his Angels This is the strong man armed that dares
to make War with the Lamb; the Lion of Hell against the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah. 2. The Palace that he keeps possession of is the Hearts of the Sinful
Children of Men. This he has usurped. God built it for Himself and worthy of
Himself. Sin betrayed it, by defiling it into Satan's hands. There he keeps,
rules and works; even in the Children of disobedience. Here he lords, and
tyranises: and does what he can to fortifye the Soul against Christ, and keep
him out of it. It was once the Peaceful Palace of God, now it is the strong hold
and Garrison of a Rebel-tyrant and Outlaw, in a state of War. 3. Satan quietly
possesses the Impenitent Soul as if it were his Property. His Goods are in
Peace. He calls it his Palace and his Goods. He pleads a long quiet possession,
and the right of Conquest, if not Consent too. The Sinners Mind and Heart and
Will are his; tamely yielded to him, wickedly used for him. Satan rules without
control, his Lusts are done, and his Interest served; and all the Powers of
the Soul are employed by him in his Service. They are his Goods; and the Sinner
is easy and unconcerned about the matter, is secure and merry, servile and
obedient, likes his Master and loves his Service; has no sense of misery, nor
fear of danger. Thus the strong man armed keeps his palace, and his goods are
in peace: A just representation of the Devils quiet possession of miserable
Souls.
II. There follows a more pleasing account of CHRIST'S Rescuing the poor Soul
out of Satan's hands. But when a stronger than He shall come upon him, and
overcome him, he takes from him all his armor, etc. So then,

1. There is a stronger than the strong man armed, even Christ If we speak of
Strength, lo he is strong! Stronger than all is our Father in Heaven: and the
Mediator there has a P^^^ion divided to Him with the strong. ^St^^^ is (...)
Lord God that Judges. 2. (...) s^^ll ^^me upon the Enemy. The certainty of His
doing so seems expressed, and the Manner of it by a way of surprise; suddenly
and unexpectedly; in His Peace and Security, when all is quiet and he is least
feared; when the Enemy thinks all is his own for ever. His hand shall find out
all his Enemies. 3. When he comes he will overcome. The Victory will fall to
CHRIST. None ever exalted or hardened himself against God and prospered. Michael
prevails.
Now the Evidences of this Victory are two.

1. He takes from him all his Armor wherein be trusted. What is that? What is
Satan's Armoury in which he puts his confidence, accounting himself sure of the
Sinner? And how does Christ take it away? Why, He breaks the power of Sin and
Corruption in the Soul, (says Mr. Henry) he rectifies its Mistakes, delivers
it from its Prejudices. When the Eyes are opened, and the Heart is humbled and
changed, then Satan's Armor is taken away. "The Sword is first wrested out of
Satan's hand, and then the Scepter. Satan is bound and cast out himself. Satan's
Armor Pool in loc.
wherein he trusted was his keeping men in darkness, blinding them with Error
and Superstition, seducing them into the love of sinful practices: Now Christ
takes away this his Armor by scattering the darkness expelling Error and
Superstition, ^^^ching the way of God in truth, and bringing Souls into the
love of it: taking away the chains of guilt and destroying the Power of Sin.
Thus Souls are turned from darkness to light, and from the Power of Satan unto
GOD. 2. He divides his spoils; or as it is in another place; He spoils his
House. This is easy to do after the Enemy is overcome and disarmed. Upon
Victory follows the taking the Spoils. The Conqueror possesses for himself the
Palace, which he has taken, and from whence he has driven the Foe; or where he
has taken him Captive. The Endowments of our Mind and Body, made use of before
in the Service of Satan; our Powers and Interests so before devoted and
debased, are these spoils. Spoils wherein Satan once prided him, and spoils
which God values and which should be Sacred to Him for ever. This is the
Conquerors Reward, which he hangs up in the Temple of God for an Everlasting
Triumph: Col. 2.15. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. His Cross.
Having thus at large opened this Copious Text, I would offer from it these
Four Observations. I. That the Soul of Man is a Palace which the Great GOD
built for Himself. II. That it is now become as a Garrison, or strong hold which
Satan keeps against God. III. That there is a wretched Peace and cursed Quiet
which the carnal heart lies in under Satan's Tyranny. IV. That the Victorious
Savior rescues whom He pleases, and will rescue all His chosen from Satan's
Power and Tyranny.
Of these in their Order, as God shall Enable; and of the First at this time.

DOCTRINE, I. That the Soul of Man is a noble Palace, which GOD has built for
Himself.
This is the Palace which the Text speaks of; even Man's Soul, and though it is
not here spoken of as the Palace of God, but much the contrary; yet from the
beginning and Originally it was His only. Every house has some Builder, but He
that built all things in God: and for whom did He or could He make any thing,
and every thing, but for Himself: for his pleasure they are and were Created.
But above other things God made his Rational and Intelligent Creatures for his
own possession, use and propriety. This is common to Angels and Men; Heaven is
His Throne, and the Earth His Footstool; but Angels the Inhabitants of Heaven,
and Men the People of His Pasture Earth, were His own designed Habitation and
Residence. He made both one and other in His own Image, in His likeness. The
Realms above He prepared for Angels; this Earth a Paradise for Man, whom He
placed an Imbodied Angel upon it, a Celestial Mind clothed in flesh, crowned
with glory and honor; and he walked with God, God visited him daily and
conversed with him, yea dwelt in him. This was Man's First State; He was the
Residence and Mansion of the Creator here upon Earth.

For what is a Palace? but some Dwelling of a Prince or King, which he builds
for himself, for the Honor of his Majesty, and to show the Riches of his
Kingdom. He builds it spacious and large to keep his Court there, and spares no
Art and Cost to render it Magnificent and Sumptuous. Such now is the Creature
Man, taking Body and Soul together. He is a Stately and curious, ample and rich
Building of God. The King of Glory pitched this Tabernacle upon Earth. The Body
he formed and raised out of the dust, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath
of Life and made him this living Soul. The Body is a wonderful Structure, and
was a much more Elegant piece of Workmanship at the first: but the Spirit
therein though Invisible is a Creature of far more admirable and beautiful
Powers. O the divine Art and Power, the Wisdom and Glory of God, Conspicuous
and Astonishing in producing the one and the other!

In short;

If a King builds -- What less than a Palace? And where a King dwells -- What
is it but a Palace? If then God made Man to reside in him, We are the Palace of
the Great King.

And what find you in the Palaces of Kings here on Earth, which is not to be
found in the Soul of Man.

1. Here God meant to Reign and Keep His (...). Here he Erected his Throne and
Sea^ of Judgment, in the Heart and Conscience, Here he appointed his Servants
to stand in his Presence and Minister to him, even the (...) Powers and every
Affection of the Soul. Here he gives Audience, and receives the humble
Addresses of a loyal and dutiful Mind, and stoops to Converse with his
Servants. The Kingdom of God is within you.

2. Man's Soul is a Palace for Space and Amplitude. It is larger than the
Circuit of the Heavens, whereon the ETERNAL rides. It scorns to be confined
within the body or to be bounded by the Earth, or by the visible Heavens. It
can compass the Universe in a Moment, and one of its single Tho'ts is (...)
than that: for I think of Him that is (...) MENSE, whom all worlds can not
o^tain. In this Idea, this adoring Though It (...) dwells. Here is a Palate for him
(...) than the Heavens of Heavens. This (...) a living Image of his Immensity,
and (...) Space is at last a dead and dull one. (...) among the Orbs of light
is the (...) brightest Body, and nothing is (...) for beauty and velocity and
ben (...) the Globes which it shines upon; but I (...) unto you this Eye and
Light of the World (...) a small and dark and single Attome, (...) to the
vaster Powers of a Batimal (...) of Tho'ts can in (...) and a brighter ^ay
(...) Throne of God, and there^ly Adoring, (...) delighting in and enjoying the
Father of these Lights, and the Former of Spirits.

3. Again, In Kings Palaces do you look for rich Furniture? how rich are the
Endowments of the Humane Mind? What are the carved Works and Gildings of the
Rooms of State? What are the costly Pictures of the Galleries of Kings? What
are the Tapestry and Imbroider'd Hangings, their Tables of Silver and vessels
of Gold, the peculiar Treasures of the Provinces subject to them; compared to
the Adorning and Magnificent furniture of a Humane Mind; the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge and Largeness of heart which their Great Ministers and
Counselors are adorned with, and without which Kings themselves do not shine
in their Palaces and on their Thrones. For Instance, Nebuchadnezzars Reason and
Princely Endowments for Empire was a far greater Glory than Great Babylon which
he had built for the House of his Kingdom: Witness the day when the God of
Heaven struck him for his Pride and took away his Princely Powers, and they
drove him from among men; unfit any longer for his own Palace, he dwelt among
the Beasts of his Park: But at the end of his days his Understanding returned
to him, and he lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and blessed the Most High GOD his
Maker and his Judge, and praised and honored Him that Lives for ever and
ever. Now his Brightness returned to him, his Counselors and his Lords again
sought to him and excellent Majesty was added to him, Dan. 4. ult. Verily, here
was a sight much more. Magnificent than proud Babylon with all its Towers and
Palaces could afford: Here was Majesty in its Excellency; A Wise and Mighty
Emperor Contemplating, Adoring, Magnifying and Extolling the Immense and
Eternal Majesty of Heaven; before whom the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed
as nothing. This Princely Humane Mind now looked vastly greater in an Act of
Reason and Worship. than ever He had done before in Governing the Empire, or
receiving the Homages of Princes and Provinces. Draw this to the life, and let
it for ever hang in the Palaces of Princes. Shall I go on and say,

4. In Kings Palaces do we look for Cleanness and Purity, that there be no dust
or soil to be seen there; for they that be in Kings Palaces go in soft Raiment,
and every Apartment there will be swept and garnished: Such was the Soul and
Body of Man as He came out of his Makers hands; He was in the Likeness of GOD
very Holy and Good, without the least spot or stain, the Glory of the Lord
filled the House, which he had just finished and Consecrated: Man was full of
Grace and Truth: the Glory of the Only-Begotten was to be seen in the measure
proper to such a Creature; Whose Delights were with the Sons of Men before Man
was Created, or ever the Earth was.

And indeed without this Original Holiness Man could not have been designed the
Dwelding of GOD: for what Communion has Light with darkness, or the Temple of
God with Belial? But now, Man being made a Holy as well as a Living Soul, He
was therefore necessarily under a religious Consecration to God from the first
Moment of his Existence: and his Posterity in Man's Primitive State of Innocence
and Sanctity could have been nothing else but so many Lively Stones in one
Spiritual house; a Holy Building and a Holy Priesthood, as Believers now are
again, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices.

Thus the Palace becomes a Temple, properly speaking: A Dwelling Sacred to God:
not barely the Mansion of a great King, but a House Dedicated to the Worship of
the ETERNAL GODHEAD the Holy One. Such Man was made; His Heart an Altar for
the Holy God; Spiritual Exercises and Holy Acts of Devotion and Obedience, the
Sacrifices on that Altar holy Affections the Fire from Heaven ^^^ng on the
Sacrifice, in the Smoke whereof the Soul would (Angellike) have been for ever
Ascending; and in all this the Understanding and the Will, the trading and
commanding Faculties of the Soul, were to do the part of the Lords Priests, and
to be the Offerers.

Man being holy, God was Conversable with him, and indeed made him for
Communion with Himself: He was made to know God, to love him and delight in
him; to obey and serve Him, and finally for ever to Enjoy Him: Here and
hereafter to live blessed in the favor, care and love of God toward him. He
made Man with a Capacity for and an Inclination after Communion with Himself;
and doubtless therefore was he ready to apply Himself to Man, and to
communicate unto him in a way suitable to the Nature which he had given him:
and could not fail "of doing so unless Man laid some Obstruction "in the way.
It remains therefore only to say,

5. That the Creature Man was in his Original and first Design a Dwelling
worthy of the Eternal and Invisible King. Surely he would not make an
Intelligent and Immortal Mind that should not be so! And I may say, surely
Eternal Wisdom and Goodness could not make 'em unworthy of his own Habitation.
For however one Rational Being may be of an Order a little lower than another,
yet the lowest must be not unworthy of Himself. For if not unworthy of his own
Making then certainly not of his own gracious Converse and Abode. The Wisdom of
God could not Design Man better than he was made, nor the Power of God make him
better. As for God his Work is perfect: and so he said of it when he had made
Man upon the Earth. Wherefore,

1. "The Father of Spirits plac^d a Spirit in Man so agreeable to his own
Spiritual Nature, on purpose that he might converse with him. The Inspiration
of the Almighty gave him understanding for this very end. God his Maker taught
him more than the beasts of the Earth, and made him wiser than the fowls of
heaven that he might enquire and ask after Him. Where should the Eternal Mind
and Spirit dwell without Himself, but in some Immortal Spirit, Mind and Reason
of his own Creating? The Most High dweldeth not in Temples made with hands:
What House can we build Him for the Place of his Rest? truly none: but he has
built Himself a proper Dwelling in the Spirit of Man, the Humane Mind.

2. The present Ruins of the Soul of Man show what a Structure it once was.
Travelers be^vail the Desolation of many famous Cities and Palaces, the Heads
of Mighty Empires and Royal Seats of Mighty Princes. Yet in their Ruins they
often find stupendous Marks of their Ancient Greatness. So whosoever is wise and
will observe his own Soul, though he cannot but find a vast Desolation upon it,
yet in its present Weakness and Corruption he must needs perceive what a
glorious Workmanship, what a Superior Creature it once was. When these Powers
were perfect; when this Mind was full of light and knowledge, when this Will
was subject to that light, and these Affections all regular, and obedient to
it, and Conscience full of Peace and Joy in its own Integrity; what a Lovely
and Venerable Form was this! how did it shine in Paradise, the favorite
Creature, Vicegerent and meet Representative of GOD here below; the Delight of
God, the love of Angels its next Kindred, and commanding the Reverence and
Homage of the Inferior Creatures by an External Raye of Majesty and Beauty.
All this is yet as plainly to be perceived within our selves that it once was,
as when we have passed by demolished Houses, that were sometimes Magnificent
Structures; we look on the pieces of ragged Walls yet standing, the strong
Foundation, its breadth and wide Circumference, the broken pieces of curious
carved work, and say, -- What a Sumptuous Building was this once! and how meet
for some Princes Residence!

But then again,

3. The Rebuilding and Restoring of this Dwelling and Temple at such a vast
Expense as the Blood of CHRIST, shows what it was in its first design, and yet
is when rebuilt in the sight of God. When David drew the Plan of the Temple he
had designed, in doing which the Infinite Mind and Divine Artichec guided him;
he at the same time gathered an Immense Sum of Riches, the spoils of many
Countries in proportion to the vast Fabric. He that had seen the Treasure
amassed and devoted, and counted the Sum, would have wondered how it should
ever be expended; and it may be they that saw it finished might wonder as much
whence the Riches could be gathered that should raise and adorn that costly
Pile. Yet this is but a small Image of the Infinite Price which the GOD of
Heaven has expended on the Repair and Rebuilding of his Palace in our Souls.
For at what price shall we be able to value the least drop of the Blood of his
own Son! For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb
without blemish, who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
World, 1 Pet. 1.18. If we believe the Eternal Godhead, and the infinite Dignity
and Glory of our Savior, what a price are we bought with. Acts 20.28. The
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Heb. 9.14 The blood of
Christ who through the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot to God. i.
e. His own Eternal Godhead gave the infinite price to the Offering and
Sacrifice. A price which Angels cannot Estimate, nor are those Hosts of
glorious Spirits to be weighed against it, nor the World, which it might well
purchase, for He Himself made them all.

But there yet remains one more Particular to be considered in the Argument
before us, and I shall add no more, for the Tho'ts of Men or Angels can rise no
higher,

And that is,

4. Let us view this Palace of the Blessed God, the Humane Nature, in the
Person of Christ, God-Man, Emmanuel, God with us. God manifest in our flesh,
tabernacling in a Body of Gods preparing for him, the Second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, in whom we are made Alive; the singular work of God, conceived by
the HOLY GHOST, the promised Seed of the Woman, born of a Virgin, the power of
the Highest Overshadowing, whereby the First begotten was bro't into the World.
The Commandment came forth at his Birth to the Spirits above, Let all the
Angels of God worship Him; and down came the Multitudes of the Heavenly Host;
they saw and adored and Sang -- Glory to God in the Highest! They bro't us the
glad Tidings of Great Joy, -- To you is born the Savior, and they yet desire
to pry into the Ineffable thing.

In him dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily, in him all the Treasures of
Wisdom of Knowledge, of Holiness and Righteousness; for He received not the
Spirit by Measure: He was Fairer than the Children of Men, Grace was Poured
into his Lips, yea the bright Angels of God were dark, and the Heavens not
clean in comparison of him; He was the LORD that was looked for by them that
were waiting for Redemption in Israel, and he came into his Temple, and by his
divine Presence made the Glory of the Second Temple greater than the Glory of
the Former: for in the first Temple he only gave a sign and token of his
presence between the Cherubims in a Shechinah, or Body of light; but into this
Second Temple he came Personally and Bodily, a GOD Incarnate; and being found
in fashion as a Man, but Eternally in the Form of GOD and without robbery Equal
with God; He Worshipped, he Obeyed, he fulfilled all Righteousness in our place
and on our account; yielding such an Obedience to the honor of God, and to
repair the dishonours which the Sin of Man had done to the Great God, as Adam
and his Posterity if they had all stood in their first Purity and Perfection
could never have been able to render to the Majesty of Heaven. For as the Altar
Sanctifies the Gift, so the Divine Nature in the Person of the Redeemer did his
Obedience to the Law; and as thousands of Millions of things finite put
together can never make any thing like an Infinite, so all the Obedience of all
Creatures for ever paid to God could never equal one Act of Obedience and
Worship from Him who was Himself GOD: But moreover, the Son of God in our
Nature humbled himself yet further and became Obedient unto Death, even the
death of the Cross, tasting death for every Man, and bearing the Curse of the
Law: For it became Him for whom are all things and by whom are all things in
bringing many sons unto glory to make the Captain of our salvation perfect
through suffering; for both he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are
all of one; for which cause He is not Ashamed to call them Brethren: -- For as
the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself took part of the
same, that through Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that
is the Devil: -- For verily He took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham.

And now in this very Nature, being Risen from the dead, and being by the Right
hand of God Exalted, this same glorious JESUS is set down on the right hand of
the Majesty on High, in the Glory which he had with the Father before the World
began; far above all Principalities and Powers and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not only in Heaven but on Earth.

Now let us but consider this Great Thing! this Palace and Temple of the
Eternal God. head in the Man Christ Jesus! What was Adam in his Paradise to
this glorious Person! What was the Glory of God in the burning Bush, or between
the Cherubims to this glorified Jesus? What was the shining of Moses face, or
the flames of Elijahs Zeal before this greater Glory! To which of the Angels
said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee! Has the
great God ever taken the Nature of Angels so near to Himself? No verily. Here
then let us see the Glory of Humane Nature in the Person of the Redeemer. God
has seen meet to exalt and dignifye it; to do all this for it and in it! To
make it His dwelling. His Temple, and the Light and Glory of Heaven it self:
for the Lamb is the Light thereof. Well therefore did our Savior turn off
their Admiting Eyes who observed to Him the wonderful Stones of the Material
Temple, and he pointed them to his own blessed Body, saying, Destroy this
Temple of God and I will raise it up in three days! It Was done, and in it God
reigns and his Glory resides there for ever and ever. And thus it appears that
the Creature Man was in his Original and first design, and is in his
Restoration and Recovery, a dwelling worthy of the Eternal and Invisible King.

I might add some other Reasons, why God has made his Rational and Intelligent
Creatures for his own Dwelling; Namely, from his Delight and Pleasure in his
own Glorious Workmanship, and in his Image on them: for the making his Creature
happy and blessed by Communion with Himself: And for the display of his own
Glory, Perfection and Happiness in the Creature: Let us make Man in our Image,
after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.

USE.
But I pass to the Use and Improvement of the Doctrine; as the time may allow
me.

1. See the Dignity and Honor of Man! God made him a little lower than the
Angels, and crowned him with glory and honor. But in this he was ever as the
Angels, that he was made the Living Temple of the Deity as well as they. And to
this his Original honor he is restored by a Redeemer: Rev. 21. 3, 5. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and be will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God. And he that sat upon the Throne said,
Behold I make all things new.

What an honorable State is this? as Mr. How excellently says upon the
Argument; and what an excellent Creature does it imply to be Immediately Sacred
to GOD and his own Converse! a Soul receptive of the Deity! able to entertain
God by Knowledge and Contemplation, by Reverence and Love, by Adoration and
Praise (...) a most delectable and pleasant State to be separated to this
Entertainment of the Divine Presence.

2. Let us see and admire the Condesc^nti^^ of God to Dust and Ashes. Will God
in v^^^ deed dwell with Man upon Earth? behold Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain thee? Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of him! What a low
and mean and narrow, nay and dirty place are we become, to be ever again
honored with the Indwelling of the Divine Glory! Behold the Heavens are not
clean in his eyes, and he charge this Angels with folly; how much less on
them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, Job 4.19.
This Grace of G^^ to us may well be in our Eyes His brighte^^ Glory. And thus
God speaks of it Himself: Isai. 53.15. For thus says the High and Lofty One
that Inhabits Eternity, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also that
is of a humble spirit.

3. What a cursed thing must Sin be, which defiles the Temple, and lays the
Palace of God in ruine^, and unfits as to be his Dwelling. God the rightful
Lord and Owner is turned out of His own House; for Evil cannot dwell with Him.
Not only is the Magnificence destroyed, and Man come short of the glory of God;
but his Temple is turned into a Stew, and Stye, and a Cage of every unclean
thing. They are altogether become filthy, the habitation of Devils and the hold
of every foul spirit.

And here I cannot but Entertain you with a most affecting strain of
Meditation, on this desolation of the Temple of God in Man, from the Pen of the
late Excellent and Venerable Mr. How.

"Here God once dwelt, but He is now retired and gone! The Lamps are extinct!
the Altar overturned! the Light and Love are now vanished, which did the one
shine with so heavenly brightness, the other burn with so pious fervor. The
Golden Candlestick is displaced, to make room for the Throne of the Prince of
darkness! the Sacred Incense, which sent rolling up in Clouds its rich
Perfumes, are exchanged for a poisnous hellish Vapor, and instead of a sweat
savor there is a stench! The comely Order of the House is turned into
Confusion, and the Beauties of holiness into noisome Impurities, the House of
Prayer into a den of Thieves! and that of the worst and most horrid kind,
Sacrilege! What have not the Enemies done wickedly in the Sanctuary!

Thus He.

4. Is the Soul of Man a noble Palace which God built for himself, See the
Reason then why God has done so much for our Redemption. For what King would
not recover his Palace out of the hands of Traitors and Rebels, that had
Perfidiously seized upon it? And what Expense could be though it too much, or what
Force to employ unto this End? In the Man Christ Jesus God prepared to Himself
a most perfect Temple, and the glory of the latter House (the Second Adam) was
Greater than the Glory of the first; For the first Man Adam was made a living
Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit: In him we are again the
Building of God, a Spiritual House, and an Habitation of God through the Spirit.
But when we contemplate the Only-begotten of the Father coming down from Heaven
and Tabernacling in our flesh, for a time, and upon his return to Heaven, when
we consider of the Descent of the Eternal Spirit of Grace to make His Abode
here for ever; we must needs Enquire for what Great End and Purpose the Amazing
Undertaking is? And here we find it --: it is to Repair and Rebuild the Palace
of the Great God on Earth! To restore this fair part of the Creation of God! To
Renew the face of the Earth, by restoring his lost Image in us! To this End it
pleased the Father that in Christ should all fullness dwell, by him to reconcile
all things to himself: And to this End is He Ascended that He might receive
Gifts for Men, even for the Rebellious, That the Lord God might dwell among
them, Psalm. 68.18.

5. If the Soul of Man was originally designed, and is recovered by Grace, to
be the Palace and Dwelling of God; then no doubt Good Men shall dwell with God,
and God in them in the Life to come. There are Habitations for them in Heaven,
Many Mansions in the Fathers House which Christ is gone to prepare for them,
and will take them to; but there they shall be (together with the Angels)
themselves the Mansions and Habitation of God. We know that if our Earthly
House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. There we know that the Redeemed are
before the Throne of God, and serve Him Day and Night in his Temple, and He
that sits on the Throne dwells among them.

6. And lastly; If the Soul of Man be a noble Palace which the Great God has
built for Himself, Learn then the Duty thou owe to the blessed God. Restore
Him the possession of thy Soul; which is his own, for he made it and gave it
Being and all its Endowments. Yea He has also bought it and dearly paid for it.
Wherefore I beseech you Brethren by the Mercies of God that ye present your
Bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service. Let not Satan keep possession of you, neither yield ye your Members as
Instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead; and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God. Let us say with the Redeemed Israelites, He is my God
and I will prepare him an Habitation, my fathers God and I will exalt him. Yea
let us swear unto the Lord and vow unto the mighty GOD, surely I will not come
up into the tabernacle of my House, nor go up into my Bed; I will not give
sleep unto mine Eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place
for the Lord, an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. We have solemnly
Consecrated our whole selves, Soul and Body, to the Lord; and we should with
Great solemnity be often renewing the Act of Self-dedication.

Wherefore, Live as one holy and devoted. Let nothing common or unclean come
into the holy Place. Remember what thou art, Know thy self, and how dreadful is
the consideration! This is no other than the House of God, and Gate of Heaven.
Kings are served in their Palaces, with great Respect and Alacrity; and God is
to be Worshipped in his Temple with Reverence and Godly fear. So employ all thy
Powers to the Glory of God with the utmost devotion. Turn aside, with Moses, to
see this Great Sight, God in the Bush, and that not consumed; and let an awful
Reverence sieze thy Soul, for Thou and the Place where thou stand is holy
Ground.

SERMON, II.
IT was a bright and pleasant MEDITATION we have been upon; which might well
Engage and carry a Man's Tho'ts away a great Length: scil. That the Soul of Man
is a Noble Palace which the Great GOD built for Himself. But I am now to pass
into as dark and melancholy a CONTEMPLATION, where a Man's Mind may well be as
much clouded and Oppressed.

DOCTRINE, II. That the Soul of Man is now become as a Garrison and Strong Hold
which Satan keeps against GOD.
He the strong Man armed keeps the Palace, and calls it his. He has the
present Possession and Rule; he keeps it by force of Arms, as a Castle in Time
of War.

Let us 1. Consider the Fact, Satan's possession. 2. Whence that is? 3. That he
keeps it by Arms, and as a Garrison against GOD.


I. It is a sorrowful Matter of Fact, of easy Proof, and the sad Experience of
the Children of Men, that Satan has and keeps possession of their Souls in
their Natural and Unregenerate State. I speak of a Spiritual possession of the
Souls of Sinners, which is a Case really much more deplorable than a Bodily
possession by evil Spirits; but this last being less common, and falling under
the Bodily senses and being horrible to behold, is terrifying and affrighting
to us; while the other being only a Spiritual misery, is not apprehended or
regarded by stupid Men, though it be of more fatal and lasting Consequence.

In whomsoever Sin reigns, in and over them Satan rules, and has possession of
them. He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning. In this the Children of God are manifest and the Children of the
Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God: And whosoever is not of
God is a slave to Satan, 1 John 3.8, 10.

He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him
not: These we know are of God, while the whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.18, 19. (...), in the Wicked one; under his power and under his
possession.

We are born in Sin, and Satan has the first possession in this State of
Corruption and Apostasy; which remains through the whole Unregenerate Life. In
the New Birth Satan is Ejected. If it be Inquired concerning any Person in that
blessed hour, as it was concerning the poor Lad bro't to Christ, foaming and
gnashing with an unclean and cruel Spirit; Mark 9.21. How long is it ago since
this came unto him? It must be answered -- Even of Child; yea even from his
Birth, and before.

The Habit of Sinful Actions, and the ungodly Courses of wicked People, shows
the possession and Rule of Satan. They are acted by him. Joh. 8.44. Ye are of
your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye do; Ye do the deeds of
your Father. It is the Style of Satan, that he is the God of this wicked world,
the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now rules in the Children
of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. And it is the wretched account of the State of the
Ungodly, that they are in the snare of the Devil and taken Captive by him at
his will, 2 Timothy 2. ult.

To conclude, Some wicked Persons are possessed and acted by Satan more Visibly
and Openly than others. The unclean Spirit shows it self to the World in the
abandoned Wretches, and in their scandalous Courses which ^^e earthly, sensual,
devilish. They are blinded and led blindfold by him: 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the
God of this world has blinded their eyes. As the Philistines of old put out
Samsons Eyes and set him to grind; or as the Demoniacks of old were wont to run
staring over Rocks and Precipices, into the fire and into the water,
whithersoever the furious spirit drove them.

Moreover, Satan hardens them in Sin, and his possession of them is to be seen
in their Security and Fearlesness: for if the Devil were not in them, they
would fear and tremble and be struck with horror at their own Actions and
Dangers. They ly among the Tombs and know not that the dead are there. They cut
and gnash themselves with Stones and feel it not, though they are so Cruel and
Barbarous to their own Souls.

I might be more particular and say,

He is a Deaf Spirit in them and they wont hear, a Dumb Spirit and they cant
Pray, a Profane Spirit and they Blaspheme God. Yea like the possessed in their
Fits they are Insensible, and you would think 'em quite dead. The thunders from
Sinai are not heard by 'em, nor the flashes of lightning seen, nor the shaking
Earth felt. Were they not in some strange Preternatural State they would
exceedingly fear and quake: Their Senses and their Reason are locked up as in a
Swoon, and it is very hazardous whether they will ever come to themselves again
and to a right Mind; or if they do it is to be feared that it will be by
dreadful Convulsions, which may be terrible, if not equally dangerous as their
present Stupidity.

II. Whence is it that Satan has possessed himself of the Souls of Men? The
Palace was Gods, built for Himself and actually his Dwelling and Residence: How
then came Satan into it?

Not to be sure by any Legal Right, but by Tyranical Usurpation: Not by any
power against God, or any freedom from his Power and Justice, but by the
righteous permission of a holy God, in Judgment and Punishment for our Sin. The
sorry Traitor, the foul and false Usurper boasts of a Right and Title, All
these, and all this Power and Glory is mine; for to me they are delivered, and
whatsoever I will I do with them. He claims as by Victory and Conquest over
God, when as he only prevailed over weak Man by Subtlety and Fraud, and by the
Judgment of a holy God is permitted to Possess and Tyrannize.

Wherefore,

The Palace was betrayed into Satan's hands by Man's Sin. Man delivered up
himself to the Devil by a base and voluntary disloyal yielding to his
Temptation. Sin was the cursed thing that made God forsake his Palace, for he
cannot dwell with it; and this gave Satan his possession. The first Order and
Command of God was, that Sin should not be permitted to enter into and defile
his Palace, on pain of his Departure in Wrath. God made Man Holy, Inclined him
well, disposed him only to that which is good, and to all that is so! He gave
him an express Warning and Commandment, with a severe and dreadful Threatening
in case of Transgression. The penalty was present Desertion and utter
Destruction. Nevertheless the Devil by craft and subtlety beguiled and seduced
Man into Sin. Man weakly, ungratefully, wilfully complied with Satan's Motion.
He treacherously gave him the Keys of the Palace, and received him into his own
heart. The Holy God then forsook his Earthly Tabernacle and Residence. He
loathed and abhorred the defiled Place. He left miserable Man in those cruel
and filthy hands which he had put himself into. The Traitor surrendered himself
into a Tyrants hand, and renounced God his righful Proprietor, and Gracious
LORD. He revolted to the Devil at his first Motion, from God that made him. It
was a voluntary Resignation to the declared Enemy of God, who had appeared to
him bare faced, giving God the lie, and accused him of Envying the Felicity of
his Creature. He transgressed in a defying manner to God, and insolently dared
his Vengeance. God was far from willing or allowing Man's fall and ruin; He did
all that was proper and reasonable to have restrained and prevented him: He
forbid it under the pain of Death, his highest Displeasure and an Everlasting
Excision from himself. This is the Rice and Support of Satan's Kingdom here on
Earth and his Dominion over Men. He tempted and Man yielded. God forsook and
Satan usurped. Man renounced God, revolted to Satan, and God left him to the
wretchedness and Curse he chose.

III. Satan now holds and keeps the wretched Soul as a Garrison in a time and
state of War against the blessed God. The strong man Armed keeps the Palace.
We read of the Powers of Darkness, the Powers of the Air, Principalities and
Powers and spiritual Wickednesses. The Devils Empire is large and his Kingdom
strong. The Hosts of Evil Spirits are many, and every single fallen Spirit is
of Great Might. Their Name is Legion, for they are many; and any one of them
can do dreadful things if God permit them. Satan and his Angels are the Great
Enemy of God and in Arms against Him. They never laid down their Arms of
Rebellion unto this day. From the day they left Heaven, from the day that God
cast them down from it, they declared and still wage an Everlasting War with
it, for they have an Irreconcilable Enmity, and a Rage which they cannot
suppress. Rev. 12.7. And there was War in Heaven; Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought and his Angels.

Tyrants have their Palaces as well as rightful Princes; but they rule by force
of Arms; by standing Armies. Usurpers and Rebel^ have no other Security of
their unjust possession.

God Arms for the Recovery of the Soul out of Satan's hands. As the Captain of
the Hosts of the Lord CHRIST has appeared in his Church. The Eternal and
Almighty Spirit of Grace has proceeded from Him, with his Sword drawn, His
Blessed Word in the Ministry thereof. His Ministers have received their
Commissions from Him to Inlist others in his Cause; with whom they are to War a
good Warfare, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ: Whom that they may serve
faithfully they are called off from Entangling themselves with the Affairs of
this World. The Weapons put into our hands are not Carnal but Mighty through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds: 2 Cor. 10.4. The whole Armor of God is
provided for us, wherein to go forth against the Goliath of Hell; and it fits
every gracious Soul, for he has proved and tried it and been exercised therein;
being skilful in the word of Righteousness, and experienced in Spiritual Graces
and Duties. The Spirit of God Himself puts them on, and is in them that go
forth in his Name to Animate, Strengthen and Prosper 'em. His Presence in his
Word appears in Showers of Arrows, and darts thrown with a strong hand, that
Pierce the hearts of his Enemies; and subdue them to be his willing People,
while their Enmity is slain in the day of his Power. The Stars of Heaven also
in their Courses fight against Sis^^a, and Invisible Hosts of Angels Engage in
the Cause of Christ, and for the Destruction of Satan's Kingdom.

Thus more are with us than there are against us. Nevertheless the Rebels are
Obstinate and Desperate; for they are never to be pardoned nor to find any
Mercy. They hold on the fight, and renew the War, amidst all their Defeats,
with impotent Spite and Malignity. They fall and are wounded and broken, and
bite the ground, and gnash with their teeth, while they see a happy Number
recovered to God, after whom nevertheless they cast their fiery darts, and give
them many a painful wound. The Convictions of others they quench, and keep
possession of them by prevailing with them to Confederate with them against
God. Sinners side with the Devil, consent to his Motions, submit to his Rule,
resist the Holy Ghost, and are found to fight against God. They have a
Diabolical Nature of their own, which is Enmity to him, and naturally sides
with the powers of Darkness. They are Seconds in the War, and count themselves
Principal in it. It is the cause of their Lusts, whom they love and like, and
can even fight and die for, rather than part with them. They are haters of God,
and despiteful as well as He under whose Banner they appear. Alienation from
the life of God and Aversion to it in the Corrupt Nature of Man, is the
foundation of his Agreement and League with Hell. It Is the Seed of the Serpent:
A Serpentine Nature, which loves its like, but hates God as its Opposite. The
Law is Spiritual, but this corrupt Nature is carnal, Sold under Sin, Sold to do
evil.

Hence is it that the Soul becomes such a Strong hold against God. The
corrupted Soul is it self Enmity to God. There is a strong hold of Sin. 1. In
the corrupt Mind and carnal Reasonings. 2. In the Will and Affections. 3. In
the defiled and corrupted Conscience. 4. Sin has deeply Entrenched about and
strongly fortified it self with many Outworks. And to finish all, 5. Sometimes
the foul Moat of Judicial Blindness and Obduracy encloses all.


1. There is a strong Hold of Sin in the corrupt Mind and carnal Reasonings of
Men. Ignorance of God, affected blindness, stupidity, Pride, Conceit, Vanity,
Unbelief and Infidelity are natural to Sinful Man. In these Consist the Kingdom
of Darkness and the Power of darkness. Satan is the Ruler of the Darkness of
this World, and as the God of this World, ( i. e. the Tyrant over it.) he
blinds the Mind of them that believe not, lest the light of the Glorious
Gospel should shine into them. The natural State of Man is Darkness: Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes darkness. The Understanding is both disabled and depraved by
the Fall, the Mind is defiled: if that be Evil the whole Soul must be full of
darkness; if the light that is in us be darkness, how great is that Darkness?
We read of the Chains of Darkness; and indeed chains are not more to the
Liberty of the Body, than Darkness is to the noble Powers of the Mind: as the
one are in the Imprisonment and Captivity of the Body, so is the other the
Thraldom and Slavery of the Soul. What a dark Dungeon is to the Body, that is
Spiritual Darkness to the Mind.

Well therefore when the Apostle speaks of the Weapons of our Warfare mighty
through God to the pulling down strong Holds, the first of these Holds that he
mentions is our Tho'ts and Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the Know^edge of God. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The Corruption of the
Angelick and Humane Mind is much alike: Angels and Men both fell by Pride, and
Pride fastens the Chains of darkness on them. Vain Man will yet be wise, and
wiser than God, though he be born like the wild Asses Colt. Are we blind also?
Said the disdainful Pharisees; and therefore they were left in wilful Ignorance
and Unbelief. The Mind of Man likes not to retain God in its knowledge. And its
own natural Notions, Fancies, Prejudices, it sets up in Opposition to the
Revelation of God. Neither is there any stronger hold of Satan in Us than this
Evil Heart of Unbelief in departing from the living God. Or when Men from the
perverss reasonings of their own Mind, corrupt Opinions, Philosophy and vain
deceit fortify themselves against the Convictions of the Word. Hence has arose
the Infidelity, Atheism, Profaneness and Licentiousness of the present Ages.
The desires of the Mind are Opposite to God as well as those of the F^sh. Ephesians.
2.3. Carnal Wisdom is devilish. Jam. 3.15. And therefore the Soul by
Sanctifying Grace is Renewed in the Spirit of the Mind. Rev. 12.2. The other
Faculties of the Soul fight, like common Soldiers, for the Prey, (says one)
but the Mind as the Leader of the Army fights for Vict^ry, and Superiority;
freedom from the power of God, or for the Conquest of him. We are alienated and
Enemies in our Minds, Col. 1.21. We are averss to the Knowledge of God, and say
to him, Depart from us for we desire not the Knowledge of thy ways. Conversion
therefore begins in Illumination and the Opening Men's eyes, and they are
transformed by the Renewing of their Mind. It was the Pride of Jews and Greeks
that hindered them from submitting to the Gospel of Christ; 1 Cor. 1.23. We
Preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling Block and to the Greeks
Foolishness. A Crucified Savior was a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of Offense
to them; they fell on it and were broken to pieces. And so do many in our own
days, in whose wise Eyes the Gospel is yet fool^^^ness, and they cannot stoop
to the Simplicity, Humility and Self-dental of its pure Laws, nor to the
Righteousness which is of faith. Hence as it was from the beginning it yet is,
Not many wise Men after the flesh are called. They test in Natural Religion
after their study of Nature. But this Pride and Arrogance and high look God
hates. This Pride of reason is Odious to God, as well as Averss to him, Not
only does it turn from God, but God resists that. So that it brings a kind of
Impossibility to be ever convinced; How can ye believe that receive honor one
of another? and see thou a Man wise in his own eyes there is more hopes of a
fool than of him. God resists the proud and gives Grace to the lowly. The
want of a Spiritual Discerning, and the power of carnal Apprehension, is an
effectual hindrance of Men's Salvation; and a strong Wile and Snare of the
Devil. So he began with Man, and so he holds on, and the Effect is the same now
that it was at first; i. e. his Possession and Dominion is Established by it: Ye
shall be as GOD's to know Good and Evil.

2. Satan finds a strong hold in the Corrupt Will and Affections of Men. They
are his by Consent, and they are obstinate in their choice of sinful ways,
they delight in some or other lust under the power and rule whereof they live,
and all expresses and issues in more and more Aversion to God, and their hatred
of his ways increases continually. The love and liking of Sin is the
Establishment of Satan's Throne. The slave loves his cruel Master and will not
go free, but will fight for the Tyrant. Such is the baseness of the once noble
and free Soul.

There needs no more to give Satan a full and entire possession of our Souls
than our own Consent to him. And indeed nothing but that can give him
possession. The Soul is yet so free that he rules in none but by their own
Will. In the day when their heart and will is changed, Satan's throne is cast
down and he is spoiled of all his Armor. He entered by our consent, and he
reigns by our tame submission and consent. And so long as thou art willing it
is impossible but he should keep the Palace. Thy will is the Palace which he
prides in, and gives him all his power. He would if he could keep his
possession of the convinced Sinner against his will, but all the Devils in Hell
cannot do that. Every Sin (says one) is an Election of the Devil to be our
Lord; so far as it has a voice it gives it suffrage or vote for him. Joh. 8.44.
His Lusts ye will do. While the w^^^ ^ubbornly persists in its Disobedience
(...) ^od and to rebel against Him; the possession of Satan is secure. The
Souls affections are his Guard while he sleeps within in peace and quiet. He
has no trouble to keep the Palace, we keep it for him. Our love of Sin is all
the Hold that Satan desires of us. Let that abide and he is sure of us. On this
his Kingdom stands, for Satan can never cast out Satan. The two are agreed and
can dwell together well. While God is hated as a Sovereign and as a Lawgiver;
Satan's dominion is Established as much as it is in our power to do it. We are
loyal to him and zealous Assertors of his right.

Here then is Satan power against God and over thee; thy own Will, choice, love
and likeing. This is Invincibly set for Sin. God will not force thee to be his
against thy will, nor accept of thee without thy Will, nor rule thee but by thy
own Consent; Though he will judge and punish thee at last without it. And this is
thy Guilt, and the Condemnation: you will not be ruled and saved by Christ, and
you love darkness rather than light. You have not the love of the Truth that
you may be saved

3. Conscience is corrupted and perverted, and becomes another strong hold of
Satan, whereby he keeps possession of us. Tit. 1.15 The Mind and Conscience is
defited. This Substitute and Vicegarent which God set up within us to govern
and to judge (...) is himself debauched into Satan's Interes^^. No wonder then
that the Fortress he was to have defended is betrayed and delivered up and that
Satan has so quiet a possession. It is the Office, and only in the power of
Conscience to disturb and disquiet him in his Tyranny. This should protest
against the Usurpation, this should exclaim under the Oppression, this should
draw up the Charge of Treason and Rebellion, this should judge and pass
Sentence, this should Awaken Reason to its just Exercise, and summon the Will
to submit again to God. But if this be Silent, if this be Bribed by the Tyrant
in possession, or if it be Awed and cowed; If Conscience side with the
Inclination to Sin, and judge in its favor from Partiality and Affection, if
the Judge takes bribes and cries Peace to the Inslaved Soul; or if it be tame
and cowardly, sneaking and fordid, as a corrupt Judge is easily found in
vicions Reigns, servile to the Tyrants Lust and Will; no wonder that Satan
keeps possession then and his dominion stands. The Foundations are out of
course, and there is all the Confusion and Iniquity proper to the Reign of the
Devil.

Indeed Natural Conscience has not power now to govern a blind Mind and an
obstinate Will. The will often carries it against the judgment of Reason and
the Convictions of Conscience. Conscience is not hearkened to, but hectored and
Insulted, opposed and resisted when he does condemn. But how often is
Conscience asleep, or dumb and conniving at the ^^penitence Men live in; and so
the hands of Sin and Satan are strengthened. Sometimes it Establishes Iniquity
by a Law and gives that for law that is not; calls evil good and good evil, and
puts darkness for light and light for darkness, sometimes it covers, excuses,
palliates, and appears an Advocate for wickedness and Villainy. Sometimes it
holds its peace and bears no Testimony at all. By all this the power of Sin^nd
its Rule is upheld in the Soul.

Indeed Conscience must needs suffer together with and by the corruption of the
Understanding and the Will: it wants the clea^ light of the One to judge by,
and violence is done it by the Other. But alas one Faculty is corrupted as well
as the other. Conscience (...) both weak and false. It holds the Truth in
Unrighteousness, the fall has made Shipwreck of it, and sensual Men drown it
with their Souls in the Sea of Lust. The Chancellor falls in with the wicked
Ministry, and involves himself in their Crimes.

4. I might add, if you will not think that I stretch the Allusion too far,
That there are many Outworks, by which Satan has deeply Entrenched and
^ortified about the Palace which he keeps: and every one of these lines he
disputes and defends, that he may keep the Fort. Such are Evil Customs, worldly
Principles and Maxims, evil Examples and wicked Tempters about us; the Errors
and Prejudices of Education, evil Habits, and sometimes even Lawful Liberties;
but above all the baits of Sensual Pleasures, worldly Riches, and Earthly
Honors; the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh and the Pride of Life; all
which are that friendship of the World which is Enmity to God, and whereby
Satan's Seat and Empire is Enlarged and Established. The God of this World has
with much hellish wisdom for himself, and malice against God, thus formed as he
could a corrupt World for his own possession. He has filled it with Snares for
Souls, and Inticements to Sin, foolish and hurtful Lusts, that we may be taken
captive by him at his will, and may never recover out of his hands. How many
are his Stratagems and devices, and how subtle and very hidden his Arts! He is
still the Serpent and an old one, and folds and twines, and shows himself in a
thousand postures and forms; and we the poor Children of Eve are taken with his
shining Skin, and glaring lies and promises; and take and eat and die. This
present evil World is a strong Confederate with Satan, and joins all its forces
against God and our Souls.

5. And lastly, Sometimes there is the foul Moat of Judic^^^ Blindness and
Obduracy enclosing all. A line of Gods drawing in his Wrath and feirce Anger,
and a deep ditch of the Sinners digging about himself. A great Gulf fixed of
an Everlasting Separation between God and the Soul. A righteous Sentence of
Reprobation passed, which can never be revoked. The tree Cursed before it is
cut down, and from that Moment drying up at the root. An utter and final
Rejection from God, and a delivery of the wretched Soul over to Satan as his
for ever. So Satan entered with the Sop into Judas, and his heart Petrified
within him, and turned into a Stone, and at last dissolved in despair, in the
fire of Gods wrath. God says concerning the lost Soul, Let him be filthy
still. God gives him up to vile affections, and unto strong delusions, that he
may be damned, because he believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness. The Sinner becomes past feeling, and gives himself over to
work all Uncleanness with Greediness, as if his Conscience were seared with a
hot Iron. From henceforth Satan has a sure possession of the miserable Soul, as
sure as if he were already in Hell, and the bars of the pit about him for ever.
No place can be found for Repentance, should he seek it carefully with Judas
his Tears and Remorse; but he hastens to his own Place.

And thus I have endeavored to represent the possession that Satan keeps of
Impenitent Sinners; as a Garrison and strong Hold in a state of War against God.

USE.
Give me leave to make a Reflection or two on this deplorable Account of the
matter.

1. See the lamentable Change that is come upon us by Sin. In the change of the
Inhabitant, and in the change of State consequent there-upon. Once the Dwelling
of God, now the Habitation of Devils and of every unclean thing. From a
Princely Palace turned into a Garrison: From a Paradise of Pleasure, Peace and
Liberty, driven into Captivity, Bondage and Misery: from the gentle Rule of a
Rightful Gracious Prince, now the Usurpation of a Cruel Enemy. Into what Evil
Hands, and into what a forlorn Condition has our Apostasy from God bro't us?

2. See what Satan's Motion to thee is in every Temptation unto Sin. It is this
-- Renounce God and Give thy self to me both Soul and Body, to be mine for
ever. With this horrid Motion the Sinner complies, though he only thinks of
Gratifying and Indulging himself. So Souls are kidnapt by the Devil; Enticed
over into the Gardens of sin and sense, as into some promised Paradise; but
truly in the Event find themselves Sold into the vilest Slavery. If the Devil
should appear to the Sinner and make the barefaced Motion to him; "Soul, sell
thy self unto me; come, Seal a Contract to be mine for ever; Let me Enter into
thee and possess and act thee; -- would the Soul Consent? No, but with Infinite
horror would scream out and die away at the Motion. O believe it, Every
Temptation to Sin, and unto Impenitence therein, is nothing better than this
Cursed Motion: and this is thy State, and this thy Misery, while you^ly under
the Power and Rule of any known Lust.

3. See the Cursed Nature of Satan and of Sin: His Enmity against us, and the
Mischiefs he has bro't upon us: How he is to be hated and detested by us, and
his Motions to be loathed, abhorred and trembled at: what madness as well as
how Impious it is to side with him, comply with him, and fight against God: But
alas! What Homage, Obedience and Service has he? He sends his Imperious Message
like some Haughty Benhadad to some Servile Ahab, "Thou and thy Riches and all
that thou have is Mine: and the Sinner tamely returns answer, -- "True Satan, I
am thine and all that I have; and all shall be employed for thee, and according
to thy Will.

4. See then what a Mighty Savior Sinners need, to deliver them from the Power
and Possession of Satan. And a Mighty One God has raised up for us, (as if God
will we may hear hereafter) even an Almighty One, His own Son in our Nature. He
is manifested to destroy the works of the Devil, to break the Serpents head; to
deliver us from the power of Satan unto the glorious Liberty of the Kingdom of
God. He is able to save unto the uttermost, able to bruise Satan under our
feet: The Devils tremble before him, confess him, and beseech him not to
torment them; and they fly at his Presence and his Word. By Him all Devils
shall be judged at the last day, and receive their Doom from his Lips to an
Eternal Torment. He was tempted and is able to succor us; He has Ascended on
High and has led Captivity Captive. He commands the unclean spirits and they
obey him, and the very Devils are subject to us through His Name. What manner of
MAN is this!

5. Let Sinners earnestly be Exhorted to seek and get Deliverance from the
Possession and Power of Satan. Recover your selves out of the snare of the
Devil, and be not led Captive by him at his Will. Now you must seek Deliverance,

1. By Faith in Christ. Believe His Power and His Readiness to Save thee from
all thy Spiritual Enemies and from the Hand of them that hate thee. Legions of
Devils are nothing in His Hands. Beelzebub and all his Hosts are but as a swarm
of flies which a Man's hand will drive away.

2. By Repentance. This Spues out the Unclean Spirit, when you loath your self
for Sin before the Holy God. He cannot bear the Moans and Agonies of a
repenting Soul. The broken Spirit which is Gods Sacrifice, is Satan's
Abomination. Thy deepest Humiliation is his surest Ejection.

3. By Prayer. This also he abhors from. If he keeps thee from Prayer he will
keep his Hold of thee, but by Prayer you bind him and carry him to Christ, and
his Strength is gone. He may tempt and hurry you, but he does not possess you,
if you are sincere and earnest in daily Prayer. Formality in it he bears well
eno', and Indulges those in it whom he possesses; but Pray thou in Spirit and
in Truth, with Constancy, holy Importunity and Fervency, and he can never
endure it. Prayer has power with God; and is has power over Satan. It obtains
help against him and power to resist him. God gives his Holy Spirit to them
that ask Him, and He drives away the Evil Spirit. This is a singular part of
our Spiritual Armor, and a weapon of our Warfare mighty through God to the
pulling down strong holds, even -- Praying always with all Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.

Pray for a Pure and Enlightened Mind; Pray for a Soft and Tender Heart. Pray
for a Free and Faithful Conscience. Pray for a Conquered and Obedient Will.
Pray for Spiritual and Holy Affections. Pray to be Saved from this E^il World.
And Pray that God would never cast you from his Presence, nor take away his
Holy Spirit from you.

Say unto God, O Lord I beseech thee deliver ^^y Soul. Yea carry your poor Soul
(...) Christ, as she did her poor Daughter of old grievously vexed with a
Devil, Matt. 15.22. Have Mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David.

4. Another means of Satan's Ejection is the reverent and diligent Study and
Entertainment of Gods Word. The Devils Throne and Kingdom Shakes before the
Preached Gospel, and Millions of poor Souls have been delivered from his
possession under the Ministry of the Word. This is the Sword of the Spirit,
whereby he pushes and peirces the Enemies of our Salvation; and also slayes Sin
in the Soul by wounding it. It is given us to wear about us, for our own
Defense, and for the Offense of them that assault us in our way to Heaven. It
is Written, said our Savior, and so put by the fiery darts of the Tempter, and
he (...) from Him. If we did better Improve Gods Sabbaths and his Holy
Ordinances, it would strangely weaken and break the power of Satan, and give us
new strength and Supplies of Grace against Him. These are the Means of thy
Deliverance.

The Last USE should have been a Word of Comfort to the Godly, and to the
Tempted. But this will properly belong to the Af^e^- Proposition, when I come
to consider, how the Victorious Savior rescues whom He pleases, and will
rescue all his Chosen, from Satant Power and Tyranny. If he has already done
this for you, Rejoice because your Name is written in Heaven. O thy Happiness,
-- while you look with so much Commiseration o^^ the Miseries of others. Such
was your (...) once, but the Holy and Mighty One has (...) Great things for
you. You once had the Legion in you, but they remain now only in the Swine and
in the Abysse^ Now you Sit at Jesus feet, clothed and in a right Mind. Entreat
Him to keep thee with him. Go home and tell how Great things the Lord has done
for thee, and has had Compassion on thee.

SERMON, III.
TWO Doctrinal Observations have been (...) spoken to; Namely, I. That the Soul
of Man is a Palace which the Great GOD built for Himself. II. That it is now
become as a Garrison and strong Hold which Satan keeps against GOD. The strong
Man Armed keeps his Palace.


I now pass to a Third DOCTRINE.

III. That there is a wretched Peace and cursed Quiet which the carnal Heart
often lies in under Satan's Tyranny.
His Goods are in Peace. He calls them his Palace and his Goods, and seems to
have a peaceable Possession. The Miserable Soul seems to Enjoy a profound Peace
in its woeful Bondage. Satan has a quiet possession allowed him. He conquered by
Consent and so he rules. The Sinners Mind and Heart and Will are his; tamely
yielded to him, wickedly used for him. "Satan rules without Control; His Lusts
are done and his interests served; and all the Powers of the Soul are Employed
by him in his Service. The Sinner is content they should be so; Easy and
unconcerned about the matter; is Secure and Merry, Servile and Obedient; likes
his Master and loves his Service; has no sense of Misery, nor fear of Danger.
Thus the strong Man Armed keeps his Palace and his Goods are in Peace.

It is strange that it should be so, because the Soul is not in its native
State of Rectitude and Order. The foundations are out of course, and all things
are in disorder and confusion. Whence then should come any quietness or rest in
this Preternatural State? What Peace can there be under Guilt and Wrath? But
however strange it be, it is in fact true and a thing undeniable, that there is
a Carnal Security and Easiness which some of the most wretched and guilty among
the Miserable Children of Men do stupidly ly in.

Concerning this, I shall 1. Observe that the thing is True in Fact. 2. That it
is a very wretched and cursed thing in it self. 3. Whence it comes. And so
Apply the Doctrine.


I. In Fact we see it to be true, most palpable and very Evident to all the
World, that there are many wicked and ungodly ^ersons who are secure and in
Peace in their Sins, as it there were no danger near them and they had nothing
to trouble them. They seem either, 1. To have a good Opinion. of themselves,
and to Entertain no doubt or scruple about the Goodness of their State: Or, 2.
A Fearlessness and Unconcern though they know that it cannot be well with them.
They have neither any sense of their own Sinfulness, nor any Dread of the
Judgment to come.

The Scripture speaks of this wretched Peace of a carnal Mind: Psalm. 36.2. He
flattereth himself in his own Eyes until his Iniquity be found to be hateful.
He persuades himself either that he is guilty of little or no Sin, or that he
shall escape well eno', and so goes on Impenitently in his Sinful ways. He
either does not see, or will not own the Evil and danger of his wicked Courses.
Present ease and quiet is all that most Men propose to themselves, without any
regard to futurity; and a present fleshly Indulgence all they crave without
caring for the Consequence thereof. Sensual Objects enclose them without, and
draw away their Eyes from future and distant, unseen and Eternal things; and an
evil Heart of Unbelief within yields to the power and persuasion of sense, and
departs gladly from the living (...). The Sinner is resolutely and obstinately
bent to keep all easy within; shuts his (...) upon the flames, and stops his
(...) the thunders of Gods Law; an^ (...) Peace in himself let the Law declare
(...) it pleases. He hears the Words of this ^^rse, (...) yet blesses himself
in his heart, saying, (...) all ^^ve peace, though I walk in the Imagination,
(...) my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. He faces the Curse,
or turns away from it, and promises himself Impunity and safety, though he
persist in his Impiety. There are Multitudes of such Men in the Professing
World, who are under the Curse of God, and cannot but know it if they would but
allow themselves to think of it, and yet bless themselves; and the more ripe
for ruin, the more resolute they are in promising Peace to themselves.

There are Degrees of this Peace in Sin. Some seem to have it more and some
less; yet it is so much a Cheat that they who s^em to have it most may indeed
have least of it; though they hector Conscience and suppress it, or bear up
against it as well as they can.

1. In some it is only a stupid Vnconcern, Carelessness and Tho'tlessness: and
then it is usually the dull quiet of the Ignorant and Untaught, who know and
have heard or minded little of God or His Word: for a vain and loose Education
must needs lay a foundation for unconcern about our Spiritual State.

2. In other it is a Presumptnous Hope. The vain Sinner will hope groundlesly,
and if he can but co^^ ^p the Word and corrupt Conscience to permit him this,
he lays a sure foundation for a false Peace. The World is full of hope without
a Promise; said the Devout Mr. Flavel. A Hope whereof a Man can never give a
Reason. A groundless, dead, Christless, irrational, idle, absurd hope: Job.
8.54, 55. Of whom ye say that he is your God, and yet ye have not known him.

3. In others this false Peace rises into a false Joy. And this is natural
'eno, for as a presumptuous hope cries Peace, Peace to the Sinner it must needs
cheer him in his evil way. This fond delusion of self-love is sometimes so
strong, that it may buoy the light and vain heart over the Billows of Adversity
through this Life, and those of Death at the End of it. As bladders of Wind may
make a shift to keep the head above Water. They are not in trouble and they
have no Bands in their death. They die with some Expectation that it will be
well with them hereafter.

Indeed many that live stupidly and quietly in Sin die so too, and they that
ignorantly and loosely take up fond hopes of their good Estate die with less
fear and distress very often than many of the Godly themselves. To this length
may security sometimes go.

But after all, It is not ^eet to be called Peace of Soul, which is a Great and
blessed thing whereof this is but the fiction. True Peace is a gracious
Tranquillity and S^^^nity of Mind built on the solid principles of Religion,
the unchangeable Promises and Covenant-faithfulness of God; the Experience of
his Good Work in us, and the certain Exercise and Actings of Grace toward God.
The Wicked are far from this, in their careless quiet or presumptuous hopes.

I go on therefore to the Second thing propounded under the Doctrine; Namely,
to observe,

II. That it must needs be a very wretched Peace and cursed Quiet which the
carnal heart lies in under Satan's Tyranny. Do you speak of Peace, O Sinner?
What Peace can there (...) so long as thy reigning Sins, are so Many? and the
power and Witchcraft of Satan over thee is so Strong? There is no Peace faith
^y God unto the Wicked, Isai 57.21. God is not at Peace, not reconciled; and
Conscience should not be easy, nor suffer the guilty So^^^ to enjoy any quiet.

Peace is a Happy thing in it self, Greatly to be wished for, Earnestly to be
sought aft^^ and much to be prized and cherished by him that has it: But in
some cases it is unnatural, unlawful, impossible, and the pretense of it the
greatest Curse and Mischief. Peace in Six, Peace without Holiness, Peace
without Reconciliation to God, Peace without Pardon, -- It is a most Irrational
as well as Irreligious and prosane thing

Peace under Guilt and Condemnation, and quietness under the Wrath and Curse of
God, what madness and distraction must it suppose? To be at Peace under Satan's
po^^^ ru^^ ^^nd ^y^^^nny! Under Spiritual-P^^^^ (...) ^ss and on the brink of
hell! To be quiet and at ease while God is our Enemy, and ready to damn and
destroy both Body and Soul in Hell for ever. Job 12.6. And they that provoke
God are secure.

A Peace not of Gods giving nor allowing! A Peace of Sutans soothing and
deceiving into! A Stupor upon the Soul and Lethargy, which under the shows of
fast and sweet Sleep, is the sure and fatal Symptom of approaching death.

The quiet which Impenitent Sinners have in their evil ways is cursed in its
Original, which is of Hell; and cursed in its End and final Issue, which is
there from whence it took its rise. It is a woeful Peace, cursed in its Causes
and cursed in its Effects.

It comes of Infidelity and Unbelief, Profaness and Contempt of God,
presumption and fearlessness, fleshliness and sensuality. It is earthly,
sensual and devilish. And it hardens Men's hearts, blinds their eyes, deprives
them of understanding; stupefies, fears and makes Men Insensible of Good and
Evil. It is a Root that bears Gall and Wormwood, as Moses says: One of the
strongest holds of Satan whereby he keeps Men in Impenitence and fixes them in
an Everlasting Estrangement from God: It reserves the Soul in chains under
darkness, as sure as those under which Devils are held, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day.

This cursed quiet and security frustures all Awakning Means, receives all the
terrors of God with mildness and unconcern; as an Arrow sinks silently into a
Wall of Mud; or it roughly puts them away, as an Arrow blunts and breaks
against a Wall of Stone. Finally, It provokes the Lord to Jealousy, and
treasures up wrath against the day of wrath, and will make the Revelation of
that wrath the more Surprising and Insupportable.

The Holy Ghost has therefore given us the Character and the Judgment of this
Secure Sinner, his Way and his End, in diverss passages which are very dreadful
to read, but most necessary and profitable for us to weigh. The Character of
the Impiety we have, Psalm. 36.1, -- 4. The transgression of the wicked says
within my heart, that there is no Fear of God before his Eyes. For he
flattereth himself in his own Eyes until his Iniquity be found to be hateful.
The words of his Mouth are iniquity and deceit; he has left off to be wise and
to do good. He devises mischief upon his Bed, he sets himself in a way that
is not good, he abhors not evil. What a miserable account is here of the
Person? Flattering himself on in wicked ways without any regret or remorse?
But what is the End of it? Can it last always? No: but as the soft Oil yields
the most Vehement flame when it is set on fire, so this carnal Peace prepares
and lays open a wretched Soul to the devouring fire of Gods wrath to fix and
prey upon, when he comes forth to Judgment. So Moses tells us, Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21.
The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall
ly upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven: and the
Lord shall separate him unto Evil, according to all the Curses of the Covenant.
There is scarce a Threatening in all the Book of God that sounds more dreadful
than this; (says Mr. Henry on the Place) O that secure and presumptuous
Sinners would but read it and tremble! For it is not a Bugbear to frighten
Children and Fools, but a real Declaration of the wrath of God against the
Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men. The Lord shall not spare him. The days
of his Reprieve which he abuses shall be shortened, and no Mercy remembered in
the midst of Judgment. The Jealousy of the Lord, which is His fiercest Auger,
shall Smoke as a Furnace against him. The Curses Written shall not only light
upon him and terrify him, but ly upon him and abide in all their weight, to
sink him down into the lowest Hell. He shall be Separated unto Evil, which is
the most proper Notion of a Curse; Cut off from all happiness, and all hope of
it; and Marked out for Misery, without Remedy. And all this according to all
the Curses of the Covenant, which are the most fearful Curses, being the
Revenges of Abused Grace.

This is the sure and certain End of present Security and Peace in Sin; and it
comes always with ^^prize and as a Snare that covers the unwary Bird while it
feeds, or sings securely and merrily. As in the days that were before the
Flood, they were Eating and Drinking -- and knew not until the flood came and
took them all away, Mat. 24.38. The height of the Sinners security is the time
of his Instant Danger, that his folly may be the more manifest, and the warning
to others the louder, and that the severity of the Punishment may awfully
appear in the surprise it brings with it. 1 These. 5.3. For when they shall say
peace and safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, ^s Travail upon a
Woman with Child, and they shall not escape.

So in the Parable of the rich fool we have the Picture of Carnal security
drawn in its true Features, and in most lively Colors, together with the
miserable End of it: Luke 12.19, 20. And I will say to my soul, Soul thou have
much goods lard up for many years, take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry: But
God said unto him, thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee. O
the surprise in the midst of his Song, of many a secure day to come, wherein he
proposed to dwell at ease! In a day when he looked not for it, and in the hour
when least aware, is he cut asunder. Though while he lived he blessed his Soul,
and his Nei'bours might praise him as projecting well for himself, in a Moment
he goes down to the dead, and lifts up his Eyes in Torments. It is a very
wretched Peace and cursed Quiet which deceives Souls into this Miserable End.

III. Whence comes it? And how comes it to be so common a thing among ungodly
Men? It is a Strange Infatuation, and Unaccountable Madness in the hearts of
the Children of Men: What possesses them? I answer,

1. Satan does. The God of this World has blinded their heart, that the light
of the Gospel may not shine into them. He keeps the Palace with a stronghand
and with much skill. He keeps it in peace. His Agency in the matter must be
Acknowledged. It is the sign and proof of Satan's power over the Soul, his
strong hold in it. If he can lull and rock us Asleep in Sin his possession is
s^^ure. If we doze away our Life he has the^ress trouble to watch us, the less
danger of losing us. It is a sure and easy way of keeping his hold, if he can
persuade us to be quiet, that there is no danger near us, that we are safe and
have nothing to fear. He takes away the good seed sown in the heart, quenches
Convictions, puts off serious Tho'ts, and endeavors to keep the Soul from any
concern or trouble about its Spiritual State and Interests. If he can keep thee
quiet thou art his own for ever, for we must bestir our selves, and resist him,
and fight for our Liberty and Lives if we would be delivered. Satan knows where
thy strength lies, and where his own hold of thee, and will find thee a
Delilahs lap to sleep and be shorn in. There is not a more manifest Temptation
of the Devil than this of security, which he beguiles unwary Souls into. So he
began, and so he holds on; (a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning) Genesis 3.4.
And the Serpent said unto the Woman, Ye shall not surely die.

2. Men are willing to be deceived. It is the Disease of the Carnal heart to
love ease, to indulge stoth, and to avoid the pain and uneasiness of
considering its own miseries and dangers Men naturally love quiet and hate to
be disturbed in their Evil Ways. The carnal Mind agrees with the Unclean
Spirit in his Outcry at the Sight of Christ, What have I to do with thee, thou
Holy One? I beseech thee torment me not. Every Man is unwilling (says Dr.
Barrow) to entertain a bad Conceit of himself, and to pass a sad Doom upon
himself. No Man likes to be galled, to be stung, to be racked with a sense of
Guilt, to be scared with a dread of Punishment, and the apprehension of
Imminent danger; Gladly therefore would he shun that Doctrine which
demonstrates him to be a grievous Sinner, which speaks dismal terror and
thunders ghastly woe against him. Seeing he cannot find a heart to mourn for and
part with his Sins he would fain be quiet in them. He flies from Convictions,
as from a Spectre that haunts and I terrifies him; Have thou found me O my
Enemy; and art thou come to torment me before my time! Now there is but this
one way to be easy in a sinful way, and that is Not to trouble ones self about
it, but to live on securely without thinking, Considering and laying things to
heart; or if troublesome tho'ts will arise to give them no Entertainment, but
get rid of them again as soon as they can, being painful and unwelcome things.

3. The Security and Peace of carnal Men comes very much from Example, and the
Evil Conversation of the Wicked. They see others easy and cheerful in sinful
ways, and why should not they as well. They learn of their Betters too
usually, their Superiors, their Parents it may be, and those that have more
Knowledge, more Age, and make more Profession than they do. They see their
Careless and Loose walk, and Unconcern about it, and are glad of the License
(as they take it) to themselves. More especially loose and evil Companions are
ready to tempt and solicit others into their own Jollity and Carelessness.
They think it strange if others are not as free and easy in Satan's Bondage and
Drudgery as themselves. They will laugh 'em out of a Serious look, or a
thos'tful air; and speak evil of them if they will not run into the same Excess
that they do. Isai. 56.12. Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine, and we will
fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundant.

4. Sometimes there is a Judicial Infatuation and Senslessness inflicted by
GOD, whereby he gives such up to a Spirit of Slumber; Eyes that they should not
see, and Ears that they should not hear unto this Day, Romans 11.8. This Calm of
a Sensual Heart is like that of the dead Sea, the Lake of Sodom, from the Curse
of God upon it: The less it is Agitated the more it Stagnates and gathers
filth. God gives Men over to a Reprobate Mind, to work all uncleaness with
greediness and with fearlessness. He gives them up to their own hearts lusts
and they walk in their own counsels. Si vult decipi decipiatur. The Plague of
Darkness falls upon the Soul, and there is not a worse Curse that God has to
inflict: Let their Eyes be darkened that they may not see, and bow down their
back always. Yea thou shall be as one that lies down in the midst of the sea,
or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast. i. e. as a Miserable Mad Man
insensible of danger.

5. And lastly, One Reason of the wretched Peace of S^nners is, Satan's
Confidence and Security of his Interest in them and Power over them, and their
object servility of Spirit and tame subjection to lust. This makes the devil
easy about them (if I may so speak) and keeps his house in Peace, for he sees
no great danger of losing the secure Sinner. He trusts in his Armor, his past
Conquests, and his long and quiet possession by the Sinners consent. The Sinner
(he sees) has no Spirit or Resentment left, so much as to struggle for his
freedom. Lust has taken away his heart, and he has no though it of Liberty. It is
not for Satan's Interest to disturb the Sinner in his quiet, free, and easy
subjection. By long Experience and many a Million sad Instances he has long
since learned that it ordinarily holds. Were there any danger of losing the
Soul the Devil would disrest him soon. So long as all is his own, and he sees
his Slave easy, all is well and let him be easy. But yet, in this his
Confidence Satan is sometimes taken; and the Strong Redeemer comes upon him
unexpected, and takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted and divides
his spoils.

To Conclude, There is a kind of Concord in Hell, and so between Satan and
Sinners here, so long as they agree in Sin. Satan will not cast out Satan. As
long as you will be quiet in Sin the Devil will willingly let you.

USE.
The Application and Improvement of the Doctrine may be in diverse USES.

I. Of Conviction to Secure and Quiet Sinners: See the exceeding Sinfulness and
the dreadful Danger of your wretched State. The Devil keeps you in this cursed
Peace. Let this Convince you, 1. Of the Wickedness, and 2. Of the Folly of your
Security.


1. It is exceeding wicked and sinful in you, and a prodigious Guilt, and
should so appear to you.

1. You don't believe Gods Word, and the Doctrines or Threatenings thereof
relating to a State of Sin. There is surely a secret Disbelief and Infidelity
which makes you say in your heart, There is no God, or I hope he is not that
Holy, Just and Dreadful God which the Scripture represents him. Under all your
profession of the Christian Belief you are certainly guilty of secret Atheism,
or you would not act so like an Infidel. So the Judge will at last surprise a
secure World, as he did the stupid Jews in their last Destruction, and not find
Faith in the Earth, Luke 18.8. Now is the Time and here is the Place for Faith,
even while we are here on Earth; and Sinners if they did believe would fear
those Threatenings of Gods Wrath, which else in a little time they shall be made
to feel.

2. You highly Contemn God if you do partly believe the Truths and Threatenings
of his Word. Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore do the Wicked contemn God -- Sinners cast
great Contempt upon the Holy God by their sinful Courses. They contemn his
Dominion, his Holiness, his Truth, his Power and Vengeance. " What an Impious
and Absurd thing is this? Jer. 5.22. Will ye not fear me, says the Lord? will
Je not tremble at my Word? No, they wont: and in Effect they dare to tell God
so. If you are but almost persuaded of the Being of God, and of the Revelations
which he has made of his Wrath against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of
Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, it were a horrible thing that you
should be able to be secure and quiet in sinful ways. Wherefore do you so
Contemn that glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD?

3. Consider the Aggravation of this thy Contempt of the Great GOD, under our
Light, and the Means of Conviction and Awakning which we Enjoy. We are not of
the Night nor of Darkness to excuse us: Not in the Night of Ignorance; nor
under the Darkness of mere Nature and of Heathenism: These Times and Places God
might wink at, but now he calls all Men every where to repent. This sound has
gone out to all the World, and reached these Ends of the Earth What Presumption
and Insolence must it be in us then to be secure and fearless in a State of Sin
and Wrath? Who know the Judgment of God that they that do such things are
worthy of Death? It is a heinous thing, however light we may now make of it, to
do violence to Reason, and Conscience rising against us within, and despire
unto the Spirit of God testifying against our Sins in his Word, and by that in
our Consciences. Heb. 10.26, 27. For if we sin wilfully after that we have
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins: But a certain looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, that shall
devour the adversaries. Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. This I say therefore and testify in
the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of
their mind; having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of
God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
Heart: Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness,
to work all Uncleaness with Greediness. But ye have not so learned CHRIST.

2. Be Convinced of the exceeding Folly and desperate Madness of your Security
and Peace under the Power and Guilt of Sin. Here we must apply our hearts, to
know the wickedness of folly, even of Foolishness and Madness: Madness is in
their hearts while they live and after that they go to the Dead. Men shift off
their fears as well as they can; compassing themselves with Sparks of their own
kindling; they walk in this poor Gleam of light for the Moment that it lasts,
and then ly down in Sorrow.

It is but a false show of Peace; a Shadow, a Dream, an Imagination of it. It
is interrupted with many a sting of guilt and fear. It does not at all put off,
nor skreen thee from the Evil Day: No more than it secures a Person from the
Lightning to shut his Eyes, or stop his Ears against the Thunder. Thou art
every Moment liable to the Blow of God, though thou will not consider it. It is a
fond and absurd kind of self love that makes thee promise thy self any safety.
Satan is highly gratified in his Successful Beguiling thee into it. And nothing
more shows his possession of thee, or strengthens it more than thy Security,
While Sin reigns in quiet, the Kingdom is strengthened in its hand. Lust has
its undisturbed sway, and however Imperious It is in its will, it is
Obsequiously obeyed. The Devil should not be allowed this easy Dominion. His
Cunning lies (as Monsieur Ludolf says) in keeping his Slaves from knowing
their own Inward State. They fancy all is well in the midst of Misery. The Soul
is one Spirit with the Devil and knows it not, though the sad Effects of that
dark Union are manifest. So then you are bewitched and enchanted by sensual
Lusts, or you would not be so quiet in your Sins. You have a Devil and art mad.
And whenever Conscience awakes, this Guilt wilt rend and tear thee. God may
give thee up to thy Security and to Satan for ever. If he do not the pains of
Repentance will be horrible unto thee. At last it will bite like a Serpent and
sting like an Adder. Prove. 1.27. When your Fear comes as Desolation and your
Destruction as a Whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. False
Peace vanishes usually at Death, Everlasting Torments begin. The foolish
Virgins sleep on, and at Midnight there is a Cry made, Mat. 25.6. Midnight is
the time of Security, when deep sleep falls upon one. To be waked with an
Outcry then is frightful indeed, and sets all the joints a trembling. O the
Consternation when Death Surprises Sinners in their Security! The sting of
death is si^^. Sin throws away its ^lask and Vizour when Death advances. It
^^ares him in the face whom it soothed before. The hope of the Hypoorite is
given up with the Ghost. The Spiders Web is swept away with the Besome of
Destruction.

This is the first Use, To convince Sinners of the Evil and Danger of their
Security.

II. The next USE may be of Comfort to them that are under Spiritual Trouble,
and Distressed on the Account of their Souls: who are Mourning, fearing and
trembling on the account of their Sins. Peace be to you from Christ the
Savior: Let not your Hearts be troubled, neither be afraid. This Sorrow which
has filled your hearts is a thousand times better than to be at quiet in
sinful ways. The Fear and Distress which thy Convictions ^ive thee are
Necessary unto and ^^^xcretratory for that Divine Peace which ^^^es all
Understanding and which abides for ever. When the Comforter comes he does thus
Convince of Sin. Godly sorrow works Repentance unto Salvation never to be
repented of. Now^d rejoice, not that you are made sorry, but that you sorrow to
Repentance.

The Devil hates to see thee under this Concern. And now he will difrest and
trouble thee as much as he can. But be of good cheer, this is the way of thy
Deliverance and his Ejection. No wonder if he tear and rend thee when he is
forced out after a long and too quiet a possession. But Christ is then near
thee to take thee up and heal thee.

While you lay in: your Stupidity and Security in Sin, Hell triumphed over thee
with Insult and cruel pleasure: but now in thy Repentance there is Joy in
Heaven among the Angels of God. Hell rages at what God is doing for thy poor
Soul. Satan will now desire to terrify thee. But the High and Lofty One Looks
to him that is of a poor and contrite Spirit and that trembles at his Word.
The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet and do it shortly. Christ
has Purchased Peace for, and Spoken it unto the Penitent. Let his Peace Keep
thy Soul. Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you my Peace I give unto you; not as
the (...) give I unto you: Let not your (...) ^^^ed, neither be afraid. If He
gives (...), who can give trouble? A holy Serenity and Security of Mind
becomes Believers in Christ. Isai. 32.17. The work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. Psalm.
4.8. I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou Lord only make me
to dwell in safety.

III. Let the Last USE therefore be, To direct our feet in the way of Peace.
See the Peace which you should be seeking after. It lies in a Deliverance from
Satan's Thraldom, in Penitential Mourning for Sin, in Gods Speaking Pardon to us
through Christ, in the Fruits and Evidences of our Regeneration, the Spirit of
Christ in us, and his Witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Children of
God.

Christ in our Peace. We must direct Sinners unto Him. You must have your
Hearts sprinkled from an Evil Conscience. The Blood of Christ is this blood of
Sprinkling. The Soul is purified, and the Conscience pacified, by Faith therein.

Wherefore Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead and Christ shall
give thee Life. Ly no longer still in thy Sins, but ly at Jesus feet washing
them with thy tears and wiping them with the hair of thy head. Weep and Love
much, for much is to be forgiven thee. He who has satisfied Gods Justice, can
satisfy thy Conscience, and He only can do it. His Blood quenches Guilt, and
Guilt it is that sets Conscience on fire.

We may not dare to heal the hurt of your Souls slightly, saying peace, peace,
when there is no Peace. You must Repent and Believe in Christ, or you will die
in your Sins. You must see your perishing and lost Estate and need of a
Savior. You must go to him for deliverance from the Dominion of Sin, as well
as from the Curse due to it. You must be Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ,
and Justified by his Righteousness. You must be taught, and ruled and saved by
him.

Then all the Malice and Powers of Hell shall not be able to over thr^w thy
Peace. It is built upon a Rock. Thy Faith in thy Savior shall quench all the
fiery darts which the Enemy of thy Soul can throw at thee.

But let not the Believer in Christ be secure neither. Thou stand by faith,
be not high minded but fear. The Wise Virgins are too apt to Slumber, but their
Fnemy is wakeful. Though Christ has prayed for them that their faith may not
fail, yet if they do not watch and pray they may sadly fall and wound
themselves and make work for bitter Repentance. If you have Peace take care to
keep it. Do not sleep as do others, but watch and be sober.

We have need to be thus Exhorting one another daily while it is called to day,
lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. See that your hopes be well
grounded, and that you are able to give a Reason of them with meekness and
fear: That they be such as purify thy heart and quicken thee in Godly living.
There is but one way of Peace to a Sinner, and that is to yield unto Christ the
Savior, upon the Terms of the Gospel.

Christ is now Storming the Sinners heart, he breaks the Truce and League with
Sin and Death. He gives it terrible Alarms of Judgment and of Hell, Mr-Baxter.
he batters it with the Ordnance of his Threatenings and Terrors; he sets all in
a Combustion of fear and sorrow, till he force it to yield to his mere mercy.
Now, will thou yield and submit to Him? To the Conditions of Peace which he
offers? He will then be at Peace with thee: thy Peace may be made with God
immediately through Him, upon the Surrender of thy self to him. Do this then: Lay
down the Arms of thy Rebellion, throw thy self at his feet, take Him for thy
LORD, submit to his Rule and Government. This is the only Basis of true and
solid Everlasting Peace: Isai. 27.5. Let him take hold of my strength, that he
may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.

I will Conclude with some very Pathetical Words of the Excellent Mr. Baxter in
his Saints Everlasting Rest: "I should wonder, but that I know the desperate
hardness of the heart of Man, how a Man that is not sure of his Peace with God,
can eat, or drink, or sleep, or live in any Quiet. Well, if thou were the
nearest Friend that I have in the World, I could wish thee no Greater Good,
than that God would break in upon thy careless heart, and shake thee out of thy
false Peace, and cast thee into trouble, -- and make thee ever read thy
Sentence as if it were still written before thy Eyes; and which way so ever
thou go still meet thee full in the face with the sense of his Wrath, as the
Angel did Baalam with a drawn sword; till he make thee cast away thy groundless
Peace, and ly down at his foot, saying, Lord what will thou have me to do!

SERMON, IV.
THREE Doctrinal Truths have been already Spoken to: I. That the Soul of Man is
a Noble Palace which the Great GOD built for Himself. II. That it is by Sin
become as a Garrison or Strong Hold which Satan keeps against GOD. III. That
there is a wretched Peace and cursed Quiet which the Carnal Heart lies in under
Satan's Tyranny. The strong Man armed keeps his Palace and his Goods are in
peace.


I proceed now unto the Fourth Doctrine.

IV. That the Victorious SAVIOR rescues whom He pleases, and will rescue all
his Chosen from Satan's Power and Tyranny.
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, He takes
from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divides his Spoils.

According to the Phrases in the Text, I will speak to it in these Three
Propositions. 1. That there is a stronger than the strong Man armed. 2. That he
will come upon him and Overcome him. 3. That CHRIST's Victory over Satan, in
rescuing poor Souls from him, is the Most Perfect and Glorious, Complete and
Entire that can be He takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted and
divides his spoils.

I. There is a stronger than Satan, the strong Man Armed. This is a small
Observation to make to them that believe in GOD THE FATHER Almighty, in the SON
and in the HOLY GHOST. For who in the Heavens can be compared to the LORD? Who
among the Sons of the Mighty can be likened unto our GOD! If we speak of
strength, lo HE is strong. Our Father in Heaven is Greater than all, and none
can sna^ch us out of his Hand. Satan in his first and best state was but an
Angel, Created by the power of God, and infinitely beneath that Power that made
him and now judges him. Like the Angels of God he first excelled in strength,
but fallen he is became weak as we. A crawling Worm and Serpent, which it is
beneath the power of God to trample on! Wherefore He treads him under our feet.
Hell is Gods Dominion: He reigns over it, as the Prison belongs to the King.
There the Devil is in Chains under darkness. limited and restrained and
reserved to the Day of Judgment. He cannot stir without leave, no not to enter
into a Swine.

The Lord JESUS is stronger than Satan; and to say so is scarce to speak with
reverence eno' of the Son of God. Else he were no Savior to us. Sampson was
the Type of Him in his Great strength. He slew the Lion with his naked hand,
and out of the Eater came forth Meat, and out of the Strong sweetness. He slew
the Enemies of God and his Israel heaps upon heaps, with his single arm, and
without a Weapon. He tore up the City Gates and bore away the Posts and Bars,
when they though it they had him sure. Yea he pulled down the Hol Temple, bowed the
strong Pillars of the Mighty Stucture, and buried Dagon and his Worshippers in
the vast Ruins together.

David was yet a more August Type of the Power of Christ, who without Sampsons
miraculous strength, yea with the weak arm of a Stripling slew the Lion and the
Bear, and the fiercer Philistine, and delivered the Israel of God. The Son of
David is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Salvation and Strength came together.

Our LORD appeared stronger than all the Hosts of Hell in Arms and Battle Array
in the day of his Temptation, when they assaulted him, were repulsed and fled.
He did moreover often cast out Satan; with Authority he commanded the Unclean
Spirits and they obeyed him. They lay trembling before him, confessing,
beseeching him, deprecating and as well as they could Adoring him. He again
suffered them not to speak, and they raged and tore and shreik'd out. In his
last Agonies, that hour of the power of darkness, they renewed their Assaults
only to their own Confusion.

The HOLY GHOST, the Infinite and Eternal Spirit of God is Greater and Stronger
than Satan and all his Legions. It were a Blasphemy against Him never to be
forgiven to say the contrary. If I by the Finger of God, i.e. His Spirit, cast
out Devils --, said our Savior. He the Holy GHOST endued the Apostles with
power from on High, to tread on Scorpions and all the Power of the Enemy; the
Dragon and the Lion to trample under foot. Satan had his lying Wonders, like
the Magicians of Egypt, but how inf^riour to the Finger of God! How devoured by
the Rod of Moses! The inspired Word is the Eternal Spirits Sword to pierce and
push back the fallen Legions into their Pit, and he destroys them with the
Breath of his Mouth.

But to descend lower yet, and take an infinite step for the Greater Debasement
of Hell: The Holy Angels of God are now stronger than Satan. They excel in
strength, harkening to the Voice of God. In this their Great strength lies,
even in their Integrity and Obedience to God, having preserved their Original
Purity and Holiness; while Satan is shorn and his strength departed from him.
Wherefore in the last day Michael and his Angels will easily bind and bring the
fallen Hosts to the Bar, and hale 'em from thence to the bottomless Pit and
cast them in, to come forth no more: See an Image of the Superior strength of
a standing Angel over those that are fallen: Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. And I saw an
Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and a great
Chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent which is
the Devil and Satan, and bound him, -- and cast him in, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him.

But this Vision may as well, or rather, be interpreted of CHRIST, by his
Ministers on Earth, as by the Ministering Spirits of Heaven. Wherefore to come
down from Heaven to Earth, -- Through the Spirit and Grace of Christ even WE are
stronger than Satan. Even we Worms of the dust. The very Devils are Subject to
the Grace of Christ in us, the Spirit of God in the Regenerate. He bruises
Satan under our feet. He makes us more than Conquerors. 1 John 2.14. I have
written unto you Young Men because you are strong, and the Word of God abides
in you, and you have overcome the Wicked One. In our selves we are wretchedly
Weak, and crushed before the Moth. Yet we wrestle against Principalities and
Powers and Spiritual Wickednesses, and they fall before us. We are strong in
the Lord and in the power of his Might. He puts on us the whole Armor of God.
Our Faith quenches the fiery darts of the wicked one. In Prayer we cry to God
and our Enemies turn back. The kind goes out at the glorious Name which we
Invoke and plead. And his Word in our Mouth is a Power and Spirit which be
cannot resist, or stand before. Thus there is a stronger than the strong Man
Armed: which was the first Proposition.

II. He will come upon him and overcome him. Which speaks, 1. The Certainty of
the REDEEMERS Encountering the Enemy of Souls. He will come upon him. 2. The
Suddenness and Sarprize where with he usually comes upon the Enemy in his
Security and Peace. 3. The certain Issue of the Combat, he shall overcome.


1. The Certainty of the Redeemers Encountering the Enemy of Souls is here
supposed. He shall come upon him. And this is very sure as to the whole
Election of Grace, and as to all that is necessary to be done for the
delivering them all and every one of them from the power of Sin and Satan, and
the translating them into the Kingdom of his Grace in this Life, and of Glory
hereafter. This in his time and way, sooner or later, He shall show who is the
Blessed and Only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

It is true that the most by far of the miserable Children of Adam are left at
last under the possession, and in Captivity unto Satan, who is the Prince of
this World; but the Election shall obtain Deliverance, even all Those whom the
Father has given unto Christ out of the World: For GOD has given him power
over all flesh, to give Eternal life unto as many as he has given him. These
chosen Vessels of Mercy are fore-known and predestined in the Eternal
Counsels and Purposes of Grace, and so are the Ways and Means of their
Effectual Vocation and Perseverance; and not one of them is lost.

It was promised from the beginning that there should be a Glorious Seed of the
Woman, that should break the Serpents head, and that He should see his Seed.
Long was he looked for by them that were waiting for Redemption in Israel, and
known in the Church by that Name and Style, OF (...), He that should come. In
the Fullness of time He came, being manifested to destroy the works of the
Devil. And as to all the future times and seasons which he has spoken of, the
Great Periods for the Advancing his Kingdom on the Ruin of Satan's, He that
shall come will come and will not tarry.

2. He comes with suddenness and surprise upon the Enemy, in their security and
peace. So it is commonly in the Conversion of Souls, and so as to the Great
Events foretold respecting the Downfall of the Kingdom of Satan, and the
Triumphs of the Church therein. The Sovereign and Irresistible Grace of God
rescues Souls in the Day of his power, when very often there is the least
Appearance and Probability of the thing, either to the Persons themselves, or
to Others. When Satan least fears he is Ejected, and when the Soul sometimes
least expects it is delivered. The Power of GOD arrests some, like the Light
from Heaven which struck down Saul in his evil way; and the free Grace of GOD
unexpectedly meets others. as it did the Eunuch on the Road. So Unexpected was
the Blow to the Kingdom of Darkness, when the Thousands were pricked to the
Heart in an Instant: A surprise as astonishing to the Infernal Powers as it was
unto the Men themselves.

But it may be it is much more so in all the Great Events of Providence, wherein
the Greatest Blows are given to the Interests of Hell, in the Changes and
Revolu^ions that happen among the Kingdoms of Men. It is not for us to know the
Times and Seasons which the Father reserves in his own Power: Nor may we too
Curiously ask, Lord will thou at this Time restore the Kingdom to Israel? The
Kingdom of GOD comes not with Observation. Wherefore least of all do the Great
Expectanda come to pass at the Time and in the Way which Men are most Confident
about; and when they are saying -- Lo here, and lo there.

When the World by Wisdom knew not God it pleased God by the Foolishness of
Preaching to Convert the World: As much it may be to the Confusion of Hell, as
to the frustration of the wise Expectations of the Jewish Doctors: for the One
no more seemed Aware of the humble Means of that Great Event than the other:
But Satan like lightning fell from Heaven, struck with the flash before he was
aware, and down to the Abyss in a Moment. How strange and Inexplicable to them
was it, to hear our Savior say, Joh. 12.31. Now is the Judgment of this World,
now shall the Prince of this World be cast out. Indeed the Great Events of the
Kindom of Christ in their Accomplishments are high and dreadful, bright and
surprising, as the Lightning that passes from one part of the Heaven to the
other; Conspicuous to all, sudden and Irresistible.

3. When Christ comes upon the Enemy he Overcomes him. Victory over Satan is
the certain Issue. He has come and he Overcame. He is yet daily Conquering. And
He will yet further overcome, and make his Victories complete in an Everlasting
Triumph.

1. In the days of his flesh our Lord came and overcame the Enemy. In his
Temptation he conquered; and so in his whole Obedience and consummate
Righteousness, in all his Sorrows and Sufferings, and in his Death, wherein he
made his Soul an Offering. He finished Transgression, and made an End of Sin,
and bro't in an Everlasting Righteousness, and made Reconciliation for
Iniquity. He condemned Sin in the flesh, he destroyed him that had the power of
Death, i. e. the Devil. He forgave Sins, he cast out Devils, he called whom he
would and they came unto him. He poured out his Soul unto Death, and divided
the Spoil with the strong. On his Crossed he triumphed, and having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly in his Resurrection
and Ascension. His rising again was the death of Death, and the utter breaking
of Satan's Head. He then Abolished death, which was the Curse. Then was bro't to
pass the saying, O Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy
Destruction. When he ascended on high he led Captivity captive. He passed
triumphantly through Satan's Territories, the Prince of the powers of the Air,
whose Hosts were in effect led in chains before his Chariot Wheels. Thus our
Savior conquered when he came.

2. Ever since his Ascension he has been carrying on his Victories, and
spreading his Conquest far and near. And this 1. In the setting up his Visible
Kingdom, which shall finally prevail. 2. His Internal and Invisible Kingdom in
the Souls of Men.


1. The Victorious Savior has set up his Visible Kingdom in the World on the
Ruins of Satan, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against his Church.
This began gloriously in the Day when the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles,
endowed them with Power from an High, confirming the Word with Signs and
Miracles, and accompanying it with his mighty Workings on the Souls of Men;
whereby the Conversion of so great a part of the World to Christianity was most
wonderfully Effected. The Idolatries of the World, and the Wickedness and
Ignorance wherein it lay, were Satan's possession of it and Empire in it. In
this respect he appeared the God of this World, and might have some pretense to
say of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, -- all these are
Mine. For the things which the Gentiles Sacrificed, they ignorantly Sacrificed
to devils and not to GOD. And Agreably the Services which he imposed on them
were like his own cursed Nature, barbarous and cruel, unclean and filthy. But
Idolatry was soon exposed to Contempt at the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ,
which came every where in power and in the Holy Ghost; and Men turned to GOD
from Idols, to serve the Living and True GOD and to wait for his Son from
Heaven whom He raised from the dead, even Jesus which delivers us from the
Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.9, 10.

From about the Time of our Saviors Birth and onwards the Devils Oracles were
shuck dumb, his Responses ceased, his power of Deceiving the Nations was
restrained; "as the "rising Sun chases away the Birds of Night. In the Place of
these was the Spiritual and Pure Worship of the true GOD restored and set up,
the Holy Doctrines and Laws of the Gospel published through many Nations,
Converts Multiplied, and in a while the Empire became Christian.

The Kingdom of our Lord first flourished in Asia and in Greece, and suffered
less there by many Oppositions and Persecutions, than it soon did in Europe
afterward by the Romish Apostasy. By that it was a long time horribly Obscured,
and the Name of Jesus was rather blasphemed than worshipped for many Centuries
of Darkness and Idolatry together; all which time the Devil seemed as it were
to have got back the Kingdom of Christ into his own Hands. At last came the Day
of the Revival and Restoration of the Visible Kingdom of Christ, in the Happy
and Glorious Reformation, which began in the days of Lather, and prevailed
wondrously in Spite of the rage of Rome and of the Imperial Power: since which
day although a Sea of the Blood of the Martyrs has been shed, yet the Reformed
Religion lives, and we believe shall finally triumph in the Downfall of
Antichrist.

For we koow that GOD has promised and foretold, and we according to his
promise look for, a more glorious State of the Church, than has been yet seen;
in respect both of Extent and Enlargment, and of Knowledge, Holiness and Love.
We believe that such a Dominion and Glory is to be given to Christ, that all
People, Nations and Languages shall serve him. We believe that the Kingdom of
Christ is that Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, which shall it
self become a Great Mountain and fill the whole Earth, and break in pieces and
consume all other Kingdoms. We look for the Coming in of the Fullness of the
Gentiles, the Conversion of the Jews, and the Destruction of the Man of Sin;
whose Coming has been after the Working of Satan, with all Power, Signs and
Lying Wonders; that Wicked One whom the Lord shall consume by the breath of his
Mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his Coming. The Earth will be
lightened with the Glory of that day, when the mighty Voice shall be heard,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen.

In a word, we look for a New Heaven and a New Earth, and a Reign of Holiness,
such as has never yet been; some most happy and flourishing State of the
Church, for Purity of Ordinances, for Increase of Light and Knowledge, for the
Power of Godliness, for the Multitudes of Converts, for the open and public
Profession of the Truth, and for outward Peace and Tranquillity. Then shall the
Church have a long and singular Freedom from the power of Satan and his
Instruments. This is the first Resurrection: i. e. The Churches Revival from
its present State of Weakness, Sinfulness and Sorrow, unto a State of Power,
Purity and Joy: And blessed and holy is He that has part therein; whose lot it
is to live in this happy time; when the Means of Holiness and the Measures of
Holiness shall be more abundant. Satan shall be bound for that happy season,
and after it he must be loosed for a little time.

To conclude, In every Period of the Advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus, from the first Days of Christianity to the Consummation of it, is
carried on Michaels War and Victories over the Dragon and his Angels; and the
Casting down that old Serpent called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the
whole World; and at every Period and great Event we may hear that loud Voice in
Heaven, saying, Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God
and the Power of his Christ! -- and they over came him by the Blood of the
Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony. Thus our Lord has come upon the Enemy
and overcame him. and shall yet further do so, in setting up his Visible
Kingdom upon the Ruin of Satan.

2. He more especially comes upon the Enemy and overcomes him in his Internal
and Invisible Kingdom in the Souls of Men. This Eminently is his Kingdom and
Reign among Men, for the sake of which the Administration of Providence is put
into his hands, and he has a Church in the World.

When therefore the Pharisees demanded of him, When the Kingdom of God should
come, Luke. 17.20. He answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not
with Observation: Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for THE KINGDOM
OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU. That is to say, The Kingdom of God is in its true Glory
and Efficacy an Inward and Spiritual thing, in the Heart, the Soul, the
Conscience of Man; There look for the Messiabs Kingdom, even within your
Selves. There is his Throne, in the Hearts of a free and willing and holy
People, who are by his Divine Power bro't to believe in and obey him. The Seat
of his Government and the Glories of it are to be sought within us. His Empire
is over Souls, and like them Invisible, by the Secret Operations of his Spirit
on the Mind and Conscience.

Thus there is a Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, set up in the hearts, his
Government in the Souls of Believers; in the Soul that is Sanctified, that
believes and obeys the Gospel. This Kingdom of Christ consists in the
Conversion of Souls from Sin unto God, and the carrying on the Work of his
Grace in them unto Salvation. It is the whole work of Sanctification, wro't and
carried on in the Souls of the Elect, by the Preaching of the Gospel. Hence we
read of the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; and of the Word of the
Kingdom, the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Good Seed and the Children of the
Kingdom. Mark 1.14. Math. 4.23.6.3.13.38.


Two Things might be very pertinent to observe here,

1. That there is no Empire or Rule in Nature like that which is over the Soul
and Spirit. God governs the World, we say; and very truly. All his Works are
ordered, directed and managed by Him. The Sun, Moon and Stars obey Him (we say)
in all their Motions. His Will is their Rule and Law which guides and limits
them. But all this is not properly Government, nor strictly Obedience in them.
The Creature knows not the Will of its Maker, nor is sensible of its own Being
and Motion, Use and Service. Government is of the Superior, Reasonable and
Intelligent Creatures, Angels and Men These are capable of Law and of a free
Subjection, and a willing Service. These have a Law written in their Nature.
Over them therefore God reigns. These are His Subjects and the People of his
Kingdom, being his Noblest Creation and Workmanship. He makes his Angels
Spirits, the Ministers of His Kingdom both of Providence and Grace; they excel
in Strength, Knowledge and Holiness. He made Man like them a Living Soul; in
His own Image, who is a Spirit and the Father of Spirits; and all Souls are
His, and we are His OFFSPRING.

Now here is the Perfection of Rule, of Knowledge and Power; to know the Tho'ts
of the heart, and search it, and turn and change it as it pleases GOD. Others
can reach the Body, order and inspect our outward Behavior, and punish the
Overt Transgression; but the Mind is free and not to be bro't under the Power
of any. Humane Laws can prescribe only to the outward Life and Actions, and
take Cognizance only of Men's Manners: But it is the Glory of God, his Laws, and
his Government that he looks to the Heart within, requires the Love and Service
of that, and will accept nothing less; but the Though It of Wickedness is Sin
before him and he judges therefore. Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the Heart, I
try the Reins. --.

Conscience within us is His Vicegerent. He has created it, endowed and
empowered it, and to Him it is Accountable. He has given it Knowledge, and he
Commissions it, and to Him it renders in its Register and Testimony. For the
Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
Belly, Prove. 20.27. This is GODS Government, whereby he rules over the Highest
and the least. The Hearts of Kings are in his Hand and he turns them, and cuts
off the Spirits of Princes. In this He appears to be the Blessed and Only
Potentate; the King Immortal, Invisible and only Wise; from whose Spirit and
Presence there is no hiding, no flying. Such Knowledge is too wonderful for
Man; it is High and he cannot attain unto it.

In a word, This Empire over Souls and Spirits takes in the Dominion of the
vast Hades, the unseen World; the Key whereof is put into the Redeemers Hand:
In Comparison whereof the Millions of Souls on our little Globe are but a small
Number, and as a single Family. How many Millions of Immortal spritis pass out
of this World of ours, in every Age of it, into this Hades? Besides the Myriads
of Angels and Legions of Devils there before! What a Kingdom of God is here
without limits, or any Number of its Hosts! this Empire over Souls or Spirits!

To these GOD has subjected the rest of his Glorious Creation, made them for
Dominion, and put all things under their feet; reserving them to be his Own
Dominion and Servants, because the Superior Orders of Being.

This is the first Note which I commended to your serious Attention, That there
is no Empire or Rule in Nature like that which is over the Soul and Spirit. The
next Observation I would make is,

II. That there is no Rule or Empire over Souls here on Earth like that which
God displays in the Work of Sanctification, or his saving work of Grace wro't
and carried on in our Souls by His Holy Spirit. There are other wonderful
Proofs and Instances of GODS Governing the Spirits of Men in the common Rule of
His Providence: there being indeed no such thing at all as a Providence over
Humane Affairs, without a particular Knowledge of and Power over Men's Spirits;
directing and overruling them as the Alwise Governor of Heaven and Earth sees
meet and necessary; Inclining or restraining them, and changing their Purposes
and Counsels, according to his own Will and unto his own Glory. There is a
powerful insensible Operation of Providence on the Spirits of Men, which puts
no force on their Freedom, Liberty and Choice, but yet governs their Will to
its own Purpose and Council. But now the Work of Grace, Conversion and
Regeneration, and the progress of our Sanctification is a more manifest and
Eminent Empire of GOD over our Spirits than all this.

1. It is Gods Glorious Efficiency. The Excellency of the Power is of GOD and
not of Man. The Word is the Power of GOD unto Salvation. The Day of a Souls
Conversion is the Day of GODS Power 1 Cor. 1.18. 4.20. Psalm. 110.3. 2 Cor. 4.7.
Ephesians. 1.19.
For who but GOD can change the Soul? give a new heart? renew the Mind and
Spirit? form and make a New Creature? For there is a new Mind given, a new
Will, new Affections, new Purposes and Resolutions, new Strength and Power, and
so a newness of Life produced. This is Dominion, Rule and Government over our
Spirits with a witness: An Absolute Power exerted upon them, whereby they are
reformed and restored, according to the Will, and into the Image of God, who
works all in all. This is the Exceeding Greatness of His Power to Usward who
believe, according to the Working of his Mighty Power.

2. It is all Efyected and Carried on in a way of Rule and Government: by a
Divine Regency which is most Free and Gracious. An Act of true Dominion,
bringing the Reasonable Creature in a Way agreeable to its rational Nature,
Liberty and Faculties, into a chosen Subjection to God. To set this in a true
light we need only consider the Means which the Holy Ghost uses, and the Method
which he takes with us in this glorious Work: And this is such as is most
proper to the Government of a Soul. That is to say, He works on the Soul by
that Inspired Word and revealed Law which He has given for our Government, to
regulate us and to be Obeyed by us. His Word is the Rule of Holiness and of our
Duty. It prescribes both to the Outward Life, and to the Inward Tho'ts,
Affections and Desires. It is a Law to our Consciences, and it is quick and
powerful as a Sword to pierce into the Inmost Soul; a Discerner of the Tho'ts
and intents of the Hearts, and a judge of them. This Divine Word is the
Ordinary Means which the Spirit of GOD uses in Convincing and Converting
Sinners; and to that End the Ministry and Preaching of it is Ordained, and by
the Blessing of GOD with it is made Instrumental and Efficacious. Now this is
Agreeable to our Nature and the proper Government of Reasonable Creatures. For
God made Man to be ruled by a Law and Precept. He wrote his Law in Man's heart
at first, and some Remains of it abide in his Apostasy. He gov^rn'd Man in his
Integrity by a Law and Commandment, requiring a perfect Obedience of him; by a
Promise and a Threatening, by Hopes and Fears. And so he does yet by the Written
Law, Precepts and Prohibitions, Promises and Threats. He uses the proper Means,
Humane and Rational, to Inform Enlighten and Convince the Judgment, to persuade
and overcome the Will, to move the Affections, Desire and Loathing, Love and
Hatred, Hope and Fear, Grief and Joy; and by all to Alarm the Conscience,
Encourage and Deter us, as His Glory and our Happiness do direct. In this way
Sovereign Grace gets the Dominion again in the Soul of Man, and in this way it
maintains it: Which is the Way of a Rational Dominion, the Governing by Law
free and Intelligent Beings. The Divine Government in our Souls is upheld by
the Law of the Kingdom. Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God.
Of His own Will be begets us by the Word of Truth. The Commandment comes and
the Sinner dies Romans 10.17. James 1.18. Romans 7.8, 9.
So he is bro't to the foot of Christ, to kneel to the Scepter of his Grace.

Thus the Holy Ghost accompanies this Word of the Kingdom with an Invisible and
Irresistible Blessing, whereby he subdues the Enmity of the Heart against the
Divine Law, and brings it to submit freely thereunto.

3. Herein is the Kingdom of Satan in the Soul overthrown, and the Opposite
glorious Reign of Holiness set up in its stead. Satan is dispossessed and Souls
recovered from Sin unto God. The Dominion of Sin is broken, and the Scepter of
Christ bowed to, the Laws of Holiness obeyed. So that here is a proper Conquest
and Reduction of the Soul from the Tyranny of Satan, and from Slavery to him
into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God. He that was sometimes
alienated and an Enemy in his mind by wicked Works, now is Reconciled, Col.
1.21. Many Enemies are conquered in the Souls Conversion, and all of them are
fought with daily and resisted in the progress of our Sanctification, and in
the Saints Perseverance. Flesh, World and Devil are the Mortal Enemies of this
blessed Work; for they well know that it tends to their Mortification and
Destruction, and consists therein These are stubborn, fierce and irreconcilable
Foes, subtle and strong, fighting for their life and for the Dominion which
they have usurped over us. All the Powers of Hell are in Arms against every
Souls Salvation, and every Soul has a treacherous corrupt Nature siding with
the Powers of Darkness. It is now the Glory of GODS Grace to conquer these
Powers, break their cruel and unjust Dominion, set up a Contrary Law and Rule
in the heart, and bring the Soul to a willing Obedience unto the Holy Law which
it once hated and violated, and unto a mortal hatred of that Tyranny and Cursed
Way of Sin, from which the Grace of GOD has delivered it. Thus the World is
overcome, and this is the Victory even our Faith: The Flesh is Crucified with
its Affections and Lusts, and Satan is resisted steadfastly and bruised under
our feet. The Soul is turned from Darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God: It is delivered from the Power of Darkness, and translated into
the Kingdom of his dear Son Col. 1.13.

4. And lastly, This delivery of Souls begun in this Life in the Work of
Sanctification, from the Power of Satan, ends in their final Salvation and
eternal Glorification in Heaven. At Death these Redeemed Souls are carried by
Angels, in safety and in triumph, through Satan's Territories into the Paradise of
God. The Devils see them pass along thus guarded, to the Presence of Christ, to
see his Glory, and to be glorified by him. They dare not come nigh 'em, to
offend 'em, in this their Glorious Passage. They at a distance see it with Envy
and Rage, and gnash and melt away. And whither they go Satan can never come:
They go to those Realms and Seats of Glory which he ( Accursed Spirit) left and
fell from, and can return to no more. The Crowns of Glory which fell from the
Heads of these Apostate Spirits, the Redeemed Saints of Christ ascend to wear;
and they reign in those Thrones, from which these were cast down to Hell. When
Christ ascended on high He led Captivity Captive, and when Believers ascend
after him they see the Captive Spirits in Chains all the Way they pass, Unable
to offend them, Afraid to behold them. They fade away and are afraid out of
their close places.

But then in the Resurrection of the Dead the Dominion of Sin and Satan will be
more sensibly and fully broken. Then Death, the last Enemy will be destroyed,
abolished, and Mortality it self swallowed up of Life, swallowed up in Victory.

And yet in more formal manner will the Redeemers Conquest of Satan appear in
the Judgment Day; both in the Condemnation of Satan Himself, and of all those
that have s^^v'd and obeyed him; and in the public Justification of Believers
in Christ.

For then Satan himself, the Devil and his Angels shall be bro't forth in
Chains before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and shall be condemned by him to
Eternal Torments: To that Everlasting Fire prepared for them. They believe this
Day and tremble, they once shreik'd out before the Son of God on Earth and
said, -- Art thou come to torment us before our time? But in the last and great
Day the Time of their Torment will be fully come, and the Man Christ Jesus (in
the Glory of the Father, with all his Holy Angels) will be their Judge; Yea His
Saints shall sit by him and judge Angels: 1 Cor. 6.3. And they shall be cast
into the Bottomless pit, into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to be tormented
Day and Night, for Ever and Ever, Rev. 20 10.

That is to say too, All those that have here Impenitently hearkened unto
Satan's Temptations and Delusions, and done his Lusts, shall be Adjudged and
Condemned with him to one and the same Place of Torments: Mat. 25.41.

But at the same time these Damned Spirits shall behold with Envy and Horror
Millions of the Children of Adam, Redeemed from the the Earth, washed white in
the Blood of Christ, openly Justified in their sight, and declared Heirs of
Eternal Glories in Heaven. Satan shall behold this blessed Election of free
Grace T^^^phing in that glorious Day; He the Object of their Contempt, Disdain
and Abhorrence, They of his Envy and Rage: He shall consider them as Saved from
Sin and Hell, from his Malice and Hatred, by the Power and Grace of Christ, to
the Everlasting Enjoyment Adoration and Service of God, to Infinite and
Unspeakable Blessedness in His Love and ^^^our for ever and ever: He Will see it
with Amazement and Anguish, Confusion and Shame, and down he will Sink
Blaspheming, with all the Sinful Ghosts a-round him, in Everlasting Despair.

And thus I have Meditated the Redeemers Conquest of Satan in the Rescue of
Souls from him by the Power of his Grace. And this would have led me to a more
particular Consideration of the latter Phrases in the Text, and the last
Proposition thence resulting; He takes from him all his Armor wherein he
trusted and divides his Spoils: It is a Victory the most Complete and Entire,
Perfect and Glorious that can be.

But I must proceed no further at this time.

SERMON, V.
LUKE XI. 22. -- He takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted and
divides his Spoils.


THESE Phrases seem designed only to represent the Compleatness and Entireness
of the SAVIORS Victory over Satan in our Redemption and Salvation. For the
taking of the Enemy's Armor, and the Dividing the Spoil are the Fruits of
Conquest and the Evidence of Victory; and serve unto the Generals Triumph and
his Soldiers Reward. The Enemy must not only be beat and routed before the
Spoil can be taken; but they must also be taken Captive or ^lain before their
Armor can be taken.

The Spoils are the Conquerors Recompense, and ^he Dividing them is the
Generals Honor and Prerogative; and the Enemies Armor is the noble Spoil that
adorns the Conquerors Triumph. This has ever been and yet is the Usage of War,
unto which these Phrases refer and by which they must be Interpreted.

Of old therefore Victory was sung of under this Phrase, -- I will pursue, I
will overtake, I will divide the Spoil. So the Mother of Sisera spoke of his
desired Return from the War, and her wise Ladies answered her in that part of
the Martial Style which they best understood and relished, -- Have they not
sped? have they not divided the prey --? A prey of diverse colors of
Needle Work, meet for the Necks of them that take the Spoil.

And thus the Victory and Triumph of the Messiah was greatly spoken of in
Ancient Prophesies: I will divide him a Portion with the Great, and He shall
divide the spoil with the Strong; (or of the Strong, as some read it). Isai.
53. ult. And thus our Saviors Death was spoken of by the Apostle, Col. 2.15.
And having spoiled Principalities, and Powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it.

Give me leave then for the Amplif^^^ie. on our Saviors Victory over the
Enemies of our Souls, to stay a little on these Martial Phrases, which Methinks
I should not be just to my Text, if I should wholly pass by. And first I will
consider a little the Armor here spoken of, wherein Satan is said to trust, or
put Confidence, and which Christ takes away from him. Secondly, The Spoils
which our Victorious Savior divides.

I. The Armor here spoken of, wherein Satan is said to Trust, or put
Confidence, and which Christ is said to take away from him.

Now the things here represented seem to be these three. 1. What a bold and
confident Enemy we have. 2. That there is an Armor that gives him his
Confidence. 3. That the Victorious Savior takes that from him.


1. I observe, What a bold and confident Enemy we have. How he arms himself and
comes out, like some Goliath defying the Armies of the living God; Confident in
himself and in his own Strength; threatening what he can do and what he will. He
makes show of Courage. Fearlessness and Security. He seems to despise Heaven,
to pretend to hold his own, and maintain his Kingdom among Men, in spite of
God. All these are Mine, said the bold and vaunting Spirit to our Savior, and
I do what I will with them. And if Heaven denies his Title he pretends to
defend it; Rev. 12.7. And the Devil fought and his Angels.

Nevertheless all this is only Grimmace, and a face put on, which the heart
gives the lie unto. He looks big and fierce; speaks Great, and roars like a
Lion. But for all that he believes and trembles. He knows that his day is
coming, and shreiks and flies at the though it of the time of his Torment. As he
fell in horror before our Savior, and cried out, and tore and raved; and (as
he could) prayed to his Judge; in the most abject and torturing fears that any
weak mind can feel.

He is bold to us because Invisible. Could we but look into the World of
Spirits, and see him before an Angel of Light, we should see something mean and
dastard beyond any Comparison that we can find for it here on Earth. So a Wolf
appears and is terrible to a Lamb, but what a cur is it before a Lion? How will
the Wild Barking Dog fly more fearful than a Lamb?

So it is the property of an Insolent Spirit to Insult those that are Ignorant
or Feeble; Whom it can deceive or fright, impose on and terrify, it is always
ready to hector and bully. Besides that our Enemy is false and impudent, as he
is proud and cruel; He covers his own shame and weakness, fears and horrors
with lies and folshood; and never appears what he is. We have a bold and
confident Enemy.

2. His Armor gives him his Confidence. He has something that he pretends to
trust in, and incloses himself in as it were in Armor. The Allusion of War is
here carried on; As Armor gives the Soldier Confidence, which he wears either
for his own Defense, or for the Off^^^e of his Enemy; so there are some things
that afford to the Enemy of Souls his boldness and security: They are to him as
Goliahs Helmet of Brass and Coat of Mail, his Sword and Spear, added to his
huge natural Bulk and Strength.

But have Spirits their Armor too? Yes, what (...) be Allusively so called,
both good and bad have. There is the Armor of Light, and of Righteousness; and
why not that of darkness and of Spiritual Wickedness, with which they fight
against God and defend the Cause of Hell? For Tyrants have their Armouries, and
rebel Hosts arm themselves for the War.

Now this Armor of Satan is the same with those Strong holds of his in a
wicked heart, which I before spoke of under the Second Doctrine, whereby he
holds it as a Garrison against God, in a wretched and accursed Peace and
Security.

The Mind of Man is corrupted and blinded by the Fall, and so are the Will and
Affections, and by the Corruption of these Conscience is defiled and debauched;
All these give Satan an easy Access unto the Soul and a mighty Power over it by
his Temptations; and this is his chief Confidence having proved his own skill
and power so very often and effectually upon us.

He is a Serpent and a Dragon, and what he cannot effect by force he does by
wile and stratagem; and in his fraud and subtlety does he most trust.

He trusts in the natural darkness ^^d blindness of our carnal minds, which
renders us liable to be Imposed on by his craft and falsehood; and he hopes
ever to keep us in Ignorance, and Alienated from the Life of God thereby: that
we may never see things as they are, but call evil Good, and God evil; never
see how hateful and dangero^^ Sin is, or how good and lovely and ne^^^^^ the
Ways of God are, and how Glorious the Methods of Grace in our Salvation.

He trusts to keep Men in the Mistakes and Prejudices, which they easily imbibe
by Education, and by Traditions received from their Fathers, which are
frequently Opposite unto the Truth and Power of Godliness. So he holds the
Pagan World in their brutish Idolatries, the Mohammedan in their Imposture and
Infidelity, the Jews in their Obstinacy and Unbelief, the Romish Church in
their infinite Superstitions and gross Corruptions; and among the Reformed some
in their External Forms, and some without any Form at all of Godliness, in
their licentious Principles and loose Morals. For indeed there are but few in
the World but who are early Prepossessed one way or other against the Truths
and Laws of pure Religion; and this is a strong and mighty part of Satan's
Armature wherein he trusts.

He trusts much in a Carnal Heart, which is Enmity to God, and in a Stubborn
Will which is Averss to his Holy Will, and bent to Sin. He trusts in that
natural and contracted ^^otence to Good, which he sees the Miserable Children
of Men labor of, and which at last comes of an Invincible Disinclination
thereto. He trusts in the Natural Deceitfulness of Man's heart, and its
unknown desperate Wickedness, which it pleases him to see Mankind believe so
little of.

He trusseth in the power of fleshly ^^sts and sensual Pleasures: in the Cares
of this World and the Deceitfulness of Riches; to allure and draw away the Soul
from God, Inchant and Infatuate it; to choke every awful Conviction and serious
Impression, and that the Earth and its Bars are about it for ever. He trusts in
the League and Confederacy which he is in with a corrupt Nature and many
treacherous Lusts within us, and with a corrupt and wicked World, whose
Friendship is Enmity to God, and which is full of many hurtful and foolish
Lusts that drown Men in Destruction and Perdition.

He trusts in the Habits of Sin and in the strong Chains of Guilt which he sees
many of the Wretched Children of Men held under. He trust that One accustomed
to do evil can never learn to do well; no more than the Ethiopian shall ever
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. He trusts that he shall ever keep
them far from the Favor of God, and under his Wrath and Curse. He trusts that
he shall keep them easy and singing in these chains of death, or drive 'em into
despair when once they begin to Mourn under them.

Finally, he trusts in his pas^ ^^ccesses against us, and that he shall yet
prevail over the frail Sons of Adam and Dau'ters of Eve. He is grown vain and
conceited of his own Subtlety and Force; and dares to attemptany thing; even
what he knows he can never p^^form. He trusts that he can deceive the very
Elect. He dared to tell God when he spoke graciously of his Servant Job, that
if he might but have Permission to try him, he would soon make him as very a
Devil as himself, and he should curse him to his F^^^^ and doubtless he
despised him in his He^^^; when Heaven bro't him forth for single Combat with
the Prince of Devils, as the hu^e Philistine did the Stripling David. Nay. when
the Son of GOD was manifested in the Flesh, the Tempter was so bold as to set
upon Him; and after he had once and again found nothing in him, but had
received an utter Defeat always, had been often Ejected by him and been forced
to ly roaring and trembling before him, and confess him who he was, the Holy
One of GOD; yet the bold Fiend continued to pursue him still even to his Cross,
where the grovelling Serpent had his Head utterly broken, while he stung his
Heel. No higher could the Snake reach his Head, yet meant all it is Poison into
the very Bosom of God; presuming to have vanquished the Son of the Highest, as
if he had been only the Son of Man.

Thus we have a bold and confident Enemy; and we see in part what it is he
trusts in.

But then,

3. Christ takes away all this, by the Merits and Purchase of his Death, and by
the Operation of his Holy Spirit on the Souls of his Chosen and Called. He
saves us first by Price and then by Power. He has paid a Ransom for his Elect
unto the Justice of God, and by his Spirit he sanctifies and rules in them for
whom he died.

They are Justified by Faith in his Righteousness, and they are Sanctified by
his Grace and preserved in Him. In the one Christ acts as the Lord our
Righteousness, in the other as the Lord our Sanctifier and Ruler. And they are
each equally Glorious to Him and Necessary for us.

1. Our Salvation out of Satan's hands, is by a Price of Redemption, and a
Satisfaction to the Justice of God. To this was his first Regard. He had in his
Eye (as Mr. Bradbury has justly and strongly represented the Matter, and whose
Words on this Head I shall use, because of their light and force The Doctrine
of Justification, explained and applied
) the Equity of a GOD whom we had offended, the Dignity of the Law which we had
broken, the Eternal Morality and Life of the Covenant of Works under which we
were planted. For there could be no saving us with any Dishonor to these. It
had not been a Redemption but a Plunder, to deliver the lawful Captive upon any
other Claim than a Satisfaction. We are therefore bought with a Price. Any
other way would have made the Savior a Party with Sin and Satan. Sin had got
the better of the L^w, if that could have been pardoned, whils^ this remained
violated, without any Rep^ration.

Our Salvation is not a mere Act of Pity and Favor without a wise and
sufficient Reason; that were Sofiness and Imperfection. Nor is it an Act of
mere Power and Violence, without just regard to the most wise Rules and
Measures of Government: But Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and Truth came in for a
share in the mighty Produce of Glory. There had been no great Work for Design,
and consequently nothing so suitable to the Infinite Mind, had He only forced
his way through all that opposed our Salvation: But this Honor and Harmony of
all the Divine Attributes in our Salvation, is what the Angels desire to look
into. The Cherubims are straining their Eyes to behold a Throne of Grace so
near unto an Altar of Atonement: That there should be a Satisfaction for Sin,
and yet all Mercy in the Forgiveness of it! a full Payment consistent with a
free Gift! a full Revenge taken upon the Guilt, and yet a noble Excursion of
Mercy for the Person!

In a Word, Here is a Righteousness declared in the Remission of Sin: One
speaking in Righteousness and Mighty to save: One to defend us at the Bar, as
well as to fight for as in the Field.

Satan trusted that this could never be; nor could the Anecls in Heaven suppose
how it could be. And without this, Christ had not destroyed the Works of the
Devil. That Wickedness would have been yet Triumphant, which is (...),
Extinguished. For if you strip the Death of Christ of the great Atonement, the
Works of the Devil had destroyed him. But now by dying, he bound the strong
Man. Thus we see Jesus in the suffering of Death crowned with Glory and Honor,
tasting it for us: We see the Captain of our Salvation made perfect through
Sufferings, in bringing many sons to Glory. Therefore is a Portion divided him
with the Great, and he divides the spoil with the strong: because he bare the
sins of many. Heb. 2.9, 10. Isai 53. ult.


This is the Strain and Current of the whole Gospel of our Salvation: It all
returns into this Mystery and Depth of Grace from whence it flowed; A
Satisfaction to the Justice of God for our Sins. Christ our Great High Priest
is HOLINESS TO THE LORD. For our sakes He sanctified Himself. In the midst of
the Throne is a Lamb stain. We are come to the Blood of sprinkling. The
Redeemed are washed from their Sins in their Savior's Blood, and so made Kings
and Priests to GOD. They have washed their Robes and made them White therein;
and so are before the Throne. They overcome by the Blood of the Lamb. Heb.
12.23. Rev. 1.6 5.6.7.14, 15.12.11.


Thus as the LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, our Redeemer has broke the Chains of
Guilt, and the Free Gift is come upon all unto the Justification of Life.

But then moreover,

2. As the LORD our Sanctifier and Ruler, He pulls doxn the strong Holds of Sin
within us, and implants the Powers and Principles of the Divine Life He renews
us in the Spirit of our Mind, forms a new Creature, and puts on it the whole
Armor of God, the Armor of Light, and of Righteousness, on the right hand and
on the left. Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13. Romans 13.12. 2 Cor. 6.7.
He clothes us with that Divine Strength, and with those Divine Graces, whereby
we may withstand the Wil^s of the Devil, resist him steadfastly in the Faith,
Overcome the Wicked one, stand in the evil Day, and having done all to stand.

He breaks the Power of Sin and Corruption in the Soul, Henry in loc.
rectifies its Mistakes delivers (...) from its Prejudices: And whe^^ the Eyes
are opened, and the Heart is humbled and changed, and made serious and
spiritual; then Satan's Armor is taken away. The Sword is first wrested out of
his hand, and then the Seepter.

Satan's Armor wherein he trusted, was his keeping Men in Darkness, Pool in loc.
blinding them with Error and Superstition, and seducing them into sinful
Practices. But now Christ by the Gospel teaches the (...) of God in truth, and
brings Souls into the love of it: He subdues the Soul to a (...) mission both
to the Glorious Way of our Justification by Faith in his Righteousness, and to
the Glorious Way of Holiness as the only path of Life.

There needs only a Work of Sanctification to be wrought in us, whereby our
Savior restores in us an Enlightened Mind, an Obedient Will, a Faithful
Conscience, Holy Affections, Pure Desires, Gracious Purposes, and Spiritual
Abilities; to the spoiling and disarming Satan of all his Interest in us and
Power over us. The Savior rules that day in the midst of his Enemies, and they
are made his footstool: It is the Day of his Power, in which his People are
made Willing, under the Rod of his strength.

In short then, As the Armor wherein Satan trusts are principally these two,
The power and strength of Sin in us, and the Chains of ^^^ilt, whereby we are
bound to suffer the Curse of God's Holy Law; so Christ takes away the one, by
the Merits of his Death, (...) the other by the Power of his Renc^^ing Grace.

And I cannot better compare and illustrate both the Confidence that Satan has
of holding his Possession, and the Grace of Christ disarming and spoiling him
of his bold and vain Trust; than by that famous and Ancient Piece of sacred
Story, which we have in the 2. Sam. 5 6, 7, 8. I mean the Story of David's
Conquest of the Jebusites, who held the strong Fort of Sion in Jerusalem, unto
the Day wherein David received the Kingdom of Israel. These Jebusites had such
a vain Opinion of the strength of their Fortification, that they set a parcel
of Invalids, lame and blind People upon the Walls, in scorn of David and his
Army, esteeming them sufficient to defend and secure them against all his Power.

Or rather these Jebusites seem to have had their Idols in whom they trusted,
(as many Learned Men have though it) and to whom they ascribed their long
Protection and Preservation in the midst of Israel. Now the first Exploit of
David's Reign, (as became so Pious a King, and so Illustrious a Type of Christ)
was to root out this Remnant of Idolatry, and of the Kingdom of Satan, left in
the very Heart of the Church. But the Jebusites showed him (we suppose) their
Gods, their Idols from the Wall, their Palladium wherein they trusted, and
defied his coming thither so long as these were there. But Holy David derided
their fond Superstition, and foolish Confidence, calling their Idols the Lame
and the Blind; for such they indeed wi^^; Eyes had they but they saw not, Feet
had they but they walked not. In just Indignation at the Affront offered to the
GOD of Heaven, he declared these lame and blind Images to be the Hated of his
Soul, and that the Man who should first scale and enter the Fort, and tumble
down these senseless Deities from the Wall where they were perched up, should be
the Chief and Captain of his Army. Upon which Word the brave and valiant Joab
went first up, and was deservedly the Chief.

From that Day Jerusalem became the Royal and the Holy City, the Seat of
Worship and of the Government; the Head of Israel and the Type of the Gospel
Church; that Jerusalem from Above which is the Mother of us all. Hither David
bro^t the Ark of God in Triumph, into its Rest; and here Solomon built the
Temple. So the Kingdom of Christ is Established where Satan's seat was, and on
its Ruins; and He takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusts.

But it is time that I pass unto the latter Phrase in the Text, and consider a
little,

II. The Spoils which the Victorious Savior divides. And divides his Spoils;
or as another Evangelist has it, he spoileth his house.

This is easy to do after the Enemy is Overcome and disarmed, slain, routed,
or taken Captive. Upon the Victory follows the taking the Spoil. These are the
Conquerors Reward, these grace his Triumph, and these he hangs up in the Temple
of God unto his Praise.

His Spoils: The Spoil that Satan had made is all the taken. As Abraham of old
armed his valiant and trained Household, and pursued after the Kings that had
taken Captive his Brother Lot, and had carried away all his Goods: He smote
them and brought back all, both the Captives and the Spoil. Or as David came
upon the Amalekites that had spoiled Ziglag, and carried away his Wives: He
found them spread abroad upon the Champian, eating and drinking and dancing,
because of the great Spoil which they had taken; and David smote them from the
Twilight even until the Evening, and recovered all that the Amalekites had
carried away.

I name these two Instances, because that doubtless Abraham and David were
herein Types of Christ spoiling Principalities and Powers, and rescuing our
precious Souls out of their cruel hands. Our Lord Jesus was the Son of David
and of Abraham, and they resembled him in this, His taking the Prey from the
Mighty and the Terrible. We may look in upon our own Souls, if recovered by his
Grace from Sin and Hell, and say of them as David's Soldiers did of that Drove
which they set apart, and in the Van upon his Return from that noble Conquest,
This is David's Spoil! These belong to the Conquering SAVIOR, the Purchase of
his Blood and Acquest of his Sword, Whom he has redeemed from the hand of the
Enemy.

For indeed Satan had made a Spoil of us. He had spoiled God of his Creature
Man, and of any Service or Glory from him without a Redemption. He had also
spoiled Man of his God and Heaven, of his Innocence and Peace and Glory. It was
an Inva^^able and Immense Treasure which he had spoiled God and Man of. These
Immortal Souls of ours were of greater Price than all the World beside. This
Rate God sets upon them, so nobly had he Endowed his Creature, and such Riches
had he expended in him! So Great was his Estimation of him, and such Account he
made of him. For him he had Created and furnished this Great and pleasant
Earth; And having made it a Paradise, and stored it with an Innumerable Bounty
and Variety, and all very costly; He then said, -- Let us make Man in our Image
after our Likeness, and let him have the Dominion over all these: So he put
them under his feet.

Now this Rational Mind, this Intelligent and Immortal Spirit, made in the
CREATOR's Image, with Angelical Faculties and Powers, contained more Riches in
a little, being a Jewel belonging to the Crown of Heaven, than all the rest of
this lower Creation, though these in their several kinds are an Unsearchable and
Inestimable Riches of Wisdom, Power and Goodness. This therefore was the Spoil
that Satan aimed at; and in carrying this he knew that he should carry all, and
become the God of this World. For God valued not the Earth, but for the sake of
Man, that bare his Image here, and in whom were his Delights. He had given the
Earth to him, and now he gave away himself from God that went with him. Satan
knew this, that in gaining Man he got all, and should spoil God of his lower
World; and now he prides and vaunts himself in his Acquest, -- All this is mine.

And now, shall the Prey be taken from the Mighty? and the lawful Captive, (for
such were we become, Slaves by our free Consent as well as a just Victim to the
Justice of God) be delivered? Yes: Thus has the LORD said, Even the Captives
of the Mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the Terrible shall be
delivered; -- And all Flesh shall know that I am thy Savior and thy Redeemer,
the mighty One of Jacob, Isai. 49. ult. So our Lord JESUS as a General after
the gaining the Battle divides his Spoils. The Victor possesses for himself
the Palace he has taken, and from whence he has driven the Foe, and all he
finds there is his own, and disposed of to his own Use and Service, by his own
Will and Pleasure.

For Instance,

1. He possesses and uses the Powers and Endowments of the Soul and Body before
de^^ed to the Service of Satan, for Himself and unto (...) own Glory.
Henceforth they are Sacred to ^im, their only true Proprietor. His rightful
Dominion is restored; His Throne set up again in the Heart, and there he reigns
for Ever. For having vindicated his Right, he asserts his Power, and maintains
his Conquest. We may write upon the Man, He is Christ's: Wholly and entirely
possessed by him, and devoted to him.

2. The Benefit of the Victory redounds to us, while the Glory is all His, and
thus he divides the Spoil among his Redeemed. He needed not us, nor any thing
of ours, nor can he receive any thing at our hands. If we be righteous what do
we give him, or if we sin on what do we against him? Our Goodness extends not
unto Him to benefit him, nor is our Misery any damage to Him. Had we remained
for ever in the Hand of Satan, what had He lost? And if we are snatched thence
by the Power of his Grace what has he gained? Was he not the same God over all,
blessed for Ever, Infinitely blessed in Himself, before Man had a Being, and
since his Apostasy? And would he not have remained so, and the Interests of his
Glory been all secure, had he reserved us with the Angels that sinned, in
Chains under Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great Day. Now therefore, that
he has descended into our low World and died, Ascended also hence and led
Captivity Captive, what is He enriched by it? Has He taken a Shoe-latchet of
ours, that we should be able to say, -- We have made him rich? as the Generous
Abraham said to the King of Sodom, in the Day of his Return from the Conquest
of the Kings, that he might be the more perfect Type of his SAVIOR. We are
indeed made free, we are restored to Liberty, and the Creature it self shall
e're long be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption: We are made Conquerors,
and are to wear the Crowns of such, and He is glorified with the Glory which he
had with the Father before the World was.

Thus the Benefit is entirely ours. The Generous Conqueror fought for our
Ransom and Deliverance, and has effected it. He divides the spoils among his
saved Ones. When he ascended on High, He received Gifts for Men, even for the
Rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

This is his Name, Jehovah our Righteousness: which speaks (say One on that
Text) a Happiness to us, a Glory to Himself: Our Happiness lies in Things, His
Glory appears in a Name: What we get by Him is a Reality, what he has from us,
is only an Acknowledgement.

3. He distributes to every Man severally as he will, of the Abundance of Grace
and Gifts of Righteousness; Graces and Comforts here in this Life, and Glory
hereafter. These are the Unsearchable Riches of Christ, and who can count the
dust of them? or number the Tenth part. either as to kind or measure? Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

1. Of his own Sovereign Will and free Grace, he divides to Whom he will, and
in what Portion he will. He has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and has
Compassion because he will have Compassion. Yea, the faint and spent, whose
hearts are in his Cause, but their feeble hands can do nothing in it, shall
come in for a share in the Spoil; as David in his Princely Piety and Justice,
ordered with respect unto the two Hundred Men, that were so faint that they
could not follow him to the War. Thus the lame take the Prey, when the Great
Spoil is divided, Isai. 33.23.

2. He divides with a Munificent Hand. He that has least has an Interest in a
whole Christ, a whole Heaven for a whole Eternity. He partakes in a complete,
Eternal Redemption; he attains a perfect Happiness, and shares in infinite
Blessedness; though there doubtless are Degrees of Glory, as well as Degrees of
Grace, Service and Comfort now. Joh. 12.24. Father, I will that they whom thou
have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory.

3. A Respect is had to Eminence of Love and Zeal, and faithful Service. The
old and beaten Soldiers, who have been forward and bold, active and courageous,
have endured hardness, often fought and ventured Limb and Life, received
Wounds, and it may be died in the Cause; They shall receive the greater Reward
and the brightest Crown, They shall be advanced in Rank and Honor in the
Heavenly World: Not of Works, nor for any desert in them; but of the mere good
Pleasure of the Sovereign GOD, who is Lord of his own Favor, and has made it a
Statute in Heaven for Ever. And accordingly we read of a Prophets Reward, and
that they who turn many to Righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and
ever: Also, that he who sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that
sows bountifully shall reap bountifully; and that they who receive abundance
of Grace and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in Life by Jeus Christ.

Thus our Lord encouraged his Apostles, the General Officers in his Church
Militant, and who were set in the Front of the Battle; Ye which have followed
me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit upon the Throne of his
Glory, Ye also shall sit upon twelve ^^^^es, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel: A^^^^ ever has forsaken Houses and Lands, etc. (...) my Name sake and
the Gospel, shall receive an hundred fold in this Life, and in the World to
come Life Everlasting. Wherefore the Apostle Pa^^^ who had done, labored and
suffered (...) more than others in the Cause of Christ, ^^^pected of the free
Grace of God a more distinguishing Crown in the Heavens; 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have
fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: and not to me only but to all them
that (in like manner) have his Appearing.

USE.
And now I have again prevented my self in the Application, which I hoped to
have made of this Doctrine: The USE should have been,

I. To teach us to give Glory to Christ our Savior. He is the true Messiah;
the promised Seed of the Woman to break the Serpent's Head; the Horn of
Salvation raised up for us in the House of David, as was spoken by the mouth of
all the Holy Prophets, which have been since the World began, that we should be
saved from our Enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us. We should now go
forth with Branches of Palm Trees in our hands, to grace the Triumph of our
Savior, and shout, -- Hozanna to the Son of David; Blessed be he that comes
in the Name of the Lord, Hozanna in the highest.

So in that great Day wherein the Philistine of Gath fell, and all the Enemies
of Israel fled at his Fall, the lovely Conqueror and illustrious Type of the
Conquering Savior, came back with the Monster's Head in his hand, and he put
his Armor in his Tent: While the Dau'ters of Israel prepared their Instruments
of Music, and met him with their Songs, -- David his ten thousands!

What a mighty Lord and Conqueror is our REDEEMER, and on what a gracious
Design has he armed to bring forth the Priso^ers, and proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, after he has slain the Tyrant and the Oppressor! With what Admiration
and Delight should we Contemplate this Appearance of the Son of God in our
Nature, and all the Enemies of our Souls under his Feet? Isai. 63.1. Who is he
that comes from Edom, (like David after the Conquest of the Edomites at the
valley of salt, whereby he got him a Name, 2 Samuel 8.13.) with died Garments
from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the Greatness
of his strength? -- I that speak in Righteousness, Mighty to save. Let the
Divine Answer the Prophet in the Vision he had of the Glorified Jesus, in the
form of a Mighty Conqueror, Rev. 19.11, 12, etc. And I saw Heaven opened, and
behold a White Horse, and he that sat on him was called Faithful and True, and
in Righteousness he does judge and make war, His Eyes were as a flame of Fire,
and on his Head were many Crowns, and he had a Name written that no Man knew
but He Himself And he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood; and his Name
is called, The Word of God. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him,
-- and out of his mouth goes a sharp ^^ord, that with it he should smite the
Nations: And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron; and he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he has on his
Vesture and on his Thigh a Name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Such a Vision of the Glories of the Victorious Savior does the Text present
us. As in the Day when David took Rabbah, the Royal City of the Children of
Ammon; He came Himself and took it, lest it should be called after another's
Name: And he took their Kings Crown from off his head, (the weight whereof was
a Talent of Gold, with the precious Stones) and it was set on David's head; and
he brought forth the spoil of the City in great abundance. So we see JESUS
Crowned, and Hell Spoiled, and all the Enemies of our Salvation put under saws
and harrows and axes of Iron, 2 Samuel 12. ult.

II. The Second Use is of singular Comfort to the Believer in Christ.

1. In all Temptations and spiritual Annoyances form the Wicked One. Christ has
overcome the Tempter: For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, He is
able to succor them that are tempted: for we have not an HighPriest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities; but was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin, See Heb. 2.14, 18.4.15, 16.

2. Under the Burden of Indwelling Sin, and the tormenting Fears which the
sorrowful Sense of it does often create in the Children of God; Whether Satan
be indeed cast out of them; whether Sin have not yet the Dominion over them;
whether they shall not yet fall by the hand of their roaring Enemy without, and
a treachercus Heart within-But be not discouraged; Christ says to you as he did
to Peter, Satan has desired to sist you, but I have prayed for you. Read the
Promise and the Prayer, Romans 16.20 The God of peace shall bruise Satan under
your feet shortly: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with You. Amen.

3. Let Believers be comforted under, and supported against all the Troubles
and Persecutions they may be annoyed with from Earth and Hell. It is a wicked
World, and Satan is the God of it. They therefore that will live Godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution from it. Marvel not if the World hate you,
for it hated Christ first. And he has said to you, Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the World. Read what the Spirit says unto the Church in Smyrna, Fear
none of these things: the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison that ye may
be tried, and ye shall have Tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful to the
Death, and I will give you the Crown of Life.

4. In the low Estate of God's Church, and in all it is Sufferings, this is the
support of God's People, that the Church is founded on a Rock, and the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail against it. Our Lord has said to us, I beheld
Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven. Read the Vision of the Church in its
travailing and weak Estate, persecuted by Satan and the Powers of this World,
but protected by her Savior to the destruction of the Dragon and his
Instruments: Rev. 12. The Church appears there as a Woman clothed with the
Sun, shining in Purity of Doctrine and Holiness of Conversation; the Moon under
her feet, trampling on all sublunary and earthly things; and on her head a
Crown of twelve Stars, the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles worn as her Crown.
She is represented as travailing in Birth, to propagate true Religion and
Godliness. But to devour this her Holy Birth, appears a Great red Dragon. God
caught up her blessed Offspring to Himself and to his Throne. Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, and cast him down. Yet he continues to
persecute the Woman and her Child, and Providence continues its Guard and
Succor. The Dragon cast out floods, but even the Earth it self was made to
help the Woman, and to swallow that Flood which might else have drowned the
Truth. Thus the Church is and shall be saved in spite of the Malice of Satan
and his power. Her Redeemer is Mighty, and his little Flock need not fear. Let
us believe, and look and pray for the Downfall of Satan's Kingdom more and more;
and rejoice over it thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets.

III Let the last Use be of Exhortation to us all, to submit to Christ and
choose Him for our Lord; to behave toward Him as rightful King, and be his
Servants. Let us all how our knees to his Scepter, let us kiss the Son, let us
consent to his Covenant, and accept of his offered Grace. Let us renounce Sin
and Satan, abjure the Devil and all his Works, and yield our selves up to the
Government of Christ, his Word and Spirit.

It is most wilful in us, if we remain yet under Satan's Power. We prefer him to
the Son of GOD by a practical and vile choice of him, renouncing our Saviors
Claim of us and Offers to us. And let Sinners consider, that they list into the
conquered side, and must fall into their condemnation.

But if Christ be our Lord now, He will be our Savior for Ever. If he now rule
in us and over us, we shall one day reign with Him. If we now give up our
selves to him, He will hereafter take us to Himself in Heaven. If we are now
subject to Him as Prince and Savior, we may know our selves to be chosen in
Him before all Worlds, unto Eternal Glory.

Wherefore Return, O revolted Soul, from Satan unto Christ: And like Magdalen,
out of whom be cast seven Devils, thou shall be yet precious in his Eyes. Lay
down the Weapons of thy Rebellion, and fight no more against GOD. Come in upon
the Proclamation of a General Pardon which is issned out in the Gospel of
Peace. See out the Pardon therein offered and secured to thee. Swear a future
Allegiance and Fidelity, and perform unto the Lord thy Savior thy Christian
Oath and Vow; thy Sacramental Engagement to Him.

Lift in the War denounced against Sin and Satan for Ever. For the Lord has
sworn that he will have War with this Amalek for evermore. Be strong in the
Lord and in the power of his Might. Put on the whole Armor of God: for we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers,
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
Wickednesses in High places. Whosoever is born of God overcomes them all, and
this is the Victory, even our Faith.

Now thanks be to God who causes us to triumph through Christ. He that conquers
in this spiritual Warfare has an Eternal Triumph. Our Lord has said, I appoint
you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me. And again, To him that
overcomes will I give to sit down with me on my Throne, even as I also
Overcame and am set down with my Father upon his Throne.

A PARAPHRASE ON St. LUKE XVII. 21. The Kingdom of GOD is within you.
1. ETernal GOD! Thy Providence
Over all Worlds extends it Reign:
In Number they and Space Immense,
Thou the One Absolute Sovereign.
2. Within thy Church on Earth we are
The visible Kingdom of thy Grace:
Heaven is the State of Glory, where
Thy Saints shall Ever see thy Face.
3. The noblest Rule in Nature is
Thy unseen Empire over Souls:
No Power may be compared to this,
Which our free Though It and Will controuls.
4. This Rule, Blessed GOD of Grace, Thou do
Display in turning us from Sin;
A Souls Conversion shows it most,
Thy Throne and Kingly Reign within.
5. Almighty Power renews the Mind,
While Satan, World and Fiesh oppose:
In Terrors armed, with Bowels kind
It headlong drives the Infernal Foes.
6. Majestic, on the Glorious Word,
Victorious Grace in Triumph rides;
And in the Purchase of its-Sword,
It Is rescued Captives, highly prides.
7. Angles! behold what Grace has done!
A fallen Soul restored, renewed;
A Soul worth many a World is won
From Sin, and to GOD's Will subdued.
8. Within my Heart, Almighty GOD,
Begin thy Reign, set up thy Throne:
From Sion send thy conquering Rod,
And Satan's cursed Seat pull down.
9. A willing Captive of thy Power
Make me: My Songs that Power shall praise
In Shouts of Grave from that blessed Hour,
Through all my future happy days.
10. Into this Kingdom come my Soul;
Or rather let it come in thee:
Take (LORD) my Heart, my Name inroll;
Thou Son of David make me free.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Pleasure OF Religious Worship, IN OUR Public Assemblies.

FROM PSALM CXXII. 1. I was Glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the
House of the Lord.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samnuel Gerrish, and Daniel Henchman: Sold at
their Shops. 1717.

To the READER.
WORSHIP is a Divine and Excellent Duty or Service. The Noblest Powers of the
Soul are Exercised, in the most noble manner, upon the most Excellent Object.
The Holy Dispositions which God has created in the Regenerate, and the Divine
Principles which he has implanted in them, as they are the things most pleasing
to the New Nature, so being Exerted by supernatural Assistances, they must
needs yield it the Divinest Joys.

Christians should have great Pleasure in the Society of one another in Acts of
Worship. Solitary Worship is necessary, and in its season is pleasant to the
Soul, and so is Social Worship. In Heaven it may be the Worship is all Open and
Social: Every Breast is always full of Devotion, and ever running over. At
present we need more the assistance of one another in our Devotion. As Iron
sharpens Iron, so do the devout Faces of Christian Brethren hearten and
brighten one another in the public Solemnities of GOD's House.

Here are the most Excellent Persons, in their best Frames, Uniting in the most
just and solemn Acts of their Lives, Confirming their Love to GOD and one
another, Promoting each his own and every Man his Brother's Eternal Salvation.
Here are the best Friends met together, the best, the greatest, and the wisest
of Men; in Whom is the Spirit of the Holy GOD; who are of Angelical Tempers,
and in Heavenly Frames; the most nobly Employed that Created Spirits, Humane or
Celestial, in Bodies or ou^ of them, can possibly be. Souls -- One in the Love,
Admiration and Reverence of the High GOD, and breathing after the fullest
Conformi^y to Him and Complacency in Him! Brethren -- going hand in hand to
Heaven! How pleasantly should they go, singing in the Ways of the LORD, and
helping one another forward. It is meet that they should make merry and be
Glad. So when Barnabas saw the Worshipping Assemblies of Christians as far as
Antioch, he was glad, and Exhorted them that with full purpose of heart they
would cleave to the LORD: And so the first Christians gladly received the Word,
-- and continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread and in Prayers: -- They continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their Bread with
gladness and singleness of heart; Praising GOD, and having favor with all the
People; and the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.

These few Words I though it meet to prefix to the following Discourse.

THE Great PLEASVRE OF Public WORSHIP.
PSALM CXXII. 1. I was Glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of
the LORD.


THIS Psalm is one of the Fifteen that are here placed together under the Ti^^e
of Songs of Degrees, or Songs of Ascents, as the Word properly signifies. Some
have conjectured that they are so called from their singular Excellency: as the
Song of Songs signifies the most excellent Song, so a Song of Degrees may
signify a Song excellent in the highest Degree. Others have conjectured, that
these Psalms were appointed to be sung by the Levites on their Stairs and
Ascents, whereof we read, Neh. 9.4. And so we might say of them, that they are
Songs for the Pulpit.

Others would understand by Degrees, the Elevation of the Voice together with
the Affections, unto a higher Strain and Note in the singing of these Psalms,
and so suppose them called as they are from the Tune they were set to, or the
Musical Instruments they were sung to, or the raising the Voice in singing
them; as we read of singing with a loud voice on high, and of the high-sounding
Cimbals.

There are some other Conjectures concerning the meaning of this Title, which I
will not stay to mention; for both Jewish and Christian Expositors are at a
loss to give the true Reason of this, as well as most other Titles of the
Psalms.

To come then unto this particular Psalm. It seems to have been penned by David
for the use of the People of Israel, when they came up to worship at Jerusalem,
at the three Solemn Feasts. And by the way, this is another Reason given, and
not the least probable, why it is called a Song of Ascents; namely because it
was to be sung by the Tribes (say some) as they were going up to Jerusalem to
worship: for which Use it must be owned the Psalm is exactly calculated: I was
glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the Lord. Our Feet
shall stand within thy Gates O Jerusalem, whether the Tribes go up, the Tribes
of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord.

In the Text I would only observe, 1. An Expression of holy Pleasure,
Satisfaction and Delight: I was glad. 2. The thing which was the Matter,
Reason, Occasion and Cause of his Joy: When they said, Let us go into the House
of the Lord.


It is the Public Worship of God, according to his own Ordinance and
Institution that is here spoken of. The Place, the Time, the Company, and the
Call to God's solemn Public Worship.

1. The House of God was the Place of David's delight. 2. The Opportunity to go
thither was the time and season of his Pleasure. 3. The Company and Society of
the Faithful there, were the Helpers of his Joy. And, 4. Their Call and
Invitation to him to go along with them: I was glad when they said, etc.
Observe, 1. They used to call upon one another to go and worship God at the
solemn and appointed Seasons. 2. They did it with Alacrity: Let us go up. 3.
And so they entertained the Call too; they were glad when it it was said unto
them, Let us go into the House of the Lord.


This was as became Israelites indeed; the pious Spirit of the Children of
Zebulun: Deuteronomy. 33.19. They shall call the People unto the Mountain, there they
shall offer Sacrifices of Righteousness.

DOCTRINE. That we should be very glad of every Opportunity and Call we have to
go up to the House of the Lord. The Liberty and Season of enjoying God's
Public Worship, should be always very welcome and pleasant to us.
The Reasons of the Doctrine may be taken, I. From the Glorious Object of
Worship: GOD. II. The Acts of Worship.


To which I might have added, the Frame, Ends and Fruits of this holy Exercise.

1. If we consider the Glorious Object of Worship, the Blessed GOD; it will
easily appear that we should be very glad of every call we have to go up to his
House. God is the most Delectable Object which the Soul of Man can converse
with, being infinitely possessed of all possible Perfections, Excellencies and
Glories. Therefore to approach unto him should be the highest Pleasure of our
Souls; and if we were in our Original State of Rectitude it certainly would be
so. We have directly to do with God in our solemn Acts of Worship, Him we speak
and address unto immediately, ^^d He speaks to us; to him we make our
^^^^rings, and of him we supplicate for Grace and Mercy. Now God is the supreme
Object of the delight of all Intelligent Beings, and the whole of Religion lies
very much in that Precept, Psalm. 33.4. Delight thy self in the Lord. If we were
called to go to the Presence of our Earthly Ring, to ask and receive any
Favors from him, being assured that it would be very acceptable to him to see
and hear us with our Petition, with what Joy and Pleasure should we go to
present our selves before him? In like manner when we go to worship, we should
go unto God as our exceeding Joy, Psalm. 43.4.

And accordingly this has been the Frame of worshipping Saints. As they have
had Joy in worshipping, so their Rejoicing has been especially in the Glorious
Object they Adored. Psalm. 9.2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing
praise to thy Name, O wast High. Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice
ye Righteous.

Indeed if God were not infinitely to be delighted in on the account of his
Essential Glories and Perfections, he would not be the Object of worship,
neither would there be any Pleasure in worship. Make the Object of worship any
other but God, and there is no Satisfaction in any Act of Adoration. For
Instance, What a dull and stupid thing must is be to worship a graven Image; a
dumb and de^t and blind, a senseless and lifeless Deity? If people would but
use their Senses and Reason this would appear to be the most sordid and sotrish
Act of their lives. The Psalmist most justly represents the Satisfaction of
worshipping the living God, but the extreme Lumpishness and Absurdity of Idol
Pagan Worship. Psalm. 115.3, 4, 5. Our God is in the Heavens, and has done
whatsoever he pleased: Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the work of men's
hands; they have mouths but they speak not, eyes have they, etc. they have
ears, etc. they have hands, etc. -- they that make them are like unto them, so,
etc. One would think (that is) that the Worshiper had no more Understanding
than the Stock which he adores, and that one was as insensible a piece of Wood
as the other. The Prophet Isaiah amplifies with a great deal of holy Scorn and
Sarcasm on this head: Isai. 44 9, 10, etc. Who has formed a God that is
profitable for nothing! they and their delectable things are vanity: the
Carpenter stretches out his rule, marks it out with a line, fitteth it with
planes, makes the figure of a Man, according to the beauty of a Man, warms
himself with the chips, and then falls down and worships it, and says to it,
Deliver me, for thou art my God. Now to be sure there can be no more pleasure
in the Adoring, than there was in the hewing and hacking the Log. Which is the
most a Stock at last, the Image or its Adorer is lest doubtful. And as the Idol
is insensible of any pleasure in being worshipped, so must the fottish Man be in
worshipping, v. 18. They have not known nor understood, for he has shut their
Eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand.

So that all the Reason of Pleasure in worship must be from the glorious
Object, GOD. Because he is infinitely Wise and Holy, and Good and Righteous,
and Powerful; and because he is the Eternal, Immense, Supreme, Independent,
unchangeably glorious and blessed Fountain of Being, Perfection and Happiness;
therefore is it an infinitely pleasant, good and blessed thing to worship him:
Isai. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God.

II. If we consider the Acts and holy Exercises of public Worship, it will
easily appear to be our duty to be very glad of every Call and Opportunity we
have to go up into the House of God. Every Part of religious instituted Worship
is in it self highly pleasurable unto a Heart suitably disposed and prepared.

The Parts of Worship I would name are These, Prayer, Singing, Hearing, the
Sacraments, and receiving the Benediction.

1. Prayer is such a Duty as we should be glad to wait upon God in his House
in. His House is called the house of Prayer. The Tabernacle, and Temple were
such of old. There was the holy Oracle, and the Altar of Incense before the
most Holy Place; which Incense was a Figure of the Prayers of the Saints, in
the Clouds whereof (from the inflamed Affections of the Soul) God would be
Approacked. The Jews worshipped and prayed toward the Temple, when they were
distant from it. And the Prayers there made the Courts of the Lord longed after
by holy Souls, when they could not be there.

Now Prayer is a large and comprehensive Word in the common use of it, and
takes in Adoration and Praise, Thanksgiving and Blessing, penitential
Confessions, Supplications for Grace and Mercy, holy Pleadings and Arguings at
the Throne of Grace, Professions and Self-Consecration, and Intercession for
others: All which are in themselves full of Delight to gracious Persons, and
sweet to their Souls; and we should sit down under the shadow of the wings of
the Cherubims with delight, because that these are the Place of Prayer.

1. We should be glad to go up to the House of God to Adore and Praise Him.
Adoration is not a more awful than it is a delightful part of Worship. To
contemplate, admire, and mention the transcendent Perfections of God, and give
him the Glory of his Titles and Attributes. In it the devout Soul is caught up
with blessed Paul into the third Heavens, where it hears things neither lawful
nor possible to be spoken. The Soul looks into the dazzling Glory of God's
Eternity, Immensity, Immutability, Alsufficiency, Sovereignty and
Incomprehensibility. It surveys all his glorious Works, and sees his Eternal
Power and Godhead displayed in them: Hears Angels worship, and sees them cover
their Faces. It worships with fear and trembling at the foot of the Mount,
before the thick Darkness, and breaks not through the bounds to gaze into what
cannot be seen, nor born. It is pleasant to the adoring Soul to contemplate the
Majesty and the Greatness of God, together with his Relations of Grace to us as
our GOD and Father, to whom we may go with the freedom and boldness of
Children. It lies before the Throne in Ecstasies of Wonder and Amazement, as
Moses under the hand of God while he passed by and proclaimed his Name to him,
or as Elijah in the Mouth of the Cave with his Mantle wrapped about him.

2. We should be glad to go up to the House of God to give Thanks unto the Name
of the Lord for his Goodness and Mercy expressed toward us, in his innumerable
Favors and Benefits. It is a pleasure to an Ingenuous Mind to express his
Gratitude to his Benefactor, and his sense of the Obligations he is under for
undeserved Favors. Thanksgiving supposes a Soul delighted in the Goodness of
God and in Love to him for it: Love is a pleasing Passion, and Goodness is a
pleasant Object; and Benefits done us are always acceptable to remember; and
so much the more pleasant the more freely they are bestowed by some excellent
and superior Person. Psalm. 92.1, 2. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the
Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High: To show forth thy loving
kindness in the morning: and thy faithfulness every night. So begins the Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath day: for as Thanksgiving and Praise are a special part
of our Sabbath Worship; so Joy is a special part (...) our Sabbath frame.
Heaven is just such a Rest for ever.

3. We should be glad to go up to the House of God, if it were only to pour out
our penitential Confessions, together with our servent Supplications for Grace
and Mercy. These are a great and special part of our solemn Worship, and to be
for ever joined. Indeed if we were to confess and bewail Sin only, without the
hope and assurance of finding Mercy upon our Repentance, it would be the
blackness of darkness without the least Gleam of light. But now we draw nigh in
the Name of a Great High Pri^^, Jesus the Son of God, and come with boldness to
a Throne of Grace, in the full Assurance of Faith. Here then is pleasure and
joy: scil. All that a State of Sin can admit of: it is not the joy of Innocents
indeed that never Sinned, nor yet of the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; but
it is the joy of Hope and Faith, which is unspeakable and full of Glory, even
now, though it be not like that of theirs who are past Sin and all Tears are
wiped away. We sow in Tears with comfortable hopes and prospect. We go to Gods
House to pour out a sorrowful Spirit, and leave it there; we come away Glad
with a word of Peace spoken to us in the Name of God by his Minister. See if
Penitents have no joy: Psalm. 32.5. I said I will confess my transgression unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 51.8, 14. Make me to
hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.
Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. Psalm. 66.17. I will declare what
God has done for my soul, I cried to him with my mouth, and he was extolled
with my tongue. So soon is Prayer turned into Praises, and the voice of
Mourning into Rejoicing.

4. We should be glad to go up to the House of God, to improve the liberty we
have of pleading and arguing with him in Prayer. We may go even unto his Seat
and fill our Mouths with Arguments, which he has prepared for us in his Word
and put into our Mouths, and bid us to use; and has taken them from his own
blessed Nature, and formed them so directly to his own Glory and our Comfort,
that they bring a mighty pleasure along with them to the Soul that uses them.
Now to ly and plead and prevail at the feet of Sovereign Grace is a most
delightful thing to a gracious heart. So the Morning broke brightly upon Jacob
when he had held the Argument, held the Angel all Night, and had been blessed
by him before he let him go. What though Jacob halted all his Life time after
this happy Wrestling? It was only a Memorial of Joy, to bring to Remembrance
his power with God and interest in him. He wanted this Infirmity in his flesh
to keep him humble ever after.

5. Profession and Self-Consecration are other Acts in Prayer, which should
make us glad of every Season of solemn Approach to Him. We should in our
Prayers give our selves up to the Lord, lay hold on his Covenant, and renew our
own Engagements to be his; pay him our Vows, present our selves a Living
Sacrifice, and bind our selves afresh to him. Our Baptism should be ever
remembered by us, and we should rejoice with fear; commending our selves to his
Grace, and committing our Souls to his Keeping. Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save
me. Psalm. 116.13, 16. I will take the cup of salvation: and call upon the name
of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord: now in the presence of all his
people. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds. So the pleased Servant among the
Israelites went gladly to the door of his Masters house to bore his Ear there.
It should be pleasant to us to Avouch the Lord in the most Public and Explicit
manner to be our God, and that we are his People; and to put in our Claims to
the Blessings of his Covenant while we put our Names to the bonds of it. Isai,
3 2. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

6. Intercession for Others is another part of Prayer, which should make it
pleasant to us to go up unto the House of Prayer. Prayer is a Generous and
Noble duty, breathing the most diffusive Love and extensive Charity. 1 Timothy 2.
Init. I exhort therefore that supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving
of thanks be made for all men; -- for this is good and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved and to come unto the
knowledge of the Truth. How pleasant should it be to bear the World of Mankind
thus in an Enlarged heart before God, for his Mercies and Blessings to be
showred down upon them! How pleasant by expressions of faith and love to
testify our Communion with all that in Every place call upon the Name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours. How pleasant to keep and manifest the
Unity of the Spirit, the Oneness of Saints all the World over! And to realize
our selves interested in their Supplications at the Throne of Grace, while we
embrace them in the cheerful Arms of our love; as the Excellent Ones in the
Earth, in whom is all our delight, and to whom our Goodness extends, at least
in a hearty Benevolence and Good Will, though not in any actual Beneficence. Such
kind and tender concern, such affection and esteem the Children of God have for
one another, whose faces they are never to see in the flesh, but whom they hope
one day to see in Heaven, that their hearts might be comforted being knit
together in love, and unto all Riches of the full assurance of Understanding,
to the Acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father and of Christ,
Col. 2. Init. And how good and pleasant is it for Brethren thus to dwell
together in love, their Prayers being promoted hereby; bearing one another like
holy Relatives on their hearts to the God of all Grace, in a gracious Sympathy
and Care for each others Concerns both Temporal and Eternal. Phil. 1.2, 3, 4.
Grace be unto you and Peace from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God upon every Remembrance of you; always in every prayer of mine
for you all making request with joy; for their fellowship in the Gospel from
the first day until Now. Truly if there be any Consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, it
is to be found in the Mutual Intercessions of Saints: Herein they fulfill their
own and others Joy, if they be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind. Phil. 2.1, 2.

Thus there is nothing but what is very pleasant in every part of Prayer. Only
we must give our selves to the Duty, and get the Spirit of Prayer if we would
experience this. For to be sure, a carnal and wicked heart, a careless and
formal Spirit, a worldly and fleshly Mind, can never favor or experience these
Truths.

But so much for the first and chief Act or Exercise of Divine Worship. I shall
not Enlarge so much on those that remain.

II. We should be glad to go unto Gods House of Worship to Sing Psalms of
Praise unto his Name. That this is a part, and a very excellent and pleasant
part of Instituted Worship, and has always been accounted so, is very Evident
through the whole of Sacred Scripture. Psalm. 105.2. Sing unto him, sing Psalms
unto him. Psalm. 69.30. I will praise the Name of God with a Song, I will
magnify him with Thansgiving. It is a cheerful duty, and calls for holy
gladness of heart; Psalm. 30.12. Thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me
with Gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee and not be
silent. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. They sang praises with gladness, and bowed their heads
and worshipped. The 47 Psalm tells us what should be our Worship in Gospel
days, at and after the Ascension of Christ: God is gone up with a shout, the
Lord with the sound of the Trumphet. Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing
praises unto our King, sing praises. The Precept is to all Nations, when they
are called into the Church, Psalm. 68.32. Sing unto God ye Kingdoms of the
Earth: O sing praises to the Lord. Selah. In the New Testament we find this
Duty Established and Recommended by our Savior, and by Express Precept. In the
first Institution of the Lords Supper he Sang an Hymn with his Disciples. The
Great Apostle in two of his Epistles Enjoins the heavenly duty: Speaking to
your selves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; singing with grace, and
making melody in your hearts to the Lord Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. And holy Joy is
prescribed in it; Jam. 5.13. Is any merry, let him sing Psalms.

It is a famous account that was given by a Heathen of the first Christians;
that they met together and Sang a Hymn to Christ as God. And the History of the
Reformation tells us how much it was promoted by this religious Exercise.
Conceive if you can the Raptures of Joy with which Moses Sang at the red Sea,
Deborah on the Avenging of Israel, David at the bringing the Ark to Sion, the
Virgin Mary her Magnificat, or Zecharias at the loos'ning his Tongue, or Simeon
his Dimittis, or Paul and Silas in the Stocks. When we lift up our Voices to
make one sound in the Public Assemblies, it should be even with like Joy.
Psalm. 98 4 Make a joyful Noise unto the Lord all the Earth; make a loud Noise
and rejoice and sing praise.

As our Tongues are made for Singing as well as speaking, so the faculty of
Singing is given us to please and to express pleasure. It is so in a common use
of the power, and surely should be rather so in a Religious One. Gracious Souls
taste much of Heaven in this part of Worship. It sweetly dilates and opens the
Soul to God, and he comes into it. Music has its charm where a person has
(...) and so have Psalms their charm to (...) heart. Before this World was
there (...) joy and Singing, and the one expressed in the other, the one
inspired by the other: I mean when at the foundation of the Earth the Morning
Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. And when this
World ends Singing will continue with Everlasting Joys; The song of Moses and
of the Lamb. We hold communion now with Heaven, we are now preparing for
Heaven, we already get some foretastes of Heaven, in the holy Exercise of
Singing.

III. We should be glad to go up unto the House of the Lord if it were only to
hear his Word Read and Preached to us. To hear the Joyful Sound, the Glad
Tidings of Great Joy to all People, even the way of our Salvation, the things
of our Everlasting Peace. It should be pleasant to us to hear from God, as well
as to speak to him: for him to speak to us, not in the August Terrors of Sinai,
but in the soft Voice of the Gospel. The Law of our God should be our delight;
it is perfect and pure and right, and inlightning the Eyes and rejoicing the
heart; and more to be desired than Gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also
than honey, and the honeycomb. It contains the most sublime, necessary, saving
Truth. There is a true and solid pleasure in the Knowledge of God, and in the
Meditation, Study and Practice of his Law. A truly devout Soul has a more
exquisite Taste and Relish of this, than any sensual Heart can have of any
Earthly Satisfactions. The 119. Psalm does most sweetly and abundantly express
this. I have rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies more than in all riches. I
will delight my self in thy Statutes, and will not forget thy Word. Thy
Testimonies are my delight and my counselors. O how I love thy law, it is my
meditation all the day. I rejoice at thy Word as one that finds great spoil.
Thy Statutes are my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. I have longed for thy
salvation, O Lord, and thy law is my delight.

If we could but bring such an Ear and such a Frame of heart to the Word as
David did, we should find his pleasure in it.

This is the way to profit by the Word, and the sign and fruit of profiting
thereby. When the Word has its Saving Effects it will be gladly Entertained.
Acts 2.41. They that gladly received the Word, were baptized; and they
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and did eat their bread with
gladness and singleness of heart. When the Word Convinces of Sin, and humbles
and breaks the heart in Contrition, it is most welcome to the Soul; for it
brings its Comforts along with it, and while it wounds it heals. 1 These. 1.5,
6. For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but in power and in the holy
Ghost: And ye became followers of us and of the Lord, having received the Word
in much Affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost.

The Doctrines of the Gospel are full of sublime mystery and dazzling light:
they shine forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, and clear as the Sun. The
Precepts and Laws (...) the Gospel are full of Sancity, most holy just and
good, and infinitely commend themselves to the Consciences of all that consider
them: for so it appears that the Holy God must needs govern us and seek our
happiness, and so it is that Men must be governed and be happy. They are our
Wisdom and our Life. The Promises of the Gospel are so full of Grace and Good
to them that love God, they are so rich and precious in the Spiritual and
Everlasting blessings they contain, that they afford the Strongest Consolations
unto the Souls of Saints. On all accounts therefore it should be pleasant to us
to sit at Jesus feet and hear his Words. To be taught, directed, excited from
the lively Oracles, should make the Sabbath of the Lord very welcome to us.

IV. We should be glad to go up unto the House of the Lord to wait upon him and
obey him in the Instituted Sacraments of Religion. These Injunctions of a
Positive Nature are very awful and solemn, but very sweet, gracious and
comfortable too in their sense and meaning. As David in the Text was glad when
they called upon him to go up unto the Solemn Feasts; so should we be glad to
honor Christ in the Observation of his holy Appointments and Institutions.
They are few and full of Spiritual sense, and Benefit to our Souls. They are
not diverse Washings and carnal Ordinances; like the Ceremonial Yoke of old to
Isael; They are but the Single washing in Baptism, and the One Festival upon
the Memorial of a Sacrificed Savior And what should be more pleasant to us
than in them to make the Consecration of our selves unto God, to Seal our
Covenant Engagements to him, and to receive the Pledges of his Grace. It was a
pleasure to the Saints of God of old to bring their Peace Offerings, and feast
before the Lord upon them; to Covenant with him by Sacrifice: So should it be
to us to avouch our Relation to God and clain an Interest in his Grace and
Favor, according to the Summary of his Covenant, I will be unto you a God and
to your Seed, and ye shall be my People.

For do but consider,

1. The Nature of the Christian Baptism, and say if it should not be pleasant
to you to present your selves and your Children to God? Is it to be owned and
acknowledged by God, and received into the Number and Communion of his People?
Or is it to own Him and submit to him as our Lord and our God? Is it to bind
our selves unto holiness, in the way of finding the Spirit of Grace and
Holiness? Is it that by the Mercies of God you are beso't to present your
Selves and your Children to the Lord a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service? And will you not gladly comply with the
offers of this Grace? It is not neither by a bloody Rite, as of Circumcision of
old; only he says unto thee Wash and be clean. So Naaman came back Adoring,
his Soul being restored with his corrupted flesh. He repented that he had
Undervalued the healing Waters, and now was ready to worship the very Earth of
Israel.

Nature assists Grace in the holy Joy of presenting our Children to God in
Baptism. The Bowels of a gracious Parent are refreshed to behold his loved
Offspring solemnly owned and accepted and blessed by God. It is, as I have
sometimes said to you, See the Government of Mirth: p. 134.
as when Joseph saw his two Sons at the knees of Jacob: (but O how far is the
Comparison below the thing) and as Jacob said to him, Thy two Sons are mine: So
the Great and High God says to us in the Baptism of our Children; Thy Children
O Christian are Mine. It was most pleasant to Joseph to hear his Agel Father
blessing his Children; God before whom my Father walked, the God which fed me
all my life long unto this day, The Angel which redeemed me from all evil,
bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers
Abraham and Isaac: and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the
Earth. Such is the pleasure that we may have and should have, while we behold
the Blessing of Abraham coming on ours after us. And what more divine pleasure
can a Parent have in the body? When Nathan bro't to David that gracious Message
from God, -- I ^^ll ^^t up thy seed after thee; and I will be his (...) and he
shall be my Son; the overjoyed King ^ent immediately before the Ark of God and
worshipped, saying -- Who am I O Lord God, and what is my Fathers house that
^ho^^ have brought me hitherto? Methinks that (...) we should feel and so
should we say, when we go up unto the House of the Lord to offer up our
Children to God, that his blessing may come upon them. So the Inspired
Zecharias Sang with holy gladness at the birth of his Son; and so the Blessed
Virgin saw Simeon take up her Holy Child into his venerable Arms, and heard him
Sing his Nune Dimittis. What shall I say, -- had we Faith and Devotion in their
lively Exercise, as there is no Love more pleasing than a Parents to his Child,
so there would be no Joy more ravishing than that of his dedicating his
Children to God.

2. And if the Sacrament of Baptism mean so much delight to a holy Soul, surely
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper means as much unto a heart suitably prepared.
It is pleasant to remember our Common Friends in their absence from us, and all
the love they have sometimes shown us; but how much more should we be glad of
the Opportunities for the solemn Remembrance of the Love of Christ and all that
he has done for our Salvation, even his dying to ^^^hase it f^^^^ If the Eye
affect the heart with grief in the Remembrance of Sin and the Curse, yet the
en^ and fruit of that Death is all comfort and peace; and though we cannot but
with Te^^s receive the Atonement for Sin, yet ne^^her can we receive it without
^^tures of Jo^^^ If it be pleasant to give up our selves to ^^^st in Baptism,
and to (...) for ours; surely it must be as pleasant ^^ene^^ the Dedication of
our Selves to Christ at his Table! As a Feast is made for laughter, so is the
Table of Christ for Spiritual delight and joy in him. We are the Circumcision
that worship God in the Spirit and rejoice in Christ Jesus If ever we rejoice
in him, surely it will be when we do this in Remembrance of Him Here is the "
Banquet of Wine, and the Sce^^ter of Grace held forth, and though we come
trembling for fear, yet the King says to us -- What is thy Petition and it
shall be granted thee. As some happy People keep with Joy the day of their
Espousals, so is or should be the frequent Communion of Saints to them. (...)
the Table of Christ; wherein they remember the day of their Espousals, the day
of the gl^^ness of their hearts. Let this be thy ^edding Garment, the Joy of
thy Soul in Christ and in the Remembrance of his love. The Israelites were glad
when the time came on for the keeping the Passover, though they were to eat it
with bitter herbs and heavy bread the Salvation was Great which they rememb^^d,
and that made all pleasant; but we have a Greater Salvation than that of the
Church from Egypt to keep our Eye upon, and to draw forth our hearts in
Enlarged Praises unto God. The Banner of Christ's love is over you at his Table,
and holy Souls should be there solacing themselves in his love. It is a
Love-feast, and a frame of love to God is the most joyful one that can be. No
Sabbaths in the Year are more welcome to prepared Souls than those wherein they
have the Opportunity of waiting on Christ in this Ordinance. Then will I go
unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy. The Mysteries and Marvels of
Redeeming love are pleasant to Contemplate. The Pron^ises in Christ most
pleasant to apply: And so the Means of Increase and growth in Grace to be in
the use of. We are glad sometimes when our friends ask us to eat with them at
their Tables, or when they come to eat with us ^t ours; much more should we be
^lad to (...) to Christ's Table upon his Invitation, and to receive him into our
Souls.

Thus the Sacraments of Christianity are such us we should be glad to go up to
the House of the Lord, by Christ to offer the Sacrifices of Praise.

V. And lastly, We should be glad to go ^p to the House of the Lord, to receive
the Blessing there pronounced in the Name of the Lord. ^^s is a Short but a
Sweet and Great Act or Solemnity in Public Worship; even the Blessing the
Congregation. It was appointed to Israel of old that Aaron and his Sons should
bless the People, and the Benediction was formed for them to use. See Numb. 6.
22, -- 27. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and unto his
sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying unto
them, The LORD bless thee, and keep thee: The LORD make his face shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: The LORD lift up his countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace. And they shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel,
and I will bless them. This Honor God put upon his Ministers from the
beginning, this Grace he showed to his Peopple. Those whom he separated to his
own Service, by them he would bless his Church. Aaron was thus honored and
Israel was comforted. Thus he honors his House and Worship, by commanding
there the Blessing. And his Blessing will be Es^caciou^^ If an Sons of Peace
are present it will c^^^e upon them. This was the Blessing of Levi that I was
to bless his Brethren. Deuteronomy. 10.8. At that time the LORD se^^^rated the Tribe
of ^^e^^ to bear the Ark of the Covenant (...) star before he LORD and
Minister, and to bless in ^is Name It is one most worthy End of the Sepa^a^^ on
of the Ministerial Order, and one most worthy part of Sacred Institution. The
People of old were wont to rejoice (...) see th^^ Ministers of Religion,
because they came (...) (...) them out of Gods House: Psalm. 118.26. Blessed be
he that comes in the Name of the LORD; We have blessed you out of the House of
the LORD.

Now this is certainly a pleasant Act in Public Worship. A pleasant Conclusion
of the Worship which should make us go home with a glad heart. It is grown so
much into a Form that I fear we lose the Spiritual Import and Benefit intended,
many of us: but he that with a devout heart and a pure mind waits for a
Blessing from God, would not willingly go without that which is pronounced.
Pleasant it is to a gracious Minister to bless, and pleasant to a gracious Soul
to be blessed. Not that the blessing from a poor Worm is any thing worth; No it
is not Man that Blesses; and if you value the Blessing from the Lips of the
Minister it is only as he speaks from God, and God by him. It is -- The LORD
bless thee and keep thee, the LORD make his face to shine upon thee: So we put
Gods Name upon his People, and He will bless them.

The Blessing prescribed unto us in the New Testament is most sweet and
pleasant for us to Contemplate. Christ came from Heaven (...) bless us; and as
he was blessing his Disciples he was taken from them. He blessed ^is own from
the Holy Mount; he blesses us ^^t from his High Throne in Heaven. And ^^om he
blesses are blessed indeed. His Apostles understood it to belong to their
Commission to bless in his Name; and guided by his Infallible Spirit they did
it ex Officio; even as Aaron and his Sons had done before. Only the Form of
Blessing altered with the new Form of Worship and State of the Church. And this
is the blessed Form now to be used: Romans 16.24. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen. 2 Cor. 13. ult. The Grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you
all. Amen. That is to say, Mr. Clark.
I wish you may partake of all those Benefits which Christ of his free Grace
and Favor has purchased, which the Father of his free love has purposed, and
which the Holy Ghost does apply, communicate to and bestow upon the Elect. Gal.
6.18. Brethren, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit. Amen.
This is again more Enlarged and amplified: Ephesians. 6. ult. Peace be to the
Brethren, and love with faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ;
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. And
yet again, shortest of all, Col. 4. ult. Grace be with you. Amen. That is,
Christ be with you: and so it is Interpreted; 2 Timothy 4. ult. The Lord Jesus
Christ be with thy Spirit; Grace be with you. Amen. Peter's Blessing differs in
a word from Paul's, but signifies just the same: 1 Pet. 5. ult. Peace be with
(...) all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. To have done, the Holy Bible
concludes with this Benediction: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.

On this wise we are Authorized yet to bless in the Name of Christ, and every
Sabbath you are dismissed from the House of God with this Blessing. It is worth
coming for, and waiting for, and happy are they that bear it away with them.
How comprehensive are these sew words? Who can unfold all that is contained in
them! What time would it require to do it in an Imperfect manner! Methinks
there is no need to add a word to them. The words we add sink below them. May
the full sense and Emphasis of them remain, and the Blessing wished rest upon
our Souls. How Amiable would this make Gods Tabernacles (...), and how Reverend
his Ministry, and how Pleasant his Sabbaths! How gladly should we go to and
from his House at all times. What come we for, but for the Blessing? If we can
carry that away we have all! Grace Mercy and Peace, from God the Father and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.

As we are Baptized into the Name of the Ever blessed Trinity, so are we
blessed in that Glorious and Fearful Name. In which blessing all that God is or
can be unto his Creatures, all that he can do to make them blessed is wished
unto us. This Blessing we wish you this Day, The LORD that made Heaven and
Earth, bless you out of Sion I am sure then that you will b^^^ad to r^^rn to
Gods House again.

As the Word, so the Blessing is directed unto Every particular Person; and
every one should stay gladly and reverently to hear it and receive it. So what
God of old promised he is yet fulfilling; Wherever he records his Name, he
meets his People and blesses them.

And thus I have considered the Acts of Divine Public Worship; and that we
should on the Account of one and another of them be glad when we are called
upon to go up unto the House of the Lord. And indeed such a Savor of the Holy
Ordinances should be the Blessing which we should seek after. Psalm. 27.4. One
thing have I desired of the LORD, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
LORD, and to enquire in his Temple.

FINIS.
Communion with GOD.
1. THrice Holy, Blessed, Immortal Dove!
Spirit of Grace, and God of Love!
Cleave the high radiant Firmament,
And make thy promised swift Descent.
2. Fill every humble Soul with Grace,
Each contrite heart with Light and Peace:
Thy Power the Sinking Mind can raise
To unknown Joys, and rapturous Praise.
3. Draw us, we'll run with strong Desire:
Life, light and love at once Inspire;
Brighten and warm us from Above,
Our Heads with light, our Hearts with love.
4. Teach us to Meditate and Pray,
Both how to Speak and what to say!
And while we Muse, or while we Speak,
Let Heavenly light upon us break.
5. Thy blessed Earnest to us give,
Seal us, and let us know we live:
To us our Saviors Love reveal,
And let our Pardon pass thy Seal.
6. Then shall we spend our happy Days,
And brighter Nights, in cheerful Praise:
Celestial Hymns we'll daily bring,
Such as the Heavenly Chorus Sing.

