Febrifugium.

AN ESSAY for the CURE of Ungoverned Anger: IN A SERMON Preached, at the
Proposal and on the Occasion, of a Man under a Sentence of DEATH, for a Murder
Committed by him in his ANGER.

At BOSTON, 23. d. III. m. 1717.

Pone Vesanos, precor, Animi tumores, teque Pietati refer. BOSTON, Printed by
J. Allen, for Benjamin Gray, at the Corner Shop, on the North-side of the
Townhouse. 1717.

The Occasion.
A Man whose Name was JEREMIAH FENWICK, was upon a Fair Trial brought in GUILTY
of having Murdered his Neighbor with an Axe, which he took up, and Employed a
Repeted Blow thereof, at a Person at whom his Anger was Enraged.

After he received the Sentence of DEATH for the Fact, the great pains taken by
the Ministers of BOSTON for his Instruction and Conversion, were not without
some good Effects, and Symptoms of Repentance upon him; One of which might be
his Desire to have a SERMON of such a Tendency Preached; as is here Published,
that so such Ends as did appear to be desired by the poor Man, may be yet more
generally answered.

For which purpose, his Dying Speech, is also annexed.

An ESSAY for the CURE of Ungoverned Anger:
Eccl. VII. 9. ANGER rests in the Bosom of Fools.


OUR People are at this time Entertained with a Spectacle, upon which our Heart
is Exceeddingly hardened, if we cannot say, My Eye affects my Heart. The sad
Spectacle is a Man who dies before his Time, with this Lamentation in his
Mouth, I have slain a Man to my wounding, and a Neighbor to my Hurt. It will
be our Happiness, and it is what the glorious GOD requires of us; to make an
Holy Improvement of such an unhappy Spectacle. How can it be better improved,
than by a due Attention to the Warnings of GOD against the Vice, which has
Murdered this poor Man, and pushed him upon a Murder! I shall bring forth a
bloody Murderer among you; It shall be Arraigned and Indicted for doing of
horrid Things amongst us, not having the Fear of GOD before its Eyes, but being
moved by the Instigation of the Devil. It shall be stoned before the Lord; Join
with me, my Hearers, in the stoning of it. It has here killed One poor Man, in
hurrying him on to kill another. It has the Seed of all mischief, and even of
Murder in it. You are doubtless willing to know the Name of the Murderer upon
whom I have this Design. I inform you then, UNGOVERNED ANGER, I say, UNGOVERNED
ANGER is the Malefactor. Behold, A Man dying a Sacrifice to the Folly of
UNGOVERNED ANGER: which certainly is, To die as a Fool dies! It Is UNGOVERNED
ANGER that has brought all this upon him. UNGOVERNED ANGER; How Fatal a Folly!
And yet, how Frequent a Folly! This is that Error against which, in the
Lamentable Circumstances of this poor Man, Lo, GOD sends forth his Voice, and
it is a mighty Voice. Oh! Let it have a due Attention from us: Let all Israel
Hear and Fear, and let that Foolish Passion be no more indulged among us.

If I should say, That the Sacrifice of the least Good Thing in the World, unto
UNGOVERNED ANGER, is the Sacrifice of a Fool, I have read unto you a Text from
whence the Assertion would be Justified.

My Text is found in a Book, which contains the Wise and Just Sentiments of a
Soul upon the Strokes of Recollection: A Soul Repenting of the Follies
Committed in straying from GOD, and Sinning against Him. One of them is a
Disswasive Employed upon UNGOVERNED ANGER; One of those Follies, which make
abundance of work for Repentance among the Children of Men. We are dissuaded
from it in those Terms, Be not Hasty in thy Spirit to be Angry: And we have
this Potent Argument offered; For Anger rests in the Bosom of Fools. How,
Rests in their Bosom? The meaning is, It has a Lodging in their Heart. They
allow it a Lodging there. Such a Lodging that it is ready to make its
Appearance upon the least Occurrence that can be; Such a Lodging that it
Abides, it Remains, it is not Eafily parted with. UNGOVERNED ANGER is intended,
by the Resting of Anger in the Bosom: And I shall sufficiently keep to the
Intention of my Text, by giving you this DOCTRINE from it.

VNGOVERNED ANGER is a very Foolish Thing; has very much Folly in it.
A Man must Govern his Anger, and Regulate and Moderate and Mortify that unruly
Passion, if he would not be as one of the Fools in Israel.

It Is well-known, and it may be, too well-known, That Anger is one of those
Passions, whereinto the Mind of Man is moved, when Displeasing Objects are
before it. ANGER; An Affection stirred in the Soul, by Evils that hinder the
Satisfaction of it; and an Affection that stirs up the Soul hastily to remove
those Evils: A Mind that should not have this Affection in it, were a Maimed
and a Lamed Soul and must halt in many of its Motions. But, alas, Mankind is
more liable to an Excess than a Defect of this Affection. Anger, it is like
Fire; And, as Fire, so Anger, it is a Good Servant, but a Bad Master.
Nevertheless how much oftener is it a Master than a Servant? Mankind is an
Angry sort of a Thing; and the Hearts that have Naturally Fire in them, are too
often made more Criminally Hot, by being set on Fire of Hell. UNGOVERNED ANGER
is a Vice by which the Quiet of the World, is very much Disturbed; It is the
Grand Incendiary of the World. Every Man has enough to do, to bring Water for
the Extinguishing of the Flames raised by this Incendiary. My Buckets are now
to be thrown upon them; And perhaps, it is hardly possible for you to be
Entertained on a CASE of a more general and Extensive Importance than this;

By what Rules are we to Govern our selves, that the Follies of VNGOVERNED
ANGER may be avoided?
There was a Caution once given; Judge. XVIII. 25. Let not thy Voice be heard
among us, lest Angry Folks run upon thee. But I don't use to be afraid of the
Fools. It is now Especially to Angry Folks, that my Voice is to be directed.
But the whole Auditory is deeply concerned. Let every Person in it, be flow to
wrath, and receive with Meekness, the Word, which, Oh! how well would it be for
us, if it might be Engrafted into our Souls!

I. It Is the Grace of MEEKNESS, which is to deliver us from the Follies of
UNGOVERNED ANGER; A Grace how much to be wished for, to be studied for, to be
labored for! -- The meekness of Wisdom. An Ornament often and highly Commended
in the Oracles of GOD! -- Glorious Things are spoken of thee, O thou Ornament
of Christianity!

The meekness to be desired is, that whereof we read; Gal. V. 22, 23, The Fruit
of the Spirit, is meekness. And it being a Grace which is a Fruit of the Holy
Spirit, it is peculiar to them, whom the Holy Spirit has Renewed and Quickened;
and who have begun to live unto GOD. It is the meekness, which is put on by the
Elect of GOD, who are become Holy and Beloved. My Friend, Until a Principle of
PIETY have animated thy Soul, it will be a Stranger to the True, Right, Genuine
Meekness; UNGOVERNED ANGER will be one of thy unhealed Maladies.

There is a Meekness of Complexion, wherewith some are advantaged. They are of
a more stayed, a more settled, a more composed Humor than other Men; and so
Phlegmatic is their Complexion, that they be not soon Enraged. There is also a
Meekness of Morality, wherewith some are Beautified. Rational Contemplations of
pure Philosophy, have mightily composed their Souls; and the Lessons of
Morality have sweetly tempered them. Yea, But the Meekness after which we are
to aspire, should be of an Higher elevation in Christianity; It should be
nothing short of that; Jam. III. 17. The Wisdom that is from above, which is
Peaceable, Gentle, Easy to be Entreated.

I will give one Remarable Difference, between the Meekness of mere Nature; and
that more Spiritual Meekness which a Mind Rectified by the Holy Spirit of GOD
arrives unto. The Meekness of mere Nature is equally Insensible under all sorts
of Provocations. But the Meekness of a Sanctified Mind is not so. In the former
Meekness Men are as unconcerned about Abuses offered unto GOD, as they are
about Abuses offered unto themselves. But in the latter Meekness it is not so.
We are to be Easy, when Abuses are offered unto our selves. And this from a
Principle of Obedience and Submission unto GOD. At the same Time, when Abuses
are offered unto our glorious GOD, Now a Certain Commotion of Zeal should-be
raised in us. Now we should be Zealous, be Troubled, be grieved. Now with an
Holy Anger we should let it be seen, Things are not, as we should have them to
be! A Meek Man should say, In aliis Mansuetus ero; at in Injuriis contra
Christum non ita. No Injuries but what are offered unto GOD, shall make any
Impressions on my Mansuetude.

Briefly. It Is praescribed, Ephesians. IV. 26. Be Angry, but do not Sin. The Rule for
this would be, Be Angry at nothing but Sin. I humbly conceive, That this may be
fairly maintained, as the Golden Rule of Meckness. If you would not Sin in your
Anger, let nothing but Sin be the Object of your Anger. If Anger begin to boil,
Examine, Is there any Sin against GOD committed, in what I am going to be Angry
at? If there be None, it will be Meekness of Wisdom to throw away no Anger upon
it. That so a Gracious Meekness may adorn us;

First. We are to make our Supplications and Resignations, unto the Holy SPIRIT
of GOD our SAVIOR; to obtain the Grace of Meekness from Him. It was Enjoined
of old, Seek ye the Lord, All ye Meek of the Earth. It Is now to be the
Injunction laid upon us all, Seek ye the Lord, That ye may be made the Meek of
the Earth Yea, Seek Meekness, is the Thing Expressly directed to. When Meekness
is called for, there is that Direction given for the obtaining of it; Jam. 1.5.
If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of GOD, and it shall be given him; --
The Wisdom to steer clear of UNGOVERNED ANGER, with a Spirit of Meekness. My
Angry Brother, Carry that Froward Heart of thine unto the Holy SPIRIT of GOD
thy SAVIOR, and plead, O my GOD, I have the Heart of a fierce Tiger in me, but
thou can change my Heart, and make me as meek as a Lamb. I put my Heart into
thy Hand; O do Thou take possession of it, and keep down and put out those
Hellish Fires, that are too Easily kindled there! When Eliphaz imagined, that
Job was too fretful, he told him, I doubt, Thou Restrainest Prayer. Certainly,
If our Fretting don't kill our Praying, our Praying will do much to Cure our
Fretting. We are bidden, to List up Holy Hands without Wrath. Let us do it
Against Wrath, and anon we shall not only Pray without Wrath, but also Live
without it. But if a Man have a Choleric Devil obstinately infesting of him;
-- it may be, The Kind will not go out without Fasting and Prayer. Certainly,
That Extraordinary Method, may be worth taking, rather than have such a Devil
resting in our Bosom.

Secondly. Having so sought Meekness, let us now proceed unto the Exercises of
it.

You are aware; That Meekness does not propose to Destroy our Anger, but only
to Govern it. It may sometimes be not only Lawful, but also Needful, to be
Angry. That most Consummate Pattern and Fountain of all Goodness, our SAVIOR
Himself, when he had some Sinful People about Him, we read, Mar. III. 5. He
looked round about on them with Anger. Goodness it self may have Anger in it;
Meekness it self may be Angry. But then, First; Meekness must Govern our Anger,
as to the Reasons of it. You must be well-advised by Meekness, against that
Weakness, of being, Angry without a Cause; Lest you be pleased no otherwise
than, -- you know how! Particularly; Be sure, To be Angry at a Good Thing; This
cannot be Good. When the words of GOD in Sound Doctrines, or in Just Reproofs
are brought unto us, it is a Wicked Thing to be Angry at them. A Wickedness
exemplified by the Hearers of our (...); Act. VII. 54. When they heard these
thing, they gnashed on him with their Teeth. Nor is it any Better to be Angry
at the Works of GOD, either in our own Adversity, or in the Prosperity of
others, or suppose, the Accidents of the Weather disappointing of us. Jonah has
the leaves of his Alcherva failing him; And now, Do thou well to be Angry,
Jonah? Hush; Do not say, Thou Do! But then, I will go on with my Limitations,
Take these Two; Be not Angry for Nothing; and, Be not Angry for Every Thing.
Both of these are Exorbitances. Your Anger should not be for Nothing. If you
are Angry you should be Able to give a sufficient, and a significant Account,
why you are so! Not fret and fume for you know not what your selves: Nor upon a
mere mistake, a mere Fancy, and ungrounded suspicion; some wrong Information.
Over all your Anger, and all that you do or speak in your Anger be able to say
with him; I Sam. XVII. 29. Is there not a Cause? Nor should Anger be for Every
Thing. What? For the Landing of every little Skiff, to set the Becons on Fire?
By no means. To be Angry, for every Trifle: Upon the breaking of a Glass, the
spilling of a Cup, every little Blunder of a Servant, some small Disrespect
shown to our Character, presently an uprore to be made in our Souls! By no
means. About your Anger take that Advice; Jam. I. 19. Let every Man be slow to
speak, slow to wrath.

Secondly. Meekness must Govern our Anger as to the Seasons of it. If you are
Angry out of Time, Verily, your Spirit is out of Tune. You make wretched Jars,
if you don't keep Time in your Anger. There are Two Cautions to be tendered you.

One Caution is this; You must not be Angry too Soon. What a Reprimand have our
short-winded, hasty, huffy People, given to them! In Prove. XIV. 17. He that is
soon Angry, deals foolishly. Syrs, My proposal is worth hearkening to; Never
be Angry without first Pausing a little, and Thinking, Will my Anger be proper
here? There was an Heathen Emperor, who would not permit his Anger to break
forth at any thing, until he had made such a pause, as to recite the Letters of
the Alphabet. There was a Christian Emperor, who would not permit the
Indignations of Anger at any thing to boil within him, until he had made such a
pause as to recite, The Lords Prayer. Thus the Brave Men, that had Rule over
other Men, in this gave a Demonstration that they could (...) themselves also.
A Glorious Dominion, and that without which, Be it known to you, O Men of
Quality, No Dominion will be Glorious. A Delay of Anger, until the fittest
minute for the working of it; How Profitable, how Serviceable, would it be;
what Praecipitations would it save us from! The Discretion of a Man, is never
more Conspicuous, than when he Deferreth his Anger. I question, Whether any Man
ever found himself a Loser by doing so. This I am sure of; He that is slow to
Anger is better than the mighty.

Another Caution is this; You must not be Angry too Long. It is the Apostolical
Charge; Ephesians. IV. 26. Let not the Sun go down in your Wrath. I hope, you would
not have the Sun carry such a story of you, to the People of the other
Haemisphaere, That you are Implacable. Our Anger, like the Manna of old, will
stink, if it be kept until the next Morning: But in this thing otherwise than
the Manna, That it Stinks worst of all, when kept until the Sabbath. We should
not give such an Evil Spirit leave to stay a Night under the Roof with us. The
Apostle in this passage, may allude unto the Law; If a Man have Committed a Sin
worthy of Death, and he be put to Death, and they hang him on a Tree, his Body
shall not remain all night upon the Tree; thou must bury him in any wise that
very Day. Even so; If a Man have Committed a Sin worthy of thy Wrath, yet thy
Angry Resentment thereof, must not remain all night; Thou shall bury it in any
wise, that very Day. Yea, There is a Cursed Carcass hanging in thy Soul, as
long as Anger is discomposing of thee. Syrs, I have another proposal, which
will be worth hearkening to; going to Rest, every Night, make it a Rest indeed,
by being able to say, There is no body in the World, but what my mind is in an
Easy Frame unto! This I will affirm Constantly. An Immortal Anger very ill
becomes Mortal People.

Thirdly. Meekness must Govern our Anger, as to the Measures of it. If we must
be Angry, yet, why Raving? Why Frantic? Why like a slated House on Flame, so
violent that there shall be no coming anear you! If Angry, yet what need of
being Transported into a Fury? and Flinging Things to and fro, as if you were
mad? Fie, for shame! Why must you fall to Railing, why to Revenge, on the Person
whom your Anger is pointed at? I Will show you a picture of this Anger! It Is in I
Sam. XX. 30. Then Saul's Anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto
him, Thou Son of the Perverse, Rebellious Woman! What a madman is here? He
calls his own Son, A Whores-bird? -- The Anger is unbounded, when it breaks
forth into Reproaching, into Reviling, into Taunts and unmannerly Expressions.
But what, when into Blows, from a Fist of Wickedness? Blows; and it may be a
poor Beast must feel them too. Brutish, Anger, and such as degrades the Man
down into the very Class that he quarrels with! So Balaam; his Anger was
Kindled, and he Smote the Ass with a Staff! An Anger that will spend it self in
outrages upon an Horse, upon a Dog, upon a Tool that fails us; how worse than
C^^^dish is it! I may say, Cursed is their Anger, for it is fierce; and their
wrath, for it is cruel! One thing more is to be spoken. Beware of making any
Vows, in your Anger; Vows dictated by Anger; The worst Counselor in the World!
Vows, wherein the Third Commandment is horribly Violated! And, Oh! Beware of
all Angry Imprecations; All Wishes that carry Curses in them: All Wishes of any
Damage to your selves or others. An Elias himself had need keep a Watch over
himself, when Anger shall indispose him. Especially, let provoked Parents (...)
such Ebullitions. Parents, (...) undutiful Children give you any Provocations?
Take heed that your Anger do not throw out any imprecations upon them. It Is a
Thousand to One, that a Righteous GOD will say, Amen, unto them; and you may
see Things done, that when you are cool, you would have greatly deprecated.

The Grace of Meekness, Oh! What a Golden Curb, would it keep upon us?

II. There are some Wise Considerations, with which we are to check the Follies
of UNGOVERNED ANGER; Things which Well-Considered would lay the Easy Yoke of
Meekness upon us. The Truth is, Angry People, are always Inconsiderate. Anger
would be mavellously allayed, if People would but Consider a little more. But
there are some Considerations, which are special Anger-Quellers; They are
Specificks for the Cure of the Malady; Singular, Adapted, Potent Febrifuges.

First. There are some Consideration purely Reasonable, which would be of some
use to Allay the Irregular Heats of our Anger. Indeed, Anger is frequently an
Unreasonable Thing. (...), Furor brevis est. If Reason could be restored, unto
its Exercise, the Anger would be over. But let us hear what Reason says.

An Angry Man may do well to Consider this; Rarely is any thing done so well in
Anger, but what would have been done much Better out of it. If a Man would have
any Thing done, it will sooner be done by Fair Words, for the most part, than
by Fierce Ones. It Is said, The Words of Wise Men are heard in Quiet; Go Quietly
to Work, and your Words will be heard; your Business will be most Comfortably
and Effectually accomplished. The Best Thing will not be swallowed, where Anger
has made a scalding potion of it. Calmness will fit a Man, for every Thing he
has to do. A Soft Tongue, will manage a Man of Bone; a Man as hard and stiff as
a Bone.

I would Especially enter this Caveat, against the Infliction of a Punishment
upon Faulty Children and Servants, while the Fit of Anger is yet burning in the
Hearts of their Superiors. I would Entreat you, O Superiors offended at a
Fault; Stay a little; Stop a little; Don't Punish till the Chafe of your Anger
is a little over. He was a Prudent Man, though a Pagan, who said unto his Man
that Vexed him; I would strike thee now, but only that I am angry with thee.
Some will say, But if I put off the Execution of my Discipline, till the Heat
of my Anger is over, I cannot find! in my Heart then at all to Execute it. Then
I say, Thou art a Fool; And it is the Wrath of Heaven against thy poor Children
and Servants, that has put them into the Hands of such a Fool! I do
particularly move it for the School, as well as for the House. Because the
Strokes ought not furiously to be thrown away; They should be reserved, either
for Greater Faults, or for Obstinacy in Lesser Ones. But the Strokes ought
always to be accompanied with a serious Discourse unto the Sufferer, showing
him, the Word of GOD, that has been sinned against; Showing him the Sin that is
now suffered for.

There is a Word, which Oh! That it were more thought upon! That word; Jam.
1.20. The Wrath of Men Works not the Righteousness of GOD! Things done
Wrathfully, how seldom are they done Righteously! How seldom done, as GOD would
have them to be?

Again; An Angry Man will do well to Consider this; What are they that have
incurred, my Anger; and what was it they intended, when they did it? Upon the
Quality of them, with whom we are Angry, methinks the Reflections of Seneca,
have something in them, Is it a Good Man that has Injured thee? Don't readily
believe it. Is it a Bad Man? Don't at all Wonder at it. For to strive with thy
Equals; This is Doubtful: with thy Superiors; it will be madness; with thy
Inferiors; it will be Sordid. He that has Angered thee, is either a Stronger
than thou, or a Weaker; If a Stronger, spare thy self; If a Weaker spare him. O
Celebrated Stoic, Thou arguest incomparably. And thus we may carry on the
Argument. The Person against whom your Anger is Enkindled; either he had no
Design to Anger you; and then you wrong him in being Angry at him; or else he
had a Design to Anger you; and then it is a silly Thing in you to gratify him so
far as to be Angry at him.

There is a weight in such Considerations. But after all, Very Notable was the
Complaint of the most Learned Roman; That the Precepts of their Philosophy were
very Fine Things; and yet whatever the matter were, he knew not; when they came
to be Practiced, they still failed of procuring what they pretended for.

We must then betake our selves unto Christianity, for higher Considerations to
suppress the Rebellion, which UNGOVERNED ANGER will fall into.

Secondly. Let us then Repair to Religious Considerations, which also are of
all, the most Reasonable; and by them let the Unholy Fire of Anger be
Extinguished. RELIGION is the Engine, that must be brought and wrought, for the
putting out of the Fire, which threatens unknown Confusion unto us.

Accordingly; First; It may check our Anger, if we will Consider this; Whose
Eye is upon me when I am Angry, and upon all the motions of my Anger! Syrs, Are
you not always in a Presence which you owe a Respect unto? I Will propound this.
The Angels of our GOD; These have their Eye upon us; They Rejoice, when they
see us behave our selves, as becomes the Heirs of Salvation; They do not so,
when we misbehave our selves. It was urged against Rashness; Eccl. V. 6.
Neither say thou before the Angel, it was an Error. It may be urged against
Anger, which very seldom is without some Rashness in it; Why should an Angel
see thee in an Error? When an Angel stood in the way of the Angry Prophet, he
would rush no further in his Anger. My Friend, In thy Anger thou art rushing
out of the way. But, what if there should be an Angel standing by thee, with a
Flaming Sword in his hand? Oh! put up the Sword of the Flaming Wrath, and be
n't so Angry lest he take notice of it. But there is a more considerable thing
than this; and a thing so certain, that there is no room for a What if? upon
it. Ah, Vexed Parence, Will thou not Endure, seeing Him that is Invisible?
Syrs, Remember, The Eye of the great GOD Himself is upon you; A Presence, which
Certainly you owe Respect unto! It Is very Ill manners to Chide, and Scold, and
Brawl, and much more to Smite with Anger, in the Company of Strangers, and much
more of our Betters; It Is an Affront unto the Company. When you are Angry, then
call to mind, I am in the Presence of the glorious GOD; The glorious GOD looks
upon me! Surely, This will bring you to some Decorum. If a Magistrate, or but a
Constable, or indeed any Person of Gravity comes in, with a, What Is to do here?
-- it uses to quiet unruly Fellows. And will it not quiet our unruly Angers,
for the Almighty GOD Himself to come in upon them! It was said; Jer. V. 22.
Fear ye not me? Says the Lord: Will not ye Tremble at my Presence? Which have
placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea; that though the waves thereof toss
themselves, they cannot prevail; though they rore, yet they cannot pass over
it. Oh! could we set our selves as in the Presence of the Lord, One would
think, This might set a Bound unto the foaming Sea of our Anger! To Strike in
the Presence of the King; How Intolerable! How Inexcusable! A whole People
once, were in such a Temper of Anger, that they were going to stone the best
Friends they had in the World; The Rage reached up to Heaven! But we read, The
Glory of the Lord appeared, -- And then all the murmur of the Raging waves of
the Sea -- stopped at once. Truly, When we are Angry, may the glorious Lord
appear unto us, it would Calm us wonderfully!

Secondly. It may check our Anger, if we will Consider this; Who is it that
makes me Angry, and from whose Hand come the Accidents, on which I place my
Anger? It Is very probable, There may be the Hand of Joab in all this; I mean,
That there may be an Hand of Satan in Contriving to make you Angry; For he
knows, That when you are Angry, he has you, at wondrous Disadvantages, to drive
you into some Snare that he has been laying for you. When we are Angry, let us
call to mind; It may be, that I am now put into this Agitation, by Satan
sisting of me! But now let me not Hamour Satan, by discovering abundance of
Bran in the sifting. What says the Proverb of Israel? He that has no Rule over
his own Spirit, is like a City that is broken down, and without Walls? We are
besieged by the Devil, in the Assaults, that alarm our Anger. If now we are
like a City that is broken down, and without Walls, what, what will become of
us? There was a Wicked Man among the Corinthians, by whom our Apostle was
buffeted, as Micajah had formerly been, after a most Intimate Communion with
the Heavenly World. But the Man of GOD says of him; 2 Cor. XII. 7. There was
given me a Messenger of Satan, to buffet me, lest I should be Exalted above
measure. Syrs, The Cause why you are so Angry, is Because that somebody Buffets
you. Now think; It may be, that Satan sets them on! And he may set them on for
this very purpose; To throw you into the Disorders of Anger.

Oh! Be not Ignorant of his Devices! -- But I am certain, There is a more
Considerable Hand than Satan's, without which no Troublesome Occurrent
whatsoever could accost you. Whatever the Man be that offends you he is but an
Instrument in the Hand of GOD; The great GOD is the Eternal, Sovereign, First
Cause of all; and you may say unto that Man, Thou could have no Power
against me, except it were given thee from Above. Oh! That our Anger might
learn that Language; Psalm. XXXIX. 9. I Am Dumb, I open not my mouth; For it is
what thou have done, O Lord. A Job will not be Intemperately Angry at a
Caldaean, when he Remembers, It Is the Lord, who has taken away. A David will
not be Intemperately Angry at a Shimei, when he Remembers, The Lord has bidden
him. Child of GOD, I hope, thou can say, I can take any thing well at my
Fathers Hands!

Thirdly. Excellent Examples of a WELL-GOVERNED ANGER well considered with us,
may be of use to save us from the Follies of UNGOVERNED A^^EP. B^ight Examples
of Meekness have been set before us; Let us observe the Examples, till we can
Follow them. Shall I tell you of a famous Divine, who while an Insolent Man,
had struck out some of his Teeth, only and calmly said unto him, I could bear
you to strike out all the rest, if I might be so Happy as to do your Soul any
Good! Shall I tell you, of another famous Divine, who having a Stone by a Base
Woman thrown at him, as he was ignominiously carried through the City, took no
notice of it, but only and calmly said, The Good GOD forgive thee! Shall I tell
you of a Calvin, who is famous for that Speech of his; Though Luther should
call me a Devil, I will call him no other than an Eminent Servant of the Lord!
Or, will you be told of a Renowned Moses, who in Meekness out-shone all of
these, and who was made Great by the Gentleness of GOD?

But after all, I will rather say Run with Patience, looking off unto JESUS,; A
JESUS, Fairer than the Children of Men! An Eminent Person wrote on the Walls of
his Study, those words of our Incomparable SAVIOR; LEARN OF ME, FOR I AM MEEK
AND LOWLY IN HEART. I have read of some, that when the Rage of Anger was upon
them, they would set before them a Lamb, which would bring all to rights. But
this is the Thing, that is now pressed for; O Angry People, Set before your
selves the JESUS, who is the Lamb of GOD, and who was always as Meek as a Lamb;
and who when he was oppressed, and was afflicted, yet opened not his mouth; as
a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not His mouth. We are so
instructed, 1 Pet. II. 21, 23. CHRIST Suffered for us, leaving us an Example,
that ye should follow His Steps; Who, when He was Reviled, Reviled not again.
Truly, Never, Never was there such a Pattern of Meekness, as our most amiable
and admirable JESUS. I beseech you, let us have that Pattern always before us,
and set the Lord always before us! Church History mentions a Man of Great
Figure who had been a very Passionate Man, and a Man of such violent Anger,
that he made himself uneasy to all the World: But all the World at length took
notice, that he became one of the Meekest Men upon Earth: and when some asked
him, what it was that had produced this change upon him; he replied, I am come
to this, by keeping my Thoughts very much on the Meekness of my Lovely SAVIOVR.
Syrs, when you feel the Fiery Serpent of Anger fastening on you, fix your Eye on
your Lovely SAVIOR. 'Twill have a Transforming Efficacy.

Our SAVIOR who is God-Man, anon carries us up into the Infinite GOD; A GOD in
whom, Oh! what an Example of Long-Suffering have we to be amazed at! A GOD, in
whom these Two Things are celebrated; Psam. GIII. 8, 9. He is slow to Anger,
and He will not always chide. Alas, How many Millions of Indignities are put
upon the Omnipotent GOD, and this every Day! The Psalmist says, He is provoked
every Day. We may wonder that He has not Long ago made this whole World an
entire Sodom, and laid it in Ashes! A World, that is sill'd with His
Adversaries. 'Twere an easy Thing, and no unjust one, for Him to dart hot
Thunderbolts down upon the Heads of all His Adversaries. But He Suffers their
Manners. He bestows -- Thousands of Mercies and Comforts on them from Day to
Day. A Patient GOD now says to an Angry Man, Do thou well to be what thou
art? Oh! Let us Imitate the Long-Suffering of our Heavenly Father. Especially,
when we think, what Experience of His Long-Suffering, we our selves have had,
in His Dealings with us!

Fourthly. Will this do nothing to Govern our Anger? Impartially Consiter, What
our Anger is; and What we are in our Anger; and What we do by our Anger?

If you take a View of Excessive Anger, will it not appear an Odious, an
Unhandsome, a Deformed sort of a Thing? Some of the Ancients advised an Angry
Man, to take a View of his own Face in a Glass. Look in a Glass, my Friend, and
see, and say, How it looks to have so much of Cain in the Countenance!
Methinks, The View may turn the Anger into Blushing, and make thee more Angry
at thy self, than at any One else. Turpis Aspectus; Quid Animus? If Anger in
the Face be so ugly, what is it in the Soul? It Is a very Good Rule in
Conversation; For a Man to Mind how his own Indecencies look, when he sees them
in other Men. Why, That Outrageous Anger, in which thou do indulge thy self,
how do thou like it in other Men, when thou see them storming with such
Outrages?

But more than so; O UNGOVERNED ANGER, From thee we suffer great Disquietments,
and very Hurtful Things are done unto us, by thy Praecipitancies!

This Anger; Alas, it unfits a Man for every Thing in the World. It mingles a
strange Fire with our Sacrifices. Our Devotions are all Spoilt, if they be not
without Wrath. If we cannot Bear much, we shall never be Pillars in the House
of GOD, nor be very useful in any Society It Is a Blemish unto a Man; it lays
him low, in the esteem of the Neighborhood. An Angry Man may keep the
Neighbors in some Awe; But little does the think, their Secret Aversion for
him; and how much they bear in mind, his Abusive usage of them. Such Anger, it
makes a Man unfit for any Relation. Art thou a Froward and a Furious Man? The
Bible forbids us to enter into a Close Friendship with such a Man. If thou art
not so much as fit for a Friend, what else can thou be good for? Such a Man
is a mere Nabal, to all that are about him.

Yea, Anger may cause a Man to fall under Anger. Thy Anger, O Man, may lay thee
open to the Anger of GOD. When Moses was Angry, he broke both of the Two
Tables, on which the Law was written by the Finger of GOD. Indeed, an Angry Man
will soon break both Tables of the Law; Yea, He will Abound in Transgression.
And GOD will Distribute Sorrows in His Anger, to the Transgressor. Sometimes
the Anger of People, will boil out in such VVishes, -- as the Anger of GOD will
bring about, in astonishing Mischiefs upon them. Whether it be so or no; our
glorious JUDGE, has given us an awful Intimation, That our Anger has nothing
less than Murder in it! -- O Dreadful; -- Nothing less than Murder in it! He
says, Mar. V. 22. Whosoever is Angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be
in danger of the Judgment; and, whosoever shall say to his Brother, Raca, shall
be in danger of the Council; But, whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in
danger of Hellfire. Anger Conceived is like the Crimes, which fell under the
Cognizance of the middle Judicatory of the Twenty three Judges among the Jews.
Anger Uttered, is like the Crimes of which the Highest Judicatory of the
Sanhedrim and Seventy among them took the Cognizance It Is like a Capital Crime;
The Commandment which forbids Murder is that which has forbidden it. Anger soon
gets on to Hatred; Hatred what is it but Murder? And verily, It Is to be wondered
at, that Angry People commit no more actual Murders than they do! There is much
of Hell in it; and Hell will be the Punishment. This is very sure; By this
Anger of ours, we shall grieve the Dove-like Spirit of our SAVIOR,
Exceedingly. Those Two Things are joined; Ephesians. IV. 30, 31. Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of GOD; let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, be put
away from you. But, will you Grieve that Spirit of Goodness? Oh! How Evil, How
Evil, will be the Consequences! Christian, It Is thy Glory to be a Temple of
GOD. When thou perceivest Anger glowing in thy Soul, now think; What? shall I
set a Temple of GOD on Fire? Should a Temple of GOD, have such a Fire preying
upon it!

And now, What shall be the Issue of all the Meditations.

May we from this Time, One and all, Study that Meekness, which is a Thing of
great Price in the sight of GOD! Oh! may the Effect of our Meditations and
Supplications be this; That we shall be the Meek, whom the Gospel has
pronounced the Blessed Ones, and of whom it is promised, That they shall be
Beautified with the Salvation of GOD. Concerning a Continual Study to suppress
UNGOVERNED ANGER, I will say unto you, what was of old spoken to one who was
dissuaded from it; 1 Samuel XXV. 31. This shall be no grief unto thee, nor
offense of Heart; It will not be Repented of! I speak this, the more
Sollicitously, because the Time is coming on for the Accomplishment of that
Prophecy, The Nations were Angry. The Anger of People against one another, is
like to make fearful Tragedies. At this Time, O seek Meekness, that ye may be
hid in the Day of the Anger of the Lord; And that ye may admit no Wrath, but
what shall praise the Lord, and the Remainder of the Wrath, you may still
Restrain.

But Above others, it is the special Concern of Persons in Superior Stations,
to be on their Guard, lest UNGOVERNED ANGER get the upper hand of them; lest
they who are to Govern others be themselves Geverned by the worst of Leaders.
Truly, a Little of this Folly, will be an unknown Damage, to a Man of
Reputation.

Syrs, If you are Men in Public. Circumstances, and especially, if you are Men
of Projection to Do Good in the World; You will have your Conduct often blamed
with Vile Misrepresentations of it. You must meet with many Prodigies of
Ingratitude, and People will heap Injuries upon you, at the very time when you
are heaping of Kindnesses upon them. You shall perhaps encounter with
unaccountable Defamations, and in every corner of the Country hear the Defaming
of many in wretched Calumnies, invented and fomented by them that Love and make
a Lie. -- But now, -- Oh! Take heed unto your Spirit. Not a Word! Not so much
as a Word, but what shall become a Meek Servant of GOD! Only say, Lord, Put not
thy Servant away in Anger, and let me not have the mark of one put away, by
Anger gaining upon me! Even a Moses himself, by Speaking unadvisedly with his
Lips on such Provocations, may incur this; GOD shall be Wroth with him! -- Oh!
That Great Men were always Wise! But, alas. They are not so.

A Miserable Man here in the Chains of Death before you, Earnestly desires it
of me, That all People may be warned against UNGOVERNED ANGER, from the sad
Experience of what he has himself therein been left unto. Yea, The Holy GOD
shows him unto the Congregation, and says unto us, Govern your Anger, or,
little do you think, what it may bring you to!

Our Charitable desires at the same time, for this Miserable Man, what can they
be? -- But that a Gracious GOD would affect his Heart, with a sense, not only
of the Follies he has by his UNGOVERNED ANGER been so often betrayed into;
Follies that have Enkindled against him the Anger of GOD; Especially that Crime
of Killing one whom he ought to have Loved, for which he must now hasten to the
Pit; but also make him truly sensible of all the Sin which has so incensed
Heaven, that having reached unto but about Three or Four and Thirty years of
Age, he must be Cut off, and come to a fearful End: That all the Sin wherein he
has denied the GOD that is Above, may appear unto him, as it is, the most
Odious Evil in the World; That a CHRIST, the only SAVIOR from Sin, may appear
inexpressibly Precious unto him, and fulfill on him and for him, all the Good
Pleasure of his Goodness; And, that having made the Flight of a lively Faith
unto the Blood which cleanses from all Sin, he may feel his Heart at the same
time filled with the Love of GOD and of His Neighbor, and a Concern to do all
the Good that he can at his leaving of the World. Ah! Poor FENWICK, in
pursuance of this Praeparation for thy approaching Death, now the Sorrows of
Death compass thee, and the Pains of Hell get hold on thee, it is high time for
thee to call upon the Name of the Lord, and say, O Lord, I beseech thee,
Deliver my Soul!

Oh! See to it, that the Work of Repentance, which now seems to be hopefully
beginning upon you, prove a Sincere, and a Real, and a Thorough Work, and an
Hope that will not make ashamed. The rather, Because a work of Repentance in
Circumstances like to yours, will have many things to bring a suspicion upon
the Sincerity of it. They that never Seek to GOD, until they feel Him Slaying
of them, do usually flatter Him with their mouth, and Lie to him with their
Tongue.

The Chains of an (...) Mind, those hideous Chains of Darkness, are with much
(...) Difficulty gotten off, than the Chains of Iron, which you have now upon
your Body. Oh! Cry to your SAVIOR, with a wonderful Agony, to take them off!
If you do so, then, Ah! Poor FENWICK Returning to GOD, In the Words of the
Prophet Jeremiah, there comes that Message from GOD unto thee; Jer. III. 12.
Return, says the Lord, and I will not Cause my Anger to fall upon you; For I
am Merciful, says the Lord, and I (...) not keep Anger for ever (...) a Sinner
as Thou art, Repenting, -- There will be Joy in Heaven over thee.

Surely, I have heard this Man bemoaning himself, That formerly instead of
Repenting, when a Gracious GOD gave him a Space to Repent, he misapplied the
Space, to add unto the Heap of his many Impieties. But, Oh! may he now Repent,
and produce a Joy, not only in Heaven, but also among all the People of GOD,
that are looking up to Heaven for him!

FINIS.
THE Dying Speech OF Jeremiah Fenwick,
Who, after he had at the place of Execution, less audibly spoken the substance
of these Things, then gave the ensuing Instrument as a more full Declaration of
his Dying Sentiments.

I Consider my self as a dying, Man, and I desire to dye giving Glory to God,
before whom I am now to make my Appearance. I offer up my Praises unto God who
has granted me such a space of Repentance, and so many helps and means to bring
me to it

I hope, the Faithful Servants of God, will with some comfort see some Harvest
of the great pains they have taken for my Good.

To all the other Sins of a Wicked Life, I have added this; That I have too
much delayed my Repentance, even since my Imprisonment, while the Sentence
against my evil work, was not yet certain to be Executed. Though I have hereby
so affronted and provoked the good Spirit of Grace, that He might justly
withdraw for ever from me, yet such has been his Free and Rich Grace, as to
continue still to visit me with his Influences; and bring on a work of
Repentance in my Soul.

I heartily mourn for all the Sins of my Life; and above all for the Fountain
of all Sins, which I have in an Heart that is desperately wicked. I most
particularly confess and bewail my Blood Guiltiness. I owe my Life to Justice,
for having wrongfully taken away the Life of my Brother, whom I ought to have
loved as my self. I own the Justice of the Government in their Proceeding
against me. But, Lord, there is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared.

I behold the Infinite Mercy of a God ready to Pardon; and my Soul is amazed at
it. I behold a great Savior, shedding his Blood, which cleanses from all Sin.
And I hear him saying to the chief of Sinners, Him that comes unto me I will
in no wise cast out. With a distressed Soul I fly to him, to be reconciled unto
God, and to be led into Paths of Righteousness. I am not without Hope. And one
fruit of my Hope, is, that it causes me to look on my Sins with more Sorrow for
them, and Hatred of them; which till I had this Hope, I did not care or dare to
think upon. Another fruit of it, is, that my Heart is melted, and filled with
Desires to Glorify God.

And I know not how to glorify God more, than by solemn warnings unto all
People to take heed of such Sins, as have brought me to such a Ruin as is now
come upon me.

The first thing that lies heavy on my Heart is, My Profanation of the Lords
Day, and my frequently and needlessly neglecting the Public Worship of God. A
Sin, which let all that love their Souls be afraid of. I have wounded my Soul
sometimes by excessive Drinking. A Sin that leads to many others I have been
very vile in Swearing and Cursing. Lord, send me not among those whose Language
I have been used unto! Ungoverned Anger has brought my Death. Beware, my
Friends, of this deadly Evil. But I would especially bewail my Prayerless Life.
I had no Prayers with my Family, nor in my Retirement, in the Morning of the
Day, when I was lest unto the Murder of my Neighbor. O my Friends, In the
Day, which you don't begin with Prayers unto God, little do you know what God
may leave you to.

Thus, I would as in the Presence of God, and as I am now in a short Time to
appear before my great Judge, there to give up an Account of my Actions done in
the Flesh, solemnly exhort and warn all that shall see or hear of my Tragical
and Untimely End; But more particularly Masters of Families, that they do not
neglect Prayers in their Families, and a due Attendance on the Public Worship
of God, on his Holy Day, and all other Duties required in Gods Holy Word, as I
to my great Grief have done. I desire all, that they look back on their past
life, and seek to God, thorough Jesus Christ for Repentance, while there is a
space given to them, least they mourn at last, and say, how have I hated
Instruction? and least God in His Holy Justice should say to them, when I
called upon you, you would not hear, now you cry to me, I will not answer you.
I desire yet more especially, to warn all young Persons, to seek unto God in
their Youth and in the Morning of their Days, as believing that their whole
Life is but a short Time to prepare for Eternity; and to live in an holy walk
with God, lest they should provoke God to leave them to fall into the same Sins
which have been my Ruin. Pray, let my Advice to you never be forgotten by you,
but take Example from (...) it as the words of a dying (...) Neighbor, that
you may not run on in sinning against the blessed God, but that you may take
warning by me, and may hearken to the Calls of God in the Gospel, with a due
and diligent Attendance on all the Ordinances of the Gospel, which is able to
make you wise unto Salvation. Thus leaving you to the Mercy of the great God,
as I do my self likewise, I hope through the Merits of my dear Redeemer, we may
have a happy Meeting in the great Day of the Lord. Take these warnings of a
dying Man. And now, O Father of Mercies, Let these warnings do Good in the
World, and let me who am leaving the World, find favor with thee, through the
blessed Jesus, my only Savior. Amen.

J. F.

The foregoing Instrument, was affirmed by Jeremiah Fenwick to be an Exact
Declaration of his Tho'ts, in every Clause of it. And he therewithal declared
his Desire, that it might be made as public and as useful to survi^^^^ (...)
were possible; In the Presence of us.

S. S.

S S.

FINIS.

