THE Honor and Happiness OF THE VIRTUOUS WOMAN; More especially Considered in
the two Relations Of a Wife and Mother. Meditated upon the lamented Death OF
Mrs. Elizabeth Hirst, the Virtuous Consort of Grove Hirst, Esquire Who departed
this Life, July 10. 1716. In the 35 Year of Her Age.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston. N.E.

Boston: Printed by B. Green. 1716.

To my Honored Friend, GROVE HIRST, Esquire
SIR,
IN a tender Sympathy with You, as becomes my Pastoral Relation and that
particular Friendship you favor me with on the best Accounts, I was naturally
led into the following MEDITATION, upon the Death of your Excellent and
Gracious Consort. As GOD has blessed you with many Lovely Children by Her, so
few MOTHERS have better answered the Character of Solomon's rare and Invaluable
Virtuous Woman, or more Merited that her Children should rise up and call Her
Blessed I know how dear her Memory will ever be unto you, nor need you Praise
her to them that know her. I wish your Children, who are too Young almost to
know their loss, may as they grow up Inherit and Exhibit a double Portion of
Her Gracious Spirit.

Remember (Sir) how happily you have lived together, Her comfortable End, and
how well She finished; and Support your Self on the Blessed Hope of a Joyful
Meeting again, never to part more.

I wish you all that Increase of Wisdom and Grace you need, (which is very
much, and which only GOD the Father of Lights can Supply you with) whereby you
may bear Exemplarily and improve Religiously the present Providence, do your
double Duty to your tender Brood, who have lost the other warm Wing they used
to gather under, and still go on to discharge Faithfully the Duties of your
Public Trusts, to the Honor of GOD and the Good of your Country.

Mrs. HIRST has made no small Addition to the Honor of Her Family, and to the
Name of SEW ALL; And now what living Pattern of profound Resignation to the
Will of GOD in Her Death, can I so Properly and Decently commend to You, or can
You with equal Pleasure and Reverence desire to learn of, as that which Her own
FATHER (the Honorable Judge SEW ALL) has been Enabled by the Grace of GOD to
give You? I pray GOD to teach All that are Related that Difficult but Necessary
and Reasonable Lesson, and to Sanctify their Bereavement to their Spiritual
and Everlasting Advantage.

And may GOD please to add to the many Bright Examples of Sincerity and true
Devotion, which are to be found through the Town both of Elder and Younger Women,
and make them more in Behavior as becomes Holiness: Particularly may He
please so to Adorn that Church whereof the DECEASED was so great an Ornament.

I am SIR, Your most Obliged Friend and Unworthy Pastor, BENJAMIN COLMAN.
Boston, July 16. 1716.
The Honor and Happiness OF THE Virtuous Woman.
PROVERBS XXXI. 28. Her Children arise up, and call her blessed; her Husband
also, and he praises her.


THIS Chapter is an Appendix to the Proverbs of Solomon. They are the Words of
King Lemuel, the Prophecy that his Mother taught him. Interpreters are
generally of Opinion, that Lemuel is no other than Solomon himself. At least,
like Solomon, he was a Wise and Religious King, under the Inspiration and
Direction of GOD in what is here wrote. He had likewise a Religious and Wise
Mother, who took great Care to Instruct and Charge Him from GOD; as Solomon was
tender and Only-beloved in the sight of his Mother. The Gracious Mother of
Lemuel was Inspired of GOD in these Admonitions which She gave to her Son; and
so has the Honor to stand on Record here as a Prophetess as well as a
Princess. She first Instructs the Prince her Son in his Duty, how to behave
himself as becomes his high Place and Dignity; and then she Instructs her
Dau'ters what they should be; more especially in the Relation of Wives. Or it
may be she gave this Description of a VIRTUOUS WOMAN to the Prince her Son, as
a Direction to him in the Choice of a Wise.

SO then a Wise Inspired WOMAN is our Teacher to Day, and her happy Son
preserves her Wise Sayings in Writing. Her Instructions will be the more
Acceptable and Powerful I hope to her Sex, and we all must with equal Reverence
hear the HOLY GHOST speaking to us, as when His Inspirations rested on the Holy
Men of GOD.

IN short, this Holy Mother, 1. DECLARES the Price and Rarity of the Virtuous
Woman, whom she describes, v. 10. 2. SHE gives her Character in many
Particulars, in the following Verses; her Chastity and Modesty, Diligence and
Frugality, Discretion and Prudence, and in all her Piety and Conscientiousness.
3. SHE tells the Felicities of this Excellent Person; what a Blessing she is to
her Husband, what a Confidence he puts in her; how she does him Honor, and is
Valued and Esteemed by him: And in particular in the Words of my Text, How her
Children rise up and call her Blessed, etc.


IT is supposed here, that she have a Husband, and have Children. It is a
Gracious Wife and a Mother in Israel, that is spoken of. For there may be the
same Excellent Women in neither of these Relations, and equally is she then
Accepted of GOD, and Venerable among His People.

MOREOVER, It is supposed, that both the Husband and the Children be in some
measure Good as she is. She will not else be so Blessed in their Eyes; nor
Praised by them for her Piety and Excellencies. Though indeed the Wicked are
often forced to Praise and call them Blessed, whom they do not Imitate and
learn of.

BUT let us suppose the best here; I mean that the whole Family be Wise and
Virtuous: Let us suppose the Virtuous Wife happy in a Gracious and Wise
Husband, that knows how to Prize and Praise her; and happy in Wise and Pious
Children, who understand the Blessing they have, or have had, in such a Mother.
And that they may the better do so, who are blessed with such a Relative, I
will enlarge a little in opening the several Parts of the Text.

I. HER Children rise up. And this may signify and import, 1. THE Reverence
that her Children bear to her, and are ever ready to express in all their
Carriage toward her, in all their Deportment and Behavior in her Presence, in
all their Words and Actions before her. They Honor her in their Hearts, and do
her Honor always; such as her Superior Relation to them, her Age, her Wisdom
and Gravity, her Authority by Nature, her Benefits to them, and all her
Persenal Excellencies do command from them. They do this from Inclination and
Love, and also from Principle and a sense of Duty. Even Nature teaches them,
and the Law of God requires it of them, for it is the first Commandment with
Promise, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. In Obedience therefore unto GOD,
Pious Children will Reverence and rise up before their Parents, and it is the
least external Act of Filial Respect, in the Letter of the Text, that Children
can think due unto their Parents. They will rise up when their Parents come
into the Room where they are, to bow down to them. They will rise up before
them when they speak, to hear their Wisdom, to receive their Will, and in order
to the doing what they require or direct. Especially Parents that are Exemplary
for Wisdom, Piety, and the good Government of their Households, are worthy of
double Honors. Solomon, though he were a King, yet when his Mother came into his
Presence, he rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down upon
his Throne, and caused a seat to be set for the Kings Mother, and she sat on
his right hand, 1 Kings 2.19. Be we grown up, and grown Great, yet we are never
too big to rise up and bow down to our Parents And not only do we at Men's
Estate owe this unto our Fathers, if they are yet alive, but also to our Aged
Mothers; remembering how they have born us in the Womb and from the Womb, their
many Tender Cares for us, and Good Offices to us from our Infancy. He is a
Foolish Son (says Solomon) that despises his Mother: And in the Wisdom of GOD
he charges us not to despise her when she is Old; which too many scornful and
insolent Young People are apt to do; they make light of what the Old Woman
says, though she warns them in the Wisdom of GOD, Prove. 23.22. We are bid to rise
up before the hoary Head, and to honor the Face of the (...) Man. Much more
should we do this to our Parents in their Age. But this is the first Sense, her
Children rise up in Reverence in her Presence. 2. HER Children rise, i. e. Grow
up in her sight; say some. Her Reward, her Joy and her Crown She sees them as
Olive Plants growing round her Table and her House. It may be she is so happy
as to have her Quiver full of them; and they are rising up about her to be her
Defense in times to come, as well as her present Ornament and Guard, that she
may speak even with the Enemy in the Gate, by them Fighting for her. Or it may
be she sees her Childrens Children, and Peace upon Israel. Her Sons and her
Sons Sons add to the Numbers of Israel and their Valiant Men, which are the
Security and Safeguard of the Nation. Her Sons are as Plants grown up in their
Touth, her Daughters as corner Stones, polished after the similitude of a
Palace. Plants, not Weeds. Grown up, not Withered and Blasted, but likely to
bring forth Fruit in their Day. Families are Connected also by the Daughters,
as the parts of a fine Building are by the Corner Stones: And as the Polished
Stones of a Palace, so are they in the Families united by them, when they are
Graceful and Beauteous in Body and Mind. 3. HER Children rise up in her place,
and fill it after her Decease. The Excellent Mother Dies it may be as they are
Growing up, but her Children, and especially her Daughters, partaking of her
Excellent Spirit soon come to Shine as she once did. The Gracious Parent
Revives in her Offspring; her Graces are seen in them, they tread in her Steps,
exhibit her Virtues, as the Branches agree unto the Stock. They are Grave and
Virtuous, Meek and Humble, Benevolent and Courteous, Devout and Gracious, full
of all Goodness; so as to bring the Deceased Mother to the Minds of them that
knew her, and now see the Chaste Conversation of her Daughters. Children worthy
of such a Parent, and worthy to bear her Name, and fill up her Place; whose
Daughters they are so long as they do well; but if otherwise, no Body would
drink that they came of her, or ever belonged to her. The Mother will never
Die, we say, so long as these live; they are the living Monument that bear the
Inscription of her Virtues and Praises: They Transcribe them in their own
Lives. 4. HER Children rise up --, It notes, (says one and another of our
Expositors) that they set themselves purposely and industriously to what
follows; i. e. To Praise and Bless her. They Seriously apply themselves to the
Work of setting forth her Praises, and doing her Honor. So Men rise up, when
they set themselves about any Work which they are Intent and Earnest upon. The
Wise Children of Excellent Parents should have their Hearts Intent and Earnest
upon this, to do Honor to their Names, and show forth their Virtues. This is a
good and pleasant Work which they are always ready to rise up and engage in.


BUT so much for the first thing; Her Children rise up --.

II. IT follows, And call her Blessed. They have been the constant Eye
witnesses of her whole Carriage; they have seen her Exemplary life, her
personal Excellencies, and happily experienced her Relative Goodness in a
thousand Instances; and are under so many Obligations to call her Blessed.

THERE is a Generation indeed that curses their Father, and does not bless
their Mother, Prove. 30.11. But it is not this sordid, graceless, profane and
unnatural Crew, that I have now to do with; save only as they stand condemned
and detected by our Doctrine. And by the way Observe, that the Generation that
do not bless their Mother, are little better, if not the very same, with them
that curse their Father. Let none of us be of this Seed of the Serpent, this
Generation of Vipers. How unlike they are the Virtuous Children of the Virtuous
Woman in our Text? Her Children rise up and call her Blessed.

THAt is, 1. SUCH is the Inward Esteem, Affection and Gratitude of their Souls
toward her, that they inwardly and secrely bless her in their hearts, as often
as they see her or think of her. As often as they rise up in her Presence, this
is the language of their hearts concerning her and toward her. O what a blessed
Woman is She in her Self! (says their Judicious Esteem) What a blessing has She
been to us! What a blessing in the World! How much are we and others the better
for her! How happy her Family, how happy her Friends and Nei'bours in her! and
how happy She in her self in being what She is Were you within her gracious
Children you would see and hear this in their retired tho'ts and real
sentiments; Lord, what a Blessing have we in such a Parent! 2. WHEN ever they
Speak of her, it is with high Reverence and Honor. In so many Words they call
her Blessed. They do not Name her but with the utmost respect. When they have
occasion to commend her behind her back, then they utter their High Opinion and
Esteem of her. They cannot bear that any should Speak evil of her. It is to them
as if one Spoke against the Light, or threw dirt in their Eyes, and next to the
Blaspheming God in their hearing. With the Mouth bless we God, and with the
Mouth we bless Men; and some are so Excellent Persons that when the Eye sees'em
and the Ear hears them, the Mouth must needs bless them. 3. THEIR whole
Deportment before and toward Her speak the Sentiments of their hearts
concerning her. And this is more than all words. You may see it in their Eyes,
which bear witness to her. There the Esteem of the Soul sits visible and shines
out. You may see by their whole Carriage and Behavior what their Veneration
is: with what delight they hear her Speak, with what Pleasure they receive her
Will; how they listen to her Wisdom, how they submit reverently to her rebukes,
with what Joy they see her smile on them. So when Job went to the Gate through
the City, when he prepared his Seat in the Street, the young men-saw him and
hid themselves, the aged arose and stood up; the Princes refrained Talking, and
the Nobles held their peace: Unto him they gave ear and waited, and kept
silence at his counsel; if he laughed on'em they believed it not, etc. That is
to say, They did by every external sign Express the high Reverence which in
their Souls they bare him. And this was indeed to bear witness to him, and more
than in words to call him blessed. 4. HER Children rise up and call her
Blessed, It may mean that they are Themselves her best Praise and Commendation.
Their own Virtues, and verrous Deeds praise their Parent. Their Good Manners,
their good Breeding, their Modesty and Humility, Sobriety, Charity and
Godliness; Their good Conversation in Christ, as becomes the Gospel; these
declare the Pains she took in their Education, the Example she gave them, the
Instructions and Charges they had from her, her Prayers and Vows for them. See
the blessed Fruit of her Fidelity, the Travel of her Soul for theirs, to see
Christ formed in them! So when a Woman saw the Grace of God in our SAVIOR, and
heard his Divine Discourses, she blessed the Womb that bare him, and the Paps
that he had sucked. And blessed indeed the Womb and the Breasts are, where in a
good Sense Partus sequitur ventrem, and the Excellent Children, do but exhibit
the Virtues and Graces of a good Mother. Blessed the Mother that bears and
brings up Children for Christ, and they live to Him as she has taught them. So
the Graces of Children do sometimes call to our Minds the Graces of Parents
even after their Decease; 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
Faith that is in thee; which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy
Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also. 5. HER Children rise up
and bless God for her. In their Secret Devotions they do so daily, and in the
Family Prayers, and often in a Day may they do so in their Secret Ejaculations,
and the upliftings of their Soul to God, in Company or out of Company, in the
Parents Presence and while she is Speaking, or otherwise. A Parent is to her
Children what God makes her to be; and a Gracious Parent is a singular Gift and
Blessing of God unto a Family of Children; wherefore to be sure every Gracious
Child will Bless and Praise God for such a Parent; and in doing that they call
her Blessed. What we bless God for, owning it to have been a Blessing to us, we
do abundantly call Blessed. 6. HER Children ever Pray for her; bless her, and
ask the Blessings of Heaven on her. So she is ever Blessing her Children, in
her Prayers for them; in which she has remembrance of them Day and Night,
without ceasing. And thus Children may bless their Parents, and Inferiors
their Superiors, by Praying for them, as well as Blessing God for them. For
have we not all one Father? And has not one God created us? And are not all
Souls alike His? The Souls of Parents and the Souls of Children? And as Parents
cannot do their Duty to their Children without commending them to the Grace and
Blessing of God in their Daily Prayers, as Job and David blessed their Houses;
So neither can Children render the Love and Reverence due to their Parents,
without Praying for them Daily. For Parents do as much need God's Blessing on
them as their Children do; and Children therefore ought to implore God's
Blessing on their Father and Mother, as much as Parents ought to ask it for
their Children. And that Child never will Devoutly and aright rise up and call
his Parent Blessed, who does not Beg of God in Solemn Prayer, that HE would
bless them: Whose Blessing it is that makes us Blessings. 7. THE Memory of the
Gracious Mother is Blessed with her Children after her Decease. They call her
Blessed after she is Dead. The Memory of the Just is Blessed, Prove. 107.
Especially ought it to be so to their Surviving Relatives. Then they freely
rise up and speak what they would not do so freely when their Relative was
alive. As when Dorcas was laid out, they stood about her Weeping; telling her
good Deeds, and rehearsing one Excellency and another that made her loved and
desired in her Life. It Is a Blessing to leave a blessed Name behind one.
Blessings come upon the Head of the Just after they are laid in the Grave, out
of Sight and out of Hearing. A blessed Parent thou were to me, may the good
Child devoutly say; a singular Blessing had I in Her; her Blessed Counsels and
Instructions, her Blessed and Holy Walk with God, shall never be forgotten by
me. 8. And Lastly, HER Pious Children Comfort themselves that she is among the
Blessed. And indeed on this side Death we must call no One Blessed. They that
are Holy and so Happy after Death, they are the Blessed. There is a State of
Future and Eternal Blessedness, into which the Spirits of the Just do go:
"Being made perfect in Holiness they do immediately pass into Glory. Rev.
14.13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord. They that are fallen Asleep
in Christ are unspeakably, infinitely, unchangeably and Eternally Blessed. They
are the Blessed of the Father: Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom. The Mouth of Chirst will pronounce them Blessed, and whom
he blesses are Blessed indeed. They are Blessed in Him and with Him for ever;
in His Presence, Love and Favor; and in the full Enjoyment of Him unto all
Eternity. They are gone to a Blessed Place, the Paradise of God; to Blessed
Company, the Holy Angels; and are employed in Blessed Work, the Praises of God
for ever and ever. And this is the best Sense of all wherein the Children of a
Holy Parent Deceased can call her Blessed; they rise up and wipe away their
Tears with this refreshing Thought, -- My Gracious Parent is among the Blessed,
that see the Face of God; Perfectly, Immensely, Everlastingly Blessed. Thus
they call her Blessed.


III. HER Husband also and he Praises her. Her Husband: He the Happy Man in
her Life; He the most Afflicted in her Death; He the most Obliged to do her
Justice and Honor; He that best knew her Worth and how to Praise her; He whose
Praises she would most desire and prefer; He whose Esteem and Testimony is her
greatest Honor. He Praises her: Because she highly Deserves it of him; it is
but a Tribute Due to her Memory: Had she been an ill Wife, or an undeserving
One, he would have Wept silently over her: For Virtuous Praise is an Enemy to
Falsehood or Flattery.

HER Husband also: It is supposed that he be a good One; No Morose Person; no
Careless, Negligent and Inobservant Man. He is Obliging eno' to bestow Praises
where they are due, and Wise eno' to know when he has received a Good Thing of
the LORD.

HE Praises her; scil. In the following Words, v 29. Many Dau'ters have done
Virtuously, but thou excellest them all. He gives her justly the Preference to
all others, knowing more of her Goodness and Excellency than of any other.

HER Husband also and he praises her. It is no Indecency at all, but a
laudable Instance of Conjugal Love for Husbands and Wives to give one another
their due Praises. But then they should be very Discreet in it: Reserved,
Cautious, Prudent; knowing when, where, to whom, and on what Occasion to do it.
Wisdom is necessary to Direct and to Restrain. Wise Consorts will (...)
Luscious and Foolish in their Praises of one another; Not every where, in all
Companies, on the most trivial Occasion, be telling of one another
Excellencies. We should not ordinarily make our selves not our own Things the
Subject of our Conversation. Prove. 27.2. Let another man praise thee and not
thy own mouth, a stranger and not thy own lips. This Self-Admiration is a
sickly Thing. Lock not every one to his own things. Least of all in bestowing
our Praises. These we must bestow in Public on our Neighbor.

NOT but that a Husband may Prudently eno' praise the Conduct of his Wife, and
let her know his Esteem for her; and where he can be Free and in a way of
Confidence he may declare it to others.

A GOOD Wife should be always spoken well of; that is the least that can be due
to her. She ought to be convinced of her Husbands Esteem for her. In Private he
may well and often declare it to her; Not to puff up: No, her Piety and Virtue,
her Wisdom and Discretion, her Conduct and Fidelity, her Care and Diligence,
her Humility and Modesty are the Praise. w. 30. Favor is deceitful and Beauty
is vain, but a Woman that fears the Lord she shall he praised.

ON some particular Occasions there may be special Reasons for Praise; and for
some particular Excellency One Person may merit Praise, and Another for
another. v. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own Works
Praise her in the Gates.

TO have done, When she is Dead he may give her her Character, his Mouth may be
then opened in her Commendation. His Tears will utter his Esteem and Value for
her, his great Affection and Delight in her. His Affliction in her Death is a
much more Substantial Praising her, however silent his deep Grief may be, than
any Words can reach. So Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her,
Genesis 23.2.

THE Decent continuance of his Mourning will be one way of Praising her. He
will not easily or soon Forget her, will not be in haste to Marry again, for it
is not easy to find where to fill her Place. He will tell her Praises to her
Children when she is in her Grave, that they may retain her in mind and honor
her Memory; that they may learn of her and be like her.

USE. AND thus I have gone through the Text in a very free and copious Paraphrase
upon it: And what has been said would teach us,

I. To Infer the Invaluable Blessing of having Dear and Lovely, Wife and
Faithful, Virtuous and Gracious Relatives. Our present Comfort and Happiness
does very much depend upon it, and our Everlasting Well-Being is very much
promoted by it. What a Blessing is a good Consort, a good Father or Mother, a
good Child, and so a good Brother or Sister? Yea, a good Servant in a Family is
an unspeakable Benefit and Comfort; and so is a good Master or Mistress unto.
Servant. He that finds one or other of these Mercies finds much Good, and has
obtained Favor of the Lord. How are our Worldly Cares eased, our Burdens
lightened, our Lives sweetnea and made Pleasant by these Gifts of God.

II. LET us be Excited and Exhorted therefore to be very Good in our respective
Relations; that we may be Blessings while we Live, and that we may leave a
blessed Name behind us when we Die. Let us so live together as Heirs of Grace
as to constrain the Esteem, and endeared Affection of our dear Relatives, to be
an Honor to them, as well as a Comfort, their Joy and their Crown; to leave a
fragrant and precious Name behind us that may live with them that Survive, and
have their Praises, as long as they shall continue after us.

FOR Instance, What a Price should a Mother put upon the Reverence of her
Children, and the Praises of her Husband? How Desirable and truly Valuable is
it for her to be a Crown to her Husband, and an Honor to her Posterity? If a
Person be not desolate of all Greatness and Goodness of Spirit, and Sense of
Honor and Reputation, this alone will appear a worthy and sufficient Motive to
do Virtuously.

BUT not to confine my self to One Relation only, 1. LET Parents be excited to
Educate and Instruct well their Children; to give them good Examples, and to
treat them with Wisdom and Tenderness, so as to form them for Virtue (under the
Blessing of God) and to command their Reverence and Affection to the utmost. It
is not to be expressed what Honors and Comforts they may then be to you; and
this is the way to make them Honor you, to render you Dear and Venerable to
them for Ever. Prove. 20.7. Ajust Man walks in his Integrity, his Children are
blessed after him. We should every one of us be Emulous of that Character, 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules his own house well, having his Children in Subjection
with all Gravity. By this means Bathsheba commanded the high Reverence of her
Son Solomon, and saw him excel in Wisdom under the peculiar Favor of God to
him. 2. LET Children be Exhorted to honor their Wise and Gracious Parents,
which is the first Commandment with Promise, that their Lives may be long and
happy on the Earth. CHILDREN, Love your Parents, Reverence, Obey and Learn of
them now; that you may be an Honor and Comfort to them hereaster. Prove. 1.8.
My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother; for they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about
thy Neck. This is to be to their Parents what the Church is to Christ: My Dove,
my Undefiled is but One, she is the only One of her Mother, the choice One of
her that bare her; the Dau'ters saw her and blessed her, the Queens and the
Concubines and they praised her. There are ill Parents and ill Children.
Parents like the Mother of Ahaziah, who was his Counselor to do wickedly; and
Children that belong to Agurs wicked Crew, Prove. 30.11. There is a Generation
that curses their Father, and does not bless their Mother. Vicious Parents are
a Dishonor to their Children, and no wonder their Children left to themselves
bring them to further Shame. But you that have Virtuous and Tender Parents, see
that you Requite them by being Virtuous and Obedient to them, that you
Reverence them in your Hearts, and live so as to Honor them in your Lives. 3.
LET the Wife see that she do her Duty to her Husband, that she may merit and
have the high Reward of his Esteem and just Praises. This seek, after the
Honor that comes from above, yea as a part thereof. It was the wise Persian
Decree of old, That all Wives shall give to their Husbands Honor, both great
and small, Esth. 1.20. But we have a greater and more Immutable Law than that
of the Medes and Persians, even CHRIST's: Let the Wise see that she reverence
her Husband; Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord.
etc. Our Wives should be Ambitious of that Character, 1 Timothy 3.11. Even so must
their Wives be Grave, not Slanderers, Sober, Faithful in all things. This is
the way for them to bear away the Blessing of their Children, and the Praises
of their Husbands. 4. LET the Husband be just unto his Virtuous, Prudent and
Faithful Wife, to Honor, Esteem and Praise her. An Excellent Wife deserves a
singular Respect, and the most Honorable Treatment in the World. The
Expressions of the Love of Christ to His Church in the Book of Canticles is the
best Account how the Husband ought to regard her and treat her. And indeed this
is the Rule which Christ has given to the Christian Husband: Ephesians. 5.25.
Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it; that he might Sanctify it and present it Glorious. What a Word
is this? As the Holy Soul, and as the Purchased Church is Fair and Lovely in
the Eyes of GOD, and Dignified by Him; so let the deserving Wife be Esteemed by
her happy Spouse.


LET us therefore be Excited to be very Good in our Relations, that we may bear
away so much honor and praise from our Obliged Correlates. Which was the
Second Use.

III. THE last USE may be in a word or two of Counsel and Direction, proper to
the present Discourse.

1. LET them that are happy in their Relatives, in their Consorts or Children,
in their Parents, etc. be very thankful to GOD who has chosen so graciously for
them, and Serve Him with the more Alacrity and Cheerfulness, especially in the
discharge of the Duties of their respective Relations. If there be any Virtue,
if there be any Praise, think of it in your Relatives, observe it, but do not
ascribe it to them, nor love them only for it; but give God the Glory of it,
receive from Him, improve it for Him, and love Him the Giver. Every Creature is
what God makes it, and what He makes it to us. He gave the Excellencies which
thy dear Relation is Adoin'd with, and then He gave the Person to thee. So He
formed Eve for Adam, and gave to them their Gracious Abel and Seth. Have thou
then obtained favor of the LORD, give Him the thanks. Prove. 19.14. A Prudent
Wife is of the Lord. His gracious Gift to thee, His Kind and Merciful Care of
thee, His fatherly Providence directing thy Choice and prospering thy pure
Desire; Wherefore bless Him for it. So again, Children are an Heritage of the
Lord, and the fruit of the Womb is his Reward, Psalm. 117.3. They are the
Children which God has graciously given thy Servant; said Jacob concerning his
Sons. We should never look upon our good and pleasant Relations but our hearts
should be full of holy Gratitude to God for them. And our Gratitude to God on
this account should give us Alacrity and Cheerfulness in our whole
Conversation. As our cares are lessened and our lives sweetened, so let our
hearts be Enlarged and list up in the way of our Duty. Eccl. 97, 8, 9, 10. Go
thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God
now accepts thy works. Let thy garments be always white, and let thy head
lack no ointment. Live joyfully with the Wife whom thou love, all the days
of the life of thy vanity, which he has given thee under the sun, all the days
of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which
thou take under the sun. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither thou go. 2. LET us bear humbly and improve fruitfully the want or
the loss of such a Blessing as we have been Meditating. The Wife and the Mother
which the Text speaks of does not fall to every ones Lot. Sometimes the Wise
and Virtuous themselves are ill-match'd and related. Solomon tells of the
Contentions that are a continual dropping, and of the angry and brawling woman,
whom one had better dwell in the wilderness than live with. If the Mother be
lewd, profane, a scold, fierce, cruel; if she be foolish, fond, indulgent,
ignorant, careless, lavish, negligent, idle, good for nothing: This is a Grief
and must be born, heavily eno'. It is a living Sorrow, and a sore Rebuke from
God, which calls to Humiliation. Her Children cannot rise up and call her
Blessed, nor is it lawful for the Husband to Praise. Love and Duty must
silently cover a multitude of Faults, and they must take up their Crass daily.
And happy the Person in that case who has learnt this Lesson.
BUT then there are Others who have been Blessed with such Excellent Relatives
whom they could not but Esteem and Praise, Rejoice in, and Bless God for; but
God takes them away, they Dye, we are Bereaved and called to Mourning and
Weeping under the Blow of Gods Hand, whereby He takes away the desire of our
Eyes with a Stroke. This also we must desire humbly to bear, fruitfully to
improve, and get the Spiritual Good of.

How often are Pious Children thus Bereaved of their Parents, and bowed down
heavily, Mourning for their Mother? How often are Happy Consorts rent by Death
from one another Arms, and the Surviver left among the most Afflicted and
Desolate. Here moderate your Mourning, and Resign to God what He gave and what
He takes. Shall we receive Good from the Hand of the Lord? and shall we not
receive Evil? The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away, and Blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

LET the CHILDREN rise up and bless the Memory of their Deceased Mother, and
Bless God who gave them such a Mother, and spared her so long to them; and now
commit themselves to God as their Father, beseeching Him to Bless them, and
make them His Children.

LET the HUSBAND also now rehearse the Virtues of his Deceased CONSORT; let him
(if he can) give her the deserved Praises of her Modesty and Chastity, of her
Humility and Meekness, of her Prudence and Wisdom, of her Sweet Temper and Good
Nature, of her Diligence and Frugality, her Care of her Family and wise
Education of her Children; and above all of her Piety and Devotion toward God:
Let him tell how safely his heart trusted in her, how much Good she has done
him and no Evil all the Days of his Life; how she looked to the ways of her
Household, and did not eat the Bread of Idleness; how she opened her mouth with
wisdom, and in her tongue was the Law of kindness; how she stretched out her
hands to the poor, and reached forth her hands to the needy, etc. Let him tell
how good a Wife she was to him, how good a Mother to his Children, how good a
Child to her Honorable and Aged Parents, how good a Sister, how good a
Nei'bour, how good a Friend she was; and to Crown all how she walked with God
in Secret, how she loved the Habitation of His House, how she Gladly walked
with him in the way to Heaven, a meet Help to him toward a better Life, as well
as through the Troubles of this --: But when the most Afflicted Heart has said
all this, (too small a Tribute of Praise to the Deceased) he must Resign to the
Sovereign GOD who formed the Clay, and formed the Spirit within it, and has now
parted them.

LET Those therefore that are Blessed with the most Excellent Relatives be as
though they had none: And they that weep as though they wept not: and those that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed
not: and they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this
world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Let us get our Souls as a weaned
Child, let us look to part, let us prepare to go first, let us bear the Sorrow
of being left, and be getting ready to follow after, from the sure and certain
hope of a comfortable meeting of all Gracious and Virtuous Souls in the future
World, where we shall be as the Angels, indissolubly united to one another in
the Presence of CHRIST, made "perfect in Holiness, and Blessed in the full
"Enjoyment of God to all Eternity.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10th. l. 6. for detected, (...)

Page 10th. l. (...) (...)

Page 10th. l. 18 (...)


