The Greatest Concern in the World. A Short AND Plain Essay, TO Answer that
Most Concerning and All Concerning Enquiry, What must I do to be Saved?

The Second Edition. Published, with a Design to Assist the Addresses of Good
Men unto their Neighbors, whom they Press to mind, The ONE THING that is
NEEDFUL.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green. 1718.

A Demand.
BEHOLD, An ESSAY which may in the Name of the Glorious GOD, Challenge a
Reading from every Person into whose Hands it shall by His Holy Providence be
delivered. Reader, The ESSAY comes to thee, with Terms like those which Ehud of
old used unto a Greater Man; I have a Message unto thee from God. It is a
Message about the most important Affair, that ever any man Living was Addressed
upon. It requires a most Attentive Perusal, a most Affecting Perusal. Well
Perused and Performed, it will render thee an Happy Creature: Despised* Thou
art beyond all Expression Miserable. It Is but One short Sermon; It Is the very
Spirit, the finest Essence, of more than a Thousand Sermons. Complied withal,
it attains the End of all our Sermons. Pray over it, Reader. Prosper it,
Graciously, Wondrously, O Almighty Savior!

The Greatest Concern in the World.
ACTS XVI. 30. -- What must I do to be Saved?


IT is Impossible to ask a more Weighty Question! It is Deplorable, that we
hear it asked with no more Frequency, with no more Agony. The spirit of Slumber
which the Poison of the Old Serpent has bro't upon the Children of men, is to
be deplored Exceedingly. Awaken us out of this wonderful Stupidity, O God of
all Grace, lest we Perish wonderfully!

My design is to bring in a good and a full Answer to this Weighty Question.
Oh! how Thankful ought we to be, for the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God,
that makes us able to Answer it! The Gospel which we have in our hands, it is a
Gospel of such astonishing Mystery, of such Heavenly Majesty, and of such
Consummate Purity, that it can be no other than the Word of God; It must be of
a Divine Original. Oh! highly Favored People, who know this Joyful Sound! Oh!
Unavoidably, and Inexcusably Wretched, if we disregard it!

The Devils knew, That those Excellent Ministers of the Lord, Paul and Silas,
were come to Philippi, with a Design to answer this Weighty Question. They
could not bear it; they feared it would issue in a Destruction upon their
Kingdom there. They stirred up the minds of some Wicked People, to Abuse and
Revile these Ministers, and run them into Prison. Some Wicked People were
afraid, lest they should lose a little Money, by the coming of such Ministers
among them; and the Devils inspired those Muckworms to use incessant
Endeavors, until they had made these Ministers incapable of Preaching any more
unto them. Our Glorious LORD appeared for His Faithful Servants. They Glorified
Him, in the midst of their Trials. They Sang His Praises, under the Stripes and
the Stocks which the Satanic Party inflicted on them. Oh! Patient Servants of
the Lord! What a symptom have you, that you shall one Day Reign in Glory with
Him! These Poor men Sang unto the Lord; the Lord heard them, and saved them! A
terrible Earthquake at Midnight shook open the Doors of their Prison. The
Keeper that had the now superseded Keys of the Prison, was terrified. In his
Consternation, he falls down at the Feet of his Prisoners; he treats them no
longer as Prisoners, but rather as Angels. He fervently puts to them the
Question, which, Oh! that it were often heard with an equal Fervency among us!
What must I do to be Saved?

Some Learned men think, that the Jailer had, from the Traditions of their
Philosophers, conceived some Hope of a Better Life; and seeing his Life here in
danger, he does, as Distressed Wretches in the last minutes of their Life use
to do, Cry out for some Help to make sure of a Better Life. Or, more probably,
the late words of the Possessed Young Woman in the Town, about these Ministers;
These men are the Servants of the most High God, who show unto us the way of
Salvation; might run in his mind, and mind him of that Salvation, and make him
think, whether these men were not appointed of God for the Instruction of
others, in the way to that Salvation.

There is a most important matter, which must now be undertaken to be
Demonstrated; That whereas there must be Something done, by every man that
would be Saved, it should be the Sollicitous Enquiry of every man, What must be
done by him, that he may be Saved.

We will proceed upon the Awakening Demonstrations of this thing;
Demonstrations more powerful than any Thunderbolts. Oh! that the Issue might
be, that the Hearers may be Awakened, with a mighty Impression upon their
Souls, to make the Enquiry, What must I do to be Saved?

I. You must Know, That there is a Great Salvation proposed unto the sinful
Children of men; And you must Know, and Think, That there is nothing of so
Great Concernment for any man, as to obtain a part in that Great Salvation.

Indeed, Knowledge is the first Thing, that is necessary in order to Salvation;
And it is Absolutely Necessary, Unspeakably Necessary. We read, Hos. 4.6. of,
People destroyed for the lack of Knowledge. Ah! Destructive Ignorance; what
shall be done, to chase thee out of the world! A world, which by thee is
rendered a Dark World, the Kingdom of Darkness! The Oracles of Wisdom, have
assured us; The Soul without Knowledge is not Good; They have Assured us; They
who Know not God, shall have a Vengeance, in Flaming Fire, taken of them; They
have assured us; It Is Life Eternal, to Know the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom He has sent. An Ignorance of the Gospel is attended with a long Train of
Unknown, but very Evil Consequences. It Is the Gospel of Salvation; They that are
Ignorant of it, must needs miss of Salvation. It Is an Erroneous and Pernicious
Principle, That a Man may be Saved in any Religion, if he do but Live according
to it. The Unerring and Infallible Gospel, has Expressly taught us otherwise: 2
Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that be Lost.

It is not unseasonable here, and as Early as may be, to bring in that
Admonition.

Knowledge, Knowledge; To get Good Knowledge, let that be the First Care of them
that would be Saved. Knowledge, It Is a Principal Thing; My Child, Get Knowledge;
with all thy might, Get Understanding. Oh! That this Resolution might
immediately be made in the minds of all our People; I will get as much Knowledge
as ever I can!

The Word of God must be Read and Heard with Diligence, that so you may arrive
to the Knowledge that is needful for you.

The Catechisms in which you have the Word of God fitted for your more easy
Apprehension of it, must be diligently Studied

Unto all the other Means of Knowledge, there must be added, Humble and Earnest
Supplications before the Glorious LORD. You must Cry to God for Knowledge, and
lift up your Voice to Him for Understanding; Prefer it before Silver, before
any Earthly Treasures.

There may be some so very Ignorant, that they know not how to Pray. I would
advise them, to take the Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm. They will find in it,
many a Prayer suited unto their Circumstances. Take it, Use it, and
particularly, those Petitions in it; Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes;
and, Lord, Teach me Good Judgment and Knowledge; and, Lord, Give me
Understanding, that I may know thy Testimonies: Give me Understanding and I
shall Live. Take Encouragement from that word; and Plead it before the Lord:
Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
Liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

And now, to pursue diverse Ends at once, I am to tell you; That the Main
Things which it is necessary for you to Know, are the Things which concern
Salvation.

More Particularly;

You must Know, First; From what you do need Salvation. And here;

First; You are to Know, That the One Eternal and Infinite God, who Subsisteth
in Three Persons (or Aspects) which His Word calls, The Father and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit; Created our First Parents, in an Holy and Happy State, at the
End of the Six Days, in which He Created all thing.

But our First Parents hearkening to the Temptations of Wicked Spirits, did Eat
a Forbidden Fruit; and by that Sin, they Fell from God, and from their Holy and
Happy State; And their Fall has brought their Children with them, into a State
of Sin and Misery. Their Sin was Our Sin; From their Corrupt Nature we are Born
into the world Envenomed with such a Nature. The Death which the Broken Law of
God threatened unto them, is due to us all: A Death which intends all Misery,
not only in this World, but in Another, where our Souls continue Immortal,
after they have left this world.

Then, You are to Know; That there is a Law given to us, which is the
Everlasting Rule, according to which, God requires us to Glorify Him; a Law of
Love to God and Man, contained in our Ten Commandments.

But, That you daily Break this Law; and that every Breach of it, incurs the
Wrath of God, who is of Purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot look upon
Iniquity.

Lastly, You are to Know, That while you lie under the Guilt of Sin, you are
also under the Reign of Sin; and under the Reign of Satan too; A most woeful
Oppression from the worst Enemies that can be. God is in Ill Terms with you; He
Visits you not with His Great Consolations. All things are against you; The
things that appear most for your Welfare, do but Ensnare you, do but Poison
you, do but produce your further distance from God. Your very Prosperity hurts
you; Your Adversity lays the Chains of Death upon you You are Every Moment in
danger, of being seized by the formidable Justice of God for Eternal Burnings.
If you Die Unpardoned, you are sent among Devils, Damned unto Torments; must
undergo a Strange Punishment, and a Long one, which is Reserved in a Future
State, for the Workers of Iniquity.

Ah Sinner; This, This is thy Lamentable Case. And Knowing this, how can thou
do any other than make that Sollicitous Enquiry; What must I do to be Saved?
Knowing this Terror of the Lord, Oh! be Persuaded.

You must Know, Secondly; By whom you may have Salvation.

And here;

You are to Know, The Great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in Flesh* Your
Salvation depends, on your Knowing of such a Savior.

We have not the least Intimation in the Book of God, That an Unknown Savior
will be Ours. But it is dreadfully intimated, That if People have no
Understanding of Him, He that made them, will not have Mercy on them, and He
that formed them will show them no Favor.

You are then to Know; That the Son of God Assumed the Blessed JESUS, the
Sinless and Holy Son of a Virgin, into One Person with Himself.

And this Admirable Person, who is God and Man in One Person, has as our
Surety, fulfilled the Law of God for us; answered the Precept of it, in His
Righteous Life; answered the Penalty of it, in His Grievous Death; Suffered the
Cross, and Endured the Curse, in our stead.

You are to Know herewithal; That this Mighty and Matchless and Only Savior of
the world, who is also the Governor of the World, is Risen from the dead, and
is Enthroned in the Heavens, and will Return to Rule and Judge the World; but
He will Save unto the Uttermost, all that come unto God by Him.

Oh! Undone Sinner; Can thou hear of such a Savior, and not make that
Sollicitous Enquiry, What must I do, that I may have an Interest in the Only
Savior?

You must Know, Thirdly; What shall be done for you, if you find Salvation. And
here;

You are to Know, That no Good Thing shall be witheld from the Saved of the
Lord.

Wonder, wonder; Be swallowed up with wonderment at this Grace, O
self-Destroyed Ones!

There is Proposed unto you, A Deliverance from all the undesirable
Circumstances, into which you have run, by your Departure from God.

It is Proposed unto you, That you shall no longer be the Children of Death,
but be made the Children of God: That you shall be Forgiven and Accepted with a
Reconciled God, and be followed with perpetual Testimonies of His Fatherly
Love: That no Iniquity shall have Dominion over you; but you shall become the
amiable Temples, wherein He will Dwell, with the sweet Influences of His Good
Spirit forever irradiating of you.

It is Proposed unto you; That you; Spirits, at your Dissolution, shall put on
the Garments of Light, and enter into the Peace and Rest of an Heavenly
Paradise: That your Bodies er'e long, by a Resurrection shall be Restored unto
your Spirits; but be the Lively, the Lovely, the most Agreeable and Everlasting
Mansions for them: That you shall have a Joyful Portion in the City of God, and
have His Mavelous Kindness forever doing unutterable Things for you, in that
Strong City: There you shall at length be filled with all the Fullness of God,
and have God become All in All unto you for ever and ever.

All this is contained in the Salvation whereof you have a Tender. Salvation,
It Is a Comprehensive Word! an Incomprehensible Good! Eye has not seen, Ear has
not heard, no Heart can conceive what is laid up in the Salvation of God.

Oh! Ruined Sinner; why does it not now become thy Sollicitous Enquiry; What
must I do, that I may not lose the vast Things, whereto I am Invited by my
Savior?

These are the Things that must be Known. And if these Things be Known and
Owned, the plain Inference from them will be this; That the man is forsaken of
Reason, unworthy to be called a Reasonable Man, who is not very Sollicitously
Inquisitive; What must I do to be Saved?

But now, it is Time to answer that Great Enquiry. We will do it, by calling in
a Second Proposition.

II. Something must be done by every man that would not Forfeit all Claim,
Reject all Hope, of the Great Salvation.

And this also must be Known. You must Know what must be Done. And thereupon it
shall be said unto you; Joh. 13.17. When ye know these things, Happy are you,
if you do them. It is not Enough, to Know; There must be Practice joined with
your Knowledge.

Something must be done; Else it had never been said, Heb. 5.9. Christ is the
Author of Eternal Salvation, unto all them that Obey Him. Something must be
done; Else we had never been told; Heb. 6.9. There are the Things that
accompany Salvation.

We are often Instructed in the Sacred Writings, That there is a Way, wherein
alone Salvation is to be Expected, A Way, called, The way of Life; and, The way
of Truth; and, The way of the Lord; and, The way of Peace; and, The way of Good
Men; and, The way of the Righteous. In this Way, Something must be done. There
are Steps to be taken, that we may find this Way, and keep this Way; It Is the
(...) Way; There is no Altering of it.

Something must be done; For, we are sure, All men are not Saved. There are
some, who are Children of Perdition; There are some, who are Vessels of Wrath;
There are some, who go away into Everlasting Punishment. Something must be
done, to distinguish you from that Crooked Generation. We Read, Mat. 7.14.
Narrow is the way which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.

Indeed there is Nothing to be done by us, to Merit our Salvation. But
Something must be done to Secure our Salvation.

Indeed there is Nothing to be done by us, in our own Strength. But Something
must be done by us, through Christ who strengthens us.

More Plainly. Our Blessedness now comes not unto us, on the Terms of a
Covenant of Works. It Is not properly our Doing, that is the Condition of our
Blessedness. We are to be Saved by Taking, rather than by Doing, The Condition
is, Receive and be Saved. Or Be willing to be Saved. We speak of Doing, in the
Largest sense of the word; and we still say, Something must be done, that we
may be Saved.

Let the QUESTION then come in. And, Oh! Bring it in, with all the Solicitude,
which were proper for, The Greatest Concern in the World; What must I do to be
Saved?

I have seen this Question Scandalously answered. in Pamphlets, that have been
dispersed about our Nation. The One Thing that is Needful has been left
unregarded, unmention'd; Perhaps, the observation of certain Superstitious
Holidays, has been recommended instead of that One Thing. Alas, How have the
Souls of men been Betrayed, by men Unskillful in the Word of Righteousness! How
Unskilfully, and Unfaithfully have the Methods of Salvation been declared, by
many who Pervert the Gospel of Christ! Not so now, I hope! A Pure Gospel, a
Sound Doctrine, must be pursued. You are now to be treated with nothing but
wholesome Words; nothing but the Faithful Sayings of God.

I. And what Better, what other Answer can be given, Other Foundation, can no
man Lay! to this QUESTION, but what the Apostles of God gave to it of old? When
the Poor man said, What must I do to be Saved? We read, They said, BELIEVE ON
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST, AND THOU SHALL BE SAVED. This is the Sum of the Gospel;
This is the Charge given to the Ministers of the Gospel; Mar. 16.15, 16. Preach
the Gospel to every Creature; He that Believes shall be Saved. Faith in the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the Only Savior; This, This must be found in all
that will be Saved: The FAITH, which is, A Satisfaction of the mind in the way
of Salvation by a Glorious CHRIST, Revealed in the Gospel: The FAITH, by which
we Deny our selves, and Rely on a Glorious CHRIST, for all Salvation: The
FAITH, by which we Receive a Glorious CHRIST, and Rest on Him for Salvation, as
He is Offered unto us.

But how must this FAITH Operate in all that would be Saved?

Oh! Set your Hearts to these things; they are not Vain Things; Your Lives, the
very Lives of your Souls are concerned in them. If your Hearts may now fall in
with these things, and be formed and shaped according to the Evangelical Mould
of them, lo, This Day Salvation is come unto your Souls. Glorious LORD, Incline
the Hearts of our People, to do what must be done, that so thy Salvation may be
bestowed upon them.

First; This must be done; You must come to be bitterly sensible, that you want
a Glorious CHRIST for your Savior. We read, Joh. 7.37. If any man Thirst, let
him come unto me. Truly, no man will come to a CHRIST, until a Thirst, or a
Pungent and Painful sense of the Want of a CHRIST, be raised in him. You must
feel the Burden of your Sin, lying on you; and Cry out, Oh! It Is an heavy
Burden, too heavy for me! You must see GOD Angry with you Sin Binding of you,
Hell Gaping for you; and utterly Despair of Helping your selves out of the
Confusion that is come upon you. You must be filled with Sorrow, for what you
have done; with Horror at what you are Exposed unto. The Cry of your Uneasy
Souls must be that; Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am; who shall deliver me!

You must be no strangers to such Soliloquies as these; I have Sinned, I have
Sinned; And, Woe is unto me, that I have Sinned. I have Lost the Knowledge of
GOD, and Lost the Image of GOD, and Lost the Favor of GOD. My Sin renders me
obnoxious to the Vengeance of GOD. Lust Enchants me, Enslaves me; Satan
Tyrannizes over me. I am in Hourly Hazard of an Eternal Banishment from GOD,
into Outer Darkness, into the place of Dragons. Oh! Wretched man that I am: I
can do nothing to deliver my self. I Perish, I Perish, except a Glorious CHRIST
be my Deliverer.

The Degree of this Distress, on the minds of them that shall be Saved is
Various. There is a Variety in that Preparatory work, which does Distress the
Elect of God, in their coming to a Savior. Converts do sometimes needlessly
Distress themselves, and even Deceive themselves, by insisting too much on the
Measure of this Preparation. But so much of this work, as will render us
Restless without a CHRIST; so much of this work, as will render a whole CHRIST
Precious to us; Be sure, there must be so much in our Experience, if we would
be Saved.

Secondly, This must be done, You must Confess your selves Unable to do any
thing Effectually of your selves, in coming to a Glorious CHRIST, as your
Savior. With a Fearful Trembling of Soul, you must make this Profession; Lord,
Thou workest in us to Will and to Do, of thy own Good Pleasure! Your Profession
must be that; Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye Saved, through Faith, and that not of
your selves: it is the Gift of God. Your Profession must be that; Joh. 6.65. No
man can come, except it be given to him. Oh! Ly at the Foot of Sovereign Grace,
Confessing and Imploring; Lord, I am justly Destroyed, if I do not sincerely
Renounce my Sin, sincerely Embrace my Savior. But I cannot, Oh! I cannot! I
have Deadly Fetters upon my Soul. I shall never answer thy Gracious Calls,
except thy Sovereign Grace Enable me. Oh! Quicken me: Oh! Strengthen me: Oh!
Enable me; Turn thou me, and I shall be Turned.

Your Impotency must not now be made an Excuse for your Impenitency. Your
Inability must Affright you Exceedingly, Affect you Exceedingly; It may not
Excuse you in a slothful Negligence. You must not remain Careless of doing any
thing, because you can thoroughly do nothing. Having first Cried unto GOD, that
He would help you to do, what you have to do, you must now Try to do it; Now
Try, whether He do not help you to do it.

Thirdly; This must be done; You must Admire, You must Adore, You must Address,
a Glorious CHRIST, in all His Offices, for all His Benefits. Oh! Hear a
Compassionate Redeemer calling to you, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, all ye Ends of
the Earth, and be ye Saved. Comply, Reply; Lord I look unto thee: I will be
Thine, save me!

And here, You are to Remember, that the First Thing you want, is, Atonement
and Acceptance with GOD. For this purpose, You must Behold a Glorious CHRIST,
as a Priest, bringing a Sacrifice, and making a Righteousness for you.
Accordingly, Your First Address to Heaven must be this; Lord, Let my many and
horrid Sins be Forgiven me, for the sake of that Great Sacrifice, which thou
have had in the Blood of Jesus Christ thy Son, which Cleanses from all sin.
And, Lord, Let me, who am a poor Sinner, utterly hopeless of working out for my
self a Righteousness, now stand before thee in the wondrous Righteousness, of
that Lord who is the Head of His Church, and who has wro't out a Spotless
Righteousness for us.

But, Remember to Depend on this most sufficient Sacrifice and Righteousness,
not as Qualified for it by any Good Thing to be observed in your selves. Do not
stay from it, on a prospect anon to come Recommended unto it, by some
Commendable Goodness in your selves first attained. No, Depend and Venture upon
it, as Encouraged by no other Qualification but this; A most Miserable sinner;
yet Invited, yea, Compelled unto this Mercy of the Lord!

Well; If the Faith which has got thus far, be not a Counterfeit, it will not stop
here. You must Behold a Glorious CHRIST, as a Prophet and a King. Faith has
other Errands unto the Savior, besides that of, A Desire to be Justified. A
true Believer will not count himself Saved, if he be not Sanctified, as well as
Justified.

The Savior puts this Demand unto you; Mat. 20.32. What will ye that I shall
do unto you? You Answer; O my Great SAVIOR, I come unto thee, that by thy
being my Sacrifice, and my Righteousness, and my Advocate, Everliving to make
Intercession for me, I may be Saved unto the Uttermost.

But this must not be All. There must be This in the Answer; O my Savior, I
come unto thee for Instruction: Let thy Spirit with thy Word, cause me to Know
the Things of my Peace, and keep me from all Delusions.

And there must be This in the Answer. O my Savior; I come unto thee for
Government: Let thy Spirit of Grace, Conquer the Enmity of my Heart against the
things that are pleasing to God; and make me a Conqueror over all my spiritual
Adversaries.

This is that Faith, whereof the End is the Salvation of the Soul. Believe
after this manner, and you Believe to the saving of the Soul.

II. But we may carry on the Answer, without being Reproved, for Adding any
thing unto the Words of God. A true Faith, will always have Repentance
accompanying of it. Repentance unto Life; It Is a Dead Faith which cannot show
it; A Dead Soul that has it not. A Genuine Faith is always a Repenting Faith.
We see the Two Sisters hand in hand; Act. 20.21. Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. We constantly see it in the Experience of
all the Faithful. It Is the Denomination of Repentance; 2 Cor. 7.10. Repentance
to Salvation. It must be found in all the Candidates of Salvation. Well then;

First; This must be done; You must heartily and bitterly Bewayl all your Sins.
Your Original Sin, your Actual Sin, the monstrous Aggravation of your Sin; You
must be Convinced of it. A Contrition must follow this Conviction; With a
Broken Heart you must Cry out, Psalm. 38.18. I will declare my Iniquity, I will
be sorry for my Sin. You must Mourn for your Sin; and Mourn for the Offense
given to God by your Sin as well as for the Mischief done to your selves:
Mourn, Mourn, and never count that you have Mourned Enough.

Secondly; This must be done; You must make a Penitent Confession of your Sins;
a Remorseful Confession of them. All your Known Crimes, you must as
Particularly as you can, Enumerate with shame and grief before the Lord. You
must be able to say; Psalm. 51.3. I Acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sin is
ever before me. Your Acknowlegement of your Secret Sins, must be only to the
LORD: But where your Sins are Known, where your Neighbors have been either
Sufferers by, or Witnesses of your Miscarriages, They also should Know that you
Acknowledge them.

Thirdly; This must be done* Every way of Sin must be Abhorred, must be
Avoided, must be Forsaken. Amendment is Essential to Repentance: Except you
Reform, you don't Repent. So you are warned of God; Prove. 28 13. He that
Confesses and Forsakes shall find Mercy. If you go on in any Evident way of
Sin, you will find it a Way of Death, a Path of the Destroyer; it will bring to
a Damnation that slumbreth not. Very Tremendous Things will be done to those
Enemies of God, who, Go on still in their Trespasses. Have you done Amiss? You
must say, I will do so no more. You must not Persist in what you have done.

And hence, If you have Wronged another man in what you have done, you must
Vigorously Endeavor all possible RESTITUTION. Restitution, a Thing too little
Understood, too little Exhorted, too little Practiced; Restitution, without
which there can be no Right Repentance.

This is the Repentance, which is found in every True Believer; It must be
found in every one that would be Saved.

III. And, Holiness, Holiness; A Patient Continuance in Well-doing. There is no
Life in the Faith, which is not Productive of an Holy Life; It Is not a Faith,
which will bring to Everlasting Life. If the Grace to Believe on the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, be infused into the Soul, the Habit of every other Grace is at the same
Instant infused. I will show you the Motto on the Golden Gates of the Holy
City; Heb. 12.14 Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. An Holy Life, a
Life pressing after Universal and Perpetual Conformity to the Rules of
Holiness; This, This is the Royal Path leading to Salvation; Yea, it is no little
Part of our Salvation.

Wherefore, This must be done; You must Resign your selves up unto the Holy
Spirit of the Lord; Consent, Request, Entreat, That He would Eternally take
Possession of you. From the Dust, Cry unto Him; Psalm. 141.10. Thou art my God;
Thy Spirit is Good; Lead me unto the Land of Rectitude. Cry unto Him; O SPIRIT
of Holiness, Raise me out of the Ruins that my Sin has brought upon me.
Possess me for ever* Cause me to Fear God, and Love Christ, and Hate Sin, and
Slight this world, and know my self, and make me meet for the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light: Bring me to be one of Them, I Pray thee, I Pray thee!
There is a Good Foundation of Holiness, laid in this Resignation.

But then; This must be done; You must Livelily pursue the Death of every Sin.
You must fly to the Death of your Savior, as the Purchase and the Pattern of
so Great a Blessing. But you must count it a very Great Blessing; Count no
Trouble too much to be undergone, that you may come at such a Blessing. This is
that Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

This must be done; You must set before your selves the Example of your
Savior; Study how He was in the world; Study to walk as He walked; mightily
Delight in every stroke of Resemblance unto Him; Yea, though it be in Sufferings
that you Resemble Him. This is that Holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord.

This must be done; You must by a solemn Dedication of your Selves and your All
unto the LORD, become the Lords. It must therefore be your Desire to have all
your Talents, all your Possessions, and Enjoyments and Interests, Employed for
the Honor of the Lord: And owning the Lord, as the Great Giver, and Owner, the
Lord-Proprietor of all that you have, you must be ready to submit unto the Will
of God, when He pleases with afflictive Dispensations, to take any of it from
you. This is that Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

This must be done; You must Remember, That the Eye of the Omnipresent GOD is
upon you. You must often bring this to Remembrance, God sees me, hears me,
knows me, is acquainted with all my ways. A sense of your being under the
Notice of God, and of the Account unto which you shall be called by God, must
make you Afraid of incurring His Displeasure; Afraid, even of Secret
Miscarriages. This is that Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

This must be done; You must make it your Exercise to keep a Conscience clear
of Offense toward God, and toward Man. You must labor to be acquainted with
your whole Duty; And your Acquaintance with the Will of God, must be followed
with proportionable Desires and Labors after Obedience to it. You must Pray
always, with all Prayer; with Secret Prayer, with Household Prayer, with Public
Prayer: You must have an high Value for those Two Sacraments of the
New Testament; the Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. You must Religiously
Observe the Lords Day. You must preserve your own Place, and Life, and Bed, and
Wealth, and Name; You must with the same sincerity befriend your Neighbors
also in Theirs: Love your Neighbors as your selves. And, Do as you would be
done unto. You must be especially and mightily Conscientious of Relative
Christianity: Carry it well in all the Relations, wherein the Lord has placed
you, whether Superiors, or Inferiors, or Equals: with such a Carriage, as may
adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior; Such a Carriage, as may render your
Correlates the better for you. Briefly, You must Deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and live Godlily, and Soberly and Righteously in the World. This
is that Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

Methinks, A most Obvious Inference may be drawn from these Things; That the
Ministry of the Gospel must be Attended, and not Neglected, by them who would
not Neglect the Great Salvation; A most awful Inference, That it is a Dangerous
Thing to Live without the Means of Salvation, which are in the Ministry of the
Gospel; ordinarily to be met withal. The Wells of Salvation are kept open in
such a Ministry. Oh! Do not undervalue the Blessings of those Upper Springs;
There are men, who by the Command of a Glorious CHRIST, give themselves up unto
the Service of the Evangelical Ministry, and are the Preachers of the Gospel
unto the rest of the world: An Order of men concerning whom our Glorious Lord
has promised, Mat. 28.20. Lo, I am with you, always to the End of the world. If
an Angel should come from Heaven unto you, as unto Cornelius once, to speak
unto this Question, What must I do to be Saved? He would unquestionably say,
Repair to such a Ministry; Don't think to live without it.

We have settled the Point; Without Faith we can have no Salvation. But I
assume; Romans 10.14, 17. How shall they Believe in Him of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? Faith comes by Hearing, and
Hearing by the Word of God. Oh! That the Vngospellized Plantations, which Live,
I should rather say, which Die, without the Means of Salvation, would Consider
of it!

Your Question is Answered. O Souls in Peril, I may now say unto you; 1 Cor.
15.2. You are Saved, if you keep in memory what I have Preached unto you. And
yet I must say unto you, That if after all, you Trample upon these things, it
will be Good for you, that you had never been born; the very mention of them
will dreadfully increase and inflame your Condemnation. But the Success of all,
must be left with the Glorious ONE. And, O Father of Mercies, Do thou
Mercifully Look down upon the Soul that has heard these things; Dispose and
Assist that Soul, to do those Good Things, upon which thou have Promised the
Salvation of the Soul; I Pray thee, I Pray thee!

FINIS.

