A SERMON Showing that the Peace and Quietness Of a people Is a main part of
the Work of CIVIL RULERS, AND That it is the Duty of all to PRAY For Them.

Delivered at Hartford May the 8 th. 1718. being the Day for the Election of
the Honorable the GOVERNOR, Lieutenant Governor, and the Worshipful
Assistants, for the Government of CONNECTICVT.

By Samuel Estabrook, Pastor of the Church in Canterbury.

Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, Printer to his Honor the GOV.
and COUNCIL. 1718.

An Election SERMON.
I. TIMOTHY II. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority; --
WHO ever rightly Considers the state of mankind since the Apostasy, the
Universal depravity and Corruption of humane Nature occasioned thereby; the
Disorders, Disquiets and Confusions which arise therefrom; will readily grant
the necessity not only of Government in the world and of Persons of Eminency
and every way fitted for the management of it; but also and especially of the
Concurrence of the Spirit and Blessing of the Most High GOD, whose Thro^e is
established in the Heavens and whose Kingdom rules over all Creatures, to
inspire such with needful Qualifications, and to give Success to their Measures
for the suppressing Disorder, and the restoration and preservation of Peace and
Quietness among men: for which all Christians ought to Pray earnestly unto God;
which is the Duty the Apostle exhorts to in our Text.

The Exhortation is, 1. General, Expressed in the preceding Verse; I exhort
therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks be made for all men: Prayer is the Duty here Exhorted to; and I
conceive the Variety of Phrases by which the Apostle expresses it, is not
Needless or Superfluous, but that it has its Significancy, and intimates to us
at least the Necessity and Importance of the Duty; and the Fervency wherewith
it is to be performed: The Apostle adds giving of Thanks, which though it be
not Essential to Prayer, yet by Divine Order it is to be inserted into all our
Prayers: Phil. 4. 6. But in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with
Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known unto God: And indeed it is highly
Reasonable seeing God continually Administers to us Matter and Occasions of
Thanksgiving; and as we ought to Pray for Mercy for all Men, which is the first
Branch of the Exhortation (except it be for such as are Guilty of the Sin, for
which the Apostle would not say that Christians ought to Pray, which Exception
is to be understood in the Apostles Exhortation) so we ought in our Prayers for
them to offer Thanksgiving to God on their behalf, for the Bounties and
Blessings He is continually bestowing upon them.

2. Particular, As in the Text; where we may observe two things.

(1.) The Persons we are Exhorted to Pray for, viz. For Kings, and for all in
Authority; or all that are in Eminent Place, as it might have been rendered:
Which intends those that have Supreme Authority and all that are Commissionated
by them, and Govern under them; thus the Apostle Phraseth it under another
Head, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Whether it be to the King, as Supreme; Or unto
Governors, as unto those that are sent by him. Which intends the Supreme and
all Inferior Magistrates; which in those times were Heathens, Discountenancers
of and Enemies to the Christian Religion; nevertheless it was the will of the
Inspired Apostle not only that their Authority should be Subjected to; but also
that they should be Prayed for in all Christian Congregations.

(2.) The reason of it; That we may lead a Quiet and Peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty: There is a Threefold Peace; Peace with God; In our own
Consciences; And with Men or in Societies, It is this latter that is
particularly meant in the words; and I take the other Term, viz. Quiet, to be
Synonimous and to mean the same thing: and these are absolutely Necessary to
the comfort of Life: for though we have a Confluence of all other good things
yet if we have not Peace and Quietness in the Fruition of them; we shall want
much of their Comfort, and their Sweetness will be very much diminished: the
Apostle adds, In all Godliness and Honesty, which seems to Limit Peace and
Quietness to things Sacred, as to the Worship of God and the Exercise of
Religion which are intended in these Phrases, 9. d. That we may Worship God
according to the mind of Christ in the Gospel, and Practice the other Duties of
Religion without Molestation, which they often met with from their Heathen
Rulers and from the Jews by their allowance; and doubtless the Apostle had a
particular aim at this and desired it above all other things: But yet we may
suppose that the general meaning of the Apostle in this expression was, that
they might not be Disturbed or Disquieted in any of their Enjoyments, and in
this Latitude I shall take the words.

The Matter of our Prayers for Kings, and those in Authority is not to be
Limited by this clause in the Text, for then we should Pray for our selves
rather than for them, but our Prayers for them ought to be Directed by their
Circumstances and Conditions: The Apostle is silent as to the Petitions which
they were to offer unto God for their Rulers; but we may conclude, that, they
being Heathens and Enemies to the Christian Religion, one main and principal
thing which they were to Petition for, was, that they might be Converted to the
Christian Faith, and be made Defenders, Countenancers and Incouragers of their
Religion: but we living under a Christian Government, and being under Christian
Rulers, our Prayers for them must be Varied accordingly: but more may be said
of this afterward.

The Text is Copious and affords Instructions to all Orders and Degrees of Men.

1. Civil Rulers are here Instructed in one great End and Design of Government,
which is the Peace and Quietness of those over whom they Rule, and also in
their Work and Duty; which is the Procurement and Maintenance of their Peace
and Quietness, that they may lead a Peaceable and Quiet Life under their
Government, this is Plainly Suggested in the Text.

2. The Ruled are here Instructed in their Duty, particularly and expressly in
the great Duty of Prayer to God for their Rulers, that they may be furnished to
their Work, and be made Instrumental in bringing about this great end and
design of Government the Peace and Quietness of those over whom they Rule:
These are the two Heads which by Divine Assistance, I shall speak to at this
Time.

1. Peace and Quietness among Men and in Societies, is one end and design of
Civil Government, and it is the Work and Duty of all that are Invested with
Civil Power and Authority to endeavor that all that Live under their
Government may have Peace and Quietness in all their Enjoyments. This is so
Plain and Evident that I need not enlarge upon the Proof of it: two things are
included in it.

1. Peace and Quietness among Men and in Societies is one end and design of
Government: And one of the Principal ends and designs of it next unto the Glory
of God, which is the ultimate End and Design of all things. The Supreme Lord
has Ordained Government and given Kings and Rulers their Offices and their
Dignity for this end; that they being Armed with Power and Authority they may
Preserve Public Peace and Order in the World: and herein it is that they are
Ministers of God for our good.

For the Proof of this I shall only Instance in some of the main parts of
Government, and show that this is their Principal design, which will
sufficiently Evince that it is one main end and design of the whole.

(1.) This is the design of all Humane Laws which contain the Rules of
Government, and it ought to be in the Intention of those that have the Power of
making them, and also of them that are appointed for the Execution of them;
they are for the Protection of the Subjects in a Quiet and Peaceable Possession
of all that God and Nature has Bestowed upon them; and they ought to be framed
accordingly and so Executed: That this end may be attained; that every man may
sit Quietly under his Vine and be undisturbed in their Enjoyments of what kind
so ever they be.

(2.) This is the end and design of all Administrations of Justice in Civil
Courts: they are appointed for the Decision of Controversies among Men: The
true Ground or Foundation of Differences and Contentions among Men: or Wrong
done either real or supposed and imaginary: now Civil Courts are appointed to
Inquire into all Wrongs and Injuries, and to give Judgment according as they
appear, which is to Determine and Issue the Controversies that arise there
from: So that Peace and Quietness is the end and design of the Administration
of Justice in Civil Courts.

(3.) This is the Design and Intention of many of the Offices that are
Conferred in Government; which may be Termed Offices or Commissions of the
Peace: which Offices do particularly oblige those that sustain them to take
care of the Peace and to Improve their Power and Authority, for the Defense and
Preservation of it: and unto such, Persons are Directed to go for Relief when
Unjustly Molested and Injured: these things Argue that this is one of the main
ends and designs of Government. And we are not to think this too mean to be the
design of so Honorable a Calling and Employment: for Peace and Quietness or
Undisturbed Enjoyment of our Blessings whether Spiritual or Temporal, is the
very Life of our Enjoyments, and the want of it renders every thing
Uncomfortable and Unpleasant: it is more Eligible to want many other Blessings
than that of Peace and Quietness: Prove. 17. 1. Better is a dry Morsel, and
Quietness therewith, than a House full of Sacrifices with Strife.

But I Proceed:

2. It is therefore the Work and Duty of all that are Invested with Civil Power
and Authority to endeavor after the Attainment of this good and great end of
Government: And all that are Employed in Government, ought to make such an
Improvement of their Authority in their respective Posts, as that those that
are under their Government may lead a Quiet and a Peaceable Life: this
necessarily follows, for surely if this be one end of Government, then those
that are Employed in Government ought to look at this and to endeavor after
it: But this is evident to all and I need not offer any further Proof of it. I
proceed to The APPLICATION of this Head.

1. Hence whatsoever in any Government whether it be Person, Office or Law, or
any other thing, that crosses and obstructs this design of Government, it is
and must be accounted an Evil, and ought to be Suppressed. The Law accounts
them such, styling them common Nusances; and such there are in every
Government; and doubtless were Strict Inquisition made, there might be many
such things found in this Government, which have hither unto Obstructed our
Peace and Quietness, and Frustrated the Attempts that have been made for the
Procurement thereof: and so long as such things are allowed and connived at
Peace cannot be expected.

2. Hence Peaceable men, being otherways Qualified, are the most fit for Office
in Government. Men of Peaceable and Quiet Tempers and Spirits; Men that are
Zealous for Peace; and are willing to forego their own Interest, for the Peace
and Tranquillity of the whole: these are the men fit for Offices in Government;
for these are the most likely to attain this end of Government and to Procure
and Maintain the Peace and Quietness of the People: and this may serve for a
Direction unto those who have the Privilege of designing Persons for Offices,
and have Power of Conferring Offices upon Persons in this Government; this
ought to be Regarded especially at this time, when Divisions and Animosities
abound in the Government.

3. And Lastly, I shall Conclude with a word of Exhortation unto those that are
or are to be our Rulers for the Ensuing Year; There are many things which
Disturb our Peace; and because of our Divisions there are great thoughts of
Heart. It is fitting, Honorable, Worshipful, and Highly Esteemed, that under
this Head I should make my Humble Address unto you particularly, for the
Healing of our Differences and the Recovery of our Peace and Quietness: The
Address has been already made by a better Hand upon the last occasion of this
Nature: but in as much as our Divisions and Animosities still remain, and I
fear Increase. I must beg leave to Reassume the Exhortation; and in Meekness
and with all due Respect I Entreat that you still use your utmost endeavors
that our Jerusalem may be Built a City Compact, and that it may be a Quiet and
Peaceable Habitation: This is peculiarly your Province, and our Eyes are upon
you under God for it. It is the Expectation of God whom you Represent, and
Serve; and of the People over whom you Rule; that you exert all your Power, and
Improve all your Wisdom and Dexterity, your Policy and Prudence for to Reduce
us to good Order; that we may be favored with the Invaluable Blessing of Peace
and Quietness in all our Enjoyments Sacred and Civil. Herein you will Act like
Him whom you Represent, who has styled Himself the God of Peace; and is so not
only as He is the Author of Peace, but also as He Loves and Delights in it; and
as He has bestowed His Honorable Name and Character upon you; so it becomes
you to Answer it in your Respective Places and according to the Talents
Committed to your Trust. And in so doing you will Answer one main end of your
Offices, keep a good Conscience, and Inherit the Blessing our Lord has Intailed
upon Peace Makers, mentioned in Mat. 5. 9.

As to our Churches and the Exercise of our Religion; we have reason to Bow
down and to Adore God for the Liberty and Freedom the Peace and Quietness we
are Indulged with, and in that our Rulers are Christians; Countenancers and
Incouragers of Religion; and have made good Laws for the Preservation of our
Peace in the Worship of God; and in that the ways to our Solemn Assemblies
don't Mourn: But yet we have reason to be Humbled that there has been so many
Divisions in some of our Churches to the great Detriment of Religion and
Hindrance to the Work of God in them; and if there might be something farther
done for the Preventing of Feuds and Schisms in our Churches, it would be very
Acceptable unto God and Serviceable to the Interest of Christ. I shall not
undertake to Determine the Extent of the Civil Magistrates Power in Matters
Ecclesiastical: it is Evident that there is a care Incumbent upon Civil Rulers
of Churches and of Church Matters, and in many Cases they ought to Exert their
Authority: ^. e. particularly in matters of Order where there are no particular
Rules in the Word of God to Oblige the Consciences of Men to the contrary; and
in things that are left to the Judgment, Prudence and Conduct of Church
Officers and Churches. I conceive that the Rules drawn up and agreed upon by
them, whether they be for the more Regular and Decent Worshipping of God or the
Exercise of Discipline, ought to be Established by the Civil Magistrates
Authority, and their Sanction ought to be Binding to all; for in such things
all ought to Acquiesce in the Judgment of the Churches; and those who Refuse
ought to be Compelled, which would very much Conduce to Peace and Quietness in
our Churches; which would very much Advantage Religion in them.

But as to our Civil Affairs; I Presume that if Property was settled upon a
better Foundation, it would Contribute much to our Peace and Quietness: for
many of our Differences, especially in our New Towns, arise from the Various
Sentiments, and Different Opinions there are about it: and it Creates many
Uncomfortable Lawsuits, which Excites the Passions of men, begets Prejudices
in them, and Ingenders Striles and Contentions, which brings with them
Confusion and every Evil Work. Hereby our Peace is very much Disturbed and
Religion is very much Hurt.

I speak Feelingly, for Divine Providence has cast my Habitation in the very
midst of them; not that I am Personally Injured or Molested; but my meaning is,
that I Feel the Hurt that our Contentions does Religion and the Interest of
Men: and I should exceedingly Rejoice could there ^e found a Remedy to prevent
those intolerable Molestations which some men meet with, and the Litigious and
Vexatious Law Suits that are Commenced and Carried on to the great Disturbance
of our Peace.

And if there might be a Closer Application made of the Laws of the Colony to
the Troublers of our Israel, it might be very Subservient to our Peace and
Quietness: there are Achans among us, who by their Transgressions Molest us,
Provoke God and bring down His heavy Judgments upon us to our Trouble and
Confusion: these Frequently escape due Punishment, whereby they are Emboldened
in their Transgressions and proceed even to offer Contempt to our Authority and
Laws; there are some of our Laws which in some Places are but rarely if ever
put in Execution: the end of the Law which is the Peace and Safety of the
Subject cannot be Attained unless it be put in Execution.

And therefore if there might be great care taken in the Designation of Persons
for the Execution of the Laws of the Government; and if such Persons might be
found in every Town, and Empowered for this Service, who are Conscientious, Men
of Courage, Zeal and Resolution; who are Sensible of the Solemn Nature and
Obligation of an Oath and Fear it; and had rather Hazard all, than Offend GOD
or Wrong their own Consciences, or be Unfaithful in their Places and Stations:
it would with the Blessing of God Accompanying their endeavors, exceedingly
Conduce to our Peace and Quietness.

And if more Care might be taken of our New Towns, it might be very Serviceable
to them in their Beginning, and prevent their falling into Contentions.

But to draw to a Close: Let Justice have free Course in the Government, and
let Schools of Learning be Encouraged and Promoted; this is an Excellent means
to Cultivate the rough Tempers of those that are growing up, and to inure them
to Civility and good Order; which will contribute to our future Peace and
Quietness.

And above all things let Religion be Promoted, and endeavor that Godliness
may be in the midst of us in the Power of it, and that your Peoples Hearts may
be seasoned with the Fear of God and be Established with the Peaceable
Principles of Religion.

And for this end, Comfort and Encourage the Ambassadors of Peace, who are
Devoted to this Work; I Hope none of us are wanting in our Places, either to
forward this work or to be helpful unto you in your endeavors for the Peace
and Welfare of this People; by our Prayers, Counsels and Instructions; putting
the People in mind to be Subject and Obedient to your Laws and Ordinances.

And finally, Let me commend to you Union among your selves, as that which will
exceedingly strengthen your Authority, and forward your endeavors and attempts
for the attaining of our Peace and Quietness. Endeavor then to be of one Mind,
and at Peace among your selves. I pass on to

II. It is the Duty of Christians to Pray for those that have the Rule over
them, that they may be Enabled so to manage Government, as that Public Peace
and Quietness may be Preserved. And under this Head, I shall 1. Show that it is
a Duty: And 2. What we are to Pray for in order hereunto.

1. We may Argue this Duty from sundry Heads, As,

(1.) From the Divine Original of Civil Government. It is not an Ordinance of
Man, but of God's. The Powers that be, are of God; whosoever therefore
resists them, resists an Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 1, 2. The Original of
Government is in God; particular Forms or Modes of Government are of Man's
Inventing; but the Substance of it came from God, and therefore it Depends upon
Him for Support and Success: Government cannot be Maintained in the World
without God who gave it its being; for the First Cause of a thing is necessary
to its Subsistence; neither can there be any good Success of Government, or any
of its good Ends attained unless its Author Smiles upon it, and His Blessing go
with it; therefore we ought to Pray to God for those that are Designed and
Empowered for the Management of Government.

(2.) From the Station and Capacity in which Civil Rulers stand in Government.
The Highest in Authority upon Earth are under God. He is the Supreme, and his
Power is Unlimited, and he does whatsoever he Pleases and gives no Account of
his Matters. Men are but Instruments in his Hands, and their Offices are only
Ministerial; hence called Ministers of God, Romans 1^. 4. Now Instruments depend
upon their Efficient Cause for Power to Act in their Places and in the Work
they are Employed about. Men have no Power to Act in Government but what they
Receive from God. Joh. 19. 11. Jesus Answered, Thou could have no Power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above. It is by Influence and
Direction and Assistance from above that Kings Reign, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me
Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice. By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the Earth: They Rule their Kingdoms wisely, justly and
happily, by My Counsel and Assistance. Therefore we ought to Pray to God for
them.

(3) From the Absolute Power and Dominion which God has over the hearts of all
men. They are entirely in his Hands; even the hearts of the highest and
greatest upon Earth are at his Command; Prove. 21. 1. The kings heart is in the
hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: He turns it whithersoever he will.
He influences and overrules the very Inward Purposes, Inclinations and
Counsels of their Hearts, which seem to be most in their own Power and out of
the way of all others: God can give unto Rulers the Spirit of Government, as he
gave unto Saul another Heart, a Spirit of and Qualification for Government,
when He Designed and Appointed him for to Rule his People Israel; 1 Samuel 10. 9.
Therefore God is to be sought to for those that Rule over us.

(4) From the Necessity of Government, and of Persons very well Accomplished
for to manage it. Were it not for Government, the World would soon run into all
manner of disorders and confusions: men's Lives and Estates and Liberties would
soon be a prey to the Covetous and the Cruel; and we cannot express the Ma^ice
and Murder, the Rapine and Robberies, the Mischiefs and Miseries which would
abound in the World were there no Government to Restrain men: One man would be
Bread for another, and the World which is like the Sea for Storms and Tempests,
would also Resemble it in this, that the Inhabitants thereof would be as the
Fishes of the Sea, the great would Devour the small; Hab. 1. 14. As the Fishes
of the Sea, who have no Rule over them. We may plainly see the Necessity of
Government in the World, in the Instance of some, who have thrown off the Reins
of Government; and what Uprores have they made? What Outrages and Depredations
have they Committed? taking away the Lives and Estates of men at their
Pleasure: and merely for the gratification of their Cursed Lusts; and what the
issue of this tragical design will be, God only knows! This is a convincing
Argument of the Necessity of Government. There is also a Necessity of well
Accomplished Persons for the Management of it: The Weight of Government is too
great to be laid upon the Shoulder of mean men; it is Rulers of the Earth, that
under God, uphold it: They are therefore called, the Pillars of the Earth,
Psalm. 73. 3. This argues, that it is a Duty to Pray for Civil Rulers.

(5) From the Difficulties which Attend Government, which arise principally
from the restless Passions and ungoverned Spirits and Lusts of men: These are
the prime occasion of all those Divisions and Clamours that are in the world;
Jam. 4. 1: From whence come Wars and Fightings? Come they not hence, even of
your Lusts, that War in your Members? This renders the Work of those in
Government very Difficult; yea Impossible for them of themselves to Quiet and
Still the Tumults that are in the world: and to Suppress the Disorders that Sin
and the Lusts of men bring into the world. Hence it is in Scripture Ascribed to
Him that has Power to Command the raging Sea and to still the noise of its
Waves, Psalm. 65. 7. Which stilleth the noise of their Waves, and the Tumult of
the People. This argues that we ought to Pray to God for our Rulers.

2. To show what we are to Pray for; or what is to be the Matter of our Prayers
for our Rulers. This I shall dispatch in these following particulars.

(1) We are to Pray for their Welfare, Spiritual and Temporal: That they may
have all saving Grace and everlasting Glory. For their Lives, and all those
Blessings which are necessary to their Comfort and Support; and for their
Encouragement, that they may be in a Capacity to undergo and grapple with the
Fatigues of Government: and to live answerable to the Dignity of their Place
and Station in the world; as they are Distinguished from and exalted above
others by the Honor and Dignity that is Conferred upon them, so they ought to
be in their living: and as their work and service is arduous and difficult, so
they ought to be Supported and Encouraged. Which we are to Pray for.

(2) We are to Pray for all good Qualifications for Government; as a right
Heart and Spirit to rule over others, Knowledge and Wisdom, Courage and
Fortitude, Patience and the Fear of God, a sincere and disinterested aim at the
Glory of God, and the Peace, and Order, and Beauty of the world: Strength and
Zeal, and Resolution for the vigorous Prosecution of these ends: These are the
gifts of God, and are absolutely necessary for Government: We are therefore to
look to God for them: and particularly and especially the Prayer which Solomon
offered unto God for himself, 1 King. 3. 9. is very suitable for us to offer
unto God for our Rulers, viz. That God would give them an understanding Heart,
to Judge his People, that they may discern between good and evil. And also that
Prayer which he offered unto God, in 2 Chronicles. 1. 10. Give me now Wisdom and
Knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this People.

(3) For the Presence of God with them, the influences of his Spirit and Grace
to assist and direct them, and his Blessing upon their Counsels, Designs and
Undertakings, for the attainment of our Peace, that it may flow in as a River.

APPLICATION.

1. Two sorts of Persons are to be Reproved.

(1) Those who instead of Praying for Civil Rulers, Revile 'em and speak
Contumeliously of them. This must needs be a very great evil, because it is
directly contrary to Praying for them: which the Apostle in our Text exhorts
to, and we have showed is a Christian duty: Which we find also strictly
forbidden, in Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler
of thy people. Not gods falsely so called, as some would have it, but
Magistrates and Governors, as is evident in the next clause, Nor Curse the
Ruler of thy People. They are called gods, in Psalm. 82. 6. I have said, Ye are
gods, -- It must needs therefore be a very great Sin to Revile them, and to
speak Evil of them, and an affront unto God whose Deputies they are, under whom
they Govern, and whose Name they bear, which renders it odious and abominable.
Hence the Apostle Jude animadverts upon it as such, and that very sharply;
calling them filthy Dreamers who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.
And though Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, durst not
bring a railing accusation against him, Jude 8, 9. Yet how many are there in
these days who are hardy and impudent enough, to heap Reproaches and
Contumelies on their Rulers, who utter their Reviling and scurrilous Speeches,
more freely than they do their Prayers for their Rulers; and if they make any
Prayers for them, their Practices contradict them, and render them ineffectual.

(2) Those who hinder our Peace and Quietness, and promote Contentions, are
also Reprehensible: For they act contrary to the duty we have been insisting
on: and contradict the reason of the Apostles exhortation in our Text. It is
the work of our Rulers to preserve Peace, and our Duty in the mean time to Pray
for them, that they may be Assisted and Directed, Counseled and Advised in
this work from above. They that obstruct our Peace act directly contrary not
only to their work, but to their own Duty; which must needs be a very great
evil and very Offensive unto God. This is one of the Six things which the Lord
hates, yea it is the Seventh which is an Abomination to him, Prove. 6. 19. --
And him that sows Discord among Brethren

2. From hence we may also Infer, the Duties of Reverence, Subjection and
Obedience which we owe to our Civil Rulers. For if we ought to Pray for them,
then surely we ought to show them the Respect and Reverence which the Word of
God requires and their Station calls for: and also to Subject ourselves to
their Authority, and Obey all their lawful Commands. We are also here taught
that it is our Duty to afford them all that Encouragement, and all that Help we
can in their Work: and particularly we ought in our respective places to concur
with and to forward their designs and endeavors for our Peace and Quietness:
And if every one would be ready to this, it would make their work very easy
and delightsom.

3. In the last Place, I shall Commend the Practice of the Duty we have been
insisting on, 1. To those that are in the Ministry. And, 2. To all the People
in general.

[1] Let my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry, suffer the word of
Exhortation to the performance of this Duty. Unto those of our Order, and unto
us the Exhortation in the Text is particularly given; and it becomes us who
ought to give our selves to Prayer, to be Earnest and Importunate therein for
all that are in Authority over us: That the Government that is Committed to
them may be managed so Wisely, Prudently and Faithfully, as that we and our
People may lead a Quiet and Peaceable Life under it: This will very much
Contribute to our Ease and Comfort; for all that are in the Ministry know by
experience, that Divisions among their People is a very great Obstruction to
their Work, and creates them a great deal of Trouble and Difficulty: This will
also promote the Common Good, which we especially ought to look at and
endeavor after: it will prevent a great deal of Sin; for where there is Strife
and Contention there is every Evil Work, and be a means to promote the Eternal
Salvation and Happiness of Souls: which above all things is incumbent upon us
to Promote.

[2] Let all the People be Exhorted to the performance of the Duty of Prayer
for their Rulers Prayer is a Duty incumbent on Private Christians, as well as
those that are in Public Posts and Serve at the Altar; and every Christian in
his Place and Station, ought to have so much regard to their Rulers both in
Church and State, and also to their own Peace and Quietness, and best Good, as
to Pray to GOD earnestly and frequently for them, that they may be enabled to
discharge their Duty, and to preserve Public Peace and Order: in so doing you
will Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, which all are Obliged to; Psalm. 122. 6.
Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, --

But more Particularly.

1. Let us all be Exhorted to Pray for our Sovereign King GEORGE, the happy and
blessed Instrument of the Peace and Tranquillity of Great Britain, and this
Land: That the Almighty would still be with Him, Preserve and Lengthen out His
Life, Prosper and Succeed His Government over us; and Crown Him with the best
of Blessings: ever remembering to offer unto God in our Prayers, the Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving and Praise, for the rich Blessings of Peace and Order which
under GOD, and by his Influences He has been the Author of. And here I might be
large in recounting and discanting upon the Signal and Wonderful Providence of
GOD, whereby He was brought to the British. Throne, at a juncture when both
Religion and Civil Liberty were in imminent Danger; and Popery and Arbitrary
Government ready to step in, -- Whereby He has been made Successful and
eminently Instrumental in quieting their Troubles, and healing the Divisions of
our Nation; setting both Religion and Government upon a better Foundation.
These things are most worthy of our Thanksgiving and Praise.

2 For all that are in Places of Authority there: That they may be well
Spirited for the interest of Religion and the Liberties of the Nations: That
they may be filled with Zeal and Fortitude, with Wisdom and good Understanding:
that they may be fitted to act aright in their respective Posts: and to serve
GOD according to his Will in their Generations: That GREAT BRITAIN may be
Defended from all intestine and foreign Enemies, and her Peace and Tranquillity
lengthened out.

3. For all those that are or may be immediately over (...) Authority; The
Honorable GOVERNOR, the Lieutenant GOVERNOR, the Worshipful ASSISTANTS, the
whole ASSEMBLY, and for all in Inferior Posts, that the Presence of GOD may be
with them: Especially with the Assembly in their Present Session, that they may
be assisted and directed by Him: that they may have right apprehension of our
Troubles and Difficulties, and afford us Relief: that there may be Union among
them, and an Healing Spirit, that they may as one man seek the Peace and
Welfare of this People. I Conclude with the words following the Text; For this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

FINIS

