Practical Truths Plainly Delivered Wherein is Showed, I. That true Believers
on Jesus Christ, shall as certainly enjoy Everlasting Life in Heaven, as if
they were (...) II. That there is a blessed Marriage between Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and the true Believer. III. That Men are Infinitely concerned, not
only to hear the Voice of Christ, but that they do it, To Day. IV. The Work of
the Ministry, described, in an Ordination SERMON.


By Increase Mather, D. D.

Phil. iii. 1. To write the same things to you to me indeed is not grievous,
but for you it is safe.

Heb. xi. 4. -- Being dead yet speaks.

II. Pet. i. 14, 15. Knowing that shortly I must put off my Tabernacle, I will
endeavor that you may be able after my decease to have these things always in
remembrance.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Daniel Henchman, and Sold at his Shop.
1718

The PREFACE.
THE Sermons Emitted herewith, are very mean, plain, ordinary Discourses, like
others of the same Author. They that have Sermons Published by me Fifty Years
ago, if they compare them with these Composures, will find them to be of the
same strain. I must confess that I have from my Youth effected a Plain,
Scriptural way of Preaching. So have I lived, and so let me dye.

I have been very much urged, and by many, to Publish a considerable Number of
Discourses on those Eight Characters of a blessed Man (commonly called the
Beatitudes) in Christ's admirable Sermon on the Mount. But I must Pray my
Friends not to be troubled at my not complying with their importunity in that
matter; Unless some One that has the Pen of a ready Writer shall transcribe
Notes taken in short hand (whom I cannot persuade to spend time in so
unprofitable an undertaking) I am not able to do it. Forty Years ago, I could
Preach every Week, and a Monthly Lecture, and Print many Sermons, and some
other Books which cost me more Reading and hard Study than the Preaching of
many Sermons would have done. I cannot do now as once I could. I find a
difference between Forty Years of Age and almost Fourscore. I have cause to
admire the Mercy of GOD, that at such an Age I am able (by the help of Christ)
to attend Public Labors (although not so frequently as in my Youth) in so large
a Congregation as that where the Divine Providence has cast my lot, and carried
me through more than six and fifty Years Temptations and Difficulties. I have
great reason with thankfulness unto Christ, to acknowledge the continued Love
of the Lords People. May I be Serviceable among them whilst in the World, and
leave those things with them, which shall be for their Edification, when I
shall be gone to that World, where of Later Years I have longed to be.

Boston, Feb. 20. 1717. 18.
SERMON, I. True Believers on Jesus Christ shall have Everlasting Life in
Heaven.
JOHN, VI. 47. Verily, Verily I say unto you, He that believes on me, has
everlasting Life.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, we have the History of a Miracle wrought by
our Lord Jesus Christ, in feeding five thousand Men with only five loaves and
two small fishes. The Jews were much affected with the Miracle, so as that they
designed to take him by force and make him a King. Whereupon he withdrew from
them, and privately crossed the Sea (or Lake) of Tiberias, and went over to
Caparnaum. The next day a great Multitude followed him thither, which they did
not that they were convinced by the Miracles (although that was enough to
convince them) that he was the Messiah, nor out of any love to his Person or to
his Doctrine, but out of love to the Loaves. Christ reproved them, and exhorted
them to mind Earthly things less, and Spiritual things more; the Meat which
endures to Everlasting Life, which he would give them, and not that which
perishes. Wherefore Christ Preached an admirable Sermon, concerning the Bread
of Life, that Bread which if a Man eats of it, he shall not die but live for
ever. There are especially two particulars contained in his Sermon, viz. A
Declaration what is meant by the Bread of Life, and who they are that eat that
Bread. He gives them to understand that He himself is that Bread, and that
Believers are they that eat that Bread. It is by Faith that the Souls of Men
feed upon Christ, and are made partakers of Eternal Life. This is asserted by
Christ in the Words before us, with the greatest solemnity. He pronounces it
with a double Verily, or as it is in the Original, Amen, importing the greatest
certainty. Amen, Amen. I say unto you, I who am the Amen, the faithful and true
witness, who never did nor can speak an untruth, I say unto you, He that
believes on me has Everlasting Life. If Christ is the Bread of Life, and
Faith is a feeding on him, it necessarily follows, that the Believer shall have
Everlasting Life. By Life happiness is meant. The happy Life is not to be
enjoyed in this, but in another World, not Earth, but Heaven is the World where
Everlasting Life is to be had.

The Doctrine then before us, is, DOCT. That the True Believer on Jesus Christ
shall most certainly enjoy Everlasting Life and Happiness in Heaven.

The Doctrine may be Opened and Confirmed in several Propositions.

PROP. I. In Faith there is employed an Assent of the Understanding to the Truth
of the Gospel, and a Consent of the Will to accept of Christ as offered in the
Gospel. This I take to be a true and a clear description of Faith. It is the
Soul that Believes and closes with Christ. Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion
says my soul. The Soul is often called the Heart in the Scripture, Romans 10.10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness. Then both the Understanding
and the Will of the Believer are given to Christ, these being the two essential
faculties of a Reasonable Soul.

I. Faith implies a work of God on the Understanding inlightning it, and
causing an Assent to the great Truths of the Gospel. It implies a giving Credit
to divine Testimony. It is expressed in the Scripture by a full assurance of
Understanding, Col. 2.2. The Believer does not only think that the mystery of
the Gospel is Truth, but He is sure of it. Hence Peter speaking in the Name of
all true Believers, says, We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ
the Son of the living God, Joh. 6.69. There must be Knowledge in the Head or
there will not be Faith in the Heart. No Man will believe in an Unknown Christ.
Joh. 10.38. That you may know and believe. Yea, Knowledge is so Essential to
Faith, as that Faith is sometimes called Knowledge, Isai. 53.11. By his
Knowledge. i. e. by the knowledge of him, my righteous Servant: it is Christ
the Righteous, who is there called Gods righteous Servant, shall justify many.
It is by Faith that many are justified. In special the Believer gives a full
Assent to that great Truth of the Gospel, that the promised Messiah is come,
and that our Jesus is He. Christ said to Martha, whosoever lives, and
believes in me shall never die: Believe thou this? She said unto him, yea,
Lord, I believe, that thou art the Christ, the Son of God that should come into
the World, Joh. 11.27. He believes what the Gospel reveals concerning the
Person of Christ: That he is God and not Man only, but God and Man in One
Person. And he believes the Truth relating to the Office of Christ, that there
is One Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: And the Truth which
concern Christ's State of Humiliation and Exaltation. That he dyed, and was made
a Sacrifice for the Sins of his People, and rose again the third day, and is
ascended to Heaven, and is at the right hand of God, Angels being made subject
to him, and will come again at the last day to Judge the World. That Man that
does disbelieve or deny any one fundamental Article of the Christian Religion,
cannot be a true Believer on Christ. But although the Faith of Assent is
necessary, it is not alone a Saving Faith. For many Hypocrites and Reprobates
have it. There were chief Rulers among the Jews of whom it is said that they
believed, but they did not confess their Faith, For they loved the praise of
men more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.42, 43. That declared them to be no
true Believers. For there is not a true Believer in the World that loves the
praise of Men (though they may love it too much) more than the praise of God.
Moreover, their declining to make a Confession of Christ, discovered their want
of a Saving Faith. For with the heart Man believes, and with the Mouth
Confession is made to Salvation. If a Man will not Confess Christ before all
the World, that is a sure sign that his heart does not truly believe on him.
Believers in the Primitive times would openly Confess the Name of Christ, when
they knew they should die for it immediately. It is related concerning one of
the Martyrs, That the Persecutors could obtain no Answer to their
Interrogatives, but I am a Christian. Where do thou live? I am a Christian.
Who are thy Relations? I am -a Christian. It is not necessary to Salvation,
that a Man should say, I am Lutheran, or I am a Calvanist, or I am an
Episcopalian, or I a Presbeterian; or of this or that Party: but it is
necessary that he should say, and confess it freely, I am a Christian. Since
then, some that have been convinced of Christ's being the Son of God, yet have
not confessed him, that shows that a mere doctrinal Faith is not a Saving
Faith. Nay, such a Faith is no more than what the Devils and Damned have. To
those that have only a Faith of Assent, the Apostle says, Jam. 2.19. Thou
believe there is one God, thou do well, The Devils also believe and
tremble. All Religion depends upon this Article of it, There is a GOD, and but
One GOD. Deny that and you destroy all Religion at once. Wherefore when it is
said, The Devils believe there is One God, it imports that they believe all the
Articles of Religion. In particular they believe that Great Article of our
Christian Faith, That Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God whom he had promised
to send into the World. We read in the Gospel of a Possessed Man, that when the
Devils in him saw Christ, they made a sad out cry, Saying, Let us alone, what
have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth, are thou come to destroy us? I
know thee who thou art, the holy One of God. So that this Belief is not enough
to denominate any One a true Believer in Jesus Christ.

2. In Faith there is implied the Consent of the Will. Believers are Christ's
People. And his People are a Willing People, Psalm. 110.3. In this does
Believing especially consist. Hence Faith is said to be not a believing Of
Christ, but a Believing On him. So in the Text before us. And Believing In him,
Joh. 11.25. He that believes in me though he were dead, yet shall he live. And
there are many other Expressions whereby Faith is denoted in the Scripture
which imply a Consent of the Will. e. g. It is discribed by a willingness to
come to Christ for Life and Salvation. Christ said to the unbelieving Jews, You
will not come to me that you might have life, Joh. 5.40. Unbelief is a
departing from Christ. So it is by Faith that we go to him for Salvation. When
some false hearted Disciples were so offended at some passages in Christ's
Sermon, as to go back and walk no more with him, Christ said to his true
Disciples, Will you also go away? Peter answered, Lord to whom shall we go,
Thou have the words of Eternal Life, Joh. 6.68. Thy words which teach us to
believe on thee will bring us to Eternal Life, therefore we will go to thee and
to no one else for it. Faith is expressed by that of Trusting in the Lord, in
which is implied a Consent of the Will, and a Resting on him, and a Leaning on
him. Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness Leaning on her
beloved. It is the Believer that comes out of the Wilderness of this World, and
Leans upon Christ all the Way in his Journey toward Heaven. Again, Faith is
called Obedience. He is the Author of Salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5.9.
It is not a forced but a willing Obedience. Isai. 1.19. If ye be willing and
obedient, you shall eat the good of the Land. They that are willingly obedient
to Christ shall eat the good of the heavenly Land, they shall eat the bread of
Life there. Moreover, Believing is said to be a Receiving of Christ. Joh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even
to them that believe on his Name. A Man that has a gift offered to him, if he
is convinced of the worth of it, he receives it with both hands willingly.
Christ is the greatest gift that possibly can be. God himself has not a greater
gift to bestow than that of his Son Jesus Christ. In the Gospel he offers him
to Sinners to be their Savior. They that Receive him as God offers him, are
the Believers that shall have Everlasting Life. The true Believer Receives him
with his heart, and in his heart. Christ says, Behold I stand at the door and
knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him and
will sup with him and he with me, Rev. 3.20. What door is that which Christ
stands knocking at? It is at the door of the Sinners heart. Christ says, Open
that door, that I may come in. The Believer says, I will do it with all my
heart. Come in blessed Lord, Take possession of this heart of mine, Dwell there
and rule there for ever; And cast out of my heart what ever stands in
opposition to thee. I give to thee, and to none but thee my heart. The Believer
that thus heartily receives Christ, shall sup with him, shall feast with him
upon the bread of Life in Heaven.

To speak more particularly:

1. The Believer receives Christ in his Person as a most desirable One. 1 Pet.
2.7. To you which believe he is precious. Not only in his benefits precious,
but He himself is so. God offers his Son to Men to be their Head and Savior,
that their Souls should be Married to him, Matthew. 22.2. A King made a Marriage
for his Son. The God of Heaven is the King there spoken of. Our Lord Jesus
Christ is his Son. It is the believing Soul that is Married to him; yea, the
Soul takes him not merely for his Portion, but for the excellency and
desirableness of his Person. Not for his Loaves, but because his Miracles have
convinced him that he is the Son of God, and so the most excellent Person that
ever was in the World. The dark Unbeliever never had his eyes opened so as to
have real visions of the glory of Christ. The language of Unbelief is that, in
Isai. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty in him that we should desire him. But as for the true Believer the
Spirit of God has opened his eyes, and shined into his heart, and has given him
to see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. He therefore says of
Christ, He is my beloved, and my beloved is the chief of ten thousand. There is
no Man on Earth nor in Heaven neither that is so desirable in his eyes as Jesus
Christ. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee. He does then most willingly receive him.

2. He receives Christ, as in his Person, so in all his Offices. He does not
only believe that Christ is a Priest, a Prophet and King, but is willing that
Christ should be his Priest, his Prophet, and his King. It is true that the
Priestly Office of Christ is in a special manner the object of Faith. (...).
3.25 Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood.
Jesus Christ the glorious High Priest of our Christian Profession, has offered
a Sacrifice to God to make Atonement for the Sins of his People, and (...) to
obtain for them the forgiveness of all their Sins, and the Salvation of their
Souls. Now that Sacrifice which Christ has offered, is Himself. He is both
Priest and Sacrifice. His humane Nature which was Sacrificed being Personally
united to the divine Nature, that Sacrifice was infinitely greater than if all
the Creatures in the whole World had been a Sacrifice to appease the wrath and
satisfy the Justice of God, for the wrong done to him by the Sins of Men. It
was sufficient to make Atonement for the Sins of the whole World. Were it not
for the Merit of the blood of that Sacrifice, the Believer would have no Faith
nor Hope of ever seeing Heaven. Heb. 10.19. Having boldness to enter into the
holiest of all by the blood of Jesus. He dare venture to say, If there is not
Merit enough in the blood of Jesus to obtain my Salvation, I am content to
perish. But since there is such a great High Priest as Jesus the Son of God to
be his Savior, the true Believer on him shall never perish. Thus does he
receive Christ in his Priestly Office. He also receives and submits unto him in
his Prophetical Office. Moses said to the Children of Israel, A Prophet will
the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me, him shall you hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you, and it shall come to pass that every
soul that will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed. Christ is that
Prophet, as the Apostle Peter declares in one of his Sermons which he Preached
in the Temple, Acts 3.22. The Believer is called a Comer to Christ: Joh. 6.35.
He that comes to me shall never hunger, he that believes on me shall never
thirst. He comes to Christ to be taught by him, as a Scholar comes to his
Instructor. Hence Believers are called Disciples. Again, the Believer receives
Christ as King. There are many that would have Christ to be their Savior who
are not willing that he should be their Ruler, But Believers say of Christ, He
is our Lawgiver, he is our King, he will save us. As such He is received by the
true Believer. Col. 2.6. As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him. It was from damning Unbelief in the Jews that they said of Christ, We
will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14.

3. The true Believer is willing to receive Christ upon Christ's own Terms. He
will not capitulate with Chirst, and say, I will be his Servant, provided so
and so: but he says, Let Christ propose what terms he pleases, by the help of
his Grace I Will comply and be his Servant.

But what are the Terms which we must Consent unto, and comply with, if we
would have Christ to be our Savior? What does the Lord require?

Answ. 1. If we would have Christ to be our Savior, we must have no other
Savior. As there is no other, nor any in Heaven or Earth that is fit to be the
Savior of the perishing World, but only Jesus Christ. Act. 4.12. There is none
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. So we may
not expect Salvation in whole or in part from any other. Christ says to the
Man that would approve himself a Believer, Thou shall be for me and not for
another, Hos. 3 3. David was a true Believer on Christ. He says, My soul wait
thou only upon God, my Expectation is from him, he only is my rock and my
salvation, Psalm. 62.5, 6. The Believer has no other Priest by the Merit of
whose Sacrifice he Expects reconciliation with God, and Eternal Life. He does
not think to be Saved partly by the Merit of Christ's Obedience, and partly by
his own. When there were some among the Galatians that would be Saved partly by
Moses and partly by Christ, the Apostle declares to them, that if they did
continue of that Opinion, Christ would profit them nothing, Gal. 5.2. Nor has
the true Believer any other Prophet to whom he yields absolute and universal
Obedience, but only Jesus Christ. The Jewish Rabbis expected that their
disciples should believe whatever they dictated, as if they had been
infallible, which is an Obedience due to Christ alone. In opposition to them,
it is said, Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master even Christ,
Matthew. 23.10. Moreover, The Believer receives Christ as his King, and the only
King of his Soul. Before he had Faith, he submitted his Soul to another King.
Sin reigned in him, and Satan ruled over him, but now he says, Other Lords
have had dominion over me, for the future I will make mention of thy Name only,
Isai. 26.13. True Believers all agree in appointing themselves one head, Hos.
1.11. That one head is none but Christ. Nathaniel said to him, Thou art the Son
of God, thou art the King of Israel, Joh. 1.49. He is not only a King of
Israel, but the King of Israel. There is no other King of Israel, (that is of
the Church of God,) but only the Son of God. The Believer receives him
accordingly.

2. It is required of Men that they should deny themselves, and receive Christ
with his Cross, if they would indeed approve themselves Believers on Christ.
Men are apt to say as those Jews did; Matthew. 27.42. Let him come down from the
cross, and we will believe him. But a Man cannot be a Christian, if he will not
be a Cross-bearer. How express and plain are the words of Christ, Matthew. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, if he will be my disciple, Let him deny himself,
and take up his cross and follow me. If a Man will be my disciple (says
Christ) he must follow my Example in bearing the Cross as I shall do: He must
go cross to his own Will, and natural inclination. So must he deny himself.
Christ and Self are very contrary. And what self must he deny? Righteous self
must be denied: which to do is a great difficulty. For nothing is more natural
to Adams Children, than to desire to be Saved by some works or righteousness of
their own, and not be beholden to another, to Christ for all their Salvation.
They would find the life of their hands. The Jews when Christ was at Capernaum,
enquired of him, What shall we do that we might work the works of God? Meaning
the work which God will reward with Eternal Life. Christ gives them to
understand that Everlasting Life follows not upon Doing, but upon Believing:
Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God that you believe on him whom he has sent.
For a Man to make many Prayers, and to remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy, to be righteous in all his dealings with Men, and to abound in works of
Charity, and when he has done to look upon all as nothing worth, and depend
wholly on the Righteousness of Christ for all his acceptance with God, is
self-denial. Thus Humbled must a Man be, that so he may be a true Believer on
Christ. He must renounce all his own righteousness and esteem it as filthy
rags. So did Paul: He counted all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ: and that he might be found in him not having his own
righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9.
Also, corrupt sinful self must be denied. A Man must be willing to part with
his Sins, and the Lusts of his heart so far as they are sinful, or he cannot be
a Believer on Christ. Joh. 5.44. How can you believe which receive honor one
of another? If a Man is under the dominion of a Lust of Ambition, how can he
believe? So if he is under the power of a Lust of Wantonness, or a Lust of
Drunkenness, or of any other Lust, that he will rather venture the loss of his
Soul, and Eternal Life, than part with that Sin, how can he believe. The true
Believer is heartily willing to part with all his Sins. It is said of the wise
Merchant, that he sold all that he had for the Pearl of great price, Matthew.
13.46. Christ is the Pearl of great price, the true Believer is the wise
Merchant, he will sell all, will part with all the World, much more with all
his Sins, rather than not have Christ and Eternal Life. That Sin which has been
his own Iniquity, as hard to part with as his right hand, he will cut it off,
if it will keep him from having an Interest in Christ. That Sin which has been
the chief Idol of his heart, he is willing to part with it. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim
shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols. Converted Ephraim shall say
so. Ephraim, when became a believer on Christ, shall say so, and will say so.
Moreover* Natural Self so far as standing in opposition to, or competition with
Jesus Christ, it must be denied. A Man must break with his dearest Friends, or
nearest Relations, rather than break with Christ, or he will not, nay, he
cannot be a Believer. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me and hate not his Father
and Mother, and Wife and Children, yea, and his own Life, he cannot be my
disciple. A less degree of love is called hatred in the Scripture. The case may
be so circumstanced with a Man, that if he become a Christian, his own Father,
or his own Brother will become his Enemy, and seek his Life. It has often been
so. Nothing is so dear to Men naturally as Life. All that a Man has will he
give for his Life: but if he does not hate his own Life in comparison of
Christ, he cannot be a true Believer on his Name. The Apostle said, I am ready
not only to be bound, but to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. In
the Primitive Times, Christians were frequently put upon the Trial, Whether
they would part with their Lives for the Name of Christ, then many
false-hearted Christians proved Apostates, but the sound Believer did not so.
Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives to the death. They might have lived and
enjoyed the Comforts of Life many a fair day, if they would have denied Christ,
but they chose death rather. And in these Latter Ages, cruel and bloody Papists
would burn the Servants of Christ to death, if they did not own Antichrist, and
so disown Christ. Notable was the Expression of One of those Martyrs. If I had
as many lives as there are hairs on my head, I would gladly part with them all
for Christ. But thus we see that if Men will be Christians indeed, they must
take Christ with his Cross. This has been the parting point between Christ, and
many a one that has bid fair for Christ and Heaven. We have diverse Instances
of it in the Gospel. There was a Person of some Note, one that was a Scribe.
Among the Jews the Scribes were Ecclesiastical Officers, not unlike those who
among Christians are called the Canonists. A certain Scribe came to our Savior
and said, I will follow thee, whithersoover thou go, Matthew. 8.19. No doubt
but notwithstanding this fair profession, he hoped for some Secular advantage
by following Christ; for when the Lord intimated to him, That if he would be
his Disciple, it may be he might be a poor Man all the days of his Life; so
poor as not to have an house to lay his head in, we then hear no more of his
following Christ. There was also a Ruler among the Jews, who was a Man of a
great Estate. He was very desirous of Eternal Life in Heaven. He came kneeling
to Christ, and asked him, What shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life. To
try what he would do, the Lord said to him, Sell whatsoever thou have and give
to the poor, take up the cross and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven: He was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had great
Possessions, Mark 10.^1, 22. There are many who if they could have Christ and
the World too, they would be Christians, but when they hear of such hard terms
as taking up the Cross, and parting with all the World for Christ, they go away
sorrowful. Men deal with Christ as Orpah did by her impoverished Mother Naomi,
when she was told that she must expect nothing of the Worlds good, by going
with her, She wept and took her leave of her. Thus do many weep over Christ,
and weep over Religion, and take their leave of it. But the true Believer, does
like Ruth, who said, Thy People shall be my People, and thy God shall be my
God; naught but death shall part thee and me. So says the Believer, naught but
death shall part Christ and me, neither shall that do it. Thus I have spent a
whole Sermon, in declaring to you what it is to be a Believer.

SERMON, II.
PROPOSITION, II. The true Believer shall inherit Everlasting Life in another
World.
THERE is no truth in all the Bible more inculcated than this. It is very often
affirmed in Express terms, and often in other words, which import it: It is
said of Believers, that they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28. And that they
shall never see Death. The second Death, that Death which stands in direct
opposition to Eternal Life, they shall never see it, Joh. 8.51. And that they
shall be Saved. Mark 16.16. They shall be Saved from Hell. It is not a
Temporal, but an Eternal Salvation which Christ has Promised to the true
Believer on his Name. He is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey
him, Heb. 5.9. It is said of the Believer that he shall Eat of the Tree of Life
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. If Adam had Eat of the
Tree of Life, he should have lived for ever. So shall the Believer who does by
Faith feed upon Christ, who is the Tree of Life.

Several things may be mentioned which Evince and Confirm the Truth now before
us.

1. True Faith in Christ is an infallible sign of Electing Grace. The Electing
Love of God is Unchangable. The purpose of God according to Election stands
firm for ever, Romans 9.11. Among the Jews there were a great many who did not
obtain Eternal Life: but the Election has obtained it, Romans 11.7. Not One
Elect Soul shall ever perish. For they are all given to Christ, to be Redeemed
and Saved by him. And he has said to God his Father, Those whom thou gave me
I have kept, and none of them is lost, Joh. 17.12. It is impossible that any
one of Gods Elect should perish. Satan and his Instruments may do their utmost
to draw them from Christ, and so to hinder their Salvation, but in vain. It Is
said, They shall deceive the very Elect if it were possible, Matthew. 24.24.
which words imply that it is impossible. But Believers on the Name of Christ
are Elected. It is true that there are many belonging to Election who do not as
yet believe, but they shall believe. Wherefore Christ has said, I have other
Sheep who are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice, Joh. 10.16. Those whom God has from Eternity chosen to Salvation, shall
believe, 2 These. 2.13. And they that do believe may thereby know that they are
chosen to Salvation. For which cause the Apostle exhorts Christians, that they
should give diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Not
that they should endeavor to make their Election in it self sure, for so it
was before the World began; but sure in respect of their own Knowledge of it.
Effectual Calling, or Obedience to the call of the Gospel is the same thing
with Faith. He that has Assurance of that, has Assurance of his Election, and
so of his being an Heir of Everlasting Life.

2. The Son of God came into the World that so whoever shall truly believe on
him might have Everlasting Life. He came to deliver from death. 1 John 3 8. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. Sin and Death were the works of the Devil. All that the Devil had
been contriving and doing against the Elect, the Son of God came into the
World, and destroyed all the Devils design in one day. The Devil drew Adam the
first Man into sin, and that sin killed all his Children: but Christ the Second
Adam has delivered his Children from Eternal Death. 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. This was Gods blessed
design in sending Christ into the World: 1 John 4.9. He sent his only begotten
Son into the World, that we might live through him. And this was Christ's end in
coming, that so he might obtain a better Life for Believers than ever Adam had,
before sin entered into the World. Joh. 10.10. I am come that you might have
life, and that you might have it more abundantly. Christ did therefore himself
dye. The sorrows of Hell took hold on him. He endured the pains both of the
first death in his holy Body, and of the second death, when his Soul was made
an offering for sin, that so he might redeem us from death. If then Believers
should not have everlasting Life, Christ has dyed in vain, the end of his
coming into the World should be frustrated, which is a thing not to be supposed.

3. The faithful God has promised that Believers shall have Everlasting Life. 1 John 2.25. This is the promise that he has promised us Eternal Life. Believers
are for the generality among the poor of the World, but in respect of the
heavenly World, they are rich. There the riches of a Kingdom is their's, and a
far more glorious Kingdom than any on the Earth. This riches they have in
reversion by virtue of a faithful promise made to them. Jam. 2.5. Has not God
chosen the poor of the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he
has promised to them that love him. That Kingdom is the same thing with
Everlasting Life. It is called the Promise, Heb. 10.36. That after you have
done the will of God you may receive the promise. What is that promise but Life
and Glory in Heaven? The promise is by a metanymy put for the reward promised.
Under the Covenant of works Life was promised on condition of Personal
Obedience to the Law, the terms of it, was do and live; but there is a New
Covenant, which is a Covenant of Grace, the Condition of which is not Doing,
but Believing. If perfect Obedience were the Condition of it, the best of us
all would have no hope of Eternal Life: The Gospel says to every Man where ever
it is Preached, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall b^ ^^^ved, and
live Eternally, Act. 16.30. Th^^ promise did God make to his Eternal (...) in
the Covenant of Redemption on the behalf of Believers, before the World began.
Tit. 1.2. Eternal Life which God that cannot lie promised before the world
began. And this promise is made to Believers themselves in the Gospel. Gal.
3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the Faith
of Jesus Christ, might be given to all them that believe. To confirm the Faith
of Believers, God has annexed Seals to the Covenant. Baptism assures the
Believer of the Eternal Salvation of his Soul. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves us.
How does it save, but as a Sign or Sacrament, Sealing to the worthy receiver
his Eternal Salvation? The like is to be said with respect to the other
Sacrament of the New Testament, the Lords Supper. In that Ordinance Christ says
to the Believer, My blood has been shed for thee: And as sure as my blood has
been shed for thee, Thy Sins are pardoned, and thou shall have Everlasting Life
in Heaven. If God had only promised this, that is assurance enough, but to
strengthen the Faith of Believers, who are the heirs of Promise, the God of
Truth has not only promised, but he has Sworn by Himself that it shall be so,
that by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie,
Believers might have a strong Consolation, Heb. 6.18. The promise of God, and
the Oath of God are those two immutable things.

PROPOSITION, III. The true Believer on Jesus Christ is as sure to have
Everlasting Life given to him, as if he was now in the actual and full
Enjoyment of it.
Hence it is Expressed in the present Tense, he has, and not he shall have
(though that is intended) Everlasting Life. In the Scripture things future are
sometimes spoken of as if they were present, intimating the undoubted certainty
of their accomplishment. Thus, Isai. 9.1. For unto us a Child is born. The
Prophet wrote those words above seven hundred Years, before that Child was
born, but it was as sure to be as if it had been already. So is the Believers
Enjoyment of Eternal Life in Heaven. He now has Everlasting Life,

1. In that he now has an Interest in Christ. 1 John 5.12. He that has the
Son has Life. The Believer Now has the Son. He is united to Christ: As the
branch is united to the vine, and one with it. Christ is the vine, Believers
are branches in that vine: As the branches are part of the body of the vine, so
is every Believer a part of Christ's Mystical body. The Mystical Union between
Christ and the Believer is like the Natural Union which is between the head and
the body. Believers on Earth in respect of their blessed head are in heaven
already. God has made them to sit in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.6. They are as sure to be with Christ in Heaven, as if they were there Now.

2. The Believer is Now in a State of Justification, and without fault before
the Throne of God. Romans 8.1. There is now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. There was Condemnation to them, but now there is none at all. It
is not only true that a Sentance of Absolution shall be past upon him before
all the World at the Day of Judgment, his Sins shall be blotted out, when the
time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, but its also done
already, then he shall live and not die. It was said to David, The Lord has
put away thy sin thou shall not dye. So may it be said to the true Believer on
Jesus Christ, the Lord has pardoned thy Sin, thou shall not die, but live for
ever. The Scripture says, That whom he Justified them he glorified, Romans 8.30.
Two things are implied in Justification, in respect whereof the Believer on
Jesus Christ has Eternal Life. One is the full forgiveness of Sin. Where there
is no Sin, there is no Death. The Justified Person is fully and for ever
acquitted from his Sins. All his Sins are done away in the blood of Christ:
That blood having been sprinkled on his Soul, he is perfectly cleansed from the
guilt of his Sins. Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with Hysop, (when blood was sprinkled
with Hysop on the Leper he was cleansed from his Leprosy,) and I shall be
clean: Wash me and I shall be whiter than the snow. It is for the sake of
Christ's blood in which he has been washed, that the Pardoned Believer is looked
upon as Sinless and Guiltless. Jer. 50.20. The iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve Moreover, the Believers
Justification implies his being accepted as righteous: He may plead a perfect
righteousness for his obtaining Eternal Life. Christ's righteousness is perfect:
He has satisfied the Law and fulfilled the Law by his Active and Passive
Obedience, which is imputed to every true Believer. The Righteousness of God,
cannot but be perfect Righteousness, this is upon all them that do believe,
Romans 3.22. Then Everlasting Life is their's.

3. The Believer has Everlasting Life, in respect of a Just Title to it. It
does Now of right belong to him. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of Life. A Man may have a
just Title to that Inheritance, which he has not a present possession of. The
Believer has a right to the Inheritance of Eternal Life on the account of a
glorious purchase. It has been bought and paid for. Not by himself. Eternal
Life is too great a thing for all the Creatures in the World ever to purchase
or lay down a valuable price for it. But Jesus Christ the Son of God has given
an Infinite price to purchase it for the Believer on his Name. He has Merited
it for them. Therefore he is said to be the Cause, (...), i. e. the Meritorious
cause of their Salvation, Heb. 5.9.

4. The Believer has now Eternal Life, in respect of the beginning of it. The
full fruition is to be in a better World. There is an initial fruition in this
World. It is begun in Regeneration and Sanctification Ephesians. 2 1. You has he
quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Out of the Believers heart shall
flow rivers of living Water That spring of Grace which is in the Soul of the
Believer, shall never dye, but will be in him a well of Water springing up into
Everlasting Life. Grace and Glory differ wonderfully in the degree, but they
are of the same nature. Believers have the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans
8.23. The first fruits and the full harvest are of the same kind. A drop of
Water, and a river of Water are of the same nature.

USE, I.
Woeful is their Error, who think that there is no World, nor any Life but what
is Present and Temporal. Such Men are worse than Balaam, who as wicked as he
was, yet had so much Religion as to wish that he might dye the death of the
Righteous, Numb. 23.10. If there is no other World but this, why would he
desire to dye the Death of the Righteous rather than of the wicked? For as to
what is visible as the one dies, so dies the other; but he was convinced that
when a Righteous Man dies his Soul goes to a better World, but when a wicked
Man dies, his Soul goes to a woeful World, his knowledge of that made him say, O
let me dye the death of the Righteous. There is a visible World, which with the
things belonging to it are Temporal, there is also an invisible World, and the
things there are Eternal. So says the Scripture, 2 Cor. 4.18. The things which
are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. There is
this present World, that is Temporal. This World shall not continue always in its
present State. 1 Cor. 7.31. The fashion of this World passes away. The Earth
and the works therein shall be burnt up; All these things shall be dissolved.
Life in this World is Temporal. There is no Creature on the Earth whose Life is
Everlasting. Especially the Life of Man, is but as a vapor that appears for a
little time, and vanishes away: but there is also a World to come. That Is an
Eternal World, The Life there is an Everlasting Life. The Resurrection World,
is a World to come. They that obtain that World are Immortal ones, Neither can
they dye any more, Luke 20.30. The Heavenly World, is a World to come as to our
Enjoyment of it. That Is an Eternal World. 2 Cor. 5.1. We have an house not made
with hands eternal in the heavens. The delights there do not (as all Earthly
delights do) fade away. They are Satisfactory and Eternal. Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for ever more. And as there is an Eternal Heaven,
where the Righteous shall be rewarded with Everlasting Life, So there is an
Everlasting Hell, where the wicked shall be punished with Eternal death and
misery. Mark 9.43. In Hell the worm dies not, and the fire never shall be
quenched. Jesus Christ has taught us the doctrine of the Immortality of the
Souls of Men. He has said, Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able
to kill the Soul, Matthew. 10.28. Its an easy matter to kill the body, a little
thing will do it, but all the Men in the World are not able to kill the Soul,
which is of such a nature that it cannot be killed. Now if the Souls of Men are
Immortal, it necessarily follows, that they will be either happy or miserable
to Eternity. Moreover, that which the Apostle speaks, is a clear demonstration
that there is another World, and another Life besides this. 1 Cor. 15.19. If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
Christians deny themselves of the Comforts of this Life, and expose themselves
to many crosses and sorrows, and all for Christ's sake; if then there were not
another World, and another Life after this, the best Men in the World, would be
the unhappiest, which is against the light of reason to imagine. There was a
Christian Emperor, that when some informed him of the Death of a Noble Man,
withal declaring that he was a very wicked Man, and yet lived to a great old
Age, and never met with any affliction in his Life, then (said the Emperor) we
may conclude that the Ministers of God speak the Truth unto us, when they tell
us, that there is another World besides this, and a Judgment to come. And wise
Men among the Gentiles have argued thus, we see (say they) That many Times in
this World Virtue is not rewarded, and Vice is not punished, Therefore there
must needs be a future World and State, in which Men shall receive according to
what their deeds have been.

All this notwithstanding there have been some who pass under the Name of
Christians, One fitly calls them Baptized Infidels, who deny all revealed
Religion, and will not believe any thing, but what they see with their eyes.
One of them when dying said, He was going to take a Leap in the dark, He
Questioned whether there was either a Heaven or an Hell. And it has been
credibly reported that a dying Pope, said, That now he should be resolved of
three great Questions, 1. Whether there is a God or no. 2. Whether there is a
Heaven or an Hell. 3. Whether the Souls of Men are Immortal. But although there
are few Comparatively which are arrived to such a prodigious height of Atheism
and Infidelity, there are Practical Infidels innumerable. What shall be said of
Worldlings, Men of the World whose portion is in this Life, nor are they at all
sollicitous about any other Life or Portion, besides what is Enjoyed on the
Earth. Do not Men live as if all their thoughts were that there is no God, nor
Eternal Life to come? If they did really believe that there is no other World
but this, would they not live just as now they do? Do they not practically say,
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye. If there is no Eternal World,
no Everlasting Life, they may well say so. Did not the holy Apostle weep when
he knew that there was among Professed Christians many whose God is their
belly, their glory is their shame, who mind Earthly things, Phil. 3.19.

USE, II.
Since Everlasting Life depends upon Believing on Jesus Christ, Christ is
certainly a most glorious One. He is the most Excellent Person that we can
possibly set our hearts upon. How ought we to Love Him and Admire Him as well
as to Believe on Him. He is a None such One: His Name is called WONDERFUL,
Isai. 9.6. He is the wonder of Heaven. He is the wonder of Angels, and will be
admired by Saints and Angels to Eternity. In respect of his Person: He is God
and Man, and therefore a wonderful Person. There is no God-Man besides Jesus
Christ. For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Colos. 2.9. Which
may not be said of any other Man that ever was in the World. In respect of his
Person, He is Gods Own Son, His only begotton Son, Joh. 3.16. Believers are the
Adopted Sons of God. Angels are called the Sons of God in respect of
Similitude. None but Christ is Gods Own Son: He has therefore a Divine as well
as an Humane Nature, In respect whereof he is Equal with God the Father. The
Jews charged him with blasphemy, because he said God was his Father, making
himself Equal with God. The Lord of Hosts, says of Christ, that Man is my
Fellow, Zech. 13.7. which may not be affirmed of any other Man, or of any mere
Creature. And although Christ Considered as Man is infinitely inferior to God;
nevertheless Considered as Man, he Excels all other Men. Psalm. 45.2. Thou are
fairer than the Children of men. The most Excellent Men that have been in the
World, have not thought themselves worthy to be his Servants. It is said, That
of them that are born of Women there has not risen a greater than John the
Baptist. But John speaking of Christ says, He that comes after me is mightier
than I am, Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. That is to say, I am not worthy
to be his Servant, for among the Jews Servants were wont to carry their Masters
Shoes after them. Moses was the greatest Man in the Church of Israel, but of
Christ it is said, This Man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, Heb.
3.3. Solomon was the greatest King in Israel. But in respect of Christ it was
said, Behold a greater than Solomon is here. The Jewish Writers have a saying
(and there is truth in it) That when Messiah comes, he shall be greater than
Moses, greater than our Father Abraham, greater than the Angels. The Scripture
says no less: Heb. 1.4, 5. Being made so much better than the Angels, he has
by inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they, for unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son. God has set the Man Christ Jesus
at his own right hand in Heaven, which is a dignity above the highest Angel in
Heaven. The highest Arch Angel is his Servant, and will appear to be so before
all the World, when he shall at the Command of Christ, blow the Trump of God,
and Summon all Mankind to appear before his Judgment Seat, 1 These. 4.16.

But there are two things in the Text and Doctrine before us which declare the
surpassing Excellency and Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. He is the object of Faith: One to be believed on. Joh. 14.1. Ye believe on
God, believe also in me. That Is a greater thing than may be said of any other
Man, nor might it be said of Christ if he were not more than a Man. We may not
trust in any other for the Salvation of our Souls. It would be a cursed thing
to do so. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man. But to trust in
Christ is a blessed thing. Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. This proves that Christ is more than a Man, as being the object
of Religious Worship. For Faith is a special thing in that inward Worship of
Soul, which is an honor too great for any Creature to receive. As all
Religious Service, so in special believing, which is internal Worship, must be
placed on no other object but God. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. We may not Worship an Angel. They all with one voice say
unto us, See you do it not, Rev. 19.10. But we may and ought to Worship Jesus
Christ the Son of God. All the Saints on Earth do so. In every place they call
upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord. All the Angels in Heaven do so. Worship
him all ye Angels. God Commands Men to Worship his Son. Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the
Son. i. e. not only in token of Love, but of Adoration.

2. Jesus Christ is the Author of Life, yea, of Everlasting Life. So does the
Texts and Doctrine before us intimate, when it is said. He that believes on him
has Everlasting Life. He is styled, The Prince of Life, Act. 3.15. Who is it
that can make the dead to live? The Son of God can do it, has done it, will do
it, which is a more Excellent Glory than any Creature may pretend unto. An
Angel cannot make a dead body to live again, much less a dead Soul. Christ does
both. The hour comes and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5.25. There is not a true Believer
in all the World, but he lives, and that not only as to a Natural, but a
Spiritual Life, which will end in Eternal Life: but all the Believers on Earth
are beholden to Jesus Christ for whatever Life they have. Joh. 1.4. In him was
the Life; in him as the fountain of it. There is Life enough in Christ for the
quickening of Millions of dead perishing Souls. There is an abundance of Life in
him. Joh. 10.10. I am came that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly. Hence Christ is called Eternal Life, because he is the
Author of it. 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.

USE, III.
Believers on CHRIST are the happiest Men in the World. The World looks on them
as the unhappiest. And the truth is, that if there were no other World (...)
this, many of them would be the miserablest Men, as before was intimated,
because they are despised, hated, reproached more than any Men: but in a World
yet to come, they will receive that which shall compensate, and infinitely
transcend all their sufferings here. The sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed. Two
particulars may be mentioned, which Confirm the Truth of the Inference now
before us.

1. The Life which Believers have through Jesus Christ a right and title unto,
is the happiest life that can be desired. Life is of all things the most
desirable. Happiness is called Life. Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires
life, and loves many days, that he may see good. Does not every Man desire
that life in which happiness does consist? True happiness does not consist in
an Earthly sensual Life, for then the vilest of Men would be happier than the
best of Men, nay bruit beasts some of which live hundreds of years, would be
happier than Men. But in a Spiritual Celestial Life there is happiness. Such a
Life as the Angels of Heaven live, who are always beholding the face of God, is
blessedness. That Is the Life which Believers shall live in another and a better
World. Do Riches make life desirable? What are earthly Riches compared with
Heavenly? Follow me, (says Christ) and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. O
the Riches of the Glory of that Inheritance! Does Pleasures make Life
desirable? Spiritual and Celestial Pleasures are the most desirable. Believers
when once in Heaven shall be made to drink of the River of those pleasures,
Psalm. 36.8. It is a joyful Life, they live there: Their hearts will be as full
of joy as ever they can hold. Psalm. 16.11. Fullness of Joy. Nay, more joy than
their hearts are able to hold. Matthew. 25.21. Well done faithful Servant, enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord. When in this World joy enters into the Soul of
the Believer, but when in Heaven, He enters into joy. The joy exceeds there.

2. They shall never be deprived of this blessed Life. It is an Everlasting
Life. Matthew. 25.46. The Righteous shall go into Life Eternal. If a Man enjoys a
thing that is delightful to him, the thought of loosing it, is grevious The
glorified Believer has no fear of being deprived of his happy Life. The Life
which Adam had in Paradise he lost it, and all his unhappy Children with him.
But the life which Believers have by Jesus Christ can never be lost. Christ is
alive, and behold he lives for ever more. Believers being united to him, and
One with him, they also shall live for ever more. Joh. 14.19. Because I live,
ye live also. Believers then are the happiest of Men. Doubtless, there are some
that will say, We know that true Believers on Christ are happy, and we should
account our selves happy, if we knew that we our selves were such: But how
shall be know that?

Answ 1. Consider the description which has been given of Believers, and ask
your selves, and let Conscience answer, whether you have received Christ as
offered in the Gospel, in his Person as vested with a threefold Office, Priest,
Prophet and King. Have you been made willing to accept of Christ on his own
terms? To receive him with his Cross, To part with whatever stands in
opposition to him, or in competition with him. Then art thou a true Believer.

2. We may know our Faith by the blessed Sanctifying Effect of it. A true Faith
is a Sanctifying Faith. It purifieth the heart, and turns a Sinner into a
Saint. Act. 26.18. Sanctified by Faith. The Apostle directs Christians to judge
of their Faith by this. All pretenses to believing without this will never
prove a Saving Faith. Jam. 2.14. What does it profit though a man say he has
Faith, and has not works, Can Faith save him? No, such a Faith can never save
him. A workless Faith is a worthless Faith. The Apostle adds, Verse 18. A man
may say, Thou have Faith and I have Works, Show me thy Faith without thy works,
and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. The works of true Sanctification are
inseparable and infallible signs of a true Believer on Jesus Christ. But who is
a real Saint? The Man that has respect to all the Commandments of God is so: No
Man but the Believer in Christ has so. Christ has therefore said, You are my
friends, if you do whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15.14.

USE, IV.
What will become of Unbelievers? This Doctrine although the most Comfortable
word that can be spoken, contains in it a thunderbolt able to split the heart
and shake the Soul of every Unbeliever under Heaven For it is as sure as the
Gospel, that (...) continuing in their Unbelief shall not have Everlasting
Life. Christ said to his Ministers, Go ye into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature. And what must they say: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved: But is that all that they must say? No, They must also
say, He that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.15, 16. There are two sorts
of Unbelief.

1. There is a Negative Unbelief; which they that never had the Gospel Preached
to them, are subject unto. Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? Thus it is
with the greatest part of Mankind, poor perishing Creatures, they sit in
darkness, and in the Region of the shadow of death. What a dreadful Scripture
is that, in Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the
Nations th^^ forget God. But this sort of Unbelief, none that hear me this day
are concerned in. The Gospel has been Preached, and the Great Salvation offered
to every Soul among us.

2. There is Positive Unbelief, which is a disobedience to the Calls of the
Gospel. This Unbelief is the most damning Sin that ever any Man has been guilty
of. Joh. 3.19. And this is the Condemnation that light is come into the World,
and men love darkness rather than light. Christ is the most glorious light that
ever came into the World, but Men prefer Sin before Him. This brings them under
the heaviest Condemnation that possibly can be. The Unbeliever is not as yet
Executed, but he is Condemned. Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is condemned
already. And what Punishment is he Condemned unto? To nothing less than death.
And what death? A death not of the body only, but of the Soul; He is Condemned
to suffer the pains not of the first death only, but of the Second Death. What
is the Second Death? Rev. 21.8. The Unbelieving shall have their part in the
Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. And that
which makes it to be a death indeed, is the Everlastingness of it. The thought
of it is amazing. Despairing Spira said, If I were to be in Hell but for a
thousand Years, methinks it might be endured, but when I think of Eternity, I
am amazed Ah! Woeful Unbeliever, if thou were told that thou should be in
Exquisite Torments for a few Years, how would it astonish thee? But will it not
affect thee, that GOD Himself declares to thee, that if thou persist in thy
Unbelief, thou shall be in Endless and Easeless Miseries, in Torment the Smoke
whereof shall ascend for ever and ever. For the Lords sake Consider of it
before it is too late. Know it of a certainty, That Unbelievers who have
disobeyed the Gospel, will fall under the saddest Sentence, at the last day, of
any Sinners that ever have been in the World. The Sinners in Sodom shall not
have so hot a place in Hell as Unbelievers and Gospel despisers shall. It shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment than for that
City, Matthew. 10.15. Pagans, mere Heathen will not be punished as they shall.
Wherefore it was said to Unbelieving Chorazin, and to Unbelieving Bethsaida,
who lived under the Ministry of the best Preacher that ever was in the World,
Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, it shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sidon at the day of Judgment than for you. Thy other Sins are small
compared with this. If I had not spoken to them, they had no sin, did Christ
say, none Comparatively. It may be some of you have been guilty of Secret
Scarlet Sins, of Crimson abominations; but thy Unbelief is thy greatest Sin. If
ever God intends Mercy to thy Soul, He will make thee sensible of it: For the
holy Spirit does Convince the World of sin, that they have been guilty of the
most heinous Sin, because they believe not, Joh. 16 9. There is no Sin that
provokes God like this. To whom did he swear in wrath that they should not
enter into his rest, but to them that believed not, Heb. 3.18. God sending his
Son into the World to be the Savior of it, is the greatest Mercy that ever
was, therefore in Unbelief there is the greatest ingratitude: And there is
Blasphemy in it. For Unbelievers give GOD the lie, which is a thing horrible to
think of. 1 John 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because
he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. God from Heaven declared
more than once, that our Lord Jesus Christ is his Son. The Unbeliever says
practically, that is a Lie! That Is the Language of his Unbelief. Horrendous
Blasphemy!

I see the time is spent, and so am I, yet I know not how to let you go without
a word of Exhortation. O how glad should I be, to dye before I stir out of this
Pulpit, might I persuade many in this Numerous Assembly to go to Jesus Christ,
and Savingly to Believe on Him!

USE, V. EXHORTATION.
Let every Soul that desires Everlasting Life, make sure of his being a true
Believer on Jesus Christ. It is impossible for me to Exhort you to a thing of
greater Moment and Importance, for Life depends on it, Nay, Everlasting Life.
There is One thing Needful. For a Man to make sure that when Death shall take
him out of this World, he shall pass from Death to Life Eternal; to make sure
of that is the One thing Needful. The way and the only way to make sure of it
is. To Believe on Jesus Christ. As for Life on Earth, there is no Securing it:
It is passing away every day. Thou have a day less to Live now, than thou had
Yesterday. Thy Life is by a Week nearer to an End now, than it was the last
Sabbath Day. But an Everlasting Life in Heaven may be Secured by Believing on
Jesus Christ. Say not, I have been a great Sinner, and may I believe? You have
the more need of the great Savior. Say not, may I dare to believe and cast my
self upon Christ for Life and Salvation! Is it not strange that any Man should
say, May I dare to obey the Commandment of God? Make no Objections. There is a
Scripture which answers all Objections. It is, 1 John 3.23. This is his
Commandment that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ.

Methinks I hear some of you saying, We are not able to believe, What shall we
do that we may become true Believers on Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1. Let us beware of thinking we are Believers when we are not so. This
ungrounded persuasion has undone the greatest part of those that call
themselves Christians, and is the cause of their dying in a state of Unbelief
to their Eternal ruin. It is a Truth which Men do not love to hear, but it
must be spoken, That there are but very few true Believers in the World. Isai.
53.1. Who has believed our report? The number of those that have a Saving
Belief of what the Gospel reveals are a very small number. It is Calvin's note
on those words of the Prophet, That among those that have the Gospel Preached
to them, scarce one in an hundred is a true Believer. As among the Jews there
were many who professed to know God, but in works they denied him. So many
pretend to be Believers on Christ, but their works declare them to be no real
Christians. But besides such, There are many Moral Men of blameless
Conversation, (as Paul was before his Conversion) who have no Saving Faith: And
besides these, many Hypocrites in the purest Churches, who have a seeming
Faith, deceiving the World, deceiving Churches, and deceiving their own Souls.
For the Lords sake, Let not any of us be of that Number.

2. Be willing to part with what ever will keep thy Soul from closing with
Christ. Any one Sin loved and lived in will make a Separation between Christ
and thee. Joshua said to the Children of Israel, You cannot Serve the Lord, i.
e. if you Serve Idols. And Christ says, You cannot Serve God and Mammon. No Man
can serve two contrary Masters. Thus you must be willing to part with those
Lusts which have been the Idols of your hearts, or you cannot be Believers on
Christ. 2 Cor. 6.15. What concord has Christ with Belial? It is impossible that
Christ and Sin should reign in the same heart at the same time. Christ said to
Peter, If I wash thee not thou have no part in me. He says to every Man, If
thou art not willing that I should save thee from Sin as well as from Hell,
thou can not be my Disciple. Also thy Sinful Companions must be abandoned.
Save your selves from this untoward Generation. If once thou art become a
serious Christian they will abandon thee. Wherefore now forsake the foolish and
live. And if thou would have Christ to be thine, beware of an heart glue'd to
the World. That keeps many from closing with Christ. Christ is offered to them,
but they make light of it, and Go away one to his Farm and another to his
Merchandise, Matthew. 22 5. Suppose a Man has a Jewel offered to him, if his hand
is full of Earth he cannot take hold of it; So when Christ the Pearl of great
price is in the Gospel offered to Sinners, they cannot receive him, if their
hearts will hold fast the Earth still.

3. Pray and Cry to GOD to make thee a Believer. For Faith is the gift of GOD.
It is of his operation where ever it is found. Therefore he must be sought unto
for it. The case stands thus; either thou must believe on Jesus Christ or
perish Eternally. But thou art not able to believe by any power of thy own.
Thou art no more able to believe by thine own power, than thou art able to
create a World, or to raise the Dead. No Man can come to Christ except the
Father draw him. O then Cry to GOD that He would please by His Almighty power
to draw thee: Then shall thou not only Go but Run to Him, as earnestly as the
Man slayer to the City of Refuge. And if GOD shall make a true Believer of
thee, thou shall receive the End of thy Faith, the Salvation of thy Soul in
Everlasting Life.

Preached at Boston, November. 3 d. 1717.
That there is a blessed Marriage between Jesus Christ the Son of GOD, and the
true Believer.
MATTHEW, XXII. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, which
made a Marriage for his Son.


IN the former part of this Chapter, we have a Parable, the design whereof is
to intimate that the Jews would reject Christ the Promised Messiah, and that
therefore they themselves should be rejected from being the Church and People
of God, and that the Gentiles should become his People, and that among them,
many should be the Subjects of an External Call, and that some (though but a few)
would be the Subjects of an internal and effectual Call.

The words before us to insist on are a Similitude or Parable in which there is.

1. The thing compared, Namely the Kingdom of Heaven. By the Kingdom of Heaven
here we are to understand the Church of God; Especially under the heavenly
dispensation of the Gospel. The Church is a Kingdom and an heavenly Kingdom. It
is under the Government of a heavenly King, and ruled by heavenly Laws.

2. There is that unto which this Kingdom of Heaven is compared, Namely, to a
King that made a Marriage for his Son; by the King understand the God and King
of Heaven, and by his Son our Lord Jesus Christ. The Marriage feast spoken of
in the Parable, has respect to the benefits of Christ which are preferred to
Sinners in the Gospel on condition of their consent to the Marriage. In a
Marriage there is the Bridegroom and the Bride, the Bridegroom is Christ, and
the Bride, the few that are chosen, or the Church of true Believers.

DOCTRINE.
That True Believers are Married to JESUS CHRIST the Son of GOD.

Or, That there is a blessed Marriage between CHRIST and His Church.

Three Propositions will clear the Doctrine.

PROP. I. That Believers while in this World are Married to Christ the Son of
God.

There is the Initiation and the Consummation of this Marriage. The Initiation
of it is in this World. As soon as a Man does believe his Soul is Married to
Christ. The Apostle therefore says to the Corinthians 2 Cor. 11.2. I have
espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto
Christ. The great work of the Ministers of the Gospel is to bring Souls to
Christ; to woo and win Souls to Christ, therefore called the Friends of the
Bridegroom, Joh. 3.29. The Truth before us is Evident.

For,

1. The Scripture does declare that there is a Spiritual Conjugal Relation
between the Lord and his People. Jer. 3.14. I am Married to you, says the
Lord. Isai. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband, the God of the whole Earth shall he
be called. That Implies that his Church shall be among the Gentiles; that he
would be not only the God of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also. The Lord
directs his Church to call him Ishi, the English of which word is, My Husband,
Hos. 2.16. And Christ calls his Church, His Spouse, Cant. 4.10. And the Church
is called, The Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.9.

2. This holy Truth was Mysteriously signified by several Types which did
Figuratively represent it to us. As now, The Marriage God made between Adam and
Eve was a Type of this. Ephesians. 5.32. They two shall be one flesh; this is a great
Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. That Marriage had a
Mystery in it as respecting the Relation that is between Christ and the Church.
Adam was cast into a deep sleep, and Eve taken out of him and given to him*
Christ has been cast into the deep sleep of death, and by means of this the
Church is produced. And Solomon's Marriage was a Type hereof. The Song of Songs
is an Epithalamium, in Praise of Christ and his Church. It was the manner among
the Jews, that when Persons of Quality were Married they had Songs in Praise of
the Bridegroom and the Bride. The Song of Solomon, is such an One; it shows
forth the Praises of Christ and his Church: And the XLV. Psalm is like it.
Solomon Married Pharaohs Daughter who was a Gentile, and thereby was signified
that Christ should be Married to the Gentiles, that is, have his Church among
them. Psalm. 45.10. O Daughter forget thy own People and thy Fathers house.

3. If we consider the things that are requisite in order to conjugal Relation,
we shall see that there is a blessed Marriage between Christ and his Church. e.
g.

(1.) The Fathers Consent is requisite there unto. God Consents that his Son
should be Married to his Church. He has made this blessed Match; wherefore, the
Text says. A King made a Marriage for his Son. We Read of the Marriage Feast,
as provided by him, which implies his Consent. Verse 4. I have prepared my
dinner, says the King. God has given his Son to his Church to be the head
thereof. Isai. 9.6. Unto us a Son is given, his Name is called Wonderful, the
Prince of Peace. So he has given his Church to Christ, as Christ to them.
Christ therefore said, Joh. 17.9, 10. I pray for those that thou have given me:
All mine are thine, and thine are mine. It is God that persuades and draws the
Souls of his Elect to Christ. Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me except the
Father draw him.

(2.) Another thing requisite in Marriage is the Consent of the Persons
concerned therein. Though their Parents be never so willing to the Match, if the
Parties concerned do not Consent to take each other, there can be no conjugal
Relation. Christ has consented that his Church should be so related to him: He
has given himself for his Church, and given himself to them, and owns them to
be his in the most peculiar Relation. Cant. 8.12. My Vineyard is mine, says
Christ. As for Believers, they are mine says Christ. And as Christ has given
himself to his Church, so Believers have given themselves to him. 2 Cor. 8.5.
They gave themselves to the Lord. A true saving Faith does consist in this very
thing especially, when a Man gives himself to Christ, as his Lord and Savior,
to be his as his only, and his for ever; that is a saving Faith. Christ says,
Give me thy heart; the Believer says, My heart thou shall have with all my
heart. This Mutual Consent between Christ and the Believer, we see in Psalm.
45.12. It is said of the Kings Daughter, The King shall greatly desire thy
beauty. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him.

PROP. II. That the blessed Marriage between the Son of God and the Believer,
will be Completed at the last day.

It was customary among the Jews, that Married People were first Espoused, and
then they were esteemed Husband and Wife; and in due time the Marriage was
completed. In this Life Believers are Espoused to Christ. At his Second coming
will be the Consummation of the Marriage. Christ will then come as a
Bridegroom. Matthew. 25.5. The Bridegroom is come, go ye out to meet him. Then
the Church of Christ is every way suitable for him, bedecked with Grace and
Glory, and all Sin and Imperfection taken away. Rev. 10.7. The Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. It will be so at the last
day, then the Church will have on all her Ornaments. Isai. 61.10. Covered with
a Robe, with the garments of Salvation, as a bride adorneth her self with her
Jewels. Then the Church will appear a glorious Church indeed. Ephesians. 5.27. Christ
will present her a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle or any such thing.
Then comes the blessed Marriage Supper. Rev. 19.9. Blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage supper of the Lamb. This blessedness is intimated to
Believers when they come to the Lords Table. Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint to you a
Kingdom (says Christ) You shall eat and drink with me at my Table in my
Kingdom; You shall fit upon thrones. This is signified and represented to
Believers in this holy Ordinance, of the Lords Supper. At the last day Christ
and his Church will be together and live together, and never more be separated
for so much as one day: they shall ever be with the Lord. Rev. 21.2, 3. New
Jerusalem comes down from God our of Heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her
Husband: And the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them.
Christ who is God shall dwell with them: They shall be with Christ during the
dispensation of the last Judgment, which will not be as many imagine a day of
Twenty-four hours only, but doubtless will continue a long time. Eminent
Divines suppose it will last for a thousand Years. And all that time Believers
shall be with Christ; and after that they shall go to Heaven together. The
Husband and Wife dwell together in the same House: So it shall be with Christ
and his Church, they shall dwell together in the same House, and it will be in
his Fathers House, which is such a glorious Palace as Mortal eye never did
behold the like. Joh. 14.2, 3. Many Mansions are in my Fathers house. I go to
prepare a place for you, and will come again and receive you to my self, that
where I am you may be also. So shall they dwell together in his Fathers House
throughout the never ending days of Eternity.

PROP. III. That the Relation between Christ and his Church will abide for ever
and ever.

This indeed is the only Marriage that cannot be dissolved. As for all Earthly
Relations, Death dissolves them. Romans 7.2. If the Husband is dead the Wife is
loosed from the Law of her Husband. But the Relation between Christ and his
Church has no end. Christ says to his Church, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee
to me for ever. This Relation continues to Eternity, as long as the Eternal Son
of God and the Immortal Souls of Believers shall live, so long shall this
Relation continue. As in Marriages the Relation continues so long as both
Parties shall live: so it is here. Christ the Son of God he lives for ever, He
is Yesterday, and to day and for ever the same. The Jews said, Joh. 12.34. We
have heard out of the Law that Christ abides for ever: He does so. Though he was
once as to his Body subject to death. Rev. 1.18. He said from Heaven, I was
dead and I am alive, and behold I live for ever more. Christ lives for ever
more. And as for Believers they shall never die, Christ said to Martha, Joh.
11.26. He that believes in me shall never die; and he said, If a man keeps my
sayings, he shall never see death, Joh. 8.51. Although a Natural Death, the Death
of the Body is that which they are as subject to as other Men; yet their Souls
live and their Bodies too shall awake out of the sleep of death; and after the
Resurrection they shall be equal to the Angels, and then they cannot die any
more: therefore the Relation between Christ and them will continue to all
Eternity: It abides in Heaven, for in Heaven is the Marriage Feast: a Feast is
there the like where-unto was never known on Earth, as to the greatness of the
Entertainment, the rejoicing and the continuance of it. The King of Persia made
a Feast for all his Princes, Esther 1.3. which lasted a hundred and eighty days
together; but this Feast lasts infinitely longer than a hundred and eighty
Millions of Years. The Scripture sets forth heavenly things by Earthly
Similitudes, otherwse we could not conceive of them, no heart can conceive what
is to be enjoyed in Heaven. Christ said to the Jews, Joh. 3 9. If I should tell
you heavenly things how could you believe? If heavenly things should be set
before us in their own proper Dialect, we could not comprehend them. Therefore
earthly Similitudes are made use of to set forth those things, and especially
this of a Marriage Feast, to denote the happiness and joy of Heaven. Many times
at Feasts there is great Joy; but the greatest Joy of Believers will be in
Heaven: There Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, Isai. 35 10. There is
fullness of Joy, and there are pleasure for evermore. That holy Man Mr. Jordan
being at a Feast, said, At a Feast there is good Company, and so there is in
Heaven, and here is good Cheer, so there is in Heaven, and far better, but anon
we hear that word Take away; that word will never be heard in Heaven.

USE, I.
There is an high dignity that does belong to Believers on Christ. They ought
to be respected and honored, because of the Relation they stand in to the Son
of God. Although they are generally despised and contemned in the World: Yea, the
best of them are so. 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made the filth of the world, and the
off scouring of all things. Nevertheless they are no contemptible Persons: They
are honorable. They are so in the Eyes of good Men. It is given as the
Character of the Upright Man, Psalm. 15.4. He honors them that fear the Lord.
As God himself does respect them: He says of his Church, Thou was Precious in
my sight and honorable, Isai. 43.4. So there is a dignity belonging to them
because of their Relation to Christ. If a King Marry a mean Person, there is a
dignity belonging to such an one. As Esther when Married to the King. Is there
not a dignity belonging to the Kings Daughter? The Church is called so, Psalm.
45 13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within. Yea, She is a Queen, v. 9.
The Queen stands at thy right hand in Gold of Ophir. That Scripture will be
fulfilled at the last day, when all Believers shall stand at the right hand of
Christ.

USE, II.
From this Doctrine we may Infer the Believers Felicity as well as Dignity. A
good Match is a singular happiness. Christ is the most desirable one that ever
was or that possibly can be. To be Married to the Son of God, To the only Son
of the King of Heaven, What greater Dignity? What greater Felicity? Christ is
the Wisest and Richest that can be thought of: Angels proclaim it. Rev. 5.12.
The Angels said, Worthy is the Lamb that is slain to receive honor, and glory,
and power, and wisdom, and riches. That is to say, Worthy to be acknowledged
the Richest and Wisest, and most Powerful and Honorable that can be mentioned.
Was not Pharaohs Daughter happy in being Married to Solomon! Behold a greater
than Solomon is here. The Soul that is Married to him is made happy for ever.

Several things may be mentioned, which declare the happiness of Believers by
reason hereof.

1. There can be no Lawsuits against them. Urori lis non intenditur. The
Husband is responsible for his Wives debts. The Wise cannot be Sued as long as
her Husband lives. So is the case here. The debts which we owe, Christ has
undertaken the payment of. He has suffered to make satisfaction to God for all
our Sins, which are our debts. God has imputed them to him, because he became
our Surety, and promised to make Satisfaction for all we did owe to the Justice
of God. Accordingly God has charged Christ with all the debts of his People.
Isai 53.6. Upon him was laid the Iniquity of us all. Therefore Justice will not
come upon them, will not demand satisfaction of the Surety, and of the
Principal too. Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? What? have they not been guilty of many Sins? Yea, but God Justifies for
all that, Who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again: which implies that God has received full satisfaction in the death of
his Son. Christ is come out of the Prison of the Grave, and God has thereby
declared Himself fully Satisfied.

2. Believers thus related to Christ shall be protected and defended against
all their Enemies. Christ their Husband will be their Protector, and happy are
they in having such a Protector. It was said to Sarah, That Abraham her Husband
should be a Covering to her Eyes. h.c. A vail to defend her from injuries, Genesis
20.16. So Christ defends his Church. If any offer wrong to them they shall pay
dear for it. Christ says of them, He that touches you touches the apple of
his Eye: that we may be sure Christ will never endure, Zech. 2.8.

3. Because of their Relation to Christ, Believers are sure to be well provided
for. He is able to provide well for them: They shall never want for any thing
since Christ is their Head and Husband. They shant want Clothing, they shall
have the best Robe given to them. In Rev. 12.1. We read of a Woman clothed with
the Sun. Who is that Woman but the Church of Christ? What is that Sun with
which she is clothed, but the Righteousness of Christ? Christ is the Sun of
Righteousness. They shant want for Food. Isai. 25.6. The Lord of Hosts has
prepared a feast of fat things, and of wines well refined on the lees. And what
will Christ feed his People with? He will feed them with Manna, with the bread
of Heaven. What is that bread Christ gives? It is the bread of Life. Bread
which if a Man eat thereof, he shall not dye, but live for ever. Christ feeds
Believers with the bread of Life, and with the water of Life. Rev. 7.17. The
Lamb shall feed them and lead them unto living fountains of waters.

4. Since Believers are Married to Christ, Christ and all that belongs to him
is theirs. They have an Interest in his Person: They are his and He theirs. My
beloved is mine and I am his, Cant. 2.16. And they have an Interest in his
Estate; all the Estate that belongs to Christ, belongs to them. Romans 8.17. They
are heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. A Kingdom is the greatest Riches:
Believers on Christ are heirs of a blessed Kingdom And more than so, by reason
that the Inheritance of Christ is theirs, all things are theirs; for what is
that Inheritance? it is no less than all things: He is said to be the heir of
all things. Is it not said of Believers, That they shall Inherit all things?
Rev. 21.7.

USE, III.
We may here see the wonderful Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in that He
becomes so related to such as we are: we may know that Christ is infinitely
gracious from this very thing. 2 Cor. 8.9. You know the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, although he was rich, yet became poor for your sakes, that through his
povert you might be made rich. This appears, if we Consider, who Christ is, and
what we are,

(1.) Who Christ is. He is a King, the most glorious King that can be
mentioned. Psalm. 24.10. Who is the King of Glory? the Lord of Host he is the
King of glory, that is the most glorious King; Christ he is that King: He is
the Lord of Host: All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth are all under the
Command of Jesus Christ. He is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. And he is
the Son of God, as in the Text: A King made a Marriage for his Son. He is the
Son of God, of the same Nature with the Father; he said God was his Father, so
made himself Equal with God, and thought it no Robbery to do so. It is Infinite
Condescension in him to look on the highest Angel in Heaven. He humbles himself
to behold things in Heaven, how much more then for him to look upon Men, such
poor Creatures as we are. How wonderful is it, that he should be Married to our
Nature? The Son of God is so in respect of his Incarnation, He has taken the
Nature of Man into his own Person to be One with him. O Wonderful! And as for
particular Believers, they are taken into the nearest Union with Christ. O let
it affect all our hearts!

(2.) Consider what we are. Who or what are we, that Christ the Son of God
should give himself to us, and not to Angels. Heb. 2.16. He took not the nature
of Angels, but the Nature of Man. What is Man that the King of Heaven and Earth
should be thus mindful of him? If a Prince should Marry a Peasant, would it not
be admired at! To do so is not the manner of Men. There is usually some
external Motive that inclines them in their choice. What was it that did
Incline Christ to us, but his own Grace and Goodness? Jacob chose Rachel rather
than Leah, because of her beauty. But there is nothing to incline Christ to
choose his Elect, in them was no beauty, before Christ set his heart upon them.
Their beauty is perfect through the Comeliness which he has put upon them. All
the Comeliness that the Souls of Believers are set off, and adorned with, is
from Christ. But in themselves separate from Christ, they are woeful Creatures.
Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. I saw them when cast out to the loathing of thy Person, when
thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, live; yea, when thou wast in thy
blood, I said unto thee, live. Sometimes Men in their choice look at Birth, and
Parentage. Christ did not so, in choosing us. Does he not say Thy Father was an
Ammorite thy Mother a Hittite. Men look at Portions and Riches we have none.
Christ did not choose us for any Riches: He has chosen the Poor of this World,
such as were Morally as well as Literally Poor: Poor as Beggars. Miserable
Wretched, Poor, Blind and Naked. So it is with Men by Nature; they have not so
much as Rags to Cover their Nakedness. Now, that Christ should look after such,
and choose such, is an Evidence of astonishing Grace.

Let the last USE be a double Exhortation.

EXHOR. I. O that every Soul would make sure of being Married to Jesus Christ
the Son of GOD. Might this be the Effect of what I have been speaking, it would
be the happiest Sermon that ever I Preached.

Consider. CHRIST is Offered unto you. There is not one Soul, Man nor Woman
here, but Christ is offered to you to be in the nearest Relation to you. God
himself offers him to you, and sends his Servants for that end. It Is said in
the Context before us, The King sent his Servants to Invite them to come,
Saying, all things are ready, Come to the Marriage. The special work of the
Ambassadors of Heaven is to woo Souls for Christ. As Abraham sent his Servant
to persuade Rebecca, to become a Wife to his Son Isaac: So God sends some to
Preach the Gospel, and to Call upon Sinners to Come to Christ; Submit to him,
and Accept of him to be the it Lord and Savior, Head and Husband. And as God
offers his Son to every Soul where the Gospel comes: So Christ offers himself,
Prove. 9.4. Wisdom, that is Christ says, I have furnished my Table, Come and eat
of my bread and drink of the wine that I have mingled. Thus does Wisdom send
forth her Maidens, that is Christ his Ministers to proclaim this. And unto whom
does the Lord Jesus Christ offer himself? To whosoever will, let them come to
him, He will accept of them; if they come with a heart really willing to submit
to him. He says, Let him that hears, Come: And whosoever will let him take
the water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17.

Consider. You will never be better offered. What would thou have? What can
thou desire in such a Relation, but thou may have it in Christ? Would you
have a Wise Man? Christ is wiser than Solomon. In him are hid all the treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge: Subjectively as well as Objectively, Col. 2.3. Christ
is called, The Wisdom of God. Do you desire one that is Rich: In Christ there
is Unsearchable Riches. Would thou have Beauty? Christ is fairer than the
Children of Men. He is altogether Lovely. Do thou desire High-birth, or One
Great and Honorable: Christ is so; all the Angels in Heaven do honor him.
Worship him all ye Angels. He is the Son of God. The greatest Emperors on Earth
are his vassals: Some of them have styled themselves, A vessel of Jesus Christ.

Consider also, That you will not be thus offered always. The Lord says, My
Spirit shall not always strive. Gods Spirit is striving with Men in the Gospel.
Hearken now for he will not always make the offer. Christ said to Jerusalem,
How often would I have gathered you under my wings, and ye would not? How often
has Christ the Son of God spoken to thee and offered himself to thee? yet thou
have not regarded: take heed lest thou have no more offer; may not thou fear
it. It may be this is the last offer that some that hear me this day shall ever
have: then slight not the offer, as you love your Souls.

Do any of you say, What shall we do that Christ may be ours and we his? That
we may come into this blessed Marriage.

Answ. If we would have Christ we must resolve to be for him and not for
another. Resolve to Renounce all other Lords and Lovers that stand in
Opposition to, or Competition with the Lord Jesus Christ. Say as the Lords
People do, Although other Lords have had dominion over us, now we will make
mention of thy Name only. So must you say, Though Sin, though Self, though the World
has had dominion over me, yet I renounce all, and part with all for Christ.
Consent sincerely to the motion of the Gospel, and the thing is done: It is but
that one thing and the Match is made; and thou art made for Eternity, if thou
do but that One thing. Then Consent to the offer of the Gospel with all thy
heart.

The Second EXHORTATION is to Believers who are Married to Christ: Approve your
Selves as your Relation to Him does call for. And how is that?

1. To Love Christ. To love him above all things; to love him more than any
Creature. We are apt to love Creatures more than we should; there is not any of
us but have been guilty of that Idolatry more or less; but resolve now to love
Christ more than any Creature. It is impossible for us to love Christ too much.
Its usual with many People to say, I love such a thing with all my heart;
that is no good saying, We must love none but Christ with all our hearts,
because he is most worthy of our love; He is so in respect of what he is in
himself, the most lovely One that can be desired, the Chief of ten thousands.
The worst that can be said of Christ is better than all the Pleasures that this
World can afford. Namely, his Cross, his Sufferings. Heb. 11.26. Moses did
Esteem the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the treasures of Egypt. And
Christ is most worthy of our love in respect of what he has done for us. What
has he done? He has paid all our debts, that we could not; we must have
remained in a woeful Prison for ever, if Christ had not paid our debts for us:
And shall we not love him? And he has destroyed our Enemies, our greatest
Enemies, Sin and Satan; He has saved us from the Enemies of our Souls, and
Salvation; and shall we not love him? All the Creatures in the whole World
could not deliver us from the Wrath of God, but Jesus has delivered us from the
wrath to come; and shall we not love him?

And 2. Let us Study to please Christ. Let us die rather than do any thing that
grieves him. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem that you awake not my
love until he please. Any death is better than to offend Christ. Would you
please Christ? Then you may not seek to please the World. Gal. 1.10. If I
please men I am no longer a Servant of Christ. If Men demand this or that of
us, we should think, Will this please Christ? if so, then we may do it, but
otherwise, not. Let us then do the things that are pleasing to him. And what
will please him? If we bring forth much Fruit, that will please him. He loves
to come into his Garden and Eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. Does Grace
thrive in our Souls? That is very pleasing to him. Do these Spices flow out?
The Exercise of Grace, that is very pleasing to Christ. If we Pray much, that
will please him: He loves to see us often upon our Knees, especially in Secret:
That is pleasing to him. If we accustom our selves to the deepest Humiliations
before him, that is pleasing to him. If we keep his Commandments, we shall
please him, so that he will deny us nothing that shall be good for us to
receive. 1 John 3.22. Whatever we ask we receive, because we Keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

That Men are Infinitely Concerned, not only to hear the Voice of Christ, but
that they do it, To day.
PSALM, XCV. 7. -- To Day if you will hear his Voice.


CHRIST is spoken of in this Psalm. So does the Apostle declare in his Epistle
to the Hebrews. And the Jews themselves acknowledge that the Words now read
have respect to the promised Messiah. The design of the Psalmist, is, to Excite
the Children of Israel to give unto Christ the greatest honor that possibly
can be, viz. That of a Religious Adoration. That divine Worship which is due to
God, and to him only, does consist especially in two things, Namely Prayer, and
a Religious Attendance to the Word of God. In the 5th and 6th verses Men are
Exhorted to Pray to Christ, To Worship and Kneel before him. In this verse,
they are Exhorted to Attend his Word, which is urged with weighty Reasons:
Particularly in that he is God, and in a particular manner his Peoples God; and
in that he is their Shepherd, which implies his being their Feeder and their
Protector, Therefore they ought to Pray to him and Hear his Voice.

In the words before us we have, (1.) The Duty to be done, scil. To hear the
Voice of Christ; which intends Obedience. Often in the Scripture to Hear is to
Obey. Hear (i. e. Obey) and your Souls shall live. (2.) The time when this
ought to be done, To day. It may not be deferred until to Morrow, but must be
done To day. The Doctrine before us, is, DOCT. That Men ought not only to hear
the Voice of CHRIST so as to Obey Him, but it is of Infinite Concernment for
them to do it, To Day.

The Doctrine may be Opened and Confirmed in several Propositions.

PROP. I. There are many in the World, whom the Lord is pleased to favor with
a Day of Grace. When it is said, To day hear his Voice, that is intended, hear
the Voice of Christ whilst you have a day of Grace vouchsafed to you for that
End. The day of Grace is in Scripture Expressed by that of a day for Men to
know the things of their Peace, and by their time of Visitation. And it is
called, The day of Salvation; a day in which Salvation is offered and may be
obtained. And a space to Repent. Such a day Sinners who are gone out of this
World are not favored with. Although the Apostle speaking concerning the damned
Souls of the Sinners who lived in the Old World before the flood, says, That
the Spirit of Christ Preached to the Spirits in Prison, which were sometimes
disobedient in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3.19. the meaning is not, that he
Preached to them after they were in Prison, i. e. in Hell, but before that
whilst they were living; the Spirit of Christ in the Ministry of Noah,
Preached Repentance to them. But notwithstanding it is a Truth that no Sinners
in the other World have a Day of Salvation vouchsafed to them, nevertheless,
there are some in this World that have such a day.

For,

1. There are many that Enjoy the light of the Gospel; which is the ordinary
Medium by which God works Grace in the Souls of Men, and so brings them unto
Eternal Salvation by bringing the Gospel to them, which is called, The Gospel
of our Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. As for such as have not the light of the Gospel,
they have no Day, it is always Night with them; they see no light but sit in
darkness and in the region of the shadow of death. But as for such as have the
Gospel, it is Day with them. The Sun is risen upon them, even the Sun of
Righteousness which has healing under his wings, Mal. 4.2. There was a time
when for many Ages only one Nation had the light of Gods Word shining upon
them; and they had but Moon light Comparatively. He showed his Word to Jacob,
he has not dealt so with any Nation. That blessed light shined but on a little
spot of ground, not two hundred Miles; as to the rest of the World, darkness
covered the Earth, and gross darkness the People. But since Christ has come
into the World, many parts of the Earth have been enlightened with the Gospel. 1 John 2.8. The darkness is past, and the true light now shines. The knowledge of
Christ, which the Gospel brings to the World is truly light, and the most
glorious light that ever shone on the Earth. Now they that Enjoy the Gospel
have a Day of Grace and Salvation offered to them. For the Gospel offers Grace
wherever it comes. It is the Grace of God that brings Salvation, and has
appeared to all Men. The Gospel proclaims the Mercy of Heaven to Sinners on the
Earth. Christ then declares to them, that there Sins shall be forgiven and
their Souls saved, if they will hear his Voice. It makes a free offer of Life
to Condenmed Sinners; yes to all that come within the hearing of it, if they
will accept of it on gracious Gospel terms. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will let him
take the water of Life freely.

2. The blessed God does not only offer Salvation to Sinners, but he waits with
wonderful Patience to see whether they will accept of the Grace offered. He
endures with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath, Romans 9.22. He extends
his Patience to Long-suffering, nay, to much Long-suffering. It is from
Infinite Grace in God that be makes an offer of Salvation to Sinners; suppose
he should do it but once, and then destroy them upon the first refusal: but the
Lord renews his offers of Grace and Mercy, and continues to do so, from day to
day, nay, he waits Petiently for Years one after another, and still finds
himself disappointed. Luke 13.7. These three years I came seeking fruit and
find none. Life Time in this World is a Day of Grace. It is Compared to the
Day, as death is resembled to the Night: Night comes when no man can work. Men
may do things in the Day Time, while they have light for what they do, which
they cannot when the dark Night has overtaken them. So whilst they Enjoy the
Light of the Living they may be working about their Salvation which when in the
dark Grave they cannot. There is no work in the Grave whither thou art going.
There are some Sinners which Live threescore, yea, it may be four score Years,
or more, and all that time the Lord has waited to be gracious to them. He has
spread out his hands, with a Scepter of Grace in them, to Rebellious ones, and
that has he done all the Day, as long as they had a Day to live on this Earth.
Thus it was with the Sinners of the Old World, they lived an hundred and twenty
Years under the awakening Ministry of Noah, who was a Preacher of
Righteousness; there was the Voice of Christ speaking to them in that Ministry,
but they regarded it not; nevertheless, for so long a time did the Lord
lengthen out the days of his Patience. Of this the Apostle takes notice, 1 Pet.
3.20. Who sometimes were disobedient when once the long suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing. When the Children of
Israel were in the Wilderness, they continued in their Rebellious Practices for
the space of Forty Years; God was Patient and Long-suffering to them all that
time, notwithstanding their not hearing his Voice; wherefore it is said in the
next words following my Text, Harden not your hearts as in the provocation, and
as in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness, when your Fathers tempted me,
proved me and saw my works, forty years long was I grieved with this
Generation. The like Patience did the Lord Exercise toward the Jews after the
Gospel had been Preached to them by the Son of God himself, and by his
Apostles. Christ indeed threatened them with a desolation of their City and
Temple, and that the means of Grace should be taken from them, yet did he
continue the Gospel to them forty Years after they had rejected it.

PROP. II. When Men ( a particular Person or People) are favored with special
advantages to be attending the work of their Eternal Salvation, that is their
day.

The Day of Grace does not consist merely in the allowance of Time, or a Space
to Repent, and seek the face and favor of God, but in having special
Advantages for it. To speak more particularly,

1. A Day of Prosperity is a day of Grace. Often in the Scripture a time of
Adversity is denoted by darkness and night; it is Wisdom for Men to mind the
concerns of their Souls before that Night overtake them. Jer. 13.16. Give Glory
to the Lord your God before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble on
the dark Mountains. Says the Prophet, ere long you will be carried over the
dark Mountains into Captivity; give Glory to God by Repentance before that
darkness comes upon you. David said to the Princes of Israel, has not God given
you rest on every side? Now set you heart and your soul to seek the Lord your
God. Because of the present Peace and Prosperity you have a singular advantage
to endeavor after the things wherein your Souls are concerned. Let not the
Opportunity slip. 1 Chronicles. 22.18, 19. Christ said to Jerusalem, O that thou
had known in this thy day the things which belong to thy Peace, Luke 19.42.
The Jews were in great Prosperity when Christ spoke these words, they had Peace
and Plenty, and Riches, and Health; but they did not improve their Day, they
did not Hear the Voice of Christ in it. They knew not the time of their
Visitation; for which cause War, and Famine, and Sickness, and all sorts of
Misery overtook them, and overwhelmed them. Men are more capable of minding
their Spiritual as well as Temporal Welfare, in a time of Prosperity, than when
they are in distressing Misery. Especially they are so in a time of Health,
more than when painful diseases are upon them.

2. The Christian Sabbath is a Day in which Men have special advantages to be
promoving their Souls Good and Salvation: Wherefore they should hear the Voice
of Christ therein. It is called the Lords Day, Rev. 1.10. Since it is Christ's
Day, He will make it a blessed day to such as shall then hear his Voice. Psalm.
518 24. This is the day which the Lord has made. He has made it, that so we
might worship him on that Day as our Redeemer. For the space of four thousand
Years from the Creation the Seventh day of the Week was the Day of solemn
Worship, in Commemoration of God, His resting on that Day from the Work of
Creation; but the First Day of the Week is the Christian Sabbath in
Commemoration of our Savior Christ his rising from the dead on that day, and
so resting from the Work of Redemption then finished. The Lords Day has been a
Day of Salvation to many a Soul; indeed to the generality of Gods Elect. Among
the Lords Ancient People, when there was to be a solemn Feast, a Silver Trumpet
was to be sounded which called the People together. The Psalmist alludes to
that, Psalm. 89.15. Blessed is the People that know the joyful sound. The
sounding of the Silver Trumpet, did figuratively signify the Preaching of the
Gospel. It is on the Lords Day that the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel sounds,
and then and thereby Christ himself is from Heaven speaking to us. The Lords
Day is a Market Day for the Soul. Is it a Spiritual Fair, in which Commodities
are offered to Men as will enrich their Souls. To refuse them is the greatest
disobedience to the Voice of Christ that possibly can be.

3. There are Times when the Holy Spirit strives with Sinners, that is their
Day of Grace. It was the Spirit of Christ that did strive with the Sinners of
the Old World before the flood, and then they had a blessed day of Grace, 1
Pet. 3.18, 19. but they did not hear his Voice in that their day. When Sinners
turn out of the way in which they should go, they often hear a Voice behind them
saying, This is the way walk in it, Isai. 30.21. The Voice of Christ's Word and
Spirit directs them into the right way. Blessed are they that hear it, and obey
it. There are Saving Operations of the Holy Spirit on the Souls of the Elect.
There are also Common Operations thereof in the Hearts of Reprobates, by which
Christ is speaking to them, and striving with them, and Grace is offered to
them. Sometimes the Holy Spirit strives by great Illuminations in the Mind.
Some have proved total and final Apostates, and Committed the Unpardonable Sin;
Who were once Enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the World to come, Heb. 6.3, 4. Sometimes the Holy Spirit strives
with Sinners by Convincing them of their Sin and Misery, and awakening their
Consciences with dismal fears of a Wrath to come. The Scripture speaks of a
Spirit of Bondage unto fear, Romans 8.15 Many a Sinner has Experience of it. He
hears that he has transgressed the Law of God, and is bound over to the Great
Assizes. He is afraid of Death and Hell. O what will become of me in another
World to all Eternity! Would he hearken to the Voice of Christ in these
Convictions, it may be they Would issue in Conversion and Salvation. There was
something of this Spirit of bondage unto fear in Felix, when he heard Paul
Preach an awakening Sermon concerning Righteousness, and Temperance, and
Judgment to come, Felix Trembled, Act. 24.25. Happy had he been, if he had
obeyed the Voice of the Spirit of Christ in these Convictions and Terrors of
his Conscience. Sometimes the Holy Spirit strives with the hearts of Sinners in
causing good Affections to be stirring in them: but they have quenched the holy
fire which the holy Spirit has kindled in them. It may be at times they have
wept at Sermons, and it may be at times have received the Word with Joy. Nay,
they have been so affected as almost to resolve to forsake their Sins, and to
become Christians indeed. Was it not so with Agrippa? He was almost persuaded
to be a Christian, Act. 26.28. Yea, many times the Holy Spirit strives with
Sinners, so as to cause a great Reformation in them, and yet no thorough saving
work upon them. They have been swept and garnished, and the Unclean Spirit has
gone out of them for a time, but afterward Seven Devils have entered for One
before, Matthew. 12.45. They have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of Christ; yet but a common work of the Holy Spirit on them, 2 Pet.
2.20. Was it not thus with Herod? He lived under John Baptists powerful
Ministry, heard him gladly, and did many things, Mark 6.20. Now when the Spirit
of God is at work in the hearts of Sinners, although but with a Common and not a
saving Work, they are greatly concerned to hear the Voice of Christ, that so
the work may prove saving.

4. The Present Time is the Day of Grace. 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold Now is the
accepted time, behold Now is the day of Salvation. Not hereafter, but Now If
you would be saved hear the Voice of Christ Now; if you would have God accept
of you, return to him Now: For Now is the time, Behold it, behold it. This was
the Voice of God by all his holy Prophets; they all with one Voice cried, Turn
ye NOW from your evil way. The Lord does not say, To Morrow, if you will hear
his Voice, you shall be saved, but To Day, if you will hear his Voice. Now or
the present Time, is the only time that any Man is sure of. As for the Time
past it is gone irrecoverably. Yesterday will never be here again. The Time
past was thine, but it shall never be thine any more. Time to come is very
uncertain. Sinners when they are Exhorted to Repent, and Believe on Christ, are
apt to say, it is good Counsil, but they had rather do it To Morrow than To
Day; when as it is uncertain whether they will ever see a To Morrow. Prove.
27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may
bring forth. For ought thou know, or any Man living, thou may be in
another World to Morrow. So then the present time is thy day. And as for the
present Time, it does not stand still, but is flying away. The wings of time
are swifter than the wings of an Eagle. Job 9.27, 28. My days are swifter than
a Post: they flee away, as the Eagle that hastes to the prey. What is swifter
than that? So then the present time without any the least delay, is thy day of
Grace, in which it is thy duty to hear the Voice of Christ.

PROP. III. Sinners are Infinitely Concerned to hear the Voice of Christ, in
this their day.

The Text says To Day. If you will hear his Voice; If so. What then? Then you
are for ever happy. If not, Infinitely miserable. The Assertion before us is
truth.

For,

1. An Eternity of Weal or of Woe depends on this. Are not Men Infinitely
concerned in that which their Eternity depends upon. If any Man was told that
he should be in happiness or in misery for some Scores of Years, would he not
be greatly concerned about it? How much more when the Word of God informs him
of that on which an Eternity of Weal or Woe depends? For so it does on his
hearing or not hearing the Voice of Christ whilst it is day.

For,

2. If Sinners hear his Voice Now before their day is past, they shall
certainly find Mercy; God will then be found of them. Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found. While the day of Grace last is a finding time. No
Sinner did ever repent and return to God within that time, but the Lord had
Mercy on him, and has abundantly pardoned his many and great Sins. Come before
it is too late. Come before Sun set. Come before the Master of the house has
shut to the door, and you are sure of finding acceptance with him; He will in
no wise cast you out, if you come to him, To Day.

3. If Sinners harden their hearts, and will not hear the Voice of Christ until
their day is past and gone, there is no hope of Mercy for them. Whrefore the
Prophet says, Gather your selves together, O Nation, in order to the solemnest
Humiliations, before the decree bring forth, Zeph. 2.1, 2. When the day of
Grace is past, the decree brings forth. Repentance is too late then. It is with
such undone Sinners as with those miserable Jews who said, Hold thy tongue, for
we may not make mention of the Name of the Lord; say they, it is too late to
Pray now, for God is Executing the Sentence which we were advised to prevent,
but did it not in due season, Romans 6.10. When the day of Grace is past, God
says of such Perishing Creatures, Call their Name Lo-Ruhamah, for I will no
more have Mercy on them, Hos. 1.6. He writes over such a woeful Soul,
Lo-Ruhamah. The Name which God has given to that Sinner, is, I will not have
Mercy on him. He has not only said, but he has Sworn in his wrath, that Sinners
who Out-stand their day of Grace shall not enter into his Rest. When they have
Out-stood and Out-sinned their day, No Prayers, nor Cries, nor Tears will
prevail for the obtaining Mercy. God said to the Children of Israel, Go up and
possess the Land which I have given you, if you will go now it shall be yours:
but they rebelled against the Commandment of the Lord, and believed him not.
And what was the Consequence? God Swore that not a Man of them all that was in
that Rebellion should ever enjoy the good Land. Notwithstanding they returned
and wept before the Lord, but the Lord would not hearken to their voice, nor
give ear unto them, Deuteronomy. 1.45. Thus God in the Gospel offers Heaven to Sinners
on their believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, they slip the Offer; they neglect
the great Salvation; until the day of Salvation is past, then they cry but God
regards them not. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they
would not hear; so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts,
Zech. 7.12. Shall Sinners that refuse to hear the Voice of Christ in the Gospel
offering Salvation to them, obtain that Salvation! No: He has said, That none
of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14.24.

USE, I.
This Doctrine affords matter of just and sad Reproof to such as do not hear
the Voice of Christ in this their day of Grace. Christ said of Jezebel, I gave
her space to Repent and she Repented not, Rev. 2.21. Alas! It is so with many.
The Lord has given them Time and many Advantages to be making sure of the
Salvation of their Souls; but they have not done it. Do Men improve their day
of Grace? Are there not many who neglect their day, as to all the particulars
but now mentioned.

1. They do not improve their day of Prosperity to Soul saving Ends and
Purposes. They have Health, and it may be Wealth too. That should cause them to
Seek and Serve the Lord Willingly and Joyfully because of the abundance of all
things. They should therefore hear his Voice, and be very Obedient to him. But
the Lord may say to them as he did to Jerusalem: Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto thee
in thy Prosperity, but thou said I will not bear; this has been thy manner
from thy Youth that thou obeyest not my Voice. They have been like Jesurun, who
when he waxed fat was so brutish as to kick his feeder. Of the Rock that begat
thee thou art unmindful, and has forgotten the God that formed thee, Deuteronomy.
32.15, 18. Wretched Sinners, the more mindful God has been of them, the more
forgetful have they been of him. And for how long a time? how many days have
they forgotten him? Jer. 2.32. They have forgotten me days without number.
Prayerless ones, Hear the Word of the Lord. How many days have thou lived, in
which thou have not Prayed to God? Have they not been days without number! Then
thou have forgotten God days without number. O foolish Creatures and unwise!
do you thus requite the Lord for all his blessings? Do thou call thy self a
Christian, and yet not Pray to God? Thou has less Religion than Mahometans; For
they Pray more than once every day. A late Writer speaks of two Turks that
being at variance, One of them, that he might disgrace his Adversary with the
greatest Reproach, uttered such words as these, You may see what a Wretch that
man is, he has not Prayed to God so much as once this day. Are there not those
professed Christians here present, that have not Prayed to God this day, and it
may be not once the last Week. Woeful forgetters of God they are!

2. Many do not improve and profit by Sermons and by the Holy Ordinances of
Christ, as they might and should do. The Seed of the Word is sown in our
Congregations: but in what ground? Have we not cause to think sadly on the
Parable of the Sower, which speaks of four sorts of ground, the most of them
not fruitful. Fruitful hearers of the word are rare in some Congregations. They
hear and do not hear. It is much to be feared, and the thought is awful, That
many who live under the Preaching of the Gospel, are under that Judicial
dispensation which Isaiah has Prophesied of, That their Ears are dull of
hearing, and their Eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should understand with their hearts,
and be converted, Matthew. 13.15. Is not the Lords day, which is a Market Day for
the Soul, by some spent very Unprofitably? O how much good might Men gain to
their Souls in one Lords day, would they carefully improve it? If they would
spend it Publicly and Privately with that Religion which ought to be; in
Praying, and in Reading Books of Piety, and in Holy Discourse; surely their
Souls would thrive in Grace. But do not many spend the Evening after the
Sabbath so Irreligiously, as that the Sermons which they heard in the day are
in a manner lost before the next day?

3. Do Men hear what the Spirit says? Do they not quench his Motions? He
sometimes kindles a fire of good Affections in their hearts, but they put it
out. They stifle Convictions, and by disobeying his word resist his Spirit.
Act. 7 51. Te do always resist the holy Ghost. May not such Sinners fear that
the holy Spirit will depart from them: Then woe to thy desolate Soul. Jer. 6.8.
Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make
thee desolate. If thou still provokest the Holy Spirit, it may be he will not
only depart from thee, but leave thee to the power of the Evil Spirit. Was it
not so with Saul? 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and
an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. And was it not so with the
rebellious Jews? Isai. 63.10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit,
therefore he was turned to be their enemy. For the Infinitely kind Spirit to
become an Enemy, is most dreadful.

4. Are there not a World of Sinners who neglect the present Time? They Sin
away the day of Grace by delays. They think another Time hereafter will be as
Convenient for them to Repent in, as N^^. Like Felix who when his Conscience
was awakened under Paul's Preaching, said, Go thy way for this time, when I have
a convenient season I will send for thee, Act. 24.25. But did that convenient
season ever come? A Sinner cannot Repent too soon, but he may Repent too late.
There is inexpressible folly in delaying this matter. Men have more reason to
delay seeking for help if their Bodies are in danger. If their Bodies are
dangerously sick or wounded; they will make have for a Physician. But thou have
a Soul that is desperately sick, a Soul that has received a deadly wound, and
will thou not make have to Jesus Christ the only Physician that can cure thee,
and heal thy wounded Soul, before it is too late? It was wise Counsil which a
Jewish Teacher gave to his Scholar, That he should be sure to Repent one day
before death. Then he must Repent this very day, for he is not sure but that he
shall be Dead to Morrow, Delays in this Matter are Infinitely dangerous. It was
once said to David when in extreme danger, 1 Samuel 19.11. If thou save not thy
Life to night, to morrow thou shall be slain. If thou will not hear the Voice
of Christ to day, it may be to Morrow thou will be slain: One days delay may
cost thee the Life of thy Soul. If Lot had lingered a day longer in Sodom, he
had certainly perished; the Angel said to him, Stay not escape for thy Life,
escape to the Mountains, lost thou be consumed. Is there not the like Voice of
Christ to those that Live under the Gospel. Oh* Make have to Zoar: Make have to
the City of Refuge. Christ is that City. Delays have been the ruin of many a
Soul. How many are dropped down to Hell! Multitudes, Multitudes are in that
Valley of decision. Could you speak with them, and ask them how came you into
this Place of Torment? When you were alive on the Earth, did not the Ministers
of God warn you of it, and did not they assure you that if you would Repent of
Sin and Believe on Jesus Christ, and live an holy Life, you should never be
sent into this outer darkness? They would reply, they did so Preach unto us,
and we intended to Repent, but delayed it from day to day, and ere we were
aware of it, Death surprised us, and now it is too late. Delays have been our
Eternal ruin.

USE, II. Of Exhortation.
Oh! that every One that hears me this day, would say and do as David did,
Psalm. 119.60. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. Shall we
be more unreasonable, than some Creatures which have not reason, which
nevertheless in Summer provide for Winter. And shall not Men with Rational and
Immortal Souls, whilst they have Time provide for Eternity! Doleful is their
State who may say, and must say, as Jer. 8.20. The Harvest is past, the Summer
is ended, and we are not saved.

Consider, 1. As yet you have a day? The day of Grace is not done. That Sun is
not set. Although as to some of you, it is far spent, since Age has over-taken
you; nevertheless, you are yet in the Land of the Living, and therefore it is
not too late for you to hear the Voice of Christ. It is possible for an Old
Sinner to be Converted and Saved. Was not Manasseh such an One? I could tell
you of a very Pious Old Man, who would often say with admiration at the Grace
of God toward him, If I had dyed before I was Seventy Years Old I had gone to
Hell. Think of this, you that have continued in your Sins, until gray Hairs are
upon you Have thou one foot in the Grave! O hear the Voice of Chirst before the
other foot is there also. Others of you are in the Morning of your Age, The
Voice of Christ to you is that in Eccles. 12.1. Remember Now thy Creator in the
days of thy Youth. Now harden not your hearts. Think not to say within your
selves, we will Repent and Turn to God in Jesus Christ, when Old Age has
over-taken us. It may be thou shall not live to Age. And you Children hearken.
Christ speaks to you. Is it not Christ that says, Come you Children hearken to
me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. The Voice of Christ
says, They that seek me early shall find me. O hear that Voice, and you will
be blessed Children.

Consider, 2. The Day of Grace will not last always. It is but a day which
Sinners have to be looking after their Salvation, and a short day too. It is
limited to a day. Heb. 4.7. He limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day
if you will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts. The Means of Grace will not
last always. As Christ said concerning himself, Me you have not always. So may
it be said concerning the Word and Voice of Christ. Now you have Ministers, and
Sermons, and Sabbaths, but you shall not have them always. The blessed Motions
and Strivings of the holy Spirit will not continue always. Genesis 6.3. My Spirit
shall not always strive. Nor will the day of Patience last always. The Justice
of God will not suffer his Patience to be always abused. Jer. 44.22. So that
the Lord could no longer bear. The day of Life in this World, will not last
always. The longest Day has its Evening. So has the longest Life. Life is
always spending away, like the Oil in the Lamp; or the Sand in the hour Glass,
until it comes to the last Sand. So there will be a last Minute of Life. Are
not some of you come to the Eleventh hour of your day! Oh delay not to hear the
Call of Christ in the Gospel an hour longer.

Consider, 3. Thy Day may be gone suddenly. It may be thy Sun will set at Noon,
and the Lord will make the day dark over thee. A sudden death may put an End to
thy day of Grace. If thou have hardened thy heart against many Calls of Christ,
thou have cause to fear it. Remember that awful Scripture, Prove. 29.1. He that
being often reproved, hardneth his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. It may be before another Lords day, thou shall be in another
World. It may be before this Week is out, thou shall be in thy Grave, and where
will thy Soul be then!

Do any of you say, What would you have us to do, That we may become Obedient
Hearers to the Word of Christ, and that without any delay?

Answ. I wish you would seriously Think and Consider. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Consider your ways. You say you cannot Convert your selves: but you
have power to Think sadly and Consider of Things, if you will. Does not David
say, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm.
119.59. Think sadly with thy self, What have my ways been? And think what is
the way which I am now in? What is my present State? Am I in a State of Grace?
Am I sure of that? If I should die this Night? Have I a persuasion grounded on
the Scripture, That my Soul shall be with holy Angels, and with the Spirits of
Just Men made perfect? And there is another thing, I wish you would think of.
Think what anguish Damned Souls are in, because their day of Grace is past. I
have heard of a poor Creature that when at the point of Death, uttered such
words as these, If I had Ten thousand Worlds, I would give them all that I
might live one day longer. Certainly it is so with those in Hell. They would
give Worlds if they had them to give, that they might have One Sabbath, or One
Sermon, or have One Offer of Grace more; One Day to Repent in, with any hopes
of finding Mercy with God. Oh Consider of it. And Oh that you would go home,
and get alone and Think sadly on ETERNITY. It may be one quarter of an hours
serious Consideration on it, might be a Means of thy Conversion and Eternal
Salvation. That precious Man of God Mr. Flavel, in one of his profitable Books,
speaks of a Person of Quality, who having been abroad with vain Companions
until late in the Night, she found a Servant who was of a more serious Spirit,
reading in a good Book; at first she derided her, saying, Poor Melancholy Soul,
What do thou poring on a Book: but after a while burst out into a flood of
Tears, Saying to her Servant, As I looked on the Book you was reading, I saw
that word ETERNITY: The thought on that word ETERNITY, has broke my very heart
within me. I Pray God the serious thought of ETERNITY may savingly Break the
hearts of many that hear me this day. Oh Consider and Think sadly of it, before
thou art gone into ETERNITY, whither thou art hastening; If I die in my Sins and
Disobedience to the Voice of Christ, until my day of Grace is past, then after
I have suffered the pains of Hell as many Millions of Years as there is Sands
on the Sea shore, I shall be no nearer to an end of my Misery, than I was the
first day that it came upon me: But if I hear the Voice of Christ, To day, All
my Sins will be forgiven, and I shall be happy throughout the never-ending days
of Eternity; for Christ has said, The Righteous shall go into Life Eternal.

Preached at Boston, July 28. 1717.
The Work of the MINISTRY Described In an Ordination SERMON. Preached at
Cambridge, October 9. 1717. WHEN Mr. Nathaniel Appleton Was Ordained Pastor of
the Church there.

By INCREASE MATHER, D.D.

Acts vi. 4. We will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry
of the Word.

Been orasse est been studuisse.

Bern. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Daniel Henchman, at his Shop. 1718.

The Preface.
THE Reason of my committing this Sermon (such as it is) to the Press, is, not
only that I might gratify the desire of the worthy Person whose Ordination
occasioned the Preaching of it (and of many others) but that besides what I
have Written many Years ago in the Preface before blessed Mr. Mitchels Life, I
might leave my dying Advice to the Students in Cambridge, which I hope may be
of some use also to those who are or shall belong to the Academical School
which is now Erecting in a Neighbor Colony.

It is mentioned in the Sermon Emitted herewith, that our very Learned
President, the Aged and Honorable Mr. Chauncey in a Discourse on Amos 2.11.
delivered many Years since, at the Lecture in Cambridge the day after the
Commencement, insisted on the necessity of that which is called Humane
Learning, to make an able Minister of the New Testament. Likewise that Eminent
Divine Mr. Sydrack Sympson at the Commencement, Anno 1653. Preached a Sermon to
the same Effect on 2 King. 6.1, 2. to the University Congregation in Old
Cambridge. Also Mr. Edward Reyner, a Reverend and Learned Minister of the
Congregational Persuasion, in Lincoln, has an Elaborate and Judicious
Discourse, showing that Knowledge in the Liberal Arts and Original Tongues is
very necessary to make an accomplished Divine. And if so, then Universities and
Colleges are not unnecessary.

It is true, that our first Reformers complain of the Universities which were
in Europe in those days, as the Chairs of Pestilence. Wickliff calls them the
Synagogues of Satan; and Satapras Antichristi, Antichrists Lieutenants. Luther
(according to his wonted vehemence) says, They are no other than the Pits of
Hell out of which came that Smoke of the bottomless Pit which has darkened the
Sun and the Air: And that Hell is Paved with the bald Sculs of Friars, who
lived in Colleges. The Martyr Tindal (who has been called the Apostle of
England) complains of them for setting up Aristotle (a Pagan, who maintains
many damnable Opinions) to be of equal Authority with Christ. Melancthon
relates that there was a Preacher in the University of Tubingen who took his
Text out of Aristotle's Ethics, instead of the Bible.

Such as these are the Universities which our Reformers have Condemned, in
which there was no true Religion, nor solid Learning taught, but Heathenism and
Idolatry, with the Rixations of those called Schoolmen who were much worse than
their Master Peter Lombard. Calvin calls their Scholastical Divinity,
Diabolicam artem rixandi. Another Reformer says, He that sees a Scholastical
Theologue, sees the Seven deadly Sins. It is not to be wondered at if such Men
as Weigelius, (whom the Excellently Learned Dr. Arrowsmith, Regius Professor in
the University of Cambridge has taken to task) should declare against Colleges,
but it is very strange, that any Master of a College should write against all
Universities whatsoever, and then produce the Reformers mentioned to Patronize
him. Yet this has been done by Mr. Dell the Quondam Master of Convil and Cajus
College in Cambridge, not considering that the Reformation has like Moses's Rod
turned those Serpents into a Pastoral Staff, and that Luther, and other
Reformers have been strenuous asserters of the usefulness and necessity of such
Societies, if duly regulated. It has been by the blessing of God on Protestant
Universities that the true Religion has been Continued, and Propagated among
the Nations: out of them have risen those who have been the glory of the Places
and of the Age in which they lived. In our own Nation how great a blessing have
the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge been in the former Ages? It has
been said of them as of Leah and Rachel, which two did build the house of
Israel. And out of the three Universities in Scotland, many Men of Renown have
issued forth, too many to be enumerated. Nor is the most famous Usher the only
famous Man that has had his Education in the College at Dublin. There are five
Universities in the Reformed Belgium. How many great Instruments of Good to the
Church of God have they produced? So among the Reformed in France, and in
Germany, and in Denmark? And some out of the University of Upsal in Sweedland.

When our Fathers on the account of Pure Religion and Undefiled, came into this
American Desert, their care was that Religion might not die with them, or
continue but for One Generation. To prevent that, they built a College, that a
Learned Youth might be Educated under the Inspection of a President and Tutors;
which owes its Foundation to a Godly Nonconformist Minister, viz. Mr. John
Harvard, who by his Will bequeathed the one half of his Estate, for the
Encouragement of that Public and Pious design; for which his Memory is and
ever will be blessed: and it is perpetuated by the Name of Harvard College in
Cambridge. GOD has made it a fruitful Mother, since not only the Churches in
New England have been supplied from thence with Excellent Preachers, diverse of
them Eminent Men of God, but moreover, some who had their Education there, have
Preached the Gospel in England, Scotland, Ireland, and in Holland. It would be
sad, if ever that Society should degenerate from its Primitive Institution.
Corruption optimi pessima. The Lord forbid that they should ever so diviate from
the Principles of their Pious Founder, as that the overthrow of the Churches
shall proceed from thence, as has been related concerning the Churches in
Bohemia, that the Corruption of their Schools proved fatal to them.

I rejoice to see a peculiar Talent put into the hands of One so Qualified and
Hopeful as Mr. Appleton is, to be Servicable to the Churches of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Dr. Preston chose rather to be a Preacher in Cambridge than else where,
because there he had an Opportunity (by the blessing of Christ) to be the
Instrument of Converting those, who might probably be the Converters of many
others. The good Lord grant that in our Cambridge it may be so.

February 3d. 1717-18.
The Work of the Ministry described, in an Ordination Sermon.
EPHESIANS, IV. 12. -- For the Work of the Ministry.


IN the Preceding Verse, the Apostle declares, that the Lord Jesus Christ has
given to his Church a variety of Ministers and Officers. Some that were
Extraordinary and Temporary, and are long since ceased, viz. Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists. An Apostle was one that had seen Christ and received a
Commission immediately from him. The Prophets here spoken of are not the
Prophets of the Old, but of the New Testament; such as Agabus, and some others
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. An Evangelist was one that did accompany
the Apostles, and Assist them in Preaching the Gospel. Such were Mark, Luke,
Timothy, Titus, Silas, Apollos, etc. But besides these, Christ has given to his
Church a Ministry which is to be perpetual. A stated standing Office, Namely
that of Pastors and Teachers. It is Observable, that it is not said some
Pastors, and some Teachers, as it was said some Apostles, and some Prophets,
which seems to intimate that the Pastoral and the Teaching Office are the same.
Every Pastor is to be a Teacher, and every Teacher that is so in respect of
Office is to feed his Flock, and is in that respect a Pastor. In this Verse the
Work of the Ministry is described from that which is the principal end of it.
Some suppose a Trajection in the words, and that the Verse runs thus. For the
Work of the Ministry, for the perfecting the Saints, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. That Is the End for which Christ has instituted the Ordinance of
the Ministry. In the next Verse, The Ministry is described from the duration of
it. It shall continue until we all come into the unity of the Faith. The Elect
of God are dispersed throughout the World in Places very distant from one
another; but the day will come when they shall all come together, and then they
shall be of One Faith, not only as to the Fundamental Articles of Religion, but
in lesser points also. In a future World it will be so, where there will be no
need of a Ministry, and until then, it shall continue. From the Words in
Consideration with the Context, the Doctrinal Truth before us, is, DOCT. That
there are some, whom the Lord Jesus Christ gives to his Church, for the Work of
the Ministry; and there shall be such to the End of this World.

The Doctrine contains Three Propositions.

PROP. I. The Ministry is a Work. The Scripture gives it that Name. When Paul
and Barnabas were to be Ordained Preachers of the Gospel to the Gentiles, the
holy Ghost said, Separate them for the Work whereunto I have called them. And a
divine Work it is. Paul said of Timothy, He works the work of the Lord, as I
also do, 1 Cor. 16.10. On which account it is that a singular respect is due to
those that are so employed. 1 These. 5.13. Esteem them very highly in Love for
their works sake. A work which cannot be done without Labor. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let
Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
Labor in the Word and Doctrine. That double honor intends, an honorable
Maintenance; therefore in the next Verse it is said, The Labourer is worthy of
his reward. Indeed the Labor of the Body is not so much in this as in some
other Callings; but the Labor of the Mind is that which is the most Consuming;
the Labor of the head and heart is most tiresome. Therefore Solomon says,
Much study is a weariness of the flesh, Eccl. 12.12.

The Enquiry now will be, What it the Work of the Ministry? What is the Work
which the Ministers of the Gospel are to be employed about?

Answ. 1. Their special Work is to Watch over Souls. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the rule over you, for they watch for your Souls. Wherefore their work is
difficult and awful, for they must give an account of all the Souls which are
committed to their care and charge. Cura Animarum, a charge of Souls is
dreadful. For if any one of those Souls miscarry through the Ministers
negligence or unfaithfulness, he must answer for it. Their blood will be
required at his hand. Ezekiel. 33.6. His blood will I require at the Watchmans
hands. Who is that Watchman? Verse 7. Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman to
the house of Israel; thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from
me; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his ways, he shall die in
his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. Who can think of
having the blood of Souls laid to his charge, without trembling at the thought
of it?

2. A principal Work belonging to a Minister of God, is, to Endeavor the
Conversion of Sinners. They are called the Bridegrooms friends, Joh. 3.29.
Christ is the Bridegroom, his Ministers are said to be his Friends; for it is
their work to woo, and if possible to win Souls for Christ. King David was not
an ordinary Minister, nevertheless a Minister of God he was; he was a Prophet,
and he says, I will teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be
converted to thee, Psalm. 51.13. Levi did as became his relation, when the law
of Truth was in his Mouth, and he did turn many from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. As for
the Primitive Preachers of the Gospel, this was their main design, and God made
their Labors wonderfully Successful. Acts 11.21. The hand of the Lord was with
them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord, Peter had the Jews
for his more peculiar Province, the Apostleship of the Circumcision was
committed to him, and the Lord taught Effectually by him. We read of near upon
three thousand Jews Converted by one Sermon which he Preached at Jerusalem,
Act. 2 41. Paul endeavored the Conversion of the Gentiles; Christ from Heaven
having given him a Commission to that work, saying, I send thee to the Gentiles
to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light and from the power
of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. And he was an happy Instrument of Converting we
know not how many thousands. The Miraculous Success of the Apostles and their
Successors in Converting the Gentile World was Prophesied of by Ezekiel, who
says, That Fishers shall stand from Engedi even unto Eneglaim, and spread
forth nets, and the fish taken in the net, would be exceeding many, Ezekiel.
47.10. Engedi was at the South-west end of the dead Sea, Eneglaim was at the
Noreast end of it; there were to be fishers from one end of the dead Sea to the
other. The dead Sea (the Lake of Sodom) was an emblem of the Gentile World, who
were all dead in Trespasses and Sins. Ministers are Fishers. Christ said to his
Disciples, I will make you Fishers of Men. They must fish for Souls, and spread
the Net of the Gospel that they may take Souls for Christ. In all Ages of the
World there will be some to be Converted, which is one reason why there must be
Ministers of the Gospel to the End of the World, because in every Age there
will be some to be Converted; and the Ministry of the Word is the ordinary
Means of Conversion. Romans 10.7. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God: And it is said, How shall they believe on him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall there be a
Preacher except there is one sent? When there are Believers, the Ministers of
Christ are usually the Instruments by whom they are made such. 1 Cor. 3.5. Who
is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom you believed, even as the
Lord gave to every one. There are few Congregations but there are some
Unconverted ones therein. It is the Ministers duty to apply himself
accordingly. It is a vain Opinion which some have, that the Pastor of a Church
is only to Endeavor the Edification of Saints, but not the Conversion of
Sinners; he ought to do both, as the next words to my Text intimate, For the
Edifying the Body of Christ. When a Sinner is Converted, the Body of Christ is
Edifyed, there is a New Member added to his Church which is his Body; another
living Stone is laid in that Sacred building. And truly what greater Service
can any Minister, or any Man in the World do for Christ, than to make those
that have been slaves to Sin and Satan, to become faithful Subjects in Christ's
holy Kingdom, to the Eternal Salvation of their Souls. He that Converts a
Sinner shall save a Soul from death. Jam. 5.20. And what can any Man do that
will be more for his own Joy and Comfort? I have often thought of a Passage
which a renowned Historian relates concerning Dr. Williams the Archbishop of
York, who had been before that the Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper, and
sustained other Places of Honor and Dignity; when a Minister came to him for
Ordination, he said to him, I have passed thorough many Places of honor in
Church and State, more than any of my Order in England; could I be assured that
by my Preaching I had Convered one Soul, I should have more comfort in that
than in all the Honors and Offices that have been bestowed on me. Without
doubt there are some who will have a greater degree of Glory conferred on them
at the last day, than others shall. Among these faithful Ministers of Christ
will be found, who have been the happy Instruments of Converting many Souls to
God. Witness that blessed Scripture: Dan. 12.3. They that be Teachers (so the
Hebrew word. Hammaschilim there used) shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the Stars for ever and
ever. A Prophets reward is mentioned as that which has a Specialty on it,
Matthew. 10.41.

3. It belongs to a Minister of the Gospel to Endeavor the Spiritual
Edification of those that are Converted, that they may be built up in their
most holy Faith. It is not enough to Sow the Seed of the Word, but it must be
watered, then it may be hoped that God will make it fruitful. 1 Cor. 3.6. I
have planted, Apollos watered, God gave the increase. Paul was the Planter of a
Church in Corinth. They were his Converts. He was Instrumental in Planting the
Seed of Grace in their Souls. He left Apollos with them, who continued
Preaching to them and by those waterings built them up in further degrees of
Faith and Holiness. A Pastor of a Church must endeavor the Edification of his
People, by building them up in Knowledge. It is a singular blessing when they
have a Pastor furnished with such gifts as enable him to do it. Jer. 3.15. I
will give them Pastors according to my own heart, which shall feed them with
Knowledge and Understanding. The Ministry of the Word is appointed, not only
that so Grace may be begun where it is not, but that they who have Grace, may
grow in Grace. 1 Pet. 2.2. Desire the sincere milk of the word that you may
grow thereby. Ministers must Endeavor the Confirmation and Establishment of
their Hearers in the truth and holy ways of the Lord. This also did the
Primitive Preachers of the Gospel. Act. 14.22. They Preached the Gospel, and
taught many, Confirming the Souls of the Disciples, Exhorting them to continue
in the Faith. No Man was more Laborious herein than the Apostle Paul: He went
through Syria and Cilicia, in which Places he had Converted many, and gathered
Churches, Confirming the Churches, Act. 15.41. Sometimes the Flocks are in
danger by Wolves. False Teachers who bring in damnable Heresies, are such. It
is incumbent on their Pastors to defend them against the cunning Craftiness of
these Men who lie in wait to deceive; and to confirm them, that they may not be
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Sometimes Believers meet with sore
temptation, by which they are apt to be discouraged: Then a word of comfort may
be much to their Edification. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, speak
comfortably to Jerusalem. It may be a seasonable word from the Mouth of a
Pastor to the tempted in his Flock who sit in darkness and see no light, will
have a wonderful reviving Efficacy in it, to strengthen their Faith, and
establish their hope in God, who has Created the fruit of the Lips, Peace.

4. In order here-unto Ministers ought to be Diligent and Labourious in
Preaching the word of God. They should come to their People with well studied
Sermons. 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that
needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. As the Priests were
to divide the Sacrifice that every one might have their share, so the Minister
must apply Comfort to whom that does belong, and Terror to whom that does
belong. He that will show himself a Workman that needs not be ashamed, must
study for it. There is more than a little contained in that Apostolical
Injunction: 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of
season. Preach. The Greek Word (...), signifies to Proclaim like an Herald,
publicly and with a loud Voice. Ministers of the Gospel are Christ's Heralds,
they must Publicly and Earnestly declare what is the Command of their Lord and
Master, and be instant, be in good Earnest. The Lord said to his Prophet, Cry
aloud, do as becomes an Herald, Spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet; it
condemns a cold, dull, lifeless way of Preaching. In season. If a Minister is
on a subject which People are willing to hear of, that is in season; if on a
subject which they have no Mind to hear, that is out of the Season to them: but
whether they will hear or forbear, the Preacher must faithfully declare the
Messages which the Lord has sent him with. What is Preaching? It is an Opening,
and Applying of the Scriptures. To search the Scriptures is every Man's duty,
but the Ministers duty more than any Man's in the World. Search them. (...), as
Miners do. There are rich Mines, in the Scripture, there is Gold and Pearls in
those Mines, but we must dig and dive that so we may come at them. No Man can
be better Employed. Ministers should be Elaborate in their Sermons. Solomon
says, The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, Eccl. 12.10. Men that
come into the Pulpits, and utter whatever comes next, without any Premeditation
or Dijudication, do not seek to find out acceptable words. There was a Man of
some Name and Fame, who had an unhappy design of introducing Ex tempore
Preaching as well as Ex tempore Praying; And being a Learned Man he would make
the attempt in the University Church in Cambridge, but the Lord rebuked him.
One that was there present informed me that he was at a Nonplus, and in perfect
confusion, Confessing his rashness, and warning the Students not to do the
like, but to Study their Sermons before they Preached them. Moreover, Ministers
of the Gospel ought not to Preach only Verbally, but by their Lives and
Conversations. They should Live Sermons. A Minister should be able to say to
his People, as Gideon said to his Soldiers, He said to them, Look on me and do
likewise, it shall be as I do, so shall you do, Judge. 7.17. Thus should a
Minister be able to speak to his People, do not only as I say, but as I do,
observe my Life and Practice, and do you Live and Practice as I do, my humane
frailties Excepted. The Apostle said to his Corinthians, Be ye followers of me,
1 Cor. 4.15. Followers of my Doctrine, and followers of my Example.

5. To be much in Prayer is the Work and Duty of the Ministers of God in a
special manner. They are to be as Gods Mouth to his People, so his Peoples
Mouth to him. The Priest was to bless in the Name of the Lord, and to be
offering Incense daily. The Apostles said, We will give our selves continually
to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6.4. They that are called to
the Ministry of the Word, are to give themselves to Prayer, which implies
frequency as well as constancy therein. Before they Compose their Sermons, they
should Pray over them. Let them Pray Sermons down from Heaven. It is reported
of Martyr Bradford that he Studied Kneeling. And when they have Composed their
Sermons they should Pray over them again, that a blessing from God may make
them Successful and Effectual for the good of Souls. And they have cause to be
much in Prayer for their own Souls, that they may obtain Mercy to be faithful
in the discharge of their Ministry. It is a dreadful charge which is imposed on
them. One of the Ancients says of the Ministry, That it is Onus humeris
Angelicis formidandum, a charge and burden which the Shoulders of Angels might
tremble to come under it. Another Ancient says, It is a wonder that a Minister
should get to Heaven. Such Mortification to the World, such Self-denial, such
Impartiality, such Faithfulness, such Exemplary Holiness is required and
expected of them, as that it is a wonder that any of that Order should be
Saved. A small error in such an one, is great by reason of the Sacredness of
his Office. Under the Law there was as great a Sacrifice to be offered for the
Priest as for the whole Congregation. Are they not then concerned to be always
Praying? It was Austins desire, that when the Messenger of Death should be sent
for him, it might find him either Preaching or Praying. Ministers are to Pray
as for themselves, so for and with particular Persons in their Flock, if they
need Prayer and desire it. Jam. 5.15. Is any sick among you? Let him call for
the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. Austin (whom I mentioned
but now) would not refuse to go to the meanest Sick Person in his Congregation,
if they desired it, but otherwise he would seldom go to any, because he would
not prevent them from doing that which is their duty, to Call for their Elders,
to Pray over them. And a Pastor of a Church ought to Pray continually for his
whole Flock. It Is his duty to bring them to God every Day, and every Night. How
is it possible that that Minister should have Grace in his Soul that can, that
dare live one Day or one Night without bringing his Flock to GOD for his
blessing when Praying for his own Soul? The Prophet Samuel said, God forbid
that I should sin in ceasing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good and
the right way, 1 Samuel 12.23. And truly faithful Ministers of God may be
Encouraged to Pray, for that there is a great Efficacy in their Prayers, their
Prayers have a greater power with God than the Prayers of other Men, since they
Pray not only by virtue of the rule of Charity, but Ex Officio by virtue of an
Office. We find in the Scripture that God has manifested a Special regard to
the Prayers of such of his Servants. Psalm. 99.6. Moses and Aaron among his
Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his Name; they called upon the
Lord, and he answered them. Moses is mentioned among the Priests, because he
did the work of a Priest before the Priesthood was settled and confined to
Aarons Family, and after that was a powerful Intercessor for the People. Samuel
was a Prophet. We see that the Lord has a great regard to the Prayers of those
that are his Priests and his Prophets. Wherefore it was said to Abimeleck when
he was Sick and in danger of death, the Prayer of a Prophet might save his
Life. Genesis 2.7. He is a Prophet, he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live.

Thus we see that Ministers of the Gospel have a Work to attend, and what that
Work is. I might have added, that there is Suffering (as well as doing) Work
which they must expect a peculiar share in. When Persecution arises they must
look to be set in forefront of the hottest battle. It is the saying of one of
the Ancients, Non est Minister Christi, qui non est ad mill mortes Paratus.

We proceed to a Second Proposition, which is, That there are some who are by
the Lord Jesus Christ called to this Work.

When it is said, That Christ has given such to his Church, it implies that
they have a Call from him to accept of that Office, and to undertake the work
of it. It is true, that there are some who undertake the Work without a Call.
Such were the false Prophets in the Church of Israel, of whom the Lord says, I
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, yet they
Prophesied, Jer. 23.21. But this ought not to be. The Apostle says, No man
takes this honor to himself; that is to say, No Man that does as he ought to
do, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. It is not good to
Usurp the Ministerial Office. All that are Called there-unto have their Call
from God and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 1 1. Paul an Apostle not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. The Apostles,
(excepting Matthias and Barnabas) had their Call immediately from Christ
without any Man being concerned in their Call; Paul peculiarly had his Call to
the Apostleship from Christ since his Ascension to the Right hand of God in
Heaven. Pastors and Teachers are not thus Called. But notwithstanding they are
Called by Men, their Office and Ministerial Authority is not of Men. No Man,
nor all the Men in the World, have power to make any Officer in the Church
besides what Christ himself has Instituted. Men commonly say, Such an One is
our Minister, but it would be more proper to say, He is Gods Minister, and
Christ's Minister. 1 These. 3.2. Timotheus our Brother and Minister of God. 1 Timothy 4.6. A good Minister of Jesus Christ. Your Pastor has his Call by you, but
not of you as the Institutor of it. Archippus was a Teacher in the Church of
Colossians. To him it was said, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord that thou fulfill it. Fulfilling the Ministry implies doing
whatever belongs to that Ministry, Praying, Preaching, Governing, Exercising
the discipline of Christ, administering the Sacraments of the New Testament. The
Minister that neglects any part of his Ministerial Work does not fulfill it.
Archippas received this Ministry in the Lord, i. e. by and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. It was in the Lords Name and by virtue of his Authority, that he was
called unto and entrusted with a Sacred Ministry, which he was under the
Solemnest Obligation Conscientiously to fulfill it.

Here the Enquiry will be.

Who are Called of the Lord to the Work of the Ministry? Ans. In Order to a
Lawful and Regular Call to this Work several things are requisite.

1. Ministerial Gifts and Qualifications are necessary. He must be (...), One
that shall have an Ability and Promptitude to Teach. One called to that work
should have more Wisdom and Knowledge than what the generality of Believers
have attained unto. Eccl. 12.9. Because the Preacher was wise he taught the
people Knowledge. Christ speaking of those whom he would send to Preach the
Gospel, says, I will send you wise men, Matthew. 23.34. And Ezra sent some to
Iddo at Casiphia where there was a College, or Company of Levites over whom it
seems Iddo Presided, that they should bring Ministers for the House of God, and
it is said that by the good hand of God upon them, they brought a Man of
Understanding, Ezra. 8.17, 18. A Minister should be such an One. He should have
in his head and heart a Treasure of Scripture Knowledge. Matthew. 13.52 Every
Scribe which is instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a Man that is
an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. That
Man who Preaches Salvation by the alone Righteousness of a Crucified Christ,
and withal Teaches Obedience to the Moral Law, brings forth things new and
old. It Is said, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his Mouth, Mal. 2.7. And in another Scripture it is said, Ask the
Priest concerning the Law, Hag. 2.11. It is necessary then that he should have
a greater Understanding in the Law of God than others have. Every Man is not
qualified to be a Public Interpreter of the Divine Law. An Interpreter is one
of a thousand, Job 33.23.

2. Where there is a Call to the Ministry there is an Inclination to Serve God
in that Work. There have been those who have been adorned with admirable
Knowledge and other Ministerial qualifications, but no inclination to improve
their Talents in that Work, they choose rather to Serve God and Christ in some
other Calling. A sign that the Lord does not Call them to the Work of the
Ministry. Not but that a Man who has a Call thereunto, may from a sense of the
awfulness of the Work, and his own insufficiency be for some time very
unwilling to engage in it, as we see in the Prophet Jeremiah, God said to him,
I have Ordained thee to be a Prophet to the Nations; What me! (says he) I am a
Child I cannot speak. I am a Young Man, and not fit to undertake so great an
Office; but God by his power over-came the unwillingness of the Prophet,
Wherefore he says, Thou art stronger than I, and have prevailed, Jer. 20.7.
Thus if God calls a Man to the Ministry, he will over power him, and make him
buckle to the work, yea, to desire it. 1 Timothy 3.1. If a man desire the Office
of a Bishop, has desires a good work; That is to say, an excellent and an
honorable work. But this desire ought to proceed not from Carnal but Spiritual
Motives. Not because he would have the honor of such an Office; not for a
Benefice, as too many take up the Ministry only to make a Livelihood of it.
Which does not agree with the Apostles Exhortation, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock
of God, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. He does not do his work of a ready mind,
who is driven to it by necessity, or drawn to it by Covetousness. When an
earnest desire to glorify God, and to promote the Interest of Christ's Kingdom,
and the Salvation of Souls shall incline a Man to desire the work of the
Ministry, it is a sign that Christ has called him to it.

3. Mutual Election is that which does Essentiate the relation of a Pastor to
this or that particular Church. No Church ought to have a (...) imposed on them
without their (...) free choice. No Patron or Prelate may do it. The Apostles
notwithstanding their having an Amplitude, and Plenitude of Church power, would
not do it. They left it to the Multitude of the Disciples to choose their
Deacons. The Electing of a Pastor is of far greater Moment, and therefore no
Church should be deprived of that Privilege in which the welfare of their Souls
is so much concerned. When an Apostle was to be chosen to join with those whom
Christ himself had chosen, Peter and the other Apostles, Call-upon the Brethren
in the Church at Jerusalem to choose One suitably qualified. Accordingly they
Nominated two, and then cast Lots which should be the Person. And the Lot feel
upon Matthias, Act. 1.26. Now the Argument is very strong, that if the Brethren
in this Leading Example might choose an extraordinary Officer, they have power
to Elect an ordinary Pastor. It is said in Act. 14.23. When they had ordained
the Elders in every Church, and Prayed with Fasting, they commended them to the
Lord, on whom they believed. That the Original Word (...) translated Ordained
does not intend imposition of hands (which is the common Ecclesiastical sense
of Ordination) but an Election of the Church by lifting up of their hands. A
learned Knight [Sir Norton Knatchbull] in his Critical Animadversions on the
New Testament, has clearly demonstrated. Nothing can be more evident than that
in the Primitive times, the Privilege of choosing their own Pastor did belong
to the Church to which he was to Minister. Ignatius in his Epistle to the
Church then in Philadelphia, says, it belonged to them to choose their Pastor.
The Nicene Council in a Synodal Letter to the Churches in Africa, advised them
to choose Orthodox Pastors instead of Arians; Cyprian says, Plebs maxim habet
potestatem dignos sacerdotes Eligendi, etc. It was a long time before this
Privilege was wrested out of the hands of particular Churches by Popish
Antichristian Usurpation. Our United Brethren in London, concur in this
Article, That ordinarily none shall be Ordained to the Work of the Ministry,
but such as are Called and Chosen thereunto by a particular Church. But it is
necessary that this Election should be Mutual. Although a Church choose a Man to
be their Pastor, Except he does also choose them to be his Flock, or accept of
their Election, he does not become their Pastor. Notwithstanding every Church
has power to choose their own Pastor, our United Brethred declare, That in so
weighty a Matter as choosing a Pastor, we judge it ordinarily necessary, that
every such Church consul: and advise with the Pastors of Neighboring
Congregations.

4. There ought to be a solemn Separation of those who are Called to the Work
of the Ministry. This uses to be called Ordination. Thus in the Scripture
aforementioned: Act. 13.2. Separate me Barnabas and Paul for the work
whereunto I have called them This Separation should be attended with Fasting
and Prayer, also with the Imposition of hands. We find in the Old Testament
that rite of imposing hands was used in setting apart to a solemn Office. So
was Joshua Ordained Moses's Successor. Numb. 27.18, 19. The Lord said to Moses,
Take Joshua and lay thine hand upon him set him before Eleazar and before all
the Congregation, and give him a charge in their fight. And thus have Ministers
of the New Testament been set apart for the work of the Gospel. The first
Laying on of hands that ever was practiced out of the Land of Israel, was that
in the Church at Antioch, but now mentioned, which may therefore be looked upon
as Presidential to the Gentile Churches. Some have esteemed that Ceremony so
Essential to the Call of a Minister as to judge those that have it not to be no
true Ministers of the Gospel. I dare not say so. For I know full well that not
only those of the Congregational Persuasion, but the Presbyterian Brethren do
many of them say otherwise. When that Question was proposed by K. James I. to
the General Assembly of the Church in Scotland, Is he a lawful Pastor who wants
imposition of hands? Their answer was, Imposition of hands is not Essential,
but Ceremonial and indifferent, in the Admission of a Pastor. Several Synods of
the Reformed Churches in France say the very same. So the Dutch Churches, and
those in Switzerland, and many in Germany. Yet there are who maintain not only
that the imposing of hands as Essential to the being of a Minister, but that it
must be by Episcopal hands, otherwise that the Ordination is Null and the
Minister that has received it, no true Minister. A most uncharitable Opinion
which destroys by far the greatest part of the Protestant Churches in the
World, and makes their Baptism and all their Administrations ineffectual.
According to the Scripture a Presbyter may lay on hands. 1 Timothy 4.14. The
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. How many should join in Imposing
hands, is not determined in the Scripture, but is a Prudential left to
Ministers and Churches to do as they shall see cause. There were belonging to
the Church in Alexandria twelve Presbyters: When One dyed the other eleven
concurred in imposing hands on a Successor. In the Reformed Churches in France,
only two Ministers impose hands on the Person that is Ordained. Judicious
Interpreters suppose that when Paul and Barnabas were Separated to the Work of
Preaching the Gospel, that the other Three Ministers in the Church at Antioch,
viz. Niger, Lucius, and Mana^n, joined in laying on hands, which is not
improbable, since among the Jews imposition of hands was usually preformed by a
Triumvirate, as has been observed by Learned Men. Although I should be loath to
say as Papists and some others do, That all who have not had hands imposed on
them are no true Ministers of Christ, nevertheless, since that Rite adds to the
Solemnity of the Ordination, and there is Scripture Example for it, I know not
how the omitting of it can be justified. It has always been practiced (as at
this day) in the Churches of New England.

PROP. III. There shall be Ministers in the Church of God to the End of this
World. CHRIST will raise up such in every Age and give them to his Church. The
Ministry is a standing Ordinance which shall abide as long as there shall be
any need of Officers and Ordinances. The Apostle in the Context before us,
declares that there shall be a Ministry, Until we all come to be a perfect Man.
He compares the Mystical body of Christ, or all Believers unitedly considered,
to a Man who has his several degrees of growth and strength until he comes to
the height of both, and then he is a perfect Man in opposition to a Child. It
is hereafter in another World that Believers arrive to their full pitch, and
are past growing. There they attain unto, The measure of the Stature of the
fullness of Christ; Not that Believers shall ever be equal to Christ, but at the
last day they shall very much resemble him, being perfectly conformed to the
fullness of Christ. At the last day all the Elect of God shall be Called, and
made perfect in Grace, until that day come there shall be Ministers in the
Church. Christ has promised to be with his Ministers to the end of the World,
which implies that there shall be Ministers until then. GOD will have a Church
on the Earth throughout all Ages. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ
Jesus throughout all ages, Gal. 3.21. Hence the Church is compared to a
Mountain, not only in respect of Visibility but Perpetuity. Psalm. 125.1. They
that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but
abides for ever. The Church whilst in this sinful World will need Teachers and
Governors. Maugre all the Malice of Earth and Hell, there will be a Church in
which the power of the keys shall be Exercised, and that implies Ministers and
Sacraments, Matthew. 16.18. One difference between the Ordinances of the Old
Testament and the New, is, that those were to be Abrogated, when as those are
to continue to the End of this World, 2 Cor. 3.11. Gospel Ordinances are things
which cannot be shaken (as the Jewish Ordinances have been but shall remain as
long as the present World shall remain, Heb. 12.27. There are Sacraments of the
New Testament, the Administration whereof shall continue to the End of the
World. So Baptism, Matthew. 28.20. And the Lords Supper is to be observed until
Christ shall come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Therefore there must be Officers to Administer
them. If non-Officers take upon them to Administer the Seals of the Covenant,
they do like Corab, and like Uzziah who invaded the Priests Office.

USE.
Many profitable Instructions, both for Ministers and People do naturally
follow from this Doctrine, but I shall not insist on them, having exceeded the
hour already.

I shall only conclude with a Word of Exhortation and Advice to such as are
designed for the Work of the Ministry. I suppose there are some Scores of such
here before the Lord, whose Parents have sent them to the College, in order to
their being prepared and qualified for the Service of Christ in his Churches.
It becomes me in respect of my Age, (as well as on the account of my having
many Years formerly, sustained the Presidentship over this Academy) to give you
Advice.

1. My first Word of Advice to you, is, Do not Enter on the Work, especially
engage not in a Pastoral Charge before you have attained such a Measure of
Knowledge as may render you able Ministers of the New Testament. First fill and
then empty. It is reported concerning Basil, and Gregory, that they spent
thirteen Years in preparing for the Work of the Ministry, before they would
undertake it. I advise not to so long a delay, for a Young Man may be called to
be a Prophet, Zech. 2.4. But it is certain that a large Stock of Learning is
needful to make a Minister that shall be able to defend the Truth against the
Sophistry of Learned and Subtle Adversaries. The enemies of the Truth know
this. Julian the Apostate destroyed all Public Schools of Learning among
Christians, because (said he) Their Learned Men Wound us with our own Weapons.
The Mahometans are enemies to that which is called humane Learning: They are
afraid that the light thereof might be a Means to discover the falsity of their
dark Religion. Some of the Papist have been great enemies to Academies. The
Jesuits in their private Instructions have this for one, We most teach that
Learning is needless in a Parish Priests, so do they Jewishly term a Minister
of the New Testament. They know that if they could bring it to that pass that
there should be no Learned Men to oppose them, the World would be theirs. That
admirably Learned and Holy Man Mr. Chauncey, who did for many Years Preside
over this College, Published a Sermon on those words, in Amos 2.12. I raised up
of your Sons for Prophets, and of your Young Men for Nazarites: in which he
shows how useful and necessary it is that Preachers should be Learned Men.
Especially you should labor after a large measure of Scripture Knowledge. And
since the Scriptures of the Old Testament were written Originally in the Hebrew
Tongue, and the New Testament in Greek, a Competent Knowledge in both these
Languages is needful, otherwise we see with other Men's eyes, and take all upon
trust and report from others, if we are not able our selves to consult the
Originals. Some of the Ancients (called Fathers) would not have mistaken in the
Interpretation of diverse Scriptures so as they have done, had they consulted
the Original. Moreover, Knowledge in the Liberal Arts is a good handmaid to
Theology. A Preacher should have a body of Divinity in his head. There have
been many Systems thereof Published, but above all that I have seen, I
recommend unto you Dr. Ames his Medulla Theologiae. That Supereminent Divine
Dr. Thomas Goodwin would sometimes say, That he esteemed that Book as the best
Book in the World next to the Holy Bible. I remember an Hungarian Protestant
assured me that in those Protestant Churches, they never Ordained any Minister
without requiring Legistine Amesium. I Exhort you not only to read it, but to
digest it, and adhere to the Principles of Truth contained therein. It was once
most highly esteemed of by the Students in this College; yea, by all those of
them that have proved Eminent Men of God in their Generation. Let it ever be
so. But besides Theology, a Minister should have acquaintance with other sorts
of Learning. Especially with Ecclesiastical History. I recommend to you the
Ecclesiastical History of the Magdeburgensian Divines, in which you will see
what the Christian Church was in the Primitive Times, and how Superstitions and
Degeneracy did gradually corrupt both the Doctrine and Discipline thereof,
until at last it became quite another Church, than what it was in the Apostles
days, and what Heresies have Pestered the Church in several Ages. It will also
be of great use to you, to Read the Lives of Eminent Divines, both Ancient and
Modern.

2. Rest not in Gifts without Sanctifying Saving Grace. A Man that has good
Natural Parts, and a Strong Memory, may by Reading and Study obtain a Rare Gift
of Preaching, so as to be admired and applauded and make a great Noise in the
World, but what is it all, if he has not Grace in his Soul? Does not the
Apostle say, That if he could Speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and had
the gift of Prophesy, and understood all Mysteries, if he had not the Grace of
Love to God and Man, he should be notwithstanding those eminent
accomplishments, but as sounding brass and a tinkling symbal, which has a
taking sound with it, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Quid prodest esse peritum et periturum.
If a Man should gain the Applause of the whole World, what is he advantaged, if
he loose himself, or be cast away. Gifts may make a Man useful to others, but
if they are not Sanctified they will aggravate the Condemnation of the Man that
has been adorned with them. Many who helped to build the Ark were drowned in
the flood. So many who by Means of their Ministerial gifts have helped to build
the Church will perish Eternally. All the World will see that this is true at
the last day, when not a few but many shall say to Christ, Lord, have not we
Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name done wonderful works; and Christ will
say to them for all that you were workers of iniquity, and therefore depart
from me, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23. Oh! remember the awful words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.27. Lest that by any Means, when I have Preached to others, I
my self should be a cast away.

3. When you Enter upon Public Preaching, Endeavor that your Sermons may be
such as shall be profitable to those that hear them. If you would Preach
profitably, you may not Preach your selves, but CHRIST. Young Preachers are apt
to make an ostentation of their Parts, and Wit, and Learning, which ought not
to be. Paul was the most Learned of all the Apostles, but how careful was he
not to make any show of it! Sermons painted with fine Phrases and Flourishes
are like painted Windows which obscure the light. One says well, That such
Preachers put the Sword of the Spirit into a velvet Scabbard, which keeps it
from wounding the heart. If you would Preach profitably, Preach plain
Scriptural Sermons. Scriptures are the Sinews of a Sermon. Confirm all that you
say with them. It is the Preachers duty to do so: He may not come to the
Congregation with Notions of his own, but with the Word of God. 1 Pet. 4.11. If
any speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. And if you would Preach
profitably, single out profitable Subjects to Discourse on; dwell rather on
Practical than Polemical Subjects: e. g. Concerning the Evil of Sin, and Man's
Natural Sinfulness, and the absolute necessity of Regeneration in order to
Salvation, and the danger of Hypocrisy, and how far Men may go in the
Profession and Practice of Religion, and yet fall short of Heaven at last. This
is a Subject much to be insisted on, since there have been and there are
Notorious Heretics who have excelled in a seeming Piety. But besure you Preach
JESUS CHRIST and His Righteousness. The Learned Scultetus, observes that the
Jesuits Preach up Morality, and Good Works, but not a Word of Justification by
the Righteousness of Christ; and that Seneca, and Plutarch, and other Moral
Philosophers teach as Good Morality as they do. The iniquity of some Clergy Men
at this day, who say, they are Protestants, is very great, since they have
little either of CHRIST, or of Scripture in their Sermons. Nay, they count it a
disgrace to their Sermons, if the Name of Christ is often mentioned therein.
How unlike are such to that good Old Predicant, who said, Si scribas, si
conferas, non mihi placet, nisi sonuerit ibi Jesus. And how unlike unto the
blessed Apostle Paul, who in his Epistles, mentions the Name of Christ four
hundred and fifty times; and in one Chapter ( viz. 1 Cor. 1.) in 10. verses, he
mentions the Name of Christ ten times. And he faith to them, That he determined
to know nothing, that is, to Preach nothing among them but Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
2.2. The Corinthians were a Polite People, and some of them no doubt great
Scholars; and it might have been thought that among such a People, he would
have come with excellency of Speech and of Wisdom, but he Preached Christ with
all possible plainess; His Preaching was not with enticing Words of Men's
Wisdom. Therefore let us Preach Christ as becomes the Simplicity of the Gospel.
CHRIST is such a Subject as can never be drawn dry. A Minister may Preach of
him all his days, and there is more to be said still. The Truths relating to
Christ Angels desire to look into. The Mystery of his Person, Office,
Humiliation and Exaltation will be the Admiration of Saints and Angels
throughout the days of Eternity. And can we Preach or Hear too much of them
now? Our famous English Martyrologist, gave that Advice to his Friend, Brother,
Preach Jesus Christ, Preach Jesus Christ It was his Complaint that Christ was
not Preached in England then, so much as should be. I wish he was more Preached
there now. It was Luthers Comfort when at the point of death, That he could say
to Christ, Lord Jesus I have Loved thee, and I have Preached thee, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit.

4. If GOD shall be so gracious as to Call you to the Work of the Ministry,
make that your Work. You may not make it to be a (...), but your (...), a
by-work, but your only work. This is not my Advice, it is Apostolical. 1 Timothy
4.13, 15. Give attendance to Reading, meditate on these things, give thy self
wholly to them. It was Mr. Perkins Motto, Minister Verbi es, hoc age. Since you
are a Minister of the word, whatever you do besure you mind that work. Your
Work and Warfare is Spiritual. You should not entangle your selves with the
affairs of the World, if you would please Christ who has made you his
Soldiers. The Work of the Ministry is Work enough for One Man. Let his
accomplishment be never so Eminent. That People is guilty of a crying Sin,
which does not Maintain their Teacher (if he has an heart to lay himself out
for the good of their Souls) so Comfortably and Honorably, as that he may have
nothing to do, but to attend the Work of the Lord, which his Sacred Office does
oblige him unto. There was a time when the House of God was forsaken by the
Ministers of it, who fled every one to his Field, because their Maintenance was
Sacrilegiously withheld from them. Nehemiah at that time the Religious
Governor of the Province of Judea, was much offended, not at the Ministers who
were necessitated to leave their Sacred Employment, but at those who did not
support them therein, Neh. 13.10, 11. For a Minister of the Gospel whose Work
is a Spiritual Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. to neglect that, and betake himself to
his Farm, if it is done of choice, is evil. It is no better when he involves
himself in Merchandising, and in driving of Bargains. Mercator intemplo, has
ever been disallowed. And it is worse when they entangle themselves in
Lawsuits. For a Man to be Sacerdos in foro, is very unbecoming his Profession.
Let every Man choose to abide in his Calling. Let Ministers of the Gospel spend
as little time as may be in fruitless and Complemental Visits: but let them
keep close to their Studies. Blessed Mr. Mitchel once the famous Pastor of the
Church of Cambridge: Cambridge was lifted up to Heaven when that light was
shining here, (the Lord grant that he who is to be Ordained this day, may be
like that Predecessor in whose Light all New England rejoiced) He gave me a
Word of Advice, which I hope I have been the better for it, for more than
threescore Years. I was then a Young Man, Eighteen Years Old, engaged in a
Voyage for England, when I took my leave of him, his Advice to me was, Keep out
of all Company whatsoever as far as the rules of Christianity and Civility will
allow, for you will surely find that for the most part, the time spent in your
Study will be time most profitably spent. I have found his Advice good and
true, and have very much Endeavored to order my Conversation accordingly from
my Youth unto this day, I hope not altogether without benefit to some others as
well as to my self.

I shall not enlarge on Motives, in which either they that design the Ministry,
or such as are already engaged in it may be concerned. I need not to say to
you, That an Unfaithful Minister is the Unhappiest Man in the World. A fearful
thing it is to Trifle in that Work. Qui ludit in Cathedra, lugebit in gehenna,
is a true saying and a terrible one. For one that has showed others the way to
Heaven to fall short of it himself, how dismal is the thought of it? Ministers
are called Angels. If one of them fall short of Heaven, an Angel falls from
Heaven. How amazing is it?

Nor shall I enlarge on the Consideration of the Joy and Glory that will
follow, if we approve our selves faithful to Christ and the Souls of Men. When
a faithful Minister shall say to Christ at the last day, Lord, here am I and
the Children whom thou have given me, Here am I, and the Souls who have been
Converted and Edified by my Ministry; and one shall stand forth and say, This
is the Man by whose Ministry I was Converted, if it had not been for Thy
Presence with him, I had never been brought home to Christ; and another shall
say, This is the Man by whose Ministry I was built up in Faith and Holiness,
blessed be Thy Name that ever I saw his Face, blessed be Thy Name that ever I
heard his Voice, Will there not be glorious Joy! But O what Joy, when CHRIST
Himself shall say, Well done, thou faithful Servant, Enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord, Amen! O LORD.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 39. line 21. for be r. we. p. 90. l. 4. r. than to.


